A THEATER OF Political Flying-Insects. WHEREIN Especially the Nature, the
VVorth, the Work, the Wonder* and the manner of Right-ordering of the BE, Is
Discovered and Described. Together with Discourses, Historical, and
Observations Physical concerning them. And in a Second Part are annexed
Meditations, and Observations Theological and Moral, in Three Centuries upon
that Subject.

By Samuel Purchase, Master of Arts, and Pastor at Sutton in Essex.

Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by R. I. for Thomas Parkhurst, to be sold at his shop, at the
Three Crowns in Cheapside, over against the Great Conduit, 1657.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Truly Noble, and Religious LORD, Robert Earl of
Warwick, Baron of Leez, etc.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
THE Creatures are the Book of Nature, as said Anthony the Hermit, who being
demanded by a Philosopher, Socrat. hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 18. Niceph. l. 1. c.
43.
how he could possibly spend his time in the Wilderness, seeing he was
destitute of Books? answered, My Book, O Philosopher, is the nature of all
things created by God, which when I please, I can peruse and read. The world is
Gods Library, God manifested and drawn out; and all the creatures are as
Glasses, in which we may see, and as Scaffolds and Ladders, by which we may
ascend and draw nearer to him: For God is a light too strong for our sense,
therefore we must (with him in the story) look for the Sun in the West, not in
the East; behold the Lord as he is reflected, and refracted, first in the glass
of his Creatures, and his Works: And then secondly, in the face of his dearest
Son.

God in the School of Nature, uses a method so suitable and correspondent to
our dullness, that our meditations should not want in the Creatures Volumes (I
may say) wherein to read most excellent admonitions and instructions: In every
creature are they engraven in ordinary characters, and in lesser a print; as in
the Scriptures, they be written in capital letters once, the Creatures are as a
bright glass, wherein we may behold our God; For as God is a glass in heaven,
wherein all his creatures are seen, lo are the creatures a glass upon earth,
wherein we may behold Sir John Hayward, David's Tears.
and know our God. They are Trumpets of his honor, witnesses of his worth,
bellows of our love* spur^ to our dullness, and judges of our unthankfulness.

There is some good in all creatures, the meanest has a beam of Gods Majesty,
yet some have more than others, the Bees more Os^^ld Crollii b^ silica chimica.
than (almost) any. That a little neglected creature should be so curious in
Architecture, and in the fabric of her hexangle Combs should observe as just
proportions as the best Geometrician, we should suspect for an untruth, if we
saw it not daily practiced by them.

Nicostratus in Aelian, finding a curious piece of work, and being wondered at
by one, and asked what pleasure he could take to stand as he did still gazing
on the Picture? answered, Had thou mine eyes, my friend, thou would not
wonder, but rather be ravished as I am, at the inimitable art of this rare and
admirable piece. I am sure no Picture can express so much wonder and excellency
as the smallest Insect: But we want Nicostratus his eyes to behold them.

And the praise of Gods Wisdom and Raymundus in Theolog. naturali.
Power, lies asleep and dead in every creature, until man actuate and enliven
it. I cannot therefore altogether conceive it unworthy of the greatest mortals
to contemplate the miracles of Nature, and that as they are more visible in the
smallest, and almost contemptible creatures, for there most lively do they
express the infinite Power and Wisdom of the great Creator, and erect and draw
the minds of the most intelligent to the first and prime cause of all things,
teaching them as the power, so the presence of the Deity in the smallest
Insects.

What should be presented to great men, but great and goodly gifts? In this
perhaps many will comply with me, but then readily deny, that a Discourse of
Insects is to be offered to your Honor; but I easily trample on such
exceptions, for although the creatures herein handled, be so small that they
cannot fully be known, and (as worthless, and useless) be undervalued by
many, yet by judicious wise men, who measure things not by greatness, but by
goodness, they will not only be prized, but praised; not only magnified, but
admired. In all parts of natural Philosophy, the knowledge whereof is most
difficult; the contemplation laborious, and the nature most obscure. I have
Aldrovand^^d^ ^ector.
(says Aldrovandus) found that most difficult which is conversant about
Insects, and that for their notable, and admirable smalness, which is the
reason (says he) that no man as far as I know, has delivered many memorable
things of them: Only Ar^stotle of the Grecians have discovered some things
worthy to be known; and Pliny of the Latins somewhat more, which he collected
from the Monuments of Greek and Latin Writers (which are now lost) and some
few things besides there are, which later Writers have taken notice of, but all
so lame and imperfect, that still much remains to be added and amended; and so
brief and obscure, that many still are ignorant and deceived.

Scaliger is very angry with Cardane, that Scalig. de subtle. ^xo^cit. 191.
after Aristotle he should write of Bees, and add nothing new, nor true:
Whereas learned Scaliger endeavoring to confute him, is guilty of many
absurdities, I cannot but expect to hear the same reproach from some, whom I
only request judiciously to read, and then to censure. L^psii Praefa^. ad ^*
Satu^nal.


Embroiderers, of threads of diverse colors (in the new world of various
feathers) make a costly and delightful Hanging: So VVriters out of a thousand
parcels, an uniform, and agreeing body; whom I have labored to imitate, where
I have failed, pardon my weakness, and accept my good will.

But my long Epistle is injurious to your Honors more necessary employments.
The Lord preserve your Honors person, with your Honorable Consort, and all
the Noble Branches descended from you.

Your Honors humble and lowly Orator, Samuel Purchase.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Several CHAPTERS.
CHap. 1. Of the Excellency of Bees Page 1. Chap. 2. Of the Name p. 2 Chap. 3.
The Definition and Description p. 3 Chap. 4. Of the Kinds and Colors p. 8
Chap. 5. Bees nature and properties p. 11 Chap. 6. Bees Politics, Ethics,
etc. p. 16 Chap. 7. Of the Bees senses p. 22 Chap. 8. Of the Queen-Bee p. 27
Chap. 9. Of the Drone p. 35 Chap. 10. Of the Generation of Bees p. 42 Chap. 11.
Of the Hives, and ordering them p. 57 Chap. 12. Of Seats for the Hives, and
Bee-Garden p. 61 Chap. 13. Of the Bees-work p. 67 Chap. 14. Of swarming, and
hiving of Bees p. 77 Chap. 15. What Flowers the Bees gather of p. ^^ Chap. 16.
Of the ordering of Bees p. 96 Chap. 17. Of Bees breathing p. 107 Chap. 18. Of
Bees temperature, sleep, and age p. 108 Chap. 19. Of Bees Fig^ting and Robbing
p. 111 Chap. 20. Of Bees Enemies and Sicknesses p. 116 Chap. 21. Of the
Hony-dew p. 123 Chap. 22. Of Honey p 135 Chap. 23. Of Tree-hony p. 147 Chap. 24.
Of Wa^e p. 157 Chap. 25. Observations and discourses Historical and Fabulous p.
161 Chap. 26. Observations, Physical, etc. p. 169 Chap. 27. Of diverse kinds of
Wild-Bees p. 179 Chap. 28. Of the Wasp p. 181 Chap. 29. Of the Hornet p. 186
Chap. 30. Of Humble-Bees p. 188 Chap. 31. Of Grasshoppers p. 193 Chap. 32. Of
American Bees p. 202
A Catalogue of such Authors as are cited, and made use of in this Tractate.
A
MR. R. Abbot Abynzoar J. Acosta Actuarius Aelian Aesope Mr. Adams Agatharsis
Raimund de Agiles Cor. Agrippa Albertus A. Alcynt U^isses Aldrovan dus F.
Alvarez Alex. ab Alexand. Ambrose Andernacus Amyretus Jo. Anglicus Appian Alex.
Aphrodiss. Hier. Fab. ab Aquapendente Aquinas Aristophanes Aristoteles
Athanasius Atheneus Augustinus Avicenna Ausonius
B
Dr. Balcanqual Hermolaus Barbarus Baronius Bartudas Broughton Basil A. Battle
Bauhinus Gorop. Becanus Beda A. Bellunensis Pet. Bellonius Bernardus
Pseudo-Berosus Bodinus Bonfinius Mr. Bolton Gio. Botero Mr. Brathwayt Geor.
Brawn Mr. Butler Buxtor^ius
C
Cajus A^oys. Cadomustus Cae^. Calcag^^nus Calepine Calvinus Camden Camerarius
Al. Campense T. Cantipratanus Julius Capitolinus Cardanus Georg. Cedrenus Cor.
Celsus Ranulph Cestrensis Chaucer Chrisostomus Chyt^aeus Cicero Ped. de Cieca
Claudian Dr. Cleland Mr. Cobbs Columella Natal. Comes Val. Cordus Fernand.
Cortese Mr. J. Botto^* P Botto^ Mr. Cowper Bishop* Elias Cretensis Pet.
Crescentiensis Pet. Crini^us Crollius Aelius Jul. Crotta Cael. August. Curio* Q
Curtius Cuspinianus Cyprian
D
Dalechampius Dr. Day Diodorus D. Dike Dion Dioscordes Mr. Down
E
Jacob Ekcelius Mr. Elton Marcel. Empyricus Epiphanius Erotis Estates of the
world* Euripides Eustat^ius Eutropius
F
Fazelius Dr. Featly Fernelius Fran. Fernandus Marsil Fi^inus G. Fletcher
Florentinus Mr. Fosbroke Franzius Otho. Frisingensis* Fuchsius Mr. Fuller J.
Fungerus
G
Galenus Mr. Garey Mr. Gataker Theod. Gaza* Cor. Gemma Geminianus Gilpine Hier.
Girova Rob. Gloce^^rensis Godignus Godwin Mr. T. Goodwin Ber. Gomesius Mi^dis
Mr. Googe Gregorius magn. Gregorius Nazian. Mr. R. Greenham Hill. Greg. Gyrald.
J. Ja. Gryneus Gualther An^. Guevara Guild
H
Hack^nit Dr. Hakewill Dr. Hall Mr. Harris Mr. Hartlib Dr. Harvey H. Hawks J*
de la Hay Sir Jo. Hayward Helmont Mr. Herbert Herodian Herodotus Ant. le
Herrera Hesychius Hesiod Hieronimus Higinius Hilarious Mr. Hill Pet. Hispanus
Hippocrates Mr. Hoard Mr. Holbroke Hollerius Dr. Holland* Homer Horatius Job
Ho^^op Hugo Cardinal.
I
Mr. ^. Jacombe Dr. James Jarricius Dr. Jeniso^ Josephus Indicus C. Jobson Dr.
Jones Mr. Johnstone Josephus Jovius Isocra^es Isidorus Hispalen* Pelusiot.
Silius Italicus Justine Juvenal
K
Dr. Kilbie Kimchie Dr. H. King Dr. J. King Kran^zius
L
Lactantius Dr. Lake Jo. Langius Mr. Lawson Levin. Lemnius Ambr Leo Jo. Leo
Nicol. Leonicus Lerius Mr. Levit And. Libanius Linschoten Lipsius T. Livie
Matthew. de Lobel Mr. Lockyer Lucian Lucretius
M
Mocrobius Magirus J. Magnus Olaus Magnus Majolus Bapt. Mantuan. Martial
Episcop. Poeta.
Matthew. Martinius Marullus Matthiolus Pet. Matthew Mr. May Menosa Hier.
Mercuri^lis Mr. Merideth Mesue Ped. de Mexia Mr. Milles Jo. Miletius Mizaldus
Rhodol* Modius Moryson Mouffetus
N
Nicander Nicephorus Nicetas Nigidius Niphus Joach. Nizaeus
O
Julius Obsequens Onesicritus Paulus Orosius Adamant. Origines Ortelius Osorius
Ovidius Oviedo
P
Dr. Page, Sanct. Pagninus Palladius Guide. Pannyrollus Paracelsus Pausanias
Pennius Perottus F. Picolomineus Phavorinus Philo J. Picus, E. of Miran.
Pigafetta Pineda Geor. Piscatorius Guil. Plantius Dr. Playfere Plautus Pliny
Plutarch Polanus Polybius Porcacc^i Dr. Preston Dr. Prideaux Dr. Primrose Mr.
Purchase
R
Mr. Randal Raymundus Mr. Remnant Mr. Reyner Mr. Reynolds Ramusio Beat.
Rhenanus R^bera Matthew. Ricius Rivetus Cael. Rhodiginus Mr. Roberts Mr.
Rollenson Hier. Romano Rosinus Mr. Rowlandson Hieron. Rubeus
S
M. A. Coc. Sabellicus Salmeron Hen. Salmouth Salvian Sands Mr. Sanderson P.
San^lorus Joaon dos Santos Jo. Sa^isberiensis J. Caes. Scaliger Dr. Sclater T.
Scot Scr^bonius Largus Seldom Seneca Servius Dr. Sibs J. Silvester Huld^ichus
Smidel Socrates Solinus Sophocles Mr. Southern Spanhemus Spencer J. Stobaeus
Mr. Stock Dr. Stoughton Strabo Valfridus Strabus Mr. S^^uther Stuckius Mr. J.
Stanes F. Stancarus Sylva^icus F. Suarez Suidas Mr. Swift Mr. Sym
T
C. Tacitus Tarnovius Dr. Jer. T. Tailor Tertullian J. Ra. Textor Theocri^us
Theodoret Theophilact Theophrastus Ped. Teixeira A. Thevet Mich. Toxites
Max^mil. Transilvanus A. Turnebus Geor. Turonensis Willer. Tyrensis Arch.
Tze^zes
V
Valerius Maximus F. Valesius Valleriola* Varro Garrillasso de la Vega L.
Verulam Vigetius Vincentius Virgil Polyd. Virgll Vi^^chindus Fulvius U^sinus
Dr. Usher
W
Dr. Wall Dr. S. Ward Mr. Watson Weckerus Dr. Williams Jod Willichius
X
Xenophon
Z
Zanchy
TO THE Author upon his Physio-theological History of BEES.
WHence this brave slame? and to what sacred fire
(Divine Prometheus^*) do thy thoughts aspired
Mysterious Nature takes it ill, to be
Dethroned from her retired Majesty:
Thy daring hand has taken off her dress,
And showed her naked, midst her hid recess:
Thou have broke up her Archives, and have set
To sale, her Jewel, and her Cabinet:
Her Iliad in her Nut; and now thy Be
Is not her work, but her Anatomy,
Which thou have handled too, at such a rate,
That '^were but one step higher to create;
Thou have her Miracle so here made known
'Twas never hers once, more, then it is now thine own;
Hers at the best was natural, but thine
Is through thy learned labor made divine;
Paradise is her flowery Garden, whence
She suck^ Elixir all, and Quintessence,
This sacred sympathy we never did know
Till thy high soa^ing search had found it so:
That which we all have yet admin'd was but
The shell, thou only feastedst on the Nut;
Whilst towering far above our common sense
Thou take* heaven by thy violence;
And with thy soul on wing, invad'st the sky,
Bringing us Angels Manna from on high
In pious raptures; thus this work of thine
Gives us another table Smaragdine;
Above and Here are like, the Gordian Twist
Is thus unravel'd by our Trismegist:
Now Heaven and Earth in one combined we see*
And God and Nature centered in a BE;
This we must owe to th^e, thy learned sweat
Bankrupts, and leaves us dying in thy debt:
Pardon me then if unto thee I do
Assert the keys of Earth and Heaven too:
Gather our Bees! and hiv'd from Envies harm,
Thrive may those stocks from whence these Graces swarm.
N. T.

Upon the Authors Elaborate Treatise of BEES.
BRokers in verse condemn it as a crime
To preface Tissue with a ragged rhyme.
Oh this does strike me dumb! and bids me look,
I draw no Curtain to eclipse thy Book:
No, if my Lackey-muse sets out, poor she
Runs but to take up eyes to gaze on thee:
Let others soundthy worth in silver mettle
Whilst to thy Bees I ^ang a jarring Kettle.
My Muse had kept at home, but that she sees
Even Drones themselves indulged amongst thy Bees:
I Have sometimes viewed thy small Volaticks fly,
Like golden atom's hov'^ing in the sky;
And then descending gently one by one,
Like curled locks dishev'ld from the Sun.
This object pleased me well, but when I spy
By wings of fancy poys'd with gravity:
Thy thoughts to soar a higher pitch, why then
My mind's unpleas'd, but better pleased again:
I Have peeped into thy Hive, thy Book, and I
Find Bees to have less of art and industry;
And sweetness too, and so must needs confess
I long to taste thy honey from the press.
Each page a comb, each word's a bell from whence
Mellifluous dew's distill in eloquence.
Were I to lead thy troops, hither I Would fly
On every leaf to prove their Chemistry.
Here tired and weary thoughts may sweetness scan,
And reassume new life with Jonathan.
Thy observation's quick, what thou have writ
Speaks thee Dame Natures ch^efest favorite.
The thoughts of various Authors thou have shown,
And proved them flye-blown fancies of their own:
Thou know each Be, their flight, and tracts their stage,
And so have wrote a second Pilgrimage.
One hony'd 'ore a Tyrants eye to feast
Did run the Gantlope through a Hornets neast.
Wasp-like, who at thy Book exceptions take
Makes thee a Martyr for thy sweetness sake.
Io. Angier.

Ad venerabilem Apiarium Authorem, Mr. Sam. Purchase Ministrum, de
Poly-historico suo Mellificio; nec non lectorem candidum, carmen Anagrammaticum.
Samuel Percas Nomen

Mel, curas apes Anagram.

MEl curas and apes, mag^ oves has diligis illos
Nee ^ugis, aut ullo negligis ipso modo.
Sancta Theologiae pandit mysteria docte
Sic tua conscribit suada Philo-lo^ia
Rhetorem and historicum libro nunc asplee docto
Ecce Minister ovum, atque ecce Magister apum.
Ja. Norricius.

To the Reader upon the Philo-logical and Theo-sophical Treatise of BEES.
WHat Aristotle, Pliny, wrote before,
Virgil, Aldrovana, Scaliger, Butler more;
In this one book see thou may more than any,
And marvel not if that I do say many.
All that have written of these Insects nature
So much, which very little are in stature.
I do not know whether for mine own part
Bees nature most, t'admire, or Masters art;
Who centuries has perused, his eloquence
Besides experience, mark t'history,
Philosophy, in the Treatise, Theol'gy,
You may called an Encuclopedy, all
For tongues, arts, matter, pos'tive polem'cal;
A Bee-hive for thy life, most full of honey
Purchase then this Purcasan work, thy money
'Twill far excel, exceed to thee as gainful,
As 'twas though pleasant, to the Writer painful:
For a subject so good you cannot less give,
Give then good words, and praise it while you live:
Or else amend, choosing, or to do better,
Or to desist from the censorious letter: (...) Critical, the letter of
condemnation, Becman. See the Latin Anagram.

There Is honey in his name, more in his book,
Which is mellifluous, come cast as look;
Make this Anthology Pantol'gy thine
Ambrosian Purchase Nectar Divine.
I wonder not it is so natural
For thee to be 'bout Bees historical.
This Treatise framed with such artifice
Shows some paternal metemsychosis:
Though some Antilogists shall vilify
The Work, Workman, both have my Eulogy.
To Zoilus.
Can Mim^s do the like, will Momus like
This Polanthean Pantologick book?
With tongue or pen do not perstringe or strike,
Pie not be Mome, nor Mime, to be I look
While Bees shall be, and shall their Honey give
This Bee-masters name, fame, when dead shall live.
Ia. Norrice Pastor of Ca^ondun.

Upon the Authors Learned and Elaborate Treatise of BEES in both parts of it,
an Encomiastick.
REader, read here a book of BEES dissected;
Their nature, stature, feature, parts detected;
Their feeding, breeding, building, industry,
Their prudence, providence, sagacity,
Their peace, their war, their love, their mortal hate,
Their Prince their Leaders, order in their state;
All these and more unfolded in such wise,
That it a Hive of glass, thou may surmise.
Then magnify this little Creatures Maker,
That (it) of such endowments made partaker;
Wherein his Wisdom, and his power Divine
(As in the heavens above) do clearly shine
In text handwriting; what-thou there do see,
In smaller letters here imprinted Be.
Next praise the Authors Bee-like diligence,
His reading, learning, long experience.
And then read on to that which follows next, On the second ^^rt. Ecclesiast.
12. 10.

The Preachers Sermon on this pretty Text,
Doctrine distilling like the Hony-dew,
Mellifluous, most pleasant, upright, true.
O gather then the Honey from these leaves,
Those vices fly to which thy nature cleaves.
And learn those virtues which the Bees do teach*
Thine understanding, else this book don't reach.
By his loving Friend and Neighbor, T. P. Master of Arts, P. P.

Ad doctum Authorem, in Mellifluam ipsius de Apibus historiam carmen, (...).
FLoribus eximiis mel Apes producere lustrant
Sic (Purchase) libris roseida mella legis.
Quae veteres scripsere diu, tutestibus aequis
Art probas; Laudem dulce loquatar opus
Tractatus doctus, permisce^s utile dulci;
S^illans delicias Religione liber.
Hic labor, hoc opus est, Apibus medicina salubris
Conditur, ac medicam porrigis art manum.
Mystica naturae narras, amor urge^ habendi
Nectar Apis? placida discutis historia.
Gratulor ingenium, librum dum men^e revolvo,
Mel sapi^ scriptis cum pietate ^ovum,
Guil. Rogers A. M.

Upon the Authors Treatise of BEES.
WHat Creature ist' that God has made?
But emblems forth some signal shade
Of that divine and highest power,
Who makes, unmakes, all in an hour,
The sea is filled with small and great,
The earth as full, and most complete,
The glorious heaven beyond compare,
That place where Saints and Angels are:
The basest worm, who eats but dust,
Speaks glorious praise, and that most just;
Unto that God who made us all
In his own way; mysterial.
The eye of man is over dim
To see the glory that is in him:
His hinder parts we may behold
Which he in Nature does unfold,
Here is the Be, a creature small
Which Sans, the rest, may teach us all
His pains, who has this Be expressed,
Shows whether Be or Drone be best;
Who reads this work shall therein find
A skilful pen, an honest mind.
Peruse it well, and thou shall see
More Honey here than in the Be.
Io. Loan Minister of Little Stambridge.

In Melissologiam a viro omnifariam docto Domino Purchaso Elogium.
PLurima mandantur chartis de Apibus M^nimenta,
Parvi a^ moments; plaeraque ficti^iis
Atque putatitiis v^nis sunt scriptar^ ferta,
Munous vult falli credulus and fa^uus
Falsum pro ver^ torpenti Com te pressus
Dev^rat, (bine sophia maximus ill^ labor
Negligitur) satis esse putans in verba Magistri
Iurare, indubium quicquid id ipsus ai^
Amplectens: Genio arridet fallacia dulcis
Quodque ^ove^ pigrum semper erit placidum.
Sedlater in pu^ei veneranda scien^ia fund^
An^lare ac debet continuo rigidus
Qui studet optalum tandem comprendere Adeptum
Ille nucem frangat qui volet and nucleum.
Hoc iter adverum, quo tu mi Purchase docte
Tendebas, credent nobilius sapere
Ex rebus quam libris, mox commercia agebas
Parvis cum Insectis in quibus ipse Deuteronomy
Emicat illustris, quorum Idi^ma tenebas.
(Qui Polyglossus eras) ingenio facili.
Numinis hac tibi pandebant Magnalia summi
Atque loquebant^r scibile quicquid erat
De esse suo, absque mora ^u Pyramidalia tecta
Ingrediens lustras Doedalea illa opera
De coitu, Genesi, partu, pastuque stupendo
Horum quid reginen, quae Polit^ia mane^
Illis contemplaris, quae ad civilia bella
Spectant, ad pacem quomodo sint reduces,
Ambrostum succum quis sit modus eliciendi
Stirpibus evariis art sua Chymica.
I^super ^is de parvis mill Arcana recludis
M^llificis, penitus quae latuere alios.
Quocirca tibi qui debetur bonore rependet
Quicunque ingenuus, proferet and merit^
Cunctis hac in re palmam preripuisse.
Plus and Apes viles insti^uisse suum
Impigrum Dominum de Diis, morum prob^tate
Occonomi cura, regis and officio
Qua spectam populum quem immensa volumina quorum
Lector in hoc solo nititur (...).
G. T.

To the Learned Author of this Bee-like laborious Treatise.
What shall I praise the Author or his pen,
Or run division t'wixt them both? oh then
My Muse would tire, his name needs not my lays
His fathers Pilgrimage erst ware the bays;
I then will sing the praise of Monarchy
In female sex, whose curious industry;
Just rule, sweet concord and frugality;
Mortals amaze, when into it they pry.
But learned Purchase spite of spears is bold
Their Castle to assault, and does unfold
Their nature, kinds, products, and curious works*
Their valor, order, wealth, and what ere lu^ks
Within the concaves of their golden wall
He has spied out, and does impart to all
Much worth's in least of things I now believe
The busy Be has taught me from her Hive.
Since Natures Ark's broke open, come all and view,
Mysterious arts, secrets both old and new,
But herein does excel his proved skill
Surpassing far the rudenes^ of my quill,
Grave meditations both Moral and Divine,
He has extracted from dark Natures mine;
Much labor has procured this precious oar,
And gathered honey sweet sucked from each flower:
And thus by imitation truly wise
He does not scorn to learn of puny slyes.
Thank then the Author, admire the little Be,
But give the God of Wisdom praises free.
Muse now be silent, let himself relate
The rare news he'ath brought from Scithian state.
I^. Fisher.

ERRATA.
PAge 9. l. 6. blot ou^^ in Sc^liger, p. 10. l. 3 blot out not, p. lb. l. 14.
r. about the Cape de burn Speranz^, so black, yet both under the same Tropique,
why the Abyssines are but Tawny Moors, when as, etc. p. lb. l. 16 r. are very
black, p. 12. l. 38 r. quie^cent, p. 15. l. 22. r. A^drovandus, p. 30 l. 34. r.
out of, p 30. in marg. r. Pod. de Mexla, p 35. l. 17 r. wasters, p. 42. l. 1.
for may r. nay. p. ^4, l. 31. r. Aristotle: p 45. l 5. r. sit: p. 46. l. 37. r.
milk: p. 47. l. 28. r. analogous: p. 49, l 37. for none, r. any: p. 51. l. 22.
for for, r. from: p. 52. l. 6. r. excrements: p. 75. l. 20 r. sicula: p. 75. l.
21. r* Hymetti; p 75. in marg r. Maiop^^m^s* p* 97. l. 5. r. Mouse; p 99. l.
16. blot out then; p. 101 l. 19. r put a* p. ib. l. ^4. r. upon the empty hive;
p. 104. in m^rg. r. Fazellus; p. ^10. l. 34. r. tattered; p. 115. l. 16. r.
second ^ p. 119. in marg r. Joaon dos, etc. p. 122. l. 4. for after, r. often;
p. 128. l. 10. blot out their; p. 130. l. 14. r. Pancy^ollus, p. 131. l. 4.
blot out of; p. ib. in mar. r. Pancyrollus; p. 133. l. 20 blot out dew; p. 138.
l. 32. blot out ascribe^; p. 144. l. 10. should have been placed p. 143. l 35,
p. 157. l. 18. r. Hollerius; p ib. l 35. r G^z^, p 160. l. 34, blot out which;
p. ib l. 35 r. on the other side; p. 161. l. 10. r. Hermonax; p. 164* in marg.
r. Tit. Livius; p. 165. l. 8. r. Olynth^a^ p. 173 l. 7. for one ounce of; r.
out of; p. 179. l. 29. r transverse; p 185 l. 32. r. once, p. 190. l. 1* blot
out if; p. ib. l. 20. r. continue; p 195. l. 27 r. ^usset; p. ib. l* 36. r. yet
within all, etc. p. 201. l. 5. r. once; l. 16. r Diaconus*

ERRATA in the Second part.
Page 258. in marg. r. D. Dike; p 261. l. 21. r. return; p. 267. l. 21. r.
makes them consistent; p. 310. l. 14. r. stubborn; p. 311. l. 5 r. make; p.
318. l. ult. r. spat; p. 3^5 l 20. r. wrought; p. 348. l 32. r. reine; l. 33.
r. Bees; p. 364. l. 15. for ^angle, r tail; p. 370. last ^ine, for Drones ^
Doves. p. 374. l. 6 r Plaucus; l. 24. r. in Pitchers; l. 26 r. advantage; p.
376. l 17. r. admit; l. 18 for were, r. are; p. 381. l. 12. for 10, r. T^; p.
382. l. 8. r. quaesitum; p. 386. l. 27. r. which i^; p. 387. l 9. r. last.

A Theater of Political Flying Insects.
CHAP. I. The Excellency of Bees.
BEes are the most excellent of all Insects whatsoever, and express both worth
and wonder in all their ways: They only afford delightful food, and pleasant
nourishment for man, whereas the best in other kinds serve only for Physic,
or the pleasure of the eye, or the delight of the ear, or the clothing of the
body: the most part whereof is by these also some way or other abundantly
supplied; so that natures power is no less in Bees, than in the greatest, and
most perfect creatures; Jo. Rains. Text. Epithet. Dr Jones Comment in Epist. ad
Philem. Carden. l. 7. de Variet^t, rerum.
for he that made the Camel, and the Elephant, made the Be too. This is
somewhat, but yet not enough; because they are the most excellent Creatures for
Prudence, and profit, except man; and indeed the divine wisdom has thus
ordered it, that we might understand that Prudence consists not in the
greatness of the body, but in the mind, which has no need of magnitude, but
as it is less, is so much the more excellent. Here is magnum in parvo, a
little in quantity, but much in worth and quality.

The Be is a little creature, but Gods smallest springs prove at length main
Oceans, his least beginnings grow into great works, great wonders.

Who can imagine that so many pleights and joints, connexions, and
concatenations, should be orderly disposed in so small a fabric? That in a
body so little, the joints should move so actively, the wings stir so nimbly,
the sting penetrate so deeply, the senses utter forth themselves so sharply,
Nay, the lungs, (though scarcely visible) to breath so powerfully, Chrysostom.
Comment in Epist. Paull ad Philip. c. 2. c. 4.
does any then glory, or is proud for his skill in various arts! What in this
respect is wiser, or better instructed than the Be? What Artificer is so
various, what Painter, what Geometrician can imitate her works?

Why do we then marvail at the Tower-bearing shoulders of Elephants, and not
rather where Nature has planted so many senses, and such industry in such
little bodies? where is hearing, seeing, smelling, tasting, and feeling, yea
where are the Pliny says, no creature can live or move without them.
Veins and Arteries in these so little bodies, which a little distance from us
can scarcely be seen with our eyes: And what shall we say of the parts of the
same? and yet in this little Be is such sagacity and industry, as the like is
not seen in creatures of greater quantity.

The great Artifex of Nature has enlarged the smaller creatures with wisdom,
and invention, so teaching that greatness Tertul. adversus Marcion. lib. 1.
is to be found in meannesse (as the Apostle says) strength in infirmities.
Imitate if thou can the Bees buildings, the Ants hills, or lodgings, the
Spiders nets, the Silkworms webbs.

Such therefore are not a little mistaken, who affirm that there is neither
much strength, nor yet such beauty in small creatures, Ant. of Guevara famil.
Epist.
as in the greater; nay, that whereas the greater, as the Elephant, and Horse
are profitable, the lesser serve only to offend, whereas what Creature for
profit can compare to the Be, or the Silkworm?

And though the greatest thing the Vulgar praise her for, is her laborious
industry, yet indeed the least thing that may be praised in her, is her
industry.

For, If old times admire Calicrates
For Ivory Emme^s, and Mermeoides Du. B^^^^s fifth. day.

For framing of a rigged Ship so small,
That with her wings a Be can hide it all.
Admire we then the all wise omnipotenc^,
Which does within so narrow space disp^nce
So stiff a sting, so stout and valiant ^eart*
So loud a voice, so prudent wit, and art:
Their well ruled state, my soul so much admires
That durst I lose the reignt of my desires,
I gladly could digress from my design,
To sing a while their sacred discipline.
CHAP. II. Of the Name.
IN Hebrew a Be is called, (...) Debora, from the order of their work, which
they frame with admirable art and industry; Among the Greeks, Bee^ had various
names, according to the variety of Nations; and Countries, but the most Vulgar
was, (...) (and Hesiod has (...), from Honey, whereof the Be is the Chemical
preparer) and they are also called, (...), because no Insect is so profitably
industrious. The Latins call them Apis and Apes, because as Virgil, they are
trunca pedum prime, first bred without feet: And indeed the Worm or Potential
Be, called by the Greeks (...), Scbad^n, is without legs, but after her
Metamorphosis (of which afterward) she comes forth a six-legged creature, but
because this Etymology answers not Analogy, as other compounds, it is supposed
by others to be a simple word: So also Servius and Pyr. Perottus in C^rnu^op.
Lucian therefore calls them, (...), A. Canlep. in dictionar.

The word Be, according to Goropius, is originally Dutch, Gorop. Be^an.
Her^^th. lib ^
and therefore English; and so composed (says he) because it affords us many
things: Wax, for curing of dolours, wounds, Ulcers; for lights, Ceare-cloath,
and many other things; and for Honey it would require a days work to declare
the benefit and worth thereof. And though these be great benefits, yet there
are more excellent and remarkable to be observed from this Creature: For every
Commonwealth, every Kingdom receive their best directions and precepts,
whereby the duties of the King toward the people, and of the people toward
the King, and of the Citizens among themselves are most clearly taught. If they
hold forth any patterns to us, we readily write after them, and practice them.
For it signifies also, says ^ee, to command or rule, because it is the same
supreme Majesty, that affords and bestows all things, and commands all things.
Wherefore the Architect of words by a singular prudence has commended to us
Monarchy, included in certain limits by the name of Be; which state whosoever
attains, it is necessary that he imitate the King of Bees, who so deports and
carries himself, that he is beloved, provided for, and protected by all the
Bees; and yet in the mean time so far from offering injury or wrong to any,
that he has no sting to hurt any (so Goropius) but which i^truer and better,
he never uses it to the hurt of any.

CHAP. III. The Definition and Description of a Be.
A Be is a Flying Insect, four winged, six legged, best skilled in making of
Honey, her shape is little, brown, bowing, oblong, not globous, as some: Her
eyes are covered with Mouffet. Theatr. insector.
a horny membrane, or tunicle for their better desence and safeguard; they are
of a shining black, like Jet, transparent as Arist. de par^ibus, animal. lib.
2. ^. 13. and also Plin. lib. 11. c. 37.
Glass, immovable, contrary to Aristotle, who says, all Insects move their
eyes, as four-footed beasts their ears; not sunk within their heads (as
Mouffetus) but somewhat prominent, no eyebrows: Their eyes are placed on the
outside of their cheeks, or rather are in stead of cheeks; o^ long, greater
above than below, through which the species of things visible are conveyed to
the common sense. The horns are called by Aristotle, Antennae, because they
hold them forth before them; They are very pliable, and readily bending almost
every way: they grow almost at the top of either eye, for defense with two
joints, one close to the head, the other toward the middle, so that she can
put them forth at full length, when she will, and draw them d^wn again close
to her head: And they are the proper instruments of the sense of feeling by
which, with the least touch, she suddenly senteth any tangible object, The
Drones eyes are far larger, being almost two thirds of their head, with two
moveable wreathed horns, growing out together between the eyes, but extending
like a fork.

For gathering her provision, she has two instruments, her fangs, and her
tongue; her fangs in fashion of a pair of pincers, hang not as the jaws of
other things, one over another, but side-waies, one against the other: Her
tongue is of that length, that her mouth cannot hold it, but being doubled
between her fangs under her throat, it reaches to her breast; it is divided
into three parts, whereof the two outmost serve as a case to cover the third,
which being the chief, the Be in her work, puts forth beyond the other, and
draws in again as she pleases, and this third is likewise parted into
three; so that there are five in all.

In their fangs or chaps, wherein are their teeth, their principal strength
consists; for in their conflicts, where they slay one with their sting, they
kill twenty with their teeth, quickly biting off the wings, or breaking the
legs of their adversaries: And therefore Mr. Butler was somewhat deceived, who
accounts this pinching of other Insects (for against them only do they* use
them) to be rather a chiding, than a fighting, a warning, than a punishment;
being indeed a deadly and mortal instrument of revenge; so that after a battle
you shall see them lie sprauling, hopping away, and crauling in great
multitudes, either drawing on the ground one, or more of their legs, or
doubling the nether part toward the ground, or turning the same awry to the
one side, or other, but as many as are bitten, within a short space will
certainly dye.

They ^unne at first limp^ng away, but survive very little: And that they are
not stung to death, that in such variety of motions, proclaim their various
hurts is very apparent.

First, Because there is no sting appearing in them; nay, more die lamed in
their legs, than hurt in all other parts; and besides, their legs are not
susceptible of a sting: And if you observe many of them, before they be let go
by their Antagonists, the Victor retains her sting still: But says one, their
skin is so thin and Mr. Remnant Hist. of Bee^. c. 3.
dry, their spears come away again without hurt to themselves; but this is not
so, for I have often seen them stricken in their backs, and breasts, and also
between their pleights, or ringles of their nether part, and the sting herein
detained. It is true in a great Carnage, very few are stricken with their
sting, or spear which they are loath to use, when their fangs will right them;
as they will against ^osects, because it is deadly also to themselves.

-- Animamque in vulnere ponit. But their stings they chiefly use against men,
beasts, and Fouls, for knowing that their bitings are little, or no way
prejudicial against such able creatures, they will kill themselves to injure
others: for their sting like a barbed arrow, once entered into skin or flesh, is
holden so fast, that they cannot draw it out again; and when they would be
gone, leave therefore a part of their entrals fastened to it, so that when they
overcome by stinging, they get a Cadmian victory, loseing thereby their own
lives. They are hairy almost all over their bodies, especially the forepart.

A Be has four dry pelluced skinny wings (and so have all Insects that live
in fields, and wander about for their food) two Aristot. de partibus animal.
lib. 4. c. 6. ^
are growing near together, on either side of their shoulders, but the inmost
are somewhat shorter than the other, least they should hinder their flying; and
these swiftly convey them into every place (though some miles remote) round
about their habitations, until by often using of them, they grow torn and
jagged (the infallible characters of old age, and death) and are unable to
support them, yet will they venture forth (but with the price of their lives)
not being able to return.

The hinder part of their bodies is full of ringes, or pleights, of Cardan. de
subtle lib. 9.
which this reason is given: the beginning of motion must be in some part,
which if it were hard, could not be moved, but with the legs, as Crabbs, but
if it were all soft, it could much less be moved, because there is nothing
firm; and therefore there is a necessity of these ringes, that interchangeably
the hard parts may be mixed with the soft.

Their tails are somewhat sharp (the Drones more obtuse) within which is their
stings joined to their entrals, which ordinarily lie bid (as Aristotle) least
they should be spoiled, but they readily exert, and put them out on all
occasions rather (as I said) co offend men, and beasts, than their own kind:
there is another use of them for the consumption of the superfluous Avicen de
anim ^. lib. 8. c. 3
humidity.

They have a place for evacuation under them, and for generation also, as some
conceive. Her feet are six, dew-clawed, pliant, full of joints, hairy; and as
it were, two toes at the extremity of either foot: her hindmost feet are
longest, that she may put them forward to her foremost, which receive from her
tongue the Bee-bread, and wax, and working it on the thighs of the hindmost,
she stands in the mean time on the middle-most; and though she can, and does
ordinarily stand and go on all her feet, yet the two foremost have with her the
use of hands, therewith she strokes and clears her eyes, before her setting
out, but principally in her working for the disposing of her labors to her
thighs. All her feet are scabrous, and rough, to take hold at the first touch,
and not that the flowers which they carry may readily stick on them, as one
says; this cannot be, for they carry no flowers, but suppose him to
understand the Bee-bread gathered of flowers, yet still he fails, Aldro* vand.
de* Insectis. lib. ^.
for this is carried on the thighs, and only of the hinder feet.

In their head is a brain, their back and breast is a kind of reddish fibrous
flesh, in their stomach, is a heart and other necessary members (of which more
afterward) in the hinder part of their bodies, is a little bottle, or bladder
(it is not in the stomach, as Mouffet delivers) the mouth of it reaches, or
opens into the stomach.

In this they carry honey, which with their heat, they defeca^e; purge, and
concoct, whereby it lasts longer than all Aerial Honey, or Manna, and rarely, if
at all, corrupts. Sometimes they carry water likewise in this bottle, and not
in their bill, according Mr. Hill Treatise of right ordering Bees.
to Mr. Hill his expression, nor yet in the soft mossinesse of their whole
bodies, as he also delivers; they have but one contracted entral, which
extended, is as long as the body: The excrements are liquid, fluid, and yellow.

Aristotle in the Description of the Cham^leon, a vile (and in many Countries a
Vulgar) Creature, is very exact, particular, Julius Caesar Scaliger com. in
Aristot. de Hist. Animal. lib. 2. c. 14.
and large. Scaliger having commended this, and wished for like diligence in
others, says, My judgment is, that a Philosopher must omit nothing, for
though some things be known to some, yet it is a secret to many, wherefore,
whosoever writes, seeing he wites to all, must do this common courtesy to all.

I question not, but that many will account me too full, nay, tedious many
times in this discourse; but I cannot shut a long foot into a little shoe, nor
enclose so many Iliads of observations (as one did the Iliads of Homer) in a
Nut shell; for this Ecclesia. cap. 11. v. 3.
would prove an indecorum, for though the Be is little among such as fly, yet
her fruit is the chief of sweet things; and she is full of wisdom* and as the
great Ocean has in it things creeping innumerable, both of small and great
beasts, so does the Be afford observations innumerable. Political, Moral,
Physical, and Metaphisical, it is no wonder then if the Fishermen in this Sea
cannot take all, yet with industry may they have draught enough, and such
plenty of various speculations as may delight, if not satisfy the patient
Reader. Too much curiosity may drown us with Aristotle in the bottom of the
Sea, or burn us with Pliny on Mount V^s^vius.

CHAP. IV. Of the Kinds and Colors of Bees.
ARistotle reckons nine sorts of Bees, and Scaliger commends Aristot. de Hist.
Animal. lib. 9. c. ^0.
this distribution, wishing he had been so exact in other creatures, whereas
here he abounded more in words, than things. Albertus, herein Aristotle's Ape,
enumerates as many, but Albert. Mag. tract. 4. c. 2.
in strange and barbarous terms, which it seems he forged in the shop of his
invention: But whatsoever the Ancients have related concerning diverse kinds,
and some Neotericks, to appear as knowing as any in former ages, have
described; we in these parts of the world acknowledge (because we know) but
one sort of Domestic honey gathering Be: Some indeed live in woods, as wild,
others in hives, as more familiar and mild; but these interchangeably shift
their habitations: And I question not, but the wilder (because more remote from
the company Aristot. de Hist. lib. 5. c. 19.
of men) by familiarity will prove as gentle as any.

Aristotle commends a little round Be in the first place, and in the next that
which is somewhat long, and in shape (not color) like a wasp. But (as I said)
we have in these parts of Europe, but one sort of domestic Be. And yet
Pliny, Varro, Columella; and in a word, all receive this distribution of Bees
from him; And which is more, he confounds the Drone into two sorts, a Thief
and a Drone, which Scalliger reconcileth well thus, that by the Thief is to be
understood that which others call a Drone.

Varro citing Menocrates tells us of three kinds of Bees, one Varro de re
rust. lib. ^.
black, a second red, a third party-colored, which he commends for the best.

In all the Islands of the Moluccas their honey is made of Pigafetta.
certain Flies less than Ants. It is a report not confirmed by any, but
supposing it true, the Bees (not Flies) were small, like unto the American
Bees, and the Ants great, such as are in some parts of the Indies greater than
our Flies.

Moreover, there is some difference in the bigness of Bees, but it is
accidental, for they that are loaded (especially with water or honey) seem
greater and longer than those that are empty. The Nymphs also when they come
first abroad are not grown to the full bigness, which afterward they have; and
the old ones do wither and become little again.

Likewise in these three Ages their colors also do vary; for in their middle
age they are brown, whereas before they are more pale, and at the last they
grow gray, of whitish again, but these are differences of Bees in the same
hive, and not of one hive from another, since these diverse sorts are in every
Hive. Natal* Com. Mythiolog. lib. 2.


The report is, That all Bees were at first of an Iron color, but for feeding
of Jupiter, had this reward bestowed on them to be changed into a golden
color. But not to insist upon Fables.

In some Countries there be white Bees, Aristotle says, in Pontus. Many such
are in America, not because they are thinner, or of a more transparent
substance, or feed more sinely as some, rather they are a fainter and feebler
kind of Bees, for L. Verulam Silva S^lva^um cent. 1. 5.
white is a penurious color, and where moisture is scant, so blew Violets, and
other flowers, if they be starved, turn pale and white. Some assign this as a
cause of colors, the excrementitious moisture, which as it passes through a
courser, or more fine, and delicate strainer, so are the colors brighter or
darker. Others, Bees are not therefore brown or black, because their thin
substance is easily dried, and that which is burnt and Card de v^rietat ^er. c.
28.
moist as a coal becomes black. Nor are Bees of one color more than Wasps,
because they feed of fewer sorts of food, than Wasps: For colors are disposed
unto all things by the great Arist. de genesis animal. l. 5. c. 6
Creator, of which no more certain reason can be given, then why some men are
Negroes, others are not.

Now Negroes are not black by reason of their seed, this is confuted by
Aristotle; nor yet by the heat of the clymate, for this is confuted by
experience, in that Countries as hot, produce Selden^ illust^at. on Drayt.
Polyalbion* ^. song.
of a different color, who can certainly show why about the
Magellanique-S^raits they are so white? about the Cape de Buon Speranza, when
as in the East-Indian Isle, ^^ilan, and the Coast of Malabar, they are black
both in the same parallel. Nor of the soil as some have supposed, for neither
happily will Onesicritu^ apud Strabon* l. 11.
other races in that soil prove black, nor that race in other soyles grow to
be better complexioned; but rather upon the curse of Noab upon Cham, or the
posterity of Chus. But of this can we be no more assured of than the former;
for Chus inhabited a part of Mesopotamia watered by Gyon, a river of Paradise,
and one of the branches of Euphrates. Sands Relat. lib. 2.


Some leaving the hot impressions in the air, attribute it to the dryness of
the earth, as though the Libyan Deserts were not more dry (and yet the people
no Negroes) than many parts of Africa, where they are all blacks.

Some ascend above the Moon to call some heavenly constellation and influence
into this Consistory of nature, and there will I leave them; yea, I will send
them further, to him that has reserved many secrets of nature to himself, and
has willed us to content our selves with things revealed: As for secret things
both in heaven and earth, they belong to the Lord our God, whose holy Name be
blessed for ever, for that he has revealed to us things most necessary both
for soul and body in the things of this life, and that which is to come.

CHAP. V. Bees nature and properties.
BEES are neither absolutely wild, nor altogether tame creatures, but of a
middle nature between both. Some Bees are not (as some conceit) ignorant or
negligent in gathering honey, and framing their combs, but yet serviceable in
meaner employments (as fetching water, watching, and warding) but all are
naturally skillful in all their proper labors, and interchangeably perform
them. Their sting is more often the cause of their ruin, than instrumental for
their relief; for loosing it (which they always do when they sting) they
unavoydably lose their lives; but with the fear of it they often chase away
timorous persons from their Hives.

Some fancy that the cause of their humming noise while they fly, i^, least
they should be deprehended for thieves; whereas the robbing Be, or thief,
boldly discovers his purpose, as soon as he comes near the hive which he
intends to assault, with a loud threatening noise, proclaiming their
destruction, if they shall resist, and not willingly permit their goods to be
plundered, endeavoring by fear to betray the courage that selfpreservation
should arm them with.

That some Bees stay at home to receive the labors of those Arist. in histot.
Anim. l. 9. c. 40.
that go to work (as Aristotle delivers) is but a fable; he says the Bees
returning from their labor, shake themselves, and three or four attend and
follow, and ease them of their burden.

That they carry in a windy season little stones to poise themselves, is a
false relation; yet in a storm they will help themselves by flying under the
Lee-side of an hedge, or encompassing a high and hilly place (if there be any)
and so as it were by making a board (as Seamen speak) take the advantage of
the wind. But if it be a plain Champaign Country, where evasions avail
nothing; then if the wind blow strong against them, they fly low, and almost
close to the ground, and rest often.

Aristotle says, The smaller Bees are more industrious than the greater; his
reason is, their wings are worn and jagged, their color black, and their backs
bowing, when says he, the greater are smooth and beautiful (like idle women)
when indeed they are originally of one magnitude, but growing old, their
bodies, are small thin, and gray, and their wings torn and tattered, a certain
symptom of an approaching death, whereas the others beauty, and lustiness is a
Crysis of their youth, not their idleness.

In the morning they are hushed and still, says Aristotle, until one (surely
the Master of the watch) with two or three loud buzzings calls them all up as
it were to work: But no such exciting sound could I ever hear; nay I am
confident there is none at all. But some such like thing is practiced by the
Apes which some have transferred to the Bees.

Near the River Gambra in Africa, and in many other places ^^pt. Jobsons Golden
trade.
it is certain, that the Apes gather together toward night, some hundreds in a
company, and in the trees (especially near the Rivers side) dance their
Lav^lita's, and perform many strange Garbo^les; but about the setting of the
Sun, one of the company (called by the English Mr. Constable) with two or three
loud voices cease all their disports, and after that they continue quiet and
silent until the next morning when by a like voice they have liberty given
them to play and recreate themselves.

When the Bees likewise return from work, they are (as Aristotle, and others) a
while in a tumul^uous hurly burly, and then by degrees make less noise, and
less, until one flying about gives notice as it were that they must all to
sleep; but it is nothing so, for in full Hives in the latter part of the
Spring, and in the heat of Summer, they make a great buzzing sound all night.
Bees live in a Martial discipline like Soldiers in a Garrison, some always
watching and warding, understand it of the Summer season, when the chilling
cold, or nipping frost does not force them into their Hives: yet in the day
time they continue it longer.

A hot Sunshine or warmer air (even in Winter) will quickly prompt them out
of their Hives to take a short vagary near their stalls, but if the cold be
intense, they are quiessent, if not dormant.

Bees are indefatigably, that I say not covetously laborious, always working,
but never satisfied, always toyling, but never coming to a period of their
endeavors, sti^l progressive, never at their journies end, being impossib^e to
be st^nted, and the longer they work, the more ^a^^est they are, and impatient
of delays, or loyterings, while there is matter to work upon in the fields,
and the weather is seasonable. Nay if the flowers decay and grow scanty; The
Stocks that have enough, and to spare, will to keep themselves doing, rob from
their neighbors.

For every Hive, or Commonwealth, endeavors to be a Non-such, and to engross
all within its own circumference, and by any means to make it self the
increasing figure, though toil, and restlesness continually attend it.

They are not offended with red colored clothes as some affirm, nor yet
in^briated with sweet ointments, no nor much offended with stinking favors: I
have known twenty Hives together stand against a dunghill diverse years, and
thrive and prosper well, yet would I not persuade any to set them in such a
place if he can provide another.

They express not more love to their keepers than strangers, but they being
used to them with greater confidence venture among them, which some (more
fearful) beholding fancy, that the Bees respect and love them more than
strangers; whereas would they boldly come among them, nay take them in their
hands, and carry themselves peaceably toward them (except when they be
irritated and offended before) they should find all love and favor from them.
They feed not on any flesh, nor need Pythagoras cavea^s for that purpose.

That some Bees gather not honey, but water for the King, and his guard, is a
mere fable, for they mutually perform all employments. Aelian lib. 1. c^p. 10.


That there is such an order that the elder Bees should have a proper place in
every Hive, and the younger another, peculiar to themselves, is (as most of the
opinions of the Ancients) a fabulous narration, for they are all promiscuously
mixed together.

Bees (as many other Insects) have neither visible bones, nor Cartilages, nor
Nerves, nor fat, nor flesh, nor a brittle shell, as some land, and
Sea-creatures have, nor that which may be properly called a skin, but a body
of a certain middle nature between all these like to a dry Nerve, but far
softer.

Their body is divided into three principal parts, and there is motion in every
part severed one from another, so that whatsoever is the reason of their life,
it is not fixed to any one member, but in the whole, and therefore Pliny was
deceived, who accords in the former, but denies that Insects, and therefore
Bees have any symptom of life by motion in the head, except it be cut off
with the breast. Aristotle taught him this lesson, which Arist. de hist. Animal
l. 4. ^. 6.
without trial he took upon trust (as many more.) And Sealiger also after him,
and is not content to entertain an error, but insolently insults over Galen,
for placing the chief residency of the Sealig. com in loc.
soul in the brain.

It is true, that the heads of Eeles and Snakes cut off, live not long, when as
the body lives a great while; nay a speedy L. Verul. cent. 4. 4^0.
way to kill an Eele, is to pierce her through the middle of her ^^il. Upon
dissection I have found that only the head being cut off, the horns, the
chaps, and the tongue also will stir, and that a great while after the
separation from the body. Now the reason hereof may be this, Bees have the
spirks diffused, amost all over, and therefore they move in their several
pieces, whereas men and beasts move very little time after their heads are off:
And therefore it is certain, that the immediate cause of death, is the
resolution or extinguishment of the spirits, and that the destruction or
corruption of the Organs, is but the mediate cause; but some Organs are so
peremptorily necessary, that the extinguishment of the spirits does speedily
follow, but yet so, as there is an interim of a small time; but for Worms and
Bees the spirits are diffused almost all over, and therefore they move in their
several pieces.

Further to illustrate this, John Leo, reports that men condemned Jo. Leo.
to suffer death in Egypt, have lived a quarter of an hour, divided asunder set
upon a heated Caldron, sprinkled with unslaked lime, and understood, and given
answers.

A living creature is sensible in every part, so that it can exercise Ca^d. de
subtle l. 9
it in regard of heat, and can also perform in every office that the organ, or
instrument for that office is remaining; and hence are determined many
controversies.

Some query whether a living creature can subsist without the head, others
whether without the heart? Without the head they are not sensible, but live;
without the heart they are sensible, but the heat quickly decays, and motion,
and life also.

Bees revive easily when they seem dead, being brought to the Sun or fire; the
cause whereof is (as before) the diffusion L. Verul. Silva Sil. cent. 7. 69^.
of the vital spirits, and the easy dilating of them by a little heat; they
stir therefore a good while after their heads are off, and that they be cut in
pieces, which (as before) is caused for that their vital spirits are more
diffused throughout all their parts, and less confined to organs, than perfect
creatures.

Augustins mentions the same with astonishment and wonder, August. lib. de
quantit. anim. c. 3. Aristot. de pa^tib. animal. lib. 4. c 6
supposing that no reason can be rendered for it, but that it is a secret work
of God, left one soul should seem to be divided into so many parts. Aristotle
says, that Insects are most like plants, because they have many beginnings in
their essence, for as plants cut in pieces live, so Insects for a time, but
plants more fully.

Bees when they fly lift themselves up; thus they do when Arist. de hist. anim
l 4, c* 9
they arise from the Hive, but they can fly forth-right, without any visible
elevation of themselves. Aldr^mandus would give a reason for it, because, says
he, they want a tail, and therefore continue not long in the air. But this
by experience is found to be otherwise, and birds that have long tails, yet
have a jumping motion in their flight, as the Wagtaile.

When the Hives are full of Bees, and well supplied with meat, neither moths,
nor any other hurtful creature can much endanger them; but when they are few
and weak, they easily miscarry by every adversary; so that it is not a sign of
a better sort of Be, as Aristotle delivers, but only of want of numbers or
strength, when they neglect their own preservation, which sometimes they having
formerly endeavored, and finding their labors frustrate, they grow desperate
and careless; but though in number they be but few, and therefore their
dangers many; their provision little, and therefore their fare poor and
pinching, yet will they not forsake their own Commonwealth to communicate of
the wealth or strength of others, but without repining rest contented, yet by
diligence endeavoring to improve their store and numbers. But when they are so
few that they cannot thrive alone, they will with a general consent (except
their Generals, to whom such a resolution is deadly) sometimes join themselves
to another Hive, but always with hazard, often with destruction.

Bees delight to play abroad before the Hive, flying in and out as thick as if
they were fighting or swarming, in breeding time, once a day usually, if it be
fair weather, and ordinarily at a set time, each Hive observing the same hour
of the day if it be fair; and then they will expatiate and dance the Hay in
circling motions, and surrounding Vagaries; and at other times when they have
been long shut up with cold, or closer weather, the first fair day they will
thus abroad both to recreate themselves, and also to ease their bodies, for
they evacuate for the most part flying.

CHAP. VI. Bees Politics, Ethics, and Economicks.
ONe drop of water has no power, one spark of fire is not strong, but the
gathering together of waters called Seas, and the communion of many flames do
make both raging and invincible elements. And una Apis, nulla Apis, one Be is
no Be, but a multitude, a swarm of Bees uniting their forces together, is very
profitable, very comfortable, very terrible, profitable to their owners,
comfortable to themselves, terrible to their enemies.

Bees are political creatures, and destinate all their actions to one common
end; they have one common habitation, one common work, all work for all, and
one common care and love toward all their young, and that under one Commander,
who is not an elected Governor; for the vulgar often want judgment, Basil.
Concio* in Go^dium Ma^tyr. and Hexame^* homil. 8.
raising the worst and wickedest to the Throne; nor has he his power by lot,
for the chances of lots are absurd, and ridiculous, conferring command often
upon the meanest: Nor is he by hereditary succession placed in the Throne; for
often through pleasures and flatteries are they rude and ignorant of true
virtue, but by nature has he the Sovereignty over all, excelling all in
goodliness, and goodness, in mildness, and majesty.

They have all the same common laws, and with common Ambros. Hexam. l. ^. c. 21.
care, observe them all, and have one common bond, not to have any thing lawful
for one, which is not lawful for another, but whatsoever is lawful, is lawful
for all. And they have one common respect, and reverence to their Commander by
whose counsel their Commonwealth is governed; a common house, a common care of
posterity, common labor, common food, common generation, a common use and
fruition of all things.

A Be, like a man cannot live alone, if she be alone, she dies: J. Stobeu^
lau^ nuptiar* p. 67.
As in the Fable of Menenius Agrippa, the whole body soon perished, when the
rest of the members to ease themselves wronged the belly; so the whole
Commonwealth of Bees will quickly be dissolved if they labor, each Be for
her self, and neglect the public. Nay the Drones, though they be idle, yet
are useful instruments for the good, and preservation of the Commonwealth.

The Polity of Bees is admirable and imitable: Plato and Cicero after a diverse
manner prescribed the form of a Commonwealth, one how it ought to be, the
other how it was of old, but both lay down this as a maxim, that a civil life
should imitate nature which is the best instructor. But what is Natures lesson,
the irrational creatures best express, and chiefly Bees, and therefore Plutarch
sends his Trojane to Virgil, that he Plutarch. reip. gerend. precep.
might borrow a civil life from the Bees. For a civil man by natures rule is
always chief of the City, as the Commander among the Bees.

And again, he says, Bees conserve community unto their Plutarch. ^n seni si^
geren. resp.
last; for no man ever saw a Be degenerate into a Drone, which some require of
Civil Governors, that the vigor of their age being past, they should live
idle at home. Great spirits degenerate no^.

They express if not great reverence, yet I am sure great love to their
Commander, without whom, they will be, they will Pet. Matthew continuat. Gen
h^st of France.
do nothing, and with whom they will be any thing, go any whither, stay any
where, be content with any thing.

The Poet elegantly thus writes, Virgil. Georg. l. 4.


Besides not Egypt, nor rich Lydia ^^re,
Nor Medes, nor Parthian^ do their King adore;
Whilst bee's alive in concord all obey,
But when be dies, all leagues are broke, and they
Themselves destroy their gathered food at home,
And re^d the fabric of their Honey-combe;
It Is be preserves their works, him all admire,
And guard his person with a strong desire:
They carry him, for him they bazzard death,
And think in War they nobly lose their breath.
Xantippus therefore the Lacedemonian being General of the Polytius.
Carthaginian^ said, He had rather serve under the Commander of the Bees, than
lead an army of Ants. I say, under the Commander of the Bees, who uses not his
sting, that is, exercises tyranny against none, and orders nothing but that
which is profitable for the Commonwealth; when as they that lead an army of
Pismires, that is, men who neither will, nor know how to obey, never perform
any thing notable, and praiseworthy; so that aptly Him^^ describing the Greeks,
hastening to the Oration of Agame^non the General of the whole Army; Homer l.
2. ^^^ad.
and as he calls him the Pastor of the people, compares them to Bees swiftly
flying with their labors to the Hive, where their Commander is constantly
resident.

The Egyptians on this ground placed on the top of the Kings Scepter the bird
Cu^^phus (which is a Stork) with a Aldrovand. de insectis lib. 1. Caelii
Calcag. Apol. p^o Alfonso duce Fe^tar. Cornucop. Pyr. Per^^ti. and Petr.
Crinitus de honest. disc plin.
River-horse underneath it, implying that piety must suppress impiety, clemency
ferity* And from hence the Tribunes of the Soldiers among the Romans carried
their swords without edges, intimating that the Generals of Armies ought not to
kill the Soldiers, but to correct them, as the Commander of the Bees does her
subjects; and perhaps on this ground, the Egyptians by the Hieroglyphick of a
Be signified a King, because it becomes a Commander of a people, to mingle
with the sting of justice the honey of clemency.

Memorable to this purpose was the practice of a certain King of Fr^^ce, who
having conquered the Ins^brians, and entered their City, by a symbol or type
thus expressed his clemency Baptist Mantuan in exhort ad In^ub.
wearing a coat full of Images or pictures of Bees, and this Motto written upon
it, Rex mucrone caret, the King wants or uses not his sting.

Their Ethics and Economicks appear in many particulars, They make frugality
the basis of their subsistence, and therefore as they laboriously gather store
of honey they shut up the Cells still as they fill them, and until Winter
come, will not open them, but live in the mean time of Bee-bread, and such
provision, as they get abroad, lest if they should prodigally waste while they
may work, they might after starve when they cannot work. And in the pleasures
of this life they are so moderate, that perfect temperance seems to rest only
in them.

They are neat and cleanly creatures, never suffering any filth or excrements
long in the Hive, emptying themselves always abroad. And if in the Winter
while they are weak, and not able to endure the colder air, filth be
contracted, yet as soon as the Spring comes, and they grow numerous, and
strong, they diligently cleanse their Hives, and carry out all.

Their cleanliness also thus appears, That they will not suffer their dead to
continue long in the Hive, but carry them forth to burial.

Their chastity is admirable, for whereas many other creatures couple together
openly; Waspes also and Humble bees, and many sorts of wild Bees scarce
specifically differing from them, yet whatsoever the Bees do in Venus service
they act in secret, and far remote from the eyes and knowledge of all men.

The Poets say, That this is the reason of it* Saturn the husband of Ops, and
father of Jupiter, was wont to devour his own children when they were brought
forth (the reason of it was, because Saturn was named the god of time, and all
times passing and returning, revolve again into themselves) which gave occasion
to this history; when Jupiter was born his mother Ops fearing the cruelty of
her husband to him, concealed his birth, and the Cretans for fear that Saturn
should hear the child cry* ^ung their brazen pans and kettles, which noise ^
the Bees following, came to the place where the Infant was, and fed him there
with honey. Jupiter for so great a benefit, bestowed on his Nurses for a
reward, this admirable gift, that they should have young ones, and continue
their kind without wasting themselves in Venery.

Others report that Jupiter being much in love with a fair Mr. May Annotat on
Virg. Georg.
Nymph called Melissa turned her into a Be, and for her sake bestowed this,
and other privileges on the Bees.

And they are not less valiant than chaste, though industry and diligence may
do much with all other creatures, yet little with these, no not to palliate
their fierceness, let them be exasperated near their Hives, you may as easily
bind a Lion with a single hair, as by opposition and resistance, compose and
quiet them, though the creature is but little, yet virtus no^ minima. Is it not
strange to behold such a little Insect to contend with the most mighty, to see
such vigor in a creature without bones or scales, or hard defenses, and yet to
be offensive to, nay prevalent over the most strong, and powerful creatures!

In valor therefore, and magnanimity they surp^ss all creatures, Mr. Buller
Femin. Monar. cap. 1.
there is nothing so huge and mighty that they fear to set upon, and when they
have once begun, they are invincible; for nothing can make them yield but
death; so great hearts do they carry in so little bodies.

In private wrongs and injuries done to their persons (for which cause men will
soonest quarrel) they are very patient, but in defense of their Princess and
Commonwealth, they do most readily enter the field,

-- For them they hozzard death, Virg.

And think in War they nobly lose their breath.
Their War whatsoever some say to the contrary, is only foreign, for though
in the same Hive, by a violent or accidental congression of two swarms, there
be sometimes a deadly contest, and bickering, yet still it is foreign, for
they were never united under one Commander.

They never fight (whatsoever some unexperienced Observers report) for food,
nor fall out among themselves for meat, but Mous^e^ The^^um Insect.
alike communicate of all they have (though but little) and when it is spent
(if it be no gathering season) starve altogether.

Their Geometry appears in the fabric of their combs; and their Astronomy in
the knowledge of the weather, for they foreknow and presage winds and storms,
and either keep themselves in their Hives, or go not far, perhaps fetch water,
and quickly return.

When they fly not far from the Hive, but fly about it, the Theophrast. l. 1.
de sig* tempestat.
weather being serene and fair, it is an usual token of an approaching storm,
or tempest, Aratus prompted him (if not experience) with this observation.

But above all, one excellent skill they have, which the most experienced
females, though they much desire it, must yield themselves to want; for they
know certainly when they breed a male, and when a female, which appears by
this, that they lay their Cephen-seeds in a wide comb by themselves, and the
Nymph-seeds in the rest, which are of a smaller size.

In their own Commonwealth they are most just, not the least wrong or injury is
offered among them: but I cannot commend their justice toward strangers, for
all that they can catch is their own, unless they may be excused in this
respect, that the Bees of diverse Hives are at deadly feud, or rather as
Kingdoms that are at difference one with another.

If Bees, creatures without reason, have such Prudence, Providence, Fortitude,
Chastity, Loyalty, Natural affection, such Government, Order, Discipline; How
much rather ought men to express the same in their carriages and conversations.
If they abhor Intemperance, Luft, Sloth, Rebellion, Cowardice, shall men
practice them? They are then worse than Brutes, and deserve rather to bear the
names of savage Monsters, than of civil and reasonable men.

CHAP. VII. Of their Senses.
CReatures produced of putrefaction are little, and weak in the senses;
defective in their exteriors, much more in their interiors; yea they altogether
want wisdom, and are Cardan. de subtle. l. 9. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 1 i* c 10.
Arist. de Hist. animal. l. 4. Scalig. com. in Arist. de hist. an. l. 4. ^7.
stupid. And therefore Bees are prudent, because they are generated of a
certain matter, and not without a parent.

Bees have all the five senses, though there do not appear all those outward
Organs of senting, which some other Animals have: And so likewise Fishes have
no visible Organ of hearing and smelling; and yet hear and smell, there is not
seen perfectly in their heads a brain, yet is it the beginning fountain and
feat of all these senses, fantasy, and memory.

Of all the five senses their sight seems weakest, yet is it clear, especially
afar off, which guides them abroad, and directs them home, though sometimes
they are three or four miles from their Hives.

But their sight is not so quick near hand; for sometimes they will fly
against you, if you come suddenly cross them when they are laden; and also near
the mouth of the Hive, if Mr. Butler Feminine Monarch.
they light besides the door, they will run up and down seeking for it, as if
they were in the dark (hereby verifying this truth, That things nearest the eye
are furthest from sight) but then up they rise, and flying back a little way,
turn again with a better view.

As many as fall besides the stool when it waxes dark, ten to one but they lie
abroad allnight; yea if at such times being troubled by any thing, they come
forth out of the Hive, although they be fresh and lusty, they will leap up and
down, run, and fly to and fro, until they be weary, but by no means can they
find the way in again.

And therefore it is, that when they fly abroad they take much pains at the
door in rubbing, and wiping their horney eyes, that they may better discern
their way forth, and back again^.

It is said by some of the Ancients, that Insects have only the sense of
feeling, which is manifestly untrue, for if they go forth right to a place they
must needs see.

Their smelling is quick and excellent, for they will sent honey a mile from
their Hives, and make haste to it, and when they fly aloft in the air by it,
sent any flowery Mead or Heath near them.

As soon as the hony-dew is fallen, they presently sent it, although the Oaks
that receive it be afar off; which the Poet (speaking of the excellency of
this creature in this sense) thus expresses,

-- Ideoque per auras Lucret. l. 4.

Mellis apes quam long ducuntur odore.
Their feeling is as active as their other senses, nay more, for it is most
individuate, it inheres in the subsistence of the creature, Mr. Brathwayt Third
Essay of Touching.
and cannot be separated, or taken away without the detriment, or utter decay
rather of the subject wherein it is. It may therefore be called the living
sense, although in diverse diseases and occurrences also oft-time befalling the
subject wherein it is, it may be deprived of it. As we read of Ath^n^goras of
Argos, who never felt, any pain when he was stung by a Scorpion.

Their feeling is so quick, that if you do touch a Hive very softly, or knock
upon the ground near the stool, they presently resent it, making a general
murmr, and many of them coming out of the Hive door, as it were to examine
the cause.

And for their taste, this is evidently as active as their other senses;
thereby they make choice of waters, and all other gatherings for their use and
purpose.

And lastly, for their hearing, that also is good, though Aristotle doubts of
it, nay denies it. Cardan says, That Arist* de hist. an* ^ 9. c. 40. Metaph.
l. 1. c. 1. Card. de subtle. l. 9. Idem de varieta^terum l. 7.
Bees, because they are so small creatures, cannot hear and see too; but being
flying creatures, there is a necessity of seeing, and therefore an
impossibility of hearing; but he contradicts himself, when he tells us,
though untruly, that every morning (all being yet silent if not asleep) one
(the Constable sure, or the Master of the Watch) by two or three Bombes or
shrill sounds like a Trumpet, calls them all up to their work; and so likewise
in the evening, flying about the Hive, with a small humming murmr commands
them to sleep.

But if Bees hear not* to what purpose is the calling before they swarm, and
also their encouragements in fight, --

-- And then a voice Virgil.

I^ heard resembling Trumpets winding noise.
And Scaliger acknowledges against Aristotle, that they hear Scalig. Comment.
in Arist. de Hist. animal. l. 9. c. 64.
signa enim don't intu^, alia atque alia etiam foris, mutat^ murmr.

But in a word, further to manifest that they hear: If a swarm rise, and the
Queen Be miscarry, and fall by the way (as it often happens) her company
notwithstanding will light, expecting her coming. But being hived, they
presently miss her; and with a mournful murmr bewail their condition. Some
run up and down distractedly within the Hive, others without; and by and by
making a sudden stop, fall into a passion of mourning, and then run up and down
again, and then mourn again, but in the mean time they send many to seek for
her. I have often found her where she has been fallen, and taking her up,
carried her to the Hive, where I have observed (not without admiration) how
that at her first coming they have in a moment changed their former note and
carriage, and with clapping of their wings, and a rejoicing murmr
congratulated her presence; and those that were seeking about for her, although
some rods distant from the Hive, in an instant, as it were, returned all home,
and with a rejoicing gratulation welcomed L. Verulam. Silva. silvar. cent. 7.
6, 8.
their Queen. And therefore they have hearing, which shows likewise, that
though their spirits be diffused, yet is there a seat of their senses in their
head.

And as they have the outward senses, so have they the inward also, else could
they not be wise and prudent; understand wisdom or prudence equivocal, so
called by reason of the resemblance F. Picolomin. universa phil. de m^ribus.
it has with true wisdom or prudence, being able to find out, and to manage
convenient means unto natural and self ends.

Virtue is not taken or understood one, but many ways, sometimes for the
shadow, and a slight or light resemblance thereof, in which signification Bees
are called prudent, whereas prudence properly so called, belongs not to them.

Bees have memory, which is not a sense or imagination, or Caelius Rhed. l.
ect. Antiq. lib. 20. cap. 3.
understanding, b^t a disposition or habit of any one of them, when the time
also is joined, or added to it, wherein the impression is made, and the vision
is left in the mind; whence this is a consequence, those creatures have
memory, which have sense and understanding of time, for we remember only in
the sensual part of the mind; for if a horse has been mired in a slough, when
he meets with the place again, he will presently remember that he was there
mired.

And herein Brutes differ from men, That a reasonable creature does not only
remember that he has seen, or heard, but also differenceth the spaces of the
present time, from the time past; but Brutes only know thus much, that they
have fallen (into a pit, or other dangerous place) at this present, or
sometimes formerly.

Again, a man observes that he remembers, which irrational creatures do not.
And among all living creatures they have the best memory, which have the most
clear, pure, and perfect imagination, of which sort are Bees and Pigeons.

As some creatures besides sense, have memory, and natural prudence, so some go
further, for they are disciplinable; but none have experience, or very little.

Now by sense we are to understand that sensitive knowledge which is only in
the presence of the object, whether it be by the internal senses, or by the
outward common sense or fantasy: For under the name of sense, the Philosopher
comprehends whatsoever is necessary to perceive or understand in the presence
of the object, but there is necessary in all, somewhat of the fantasy or
imagination, to understand even that which is without. And therefore it is
common to all brutes, as to understand, so also to have imagination; but memory
adds an inward strength, and power of conserving the species and using them in
the absence of the objects, that by this means any thing may remember those
things which it takes in the sense, even then when they are not present, in
regard of the external senses.

This faculty, says Aristotle, some creatures have, but not all, but yet he
declares not what creatures have, or what want it. They are commonly thought to
have memory, which may properly and perfectly be moved from one place to a
more remote, either by a progressive motion on the land, or flying through the
air, or swiming in the waters, for memory seems for this purpose to be given
to creatures, that they may be removed to a distant place, either to avoid
that which is nocive and prejudicial, or to find that which is useful, which
they have any ways made trial of.

Further, some creatures, says Aristotle, with memory, have prudence, which
(as we said before) is not to be understood properly, but metaphorically, for
they use not discourse, nor acquire a habit, whereby they may judge of what
they are to do; but oftentimes so act by a natural instinct, and so provide for
the future, as if they had reason indeed, and therefore by a figure are called
prudent.

And this prudence of Brutes is a special sagacity in some, which by the
instinct of nature, are so ordered as that they seem to imitate the reason and
prudence of men; but all brutes have not this prudence, but those creatures
that have it, are so perfect, that they have all of them memory.

And we may add further, that this natural sagacity, then chiefly merits the
name of prudence when it is trained up, and perfected by the memory of former
things.

Some creatures have not only memory, but are also disciplinable, but others
are not: Of this last rank are those, which though they have memory, want the
sense of hearing, for hearing is the sense of discipline; for we see many
creatures, dogs, and horses, act by external signs, but never without a
cooperation of hearing, whereby they are called and stirred up to understand
the signs. Arist. Metaph. lib. 1. cap. 1.


Now Aristotle sets down an example in Bees which he supposed not to hear. But
Pliny, Scaliger, and many others affirm the contrary, and by good arguments
prove their Assertion.

Albertus willing to salve the Philosophers credit, invented this distinction.
There is, says he, a hearing of a sound, as so, or of a voice, as it is an
articulate sound, now Bees hear in the former way, not in the latter; but this
latter hearing, says he, is necessary to make a creature disciplinable; but
whether many disciplinable creatures so hear, might bear a great question; for
although when they hear such words or sounds, they come, or fly down, or speak
after the fashion of men, yet are all these things done by a natural instinct
(supposing memory, and the experience of such a sign, or voice.) And therefore
Suarez ^r. Suar^^* Metaph, disp. 1.
says well, It were better to say all creatures which are disciplinable, have
hearing, and perhaps sight, memory, and a metaphorical prudence or sagacity.
But to leave these nicer disputes, (as perhaps by some supposed) impertinent to
our present Discourse.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Queen-Bee.
THe Queen-Bee is a fair and stately creature, longer by the half, and much
bigger than a common Honey-Bee, yet not so big as a Drone, but somewhat longer.
She differs from the Common-Bee both in shape and color; her back is all over
of a bright brown, her belly even from the top of her fangs, to the tip of her
train, is clear, beautiful, and of a sad yellow, somewhat deeper than the
richest gold: Her head is more round than the little Bees, by reason her fangs
be shorter, her tongue is not half so long as theirs; and thereby nature has
disabled her for working, for it is impossible for her short tongue to extract
much out of any flower, were she never so industrious.

Her wings are of the same size with an ordinary Bees, and therefore in respect
of her long body, they seem very short, resembling rather a cloak than a gown,
for they reach but to the middle of her train, or nether part. She has
streighter, and stronger legs and thighs than a Honey-Bee, which are of the
color of their belly, but her two hind-legs more yellow. She has a lofty
pace and countenance expressing Majesty: That she has a white spot in her
forehead glistering like a Diadem, I never saw, though it be frequently
reported: Nay I am sure of the contrary.

Her nether part is much longer than her upper part, and more sharp than any
ordinary Bees, having in it four ringles or partitions, and in each ringle a
golden bar instead of those three whitish rings, which other Bees have at their
three partitions. The spear or sting she has is but little, and not half so
long as the other Bees, which like a Kings sword, is rather born for show and
authority, than any other use. I believe they cannot use their sting, for I
have provoked and forced them to sting by hard holding of them, and putting
their tail to my bare hand, but could never perceive them willing to put it
forth. Nay when I have forced it out yet she would not enter it in my hand.

In a word, the Queen Be in her whole shape and color, is a goodly and
beautiful creature.

-- Velut inter ignos.
Luna minores.
As the Moon when in a clear night, she fills her circle, is more and more
eminently beautiful than all the lesser stars, so is the Queen Be among the
other Bees.

There are not two sorts of Kings, or Queens in any Hive, as Aristotle, and
after him Pliny; and the most have delivered, but only one, and though a King
in place and power, yet Arist de hist. Animal. lib 5. cap. 19.
is in sex a female, Vocantur ab aliquibus matres qua^i quae pariant.

That two several Queens or diverse companies should agree in the same Hive,
though divided in their works, and neither entrench on the others subjects and
labors, although the Ancients very confidently deliver it, yet it is a mere
fable Mr. Googe ^. Book in Treat. of Bees*
. Many Kings in a Hive, but falsely: As Aristotle makes two kinds of Kings, or
Queens, so in every Hive he would have at once several Kings, for although one
be enough for government, yet not for generation, says Scaliger, supposing
with Aristotle, that they were instrumental, as the males, for the generation
of Bees. Arist. de hist. Animal. lib. 5. cap. 19. Scalig. Comment. in loc.


The Queens cells wherein she breeds, are not usually in the bo^tome, or under
the combs, but on the edges, some on the outside, some more inward in the
middle of the combs.

And they often exceed Aristotle's number, who determines them to be six or
seven, whereas in some hives there are not so Arist. de hist. Anim. lib 5. cap.
19.
many, in others nine or ten.

It is a Chymerical fable that some have asserted, that the Bees first build
their Commanders houses in the most eminent part of the combs, more large and
beautiful than their own, and of the purest wax, and then enclose it with a
waxen wall from the rest. Whereas indeed neither Commander, nor subjects have
any particular habitations, for they live and lie between the combs, and the
hexangle cells are repositaries for food, and nurseries for generation; and the
orbicular cells are breeding places for the Royal issue.

And yet Aldrovandu^ delivers it as a received and ancient Andro. de Insect l.
1.
truth that the Queen Bees cells are made in a more eminent part of the hive,
very large, environed with a fence, or wall, for an emblem of their greatness.

And as in conditions they are of three sorts, so they make a triple division
of their cells; those nearest to the Queens Palace, for the most ancient
inhabitants, as the Queens guard, and next to those the younger, and such as
are not yet a year old; but to the middle sort as the most strong and lusty are
committed the extremities. This is a fancy also.

The materials for the Queens generation are yellow, and Arist. de hist.
Animal. l. 5^ c. 22. Columel de ^e just. l. 9.
there is not first a worm, but presently a Be, ut aiunt, says Aristotle. And
Higinius as he is cited by Columella, says, the Commander is not procreated
of a worm as other Bees, but in larger cells than the Honey-Bees, are found
holes filled with a matter of a red color, out of which the Queen Bees are
bred, even at first with wings, so that it appears there was some glimmering
light among the Ancients concerning the Queens generation, but dark and
uncertain.

Know thus much, that into those orbicular cells is injected a spermy matter
thick like cream, but inclining to yellow, wherein and whereout the Queen Be
is bred, it being both matter of generation, and augmentation, for she is at
first (when she is visibly any thing a perfect Be in lineaments and shape,
though not in magnitude and dimensions, and feeds of that wherein she is bred,
until she comes to her perfection.

The Bees never destroy the Nurseries, or breeding cells of the Queen Be, as
Aristotle delivers* and also Pliny, although after they intend to swarm no
more, they kill all the Royal issue then in being (nay although they be
imperfect embrioes) to preve^t a future distraction.

Before the Bees swarm, the Queen Be by a peculiar and distinct voice (
Hesic^ius calls it (...), which we in English Hesic^ius*
say Sing, for it is performed in a musical manner) some days before makes it
known throughout all the Hive, that all may be ready.

Ridiculous is the conceit of Didimus to pull off the extremities of the Queen
Bees wings, that they may not fly away, for sometimes for recreation, and also
for evacuation of their bodies, they use to go forth; and if their wings were
cut would be disabled to return.

I once had a good swarm likely to miscarry, the Queen Bees wings being
accidentally torn, so that going out of the Hive, she fell besides the stool,
and could not get up again. And although once and again finding her before the
Hive, I put her into it, yet afterward she went forth, and was lost. And
almost all the Bees (in her loss) neglected their work, and began to pine away,
until I furnished them with a new Commander.

The Queen Be never voluntarily deserts her subjects, as Aelian and others
intimate, affirming that the Bees diligently Aelian. lib. 5. cap. 12.
seek her out, and return her when she has fled away.

Oftentimes when a swarm goes forth, the young Commander being weak, is not
able to follow, but falls down, sometimes besides the stool, or sometimes
further off, with whom some of the company will stay (such as being near her
saw her fall) and encompassing her round will continue with her, except she be
taken up, and conveyed to the swarm or hive, until they perish together. The
Bees find not their leader by the P^d. mexia de Bedae ^xiomat. Philosoph. and
Cantiprat. in bonum universale de apibus, lib. 1. c. 19.
smell.

Many are confident that the Queen Be never goes off the hive, but with a
swarm. Cantipratanus asserts this, but forgetting himself in the twentieth
Chapter, he says, If her subjects be weary with working, and cannot, or
wander, and know not the way home again; the Queen Be goes forth and finds
them by their smell, and relieves them, and conducts them to the hive; but this
is more fabulous than the former.

It is more than probable, that the old Queen Bees, go forth sometimes with the
latter swarm (whether out of curiosity, or wantonness, or indulgency, or
dislike of her proper house, or love to ^er ancient subjects, I determine not)
and this is the cause of the not thriving of many old stocks, after they have
cast a second swarm; for although the Bees that are left, be in a well
replenished Hive, and therefore live out the Summer well, and work too, though
not with that order and diligence as formerly, yet will they rarely breed, but
by degrees consume away, and come to nothing. I have exactly viewed diverse such
stocks that I have taken, and could never find a Queen Be among them.

If therefore you perceive a hive, after it has cast twice, to have some
quantity of Bees, and yet to work negligently, or not to increase in the
Spring, suspect them to want a Queen, and supply them with one as soon as you
can, if no other way, by driving a poor swarm into them, for which purpose
always reserve some.

It has been a constant tradition, that the Queen Be has a special guard
always waiting on her, and that when she goes forth, she is always attended
with them. I have often seen her to go forth, but always without attendance.
It may possibly fall out that some Bees may go abroad with her, and some others
return when she comes back to the hive, but never as her special guard.

Mr. Butler says, If the Queen Be by her voice bids them go, they swarm; this
is warily to be understood, namely of the latter swarm only; for the first is
for ought I could ever find out, at the will of the Commons; but there may be
a tacit consent of the Queen, but not solemnly by voice, allowing their
departure as in after swarms.

And again this is not always true in second swarms, for after the Queen has
approved of their going forth, yet they will sometimes refuse, and manifest
their dislike by massacring all the Infants of the Royal family.

I have observed some few Bees in the Spring in every good Hive, with crests,
tu^ts, or ta^sels on their heads, some yellow, some murrey, in manner of a
plume, some standing upright, some turning down, but in all other respects like
other Honey-Bees.

Mr. Butler supposes them subordinate governors and leaders, as Captains and
Colonels: They are seldom seen but in May, and a little after; that they have
any authority, or command over the rest, or special place about the Queen Be,
I believe not. This I am sure, I never saw any one of them attend her in her
short progresses. Their working, I conceive wears often this ornament.

The Queen Be goes first out with the swarm, say some: T. Cantiprat. bonum
universale de apibus, lib. 1. cap. 14.
but it is not so, for she goes almost last, sometimes indeed she comes forth
half an hour before the swarm rises, with a great company which environ, and
attend her on the stool; but her company moves not until the greater part are
passed out of the hive, and then those that environed her begin to arise, and
she with them.

And as in the emission of a Colony, the Queen Bees go not Aelian lib 5. c. 11.
before, neither are they carried at any time as some report.

Sometimes as I said, she comes forth before, and stays without; at other
times she comes first to the bottom of the stool, and perhaps out of the
door, as it were chiding their slackness; but then when the swarm begins to
arise, she returns in until the greater part be come forth, when she
follows, and where they usually light, joins her self to them.

Bees are governed by a Queen, which many hold not properly to come to the
supremacy by succession, but by a judilcious and prudent election, whereas it
is most apparent, that the elder of the Blood Royal goes forth with the first
swarm, and so the next in order with a second, although sometimes especially in
castlings, or second swarms; some others venture forth. I have known eight go
forth in one swarm, for they can but dye, going forth, and death is certain and
inevitable if they stay. And a younger by dividing the swarm, or first getting
the highest place of the Hive, may be peaceably obeyed, with the destruction
of all the rest.

Nay being necessitated, their own leader miscarrying in swarming, or by some
accident afterward. I have preserved the stock by putting to them a Queen Be
taken from another. And once, because I would be sure, I pared off a little of
one wing, and some months after, for experience sake, took the Hive, where I
found that Commander put in by me, and no other Leader. So that though
ordinarily the Queen Be comes to her government by birthright and seniority,
yet sometimes by election, as in the miscarriages of their old Queen, and in
second swarms when two are united together.

When several Leaders go forth, one whose party prevails gets the Throne, and
all the other competitors are slain. When their proper leader by some mis-hap
has been lost, I have given them another (as I said before) with whom they
have well agreed, and prospered, so also in the union of swarms.

And although they are willingly subject to a leader, yet do they not
altogether lose their liberty; for the first swarm goes always forth at the
will of the commons; and although the second, and also the third, must have the
Regal assent which usually (being indulgent to their issue) upon petition they
grant; yet if the Commons see it not convenient to diminish their numbers, upon
the Queens grant, they kill the Probationer, and all of the Blood Royal; so
that Prerogative avails little in the Commonwealth of Bees.

The Queen Be (for it is an Amazonian Commonwealth) transcends in greatness
and beauty of body; but which is most praiseworthy in a Commander, in mildness
and gentleness, therefore though they have stings they never use them, which
the breeding or mother Wasp does, stinging more venomously than the smaller.

The Laws whereby this Commonwealth is ordered, are natural, not written in
letters but engraven in their manners; and so studious are they of peace, that
neither willingly, nor unwillingly do they offer injury to any of their
subjects.

Who will not hate the Di^nis^i of Sicilia, or the O^^^man family among the
Turks, of the present great Mogore, or Persian Tyrants? who (in practice) hold
Monarchy to be nothing else but a lawless exorbitancy in all manner of lusts
and mischiefs, which ought to be far from a good Prince, le^t while he seems
to be a man, he discovers himself to be far worse than these irrational
Insects.

And as their life is not vulgar, ^o neither their birth and original; for
whereas all domestic Bees, at first are imperfect creatures, worms fixed to
their Cells, wanting many senses for twenty days together, and then that they
may live a more perfect life after a death of twenty days, more transmuting
their shape, come forth winged creatures; The Queen Be is bred (as I formerly
hinted) in another fashion.

There be in every Hive ordinarily on the outsides of the combs (yet sometimes
in the middle) but not near the verge^, little concave cells (but one in a
place) almost like acorn cups, but nothing neat so broad, yet somewhat deeper,
very strong and thick of wax, orbicular, wherein the Queen Be injects a
spermatical substance thick like cream, but somewhat more yellow, wherein the
Queen Be is bred perfect at first in all the parts, and lying almost round in
it, feeds of it, and so grows as the chicken in the shell, first of the white,
and then of the yolk (while the Hen sits upon it) until it be disclosed.

The Atbenians banished Pisislratus from their City; and the Syracusia^s
Dionisiu^ from his Royalty; and many other people several Tyrants for their
want of humanity and moderation: But in the Bees Commonwealth, never any
Commander gave occasion of dislike to the Commons. She orders others what to
do for the public good, or rather nature directs them; she is provided for,
and maintained by their labor, and they directed, protected, and preserved by
her society.

How the Queen Be governs, I will not (as many conjecture) cannot certainly
determine; each Be readily fulfills, and follows her proper task, and all in
all, aim at the public welfare; none, how old soever, desiring a Writ of Ease,
but all labor until their labors kill them.

The Queen Be lives not retired (constantly) in any part, but as occasion
serves, is sometimes in one part of the Hive, sometimes in another, but works
not* nature denying her fitting organs.

And because some have observed large orbicular cells on the edges (for the
most part) of the combs, they have therefore supposed them to be their
palaces, but they are sca^ce capable of half their grown bodies, and are only
seminaries for generation* ^ot places or palaces for habitation.

CHAP. IX. Of the Drone.
THe Drone is a great Be without a sting, the Vulgar opinion is, that he is
made of a Honey Be that has lost her sting; but no man ever saw that a Be
became a Drone.

Others seeing the fondness of this opinion, have thought J. Stobaeu^ de
po^entibus ser. 45.
that the Drone is a different species, and that as Bees breed Bees, so Drones
breed Drones, which concelt, if the Author had observed, that at the time of
their breeding, and many months before, there is not a Drone left alive to
breed them, he would have liked as well as the former.

Aristotle says, That they only are bred of the Bees, but the truth is, they
are of the same species with the Honey Be, but of a different sex.

Many reasons are laid down by Mr. Butler to prove the Mr. Butler Feminine
Monarch. c. 4.
Drone to be the male.

First, because though they be great Masters of the Honey, yet until the Bees
begin to leave breeding, and have conceived for the next year (which some do in
July, most before August is expired) they suffer them, afterward they begin to
beat them away, which if some stalls do not, they dye naturally before October;
and from thenceforth all the Winter until the Bees breed again, there is not a
Drone to be found in rerum natura: When they are quite gone, then do the Bees
lay no more seeds that year, but only hatch and breed up those that are in the
cells.

Secondly, because as the rather, and the more the Drones are, the greater and
the earlier are the swarms: So where the Drones are few and late, there is
small increase. And therefore if you kill the Drones of a Hive before they have
done swarming and breeding (as some sondly have done before Midsummer, to save
their honey) neither will the swarms come forth that were formerly bred, nor
the stock thenceforth breed any more. After which time bringing in Bee-bread as
much as before, and having no young ones to spend part, they lay it up
carelessly in their cells, where it corrupts and tuineth to stinking,
stopping, which will cause them so much to mistike their Hive, that in Autumn
they will yield to the robbers. And if by your care and watchfulness they be
then preserved, in February following, when the breeding time begins, finding
their wombs barren, and therefore loathing themselves, they yield their goods
to them that will take it, and after a while by conversing with the strange
Bees, like of their company, and go away with them to their D^one^. But every
fair day they will with them return to fetch that they left behind.

Thirdly, because every living thing does breed male and female of his kind,
and experience does teach us, that the Bees do yearly breed as well Drones as
honey Bees; and seeing the honey Bees are females, it follows necessarily,
that the Drones are the males of the same kind: And therefore the Drone in the
learned languages has his masculine appellation, as the honey Be her feminine.

Fourthly, we see the like in the likest Insects, the Wasps, Hornets, and
Humble-Bees, of which in their proper places.

Fifthly, I add the Drones are males, and the honey Bees females, because of
the smalness of their voice, which is always Arist. de hist. Anim. lib. 4.
cap. 11.
smaller, and sh^iller in females than males, except Cows which bellow louder
than Bulls.

When the old Bees have ended their first brood of females, then last of all
after the same manner, first in the Drone comb, which is one, and but one in
every Hive, and almost the backwardest, made with deeper and wider cells for
the nonce, Plin. Not hist. l. 11. cap. 11.
they breed the male Bees, or Drones, as was long since observed.

In the latter part of the year they breed some promiscuously with the Nymphs,
but then they elevate their covers.

That not many are bred before Mid-May, not any before Mid-April (except a few
by chance which are not suffered to live) as Mr. Butler asserts, is not so; for
there are some in all swarms, and some stocks (with us) swarm by Mid-April,
therefore must the breeding of many of the Drones be then finished.

And after a Hive has swarmed, though before you saw not one stir, yet then
shall you take notice of their flying abroad every day about noon. But when the
Hives are full, and yet swarm not so early as their fellows, they will then
(but not often until Mid-May) fly forth, and play a while, and then return
into the Hive to fill their bellies.

But to put all out of doubt, that the Drones are males, I add that the Drone
in diffection has two large testicles, greater, proportionably to his body
than any other creature.

They are joined together upward, but hang down toward the tail in two visible
parts, of a whitish watery color toward the ends, their ends or points are of
the bigness of a small pins head, milk-white; the testicles are half as long as
the nether part of the Drones body.

In the belly is a white entral longer when it is extended then the whole body.
They have lungs (if my ^yes deceive me not) of a reddish color, divided as it
were in the middle. The outward part of the back and breast is of a grisly
substance, under which is a kind of flesh, all of a reddish color, where is
the heart, and other necessary parts, although (without a magnifying glass, by
an expert Anatomist) not exactly to be distinguished.

The eye has a watery substance, and there is a visible brain in the head, of a
reddish color.

In the tail (which I had almost forgot, though often made trial of it) upon a
little pressing, a saffron-coloured Ox-head, with stretched out horns, and a
crooked snout will discover it Bernard in Gomesiu. ^iedis, lib. 1. de Sale.
self, which one (cited by Aldrovan^^) pressing a Drone to experiment whether
it had a sting, reports as a strange, and never before heard of relation (I
often saw it before I read him, or any other.) And he concludes that nature in
this portent does show the seminal reason of them, and how being lost they may
Mr Remnant discourse of Bees, l. 1. c. 2. Arist. de gen^r. lib. 4. cap. 4.
be recovered; which how to effect, Virgil and others have at large
discoursed. This is supposed to be the instrument of generation.

The testicles are in the upper part of the belly, and so likewise the males
among birds have the testicles drawn inwards. L. Verul. Silva Sil. cent. 9. 852.


The difference between male and female, in some creatures is not to be
discerned, otherwise than in the parts of generation, as in Horses and Mares;
but some differ in magnitude, and that diversely, for in most the male is the
greater; the chief cause is, for that the males have more strength of heat than
the females; now heat causes greatness of growth generally, where there is
moisture enough to work upon: But if there be found in any creature (which is
rarely seen) an over great heat in proportion to the moisture in them, the
female is the greater, as in Hawk^s. Heat also dilateth the pipes and organs
which causes the deepness of the voice.

Aristotle delivers that the Drones are bred by themselves if the Commander
lives, but if she dies, they are produced in the Bees cells by the Bees, and
these so bred, are more hardy and courageous than the other; but the truth is
(as I hinted before) all Drones are bred by the Bees, when they are wearied,
and almost spent with breeding of females, that by them they may have a new
prolifical power whereby they may breed females afresh; but the Drones are
first bred in the Drone comb, which is afterward at least a great part of it
filled with honey; and then in the latter part of the Summer, they breed some
Cephens among the Nymphs.

As Aristotle could not determine about the breeding of the Arist. de hist.
Animal. l. 9. c. 40.
Drones, so neither of the making of the Drone-comb, sometimes he lays it
down, yet as the judgment of others (susspending his own, as in a thing
uncertain and dubious) that they made their own combs in the Hive, or did
assist at least the Bees in that labor; sometimes that the Bees made the
Drone-combs, but yet only then, when there was great expectation of much
honey; whereas in a Hive stored with Bees, there are not many days difference
between the beginning of their own combs, and the Drone-comb. Nay they begin
the Drone comb and half finish it, before they make the Nurseries (for so I
rather call them, than with Aristotle, houses or palaces) for their Queen, of
which there be always some in every hive. And therefore Aristotle was
deceived, who says, They made the Queens Palaces or Nurseries only, Cum
faetus la^gior esset, when they had a numerous issue.

The Bees never destroy the Drone-combes as Aristotle affirms, although they do
the Drones, when they have no more need of them for that year.

Aristotle says, The Drones are useful, if not too numerous, and the Bees
because of them more industrious, but wherein they are useful he mentions not.
Nay, he allows the Drones no service in the hive; but by his leave they are
profitable to the well-being and generation of the rest, being the males; and
also by their heat in ha^ching the young, especially after the stock has cast
a swarm or more, there being few Bees left, and most of them in the day time
abroad at their work.

But the Drone works not at all as Mr. Muffet a^^i^ms, who Mr. Muffet Theatrum
Insector.
says, they gather wax, and sometimes build the combs; but had he seriously
viewed them, he should have seen a disability to gather, nature having denied
them fitting fangs and tongue, for they are very short, and not fitting to
gather.

Aelian tells a long story, how that the Drones lie hid among the combs in the
day, but in the night when the Bees are asleep, rob and purloyn the honey,
which when the Bees understand (for most of them sleep being weary with
working, and a few only watch) they first correct them gently, and drag them
out of the Hives by the wings. But for all that they will not be amended (for
by nature they are gluttonous, and l^zie) as soon therefore as they are gone
abroad to work, they follow their work, namely fill themselves with honey; but
when the Bees return and find the spoil, they deal no more gently with them,
but kill them out right.

Once the Drones do not only serve for generation (as has been showed) but do
also much help the females by reason of Plin. Not. hist. l. 11. c 11.
their great heat in hatching their broods. And for these causes they are
always in breeding-time mingled with them throughout the Hive: Although
afterward (when they have been much beaten, and can go no where single, but
one or other will be on their jacks) they gather all together in a cluster for
their safety in one side of the Hive; so that it is true at sometime, Arist. de
hist. Animal. l. 9. c. 40.
which the Philosopher spoke indefinitely, Ten^nt alvei locum penitiorem. And
yet their hanging together will not serve their ^um, for the Bees, when they
are disposed, will quickly make them part, and depart, when there is no use of
them, there will Mr. Butler.
be no room for them.

The Bees breeding, or laying of seeds, beginning to cease in some sooner, in
some later; and these Amazonian Dames having conceived for the next year, begin
to wax weary of their mates, and to like their room better than their company.
It seems incredible to some, that the honey Bees should receive a prolifical
virtue from the Drones, which they should exercise eight months after, and yet
they consider not, that if a Hen be trodden a day or two, some affirm the eggs
will be prolifical Hier. Fabriciu^ abaqua pendente de ^ormatione o^i and pull^.
the year following. And Dr. Harvey attests the same; but yet upon the
experience only of twenty days, it is confessed, that it is sufficient for
that latter; and Aristotle says, That generous Hens will lay sixty eggs,
before they sit, others more; so that they will be sometimes prolifical two or
three months, but afterward they must be trodden again, or the eggs will be
addle. But to leave this until we treat of Wasps, when we shall have a more
fit occasion to handle it.

The Bees having conceived, begin to neglect, nay to molest their Mates: At
first not quite forgetting their old familiarity, they gently g^ve them Tom
Drums entertainment; they that will not take that for a warning, but presume to
force in again among them, are more shrewdly handled. You may sometimes see a
handful or two before a hive, which they had killed within, but the greatest
part flies away, and dies abroad.

They are but short lived creatures did they live their utmost date; for eating
much, and being idle, only in the heat of the day, with a great humming sound,
they fly forth, and fetching a short compass or two, having emptied
themselves, and whe^ted their stomachs, they return to feed, and that always
of the purest honey, whereby they may become so foggy, that oft*times before
the Bees meddle with them, you may see hundreds in a day crawl rather than fly
out of the Hive, but not able to recover the stool again miscarry abroad.

And whereas poor stocks (I mean such as have few Bees, though otherwise well
provided) despairing of their own continuance, let the Drones alone, not
disturbing, much less killing of them, yet not one will outlive October.

Some may ask, Is not the male more worthy than the female? Bedae axiom.
How is it then, that the Drones are but vassals to the honey Bees? which as
they excel the Drones in virtue and goodness, so in power and authority,
ruling, and overruling them at their pleasures. Albeit generally among all
creatures, the males as most worthy, do master the females.

And this Sesostr^tus King of Egypt, who conquered a great Coelli Calcag.
Comment^e verborum and rerum significat.
part of the world did thus express according to H^rod^tus. If he overcame any
people without contention, or battle, he made them bear the badge of a woman
engraven in their weapons, but if they did fight it out courageously, the
cognizance of a man. Yet in these, and a few others, the females have the
pre-eminence: And by the Grammarians leave, the Feminine gender is here more
worthy than the Masculine. So in all the kinds of Hawks, the female does
command the male, as being the stronger, and the better armed. And the female
of the Arist. de hist. l. 9 c. 1.
Bear, and the P^nthar are more bold and courageous, stronger, and of greater
spirits.

The female Ounce likewise, though less than the male, yet is Jo. Caii hist.
rarior Animal. Weeker. de secret. l. 8.
more cruel.

Ridiculous is the conceit of Democritus to catch the Drones. Wet, says he,
the covers of the Hive with water, and in the morning you shall find the
Drones busy sucking thereof, for feeding of the best honey, they are always
thirsty; Nay because they feed of the best honey, and not Sandaracha which is
hotter, they are not thirsty; for the Bees all Winter long, while they live,
thereof drink not at all.

Timely ridding of the Drones by the Bees, is a good sign that they are like
to be forward the next year; because the stocks that have cast often, do beat
long with their Drones, although there be twice so many as be needful for the
Bees, that are left, therefore (to save the honey which these would devour) it
is not amiss to prevent them; and about a fortnight after their last swarm to
diminish their numbers, which you may do safely in the heat of the day, killing
them with your fingers: And the bruising of them with your fingers before the
Hives mouth, will sometimes cause the females to take the work out of your
hand, and fall upon them themselves.

Some use Drone-pots made of Oziers, the twigs being set so close, that the
Drones, although they go forth, yet cannot easily return in again. But the
catching this way does much trouble; the Bees may sometimes keep out the Queen.
And therefore I like not of them.

CHAP. X. Of the Generation of Bees.
IT has been an ancient tradition, that Bees have a twofold production, as
many other creatures, by generation and putresaction. About this latter way,
Virgil, Cardan. Aldrovandus, and many others have been copious; but whether
there be any solidity in this particular, I am somewhat dubious, because it
was never authentically proved to be performed by any. But they tell us that
the best sort is procreated of a corrupted Lion; And therefore say it is no
wonder, that being so small creatures they fear not any, ^ay prevail over the
greatest, with a Lion like courage assaulting them.

A second sort is bred of a Bull, and therefore they are called the daughters
of Bulls, because they are bred of their carcasses. Suidae Histor ca.


A third sort of a Cow.

A fourth sort of a Calf, but tell us not wherein these kinds differ, for they
forgot waking what they dreamed of sleeping.

Would I spend words to no purpose, I might easily for the general, evince the
invalidity of this opinion, for in Brasile, Peru, and most of the new world
where are many sorts of Bees, and some in color and magnitude not differing
from ours, there were no such creatures, whereof (if they were lost) they might
be again recovered, before they were transported by the Spaniards.

But more absurd is that opinion of others, that of the ashes of Bees bedewed
with sweet wine, and exposed to the Sun in Muffer Theatrum Insector
a warm place, there will be a present resurrection of the former burnt Bees.

Perplexed and various are the opinions of the Learned, concerning Dr. Harvey
de genera^ Animal. exercitat. 13.
the generation of Bees.

The first workings of nature are as dark as midnight, and with their subtlety
do not less be-fool, and deceive the strongest understanding than the bodily
eye.

Some not comprehending their conception and generation, have fondly delivered
that they carried the spermatical matter of their original into their hives,
gathered out of flowers, and after hatch them, either from the white honey
suckle, or the reed (or Arist. de hist; l. 5* c. 19.
Calamus) or from the Olive because, in years abounding with Olives, there are
plenty of swarms. Not considering that the first brood is hatched before any of
these flowers bl^ssome, and that some of these flowers are not at all in the
Northern Regions where is the greatest plenty of Bees.

And for the Olive, Pliny denies that they taste of it, and Plin. Not. hist.
lib. 21. c. 12. idem. lib. 11. cap. ^. Card. de subtle. l. 11. Scalig de
subtle, ^ 51 exer.
therefore says, it is better away; and yet he was sometime of a contrary
opinion.

Cardan denies that they lay eggs, but are bred of honey. This Scaliger well
opposes, because, says he, There can be no generation of honey, for then it
should be the seed of the Be; but this is false, neither of honey corrupted,
for it corrupts not, but preserves from putrefaction.

Scaliger questioning whether Bees did copulate or not, says that of the dew
in leaves of plants, worms are produced, and therefore dew opportunely
gathered, and fo^erted with a genital heat of the Be may be animated into a
worm. But the first, and chiefest breeding of Bees is in end of February, when
they scarce stir forth at all, or not until the dew be exhaled. And howsoever
until May, dews are known to have little efficacy, or excellency, besides you
may visibly see the eggs when they are first injected into the cells, they are
eggs, and not a dew.

Scaliger, though he propounded the former opinion, yet held not to it; for
whereas Aristotle delivers it as an opinion of some that the Bees bred by
copulation, and that the Drones were males, and the honey Bees females; this
says he is false Scalig Comment in Arist. de hist. Anim. l. 5 c. 19.
(although without reason or experience) for the Bees indeed are females* but
the Kings are the males: And Muffet also acknowledges no males but the Kings.

I believe, says Muffet, they propagate by copulation, and the greater are
males (namely in his sense the Queens) and the Muffet in Theatr. Insect. l. 1.
c. 3.
less females, but whether they tread as Cocks he professes that he knew not.

Toxites supposes that Bees copulate, and that the Bees are Michael Toxites in
Onom^stico super Theophrast.
the Males, and the Kings Females: And that the Kings do at certain seasons
cast forth worms in multitudes as flies, their flyeblotes, and that the Drones
sit upon them, and hatch them after the manner of Serpents.

Another says, the matter in which they blow or breed, is Mr Remnant hist. of
Bees.
something that they gather of the flowers or plants, and bring home, and put
into the holes, or cells of the combs, which they mix finely with a little
water, and then blow in it a thing less then, or as little as a flye-blote. But
this cannot be, for we find nothing in the cells wherein the seed is
injected, but the seed it self. And again, the Bees seed is much bigger than a
flye-blote.

And as to others, so to Aristotle, the generation of Bees Arist de gene. lib.
3 cap 10.
seemed very ambiguous and doubtful; for whereas among fi^^^es some generate
without copulation, he sometimes supposed the same of Bees, and argues thus:
They must either fetch their young elsewhere, as some in his age opinionated,
which young must be either bred of themselves, or be produced by some other
living creature, or they must generate them, or partly fetch them, and partly
generate them: For so some supposed that they fetched only the Drones, or else
they must generate them by copulation, or without copulation. Thus Bees by
copulation among themselves to breed Bees, Drones to breed Drones, and the
Queens to breed Queens. Of all the rest from one kind, either from the Queens,
the Drones, or the Bees; for some, he confesses in his time, held that the
Drones were males, and the Bees females: Others held a contrary opinion, that
the Bees were males, and the Drones were females.

But against all these tenets, Aristotle's reasons as impossibilities. If, says
he, they breed not, but fetch their young elsewhere, of necessity it must be,
that there be Bees without any labor of Bees, namely in that place from whence
they fetch their seed; for why do they come to perfection, being carried away,
and not in their own proper places.

And again he says, It agrees not with reason that the Bees are females, and
the Drones males, because nature never gives females weapons to defend
themselves withal.

Now the Drones are weaponless being without stings. And on the contrary, it is
not reasonable to imagine that the Bees are males, and the Drones females; for
no males are diligent and laborious in educating of their young Cock-pidgeons,
and most males among birds, sits part of the day, as well as the female, and as
diligently ^eed their young. Some say the Pa^tridge makes two nests, and the
Hen sits upon one, and the Dr. Har. exercitat^, 8.
Cock upon another, but they are mistaken. The males also of beasts of rapine
seek out, and provide for their young.

And that some Bees should be males, some females, is altogether likewise
improbable, for in all creatures the male differs from the female, externally
many fowls differ not, as Crows, Rooks, and many small birds.

And that by generation they should procreate, is as unlikely, because no man
ever saw it.

At last he determines that the Bees are females, but as plants have both
sexes, because the sex is not to be distinguished. But if the Drones are bred
without copulation, then also keeping the same order, the Bees, and their
Commanders, are bred without copulation.

He concludes after a long uncertain discussion of this doubt, That the Kings
or Queens Bees breed themselves, and the Bees. It is necessary also that the
Commanders be procreated by some, but neither of the Bees, nor of the Drones,
therefore of themselves.

Now the Commanders cells being last made, and but few in number, they breed
therefore their own kind (few according to the cells) and also the Bees. And
the Bees breed the Drones, and they breed nothing; and so the Generation
determines in the third number, Non tam^n satis adhu^ explorata quae eve^iant
babemus; so that in all this we have it confessed; there is much to little
purpose: The Drones, whatsoever some say to the contrary, is the Mak-Bee, and
although he be not seen to engender with the Hony-Bee, either abroad as other
Insects do, or in the Hive, which (whatsoever some have projected) is
impossible, yet without doubt is he the Male-Bee, by whose natural heat, and
masculine virtue, the Hony-Bee which breeds, both Hony-Bees and Drones
conceives; that they are Males, we have sufficiently proved in the former
Chapter.

In the next place the main Query i^, how the Bees receive a prolifical power
from them.

Albertus denies by copulation; but granting the Drones to Albertus Magnus.
lib. 16.
be Males (which is undeniable) and the Hony-Bees Females.

Aristotle concludes for it, he says, co^^nt ea in quibus m^n it Arist. de
Hist. animal. lib. 5. c. 2
femina est. Those creatures conceive by copulation where there be Males and
Females. And again; they that are bred of the same fort, or kind, if there be
among them Male and Female, e coitu generantur, are bred by copulation: And
this is asserted Idem de Hist animal. lib. 5. c. 1. Geor. Piscato^^us.
by others.

That they engender not together, Aristotle's Argument is, because there be but
few young in their cells; but other Insects that are procreated by copulation
engender long, and hatch quickly: This Reason is frivolous, nay false, for the
Bees are Arist. de Generat. lib. 3. c. 10
numerous in their young (that I say not almost innumerable) and they hatch
quickly, sooner than the Wasp. And yet that Wasps are bred by Generation (being
cognatorum generatio) and not Bees: He attributes it to a defect of Natures
bounty toward them, because nihil ut apum, habe^t genus divinitatis.

So that according to the Philosophers axiom, and the weakness of his reason
to the contrary, they do engender together; but because this is not visible,
and therefore perhaps may be denied by some cavilling Sceptick. I will further
show that the Hony-Bee may have a Masculine virtue from the Drone, otherwise
than by copulation. For in the Eele, and the Purple, (a Shel fish whereof
Purple comes) is no Sex visible, yet by their slaver, not by copulation do they
produce their young, and perpetuate their kind.

And many other sorts of fishes do not by copulation become fruitful, and
generate their kind; but when they have brought forth, or laid their Eggs, the
Male bedews, or sprinkles them Arist. de Hist. animal. l. 6. c 1^ Dr. Harvey de
generat animal. exercitat. 40
with a seminal mo^stuie, whereby they are not addle but prolifical.

I have seen, says Dr. Harvey, the Male-Fishes to followthe Females in shoals
in breeding time, that they might sprinkle their new laid Eggs with their Milt,
or seed. Thus the Sepia or Cut^le-fish.

There is a Fish called Glanis, in the River Glanis in Hetruria: The Female
whereof by rubbing her belly on the Males Arist. de Hist. lib. 6. c. 13
belly is fruitful; and so the Scate and all Fishes with a full tail with the
rubbing of their bellies together engender: And so in a word do all fishes,
besides broad griftly fishes.

All Fishes that bring forth Eggs, their copulation is scarcely visible, but
without a Male they conceive not, nor any other Ambrose hexam l. 5. c. 20.
Creature where there are Males. Vultures faith Ambrose conceive without a
Male, and generate without conjunction; but Aldrovandus on good grounds denies
this; and also Albertus, U^ys Aldro. O^n^holog. l. 3
who says, they are often seen to tread.

When the Bees have conceived, they deliver their seed, not by their tail, but
by their mouth, faetum edu^^ ore editum ut Arist. de Hist. animal. l. 5. c. 19
a^unt quidem; and this was the cause that some thought that they fetched it
elsewhere from some flowers: Aristotle therefore speaking of it, speaks
doubtfully (...), for it is a very obscure thing.

And that they blow their seed, our Vulgar expression intimates, for their
young is called spat, that which the Bees spit forth, or deliver by their
mouths.

If we affirm the seed of the Be to be blown, it cannot so properly be called
an Egg, Aristotle says Aquapendens was very Aquapen. de formatione ovi and
P^lli. p. ^9 Arist. de Hist. lib. 5. c. 29* 30 Dr. Har. de generat. animal.
exercitat. 61
careful not to call the seed of Insects Eggs, but Worms, yet Dr. Harvey cites
him, as if he sometimes or promiscuously, called the Worms, Eggs; It is true,
he called the seed of a kind of Grasshopper Eggs, but it was before they were
quickened but when they are hatched, he calls them no longer Eggs, but worms:
Although indeed they may seem when they have done feeding, and are enclosed in
their cases to be amalogous eggs, but not while they feed; and therefore
Aristotle says, Arist. de gener* l. b. 3. cap. 9.
Every kind of worm when it has attained his full end, and perfect magnitude,
is as it were an egg, for the shell hardens, and for a time it stirs not,
which, says he, is apparent in the worms of Bees, Wasps, and Caterpillars.

But the Philosopher enumerated too fast: Of Caterpillars it is true, and of
all others that have proper, or natural cases, but such as have adventitious,
as Bees, and Waspes, never harden.

An egg properly is that, out of a part whereof a living creature is produced,
and the residue is meat for it, improperly that is an egg out of the whole
whereof, a living creature is Aqua pend.
bred, as the eggs of Spiders, Ants, Flies.

Insects first breed a worm (although it be not yet a worm Arist. de genesis lib.
2. c 1.
until it be hatched, but indeed rather an egg) and this after a space of time
is a kind of egg, for the Aurelia has the faculty of an egg, and a living
creature is bred of it, receiving in the third nutrition, the end of generation.

That the Bees blow as a Fly or Wasp, is affirmed by some. Mr. Butler, Mr.
Levit, Mr. Remnant.
And a^ the blotes of the flies are nourished by the flesh wherein they are
blown, and by the earth wherein they are bred, so the spat or brood of the
Bees, says Mr. Levit, are nourished by honey and water; but of this in his
place.

The Bees seed is white, about the bigness of a Butterflies, not round, but
oblong, which they lay close under the honeycombes. In the middle of the
bottom of the void cells Mr. Butler
round like a ring, says Mr. Butler, but although he was a great observer, yet
for want of observing himself, and following, as he supposed Aristotle, he was
mistaken in Theod. Gazas translation, T. Gaza
who renders the word, (...) by obliquus, which Scaliger well reads ad latus.

The Bees seed first sticks to the side of the cell, says Aristotle, ad latus
jacet, always (as I remember) at an angle, Arist. de hist. Animal. l. 5. c. 19.
some distance from the bottom, and so does the Wasp lay her seed, and not
close to the bottom; thus it sticks with one end, and with the other end bends
slope-wise toward the middle of the cell.

And after it is hatched, it lies a while cross, or side-wayes, with the mouth
somewhat erected, and grows so long as the matter of augmentation continues,
which is not long, and then it falls to the bottom, and raises it self up
that it may be fed. It will raise it self up, and sink as it were within it
self by contraction when it pleases; for though it have not feet, yet the skin
is somewhat scabrous whereby it rouls, or moves it self higher, or lower within
the cell.

The Bees in their breeding descend by degrees toward the nether part of the
combs, filling one cell after another: But when their chief breeding is past,
they do not precisely observe this order, but lay up their food promiscuously
among the young Bees, where they find the cells empty.

First, The seed sticks to an angle above the bottom, when it is hatched, it
falls after a little space to the bottom, but cannot come forth to take food,
which yet Aristotle seems to grant to be necessary: First, he says, It is
nourished, but tell^ not how: Secondly, he says, over against the cells, where
the young are bred, the honey is laid up, he tells us not wherefore.

But Scaliger says, That the young may eat thereof, ut Accumbe^^i Scalig.
Comment. in Arist. de hid. l. 5. c. 19
c^^us opp^natur, supposing, as he professes, a few words before that, the
worms and honey were both together in one cell, for he rationally concluded,
they could not live and grow without food, they were not locomotive, and
therefore could not go forth of their cells for it. How therefore they should
receive it, was the great mystery. He supposes the worms to stick fast on one
side of the cell, and the honey on the other, that with bowing of their bodies,
they might ^eedthemselves. The worm, says he, sticks so fast to the side* as
if she were glewed or rivited there, but by no means at the bottom, lest she
should be drowned with the honey. And this supposition of the worm and the honey
being together in the same cell, made him conceive the worm smaller than the
Be; for says he of the seed is generated a worm, which worm is always less
than the Be; but this is not so, for the grown worm is every way as great, and
as large as the Be.

But neither of the former opinions are true ordinarily, for the Bees are bred
usually in the combs before, or in the lower part of the other combs, the honey
(if there be any) being reposited in the backward combs, and the upper parts of
the other. It is true indeed, that the Bee-bread is often laid up in the void
cells, among the breeding cells; not that the young may feed themselves, but
that therewith being ready, and near at hand they may be ^ed by the Bees.

The seed is never visible in Be or Wasp, that I could discern upon
dissections of many in one part or other.

Cardan affirms that they cannot have eggs within them, and Cardan. de subtle.
l. 11.
be exercised in their continual labors, because neither Silkworm, nor
Grasshopper as long as they fly, have none; suppose the assertion true, that
they have not eggs within them (but blow their seed which I believe) yet is
this instance and reason very weak. Scaliger answering him, justly denies what
he says, but contradicts not his instance, only saying, That they that are
well versed in natures secrets can determine this; whereas it is well known,
that the Silkworms when they have wound up themselves into their bottomes
after twelve or fourteen days eat themselves out a winged creature, but have
little lust to fly presently for fulfilling their lust, and engendring
together: Whereby the male having spent himself* falls down, and dies, and the
female also as soon as she has laid her eggs, which is not long after.

As for the Grasshoppers, they will fly nimbly with eighty, nay one hundred
eggs in them as big as the eggs of Pismires, and the claw-tailed Humble-Bee (of
which afterward) works as diligently, and flies as deliverily when she is
great with young, as when she is barren.

Fabricius concurs with Cardan, and therefore renders this as Fabric ab Aqua
p^nd* exer.
a reason why some creatures lay eggs, and bring not forth living creatures,
because if they were detained in their bodies until they were hatched, with
their weight they would hinder their flying: It is true, if many were animated
within them at once, it might be so, otherwise not, as is manifest by the
former example.

And that it is possible for Bees to fly with eggs, Scaliger Scaliger de*
^u^til. exer. ^ 91.
makes good by these following instances: He took a Glowworm engendering with
a female, and put them all night into a box with a hole in it. The male
continued at his work next day, and at noon giving over, dies; from that hour
until evening the female laid many eggs which were hatched in twenty hours,
and presently went their way; so that some Insects speedily hatch, and perfect
their eggs.

Therefore he concludes Bees may copulate in a few hours, and presently lay
their eggs.

Likewise he relates, that when he was a stripling, that he took of the greater
sort of flies, one marked with white strakes, and holding it some while in the
hollow of his hand, being delighted with the shape, it brought forth many white
worms notable for their motion. And therefore as she carried worms* so may
Bees eggs when they fly.

But the Flesh-flye, Butter-flye, and many other Insects without all
controversy fly about with their eggs in them. Now Scaliger at last
discovered his little experience in the nature of Bees, when thinking to answer
more fully; he mars all: For whereas Cardan says truly, they are in continual
labor, he denies it, and affirms, that the Bees having gotten honey by
labor, they take the benefit of it without any more working: Whereas it is
certain, that they never give over working (the season being fitting)* as long
as there is any thing to gather, and they give over breeding, before they give
over working.

The seed being hatched lives, and excerns excrements* All Insects first make a
worm, except a certain sort of Butter-flye, which produces a certain hard
thing, like wilde-saffron seed, but fluid within.

Now the generation of Insects in these worms, is not caused in some part
only, as that some part of the egg, turns to the formation* the rest to the
nourishment, but the whole alters until it attain the just and due proportion.

Creatures which produce a worm first; bring forth a small Arist. de generat.
l. 3. c. 4.
one, which is increased by it self, without any addition, as meal by leaven is
made of a little mass a greater.

And again, some creatures have this property in themselves, that Idem de
generat. l. 3. c 9.
they have an increase for themselves, as the worms of Bees, others gather it
abroad, as the worms of Butterflies, called Caterpillars.

This is, if at all, but partly true; for after they are hatched, there is a
small augmentation from the seminal virtue; but as soon as they are capable of
food, they must have it, or else after three or four days they will dye, as I
have often experimented* whereas when they have done feeding* and are shut up
with their waxen covers, they will (though out of the Hive) live, and come to
perfection, but will be perhaps longer in their Metamorphosis, than if they
were continued in it. I have had some three weeks before they have eaten
themselves out.

Creatures shaped without the females womb have in the egg, as well matter of
nourishment as matter of generation of the body, because after the egg is laid,
and severed from the body (of the Hen, or other creature) it has no more
nourishment from the Hen, but only a quickfling hear when she sits, but as
soon as the chicken i^ disclosed* there is not much longer any matter of
nourishment, but it must receive it elsewhere.

Aristotle acknowledges that they void excrements, and can there be
excrements without a supply of food, or a mutiplication of a little seed above
a hundred fold by the feminal virtue, or ambient air, especially where the
excrement are four times so much as the seed, or egg was at the beginning; yet
Aldrovandus concurs with Aristotle, saying, That the worms of Bees and Wasps
have within them that which is the matter of their augmentation; the contrary
whereof is evident, for if the Hives be not provided before hand, or supplied
daily with food in stormy* and unseasonable weather, the young brood will dye
in the cells, and you may see the old ones carry them out in abundance upon the
first change of the weather, and then breed again.

Often toward the end of Summer, if hony-gathering be not plentiful, they
will draw out the young unfledge Cephens, and sometimes (though rarely) the
Nymphs, lest for want of sufficient meat they should all starve together.

Fishes produced of eggs (as almost all are) either within the females, or
without them, at first receive no meat, sed ^rescunt hausto ^vi humore, but
afterward are nourished when they grow with the river water.

In the generation of Animals which are procreated by an after Dr. Har. de genesis
animal. exer. 44.
addition of parts (as the chicken in the egg) there is not to be sought
another matter, out of which that which is to be produced, is to receive the
shape of a body, and another out of which it is made, nourished, and increased.
But here in the eggs of Insects, it is otherwise, because they are not at first
perfect, and therefore must have an increase, and augmentation elsewhere,
until they attain their just magnitude.

The eggs or worms of Insects have from without them that Harvey de genesis exer.
62.
whereby they increase. But how they have it, is a riddle. Seeds of herbs* as
Beans, etc. attract by their husks, or shells the moisture of the ground, which
they suck in like spunges, and Idem exercitat. 9.
are therewith nourished as well as if they received the same by veins. But
thus the worms in the combs cannot be sed, the meat being remote from them.

The Bees vomit forth the honey which they have gathered Idem exer. 6.
and digested in their bellies, and lay it up in their Hives, and after the
same sort the Hornets, and the Wasps nourish their young. The assertion is not
true, or very ambiguous and imperfect. If he understands that the Hornets and
Wasps empty into their cells what they collect, and gather, then is it not
true, for they lay up nothing that ever I could find. If it be understood
that they feed their young with what they gather, as also the Bees, with what
they gather, and also with that which they have formerly injected into their
combs, when the weather will not permit them to gather abroad, than it is a
truth, but darkly, and imperfectly delivered.

So then we see after that they are disclosed, they must have meat; out of
their cells they cannot come, nor creep, they are not locomotive, like
Caterpillars.

Now the main Query is, how they should have it? And the ignorance of this
caused Aristotle, and others to deny, that they received any, so that from the
history of their being a worm, to their metamorphosis into a Be, we hear of
nothing.

Concerning this, I was long without satisfaction, and finding that it was
impossible to observe the particulars among the Bees, because of their numbers
and closeness, I sought to find it out by observation in other Insects of
somewhat differing, yet of a like nature, in many particulars. I considered
that yearly in my empty Hives there Hornets, I took notice therefore daily of
the progress and order of their work, and generation, which I found to be thus:

The Hornets neast is begun by one mother, or breedinghornet at the first,
which in the top of an empty hive wrought a very short little drossie pendant
peg or pin, about the bigness of the tag of a point of the outer dry parings of
pales, or other old timber with a mixture of a gummy liquor that flows from
oaks principally (of which matter are all her combs framed) this short peg she
made the foundation and center of a Canopy, or Tent like to a half globe, in
the center of which with ^o, she works six or seven hexangle cells, all
concurring and meeting together in the center, but all ju^ting out on each side
downward, and having wrought them half their depth to an angle of every cell
somewhat above the hono^^e, she injecteth into each a several seed, and then
on the outside of those cells begins six, or seven more, but all co^entring in
the same point with the former; and when they are wrought half their depth,
she injecteth into each a particular seed; but before this is done and
finished, she quickens and hatcheth the former, encompassing with her body, or
lying round like a ring about the pin that is the center of the globous
depending Tent, or Canopy, but in the inside of it, that her heat may equally
transmit it self to each cell, and enliven every seed.

Within a few days thus receive they life, and begin to stir, at first
sticking at the tail end, and then falling to the bottom, do they raise
themselves upward. Now the mother sometimes sits upon, or rather about them,
and the latter brood also to hatch and comfort them, and sometimes goes abroad
and fetches food for them, and gives it them as a bird her young, with her
mouth going from one to another: And as they grow she works the cells
deeper, until they attain their perfect growth, which will be above three
weeks; and then the first brood begin to be torpid and dull, and receive no
more food, which when they refuse, she works a cover over them, whiter than
the combs, and they so continue shut up about three weeks, and being
transchanged from a worm to a Horner, eat of the cover, and come forth, and
work, and breed their kind, but then being many, in broad combs.

And as they are fed, so also I am confident are the Bees, although they come
to their perfection in a shorter space: For they also after they have fed about
eighteen days, and attained their growth, are shut up by the Bees, with awaxen
cover, and continue so about the like space wherein they are metamorphosed, and
eating the cover before them, lift up the rest with their head, and come forth
winged creatures.

Of this metamorphosis of Insects, Aristotle thus; Every Arist. de genesis Animal.
l. 3. c. 9
imperfect conception produces first a worm, which is afterward perfected by
a change and metamorphosis, and becomes a living creature.

In the generation of Animals formed and transfigured of a Dr. Harvey de
generat. Anim. exercitat. 44. 56.
matter prepared and provided beforehand, and all the parts begin to appear,
and are distinguished together by a metamorphosis, and a perfect creature is
brought forth: But some, one part or member being made before another of the
same matter, afterward are together nourished, augmented, and formed.

The frame of those begins from some one part as the original, and by the help
thereof, the other members are added and joined together; and these we say are
done by a Epigenesis, or after addition of parts, namely, by degrees, part
after part, and in respect of the other, properly i^ called generation.

After the first sort is the generation of Insects, where the worm by a
metamorphosis is bred of an egg, of the beginnings are procreated of a
corrupting matter (the moist drying, or the dry moistening) of which as* of a
Caterpillar grown to a perfect magnitude, by a metamorphosis a Butterflye
appears in the just magnitude. Give me leave to vary from so learned an
Author, and diligent observer.

It is a truth that there is no metamorphised creature, and addition of a new
matter or magnitude, yet in many there is a diminution for those that have not
adventitious cases, or covers, as Bees, Hornets, and Wasps, but natural
hardened shells or covers, as Caterpillars, etc. have so much (as the shells or
covers) subtracted from the being and substance of the future Butterflyes.

And this also holds not that all the parts begin to appear, and are
distinguished together for the change and metamorphosis of Insects is not
altogether, but by degrees, part after part is changed, and altered, as we
will further make appear in the particulars.

The alteration of Insects in some is made of the whole, as Bees, they having
no membranous skins or shells about them, but the cells of the combs, and not
of any parts of it: But every such kind of worm, when it has accomplished his
magnitude and greatness, is made as it were an egg, for the skin hardens, and
all that time it is immovable from its place, yet moves in its skin, cell, or
shell, as is visibly evident, for touch the outside and they will contract,
and s^^^.

Now the cause hereof is, because nature hastens* and before it be a perfect
egg; brings forth so* that the worm by degrees, grows to the bigness of a soft
egg, and after in season* eats through the cover or shell (for they are not
reposited in cells as Bees) and comes forth as a chicken out of an egg being
perfected Arist de genesis lib. 3. cap 9.
in the third generation. Their metamorphosis is their perfection, and yet some
groundlesly have delivered the contrary. Mizaldus memorabil, cen. 1. 60.
Wonderful, says one, are the metamorphoses of some creatures, for
Caterpillars getting wings degenerate into a Butterflye.

The worm being now dead, presently the alteration begins Mr. B^^^er Feminine
Mon. c. 4.
from a worm to a Be which is twofold in shape, and in color. The first
alteration in shape is the division in the middle* then the other division
between the head and shoulders, Thus Mr. Butler. But it is otherwise, for the
transmutation as in a Wasp, begins to be first visible in the superior part,
and the eyes are first discerned, and then the incision between the head and
the shoulders, which yet as it grows more perfect, becomes smaller, the middle
incision or division is scarcely visible, when the eyes may be seen, then the
legs, and the horns begin to be framed, and the wings are last finished.

When they are perfect they thrust up the covers over their heads, which hang
at their backs till they come forth, their fangs and tongue hang down on their
breast, but when they are come forth, they then contract them (until they have
occasion of their use) and draw them up close bending under their throats, that
they are scarcely visible, but when they eat or work; their color is at the
first ash color, and so are their wings, but in a little space they convert to
a dark brown until they grow old, when they become gray.

And thus it is in many other creatures. Fishes procreated of Arist. de hist.
l. 6. c. ^.
eggs, have their eyes apparently great, and oblong, contrary to those
creatures which are bred of worms, where the head and eyes are last. But he
was deceived, for in the metamorphosis of flying Insects, the alteration begins
at the head, and is first visible in the eyes.

As in dry weather Bees gather most honey, suppose it with moderation, for
immoderate drought (as in the year 1652.) withers away the flowers; so moist
weather produces store of Bees, suppose it still with moderation, for
otherwise (as in the year 1648.) the perpetual raines washed away all the
substance of the flowers, that not only the swarms, but old stocks generally
dyed. I lost above half a hundred, 1648* for my share.

Now the reason why moist weather produces store of Bees, is because the Bees
do spa^ and breed the faster, and preserve and nourish their brood the better
by the moisture that falls in those times, which in dry weather they cannot
so well get, or rather approve not so well of, for after a warm rain, you may
see them drinking on every herb, you can hardly set your foot on the ground or
grass near the Hives, but you must tread on them, and that when their water is
just by.

Too much fair weather is destructive to the increase of Bees, for going forth
every day to gather, they are there with wearied, and neglect breeding, and so
though they leave fat stalls, yet in a short time few Hives, and therefore
Columella advises to Colum. lib. 9.
stop them in, every third day, that they may attend to breeding.

The Bees breed best, says Aristotle, when they gather Aristor. de hist.
Animal. l. 5. c. 19.
most honey, but herein he was deceived, for they gather most honey, according
to his own position when the honey dews fall, which says he, is not ante
vergiliarum ortum. But we have often swarms, a first, and a second also out of
the same Hive before that time: And generally all good Hives are well furnished
with young before that time of the year. Indeed honey is not the ordinary food
for the Nymphs, but Beebread, which from Mid-March, and in some temperate
Springs from Mid-February, they plentifully gather.

CHAP. XI. Of the Hives, and ordering them.
NOw having at last, though not without trouble and travel delivered our Bees,
and brought them into the world, it is high time to provide them a house, and a
sitting station, which when I have done, with as much brevity as may be: I
will entertain the Reader for his pains, and patience with a collation of sweet
meats.

They have Hives of several shapes and matter, in several, and diverse
Countries, some of Ozier, some of Barks, some of Petrus Cresc^^. lib. 9. c. 105.
Trees hollowed (and this sort the American^ about Mexico use) some of square
boards, three foot high, and a foot broad; so in scarcity of Hives, I have
known some use Butter-firking^* Some of earth, which they daub with Cow Dung
within, and without, because the smoothness is offensive, and the heat and cold
also otherwise would be too extreme.

Pliny says, The best Hives are made of barks of trees; a Plin. hist. ^. ^^.
c. 14.
second son of Rods, and a third sort of Wickers.

Each Country almost has his several fashion, as well for the matter whereof
they are made, as also for the manner and form of their making. In our Country,
the Hives principally in use, are either made of wickers, or of straw.

The wicker Hives, if they be not often repaired, will be at a fault, and lie
open unto Wasps, Robbers, Mise; any of these if she finds but a crack, or
crany, will dig her way in. And the Mouse, unless the twigs be close wrought,
although she find none.

The straw Hives when they are old and loaded, do usually sink on the one side
(especially if they take wet) and so break the combs, and let out the honey. Yet
I have diverse which have been continually used above twenty years together, and
never lost spoonful of honey out of them. Hives made of the fashion of a Bell,
which they use in Northfolke, are not so subject to sinking, but being
generally large, they are not fit for single castlings; and besides they are
colder than the globous Hives.

All things considered, the straw Hives are the best; and the Bees do best
defend themselves from cold when they hang round together in manner of a Sphere
or Globe, and therefore the nearer the Hives come to the fashion thereof, the
warmer and safer they be; but of necessity the bottom must be broad, for the
upright and sure standing of the Hive, and for the better taking out of the
combs* and the top must rise three or four inches higher than the just form of
a globe, whether they be covered with hackles or not, because they delight to
hang in a cone, and work from a point; but chiefly to prevent sinking when they
are full of honey, or young Bees, to which the broad crowned Hives are
generally subject.

So then that Hive has the best shape that is likest to an egg, with one end
cut off, as we usually order it when we eat it. It may consist of twelve
strawn wreaths or rowls, or more, according to the bigness of the Hive.

Let the three first rowls be of one magnitude, and compass, and about a foot
or somewhat more in the Diameter, the four next above them more large, bellying
out a little each beyond his fellow that the combs may be more firmly
fastened: Let the other five by little and little be narrowed to the center at
the top that it may be pyramidal.

And after this proportion, if the Hive consists of more wreaths or rowls, for
this is the shape of a small Hive. I have some consisting of seventeen or
eighteen wreaths.

Hives are to be made of any size between a bushel and half a bushel, says
Mr. Butler. I have many Hives containing five pecks which swarm yearly, and
last (by succession) longer than those that are hived in small Hives: And
although a half bushel Hive will contain a competent stock, yet the swarms for
the most part are small, and the castlings of themselves worth nothing; and the
Bees that are ordinarily left when they have cast twice are so few, that they
quickly miscarry.

However let your Hives be rather too little, than too great, for such are
hurtful to the increase and prosperity of Bees. If the Hives be too great, the
Bees will be more lazy, working uncomfortably, because they despair ever to
finish and furnish their house; but yet if there be a competent number of
Bees, they will work industriously (though the vacuity be large) and complete
as much with combs as shall be sufficient for them. But an over large Hive is
prejudicial to their swarming.

When you have provided your Hive, clip off, and cut away all the staring
straws in the inside, and make it as smooth as you can. The best and readiest
way to perform it, is this: First wet the skirts of you Hive, then hold it a
turn or two over a blaze of straw, and then take it off, do it a second time,
and if need be a third; and after rub it with a piece of a rubbing stone, such
as Mowers use to whet their sithes withal. And so shall you much ease the
Bees, they will do it themselves in time, but not without much pains and
labor, which might be more profitably employed. Howsoever when you have
^^mmed it as well as you can, yet shall you hear them if you listen in an
evening harping like Mise (as if Mise were gnawing on every side) and that for
diverse nights together.

And if it be an old Hive, though it were musty, yet holding it over a fire
several times, will sweeten it. And the Bees will better like in such a Hive so
ordered, than in a new one, not purged with the fire.

Mr. Southern, and others after him advise, that if Bees find Mr. Southern.
fault with a Hive, and will not continue in it, to pull out the spleats, and
put into it a little quantity of Barley, Pease, or Moult, and let a Hog, eat it
out of the Hive, turning the Hive with your hand as he eats, that the slaver
or froth he makes may remain in the Hive, and then wipe it lightly with a
cloth, and having put in your spleats again, hive your Bees in it, and they
will undoubtedly tarry. I never had occasion to experiment it, because that I
never had swarm that I could not make to ta^ty in one Hive, or other.

Many rub their Hives before they use them with fennel, or other sweet herbs,
and sprinkle them also with Honey and Beer mingled together, Sweet-wort, Milk,
or some other sweet liquor, but I seldom use it, but only as I said before,
purify and sweeten them with fire; and perhaps set them, before they be used,
open in the air a few days out of the danger of rain.

I have scarce (in forty swarms, and more that I have had in a year) hived one
twice, or had any return after that they have been hived, except when the Queen
Be has been wanting.

Having prepared and dressed your Hives, the next thing that you are to do is
to stick them. And various are the fashions that are observed, some doing it
one way, some another, Mr. Mr. Levit ordering of Bees.
Levit prescribes this course. Take a stick of Sallow, or Hasel, about the
bigness of a man's thumb, let it be a foot long, or somewhat more, then cleave
it cross-wise from one end till you come within a handful of the other end,
and no further, then bend each quarter a several way, cutting off the sharp
edges in the midst of every one of them, then may you put the end that is not
cleft into the crown of the Hive, and bending every of them a several way,
stick them into the side of the Hive, that they may force the upper uncleft end
hard to the crown of the Hive; but if the Hive have a little hole in the crown
(as many straw Hives have) then cut the upper end of your said crown tree where
it is not cleft small enough to go through a little way, leaving a shoulder on
the inside to stay it: And this is to keep the crown of the Hive from sagging
down-wards as they will do (except your Hives be exceeding good) when they are
heavy laden with honey.

Lastly, Take a small stick and cleave it clean through in the midst, cutting
both the parts flat and smooth, and put them cross-wise into the Hive within
four fingers of the board they shall stand upon.

But this inconvenience I find in this manner of sticking, that they cannot
be taken out, but altogether, and therefore the combs will be much broken,
and the honey run out when you take a Hive.

This course I observe; I take a willow stick, about nine, or ten inches long,
and (according to the greatness) cleave it into several thin pieces, each
spleat I shave till it will bow, then sharpning both the ends; I stick three
such spleats in the center of the crown of the Hive, and bow the three other
ends to the sides of the Hive (that they stand like so many bows) and there
enter them in a triangle. And then after put a strong spleat quite through the
middle of the Hive within four inches of the bottom. If it be a large Hive, I
put another cross that (otherwise not) about an inch lower.

That the Hives should have holes quite through them to prevent Spiders webs,
or by the wind passing through to blow away any offensive matter, is an idle
fancy, yet prescribed by Florentinus.
Florentinus.

CHAP. XII. Of Sea^s for the Hives, and the Bee-garden.
LEt your Bees be seated not far from your house out of the Columell^*
danger of an echo; not too hot in Summer, nor in too shady a place in Winter.
This counsel may be profitable to some, but it is of little worth to us where
the hottest Sun in Summer if they be well defended with covers, or a Penthouse
hurts them nothing, and the greatest frost in Winter (supposing them covered
above, and also well stopped below) damnifies them nothing. Nay, I have found
experimentally that in a row of Hives standing on the North side of a long
Barn, whose height has intercepted the Suns beams all the Winter, less
provision (almost by half) has served those Hives than would have served
others standing always open to the Sun, for coming seldom forth they did eat
little, and yet in the Spring were as forward to work, and to swarm, as those
that had twice as much honey (otherwise alike) in the Autumn before.

Some Bees will be late at their work after Sunset, and if when they return
they find it dark about the hive, they must lie abroad, if not altogether
perish. Let the door therefore be somewhat to the West.

Let your Bee-garden be well fenced from Cattle, and as well as may be
defended from winds, especially let them be secured from the West and
South-west winds, which are with us most constant in the Summer. The time of
Bees laboring, Virgil thus prescribes,

First for your Hives a fitting station find Virgil Georg. lib. 4.

Sheltred from winds rough violence, for wind hinders their carriage --
Mr. Butler would have them defended from the rising Sun, because it invites
them to work when the air is chilly and cold. Suppose there were such an
inconvenience, which yet I never found, yet where there were many hives, a
fense on the East side could not defend many if any at all. And if they stand
on benches with backs or walls behind them, and a Penthouse over them, they
will be at work in a fair day two or three hours before the Sun can shine upon
them.

And for swarms, it is best to uncover them on the first shining of the Sun
upon them the day after they are set up (till they know their station) that
they may be allured forth by the heat thereof, yet when the Sun shines hot at
noon, let them be slightly covered.

Columella prescribes that the hives stand with their mouths somewhat to the
East, that the Sun may shine on them in the morning, and make them more early
to follow their work; but upon experience, I commend the setting of them
somewhat to the West, that (being late often at their work) they may have more
light (their eyes being weak) to enter their Hives, and also that they be not
prejudiced with the Easterly winds, which are cold and hurtful.

Let their entrance be low (because of the Mouse) but longer in Summer, and
shorter in Winter, but in Autumn shortest of all, not having passage for above
a Be or two at once, to prevent the danger of robbing both by Bees and Waspes.

Some prefer single stools as not subject to diverse inconveniences, which
Bees standing on benches (as they imagine) are liable to, they are kept says
Mr. Levit by Penthouses from the rain, but neither from the heat of Summer,
nor cold of Winter, for they stand naked, the heat or cold easily takes hold of
them, especially any great and long frost.

Again, the Wind many times makes a great noise in the hollowness of those
kind of houses, which sore annoyeth the Bees; Mr. Butler says, that many
stalles upon a bench in Summer may cause the Bees to fight, as having easy
access on foot to each other.

And again, standing so near, they some time mistake the next Hive for their
own; and again, in Winter the benches will be always wet, which loses the
cloome, rotteth the bottom of the Hive, and offends the Bees; and lastly, the
Mouse at all times has free passage from one to another without fear.

I have tried both ways, and found none of these evils that are objected, in
setting Bees under a penthouse, and whereas in the first place it is urged,
That they are always subject to Heats, and Colds; I answer, that if any are
much offended with either of these extremes, they are the Hives that stand on
single stools where the Sun penetrates, sometimes through the hackle and the
cold winds every way pierce them; and in the Spring, when they begin to work,
will blow many of the Bees from their Hives when they would enter in.

And for the noise that is occasioned by the Winds to Hives under a penthouse,
it is less loud and violent than where it has an open passage on all quarters;
but they are more apt to fight on benches than on single stools. In many years
observation, having more Hives upon benches than ever I knew any to have on
single stools, I never had any robbed by his next neighbor, but most commonly
(if at all) by some of another Bee-fold; and whereas it is objected, that in
Winter the benches will be always wet, I answer, that this objection is
altogether frivolous, nay false, for the same cause shall wet the single
stools that will wet the benches under covers; nay, they are much more subject
to it, for only a driving rain from the South can wet a little at most before
the entrance, which the Sun or Wind will quickly dry, when as they are liable to
wet on every side; and for the Mouse, she will more securely visit them where
she may unseen (getting under the hackle) eat her way into the Hive, Mr.
Lawson new Orchard.
Mr. Lawson therefore commends a penthouse.

But if any delight in single stools, let them be of wood rather than of
stone, for they are too hot in Summer, and which is worse, too cold in Winter;
be careful that they be well covered with hackles, which you must often take
off, both to dry the Hives in a Sunny day, and also for fear of Mise and
Spiders.

And whereas it is objected, that Bees standing on benches are apt to mistake
their Hives, especially the young ones; and if a Swarm return home they will
settle upon the next Hives, to their own and others ruin, and thereby
occasion a great loss of Bees; to prevent this, let them stand half a foot at
the least between Hive and Hive (it were best a foot) and these miscarriages
would be avoided, and to secure you from Mise, keep a Trap constantly on every
Be board.

Take notice of some advantages that this way you may enjoy, which you cannot
so well when they stand on single stools; oftentimes a poor Hive standing by a
full neighbor, if they lie ou^, and the weather be not sitting to swarm, they
w^ll (as it were) make a League of amity with them, and first growing familiar,
will with their supernumerary Bees (all not being able to work in the full
Hive) replenish their neighbor with bread and meat, whereby they will swarm
almost as soon as the best, which otherwise would not have swarmed that year,
or very late.

But besides (which is more considerable) you may have much pure Honey without
any trouble, or loss; about midde April in a warm Spring, observe what Hives
are full, and begin to lie out, and set a Hive with the Combs that the Bees
dyed out of the Winter immediately before, next to such a full Hive, and you
shall have them work into it presently, and carry in abundance of Honey; of
necessity many of them must have been idle in their own Hive, there being no
room for half to work; they take this as a retiring house which they will work
in, and stay in too, night and day, only keeping an intercourse with their
own, which will swarm never the later, and as soon as by the emission of a
Colony there is room made in their own Hive, they will go again to their
Leader and leave their provision; if some few stay when you take it, knock them
out, and they will return to their old habitation; I had this last year, one
thousand six hundred fifty six, in four such By-hives thus gathered, in eight
days before the end of April near four gallons of Honey, and the Hives also
swarmed in April* this Honey was pure Virgin Honey, as white almost as milk.

But if they stand a week in May and swarm not, then take the retiring Hive
and carry it some distance from the stool, and knock it on the crown and
sides, and they will all go out to their own Hive. But if you dare not venture
on this course* then drive them into an empty Hive, and the day following knock
them out near their own Stock, and they will quickly return into it. By this,
conjecture how much honey Bees gather in the Spring, but of this more
afterward, so that it is neither for want of room, or stools, or wit (as
some imagine) to set Hives on benches under a penthouse.

Mr. Butler designs to set sixty three Hives of Bees in a plot of ground of
fifty foot square (if any, says he, be so happy to attain this number, which
I have much exceeded) but I would rather advise to set your Hives if you have
many* at a larger distance, if you have room, whether upon single stools, or
upon benches, namely, not above sixteen, or at most twenty in a row (still take
notice to set them from East to West) and three or four rodds to the Southward,
another row, and so according to your numbers, or at double that distance if
you have room enough, for it cannot otherwise but often fall out, that you
shall have many swarms rise together, or before you shall have Hived the
first, especially in a plentiful year, to your no little disturbance, and
prejudice: Whereas standing at that distance, you shall more frequently prevent
it; and the more, if you have a row of trees planted thick to the Southwards of
every row of hives, some two or three rods distant, where they will readily
light and seek no further.

Another inconvenience of many hives standing upon single stools one before
another is, that sometimes the swarms will settle on the hackles of the hives
before them, and if you be not present, and speedily hive them, hazard the
loss of the swarm, and perhaps the stock too, as I have found by experience.

Let the ground before your stools or benches, for a rod or two at least, be
kept short with often mowing, for long grass and weeds, much more Beans and
Pease are prejudicial: for the young weak Nymphs falling on those shady places
(except the weather be warm and dry) are in danger to be chilled, before they
can ^^se again.

Let it not be a bare ground, for in Winter it will be wet, and chill the
Bees when they light on it, and in the Summer dusty, and falling on it if they
rise not presently, but go a little, their feet being dew-clawed, and scabrous,
will quickly sur, and they will be so clogged, that they will not be able to
rise at all.

Let them not stand above a foot, or a foot and a half from the ground at the
most, for if they stand higher (as most set them) they are more subject to the
violence of the winds, for though they do well enough abroad in windy weather,
yet when they return home, especially in the Spring, they will be beaten down
besides the hive (and the more if they stand upon stools than on benches) and
if there be a present shoure (the weather then i^ variable) or the Sun
suddenly over-cast, they will quickly chill, and perish.

That they infect one another with their smell if they stand too hear together
(as Mr. Levit surmifeth) I never found, nor do I believe. And i^ great noises
offend them, the higher they stand, the more (...) they subject ^^ them.

I have observed that Bees fly more frequently to their work East ward than
any other way, though there be as good gathering to the West*

Smoke is very offensive to Bees, let them not stand therefore near a
Brick-kilne, Lime-kilne, Brew House, or where any long continuing smoke may
beat down upon them.

Let your Be garden, or the ground adjoynin to it, be planted with all sorts
of Plumbs, Cherries, Apples, Pears, Goos-berries, Rasps, Ribes, and beds
between planted with all sorts of flowers that they delight in, I will give you
a Catalogue of them in their proper place.

The humble Plains, or lowly Valleys are commended as the Columel.
best place for a Bee-garden.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Bees work.
WHen the Earth begins to put on her new apparel, and the Sun runs a most even
course between the night, and the day, then most commonly, sometimes before in
warmer seasons, the industrious Be hating idleness more than death, diligently
visits every tree and flower that may afford her materials for her livelihood.
Hear how an ancient Poet expresses it.

When forget had the Earth his poor estate Chaweer Prologue to the legend of
good women.

Of Winter, that him naked made, and ma^e,
And with his sword of Cloud so sore grieved,
Now has the attemp^e Sun all that rolieved,
That naked was, and clad it new again,
The busy Bees of the season fain, etc.
Pliny was deceived in the time of the Bees working, for he says, they lie
quiet in the hive until after the rising of the Vergiliae, which are the
Plei^des, or seven stars in the neck of Taurus, about the third of May.

This incessant labor while the time permits, with the three singular
effects thereof, working of wax, making of honey, and the feeding of their
young. The Poet in few words has elegantly expressed.

But when bright Sol has banished Winter chased
Under the Earth, and Summer light has graced Virg. Geor. l. 4.

The sky again, over the fields and woods
They wander straight, lightly the brinks of fleods;
They sip and taste the purple flowers, from thence
(What sweetness ere it be that stir their sense)
Care for their brood, and progeny they take,
Thence work their wax, and honey clammy make*
Bees gather of all things which have flowers (as it were) in a Arist. de hist.
Animal. l. 5. c. 19.
hose or socket, and of all other things which are sweet; but either assertion
is too general, as we will show when we particularise what they gather of.
Scaliger commenting upon him, goes further, and says, They gather also of
bitter, and sharp things, as Raddish, and Mustard Seed, but he mistook
himself, for the flowers (which they only gather of) are neither bitter nor
sharp.

The fabric of their combs is an inimitable excellency, without all rules or
compasses do they make their hexangle Aeli^n l. 5. c. 1.
cells. As soon as they are furnished with a new house, they begin their work.

They gather not, whatsoever some groundlesly imagine of the Sallow, Elm, or
other trees any gummy substance other than Arist. de hist. Animal. l. 9. c. 2^.
wax. Indeed the Horners, and Wasps suck the sap that leaks from some Oaks,
Elms, and other trees, wherewith they temper the dry rossie dross, that they
gnaw off from old decayed posts and pales, of which mixed together they frame
their ^*
combs.

Much ado the Ancients make about the foundation of their work, which they
conceit to be framed of some tough and glu^inous matter other than wax, and
they fancy a triple foundation, for the c^mbes, all of such tough, but pliant,
and lim^er stuff, differing somewhat one from another, and all from pure wax:
The first foundation they call Commosis: A second, which they over-lay the
former with Pissocera; and the third, wherewith they cover the two former
Propolis.

But whatsoever they fancy, the foundation of the Combs is not any other than
ordinary wax: Take an old Hive wherein some remnants of the Combs have been
left sticking to the sides, or if there be none, fix toward the crown of the
hive in several places, little fragments of wax, and hold the hive a little
over a blaze of straw that the wax may melt and diffuse about the sides of the
hive, and such a hive will they more contentedly work in than any other,
presently to that foundation of wax, fastening wax new gathered from the
flowers (for in some Islands plentiful of Bees, there are no trees for some
miles, as Fowlness, etc.)

They fasten the first wax near to the center of the hive, if they be many,
but if there be few Bees then near the side, they make their combs
perpendicular, beginning at the top, and so working down to the bottom; the
heat of the Be (that I say not of their breath) makes the wax warm and
pliable, that at the first gathering they can work, and turn it to their
purpose.

They will not only work artificially the wax they gather into thin hexangles,
but blow and soften, and work a solid piece of wax into a comb, as I have often
experimented, putting a piece of wax under a hive almost combed to the board.

The order of their work is thus: They fasten their first wax to the hive, and
adding more still, make first the middle between the cells, and having wrought
a little of the thin bottom, than on either side begin to raise the hexangle
cells, and so still descending to the bottom, as some are fully finished,
others are but half way, others new begun.

Their combs are placed otherwise than the Wasps, for the Wasps hang theirs
one under another, and the Bees theirs one besides another, beginning still at
the top, and at that distance that a Be may reach from one to another. And
usually supposing them to stand with the entrance into the hive Southwards,
they fasten and order them so, that in the breadth they are from East to West,
thereby better securing themselves from cold.

Their cells are made six quare, according to the number of their feet of that
length and wideness that each of them may easily contain a young Be. More
particularly they make their Basil He^em. Homil. 8.
combs with such artificial prudence, that they seem to out go Archimedes,
for the wise Be is not ignorant of Geometrical inventions, all her cells are
hexangles, and have equal sides, not leaning by courses right forwards, that
the lowest being joined to the empty one, may not be pressed or prejudiced, but
the angles of the lowest hexangles may be a basis and support for that that
leanes upon them, that they may securely hold up, and bear the burdens put upon
them, and the Honey may be contained severally, and apart in every cell.

And again, the Bees contrive their Hony-cels both wisely, and artificially,
for distending the Wax into a thin membrane, they frame together many and
numerous cells, that by the frequency of the binding or knitting of the small
cells one among another, there may be a stay or p^op for the whole work; for
every cavity or cell takes fast ^old of his fellow, being separated by a small
division from it, and all joined to it.

And lastly, these pipes, or cells, are twice or thrice arched, and framed
together like the rafters of houses.

O^ they thus make their hexangle cells, which with a diverse Nice^s comment. in
Greg. Nazian. orat. 43. ^^. 1.
and opposite order answer one another, for some are placed at a right line,
others are instead of foundations to them that lie upon them, and stays for
the honey, both for the elegancy, and also the security of the work; so wisely
and skilfully does she fabricate her Storehouse, for drawing out the Wax into
a thin skin, or membrane, she makes thick and continued cavities, so as that
thick composition of small things among themselves do sustain and underprop
the whole work, for every cell does join or hang to his fellow, being divided
by a small partition, and also (as before) conjoined together.

In a word, the cells are so framed that they have two or three floores or
rafters, for she is afraid to make but one through the whole cavity, left the
honey pressed down with the weight, should sink to the external part.

Now all the cells in every Comb are hexangle* and equilateral, not leaning
straight forth one to another, left the lowest parts joined to the empty ones
should be too much burdened, but the angles of the lower hexangles are instead
of a basis, or prop to the superior. After this fashion the Be frames her
work, varying Elias G^etens. Antist. com. ^^ Greg. Nazian. orat. ^. de theol.
right lines with angles.

And thus says another, where had the Bees such studious industry and
workmanship, that they should after such diverse manners knit together their
Combs by hexangle Pipes turned one against another, which connexions made
wisely, and with much cunning, do hold together by hexangle pipes, which pipes
are the long and concave Storehouses for the Honey; now these are opposite to,
and turned one against another, for some are placed straight, others on the
contrary are obliquely stretched forth on the bottomes of them which are drawn
forth right, which do afford their sides for the pipes that hang over, instead
of a foundation, and as it were a shore, whereon the honey may rest.

Now what Euclid busied in representing lines which are no where, and anxiously
laboring in demonstrations can imitate them? The frame and manner is most
curious, with holes on both sides of the Combs, many hundreds, and yet they
are none of them just one against another, but placed triangular one among
three, and that most neatly and artificially, which argues their feeling to be
good, for they do all in the dark.

Each hexagonical bottom of one side, answers to three Mr. But. Fen^^ mon.
c. 6.
third parts of the hexagonical basis of three contiguous cells on the other
side, meeting all in one angle right in the center of the opposite bottom, as
in this form; which is so artificial, as well for strength and beauty, that no
Schadon though the thin bottom of his cell should fail, can break through into
a cell of the other side. He that sees this, sees he not a wonder?

How much Wax they bring at once does appear by the new Swarm, whose first
weeks work is spent chiefly in building Comb^, wherein they are so earnest,
that it falls out with them, as it is in the Proverb, The more baste the
worse speed; for part of many of their burdens do fall from them before they
can fasten them to the combs.

You may see great store upon the stool by the skirts of the Hive, like unto
the white scales which fall from young Birds feathers (but whiter and brighter)
and therefore some have imagined that they also are soales, which the young
Bees do likewise shed from their wings; but put you some of these parcels
together, and you shall quickly be resolved of that doubt.

The Swarm when it begins to work falls low toward the bottom of the Hive
(in appearance filling it) that there may be a vacuity and hollowness above,
that those that work (for a^ first all cannot) may neither be crowded, nor
disturbed, but as the Combs descend, so do the Bees ascend, and after a week
or ten days will be all above.

Now to say something of their gathering of Honey, which they fetch in little or
much nine months in the year; this is of two sorts, the one pure and liquid,
called therefore by some Nectar, as the other which is gross and more solid
Ambrosia, and both of them are the Bees food, but in several seasons.

The gross honey Sandaracha, or Bee-bread, is gathered by their tongues, with
the assistance of their fangs, from whence it is conveyed by their fore-leggs
to the thighs of their hind-leggs, and that so nimbly, that unless you have a
quick eye you cannot perceive it. In the Spring, when the air is colder, and
the Bees duller at their work, it is more visible: namely when they gather off
the Aglets, or Catkins, of the Hazel, or the Willow a little after.

Many out of curiosity have supposed, that they might be able to observe the
Bees work if they had a transparent Hor^-hive, as a certain Consul in Rome
had, or a clear Glass-hive; but the Gullel, de Conchis.
vanity of this opinion will quickly appear to any intelligent and rational
man; for imagine the Hives were more transparent than Crystal, unless the Bees
also, and all their work too were transparent as well as the Hives, this cannot
be; put an opacous body into the hollow of it, your sight is dulled and
darkened, but more when they once begin to frame their Combs, the foundation of
their work, which they frequently compass round about; and howsoever such Hives
would not be profitable, for they are subject to violent heats and colds, and
therefore earthen Hives were justly condemned by the ancients.

But if any be desirous to satisfy himself, as much as is possible, I will
direct him in a more certain way, often experimented by me, yet I say not, that
I will altogether undeceive his expectation.

Let the board or plank whereon the Bee-hive stands have a small hole, or cleft
through the middle of it (big enough for a Be to go through) or let the Hive
stand a little over the board or stool, and when the Hive is full you shall
ordinarily have them work Combs to the bottom of the board under the Hive; I
have had under one hive six or seven Combs about a foot long a piece, wherein
they bred their young, laid up their honey and Bee-bread as in the hive; and
although they were in the open air, yet was I thereby little the wiser, only
sometimes in a colder season I have observed them blowing, and working of the
lower part of their Comb, but was not any thing at all enabled to understand
the generation of their young, or other curiosities which were performed in the
inmost combs; and within themselves (except the Bees and their work too, had
been transparent) they still some of them encompassing their work; and
therefore except you can with your eye penetrate a solid body, you will
conceive thereby little of their work (only sometimes on the edges of their
Combs) and much less in a Glasshive.

They unload into the empty cells the Bee-bread which they have gathered for
food for themselves, when they cannot go forth to work, and also to feed their
young, but if it continue any long time uneaten, it will grow dry, insipid, and
sower, and thereby as tastless, so useless, and often cause the Bees to forsake
their Hives (as some suppose) but this is never the chief cause of their
departure, but rather paucity and fewness of Bees, having over-swarmed, or else
the loss of their commander. For, hive a swarm into old combs where is much
stopping, yet shall you find that they will thrive well, for they will draw it
out of the cells with their fangs, and carry it forth. And let the combs be
never so old, except they have taken wet, and so be rotten and crispie, they
will like well of them, only if they be very old, they will do as Masons do
with old stone buildings, take down the out-part and work it again with new
materials, whereby it shall be as good as new, and they continue as long, and
as well in them, as if they had been put into new combs.

Into old combs (after nine or ten years standing the Bees by casualty dying) I
have hived little or late swarms, which have continued in some of them ten
years more.

Sometimes my own, sometimes my Neighbors Bees have trimmed up such Hives as
they have found standing (the Bees being dead) and have gone of themselves into
them, and thrived better than others hived into new hives, or new combs; so
that blackness (as it is commonly thought) is not an infallible sign of a
faulty hive, for the combs have successively sundry colors.

The first color is white, which in a good Hive before the end of Summer will
turn to a light yellow, and by the beginning of the next Spring* this light is
changed into a sad color, and so by degrees it becomes brown, and then black,
but not in all parts of the Hive alike, for the combs will be black before,
and brown in the middle when they are yellow, if not white in the backward
combs. And this alteration of color, is caused by the heat of the Bees, who
lying for the most part before, do soonest discolor them; but the blackest
combs (tried or melted) will turn again to yellow.

It is not amiss (especially if the Hives be poor) to cleanse away in the
Spring the dross and filth that the Bees have contracted all Winter when they
could not go abroad* but for fuming of them, as some require, I never saw any
cause, nor found any profit in many years that I have been conversant among
them.

To seek (as Varro requires) if there be diverse rulers, because divisions
would make them laz^e, is a ridiculous, if not impossible task: They kill after
the last swarm all of the blood Royal, and in the Spring early breed new, that
they may be ready to go with the first swarm.

The Vulgar when they see the Bees go home laden with Bee-bread, suppose they
carry way, and so they call it, but if you taste it, you will easily resolve
your self.

Besides, if you would coagulate it together, with the heat of your fingers (as
you may wax) you cannot, but shall find it crumble, and not stick together
like wax Put it into the fire, it will not melt like wax; besides, it is of
diverse colors according to the quality of the flowers, or plants whereof it is
gathered, so that by the color with a little observation, you may say of most
of the Bees, when they return with it, where they have been gathering.

Taste it when it is new gathered, it is sweet, and not unpleasant, but not so
sweet as honey.

And that it is not wax, take notice of an old stock into which they carry
plentifully of it, and yet at the end of the year there is no more wax (if so
much) then there was in the beginning. Whereas a swarm will sometimes work down
half their hive in a week, and yet you shall see them carry* little of it if
any at all.

And the reason that the old stocks carry inso much, is, because they have many
young ones to feed, whereas a swarm for the first ten days, ordinarily have
not hatched much spat, or young brood, and they feed for the most part abroad,
and therefore need little of it in the Hive.

The liquid honey the Bees suck or gather with their tongue, whence they let it
down into their bottles, which are within them like bladders, each of them will
hold a drop at once; you may see their bellies strut withal. Many think
because they see nothing on their thighs, that they come home empty, but they
are better, and more heavy laden than the other.

This sedulous diligence and indefatigable industry of the Bees is most evident
and eminent in the Spring, after they have been long confined to their hives
with the Winters frost and cold, but being set at liberty by the Suns warmer
beams, they speedily scour over hills and dales gathering of every blossom,
and flower as greedily as the griping Usurer graspeth gold, which diligence of
theirs, is notably expressed by a Modern Poet.

Quales vere novo siculeae sub collibus Hyblae Aelius Julius Crota. Eidyl. 3.

Vallibus, aut riguis late fragrantis Hymeth
Exercentur apes, stabulis ubi pinguibus agmen
Prodit mane novum, and coelo bac^batur aperto.
Hae veris popul^ntur opes, Tymbraeque laborant:
Illa Apii lachrymam, and graveolen^is Centaureae
Narcissique legunt florem, Casiasque rubentes:
Caetera dum legio ^ectis ascripta, tenaces
Suspendunt caeras, and mella liquentia fundunt.
Thus in the Spring the diligent Be spreads forth her wings, Greg. Nazian.
orat. 43. ^. 2.
yet stiff as it were with the Winters cold, and with haste leaving the hive,
flies to the slowery Meads and pleasant Gardens.

But for your further delight, consider the Bees labor, in the words of one of
our best English Poets, yet somewhat altered, because not intended by him for
this purpose.

The Woods, the Rivets, and the Meadows green* Spensers Minopotm^s.

With her air-cutting wings, she measures wide,
Ne does she leave the mountains bare unseen,
Nor the rank grassie Fens delights untr^d;
But none of these how ever sweet they been,
Mete please her fancy, nor cause her ^'abide
Her choiceful sense with every change does flit,
No common things may please a wavering wit.
To the gay Gardens her unstaid desire
Sometimes her carries, to refresh her sprights,
There lavish nature in her best attire
Pours forth sweet odors, and alluring sights,
And art with her contending, does aspire
T'excel the natural, with made delights.
And all that fair or pleasant may be found,
In riotous excess does there abound.
There she arriving, round about does fly
From bed to bed, from one to other border,
And takes survey with curious busy eye,
Of every flower and herb there set in order;
Now this, now that, she tastes tenderly,
Yet none of them she rudely does disorder
Ne with her feet their silken leaves deface,
But pastures on the pleasures of each place.
And evermore with most variety,
And change of sweetness (for all change is sweet)
She casts her tasting sense to satisfy
Now sucking of the blooms of herbs most meet;
Or of the dew, which yet on them does lie
Now in the same bathing her tender feet.
And then she pearcheth on some branch thereby,
To weather her, and her meist wings to dry.
And then again she turns to her play,
To spoil the pleasures of that Paradise;
The wholesome Sage and Lavender still gray,
Sweet Carrowayes, and Cummin good for eyes,
The Roses reigning in the pride of May,
Sharp Isop, good for green wounds, remedies;
Fair Marigolds, and Bees alluring Thyme,
Sweet Marjoram, and Daysies decking prime.
Cool Violets, and Burrage growing still,
Embathed balm, and cheerful Galingale
Goodly Tulips, and breathful Camomile,
Dull Poppy, and drink quickening set wale,
Vein healing Ver^^n, and Head-purging Dill,
Sound Savory, and Basil hearty hal^.
Fat Cole-worts, and comfirting Strawberry,
Cold Le^ice, and refreshing Rosemary.
And what so else of virtue good or ill*
Grew in the Garden, fetched from far away,
Of every one she takes and tastes at will,
And on their pleasures greedily does prey, etc.
CHAP. XIV. Of the swarming, and hiving of Bees.
BEes breed in May, when there is plenty of honey dews* Dr. Harvey de partu.
Wasps in Summer, when the fruits begin to ripon. It is true Bees breed in May,
but their chief breeding is in March, and April. And although the Wasps appear
not in great numbers until the latter end of Summer, yet they begin to breed
in the Spring.

The old stocks having bred in the Spring, and with a new supply replenished
their hives, they presently prepare to send forth a Colony or two (if the
weather prove seasonable) out of every good stall.

In extraordinary dry and windy times, many, though they be full, yet they
will not swarm at all. For having wa^ted long for an alteration of the weather
in vain, and the year wearing away, and they by lying forth under; or about the
sides of the hive* cooling themselves, and being well provided for, are loath
so leave their labors to go anew to labor.

Sometimes it falls out* because they have no Commander ready. I once had a
very good hive full, and multitudinous with Bees, and yet never swarmed in many
years, I was resolved to let them alone, to try whether they would ever swarm;
in the eighth year they swarmed twice, and also other years after, what might
be the cause of their long delay, I cannot certainly assign.

The swarm consists not of younger Bees, then the stock, for there go forth
both old and young, and therefore Aristotle was deceived, who said that the
swarm consisted of young Bees, Arist. de hist. Animal. l. 9. c. 64.
and was not contradicted by Scaliger commenting upon him.

The swarm parts not into several companies, but when there are more Queens
than one. Some Drones go along in every swarm, but not many, seldom a dozen:
And therefore whereas some lay it down as an insallible rule, That those swarms
that have not many Drones will not thrive, is not always true.

Many times the weather proving stormy, and cold, the Drones will all be
starved, when as the Bees will supply themselves by going sometimes (though
seldom) abroad. Nay the Bees often in such seasons jealous of their own safety
(and knowing them to be great devoure^s) will kill them; and yet the weather
proving seasonable, afterward have thriven and prospered well that year, but
perhaps they had a concept^ve power by a masculine virtue from the Drones
before they swarmed.

It is impossible to determine the precise time of the year when Bees will
swarm, but by the forwardness of the Spring, and warmness of the weather you
may probably guess.

A warm, calm, and a showing Spring causes many and early swarms; but it is to
be supposed if stormy, cold, and close weather follow, not a great while
together, immediately after. I once had many Hives (the beginning of the Spring
being mild and warm) very forward, so that by the end of March they began to
lie forth.

And although the weather within a week of April, did somewhat alter, yet
(being full of brood within which came daily to perfection, they lay forth in
abundance by Mid-April, but the Spring continuing tempestuous and cold until a
week in May, ^^^ of the very best wholly perished, having many mouths and no
meat, and not being able (because of the cold) to go forth to gather any, in
January before* I am confident the worst of them had not less than three quarts
of hoay.

Now those that were poor and weak began not to breed so early, and though they
were not so well supplied, yet had they few mouths as they had a little meat,
and endured the extremity, and swarmed that year, but somewhat later than
ordinary; the first sort lying forth without the Hive I could not securely feed
them, which otherwise I would have done, when I perceived them to perish.

Sometimes also in regard of the uncertainty of the weather, early swarms are
not the best; in the year one thousand six hundred fifty two, I had twenty
swarms before mid May, and many more after, and of all, but one survived until
the next year, for the year was so dry that by Midsummer there was scarce any
flowers, and they yielded little honey, except in the Woodlands, where the Bees
among the moist and shady pla^^s found better provision.

Many times May swarms prove not so well as those that are cast in the
beginning of June, the Wind often times continuing high and cold, and the season
close, so that without a little refreshing many swarms are like to perish.

If a swarm by bad weather be checked, and hindered in their work the first
week, they will seldom work courageously all the summer following.

Dry weather makes plenty of hoay, and moist of swarms, so that when a d^y
summer follows a moist spring, the Bee-folds Arist. de Hist. animal. lib. 4. c.
22. Mr. Butler, Fem. Mon.
are rich, but if the summer be also moist, the increase of Be^s will be great,
but because of the scarsity of honey, this increase will prove a decrease; the
more swarms you have at the end of summer, the fewer stalls shall you have at
the beginning of the next, for except some very early swarms, and some good
stocks which cast betimes, or not at all they will all dye for hunger; and the
reason is, that the weather keeping them much in, they can do nothing but
breed, and when they go abroad, bring in nothing but Bee-bread and water,
wherewith they seed their young, but can find nothing to lay up in store; so
that moist weather gives them two causes of swarming, plenty of Bees, and
penury of Honey; the one makes them able, the other willing, and then neither
Winds, nor Clouds, nor Rain can stay them, whereas in times of plenty it is
otherwise.

Before they swarm some days, they will by a peculiar and Arist de Hist.
Animal. lib. 9. c. ^0
distinct voice, make it known throughout all the Hive, as in the dislodging of
an Army by the sound of Trumpets, proclaim, pack up, and be gone; so that as a
presage of their swarming, there is a peculiar sound heard two or three days
before.

-- And then a voice Virgil.

Is heard, resembling Trumpets winding noise.
Mr. Mouffet mistakes this place strangely, and applying it to Mr. Muff.
Theatrum Insect.
the Bees, says, When the Bees for the Queens tyranny will forsake the Hive
(which falls out at the Greek Calends) there is a peculiar and solitary voice,
as of a Trumpet, heard two or three days before: when therefore they are ready
for their slight, away they go, and if the Tyrant whom they forsake follow
them, they put her to death.

But this voice is not at all, or but some few hours before they go forth with
their first Colony, it is true indeed always of the after swarms, but by the
way, if they hear not at all, (which Aristotle elsewhere denies) to what
purpose were this call, or proclamation to make ready to be gone?

The signs of the first swarms are somewhat uncertain, but Varro de re
^ustic^, lib. 3.
lying out, about, or under the Hive, in the mornings and evenings only, is a
very probable sign of swarming, whereas to lie out constantly, is a sign of
not swarming.

When they will presently swarm you may sometimes know, by their gathering
together without at the door of the Hive, and not only upon the Hive, but on
the stool also, where when you see them begin to hang one upon another in
swarming time, and not before, and to grow into a cluster that covers the
stool in any place, then be sure they will presently ^ise, if the weather
hold; but commonly some few do first fly forth to and f^o the Hive door, with
a greater noise than ordinary, and so allure out more company unto them, and
when by this means they have got out a pretty many, the noise made by them is
more smart and vehement, when they begin to dance before the Hive, and making
many circling mo^^ns turning from, and yet again returning to the Hive, with
delightful melody singing a loath to depart, invite all their Sisters to hasten
apace, and wait upon their Queen now on her coronation day.

Their murmuring small Trumpets sounden wide, Spenser Faery, Q. lib. 2. can^. 9.

Whiles in the air their clustring army flies,
That as a cloud does seem to dim the skies.
When Bees lie continually forth of the Hive, they usually swarm late,
sometimes not at all that year, the reason thereof is, because the Hives being
full of Bees, and therefore very hot, the Bees to refresh and cool themselves
lie abroad under the Hive, or upon the sides thereof, whereby the Hive never
seems over full; and they having used a while to lie forth, find no
inconvenience from their multitudes, and are loath to forsake that plenty which
they have painfully gathered.

If they begin a Comb under the board, it is a sure sign of not swarming;
sweep them down that hang under, and imbitter the place, and gently drive them
into the Hive with a brush of wet stinking weeds, or smoke them in, as you
shall be more fully informed afterward. But do what you can, some Hives will
not swarm at all, or not a great while, perhaps they want a Leader.

Always choose a Hive answerable to the swarm, a forward swarm if great, may
be put into a Hive that contains somewhat more than three pecks, but if it be
a prime swarm, in the beginning of June, into a Hive containing three pocks;
if at Midsummer, into a Hive somewhat less, but I like no Hive that holds not
somewhat above half a bushel.

By this time the swarm is settled, go presently therefore to hive it (having
Hives of all sorts always prepared) for fear of rising again, or of others
coming to it.

If it be in the heat of the day, and the Sun shine upon it, it will not stay
long, if it be provided of a place (hive or tree) as some are before hand;
presently after they are settled, and all their company gathered together, they
will uncluster, rise again, and be gone, and fly forth right thither (not as at
other times uncertainly) and will not be staid by any course you can take. If
they be not provided beforehand, as soon as they are gathered together, they
design, or empower some of their company to espy out one, and if they return
with the news of it before swarming time be past, for that day (and they yet
unhived) they will presently uncluster, and away, otherwise they will hang
until the next day. They therefore deal indiscreetly, that let their swarms
hang until night, losing thereby many, and hindering them in their work; for as
soon as they are hived, if it be not late in the afternoon, they will
presently ply their work, and sometimes make a comb a handful long before
night, and fill much of it with honey, as I have often found, when I have
united them to another.

And besides by long hanging, they will be wonted to the place, that for some
days after, they will hanker thereabouts, and neglect their labors.

And where there are many Hives, there is great likelihood of others rising,
and then if they be within hearing, they will fly all together; bestir you
therefore to hive them presently; and if you espy any other to arise before you
have done, stop them up with a cloth (and when you have dispatched, let them
out) but if you have finished before they come forth, or come toward you,
cover the first with a sheet until the last be settled elsewhere. But if they
fly about the covered Hive, seeking to enter there, set down a prepared empty
Hive by it, and they will often go in of themselves.

But if two prime swarms rise together, then there is no prevention, but for
the most part they will settle together: Hive half of them into one Hive as
near as you can guess, and the remainder into another. And if the Queen Bees be
divided, they will continue severally, otherwise, will go out of that Hive
where is no Queen, into the other. When they are all entered into one, knock
them down into a fan, or upon a very broad board, and set two Hives over them,
having first laid sticks along in the fan to bear up the Hives a little from
the bottom, that the Bees may on every side easily enter in, and with a wing
or brush of weeds, sweep some to one, and some to another, as equally as you
can. But if notwithstanding all your endeavors, they will go to one Hive, then
fetch a weak castling, and knocking down near half upon the fan, carry the
other away the distance of a rod, or more, and set the castling over those in
the fan, and so shall you have two good Hives howsoever.

If your swarm light upon a bough, shake them in gently, and set them upon a
board o^ fan, underneath the place, having laid two sticks first (near an inch
about) about half a foot asunder, to rear up the skirts of the Hive, that no
Bees may be crushed by the Hive, and the Bees may more readily enter. And if
any rise as (usually some will) shake them down, and lay a handful of
May-weed, Wormwood, or other wet herbs in the place where they settled, and they
will quickly remove, and go to their fellows; but if they light very high,
then carry up a cloth with you, and cover them that you have in the Hive, and
bring it down with the mouth upwards, and set them below (on a fan as before)
and fetch the remainder in another empty Hive covered, and when you are down,
knock them out by the side of the former, sometime you must do it, a third, nay
a fourth time before you have all.

If they light upon the body of a tree (they will be trouble^ some to hive)
you cannot take half of them in at once, but sweep with a wing or brush of
weeds, as many as you can, and set them underneath the place, and fetch the
remainder, as before.

Sometimes it will not be amiss to saw down gently the bough (when you cannot
otherwise well come at them) where they hang, fastening first a little line to
it, and so softly let it down, or else bring it down in your hand. I have
brought down many, and hived them with ease below. At other times when they
have been very high in the middle or outside of a tree, I have carried up a
fan, and fastened it by the ears underneath the swarm, and so hived them as
easily as if they had been near the ground, setting them in the fan, laying
sticks ^^st in it, as I prescribed before. And in the evening without any
trouble, fetched them down, and set them in their place.

The manner of hiving is very various and manifold, by reason of the many and
different circumstances of the lighting, or pitching, that it can hardly be
taught by rules, but is rather to be learned by use, and experience, guided
with reason and discretion.

If they settle on a dead hedge, or on the ground, set the Hive over them,
under-propping it if there be cause, and with a handful of wet weeds stir
them softly underneath, and they will go up, and to allure them the sooner,
anoint the edges of the Hive with a little honey, and sprinkle a little within
it.

It will not be amiss to shred, and order here and there some boughs of the
trees in, or near your Bee-garden, that they may hang out, as it were from the
rest more opportunely to entertain the Bees when they swarm. Yet in places
where are neither trees, nor dead hedges, they will settle upon pales, nettles,
mallows, they will refuse nothing they readily meet with; sometimes on the very
grass: Thus in the Island of Fowlness.

To cause stocks that lie out more speedily to swarm, diverse Mr. Butler ^em.
^om. c* 5.
rules are prescribed. To keep them cool by watering and shadowing of them, and
enlarging* of the door, to give them air (always provided that there be no
backdoor in the Hive) I have with a contrary course occasioned their swarming,
first rubbing the bottom of the stool against the door well with wormwood, or
the juice of Elder, and all the sides about the door, and ^aying wormwood, or
May-weed also, close to the mouth, and also before, above the door; which being
done, I have in the heat of the day taken off their cover, so that not being
well able to continue in the Hive, nor yet to rest under it, nor on the sides
of the Hive, they have presently swarmed.

A second way prescribed by Mr. Butler is, when they have lain out (although
they have had fit weather two or three days) then the next calm and warm day a
little before noon (when the Sun shines, and you see no clouds coming to hide
it) put in as many as you can with your brush (it is better to smoke them in)
and sweep down the rest, not suffering any to cluster again: These rising in
the calm heat of the Sun, will make such a noise, as if they were swarming,
which their fellows hearing, will perhaps come out unto them, and begin to
swarm. It is but a perhaps, for I have seldom seen this course successful.

When all hope of their swarming is past, in some evening while it is yet light
(says Mr. Butler) holding a Hive under those that lie out, cut them off with a
tight thread held straight between two hands, and carry them to an over-swarmer
that you would mend, knock them down on a table close before his Hive, into
which, because they come without a Prince, they are quietly admitted, and
quickly united under one Commander: Stay there, I have often tried this course,
but without success always; for though they be without any great contest
admitted and continue there that night, yet the day following, they will return
to their old Hive.

See here the difference between a voluntary emission, and a compulsive; when
they go forth with a Leader, you may put them any where, for they have by a
voluntary departure, excluded themselves from their former society, and to
return thither again, except it be in a short space, is capital: They are
reputed as enemies, forsaking their own Commander, and going away with another
Leader; but if their Princess in a short space return with them, there is no
question about their admission; but if by a wile they are taken from their own
company without a Leader, they will return back again do what you can, except
you carry them so far that they know not the way.

Mr. Butler for such Hives as have not swarmed before Midsummer, directs this
course, to double the stall, by turning the skirt of the Hive upward, putting
the crown into the rim of an old Pale (or the like) well staked about, that it
may stand fast, and setting an empty prepared Hive fast upon it, then dawb them
(in the middle where they are joined) round, only leaving a passage even with
that of the old stock, and they will ascend into this, and breed, and work as
well as in the old. And in the end of August, you may drive them all into the
new, and take the old for your labor.

This course seems plausible upon the first proposal, but upon frequent trial,
I have found it to little purpose: For the Bees having many young ones in the
old Hive, and much meat, will not ascend, but as they are necessitated for
room, and then work their combs to the old, upwards, and not downwards from the
top of the Hive, newly set over them; so that by parting of the combs which
will not be without trouble, you may take some little profit of the combs new
wrought, but must continue the old Hive to stand still, except you mean to take
all, I never found any to have wrought above half way upwards, so that having
no foundation, but the old combs, it is impossible to set down the new Hive.

Bees will swarm any time of the day, between eight in the morning, and four in
the afternoon, but the chief time of swarming, is between eleven and one. Many
stocks when they are disposed to swarm, will rise in a cloudy season often
before the Sun shine upon them, I have had some by eight of the clock; but
chiefly in a hot gleam, after that a shower, or a dark cloud has sent them
home, but in hot and dry weather it is not so. The swarming month^ are April,
May, June, and July; rarely, though sometimes in August.

To judge by the time of their swarming, which will thrive, is very uncertain,
because of the variable weather that often follows after, for being checked a
little, and discouraged at the first, for a week together, they will scarce
work kindly all the year after, so that many (though less, and coming a month
after) not hindered at all by ill weather, will be better than those at the end
of the year. And another cause why forward swarms thrive not after soul
weather, is, because they are very ventrous abroad, and by the stormy winds,
and unseasonable weather many are diminished, and thereby their increase
exceedingly retarded.

Signs of after swarms are more manifest and certain, for about ten days
after the first swarm is cast, sometimes a little sooner, sometimes a day or
two later, the next Princess will begin to tune in her treble voice a mournful
and begging note, as if she did pray her Queen mother to give her leave to be
gone, unto which voice if the Queen vouchsafe to reply, ^uning her base to the
young Princess treble, as commonly she does (though sometimes not entreated in
a day or two) then she consents, and the third day after expect a swarm. The
first day after the grant, how fair soever the weather be, they will not go,
and not ordinarily on the next day, except it be very fair; but on the third
day, though it be somewhat close, and cloudy weather, yet sometimes the
weather proving very cold and windy, I have known them stay five or six days
after liberty granted.

The evening before they swarm, the young Princess goes calling from one part
of the Hive to another, sometimes she is before, sometimes behind, sometimes
above, but still calls, and resting a while between, she still renewes her
calling. In the morning before, she often descends to the bottom of the Hive,
with shriller and thicker, longer, and more continued notes than at first, that
none may plead ignorance, but all know, and acknowledge, there is a new
Princess, and be ready to attend her when she takes possession of her
Royalty, dealing herein (but that she is her own officer, and it is no
disparagement, for the Queen mother is her continual assistant) as Princes on
earth that come newly to succeed in their Dominions, they make it known by
sound of Trumpets, and Proclamations, in the most eminent parts of the Kingdom.

But take notice by the way, that sometimes the Commonalty (knowing best their
numbers within, and the state of the weather abroad) not thinking it good to
make a division, will after leave obtained, kill the young Princess, and all
the infants of the blood Royal, but this is not ordinary.

If the Queen mother after a long entreaty be silent, then there is no way but
one, she must dye, and all her Allies. As the Mr. Butler.
Queens voice is a grant, so her silence is a s^^t denial: The Proverb here
has no place, Quitacet, consentire vide^ur, for without this concent, there is
no consent*

Sometimes a third, nay a fourth will arise after a second, if the prime swarm
be broken; but all (ordinarily) within a fortnight. I have known the last (but
rarely, and in bad weather) seventeen days after the first.

When the swarm i^ up and busy in their dance, it has been an old and common
p^^ctice, for want of other music, to play them a fit of Mirth, on a Basin,
Warming-pan, or Kettle, to make them more speedily light, and keep them from
slying away, but this (though ordinary) yet is needless in this respect, for
they will settle of themselves, except they have chosen a place beforehand,
which is very near. And then when their company is all out, they will fly
directly thi^her, and your ringing and tinging, will prevail nothing to
persuade their stay.

This benefit there is of ringing, that if you have neighbors near, you that
keep Bees, you may give notice thereby to prevent wrangling, if some of theirs
should rise at the same time.

Mr. Levi^s opinion is, That tinging is so far from preventing their flying
away, that it is often a cause to return them back into their Hive, if not to
drive them qu^te away, for they are amazed as it were, and confounded with the
unwonted and clamorous noise.

Mr. Remnant dislikes ringing before the swarm be quite out of their Hive; but
if they be on the wing ready to fly away, then prescribes to make the greatest
sound you can to prevent it, as also by throwing up dust, Hogs-dung, or
Cows-dung to disturb, and trouble them.

Aristotle doubting whether Bees hear, therefore questions whether they take
pleasure in the sound because they hear, or for fear, because of the
reverberation, and tremor of the ai^e?

That the ringing of Bees anciently practiced, was for the Cl^udian de ^^x^.
Consul. Honor^i.
former reason, the Poet implies, saying, The Bee-master ringing on his Basin
by the shrill sound, labors to recall the Bees when they are flying away; and
Virgil before him, and before him Aristotle, Convocarieas in alveum aiunt, they
did cause them to return.

They fly faster or slower, according to the ringing, if he Mr. Muffet
Theat^^^^ Insector.
strikes apace, they hasten away, but if he beat leasurely, then they fly
slowly.

But if they will not be stayed, but hastening on still, go beyond your bounds,
the ancient law of Christendom permits you to pursue them whithersoever,
but our common Law is more uncivil, and yields no such privilege, for if your
Bees be out of your ground, your property is lost, if your neighbor be not
more courteous.

Many directions have been given, to arm them that hive the swarms to escape
danger, but except they be about the body of a tree, or settled very high, you
may without any cover, or defense securely hive them, otherwise get on a pair
of Mi^tens or woollen Gloves on your hands, and a thin Cypress over your head
and face, and then without any fear, you may safely venture among them.

Second swarms after they are all forth of the Hive, will usually fly about
(before they light) longer than prime swarms, the reason is, the Bees knowing
that multi^udes best thrive together, and they by the smalness of their
murmuring sound, being privy to their paucity, do by a continued flying about,
allure as many as they can to come forth to augment their numbers.

Sometimes swarms will settle in two or more clusters, a little distance one
from the other (seldom prime swarms.) Now usually the cause is, because there
be diverse Commanders, and each gets a company. Hive the greatest cluster
first, and set it down toward the other, then into an unspleated Hive, shake
down the other, and when they be all in, knock them down close by the first,
and they will go together.

Second swarms except they be early, and out of large stocks, seldom thrive
alone: Therefore unite two or three together, and so they will be as good as a
first swarm; you may do it thus, Having hived that swarm that you intend to put
to another, as soon as it begins to be dark, take a fan, and laying a couple
of sticks on it, set your first hived swarm on them toward one end of the fan,
and then fetch the other, and between your hands clap the Hive hard on the one
side, holding it close to the other, most of the Bees will fall down at the
first clap, but reiterate your knocking, and they will all fall down, and if
they enter not presently, stir and guide them to the Hive, with a brush of
weeds, and such as go any other way, sweep them to their fellows, and they will
all quickly, and quietly ascend. Within an hour or two, you may (for the most
part) set up the Hive again in his place. I have not lost forty Bees in uni^ing
twenty swarms, besides the Commanders, which of necessity must perish.

Swarms after they be well settled, seldom return home again (if you let them
not hang too long in the heat) and the chief cause of their returning* at any
time, is the miscarriage of the Queen Be, who cannot well use her wings, being
(perhaps) neverforth of the Hive before, and assaying to fly, falls besides
the stool, sometimes flies further, but being quickly wea^y falls short of her
company.

You may easily know if it be thus, for as soon as you have hived the cluster,
the first inquiry they make is for their Leader (whose coming while they hang,
they did anxiously expect) but now being hived, and missing her, they presently
discover it with a mournful murmuring, sometimes bewayling their condition,
jointly crying out together, and then are all suddenly whist and silent, and by
and by again renewing their sad lamentations, tumultuously likewise running
before the Hive, and about the sides thereof, as if they were not only
discontented, but distracted: Others are flying (but pitifully complaining, as
they fly) about the Garden with a busy Quest searching for her; and if they
do not in a short space meet with her, will all comfortless return to the stock
again, whence they came forth.

But if they find her, or she be brought unto them, they presently
congratulate her return with continued shaking of their wings, and oral
rejoycings, witnessing their present contentedness, complacency, and
satisfaction, making even their joyful content in her, something more joyful
than before, as if the felt pleasure at her first return, were more delicious,
and ravishing, by reason of the sudden change from that discontent, and
distraction in their late loss to an excellency, if not ecstasy of delight and
joy.

But if (not finding her) they return home, the next time they come forth,
though in numbers a first swarm, yet not in the manner of their swarming; for
the next Princess comes not forth at the will of the Commons (losing their
Commander, they lose in this respect their liberty) but by petition must obtain
leave of the Queen mother, as in second swarms.

Now when you perceive the Bees discontented carriage, presently seek about
(beginning at the stock, whence they rose, and going that way, the swarm took)
and you shall undoubtedly find her, for she is not alone, but encompassed
with a guard which will never stir from her, though they starve in the place:
Take her up therefore, removing the Bees that environed her (you may do it
securely with a little stick) and carry her to the swarm. And you cannot but
with wonder behold the sudden alteration, with what a rejoicing plaudite (their
mourning being ceased) do they welcome, and entertain her; and those that were
seeking for her abroad (although some rods distant) are instantly sensible of
their felicity (by their fellows rejoicing) and hastily return to express their
content, and bear a part in the general gladness.

If a swarm light near the place where another was hived a day or two before,
when you have hived it, set it ten foot distant from the place where the other
stood, for some Bees of the first hived swarm, will for two or three days
together hanker about the place, and if they find a hive standing there, will
boldly enter, supposing it their own company, and so miscarry by the others,
who take and deal with them as enemies coming to endamage them.

Swarms will the day after they are hived busily follow their labor, but the
removing of them from the place where they were hived, does not a little
discourage them; if therefore the weather be not fair, they will not stir the
first day, and except it be more than indifferent, they will not stir the
second day, and so as the foul weather lasts, droop, and grow faint, and
sometimes totally miscarry.

To prevent this, the day after they are set up, when the Sun shines upon them,
or howsoever about noon (except it rain) put a little honey under the hive near
the mouth of it, and some at the mouth, and before the entrance (less than a
spoonful will serve) which they will quickly smell, and come down to feed on,
and fly forth, and thereby be acquainted with their new standing, and fall to
work upon the first fair weather.

If the weather continue cold and cloudy a week together, without a little
supply they will dye, therefore every day refesh them with a little honey.
After they are acquainted with their standing, you may put it into the Hive
upon a piece of an old comb in the evening. They can endure four or five days
without meat, but if the foul weather continue longer, they will hanging by one
another legs, fall down to the bottom of the Hive, and perish; but try them
not too far, but quicken them daily with a little honey, and you shall keep
them strong and lusty (such close and windy weather falls out often in May) you
shall gain by this loss, for the weather altering, they will not only subsist
of themselves, but by their painful labors, recompense your cost and care.

If your stocks cast a second swarm after Midsummer, the best way is to return
it home again. Hive it as you do other swarms, and about six of the clock knock
them out on a table before their stock, and they will go in* and if they come
forth again (as perhaps they will) do so the second time, and if there be
occasion, the third also, but look heedfully when you first knock them out for
the Queen Be, and take her away, and then shall you be sure to prevent
further and future trouble. And thus shall you keep your stocks full and lusty,
which otherwise were in danger of miscarrying, and the swarms (most years)
would be worth nothing.

Set the poorest swarms upon a plank, and when they have done working, dawb
them round, allowing air, only through two or three quills, and set them in a
dry cold place of your house, or barn, and so being little sensible of the
alteration of the air, they will sleep much, and eat little.

CHAP. XV. What Flowers the Bees gather of.
IT has been almost generally received, that Bees gather from all sorts of
flowers, good, and bad, sweet, and bitter; some P San^lorus Thes^u^. Arist l.
11.
a little, and but a little straiten this vulgar position of all kinds of
flowers, both of Herbs, and Trees (says one) except Docks and Cheesrunnet.

Aristotle curtails this a little more, and tells us that they Arist de hist.
Animal* l 5* c. 19.
gather of all flowers that have cells or sockets. Mr. Mouffet straitens this
also, saying, They refuse no flowers, that are fragrant, contained in cells, or
sockets; but this also must be narrowed into shorter bounds, as yet being too
large, for of many sorts of such flowers, they meddle not with at all.

First, Bees gather not of flowers which have deep sockets, as
Batchelors-buttons, Cuckow-flowers, Cockscomb, Jasmin, Cumphilly, Dead-nettle,
Wood-bettony, Wild-blew-teare, Teazil Red-hony suckle, rarely, and diverse
others, and yet these are more abundant with honey, than many that the Bees
gather of. And of these the Humble bees gather plentifully, nature furnishing
them with larger fangs, and longer tongues than the Bees. 2 Ordinarily they
gather not of many little or small flowers, as Rubia, Pimpernel, Scorpioides,
Hares-foot, Oliver, Veronica, etc. 3 Not ordinarily of many physical Herbr, as
Erisamon, Agrimony, Century, St. John's Wort, Mugwort, Motherwort, etc. 4 Not of
bitter Herbs, as Wormwood, Lavender-cotton, Southernwood, etc. yet sometimes of
Ru^, the flower whereof is scarcely bitter. 5 Not of very dry flowers, as
Docks, Sorrel, Mercury, Atriplex, Wheat, Rye, Oats, etc. 6 Not of those that
have a strong stinking smell, as Smalledge, Hemlock, Galopsia, Crown-empereal,
Cheesrunnet, etc. 7 Not of those that are sopo^iferous, and Narcotick as
Mandrakes, Red-poppy, Nightshade, Black-briony, etc. 8 Not of those that are
very cold and unctuous, as Orpine, Housl^ek, Prick-madam etc. for all oily and
unctuous things are hurtful to them. 9 Not of those that have a strong sweet
smell, as Feve^few, Maudline, English Laurel, Myrrh, etc. 10 Of very few
flowers that grow in Ponds, or Rivers. 11 Not of those flowers, that (though
they have great hollow bodies) shut hard and close at the top or lips, as it
were, as Toads-flax, Snap-dragon, Fox-gloves, which the Humblebees will open
(being stronger) and gather of. 12 Not of very double flowers, as double
Primrose, Wallflowers, etc. except where the leaves are very fine, as the
Dentdelion; nor of such as have deep sockets, and have no strings from the
bottom to the top of the flower. Nor of such whose strings, or horns extend
far out of the flower, as Avens, except there be an excrescency, or cod in the
middle of the flower, as Gillow-flowers have.
Bees sometimes gather of such flowers, as are pernicious and Columel.
hurtful. The Teil-tree, and the Box are very pestilential, so is also the Yew
tree.

If they taste of the flowers of a Corn^ile-tree, they dye of a scowring the
blowings of Elmes are discommended, and wild Plin. l. 21. c. 12.
Cowcumbers, as also Woad, which affords a foggy food that over-lades the Bees,
and makes them miscarry in the fields; strew Salt under your Hives, and they
will be the stronger and lustier. Tulipas kill Bees for closing a little
afternoon, the Bees that are in them are imprisoned, the sides being
out-bowing, and smooth, they cannot get out, and will be dead, before the next
day when they open.

The Lentick tree from whence the Mastick is gathered, affords the best honey
in the world, of which in the Island Sio Sands relat. lib. 1.
(anciently Chios) is great plenty.

Bees gather of these flowers following, yet of some more plentifully than of
others.

In March.

Hasel, Willow, Sallow, Enemony, Bunnikin, Daffadil, Violet, Gooseberry,
Cornelian, Misselto, Crocus, Elm, Primrose, Pilewort, Dendelion, Spoonwort,
Bears-foot, Black-thorn single Wall-flowers, etc.

In April.

Ale-hoof, Ribes, white, red, black Oak, Peach, March-marigold, Cole, Turnep,
Sycomore, or great Maple, Ribwort, Stockgillowflower, Cow-weed, Furse,
Strawberry, Broom, Beans, wild white Enemony, Bears-ear, Ozier, Plumtree,
Cherry, Pear, Apple, Crab, Barbery, Beech, Tear, Maple, Bi^ch, Apricock.

In May.

Watercresses, Hull, Angelica, a tall rank grass Parsnep, Onion, Leek,
Garlick-seeds, Dogs-tongue, white Valerian, Tamarisk, Thrift, Sage, S^orksbill,
Mous-ear, Raspis, Charlock Marigold, small yellow Honysuckle, Poppy, Woodbind,
Medlar, blew Valerian, Burnet, wild Tansie, Archangel, both with the white and
yellow flowers, called by the Tygurines, Been-sauge, or Bee-suck, Hawthorn,
Elder, white Honysuckle, King-cup, Pease, double Gies.

In June.

Tre-trifoly with yellow knops, and another kind of Trifoly with long red
blossoms, and a Trifoly with pale, yellow blossoms like a Lotus, but ranker,
Dewbery, Blewbottle, Mothmulleine, Luteola* or Diers weed, white Briony,
Savory, Origanum, Hysop, Pondweed with a flower like Patience, Lang d^z beuf,
common Thistle, Bugloss, sometimes, but seldom, Burrage, Parsley, Lotus,
Lis^^achia, Roses, red, Damask, Velvet, Henbane, Mustard Seed Sharewort,
Cankerrose, Daneswort, Bindweed, Mallows, Melilot, Calamint, Cowcumber, Thyme,
which only yields Nectar. So Mr. Butler, who therefore finds fault with
Virgil, for saying, Mr. But. fem. mon. c. 6.
Crura thymo plena, but let any observe, and he shall find they gather as
often Bee-bread as honey; and again he says, The Bees gather not of the Rose,
the Primrose, the Clove-Julyflower, the Pease, of all which they gather
plentifully, but not of the Pease until the blossom begins to wither, and the
cod to put forth, and then they gather Sandaracha of it plentifully, especially
in the morning.

In July.

Tobacco, Love, Carduus-benedictus, Jacea, Lampsana, Pennyroyal, Small
Dentdelion, Sca^let Beans, Mayweed, Gourds, Clotbur, Live-long, Horse-mints,
Skir^e^s, Yarrow, Germander, Nip, Sowthistle, single, and double July-flowers,
Succory, Dill, Clematis Altera, Fenil, Filius Ante patrem, Holy-hock,
French-marigold, Coriander, Lavender, Melon, Blackbery, Buck, Jacobea,
Stechados.

In August.

Red Eyebright, Knap-weed, Heath, Virga Aurea, Ivy.

In September.

You are to take notice that many of these flowers blow twice a year, as
Rosemary, Archangel, Tamari^k, Bu^rage, Charlock also, although not the same
roots. And some continue longer than the month whereto they are ascribed, and
some begin to blow a little before, but whensover they blow, the Bees gather of
them, but less in Autumn than in the Spring.

Many flowers afford matter of gathering in the morning before the dew is quite
exhaled, which in the heat of the day yield little, as the Pease, and a tall
rank grass, having a stalk a foot, and a half long, with a large bushie ear.

Bees have this property, that whatsoever Flower they first begin with, when
they go to work, they meddle with no other Arist. de hist. Anim. l. 9 c. ^0
that journey, but lade themselves with such meat alone as that kind yields;
this is a common, but no catholic custom, for I have often observed the
contrary.

It is true, if there be flowers enough near at hand, to make up their burden
of that sort they begin withal, they will meddle with no other, but if they
have begun to gather of a flower that likes them, and cannot find enough to
furnish them, then they will make up their load of some other.

CHAP. XVI. Of the ordering of Bees.
IN February lift up your Hives on the one side nimbly, and with a wing wipe
away all the sharings of combs, dross, dung, or whatsoever else lies upon the
stool, which although the Bees in time would perform, yet hereby shall you
save them a great deal of labor.

If your old Stocks have any crumbling, or crispie combs, take them out in the
Spring, for they cannot work to them; lay the Hives on one side, having ready a
fire of dried Cow Dung in a Chafingdish without a flame, the smoke will drive
the Bees inward, and you may securely perform it.

Some tell us of putrefaction in the combs, in regard of dead brood chilled,
which combs they would have taken out; but I never met with more than the Bees
could rid themselves of, except when the Bees are almost, if not altogether
starved.

That they so love quiet, that they scarce endure the company Weck^rus de
secret, Lib 8.
of men (is false) and therefore must have walls built about them with holes,
to see what offends them, is ridiculous, yet commended by Florentinus.

Bees are much offended with long hair on head, or face, let such therefore as
must be often among them wear short hair, or be well covered, on peril of
stinging.

If a Be have stung you in hot weather, your wisest and safest way is to
depart for a while, for there issues with the sting a strong poysonful savor,
which you your self may smell, but howsoever, the Bees will readily, and knowing
thereby that some of their company are wronged, will with eagerness seek to
vindicate the injury on whomsoever they find present in the place, and come
about you thick and threefold; there is no way to appease them but one, get
away as fast as you can, and when the ^^roar is over, you may securely come
again.

The best time to do any thing about your Bees, is, in the morning before they
stir, or when they are new gone abroad, or in the evening* when they are
returned from their work.

Make the mouth narrow, least the Summers heat dissolve the Virgil.


Dissolve the honey, or cold Winter freeze,
For both extremes alike annoy the Bees.
Be very careful about the door, or entrance into your Hives, for negligence
herein occasions the loss of more Bees than any other neglect, from the
Dor-mouse, and Tit-mouse in Winter, and the Wasp, and robbing Bees in Autumn.

Let the doors be somewhat long, but very low, not much above the height of a
Be, and let them be more or less open, according to the seasons; but rather
offend in leaving too narrow an entrance than too large; a thin board in Winter
cut in notches like a grate, well fastened to the Hive, with Cow Dung and Ashes
tempered together; two notches open in Winter, is enough for a good Hive, one
for a poorer; for thereby they are kept more warm in Winter, and more secure
from enemies.

When they have wrought a week in the Spring, the better Hives may have three
or four notches open, and by degrees more, until they be full, and then you may
take away the grates altogether until Autumn; but be sure to set them early to
the old Stocks that have over-swarmed, as also to the poor swarms, and in a
dry year, sooner than in a moist, for the Waspes will be more numerous and
early, and the robbing Bees finding little abroad to busy themselves about,
will be seeking to plunder poor and weak Stocks betimes.

When you see the Waspes begin to be busy, and forsake eating of dead Bees,
before the stools, venture into the Hives, set up your doors to the poorer
Stocks, and narrow the passage of the better with a little Cow Dung (tempered
as before) that it may not be above an inch long.

If you will be at cost, it will be very beneficial to have a hurdle made of
Oziers set before your Hives, even with your stools, or else boards shelving
outward at the bottom, for the Bees to rest on when they come home weary and
laden.

Mr. Levit mislikes the keeping of Hives four or five years at the most, but
his reasons are weak, because (says he) the combs will be black and
unsavory, and the old Bees are not so good for increase and breed, as the
young, nor so strong and lusty for labor; but these reasons are without
reason, for blackness of the combs is no fault, as we showed before, and of
the age of Bees, we shall treat by and by, only in a word, note that they are
an annual creature, and live not beyond a year with the vantage; on the same
ground, therefore all the old stocks must be taken every year.

Many things are necessary for the preservation of Bees, first, A competency of
food which they will labor for, and compass with their own industry, except
the unseasonableness of the weather, the smalness of their numbers, the
treachery of enemies, the power of robbers, or the covetousness, or simplicity
of their owners by driving them too late, or after that by reiterated swarming,
they have diminished their numbers, for the recruiting whereof, they were well
enough furnished with brood (although then unfledge Nymphs, yet the hopes of
continuance) of which being untimely bereaved by driving, as desperate, they
either forsake their Hives; or if they continue and work, yet can they not
sufficiently breed, and provide themselves before Winter, and therefore must
starve.

It has been inquired by some, what quantity of honey will serve a Hive of Bees
all Winter: To which question no certain answer can be returned, because of the
numbers which in some Hives are more, and therefore must have more meat; and
also because the Spring in some years, is more forward than in another, so that
quantity that will serve in one year, will not serve in another. But I would
not willingly let any stock continue, that had not five pintes at the least of
honey.

Sometimes it will be convenient to hoist up such swarms that you fear will
cast, especially if Midsummer be past, for although they may live, yet
ordinarily they will be weak and poor, and the stock whence they came so
impoverished, that if it continues, it will scarce swarm the year following.

Raise them up by putting four Brickbats at an equal distance under the skirts
of the Hive, let them go no further inwards than the verges, then dawb them up
well, leaving a fitting passage for them to go out of the Hive.

I like Mr. Southerns judgment to set them down again afterward, the best
time is in January. This Mr. Levit laughs at as an impossibility, supposing
that they having wrought down to the board, the combs would be crushed
together, and many Bees killed; but laying the Hive on the side, and making a
smoke (as before) in a cold morning, to drive the Bees up, with a long sharp
knife cut the combs a little within the Hive (as I have often done) and there
will be neither danger, nor damage*

Mr. Butler advises to set them down in the end of August, Mr Butler Fem. Mon.
c. 3.
when by the death of the old Bees, and also of the Drones, there is more room
made, lest their swarming be hindered the next year, unless they be swarms
that have wrought down to the stool, which indeed most have, and then this
advice is to little purpose.

The course in our Country which most take to get some profit by their Bees, is
driving, out of a foolish ^i^y they will not burn them, but care not much to
starve them, and that without any great profit to themselves, for they usually
do it after they have cast a second swarm about Midsummer, or a week after. The
Bees then (besides those in the brood, which would have been a sufficient
supply to them) being then very few, and many of them old Bees, which in a
month, or a little more, will all dye, and then they will be by much fewer; as
soon as they are driven therefore, despairing by their own industry to subsist,
they will leave the Hive and fly into another, so skipping for the most part,
out of the Drying Pan into the fire. If they work, as some will endeavor their
own preservation, yet not one of three in ordinary years outlive the Winter,
and they being weak, are often made a prey to robbers in the Spring, or having
spent their little store, then fly away; but if they out-wrastle all these
difficulties, yet they will scarce swarm that year.

Moreover little honey at that time of the year is ordinarily to be had; a
quart, perhaps a pottle, and this is a liberal portion. Whereas if they will
drive them, let them do it early before their honey is consumed by successive
broods, and let them observe the condition of the Spring, for thereby they may
have some likelihoods whether they will do well.

I have driven ten Hives in the beginning of May (not swarming the year before)
all which after swarmed the same Summer, and the prime swarms did very well: Or
if you will drive, take this course, when your stock has cast a second swarm,
the night following drive the old stock into the swarm, and they may do well,
except it be late in the year.

Old stocks before they have swarmed, and early swarms driven, seldom
miscarry; I have known them driven twice in three weeks, and full of honey the
second time. Nay a foolish neighbor of mine drove a swarm the third time, and
had above a gallon of honey at either of the two first drivings, and above three
quarts the third time, but it was so late that the Bees dyed that Winter.

If you have a stock that lay out the year before, and swarmed not, and does so
the year following, and Midsummer be past, drive it, and ten to one (if the
year be indifferent it will do well.)

Now to preserve your stocks, and yet to make some advantage of your Bees, take
this course (except you know a better, but thus I do) About Bartholomew-tide, I
survey my swarms, and all those that I find not by the weight competently
supplied, namely with five pintes of honey at the least, I take, and I examine
my old stocks, especially such as have swarmed twice, or oftener, and where I
find few Bees, which you shall know, if giving the Hive a little knock with
your finger on the outside of the Hive, if the murmur be sudden and short,
then it is a sign there be but few Bees, but if it be smart and long,
descending from the top downwards, then it is a sign of plenty.

They that have but few Bees, though they be never so well stored with honey,
yet will not continue over the next Spring, but will be a prey to robbers;
therefore it is better to take them then to lose them, and their honey also;
but yet if you desire to save any that are well supplied, then drive a swarm
that you intend to take into them, and so shall you have a good stock; and thus
with Gods blessing shall you increase your Bees, and have a sufficiency of honey
and wax. If you have not, you may take as many of the best as you shall think
convenient.

Some prescribe to take those that are too full of honey, as (thereby) disabled
to breed, and prosper the year following, but this is but a groundless
supposition for ought ever I could find, having had as good as any other, the
combs being generally filled with honey to the board, which I have let stand on
purpose to try whether they would breed, and never found, but such were as full
of Bees the year following, as any other; for after working time there is a
long time of eating, and if they be numerous with Bees, they will make room
enough by breeding time.

The manner in a word to take Hives in the latter part of the year is by
burning, which briefly you may thus do; take an old linen cloth and cut it
into long narrow pieces, about two handfuls long, and half an inch broad, and
then having melted beaten Brimstone, dip them therein, and having dug a hole
near the Hive that you intend to take, let it be somewhat more than a foot
over, and half as deep; set in the bottom of it two or three crotched sticks,
into which put three or four of your rags smeared with Brimstone, and having
kindled them set the Hive over, stopping the verges somewhat close, and your
Bees with the smoke will in a short space fall down st^sled and dead.

For the manner of driving, it is needless that I should speak much, being well
known almost to every one.

Have a prepared Hive as near as you can, of the breadth, in the skirt, of that
Hive you will drive setting it on the ground, put sheet over it, and well fasten
it with a strong pack-threadround about the Hive within an inch of the skirts,
then having a Trivet^, Payl, or Firkin ready, set the empty Hive therein with
the mouth upwards, and then lift the Hive you will drive, nimbly from the stall,
and set it upon them empty, and gather up quickly the sheet that hangs down to
the crown, and fasten it well likewise with a little line, about an inch from
the skirt, and turn them thus tied together, that the empty Hive may stand
upwards, and knock gently with the palms of your hands on the sides, and on
the crown, sometimes in one place, and then in another, and often pause, and
make a little stop, that the Bees may ascend, and reiterate your clapping
again; in half an hour they will be all, or the most of them gone up, and then
carry it to the place where the other stood; if you do it in the evening, let
it stand unmeddled with all night; if in the morning, let it be before Sun; and
if there be any Bees behind, when you take out the combs, sweep them off with a
wing, and they will find their fellows.

Many in the Bees necessity commend and applaud feeding, when by driving
unseasonably, or not seasonably uniting (as the Proves is) They have broken
their heads, they would give them a plaster, but for the most part too narrow
and scanty for the sore.

For feeding of weak Bees, many things by many are prescribed, I shall be brief
in the particulars, because I altogether dislike feeding, except in the
beginning of the year, through the backwardness of the Spring, some Hives
(otherwise sufficiently furnished) stand in need, or some early swarms, the
weather proving tempestuous, cold, or close, sometimes for above a week
together: it will be very convenient then to relieve them, until the weather
alter, and they begin to work, when they will need no longer your supply, and
without a little supply would be so poor and feeble, that they would untimely
miscarry, and dye.

The ancients commend feeding of them with Raisins, bruised Figgs; Pliny bids
set Hens flesh before them, although he acknowledges that they eat no kind
of flesh, and therefore in that respect preferres them before the Hornet, and
the Waspe.

The Gentleman that wrote the first large Letter in Master Hartlibs Legacy, a
wel-wisher to Bees, although little skilled, Mr. Hartlibs Legacy.
(as it appears by his Projects) in the nature or ordering of them, taxes a
general deficiency in this Kingdom in this respect, as if we were more
negligent, or ignorant than some of other Countries; for the glory of our
Nation let me plead (which he ignorantly traduceth)

The knowledge of Bees was never truly communicated to the World by any but by
English men; Mr. Southern brake the ice, then followed Master Levit, who wrote
more than fifty years since: though he was published long after Mr, Butler: Mr.
Levit, I say, not the Father of the publisher, but the Grandfather (perhaps his
Grandchild knew not so much) and I question not but Mr Butler was acquainted
with his Book, for it was in diverse men's hands though not printed.

After him Mr. Butler wrote singularly well (although in some things defective,
and no question but after Ages may add more, but I will not be too bitter, not
doubting of the Gentleman's good meaning, but advise him, and all others in
this, or any other subject, not to urge Eutopian conceits, but such things as
out of experience they have some probable grounds for, Ne suitor ultra crepidam,
all Countries produce not an equal store of every commodity; that other
Countries abound more with Honey, is not because they abound in skill, Scandia is
more plentiful, because after the great snowes that lie all Winter on the
ground, and keep it warm, which once dissolved, the earth is presently
embroidered with a garment of Flowers in greater plenty, variety, and
continuance than most Countries afford; and the long days are another
advantage, especially the weather not being so variable as with us, and a
principal cause of their increase is the extreme cold in Winter, which holds
them in a perpetual sleep, so that they eat little after they leave working,
and the earth with the Winters Snow and Rain is thoroughly moystned, that
drought seldom proves injurious to them, as it is often with us.

But for his conceits of feeding Bees with sweet compositions of diverse things
besides Honey, because cheaper; we are to know, that although they will eat of
all kinds of sweet things, yet are they not so proper and natural as Honey,
neither will they when they stand in need of feeding extract Honey out of them,
as he supposes, and replenish their Combs, no nor car^y at such times Honey
which they feed on into their Combs; and when they can do this, namely, when
they are lusty, and the weather warm, they rather gather it abroad (and save
your cost and charges) but suppose those compositions were beneficial, yet not
to the old Stocks that are likely to miscarry, for they for the most part have
already more meat than mouths, but yet it might preserve the swarms.

I have showed a cheaper and safer way, by uniting, and for casual wants, in
regard of the continuance of cold and bad weather, Honey is more natural.

And whereas Mr. Southern objects against old Honey, that it will make them
scou^e, this is but a fancy, I yearly upon occasions experiment it, but never
found that inconvenience.

He objects further, If they be fed, they will fall to robbing of others, but
herein also he was mistaken; Bees that stand in need of feeding are seldom so
lusty, never so vent^ous to plunder others, but rather in continual danger to
be robbed by others of that little they have, which feeding, not duly
performed, readily exposes them unto.

The Gentleman in Mr. Hartlibs Legacy, desires to save the poor swarms by
feeding, and with the least charges that might be, whereas not one of six
(never so carefully fed) that are desperately poor, can be preserved, and if
they do live and escape the robbers, and not forsake their Hives, which most
of them will do, finding their numbers small, yet will they not swarm if they
live out the Summer, so that the charges besides the trouble will double the
profit.

When you have occasion to feed, if you have not reserved Combs on purpose when
you took your Bees, spread Honey upon a dry comb, and put it under the Hive in
the evening, but remember to take it away in the morning, if any be left, or
shut them up until they have eaten all, least the robbing Bees find it, and
not contented therewith, carry away also that little they have in the combs, I
would have feeding begun (where it is necessary) before an absolute want, least
they be so poor and weak that they cannot come down; if any happen so to be,
then turn up the mouth of the Hive in the heat of the Sun, or near a Fire, and
drop a little liquid honey among them.

I have recovered swarms shut in by long cold weather, where not a Be has
been able to stir, and continuing it after with a little honey put under the
Hive until the charge of the weather, they have done very well that year.

Bees will sometimes suck the sweetness of rotten Pears, sometimes full ripe
Grapes, but yet a very few among a great many with us.

In Sicilia there be Grapes of which they make Muskatell* Fache^lus de reb.
Siculis, l. 1. prior decad.
which are therefore called the Bee-grape, because the Bees greedily feed upon
them, as also Flies.

Mr. Butler counsels, that you cut asunder such Stocks as you intend to
preserve (almost even with the Bees) if they have not wrought within a handful
of the stool, and then to set them down, making them a new door, that thus
they may be warmer in the winter.

This is a course both wastful and useless, for I never had any stock, if it
were supplied with meat, that miscarried, although the Bees had not wrought
half way down. And to prevent it, in ordinary years sit your Hives according to
the greatness or smalness of your swarms; This way, if otherwise profitable,
cannot be performed without destruction of your Hives, and the loss and trouble
of your Bees, and the Stock will be so small, that except you add another, and
raise it, the swarm will be worth nothing.

To prevent the cold, daub up the skirts round, and let the entrance be very
small.

A watering place near your Bee-garden is very necessary, they cannot subsist
without it.

-- But near pure Crystal Springs, Virgil.

Green mossie Fountains still your Bee-hives place,
And streams that glide along the verdant grass.
Without it some say, they can neither make their Combs, Columel de re rust. 9
l. c. 5.
nor yet their Honey; but the use is not so general, but when they feed on
Bee-bread (which is hot and dry) they cannot be without it, and they love not
to go far for it.

Into your running or standing water many prescribe to cast in stones, somewhat
elevated above the water:

Into the Poole, whether it stand or flow, Virgil.

Great stones a cross, and Willow branches throw,
As Bridges for the Bees to stand upon,
And spread their wings against the Summers Sun.
But pieces of Wood, or Boards, entered into the water, and set shelving, or
leaning toward the North are much better, the stones being too cold in the
spring; but if you can bare the banks of the North-side of your Pond of all
bushes, and grass shelving toward the water, where they may drink under the
Wind, and in the heat of the Sun, and suck it out of the earth above the water,
which they rather desire, than to suck the pure water it self.

But if you have neither Pond, nor River within twenty rodds of your
Bee-garden, set water in wooden troughs in your Garden, and have light thin
moveable boards, or corks within your troughs, that may rise and fall with the
water, let them have small clefts, or many little holes bored through them,
that the Bees may stand on the boards and drink; keep Hens and Chickens,
especially Ducklings from these troughs, for they will destroy your Bees.

Mr. Butler enumerating the several actions of Bees in warm days in Winter,
among others says, they drink, but he was deceived, for although sometimes in
January they gather a little Bee-bread, yet until they plentifully feed of it,
they drink not, for while they feed on Nectar which is hot and moyster than
Bee-bread, they need it not, but the other being more hot and dry, makes them
exceeding thirsty.

Bees will be very much about sinkes, and where greasy water is thrown, nay
they rather delight to drink out of Sawpits and holes where the water is thick
and troubled, than out of Ponds, though nearer them; and when they water out of
Ponds, they delight (as I said) to extract the water from the moystned earth
near the Ponds, or Rivers brinkes, than to suck or drink of the purer water it
self, which yet some will.

Mr. Remnant supposes, that they suck out of sinkes, or old di^ches, and
places that incline to Saltpeter, for want of salt water, wherewith says he
they season their Honey, which I believe not, but rather that they may be more
vigorous and lusty, and therefore salt is prescribed to be laid under weak
Stocks; he says, it is in the defect of Salt water, but where they are near
the Salt they use it.

And he further says, they season their Honey with salt water, and in the want
of it, with brackish water thus extracted, therefore he commends the setting of
salt water or brine near them; but they neither use salt water about their
Honey, nor yet fresh, (as Columella) but for the reason before mentioned,

In Summer they will drink securely upon the Duck-sheard, and other thick weeds
in the middle of Ponds; the best time to remove Bees, if you are to carry them
far is in the end of January, although if you be necessitated, you may do it
well enough presently after Mi^^aelmas.

A little before you take them from their standing, lift up a little the skirts
of the Hive, and put three or four Tile-sheards under the Verges, that (the
Hives standing somewhat above the board) all the Bees may ascend, otherwise
some will be left on the bottom of the stool, which will be lost; then spread
a sheet upon the ground before it, and nimbly take it off, and set it upon the
middle of the sheet, and gathering it up round, tie it close above the crown
with a noose, tie it also about the middle with a Pack-thred, then put a Cool
staff through the noose (be sure it be well tied) it must hang
perpendicular, not swaying one way, or other. Let it be carried between two to
the place whither you intend it, when you come there, set it down, but open it
not presently, for the Bees will be somewhat disturbed with the motion, and
ready to fly forth; it is best to set it up in the heat of the day, that if
any suddenly fly forth, they may not be chilled with the cold, but after a
little flying about, they may return to it again; but if the weather be close
and still, then set it up in the evening, and stop it up close (leaving
breathing holes) until a fair day, and then open the door.

CHAP. XVII. Of Bees breathing.
AFter a long condescension to the capacities of the Vulgar, to whom almost
peculiarly this large practical Discourse appertains: I will now endeavor to
set an edge upon, if not, to satisfy the appetites of the more Judicious,
though not with a banquet of Rarities, yet with a dish or two of Sweetmeats
(according to promise) as soon as I can provide them.

There is a necessity of refrigeration from without, by air Arist. de partibus
Animal. l. 3. c. 6. Arist. de Spirat.
or water. Now the grand inquity is, How Insects (in particular Bees) are
refrigerated. The Philosophers before Aristotle, held that all creatures
breathed, as Democritus, Diogenes, An^xag^ras.

Pliny professes that he accords not with Aristotle in Plin Not. hist. l. 9.
c. 7.
this particular, that Fishes breathed not, because they did hear and smell.

I will speak one word to this (although out of my sphere) and but a word, lest
I conjure up learned Scalagers ghost to oppose me, That Fishes breath is
evident to sense, I have seen them often come up to the top of the water, and a
little elevating their heads above, draw it in with the water, and with many
bubbles return it again, some at the Gills, but the greater part at the mouth.

And that they cannot live without air, thus, In great Frosts they cannot long
continue though they have water, except the Ice be broken, and then they will
presently come to the hole for air, so that sometimes you may take them out
with your hands. And if it be some days delayed, they will turn up their
bellies in the holes as quite spent, yet by the benefit of the air, many of
them recover, but if it be altogether neglected, in a great Frost most
Pond-fish will dye.

Rondele^ius holds, That not only Fishes, but Insects also Rondel. de pisc bus
l. 4.
breath (although without lungs) in particular Bees, because of the sound, and
murmr that they make, and because they smell.

Cardan affirms, That all living creatures breath either openly Cardan. de
subtle. l. 12.
or secretly, manifestly such as have lungs, more hiddenly which have gills;
and that is must obscure by palpitation, and therefore whereas Aristotle denies
such creatures that have no lungs to breathe, he understands thereby a perfect
breathing, and therefore says, The sound of Bees is caused by the air, which
they receive and draw in; why not the same instrument that draws it in return
it? But this opinion, although Aristotle's Scaliger labors to undermine, but
to little purpose. He supposes it to be caused by the shaking of their
wings. This both Aristotle, and H^lychius before him propounded, but did not
conclude of; Mr. Muffet says, It is a secret not to be determined of. The L.
Verulam supposes the humming sound of Bees (which is an un qual buzzing) to
be from the motion of I. Verul* silvasi. var. cent. 1. 175.
their wings, because it is not heard, but when they stir, I deny not but the
sound ^s more shrill and audible thereby, but not only caused therewith.

First, because in a Hiv^ full of Pees, where they lie crowded up thick
together in the Winter between the combs, without room to dilate their wings,
not at all to shake them, you shall have a sudden smart sound in an instant
from the place touched, descending to the bottom from all the Bees, as it were
complaining.

Secondly, by the encouragement of the Queen Be, when two swarms are united,
and so mingled together, that either of them being encompassed with their whole
troop, and having no room to stir, and shake their wings (being each of them in
the center of their regiment) but as they are in the conflict moved with the
whole body; yet may they be heard audibly sometimes a rod from the Hive a
great while together, without intermission, each encouraging her army to stand
to her, and for her.

Thirdly, If their sound were caused by the agitation of their wings only, it
could not be various and changed, but only smaller, or greater, but both
Aristotle and Scaliger acknowledge, that they change their voice; and if they
did not, yet Arist de hist. l. 9. c. 40.
is it so evident to sense, that but coming among them, by their different
voices, it may be known whether they mourn or rejoice, work or sight.

Fourthly, If their sound were caused by the agitation of their wings, then
according to the largeness of their wings should be the greatness of their
sound, but this is not so; the Queen Bees wings are no bigger than a common
Bees, but her sound is more than ten times louder and greater.

I might add that Crickets sing, and their voices are heard very far, and yet
have no wings to shake; nay they move not their bodies when they sing, as I
have often observed, and as soon as they stir, they give over singing.

In a word, as to a Musician that plays on a Flute, or such like
Wind-instrument, there is required skilfulness in the outward touch of his
instrument, and also wind to be inspired, without which he cannot possibly
strike the ear, or please the sense with any melodious noise, so do I conceive
in some respects the humming noise of the Bees, is caused both by the outward
motion of their wings, and also by an inward motion, that I say, not
inspiration.

Aristotle was very wavering what to determine concerning their sound,
sometimes he says, they make a noise; sometimes, he grants they have a
voice, and he has no sooner granted it, but would fain bite it in again if
he could, as overthrowing this Arist. de hist. l. 9, c. 40.
position, that they breathe not; Hear what he says, they change their voice,
when they swarm they have a proper and peculiar voice, but whether they have a
voice or not, is not yet thoroughly understood in regard of the difficulty.

Thus is this grand Philosopher unresolved, it is a difficulty, he cannot tell
what to determine; but he has taken up another opinion, and although he be
somewhat convinced of the vanity of it, yet he is loath to retract, he will
rather set his wit upon the Ten^ers, and seign some new distinction, sometimes
they make a sound, sometimes they have a voice.

Small and blood-less creatures are externally cooled by the Arist de Spir^t.
ambientaire, or water, neither is it necessary that the air should penetrate
them, because of the weakness of their natural heat; but the coldest creatures
need refrigeration, for they have a heart, as the Snail, which is visible to
all men upon dissection, and much more hot creatures, as Bees are, which have
also a heart, although it be not easily discerned by prejudicate eyes.

Winged creatures when they move themselves by the attrition Arist. de Somno
and Vigil. Arist. de hist. l. 4 c. 7.
of the air sliding into their belly, make a noise.

And again, Insects have no voice, but make a sound only by the admission of
the air, not emission, and Bees, and all other Insects lift themselves up with
their wings, and presently contract themselves when there is made a sound by
the attrition of the air taken in, but not constant to himself, he says in
another place, There is an innate implanted air in the transverse enclosure,
Arist. de Spirat.
which being lifted up, and contracted, causes thereby a smiting on the little
membrane, and hence says he is their sound.

Scaliger says, It is from a membrane including the air, and Scalig. com. in
Arist. de hist. l. 4 c. 7. Magirus Physiol. L. Ve^ul. Silva Sil. cent. 2. 133
the motion of the external members.

Magirus says, Their noise is not made by a return of the air, but by an
agitation of an inward not outward air.

Another supposes sounds, and therefore voices may be made without air. It
is certain, says he, howsoever it cross the received opinion, that sounds be
created without air, though air be the most favorable deferent of sounds.
Take a vessel of water, and knap a pair of tongs some depth within the water,
and you shall hear the sound of the tongs well enough, and not much
diminist^ed, and yet there is no air at all present. What if I should say
there is air in the water, because there is in it a sound made?

Hot creatures as Bees, desire a greater refrigeration: Bees Arist. de Spirat.
like to those creatures that breathe, do make a sound ( spiritu) with the air
or spirit, for when the native, which is (as before) implanted in the
transverse enclosure, is lifted up and contracted, then is caused an attrition
of the membrane; For they do not otherwise move this part, then other Animals
draw air with their lungs from without, and Fishes by the agitation of their
Gills.

Scaliger is for transpiration; and so Basil, he says, That Basil Hexain.
Hon^ll. 8.
Insects breathe not, being without lungs, bu^ were nourished by air in the
external parts, and his reason is, if they be dipped or smeared with oil, they
presently dye, the passages or pores being stopped, but yet says he, If they
be presently washed Alexand. Aphrodis. l. 1. Problem. 6 2.
with water (others say Vinegar) the passages being opened, they will live; and
with him accord diverse others.

To this I answer, That it is granted that oil kills Bees, and almost all other
Insects being naturally mortal to them, and wash them after with what you will
they will, neither revive, not recover, but almost as suddenly dye (though but
a part of their body be smeared with oil) as if they were cast on hot embers.
And that it is not, because of the stopping of the passages of the air,
appears thus: Let Bees be drowned in honey, which is more viscous and clammy
than oil, yet if they be timely taken out, they will dry themselves, or be
sucked dry by their fellows, and recover.

Now at last you cannot but take notice how various they are in their opinions,
that deny breathing to Bees, ^r so to make a noise, they cannot but acknowledge
a necessity of refrigeration.

Aristotle sometimes by the admission, not emission of aires sometimes by a
native implanted air.

Scaliger from a membrane including the air, and the motion of the external
members.

Magirus by an agitation of an inward air only, but whether native, or
adventitious, he expresses not.

L. Verulam sometimes, that a sound may be made without air, sometimes by the
motion of their wings.

Basil that they are cooled by transpiration, and therefore by an air so
admitted, must make their noise. Thus wilfully deviating from, and denying a
truth, they are quickly be-wildred in a th^cket of errors.

Now let us hear their arguments why they suppose them not to breath,
Aldrovandus says, Insects, neither breathe, nor Aldrovand. proleg^m* in lib.
de in^ectis.
need breathing, because a breathing faculty is bestowed on creatures which
have lungs, but Insects being blood-less are cold, and therefore want not
refrigeration, but are sufficiently cooled by a native air, or externally by
transpiration; I answer many of them (if any) are not blood-less, for they have
a heart which the Philosopher accounts the original of blood. And if they have
a heart ( Aldrovand* acknowledges) they have lungs also, and stand in need of
great refrigeration. And that Bees are hot creatures, Aristotle affirms. Arist.
de Spir.


Secondly, If they breathed, as they drew in breath, they must also return it,
which could not be done but by some inward instrument; but all Insects are
without bowels (according to Aristotle) but this is manifestly untrue; dissect
a large Grasshopper, the bowels are visible to him that has but half an eye;
and so also in Humble-bees, and in many other Insects.

In some that are very small, they are not distinctly visible; but it follows
not therefore that they are without them, no more than because they want the
visible organs of hearing and smelling, that therefore they neither hear, nor
smell; both which senses almost all natures secretaries acknowledge to be in
them. And yet who is able to point out the instruments. Aldrovand. has some
other reason, but all built on the former foundation, which miscarrying, they
must needs go to the ground.

Scaliger his main argument that they breathe not, is, because Seal. de subtle.
exercitat. 173.
they need not a refrigeration of their heat having no heart; but this being
manifest to sense, as learned Dr. Harvey avers, the argument falls to the
ground.

Others deny that Insects breathe, and their reason is, because there is no
breathing knot, or turning in the inward intrall, that is to say a membrane
like to the lungs, whereby the air is drawn in, and therefore some hold that
they live as plants; but there is a great difference whether any thing breathes
or lives. Others convinced of the vanity of this conceit, hold that they have
something analogous, namely by transpiration.

Aristotle says Bees breathe not, because they continue long Arist. de Spir.
in the water. But not long under the water; so long as by beating with their
wings, they keep their heads out, they preserve themselves; but their wings
being once thorough wet, they quickly drown.

And that they receive water into their bodies, appears, because when they dye
suffocated in the water, they are greater than when they are alive, whereas if
they dye otherwise, they shrink up, and are less.

Aristotle, and also Scaliger, add another reason, they will, Idem de Spirat.
covered with ashes revive, perhaps if they have not been long drowned, with
heat they will recover, as they will if they be chilled near twenty hours, but
ashes are so far from reviving of them, that if they be alive and lusty, they
would rather kill them; for dust (much more ashes) will, if they go a little
upon it, so fur their dew-clawed feet, that it will indispose them to fly.

Breathing, says Scaliger is seen by motion, or perceived by Scalig. de
subtle. exercitat. 173.
touch, by the pulse, or understood by the voice, and all there ways more or
less, may it appear that Bees breathe.

But it may be objected, that they have no nostrils to receive breath by.

I answer, They breathe by their mouth, Aristotle says, the Arist. de partibus
Animal. l. 3. c. 1. Arist de Spir.
mouth i^ for many uses, for diverse creatures do breathe with it. For breathing
is not a proper work of the nostrils, but creatures breathe, partly by the
nostrils, partly by the mouth.

But it is further objected, we see no lungs: I answer, in fowls the lungs are
small, and but like a membrane; surely then in such small flying creatures as
Bees, they are not visible.

But to conclude they have no lungs, because we see none, Arist de partibu^
Animal. l. 4. c 6.
were but a weak arguing. In some creatures denied to breathe, we see them, and
perhaps with a good multiplying glass, might see in these; by the same reason
we might deny they hear or smell, because we see no organs (as before)
whereby they perform it, and yet nothing is more certain.

That Bees breathe, Mr. Butler affirms, but it was a question Butler Fem. Mo^.
c. 7.
he disputed not, but relating how after they have been dead a whole day
(being chilled wi^h cold) although, says he, they be quite dead, without
sense, motion, and breath, you may, if you be disposed, revive them with the
warmth of your hand (but look to your selves, for many when they begin to
revive, will ingratefully sting.) And this their reviving cannot* but almost
seem a miracle unto you, for presently their spirits returning, you shall see
them begin to pant and breathe, and anon they will fly away as lusty as the
best.

But to come to arguments, That Bees breathe is evident by their panting and
palpitation; I mean not when they are in the condition of prisoners, and
violently held or detained, for with Scaliger I acknowledge, that Bees or flyts
captivated, palpitation is not breathing, but a striving to escape.

Bees when they return from their work are often so weary (as men out of
breath) that they are necessitated to rest themselves near the Hive, until
they have recollected their spirits, and gotten, by a little rest, new
strength, at first panting more quick and short, but by and by fetching as it
were a longer breath, until at last they pant little, if at all.

Secondly, It appears by their swearing at the Hive-door, a moist vapor is
visible at the door of a good Hive in the morning, sometimes in drops of water.
As Bears in Russia, while they sleep in Winter, yet are found by the Hunters,
by the dissolved snow turned into isycles on the boughs of the trees under
which they lie, caused by their continued breathing.

Thirdly, because if a full Hive be close shut up that no air enters, they
will quickly be suffocated and dye; whereas indeed is^ there be but few Bees,
they will continue the longer enclosed, a circum-ambient air in the mean time
refrigerating, and cooling them.

Fourthly, if you stop their throats, Aristotle acknowledges Arist de Spirat.
they will be strangled.

Fifthly, when they are chilled with cold, lay them in the warm Sun, or near a
fire, or if you dare venture, hold them in your hand, and you shall see them
begin first a little to stir, then to pant, and the longer more strongly,
until they remit it by degrees as they recover life.

But I trifle out the time to prove by arguments to the ear, a thing to visible
to the eye. Hold your hand near to the mouth of a full Hive, and that in the
night when they are supposed to sleep, and not to stir, and you shall feel a
cool air come from them. Nay hold a feather, and you shall see it fly to and
fro, as if it would be blown away.

Some affirm, that insects have no blood, because they have to heart nor liver,
Pliny was of opinion, that though they had no blood, ye^ somewhat analogous or
equivalent, for whatsoever is the vital humor is its blood. Learned Doctor
Har^y in his Dr Her. exercitat. anatom.
anatomical lectures, openly affirmed, that Bees have a heart, (I heard him)
which also he has since published, although Dr. Primrose will scarce
acknowledge it, pretending his weak eyesight, but this being asserted and
confirmed by such undeniable experience, I readily subscribe they have a heart,
and Arist. de gene. idem de patt^bani l. 3. c. 4.
therefore a liver, and therefore blood, for the heart is the fountain of
blood, and has first blood, and Creatures which have blood have a l^ver.

Aldrovandus citing Aristotle says, all creatures have both a Aldrov. (...)
proleg^m. in lib. de insecti^.
heart and also a liver, one for the Original of heat, and the other for the
concocting of their meat, And again citing Aristotle de partibus animalium lib.
3. he has these words, cord cavens nu^^um animal unquam or^um est. No
Creature was ever produced without a heart: and there is good reason for this
assertion, seeing the heart in Aristotle's judgment is the Original of life,
heat, blood, sense, and motion, and nature does suppeditate breathing or
refrigeration for the benefit or cooling of the heat in the heart.

All Creatures which have blood have a heart, and why not, all Creatures which
have a heart have blood? but in little creatures Arist. de hist. animal. lib. 3
c. 10.
the blood is so obscure, that it cannot be seen as in greater, but only in
the heart (not always there) because of the thinness of the blood and the
veins, are so little and small, that they can scarce if at all be perceived,
but the heart is the beginning of the veins, and the Original, and fountain of
Arist. de somn^ et Vigil.
blood, and (as he says) the beginning of sense, for living creatures have
the beginning of sense, where they have the beginning of motion.

But yet notwithstanding all this, the liver and the heart is so De Har. de
gener^t. animal, (...).
far from being the author and fountain of blood (which yet Aristitle, and
all Physicians affirm) th^r the contrary plainly appears in the fabric of the
Chicken in the egg, namely, that the blood is the mother of the heart and the
liver, which Paystrians seem to confess unawares, when they determine the
Parenchyma of the Liver to be a certain flowing of blood, as ^f nothing else
were there but coagulated blood, and that the heart (says Idem in eod. lib.
exerc^tat. 19
he) is not the author of blood, appears, because his substance or parenchyma
is produced, sometimes after the blood, and is super added to the beating
vesicles.

Now seeing it is so apparent that Bees have a heart; then it must follow
necessarily, that they must have lungs also (which Aldrovandus grants) that
these receiving and returning air may refrigerate the heart, now the lungs
receive the Original of their motion from the heart, and with his fullness and
emptiness as it is contracted and enlarged, makes way for the egresse or
ingresse of air, when it is lifted up, the air comes in, and when it is
contracted it goes forth.

That some insects have lungs, Aristotle does implicitly Arist. de Spirat.
grant, for he says, pulmones habent quae in lucem fae^um jam conceptum
profe^unt; such creatures have lungs which bring forth a living creature
conceived in them. Now that some insect^ do so, is undeniable. Scaliger affirms
it of a certain sort of fly, of which we spoke before, and it shall be
further confirmed by a Scalig. de subtle. exerc^tat. 191
discourse of the claw-tailed humble Be, when we speak of Humble Bees.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Bees temperature, Sleep, Age.
ARistotle affirms most insects to be of a cold temper, his reason is, because
they breathe not, and to this N. Leonicus Nicol^us Leonicus in quaestion.
natural. 43
subscribes, and says all insects need little food; because they have small
bodies, and therefore are satisfied with little, or rather says he, because
they are cold and bloodlesse, now creatures which are hot, desire much
refreshing, and quickly digest Aldrovan. prol ^^m in lib. de insectit.
what they ea^. So Aldrovand. Insects are sufflced with little meat, not so
much for their smalnesse as their coldness. That this may be true of some I
will not deny, but not of Bees, Aristo. de Spirat.
they are hot creatures, and desire much refreshing, and quickly digest what
they eat. Indeed they are very liberal feeders; whosoever shall observe the
abundance of Bee-bread that is daily brought into a good hive, which they spend
almost as fast as they get (besides honey) and also considers, how much they
eat abroad when they gather, cannot but acknowledge that they are great eaters.
And Aldrovandus upon experience affirms, that many insects are hot, and Bees in
particular, and his reason is, because they grieve and violently pain those
that they sting. Insects L. Verul. Silv^. Si^ cont. 7. 697.
have been noted by the Ancients to feed little, but this has not been
diligently observed, for Grasshoppers eat up the green of whole Countries; and
silkworms devour leafs swifely, and Bees eat in great quantity according to
their bodies; which is evident to any that shall observe, what store they carry
daily into their Hives, and what little increase there is sometimes, after
three months laborious constant working.

It is true, that creatures that sleep and rest much, eat little in those
times, as Bats, Dormice, and Bees, But says Cardan Card. de Subtle. lib. 9.
it is necessary, that Creatures that sleep much, feed much, and by the virtue
of the meat formerly eaten in abundance, subsist when they sleep.

All creatures almost, more or less sleep, yea insects sleep somns tamen
breviutuntur, but they sleep but a little says Aristotle, Arist de Somno et
Vigil.
surely if at all a great deal, the brain is chiefly the cause of sleep, and
such creatures as have not a brain, sleep not. Bees sleep says Aristitle, and
he proves it because they are quiet, as he says, all night and make no
noise, and they cease not Arist. de somno. Idem in eodem. Plin. not, hist. l.
11 c 3^. Arist de Hist^. l. 4. c* 10
from motion, because they are weak sighted and not able to move, bring a light
they stir not, says he, but this is false, for they will fly after and into
a Candle, or light, like a moth, and burn themselves, but suppose they did not
stir with a light, yet were the argument of no force, they stir not at a
light, and therefore sleep, for we know that many fowls are taken in the night
with a light, at which they stir not, although they be awake, because they see
nothing beyond or beside the light.

That they sleep from the beginning of winter to the rising of of Arcturus
sixty days together, and eat nothing at all as Pl^ny affirms, is not true with
us, perhaps in Northern Countries, where the cold is more intense, they feed
little, and sleep for a longer space, which is a principal reason of their so
great plenty of Honey. The more temperate winters with us, occasion if there be
not the larger provision, a great decay of Bees. For every warm and sunshine
day, they will fly abroad, and play, and empty themselves, and thereby getting
good stomachs return home and feed: whereas gloomy cold and close weather,
shuts them in and saves stover, and therefore a smaller proportion will
sufficiently supply them until the gathering season.

That they sleep when they are abroad out of their Hives (on their backs) is a
ridiculous fable, least the dew should wet or prejudice their wings, and hinder
their flight when they awake, as Aldrovandus, and other deliver from the
Ancients. Aldrov. de insect. lib. 1
And suppose that they should observe this course, yet could they not
accomplish their purpose, for from the vepour arising from the earth their
wings would be as much if not more wet, then if they should rest on their
feet: howsoever their wings being slimy and (as it were) unctuous, the wet
would not much stay upon them.

Concerning the age of Bees, diverse have been the opinions, some giving them a
longer, some a shorter life, Aristotle says, Arist. de hist. anim. l. 5. c. 12
Plin l. 9. c. 3. Cardan. de variet. rerum. c. 18. Moufet. thea^. insect. l. ^.
c. 3
they live six or seven years at the most. Pliny, that they never exceed ten,
no not by succession. Columell^ also says the same, Carda^e says; strong Bees
may continue twelve years. Mr. Remnant says, if they continue in health three
year, they may stand twenty, Mouffes supposes, that if they be well ^a^ed
for, and cured of their distempers, they may live thirty years, and tells us
that at Hanworth, he knew a stock continued in the seeling of the house of the
Duchess of Sommerse^: more than three decads of years, and swarmed four times
almost every year and therefore doubts with Alberius whether they ever dye of
age.

The truth is, notwithstanding these men's opinions, that Bees live but a year
and a quarter at the most, for those Bees that seem in May lusty, full, brown,
smooth, well winged, will by the end of July following begin to wither, become
less, look gray, and have their wings ^ottered and torn, and be all dead
before the end of August. And although their life seem short, yet is it more
then double to the Droans, but by succession they may continue many years.

Now what is to be said concerning the life of the Queen Be, it is a que^e
never propounded by any (for ought I know) for most men concluding that the
Bees live many years, have supposed the Queen Be to continue as long, and her
life to be of an equal extent and date with theirs. Mr. Butler that first
published the Bees to be birds of a years continuance, and somewhat more, yet
started not this scruple.

It is well known, that some Hives continue tea, nay twenty years, and more,
what shall we suppose of the Queen Be, does she survive ten, nay twenty
generations; or how comes there a succession of Rulers? I have propounded a
question, wherein I shall scarce satisfy my self, it is not strange therefore,
if I leave others unreso'ved.

It is manifest that the Honey Bees are but yearly creatures, and the reason of
their short life is their unwearied labors, by daily flying abroad, incessant
working, and ponderous burdens, they waste themselves, and wear their wings,
which could they renew as the Eagle her bill, they might for ought I know live
many years. Now the Queen Be not working at all, seldom flying abroad, and
then not far, not so much in a year, as a Honey Be in an hour, never tears her
wing^, wastes her strength, nor makes her self old with labor, so that it is
more than probable, that she may live many years.

Otherwise you must suppose her miscarriage ordinarily to be, when her Infants
are in their prime, and not departed from her, the elder being able, and ready
to succeed her, for if she should miscarry a^ other times before their birth,
or after their ^^^^^hery, the whole stock must needs miscarry.

CHAP. XIX. Of Bees fighting and rebbing.
BEes when they are abroad at their work, or remote from Arist de hist. lib. 9.
c. 40.
their Hives and common treasure, are very gentle and peaceable, so that in
their private wrongs, how ever you use them, they will not resist, if by any
means they can get away, sometimes at their waterings they will contest one
with another, but are quickly quieted, and parted, whereas at their Hives they
are fierce and surious, they will neither give, nor take quarter.

Upon the union of two swarms, sometimes (but it is rare) there is at first,
especially if the companies be somewhat equal, a violent charging each of
other, and the Leaders (for other extraordinary Trumpeters have they none) with
a shrill and loud noise animate and encourage their several companies boldly to
stand to it, and not without cause, for it is their safety, or destruction that
all the conflict is for, and as soon as they conclude who shall govern, which
for the most part is determined in few hours, then they will all cheerfully as
one body, live and love together.

Aristotle writes of certain Serpents in Mes^potamia which do great mischief to
strangers, but do no hurt at all to the inhabitants: And Mr. Herber^ tells us,
Cashan in Par^hia, is much insested with Scorpions, but a finger long, but of
great terror in the Mr. Herbert.
sting, inflaming, such they prick with their invenomed arrow so highly, that
some dye, none avoid madness a whole day, but which is remarkable, they never
hurt a stranger; but Bees irritated near their Hives, are at equal enmity with
strangers, and domestics; such as are daily conversant with them, if they be
but a little provoked, shall find no favor, so that no creature is Avicen.
so violent and revengefull; but although their spite and malice in their rage
is as much to men and beasts, as to their own kind, yet seldom do they work
an equal hurt and mischief; and indeed the opposition is bitterest between
those that are nearest, for there is a special implacable hatred.

When two swarms settle together, and eagerly bid defiance each to other (this
falls out seldom, yet sometimes) always expect a martial and deadly skirmish.

When a company with their Leader forsake their own Hive, and enter into
another, their difference is irreconcilable, their hostility unappeaseable,
but by the death of one of the Commanders; for things that are in their nature
contrary, can never be reconciled, as two Commanders in a Hive.

And grapling so in clusters ^ead-long fall
H^ll from the Winters sky falls not so fast, Vir^il.

Nor shaken Oaks so thick d^shed their mast.
I had once two large swarms, that rose almost immediately one after the other,
and before the first were fully settled, the last came and se led with them; and
began presently to kill each other most desperately. As soon as I had notice of
it, I caused them to be hived that were yet alive, half being slain in little
more then a quarter of an hour; but the remainder being hived, yet ceased not
their quarrel (although I threw strong drink upon them, and did what I could to
appease them) yet they still continued the battle, that before night there was
not above a pin^e left.

But although two companies upon their congress and coming together with equal
forces be thus desperately cruel; yet when they rob, and plunder, they show
less rage and serity, but are not less mischievous and hurtful.

Bees are the most dangerous enemies to Bees, they have many other, but none so
hurtful.

Some are too favorable in their censures, and clear them Aris^. de hist.
Animal. l 9. c 64. Scalig. com. in loc.
from robbery. Bees, says Aristotle, hunt after nothing, but laboring
painfully, gather all they possess. And Scaliger gives a reason for it, because
they feed not on flesh, nor hunt abroad to plunder other, and therefore expect
a reciprocal carriage from others; but by his leave, no greater robbers of
Bees, than Bees, so that though he return an Ignoramus to this bill of robbery
put up against them, yet upon better evidence I must find it.

The greatest danger that befalls the Bees, comes where it should least come,
from the Bees themselves. Bees are loving and sociable creatures, and therefore
we might think should converse one with another in love and peace; but instead
of support and protection, they do find ruin and destruction from their own
kind.

Pliny says, when their provision fails, they invade their neighbors and rob
them; they fight not then for their right, but to get a booty, and under color
of warring, make a trade of ^ilii Greg. Gyrald. ^. 1.
robbing. And another says, When they want meat, they forcibly rob their
neighbors: but the matter, is quite otherwise, for usually the lustiest, and
the best stored, that need nothing, will be first prying into their poor
neighbors weakness. They set not upon an empty Hive, seldom upon an ill
furnished Hive, but upon some well provided stock, where the fatness of the
booty is a fitness to their desires.

Remiss opposition provokes fiercer attempts, they are impudent when they meet
not with bold resistance, only resolution can make them give back, give over,
they will make many tedious and f^intlesse onsets, as if the strongest foit
were not able long to hold out.

They first come with a few and make an assault, and by the opposition conclude
the issue, but still renew their numbers, and although they lo^se many in the
conflict, yet will they persist, and not prevailing that day, will the next
morning before the true Bees be stirring, venture in, and if the opposition be
not the more resolutely maintained, they will come so numerously, as waters at
a breach, that resistance is to no purpose, and then they do fall to
plundering, going and returning until it be dark, if they have not carried
away all before; and so continue till they leave not a drop of honey; to whom
often the true Bees (seeing their condition otherwise desperate) will join
themselves, and accompany them to their Hives, and help to carry away their own
goods.

As long as the opposition lasts, they are very fierce, and until they have
overcome, merciless, but having once made a forcible entry, they quickly give
over killing, and fall to plundering.

Sometimes many stocks will be up in arms together, and then it is no easy
matter to compose and quiet them.

Would thou this sight and furious heat allay; Virgil.

A little dust thrown up will part the fray
Yet this often avails little, it is better by prevention to avoid it, by
narrowing their doors when once mid- July is past, that but a Be or two may
enter at once (understand it of the poorer stocks) but if this has been
neglected, and they be together by the ears, then make a smoke of much and wet
straw, and throw water about the Hive door where the greater conflict is,
straitning the passages of those that are robbed sometimes (if the ^kirmish be
violent) stopping them up close, and throw water upon those that eagerly seek
to enter, and in less than an hour find^ng no entrance, and trouble without,
they will return home. After sunset open them, and all the robbers that are
alive will go to their own Hives. Examine their state after the robbers
depar^ure, and i^ you find but a few Bees, it will not be worth your labor
to trouble your self for their preservation, for at one time or other they will
be robbed, if not, they will never thrive.

But if there be a considerable quantity of honey still left, and also of Bees,
then stop them up again close, allowing them air through a quil; but be sure
you stop them up very well, for in the day time they will be gnawing and
mineing to make a hole out, and the robbing Bees will be ever and anon
visiting the door, to see if it be open, which if they ^inde (if you do not
presently stop them in again) the last danger will be worse then the first.
After sunset allow them a passage to go forth, to take the air and empty
themselves; take this course seven or eight days, and when you give them a
free passage in the day, let it not be until nine of the clock, and the first
and second day that you open them, stop up their enemies, that they may not
trouble them who are not lusty, as at the first by shutting in, and in eight
days their enemies will forget them,

Some prescribe to cast ^lour on the Bees that you let out, that so you may
know the plundering Hives, which you may easily otherwise, but if you do not,
take this course, and observe whither they go, when you once know the robbing
stock, with a long penknife, through the Hive, cut the combs toward the top,
that so they may find work at home to stop up what you have broken.

Although they will not admit of strange Bees in their Hives, yet diverse
stocks will conspire together, and agree well to undo their neighbors: and
usually like the fox they prey furthest from home, seldom robbing their next
neighbors.

The chief times of robbing are Autumn and the Spring: usually about the end of
August, but in dry years, about a fortnight before, when the honey gathering is
almost over, then do the lustiest (being most numerous in Bees) practice it on
the old stocks, such chiefly that have overswarmed, and have but a few Bees
left: on such also as have lost their Leaders, who are careless to resi^t, and
will quickly go along with them, and help to carry their own goods. There is no
way to save such, but as I prescribed formerly.

Another time of robbing is in the spring, and then those poor old stocks that
escaped in Autumn must be carefully watched, poor swarms also shall now be
tried, until the year grows up, and the flowers be plentiful.

Let all such have (as I ordered before) very narrow doors; swarms are more
difficultly prevailed against then old stocks; for though perhaps they have not
wrought down to the board, and so the entrance be more easy, yet being usually
more multitudinous, they will hold out longer: whereas old stocks although they
have more provision, yet have fewer soldiers, and therefore are quickly
overcome and plundered, and more easily in the spring then before.

Once, if you perceive, that waspes in multitudes, or robbing Bees have made a
breach into an old stock, delay no longer, but take them, for although by your
circumspect care in stopping them up, and narrowing their entrance, you may
prevent their present destruction, yet will they not escape in the spring: but
if it be a swarm, there is some hope, that by your care, you may prevent their
present and future destruction.

CHAP. XX. Of Bees, Enemies and Sicknesses.
ALl Commonwealths are infested with enemies, and the Commonwealth of Bees as
much as any other. We have already spoken of the worst, namely Bee^.

In the next place let us treat of Mice, which are also very hurtful and
destructive. Sometimes they get in at the door, when it is left too l^rge and
open, sometimes they make their way through the Hive, most commonly near the
crown of it, and they are no sooner in, but they presently share down the
Combs, and eat the honey; and if they be let alone, will often make their nests
among the Combs. To prevent them, be careful of the door; often, especially
in the winter, view your Hives. If you see any crumbles of wax at the door, be
sure there is something amis^, look therefore wa^^ly, and keep traps baited
about your stalls.

Waspes in Harvest do great mischief, sometimes destroy whole stalls. At first
when they are new come, they content themselves with dead Bees; but after a
while they grow bolder, and venture into the Hives, and most of all in the cool
mornings when the Bees stir not. And after they have found the way they will
never give over, but invite their fellows, nay, they are often the robbing Bees
harbingers, who make an end usually where they begin. And although there be
an antypathy between them and Bees, yet will they readily join together to
plunder the poor Hives. They are naturally hardier and stronger than Bees, one
waspe will often violently break away from two or three Bees, yet many of them
come short home, being slain in the Hives by them.

In the spring at your watering troughs, or other places where your Bees drink,
and on the south side of your pales, you may see the mother Waspes, drinking or
gathering kill them if you can, and know that you destroy as many nests as
waspes, for every mother Waspe makes a nest. After when they have bred let
their nests be sought ou^, and destroyed, burn them or scald them; or (which
is sooner done) in the evening with an iron spade (having before observed which
way they go) seek for their nest by putting it into the ground, and you shall
know when you meet with it by the hollownesse, then loosen the earth round and
stamp it in. Set glasses with strong worte, sweetened water, or sweet fruit: or
rather pots covered with a paper, with a hole in the middle, and that is the
best way, for in the other the Bees will be often drowned.

The Hornet is as hardly censured as the waspe, but she is nothing so
dangerous; she now and then ea^s a Be, but the waspes destroy whole Hives,
her manner is to fly about the Hive, and when she sees a Be ^esting her
self upon the stool, she presently seizes upon her, and carries her away in
her feet, as the Hawk does a bird. Destroy their nests if you can without
danger, if it be no large hole, in the evening having made a wooden plugge,
suddenly knock it in, and you are sure of them, or set lime twiggs before their
holes, and thereby you will much diminish their numbers.

The Titmouse is more hurtful then the Hornet, I mean the great Titmouse called
a Colmouse, with a black head, for she will eat ten or twelve Bees at a time,
and by and by be ready for more; she seeds her young ones also with them. She
eats not the whole Be, but divldes it in the middle, and pulls out the bag
of honey with the entral, letting drop the skinny outside.

When she comes to the hive and finds none, she knocks with her bill at the
door, and as soon as the Bees come out to enquire the cause, she catches first
one, and then another, until her belly be full; in the Spring she watches for
them in the Willow and Sallow Trees, and takes them when they are at their
work. Destroy their Nests in breeding time, and shoot them in Winter.

The Spider is a great devourer of Bees, if the Hives be empty, or have but a
few Bees, she will make her webs within: but for the most part if it be a
penthouse, she lies between the boards where they ^old one over another in the
day. And in the night she weaves her nets right before the Hive, wherein the
Bees are quickly ensnared.

-- Close
About the door her net-like cobwebs lose Virgil.

The Pallas ha^ed Spider Spins.
Kill the Spiders if you can come at them, and in the mornings beat down their
nets. Many also spread them in the flowers, and among the brambles in the
hedges, and they lie in ambush in the cod or center of them out of sight, and
no sooner does a Be or fly strike them, but they are upon them and kill them.
They will grow quickly greater then large Pease by eating of Bees.

The Woodpecker is by many indicted, I think not much guilty, yet I will not
discharge her.

The Swallow has un ill-name, but I could never observe any great hurt done by
them.

The Swallow murdresse of the Bees small, Chaucerass^mbly of Fowls.

That maken ^ony of flowers fresh of ^ue.
The Moth with her mealinesse somewhat offends the Bees, but except the Hive
has very few Bees, or be altogether empty, she does no great hurt; yet then
she will lay her blots in the Combs, which will spoil and consume them all.
Ordinarily she breeds her young by the heat of the Bees under the skirts of
the Hive, and the daw^ing ^ails will sometimes creep into the Hives, and much
trouble the Bees with their coldness and sliminesse.

The Toad is thought to be dangerous, though she does but lie under the
stool, and sometimes to destroy them, as the Frog when they drink, but I never
observed it.

The P^s-mires are often very hurtful, troubling the Bees, and devouring their
honey, scald them in their nests, and Albert. de mi^ab. mund^*
tarr the places where they use to ascend. Albert. says, mountain Origanum
dried and beaten to powder, if it be strowed on their rests, makes them to
forsake them.

If the Ants holes be stop^ with Heliotropium; they will Mizald a^c^norum l. 1.
certainly dye.

Bears in some Countries do greatly endamage the Bees, and Bats, those that
breed in trees, seldom are injurious to those in Hives.

Sparrows feed on Drones, but meddle not with the Bees, At first I was
suspicious that they destroyed the Bees; taking notice therefore of their often
flying to the Hives, and from thence to their nests; I caused the young to be
taken, and found their crops full only of Dro^ns. Arist. de hist. lib. 9 c. 9.
Scal. com. in lo^.


Ferrets delight in honey, and therefore spoil Bees, but this Scaliger denies,
for he says, that he has offered them ^oney, but they refused to taste it.

In Guinea are many Bees, but all wild, breeding in trees, Pur. Pilg. 2 part l.
8 c. 2.
and receive much hurt from a kind of great black Ant, which make holes in the
earth like ^^eld Mice, and much damnify the Bee^ by eating both honey and wax.

In the Country of Sof^la, there is a bird called by the J^vo^d ^ Santo,
live^o pin. d^ Ethiop. oriental c 24.
Cufers Sazu. It is of the bigness of a Linnet, and almost of the same color,
with a long Bill. The chief food of these Birds is wax. They seek about the
woods for stocks of Bees* And when they have found one that has honey, they
come into the ways to seek for Passengers to show it them; which they do by
crying before them, and beating their wings from bough to bough until they
come to the Bees. The naturals who are acquainted with their manners, presently
follow them, to get the honey. And the advantage that these birds get is to eat
the wax they leave, and the dead Bees. They will come into Churches at the
windows, and if they find wax candles, eat them.

The Hirara is like the Civet-c^t (though some say it is Purchase Pilg. fourth
part, l. 7. c. 1
not) they are of many colors, viz. gray, black, and white, They eat nothing
but honey. And in this they are so terrible, that let the hole of the Bee-hive
be never so little, they make it so big that they may get in, and when they
find the honey, they never eat it, until they have called their young ones. And
then the old one going in does nothing but bring out the honey, and give it to
the young ones. A thing of great admiration, and an example of great charity.

In the Island of Barbados, and the adjacent Islands, are certain birds bigger
than Sparrows, with a very great head, called by the English Logerheads and
Counselors, they live naturally on all sorts of Flies, and are great
destroyers of Bees, for they have made a total destruction of all that have
been carried thither.

Crabs burned are hurtful to Bees, and also the smell of Palladius de re^ust. l
^ Columel. I^dorus Hispalen lib. 12 Etymol. c. ^
dung, and places subject to Eccho's, for Eccho's and great noise much
exasperate them.

There is no such creature called Clerus (as some) bred by Bees, Moth^ are bred
in the combs where are few or no Bees, in lusty hives they are bred under the
verges or ski^^^ of the hive, but generated of Moths, not of Bees, as
Columella, and from him Aldrovandus.

The Martins in Russia live for the most part on the tops of 1. Miletius
religio Bo^uss^^. Huldrichus Schimdel.
Trees, and greedily devour the Bees.

The Crocodile is much delighted with, and desirous of honey, Saffron is their
antidore or preservative (which it seems he cannot endure) to safeguard the
Bees.

The dung of Poultry is supposed to be very offensive to Bees, but I have not
taken notice of any such effect, although I have observed in several places,
that for shelter the Hens would repair to the Hives (such as stand under
Penthouses) and dung among them, howsoever (if you can) keep them away, and be
sure to let no Hens sit under the Bee-boards, for the Bees will sometimes come
to them, which the Hens will catch in their bills and kill; which other Bees
smelling will seek to revenge, but with their own destruction; I have known
above a quart of Bees killed thus by a Hen in a little space.

Lightning, especially Thunder affrights, and much disturbes Mouffet the^^tum
insector, lib. 1*
them, says Mr. Mouffet, and to confirm this tells us, that in the month of
August, one thousand five hundred sixty six, being with the Duchess of
Somerset, desperately diseased, suddenly, (on occasion of a stroke of Thunder)
under the next Bed-stead, he and others heard a murmuring and shril noise, but
at first knew not that Bees were housed in the seeling of the room, underneath
where they had inhabited thirty years.

And the day following (for want of sleep, as he supposed) flew up and down
trembling, and making more than ordinary noise, and in a distracted manner
struck themselves against the windows, were extremely provoked against the
Family more than at other times, so that they are impatient of fear, do he
concludes; as also of disturbance by night, when he says they all sleep, and
not at all by day; when indeed they sleep not all, for some watch, and make a
constant buzzing (in full Hives) all hours of the night, until Autumnes cold
forces them up within the Hive, and makes them to lie close compact together
among the uppermost combs; yet then (if they be asleep) they are presently
awakened, not only with the least touch on the Hive, but of the ground near it.
Nay, if you breath before the Hive, though at a yard distance, they will
presently come forth with a great noise to examine the cause.

Snow is very hurtful when it dissolves with the heat of the Sun, for the Bees
with the heat will be tolled out of the Hives and they are no sooner forth, but
they are dazzled, and blinded, and cannot find the way in again, but flying a
while up and down being wea^y, think to rest themselves on the Snow, which they
no sooner touch but they are killed; be sure therefore at such times to shut
them in.

Sharp frosts, nipping blests, chilling air^^, drisling s^eet, boisterous and
cold winds, in the Spring, are very prejudicial for the Bees, coming home
weary and laden, are beaten down after ^^ mukitudes, and (unless the Sun shine
out presently, or the wl^ds calm) never recover the Hives. Let your Bee-garden
be well defended (take head of a^ eddy wind from some house or building) and
let them stand low* I have observed, that out of six Hives, standing two foot
high, and in the eddy of the wind. I have lost more Bees (being beaten down,
and miscarrying on the cold ground, then out of sixty Hives, standing not much
above a foot from the ground.

Bees are sick in dry year, and in such times when the flowers A^ist. de ^ist,
Animal. l. 8. c. 32.
are blasted Concerning Bees sicknesses, hear ^^^^ V^gil says.

But if their bodies be^ diseased (as Bees
By life are subject to our maladies)
Which may by signs infallible be^ known*
The ^^^k straight lose their* color, and are grown
Deformed with l^^rness* they in ^^^ful wise
Be^^ f^^th their dead with solomn ^bsequies,
Or ^l^ist^r'd else within their houses they
Sa^^ contain themselves, or li^gring stay
About the ^^^r^ in ^l^sters taking ^^l^,
^^mis^'d, and se^ and feeble by the cold.
The murrain among Bees is very r^^e: other diseases they Col^mel. l. 9.
are subject too, especially to a scowring, by gathering, or feeding on
Tithymal, and the blowings of the El^^* and therefore in those parts of Italy
where there are many Elms, there are but a few Bees. I deny not but the
gathering of the Elms may be dangerous in Italy; but I am sure in our parts,
which are plentifully stored with Elms, they are no way prejudicial: Indeed
they seldom gather of them.

Much ad^ is made by many Authors concerning Bees sicknesses, and the remedies.
They tell us that they are subject especially to a C^coc^ymi^, Bl^^^^gania,
M^^^smus and Di^rr^^. Whereas in all my long observation, I have found no
proper sickness; accidentally indeed, when they are necessitated for provision,
or not well defended from winds and wet, they have an ill digestion, because
they have little to eat, and they lose their brood, because they have not
wherewith all to feed them; and their natural heat is wasted for want of meat
to maintain nature; and they have sometimes a scowring not having meat proper
and good for them, they then will sometimes gather of purging flowers, which
does not strengthen them, but make them more faint and weak.

And yet to all these various effects proceeding from one and the same cause,
have the Ancients given sundry and diverse names, Varro dear ^ust: l. 9.
as if the causes had been as diverse. Varro therefore giving directions what a
man should observe that buys Bees; minds him to take notice, if they be
numerous, if they be shining, and full; whereas if the combs be not set in an
even posture, if the Bees be hairy and thin bodied, they are to be refused, all
which are but effects of hunger.

In a word, if you desire to have your Bees thrive, and prosper, keep them well
from winds and we, heat and cold, destroy their enemies, and let them enjoy a
sufficiency of food gotten by their own industry; and if there be a want in
some, timely supply them, and doubt not of, by Gods blessing on your
endeavors, the increase and prosperity of your Bees.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Hony-dew.
THe Hebrew word for Hony-dew is (...) je^aken, which comes from (...) j^rak,
and signifies spuere, euspuere, humorem ^vacuare, as if it were saliva sider^^
(as Pliny) an excrementitious moisture, which the stars spit down on the fruits
of the earth. By this word also is signified the King's Evil. Bux^orf. lex.


In Latin R^big^ is a Hony-dew, as well as rust, a name from the effect,
showing how that by a hurtful touch, it stops the J. Rowlandson Gods blessing
in blasting.
growth of some fruits that are obnoxious to it, making them to rust, eating
out their state and substance, at a ca^^er or rust fre^teth iron; so that what
is a disease of metal is figuratively R^ber^ com. in Amos c. 4.
transferred to corn, and such like things* because it destroys and consumes
them, for with too much moisture the stalks wax pale, and the corn is turned to
dust; but he was much mistaken, not distinguishing between smutty and mildewed
corn, for corn affected with the mildew is not turned into dust, but shrunk up,
and prevented of its radical moisture, so that though it come to maturation
(for it will ripen, and is best for seed) yet not to a full bigness and
dimension.

Of the cause of smutty corn, I will speak briefly afterward.

Some conceive shrinking of corn by the Hony-dew to be thus occasioned. In
fields less previous to clear and strong winds (as in lower grounds, and narrow
places between woods and hills) there falls often sultry and foggy mists, and
those covering too close the fruits of the ground under them, as under thick
mantles do cast that corn or kind of grain which is subject to this malady, as
it were into an unkindly sweat, at such times as the ears thereof are not yet
sufficiently filled from the root, by which faint sweat is vented that
sweetness that should feed the ear. Now this sweetness once exhausted or drawn
out at the stalk, or straw, sticks close unto it being burnt, or made adust by
the extraordinary heat of the Sun, as it happens especially in the Canicular
days, which (as it may seem) made the Romans sacrifice a Whelp or Puppy to
Mildew. Ovid de fast. l. 4. Hier. Romano de la Repub. genesis l. 2. c. 7.
And this they did to prevent it, or to drive it away, if it had seized on
their corn, That this prejudice is chiefly caused in narrow and close grounds
we grant, and seldom comes on hills, or large champion grounds. But yet it
brings not damage to the corn this way, but rather thus, The corn in close
places when the Hony-dew descends, not being ventilated and shaken with winds,
the Hony-dew as it dries, becomes viscuous and clammy, and sticks close to the
straw, and by the heat is hardened and congealed, and thereby stops the radical
moistures from ascending, and so the ears being no longer sed, shrink and
wither. As hard binding or tying of a man's arm, causes (if continued too long)
by stopping the circular motion of the blood, a mortification or gangreen. It
comes not from any malignancy as some, nor because that the oily viscuous
quality, that is in it stops the pores of the husk wherein the corn lies, and
deprives First large letter in Mr. Hartlibs Legacy.
it from the air, and consequently from nourishment, this is not the cause,
but what was delivered before. But he concludes it is, and therefore commends
bearded Wheat, because the beard shoots off the dew, that it does not so easily
ins^^uate it self into the ear, and likewise causes the ear to shake, by the
least breath. Credat Iudeus Apella. Howsoever had he been acquainted with the
inconvenience of bearded Wheat, he would rather have stood to the hazard of a
Hony-dew.

For cure Mr. Remnant prescribes, when you perceive by your Bees that a
Hony-dew is fallen, to draw a cord over your Wheat as fast as may be, before
it be dried on by the wind or Sun. One in one furrow, and another in another,
two or three furrows distant as they can well reach. One at one end, and the
other at the other end of the cord, for the least mot on will shake it off, it
is so exceeding thin when it newfalls. I dare not say (as some) that this can
be done with good profit, for materiam superat opus, the charge will exceed
the benefit. Such as sow sixty or eighty Acres of Wheat must of necessity
employ many men, and perhaps many days together, for Hony-dews in a dry season
fall frequently, and sometimes twice a day, and therefore it must be often
reiterated.

And the loss by it, is seldom great, it is rare to have one Acre in an
hundred prejudiced by it, and yet we consist of enclosures, and much wood-land.

Pliny affirmed the Hony-dew to be either the sweat of the Plin. Not. hist. l.
11. c. 12.
heaven* or the slaver or spittle of the stars, or the moisture of the air
purging it self.

Gualter says, It is caused by the inconstant change of the Gualter in Amo*
Hom. 11.
air, when immoderate heat cause raines, and cold raines expel heat.

Dr. Lake says, That too much moisture is the cause Dr Lake in 1 King 8. 37.
of it.

Mr. Butler judges the Hony-dew to be the quintessence of all the sweetness
of the earth, meaning as he explains himself, the quintessence of flowers,
because when the year is backward in his fruits, the Hony-dews are always
backward, coming only at such times, as the flowers have the most solid and
best juice.

Secondly, because in more hot and southerly clymates, where the fruits are
more forward, the Hony-dews are more timely* in Italy not until May be
entered, but he says not usually with us until a month after, whereas if the
season be warm and dry, often by the beginning of May, and sometimes a little
before, always in May, there are with us many swarms.

Thirdly, because the Countries that have store of the best and sweetest
flowers, have ever the best Honey. It is true, that Honey is ^iner or courser,
recording to the flowers that the Bees gather of, but this rather concludes
(against him) that the Bees gathering is not chiefly, no not very much from the
Hony-dews; for it cannot (almost) but be supposed that the exhalation must
remain sometimes in the a^^e, before it be concocted and fall, in which space
either ascending, or descending by the motion of a gentle breath, it will be
cattled some miles from the place where it was first exhaled, so that grant it
extracted from the flowers, yet that which was exhaled from good and fragrant
flowers, may fall in woody and heathy places, and that which was exhaled from
heathy ground according to the motion of the air^, may fall on good land, h^^
rule the^ cannot be constant. And some years, when there are few or no
flowers, yet are there many Hony-dews, as 165^. so that the matter of them
could not be extracted chiefly from flowers, and in extraordinary wet years,
as himself instanceth in the year, 1613. the Hony-dews fell not until the end
of August, when most flowers had done blowing, and those that were, had a very
weak and faint juice, and therefore it is not probable, that there should be a
competent matter for their production chiefly out of flowers.

It is agreed by all, as far as I can search, that the Hony-dew consists of
vapors raised up into the third region of the air, exhaled from all lower
bodies (not only flowers) both earth and water, which vapors* being purged
from the ^^^thier and drossier matter, and thoroughly digested by the heat of
the Sun, and after a sort made fatter by the cold of the following night, are
thickened, and so condensated, fall down on the earth, trees, and flowers.
Arist. de bist. l. 5. c. 22.


Bees make Honey of the Hony-dew, says Aristotle.

Butler says, The greatest part of the purest Honey comes from above.

Seneca says, It is not yet evident whether the moisture that S^^ ^4. Epist.
Bees gather out of flowers be presently honey, or whether by a mixture or
propriety of their own, they change it into honey.

Aristotle before the rising of the Vergilia, denies that Bees gather any honey,
but this is an apparent error, They gather much honey, when there are
Hony-dews, but yet more before any fall, if you respect the shortness of time
they gather it in. Bees gather honey more or less all Summer, but least in
Autumn, because the great dews and frequent showers, corrupt the native honey
which is bred in the flowers; and yet Aristotle acknowledges where there is
plenty of Ivy which flowreth in the end of Autumn, the Bees gather much honey,
but we find it not.

That great plenty of Honey comes from above, is acknowledged, and that the Oak
among trees is principally instrumental to retain and keep the same on his
smooth and solid leaves: yet I affirm, that there is a greater proportion
collected from flowers, than from the Oak, and all other sorts of trees, I
understand from the leaves.

This indeed is altogether gainsaid by Aristotle: He delivers, that Arist. de
hist. l. 5. c. 19.
Bees gather not honey of flowers, but chiefly of the Hony-dew; and his argument
is, because in a day or two, when the Hony-dews fall, some combs will be full,
and in the end of Autumn there be flowers, but no honey, if any Hive be taken,
driven, or gelded, he says they would gather honey, if any were to be found.

We are to know, That as great store of honey falls from above, so there is a
native sweetness, or honey, in flowers, the Spring and Summer chiefly, which is
not to be found so plentifully toward the end of Autumn, because the flowers
at that time of the year are weak and spent, and afford little, and that
little, is usually exhaled with immoderate heat, or spoiled with frequent
raines, or great dews; so that there is little, or no advantage at all from
them, in respect of honey. Some Sandaracha indeed the Bees gather then, but that
will not last long, therefore of necessity when Bees are late taken, for want
of food, they cannot live long.

If Bees gathered honey chiefly of the Oak, which almost alone is retentive of
the hony-dew (from flowers he denied they gathered any honey) how comes it to
pass that hony-dews falling late in the year, as in the years one thousand six
hundred and thirteen, and one thousand six hundred forty eight, almost two
months after the usual time, namely, in the latter end of August, when there
fell diverse hony-dews, but the Bees were little the better for them, except
only in the Heath Country, when the Heathflower was in his prime, and there
those late hony-dews made their fat stalls, but in other places the Bees
generally miscarried.

If they did principally gather of the Oak, the leaves thereof were then as
retentive of it, as at Midsummer, but rather hereby it appears, that the
hony-dew is received into the hollow sockets of Flowers, and there long
contained, until by the Bees it be extracted.

Hony-dews therefore falling late when most Flowers have done blowing, not
having any proper place to contain them, are, either quickly washed away with
the rain, or exhaled with the Sun.

Further, that Bees gather honey of flowers is manifest, in many Islands where
grow no Oaks, nor yet other Trees, nor yet are near them by some miles (as the
Island of Fowlness) yet Bees thrive very well, and yield ordinarily a greater
increase of honey than in other places.

Pliny says, the Bees gather the hony-dew from the Elm, Teile-tree, and
Sallow; but our Elmes are not retentive of the hony-dew, no^ yet our Sallows
often, sometimes a little; more plentifully is the Hop, and would be very
beneficial to the Bees, were it not for the bitterness of the leaf corrupting
the honey; Chery-trees (especially the wild Cherry-tree) are retentive of the
honey dew, and thereupon curle up the leaves, and so contain it longer, but to
their own prejudice, for the radical sap or moisture is thereby checked, and
ascends no more, and of^times their tops wither and dye, but the Oak of all
others most plentifully affords it; the great Maple also (vulgarly called the
Sycamore tree) the leaves of other Trees are more spongie and L. Verul. Silva
sil* cent. 5 496.
porous, and drink it in as fast as it falls.

The L. Verulam makes a doubt whether any cause be from the Oaken leaf it self,
to concoct; or whether it be only that the leaf is close and smooth (and
therefore drinks not in the dew, but preserves it)

That which in Scripture is called Manna, by the wisest of the Caelius Rhod.
Lect Antiq. l. ^1. c. 3 Idem. lib. 25. c. 25
Greeks was called (...), a hony-dew; and Celsus in his Physic says, by the
Syrian dew is understood that which by a strange or foreign name is called
Manna.

The present Manna, and that wherewith the Children of Israel were fed forty
years in the Wilderness, differ not much from the hony-dew.

First, That Manna of the Israelites, and the manna used by Physicians differ
not much, Fr. Valesius, and also Io. Fr. Picus Fr. Vales* de sacra, Philosoph
c. 57 Levin. Leminus Herb. bib. explicat.
Earl of Mirandula attests the same in certain learned Verses, and Lemnius
agree; hereto, saying, the Manna now in use by Physicians is not much unlike
the Manna that the Israelites fed of.

The Hony-dew and Manna do not substantially differ, the Dew is not Honey
except it be gathered by the Bees, concocted in their bodies, and condensated
(by their heat) in the combs; for when it is thickened of it self, it is called
dry manna; but if it be not coagulated it is called liquid manna, as a
congealed dew, viscuous, and very pleasant to the taste, of which sort is that
Hippocrat. lib. de vulneribus, Pet Bellonius, lib. 2. observat. c 25
which is called Cedria, mentioned by Hippocrates, and it is the same which the
Hebrews call Manna; it is plentifully gathered of the greater Cedars on Mount
Libanus, and Mount Sinai.

The Characters of the present Manna agree to the Jews Exodus 16. 14
Manna;

First, it fell on the ground like a hoare Frost, in the night.

Secondly, the taste thereof was like Wafers made with honey, which agrees with
the manna now in use.

Thirdly, it was gathered in the morning, before the Sun waxed hot, for the
heat thereof did dissolve it, and make it to evaporate and vanish away.

Fourthly, if it were kept, it bred Worms; I was informed from a learned
Gentleman, that the Hony-dew has bred Worms before night, of which he was an
eyewitness in our Country.

Some gather the excrements of Bees (of a yellow color, and honey taste) which
they find near the Hives, and some ignorantly Levin. Lemnius. Herb. bib
exp^lcat.
suppose to be thickened by an aerial concretion; but this cannot be, for the
excrements of Bees are always liquid, and fluid, and if there be any reality in
this report, It must be the Bee-bread, whereof much is yellow, and all of a
honey taste; it is gathered in little round parcels as big as small pins
heads, but they are brittle, and broken, will not easily coagulate, for they
are not clammy; and the Bees let many fall at the Hive doors, if the entrance
be small: but they must be very fools that will take this for Manna, much more
they that will be cozened with the excrements.

It has been questioned, whether Manna was known to the ancient Grecians,
some deny it, because the name is not found; others affirm it, as Guido
P^nnyrollus, that Manna was known to them, but not under the name of Manna
(which word the Arabs borrowed from the Jews.

Galen speaking of the same, acknowledges that in his time in Galen lib. 3. de
al^ment. facult.

Amiretus de As^ae ponderibus

J. Langius ^. 1. Epist. Medic 64


Asi^, this kind of honey was found so plentifully on the leaves of Trees, that
the inhabitants said, Jupiter rained honey; and long before Galens time,
Amirelus has exactly described it under the name of aerie honey, as Io. Longius
^ffirms; and the reason of this name is evident, because honey like a dew fall^
from Heaven, or the Air before daylight; for when the exhalations are elevated
from the earth, and the waters by the heat of the Sun, and then being perfectly
attenuated and concocted, are thickened, and congealed by the cold of the night
into honey, grains, or sand, they stick upon herbs and leaves of Trees
(sometimes on stones, and the ground) The inhabitants therefore spread Hides on
the ground, and beat the Trees, and that which falls (like honey) they gather,
and put into earthen vessels, where in a short time it hardens, and becomes as
it were like sand.

It is like a kind of Gum, as Fuchsius delivers, and Matthiolus Matthiol. com.
in lib. 1. Dioscorid. c. ^3 Mesue lib. 1. de simpl. c. 8
confirms the same, and Mesus also says, the Arabian honey is a dew salling on
Plants (and Stones) whose matter is an elevated vapor, which has its
digestion and maturation in the air, when it is equal and propitious, with
fortunate aspects, but it is diversified according to the diversity of things
on which is falls, Galen. lib. 3. de al^m. f^c.
salling on plants it participates of the nature of Plants, so that the best
honey is usually where the most temperate Plants grow.

Now if Galens description of his Ai^y honey be compared with this, it accords
in every thing; and Galen in the same place says, that this Hony-dew, or
Manna, is so like to that honey that the Bees gather of, that they have one and
the same matter, namely dew,

Valerius Cordus endeavors by many (but not invincible) Valerius Cordus
A^notat. in Dio cor. lib. ^. c 104. Guido Pannyrollus Nova repe^t^, l. 2. tit.
6.
Arguments, to prove that they differ; with whom Hen. Salmouth, and Guido
Panyrollus concur, and accord.

First, the Bees honey, says Cordus is found at all times of the Spring, and
Summer, but the Hony-dew (and also Manna) but sometimes and seldom.

I answer, that there is a native sweetness in some flowers at most times of
the year, and plentifully in a mild and forward Spring, but yet notwithstanding
the Bees gather much honey, when the hony-dews fall.

Secondly, the Bees honey is found both night and day in the Flowers, but the
hony-dew only in the morning.

I answer, It is true, that the Bees gather honey out of the flowers a great
part of the day, but there is (besides the native honey) an addition of honey
from the hony-dew in the cells of the flowers, where it is preserved longer
than on the Oaken leaves, being there obvious to every drying blast, and
exhaling rain.

And so says the L. Verulam, Flowers that have deep sockets, L. Veru^. Silva
silv. cent. 7. 669.
do gather in the bottom a kind of honey, as Hony-suckles (both the Woodbinds
and the Trefoile) Lillies, and the like, and in them certainly the flower
bears part with the dew, and Sands relat. lib. 4
therefore places abounding in Manna, do also yield plenty of honey; Thus
Cep^alenea. Moreover, the honey dew does not only fall in the morning early, but
in hot gloomy seasons, often in the after noon.

Thirdly, the Bees honey most abounds in flowers about noon, but the hony-dew as
soon as the Sun waxes hot, perishes; I answer, it perishes where it is open,
and exposed to the Sun and Wind, but where it is well defended from either (as
in the small sockets of flowers) it endures much longer.

And I affirm further, that Bees gather most honey in the fore-noon, except the
hony-dew falls in the afternoon, and neither rain washes it a way, nor the
Suns hot rays exhale it.

Fourthly, the Bees honey while it is contained in the flowers, is liquid, but
the hony-dew, namely Manna is compacted together, and congealed; Answer,
Although the honey be liquid in the combs when it is newly gathered, yet
thereupon it follows not that it was so liquid in the flower, being by a
transcendent Chimical skill extracted forth of a more grossie substance, and
after rare^ied, and defecated in the limbeck of their bladder, moreover, as we
showed before, in many parts of Asia, the manna falls more liquid, but hardens
after it is gathered.

And again, it is true in some parts of the World there falls, or rather is
gathered this concrete, or coagulated honey (the Sands relat. l. 4
right manna) Manna in Calabria is gathered from the leaves of the
Mulberry-trees that grow higher in the mountains, it falls like a dew in the
night time, like a dew, and therefore liquid; it is gathered from the leaf of
the Mulberry-trees, but not of such as grow in the Valleys, and it falls upon
the leaves by night.

It should seem that before these dews come upon Trees in L. Verul. Silva sil.
cent. 8. 7^1
the Valleys they dissipate, and cannot hold out; it should seem also the
Mulberry leaf it self has some coagulating virtue, which conspiss^teth the
dew, for it is not found upon other trees.

And it is more than probable that that Manna that is gathered coagulated, has
its c^ndensation from the virtue of the tree, or plant from whence it is taken.

In Persia they call Manna X^rquest, Xir in Persian is Milk, and Pedro,
Teixeira de los. Rays de Pers^^ l ^. c 7
Quest is the name of the Tree which produces it, or rather whereof it is
gathered; the best comes from Hiez, from whence it is c^rried in great quantity
to Ormuz, and from thence throughout all the East; it is white, soft, sweet,
and in Grains like Incense o^ M^stick.

They have another sort called Toraniabin, gathered on certain Idem lib. 1. c.
22
plants like wild thistles; there is a D^ng or kind of Manna brought from ^^ad,
not far from the River Sind in the East Indies; the Naturals call it Geukar,
of Karsal^, and Geu fat, for of the dew which falls and congeales in the lowen
fields (mark, it falls liquid) it is gathered and called by us Salgen, and more
corruptly Salgenia.

I must a little digress to reform a Geographical error, the River Sind which
was mentioned before, is the principal of five, of which the River is
compounded, first Behat, which arises near Kobul toward the coast of Persia.
The second is called C^anab, which comes from the Province Quexmir fifteen
days journey distant from Labor. A third is called Ru^y springing near Labor.
A fourth, Via; And a fifth Sind, which Mr. Herberts Travels into Africa and
Asia, l. 1.
gives name to the Land and Kingdom, commonly called by the Portugals Sinde.
And therefore Mr. Herbert was deceived, who supposed the River Indus to be
called Sind. To return again. A^t. de Herrera decad. 7. l. 1. c. 7


In the valleys of Chile in their season fall great dews (which collect and
harden) like bread tempered with Sugar or Marchpane (Mark, they fall liquid
dews) which i^ as wholesome as that which they call Manna: By all which
instances, it appears that Manna is first a liquid dew, and after inspissated
by a virtue of the tree, or plant on which it falls, and falling on other
plants or trees, it never condensates.

From the City of Bal^ora scitua^e in the end of the Red Sea p. Teixeira
relation de lo^ Rey^^ de Persia, l. 1. c. 7.
on the banks of the Rivers Tigris and Euphrates, is brought a kind of Manna
in bottles like thick honey, so that some Manna, is never coagulated.

Fifthly, Hony-dew is contained in flowers, but the Hony-dew falls on leaves of
trees. Answer^ only on leaves of trees? Nothing less, on flowers also, and a
great part, as I showed before of the honey in flowers, is not natural but
adventitious.

Sixthly, The Bees honey does not only last longer, but conserves other things,
and that many years; but the Hony-dew, or Manna will not keep uncorrupted one
year, nor yet preserve other things from putrefaction; and in the Northern
Regions there is plenty of honey, but rarely any Hony-dews.

So Magirus Hony-dews are very rare in our Countries, in Jo. Magirus Phisiolog
l. 4. c. 6.
regard of our cloudy air, but frequent in the Eastern Countries, Answer, That
the lasting of honey longer than Manna may be from a further concoct^on which
it has in the Bees bodies, as also from the continued great heat of the Bees
after it is repos^ed in the combs, whereby it comes to further matu^ation and
perfection Vide Cap ^^ of the B^asil^an Be called Zelloh.
. And whereas he says, Hony-dews are rare in the Northern Regions, we often
by woeful experience find the contrary, receiving by the frequency of them,
great prejudice in our hops and corn.

Seventhly, If the Hony-dew be the matter of honey, how comes it to pass that
it falls only on flowers, and not on the plants and leaves of trees? Answer,
It falls not only on flowers, but on leaves of trees and plants also, though
some plants and leaves, are not so tenacious, and retentive of it, as the great
Maple, and the Oaken leaf, but being more porous and spungy, suck it up, and
consume it.

Lastly, When the Hony-dew falls, the Bees gather it, and flock to it, but
only for their present repast and food. Answer, There is no rustic conversant
among Bees, but knows the contrary, and by experience can say, that they then
gather more honey in two or three days, than in two or three weeks after they
cease.

Ribera, as you may remember, attributes smuttiness of Wheat to the Hony-dew;
and Helmont seems to be of the same opinion, Helmont* tumulus pest ^.
calling it Triticum roratum sive mol^itum, and so do some others also. Now in
a word to undeceive them. The cause of smutty Wheat, is not at al from the
Hony-dew, nor yet from any of those causes, that the author of the first letter
in Mr. Har^libs Legacy delivers. No^ yet is it a deficiency only in the
vegetative faculty, for it grows and produces a blade, and an ear, but then it
wants power to quicken and give life, as it were, by blowing to that corn that
is put out in the ear; so that not being enlivened, it proves abortive, and
turns into a stinking black powder ( Corruption optimi pessima) smelling like a
red Her^ing, or Carrion.

Now this falls out for want of a nitrous, and thereby a nutritive quality in
the grain, for it is most certain, that salt is the seat of life, and
vegetation, and so the subject of nutrition.

This by the way, take notice of, that they are most under ears that are
subject to that malady, not therefore subject to it, because they are lower
than others, but therefore lower, because of a deficiency and weakness in the
vegetative faculty. And usually if one stalk has the ear smutty, all that
arise from the same ^oot are infected, yet it falls out (though ra^ely) that
sometimes one side of the ear is good corn, and the other bags, for one side
blows, and the other does not, and whatsoever blows not, will be smutty.

Many years together I suffered much damage by it, but knew not how to remedy
my self, but after the projection of diverse experiments, at last successfully,
I fell upon this course, I caused a Hogs-head of salt water to be fetched, and
put into the water near a bushel of Bay Salt not at once, no^ yet into the
Hogs-head, but pouring half of it at a time into a Tub, I after put in half the
salt, wherein when it was melted, I imb^bed my Seed-wheat thus: Filling a close
well-wrought Ozierbasket (that would admit the water, and hold near a bushel)
with Wheat, and then put it into the Tub, holding it by the ears, and when it
was all well moistened, took it out, letting the water drain as it stood on the
Tubs side, into the Tub again. And when it began to leave dropping, poured it
on a floor, and strewed upon it as it was turned over, near a shovel full of
slaked lime, not that lime adds any thing to the vegetation (perhaps it
accelerates the growth) nor yet secures it from vermin (as some conceive) but
only dryes it (being done overnight) that it is more nimble and better to sow
the next day. Lime without steeping your corn, does not prevent smuttiness, but
corn thus imbibed, and then sown without lime, will not smut.

Thus adventitious Salt supplies the defect of that nitrous quality which some
grain are defective of, and are hereby quickened, refreshed, and as it were
empowered to perfect vegetation to maturation.

Such as are remote from the sea, must make a brine which will be every way
equivalent, only more chargeable, I have many years made trial of this course,
and without any great curiosity, for my seed have had constantly bright wheat,
and so also my neighbors, to whom I readily divu^ged what I found good for the
public; but in my public Discourse, I forget too much my private Design.

CHAP. XXII. Of Honey.
CArdan affirms, That neither Honey nor Wax is made by Cardan lib. 9^ de subtle.
any creature but a Be, which is a truth, if we take it conjunctively,
otherwise not. There is no other creature that makes both honey and wax.

And that which Scaliger says, Pliny observes out of Aristotle Scaliger de
subtle. exercit. 191.
(which I remember not) that Waspes make wax, is false whosoever affirms it.
Combs they make, as some other Insects, but they are not wax, but drossie
collections of old pales, and other old wood, tempered with a gummy liquor
flowing from the Oak, or (felled) Elmes whereby they become tough and capable
to contain their young. Try to melt them, and you shall quickly resolve your
self.

And whereas Scaliger says, There is in the Mol^^^a Islands honey made by Flies
less than Ants (the truth is questionable, for it is only reported by
Pigafetta) I suppose he called them Flies, only for their smalness. The
earth-Bee, with us a kind of wild Be, is smaller, and yet gathers Bee-bread
abundantly, and honey also for ought I know.

And most of the American Bees are not bigger than Flies, but yet are Bees, not
Flies.

And for his instances of the solidity of some honey (admitting of the
Histories) they do not at all enervate this position that Bees only make honey.

Among the Troglodites in a Country called Balgada, there is honey found whiter
than snow, and as hard as a stone; And in the Country about Calicut the honey is
so hard that they carry it in baskets, what then, was it not made by Bees? I
have seen as white, and as hard made by my own Bees. Indeed besides the
domestic Be, the humble Be makes honey, but little in quantity, and nothing
so pleasant in taste for quality.

In China there is not only plenty of Bees wax, but there is another sort
which is not only whiter, but also better, for it is M^th. Ric^i de Christiana
expedi^ apud Sinas l^b. ^.
less glutinous, and being lighted, burns brighter: It is made of certain worms
which they breed up in trees for this purpose. They make a third sort of a
fruit of a certain tree which is not less white than the former, but burns
nothing so brightly.

Thus have we found honey and wax too, made by other creatures besides the
Hony-Bees, but both by no one creature.

Libanius says, Honey and Wax may be gathered without the Bees labor, there is
in the flowers, says he, and leaves of Andreas Libanius, lib. 2. Alchym.
tract. 1. c. 45
plants, both honey and wax, which by sublimation may be easily segregated, but
as a fruitless and needless speculation, I will not insist upon it.

Gorrbeus says, honey is a sweet juice, hot and dry, it seems Mat. Ma^tinil
l^x Philolog.
to have its original from the Hebrew (...) which is delight, and thence the
Germane Honig, which we contracting call honey.

By honey Metaphorically is understood every pleasant, dainty, Diction^r
Etymolog* trilingue, ^. Fungeris, Cael. Rhod. lect. antiq. l. 6. c. 2 Barradas
itinerarium filiorum Israel ex Aegypto lib. 6. c. 5
and savoury meat.

Honey is the Symbol of Death, as Gall^s of Life, wherefore the Ancients offered
honey in Sacrifice to the infernal Deities, for because of pleasure, death
creeps on us.

Honey signifies Marriage, says one, and is taken Figuratively for carnal
pleasure, and signifies a worldly life, not abhorring delight, for marriage is
honorable; nor is a Christian to be blamed that lawfully uses it. But as in
the old Law, although honey might be received for gifts, and first fruits, yet
it was forbidden in Sacrifice: so in the Church (only the Roman Church) the
honey of Marriage is honorable in Laymen, yet are married persons prohibited
the Altar, for it is not lawful for a Priest to be married.

There are many sorts or kinds of honey; Aerial, Manna, Reedhony, Sugar, and
that which is gathered by Bees; the best honey is that which is so pure that it
glisters yellow ( Aristotle commends the white) having a good smell, not too
hard, nor too thin, sweet to the taste, and hanging together, once being boiled
yields little scum.

Another says, that is the best honey which is in a mean between Scolia Guil.
Plantii in Fernel, method* medendi, lib. 7
thick and thin, sweet in taste, and yet sharp, pricking the tongue; for color
either pale, or pellucid, and shining like Gold, odoriferous and new, and which
taken up, hangs so together that it will not be easily separated; in a word, the
best is at the bottom.

A measure that contains fifteen ounces of honey, will hold but Fe^nel* method
medendi, l. 4. c. 6 We^ker* de secret. lib. 8
ten ounces of wine, and nine of oil.

Diopha^es prescribes to know adulterate honey thus; if it will not burn
purely, but rather thus; melt a little in a porringer, and if it be adulterated
with flower, or any thing else, you shall perceive it by the ^cum; if it be
pure, it will be as clear as rock water.

New honey is better than old, the Sicilian was with the Ancients Porcacc^i
descrit del isole di Sicilia.
in highest estimation, so that by a Proverb, the Hyblean was notorious,
Bau^inus commends the Attick before all other.

Some imagine that the chief labor, or rather skill of the Be ^. Verul. sil.
^^l. cent. 7. Arist. de b^st. lib. 5. c. ^^
is about the Wax, and that the Be (according to Aristotle) gathers honey
only from the honey dew; but this we made clear before, that she makes, that
is, extracteth more from the flowers, than she gathers from the trees.

Cardane fondly supposes, that they neither make, nor gather properly, but
convert what they gather into honey, by virtue of a little bag or bladder
sweet as honey; and like says he, is made of like.

Various are the opinions of the Ancients concerning those that first found out
honey, with the nature of Bees; some say by Eu^eme^us in the Island Cea; others,
by H^^^ro^ius, in the days of Ericht^nius on Mount Hym^tte, a Country of
A^^ic^, Nicander says in Cre^t, in the time of Sa^unne.

Aristodemus the Philosopher studied many years to find out August Ser. 15 ad
s^at. in ^remo.
the nature of Bees, and could not; Aristomachus says Cicer^ did nothing else
for sixty two years; and Pliny says of him, that he first taught and found out
the increasing of Bees, and was so earnestly affected to them, that he studied
day and night how he might best order, and entreat them according to their
kind.

Others ascribe this invention to one Thaffias, who deserved great commendation
for his skill among Bees, Diodorus says, Diod. Siculus lib. 6 Macrob.
Sa^^^^^l. l. 1. Justin lib. 13
the Cure^es, a people of Cre^a first found out honey, Macrobius ascribes,
Diodorus, and Pliny, and Columella, to Aristem in Thessalie, to whom Iustine
agrees, although in his forty fourth Book he ascribes it to Gargoris, but only
^ conceive for Spain; fabulous Berosus cites him by the name of M^licola,
P^lid^re to the Polyd^r, Virgl^de invent. rerum lib. 3. c. 3
Jews; I hold it ancienter, for Jacob sent a present of honey to the Governor
of Egypt.

In no part of the world is more honey than in Aethiopia, the Godignus de
Abissino^ ^^^ rebus, lib. 1. c. 10
cause whereof is the plenty of Flowers which grow there (lot such take ^otice
of it that deny Bees gather honey of Flowers, and the many Rivers, Lakes, and
Waters.

Ilensagaghen a Town of Hea in Africa abounds greatly with I. Leo. lib 2
honey, which serves the inhabitants both for food (consisting of two hundred
Families, having neither Gardens nor Fruit Trees, but only Barley and Oil, the
inhabitants being sloathful) and for Merchandise to sell in the neighbor
Countries, they cast away their wax.

The Mountains in Africa are most plentiful of honey, whose I. Leo. lib. ^ and
lib. 3.
tops are always covered with Snow, as Nififa, Sensana, Tag^dost; Thagia,
Beni-fenescare, but white honey is there a ra^ity; yet in the Kingdom of
Morocho they have very much Cael^^ August. Curio^^s, Marochensis regni
descript* Mory^^^ ^tin. part 3 lib 2. c. 4. Col. Rhod.
honey, some for whiteness like to Milk, other clear and yellow like gold.

Poland abounds with honey, which they find in hollow trees, and Caves of the
earth, besides the Husband-mens Hives.

In Mycono there are no Bees, and if they be brought thither they dye.

Mycono is one of the Cyclad Islands. Ortelli Thes^^^ I. de la H^ye thresor de^
ch^rte^.


In Ireland are many Bees, as well in Hives at home, as in hollow Trees abroad,
and Caves of the earth, contrary to S^li^^^^ and Isidore, and it is as good as
in other Countries, and more store would be there, but that there grow some
Trees that are venomous, but what those Trees be he names not.

Aldrovand says, there be no Bees in New Spain, and Isidore relates the same
of Scotland, and says, that stones and dust brought thence and laid in the
Hives, makes the slees forsake Polyd. Virg. lib. 13. hist. angl. Sand. relat.
lib. 4 Po^ca^^hi descrit del Isoldi Ma^t^. Martil^u^ Ficinus* lib. 2. de diet.
c. 18
them, but false, as Polidore acknowledges.

Malta is hotter by much, than any other Country which is seated in the same
parallel without Rivers, but has sundry fountains, and honey in abundance.

And the plenty and goodness of the flowers in Malta is the cause that it
affords excellent honey, therefore says a learned Physician, that Honey is Flos
storum, the flower or quintessence of flowers, nourishing not a little with his
sweetness, and preserving things from putrefaction.

Sicilia likewise though hot, yet is stored with Rivers and Fountains; the
Winter most temperate, no day so tempestuous, as affords not some Sunshine,
and about Enn^ the flowers are so numerous, and fragrant that the Dogs cannot
hunt.

In Pod^lia, and indeed all Sarmatia (understand Sarmatia in Europ^, for there
is Sarmatia in Asia) now it contains Polonia, Hier. Gi^ava de Cosmograph.
Russia, P^^ssia, Lituania, Livonia, Podoli^, and Moschovia: whereto is added
Alba, Russia, and Vandalia.

In a word the people were anciently known by the name of Dictionar. Etym^^.
tri lingue ^ungeri. Clao Mag. hist. delle cose S^pten. l. 2^.
Scyt^ians. Here is more honey then in all the world besides, for they fill
sometimes great dry pits with combs, that the Bears coming to eat the honey,
accidentally falling into them, have been suffocated with the abundance.

Nature denies them the vine, but the God of nature has more than sufficiently
recompensed that defect with an incredible Gio. Boterole relationi univers.
s^li 2 part l 1. Me^dosa, Trea^^^e of the Kingdom of China G. Fletcher Russe
Commonwealth.
quantity of honey, which they use (besides to several other purposes) to make
mead with.

There is great abundance in China, for they wonderfully delight in keeping of
Bees, there is also very much wax, you may lade Ships, nay Fleets therewith.

Honey is more plentiful in Russia than in any part of the world, thereof they
spend great quantity in their ordinary drink (which is Meade of all sorts) and
many other uses, and yet good quantity is carried out of the Country, which may
better appear if we take notice that there has been shipped fifty Lettere
d'Ab. C^mpense inte n^le cose di ^os. and P. Jovio delle cose d^l. Mos. apud
Rhamus^* 2. Volum.
thousand Pood yearly of wax, every Pood containing forty pound, which amounts
to a thousand Tun, and yet the great men use but little Tallow, but much wax
for their lights.

Muffet perstringeth Iovius for applauding the Russian honey, for says he,
There is not a Be in the whole Country, and he justifies himself from the
relation of Sebastian Baro, how truly from the premises you may easily
determine.

About the River Occa, distant about thirty Leagues from Mosco, is the greatest
store in all the land of Russia. Purchase pilg. 3. part. l. 2. c. 1.
Encouragement of settling a Planta^. at ^^^d^gas. J. Leo l. 8.


There is a report that a greater quantity than that mentioned before is
brought yearly to India, from the Coast of Malindia near adjoining to
Madagascar, namely fifteen hundred Tuns.

There is little honey throughout all Egypt, and that little is not very good,
for it is always moist and thin like water, the reason whereof is said to be,
because the flowers are over moist by the overflowing of Nilus, but in America,
where the Alex. Aphedis. Prob. 74.
lands are not overflown, but exceeding dry, yet the honey is always liquid, so
that it comes from some other cause.

Corsica yields many venomous trees, from which if the Estates of the world
translat. by Ed. Grims^.
Bees suck any thing, they make the honey very bitter; It seems these trees were
but in some places, for Atheneus reports, that the Corsi^ans were long lived
with the daily use of honey, which is very plentiful with them; some parts were
infamous for their Servius com. in 4. l. Georg.
bad honey, occasioned through their plenty of Yew trees, which Servius
confirms, saying, The Corsican honey is bitter, and Martial mentions it.

Some vainly conceit, all honey at first to be sharp and bitter, Martial 9.
^^pi. Nicetas com. in Greg. Naz. t. 2. ^^at. 43.
but in process of time being concocted, it returns to its proper sweetness.

In the City of Trapezun^ in Pontu^, the honey gathered of the Yew trees smells
filt^^ly, and makes them that are well in their Arist. de Mi^abil. Auscult*
wits, mad, and but cures those that are distracted.

In some parts of Spain the honey is poison: Also at Heraclea in Pontus some
years, they have an herb called Aegolethron, hurtful to Goats, the flowers
whereof, especially in a wet Spring have a poisonous quality. Signs of it, it
never thickens, the color is more red than other honey, a strong kind of
smell, presently it causes sneezing, they which eat of it throw themselves on
the ground seeking to cool themselves, for they are all on a sweat. And if dogs
eat their excrements that are affected with it, they have the disease.

Likewise in Pontus among the Sanni, there is a honey which Plin. Not. his^. l.
2^. c. 13
causes madness, which is supposed to be gathered from the Rhododendron,
whereof the Woods are full. In some parts also of Persia, and in Getulia, a
Province of Mauritania.

Galen says, his father had honey so bitter with age, as if it Gallen, l. 1. de
Antidot. c. 2
had been gathered in Pontus. And therefore Servius on those words of Virgil,
Dul^ia mella premes, says, It is not a superstuous Epithet, because there is
bitter honey. So is there sharp Idem l. 3. de compos. medic, secund. Genesis S^^abo
l. 11. Dioscorid. l. 6 c 8.
honey also which comes by age.

The honey is bitter near Phasis, and about Hereclea a City of Pontus, from the
plenty of Monks-hood, or Wolfes-bane, says Dioscordes.

Pet. Bellonius says, These Countries of Pontus abound with an herb called
Black* ^^meleon, the root whereof has an excrescency called I^^i^, which is a
deadly poison, and kills presently those that drink it. Now, says he, if the
Pees gather the substance of the honey from the Chameleon-flower, there is no
doubt but the honey is very dangerous, but says he, we are not ignorant, that
the Bees gather not the matter of their honey from the flowers, but only of the
leaves when they are covered with the Hony-dew. But this great observer, for
want of observation failed, trusting too much to Aristotle, and others, that
the Bees did not make, but only gather honey.

The Sanni of whom we spoke before, paid a tribute of Wax to the Romans, but
the honey, as dangerous, was not vend^ble.

Strabo writes, that the people called Hep^acomete^ beyond Strabo l. 12.
C^lch^s, slew three cohor^s of Pompie^ soldiers when they passed through the
mountain Country, for they mingled a kind of poisonous honey with their drink,
and easily m^ssacred them when they were besides themselves.

Diodorus reports, That the Grecian^ returning from Babylon Diod. Siculus, l.
14.
in the Country of Col^^os, found abundance of Bees, and did liberally feed of
the honey, but as soon as they had eaten it, they became mad, and presently
threw themselves on the ground, and lay like dead men; but the day after, the
same hour they were taken, they recovered their wits again.

In Sardinia is no venomous creature, yet the honey is poison. Dioscor. l. ^. c.
75.
Dioscorides says, It is very bitter, and that they gather it of wormwood, and
that it is excellent to cure blemishes and G^^^n* lib. ^ de simp. ^^^^l. Med.
spots of the face. Galen mentions it, saying, If any honey be bitter as the
S^rdi^i^^, it is of a mixed faculty, as if some of our honey were tempered with
wormwood. Virgil says, It is gathered of the Yew tree, Sic tua Cyrne^s
^ugi^^t, examina Diod. Sicul. l. ^.
^axus. Diodorus from the Box tree.

In Candia there is a mountain called Carnia, nine miles Plin. Not. hist. l.
^1. c. 14.
in compass, in which space, no Flies are ever seen, and they never touch honey
that is made there, and brought from thence.

In T^r^o^a the honey is not only solid, but sandy, such as is gathered in the
Heath-country of Hampshire, very course, and red, full of little clo^s or
knots, like sand, but much greater: Pliny dislikes it on good grounds, as the
worst honey.

All honey hardened, keeps the same solidity, diverse from water and other
liquids, for all other liquid things once compacted, dry, and are attenuated,
but honey does not.

That honey works as wine in the comb until the twentieth day (asserted by
some) is a fable, and that the cover that stops it up is the f^ces from the
working, which they that maintain the former deliver, is as ridiculous; make
trial, and you shall find it wax as the combs.

Some combs in plentiful years, are shut up the first day.

Honey in the comb is all pure, but after it is expressed, some ^ecule^t and
dreggy matter, partly from the combs, partly from the Bee-bread and spat,
somewhat corrupts the purity, all which it purges up to the top, contrary to
all other liquids where the sediment is at the bottom.

The use of honey was prohibited in the old Law, because it is a symbol of
pleasure and delights, in regard of the sweetness Fr. Valesius de sacro
Philoso. c* 16. Arist* Ethic. l. 2. c. 3
thereof. Now pleasures are displeasing to God, no lovers of them can offer a
grateful sacrifice unto him. Therefore the Philosopher said, Because of
pleasure, we do wicked things.

Another says, By prohibiting honey in the Law, we are to Caelius Rhod* lect.
Antiq. l* 28. c. 27.
understand Philosophical ostentation, and pleasant allurements of humane
eloquence, very sweet in sound, but not in substance.

Another, Honey was not offered in sacrifice, nor yet wax, wherein honey is
deposited, but oil for the Lamps in Gods Hieron. Epist* ^. ^d Gaudent. t. ^.
and Epist. 19. ad Eustochium* ^. 1. Tho. Aquin. 12. q. 102. 3. 14* m.
Temple, which was expressed from the bitterness of the Olive, for vices are
sweet, and therefore the Harlots lips drop as an Honeycomb.

Aquinas says, Honey was not offered in sacrifice, because it was ordinarily
offered in sacrifice to Idols, and also to prohibit, and avoid all carnal
sweetness and pleasure from those, who intended to offer sacrifices to God.

The heathens used honey in their sacrifices, especially the Stuckius S^^r.
sacrifi^* descrip. Plut. quest 5. S^^p. Hier* Romano* l. 2. ^ 3.
Athenians, and that to several of their Deities, and yet Plutarch propounds a
question why they did not use it. But it is certain they offered no wine to
their gods, but water sweetened with honey.

The Romano had diverse names sot their Religious places* Good win Ant q. l. 1.
c* 2* and Alex* ab Alex. genial dier. l. 5. c. 26
one was called S^r^^i^^lu^* which was a furrow, or pit, containing an Altar in
it, into which they powered the blood of the slain beast, together with honey,
and other things when they sacrificed to an infernal Deity.

The Romans sacrificed to Pluto three times in the year, the Hier. Romano l. 2.
c. 8
beasts for sacrifice were black, old, and barren, and they made ready in this
sacrifice a drink of wine and milk, mixed with honey and blood. Guil-Moses
unvailed


One gives this as a natural reason, because being burnt, it had no good smell*

In the Feast of Bacchus, all the Priests being crowned with Idem. l. 2. c 9
garlands of Ivy* offered sacrifices made of fine flower, and honey fried with
oil, and sometimes with honey, because Bacchus, as they supposed first found
them out. Horace says, They sacrificed honey taken out of the Combs to him.
Horat. 2. c^^m.


Bacchus by some was called Bryseus, from an old word, (...) to flow, because
he first taught the use of honey: And Ovid. l. 3. Fast.
Ovid says, That he was not only the inventor of honey* but that honey was
offered in sacrifice to him.

The Egyptians when they celebrated the feast of Mercury, Plutarch de I^^^^.
and O^^r.
did eat honey and figs.

Among many other things which the Romans offered in sacrifice Hier: Romano l.
2. cap 11
to Ceres, they used to present honey and wine. And because Ceres sought her
daughter Proserpina ravished by Pluto with torches, or candles, which she
lighted in the Vul^ane^n mount F^^^, therefore a day of burning lamps and
candles, was dedicated to her by the heathen, and from hence came the Good win
An* l. 2. c. 13. Alex. ab Alex. genial dier. ^ 6. c. 8.
feast of Candlemass among the Christians.

In the sacrifices to Bona dea, or the earth, they used wine, but called it not
by the name of Wine, but Milk or Honey, and the vessel wherein it was put, the
Hony-vessel.

The ancient Greeks quieted or appeased their dead with Eurip.
honey, Iphigenia in Euripedes vowing sacrifices to her brother, promises to
sprinkle the blood of a Mountain-calf, the liquor of Ba^ohus, and the labors
of yellow Bees.

Chaucer relating the burning of A^site, tells what they used Chaucer in the
Knight tale.
to cast into the Funeral flames.

With vessels in her hand of gold full fine,
All full of Honey, Milk, Blood, and Wine.
They gave the deceased a Wa^er tempered with honey to appease Adr. Turneb. l.
28. c. 45. Hier. Romano lib. 2. cap. 1.
Cerberut withal.

In Peloponesus they began their sacrifices to the goddess Melissa which was
adored among them, because she taught them the use of honey.

This Goropius denies, for he says, Noah first after the deluge Gorop. Becan.
Hierogliph. l. 13.
sacrificed to God, and God smelled a sweet favor. This was the first banquet
after the stood, wherewith Noah feasted Jupiter, for which, because it was
sweet, he was called Melissus, namely for offering honey to Jupiter, and
because this Hony-service or sacrifice came from him willingly, he was said to
have a daughter at home called Melissa, namely the honey goodness of his mind,
whereby he made a feast to God.

And then because with this sweetness, or Melissa, he presently obtained that
favor from God, by which he was abundantly supplied with all necessaries; for
this, he was said to have another daughter, which was called Amalthea. So that
having Melissa good will, and Amalthea a large plenty of all things; and by
these his two daughters daily to feast Jupiter, posterity fained that Jupiter
being an Infant was nourished by the daughters of Melissus.

In ancient times, Junkets prepared with honey, were proper Pineda derebus
Solom. l. 5. c. 12
to marriage solemnities, of which cates, or honied cakes, the Bridegroom
first tasted, and then the Bride, and after the Guests.

Curtius speaks of it in Alexanders marriage with Roxane. Q. Curtiu, l. 8.
Cant. ^. 1.
And Pineda says the same of Solomon's marriage with Pharaohs daughter to be
obscurely implied, I have eaten my hony-combe with my honey, I have drunk my
wine with my milk; Eat O friends, drink, yea, drink abundantly, O beloved.
Which is an invitation of the Spouse to the tasting of it: Where the Septuagint
Reads, I have eaten my bread with my honey. Moreover it signifies any
extraordinary sweetness, as also milk, or any more pleasant dainty. And truly
honey and wine seem to be proper to Nuptial seasts, which is more clear, E^^k.
16* 13* For whereas all the rest that went before concerned marriage; this was
a wedding Ceremony to eat bread made of fine Flower, Honey, and Oil, by the
communion whereof the Bride was taken into the Partnership of the Kings bed and
Kingdom.

In Fez after the Espousals and Marriage ceremonies performed, Jo. Leo l. 3.
diverse Guests are invited to a Banquet, where for great dainties is first
brought a kind of bread fried and tempered with honey.

Among many other Nuptial ceremonies which the Borussians J. Miletius Religio.
Borussorum.
use, after they have washed the Brides feet, and with that water sprinkled the
Marriage Bed, and all the utensils of the house, and the Guests also, then they
anoint her mouth with honey, and covering her eyes with a vail, lead her to all
the doors of the house, which they bid her strike with the right foot.

The Russians use many strange Marriage-solem^^^ies. The Religio Russorum ad
Dom. Chy^r^um.
Priest having a book open before him, sings with a loud voice one of David's
Psalms. And then taking hold with his hand on one of the Bridegrooms curled
locks, speaks to him after this sort. Tell me, O Bridegroom, brother, friend,
Will thou be this young woman's husband, Will thou sometimes beat and cudgel
her, etc.

Here the Bridegroom solemnly protests to do the office of a good man. And then
turning his speech to the Bride, he asks her, if she be sufficient for a
husband (for their Maids of ten, and eleven years old marry) Will she have a
care of the household affairs etc. which she affirms. Then the Priest puts on
either of their heads a Garland made of Boughs, in the circumference whereof is
written in Russe letters, Increase and multiply. While he does this, many wax
candles are lighted, and a bowl full of Mead is then given to the Priest which
^ee drinks all off to the new coupled at one draught, and they cheerfully
pledge him and then return him the cup again.

After many preceding ceremonies, the Bridegroom taking G Fletcher Russe
Commonwealth ^. 22.
the Bride by the hand they go on together with their friends after them
toward the Church Porch, where he is met by some with pots and cups in their
hands full of Mead (the Russe proper wine) whereof the Bridegroom takes first
a Cha^k or little cup full in his hand and drinks to the B^^de, who opening
her hood or vail below, puts the cup to her mouth underneath it (for being
seen of the Bridegroom) pledgeth him again.

The Romans in the Nuptial supper, gave the new married Ovid. l. 4. Fastorum.
Ad. Tu^ne^. advers. l. 28. c 45 Fulvius Ur^nu^.
couple the juice of Poppy tempered with milk and honey.

The Ancients did use honey in all their Sweetmeats, as we do Sugar, indeed
they knew not what Sugar was.

The Romans used honey in their first service at their feasts, as also in their
second. And indeed formerly no kinds of meat, but were with the use of honey
made more acceptable.

Pithagoras usually fed on honey, and Hony-combes, because Lilii Greg. Sy^ald.
Symb, ^ 2. Calvin in Esaiam c. 9. Aristot. de Mirabilibus auscultat.
they were prepared without man's labor, and were a kind of heavenly food.

To this day the Jews give Infants a taste of butter and honey before they suck.

Among the Illirians was first of all the use of Mead, which in Aristotle's time
the Greeks were scarce acquainted with.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Tree-bony.
THere was anciently, and is still Tree-hony, as well as Beehony. And this
Tree-hony is of two sorts, either a plentiful hony-dew, which might be
gathered; or else sweet saps or juices drawn out, or concocted from several
sorts of trees and fruits, to the consistence, taste, and likeness of honey.

Of the first sort it is reported that near the Cospian sea, there Mr. Anton.
Co^ci^ Sabel* lici E^n. 4. l. 5.
are plenty of trees with leaves like Oaks, yielding much honey, but it must be
gathered before the rising of the Sun, for the rays thereof quickly consume,
and waste it.

In Arabia Naba^bea, they gather honey plentifully of the Diodo. Sic. Bib*
lioth. l. 19.*
Trees, which they call Wild honey, of which, mixed with water, they use to drink.

There is a Tree called Occhus in the valleys of Hireania that L. Ve^ul. cent.
7. c. 612.
distilleth honey in the mornings.

In Lidia there is plenty of honey gathered of the Trees of Arist. de Mirabil*
^uscul.
which the inhabitants make loaves, or lumps of such hardness, that without
many blows, they cannot be broken.

The inhabitants of Mount Libanus spread hides under the Mouffet Theatrum
Insect. ^. 1. c. 5.
trees, and then shake and beat them, and after gather up the honey, which they
reserve in earthen pots.

The Maguey is a Tree of wonders, it yields Honey, Water, J. Acosta natural and
moral hist. of the Indies l. 4. c. 23.
Wine, Oil, Vinegar, Syrrup, Thread, Needles, and a thousand other things. It is
a tree which the Indians esteem much in new Spain, and have commonly in their
dwellings some one of them for the maintenance of life: It grows in the fields,
and has great and large leaves, at the ends whereof is a strong and sharp
point which serves to fasten little pins, or to sow as a needle. And they draw
out of this leaf as it were a kind of thread which they use. This liquor being
sodden, turns like Wine, which grows to Vinegar, suffering it to sour, and
boiling it more, it becomes as honey, and boiling it half, it serves as Syr^up.

Below by the root of the Magueis Tree, the Indians make a Hackluits Voyages
first part Job. Hort.
hole, whereat they take out twice a day a certain kind of liquor which they
seethe in a great kettle, until the third part be consumed, and then it
waxes thick, it is as sweet as any Hen. Hawke ibid.
honey. It is not so sweet as the honey (says another) of Bee^, but it is better
to be eaten with bread.

In and about the City of Themisti^an, besides the honey of Fernand. Cort.
t^sela. 2. relation apud Rh^m^s. 3. volum. He^^eradecad. 8. l. 5. c. 1.
Bees, is honey of the Canes of Maiz, which Canes yield very much honey, and as
sweet as the juice of the Sugar-cane.

In Sancta Cruse, and the Country about it, which is in the Province of Tucuman
grow sweet Canes, of which they make very good honey.

The fruit of the Palm Trees growing about Jericho, being ^rodden Geor. Cedreus
hist. compend. Bedade sanct. loc^^ c. 14.
and pressed out, yield great quantity of honey.

There grow trees in Palestina with broad and round leaves of a milky-colour,
and a honey taste, very brittle by nature, which they eat, rubbing them in their
hands. This a certain Bishop, Baron. A^nal. Eccles. ^. 10.
called Archulphus, who had visited the Holy Land, supposes to be the
wild-hony that John Baptist lived of in the wilderness. But others say, It was
a mountain-hony made by wild Bees, Is^dor* Pelusiot 132. l. 5. Theophil^in
Evang. Ma^a ^ 3.
bitter, and unpleasant to the pallat. Theophilact wild honey was made by wild
Bees in trees and rocks.

They get the Palm-wine after this sort in Cong^, they bore a hole near the top
of the tree, whence flows a liquor which they Ia^tic. Thes^^^* indicu^.
receive into pots fastened underneath, at first it is in taste and color like
milk, it quickly ^oureth.

In Crangan^^ they make honey of it after this manner, within Novus orbis.
Iosophu^ Indicus.
three days (for after of its own nature, it proves vinegar) they boil it in
Caldrons, or Kettles until two parts be wasted, and then it is very sweet
honey. Of this honey mixed with water, and purged twenty days together, they
make an excellent sweet wine. I might speak of the Indian Palm, or Coco-tree,
which likewise yields honey, but I will add no more.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Wax.
WAx is either natural or artificial, the natural Wax is the gross part of the
combs, containing the honey and Bee-bread, sometimes the Seminaries for
generation. And this is either Virgin-wax, or of a courser fo^t: the Virgin-wax
is that Helle^iu^ l. 6. Institut Chyrurg. c. 1.
which is made by a swarm, or a stock new driven, not that only which is made
by the younger Bees, as Hellerius, for they work altogether.

This is called by some Propolis, as Aldrovand. observes out Actuar* de compos
med^
of Actuaries. And Scrib^nius Largus, It might be expected, that I should
speak somewhat of Propolis, Commosis, Mity, and Pissocera, used anciently in
Physic, and supposed to be made by the Bees. But I can find no agreement
among Philosophers, nor yet Physicians what they are, and am certain that they
are not what Aristotle, Pliny, and others determine them to be, and therefore I
will leave the discussion to others. Only in a word, Mity says Aristotle, is
the black dross of wax of a sharp Arist. de hist. anim. l. 9. c 64* Scalig.
com. in loc.
smell, I suppose he means the feces of the wax when it is melted and strained;
Propolis seems, says Scaliger a translative surname of Mity.

Caza translates it Commosis, but Pliny, make a difference Plin, lib. 11. ^ 7
between Commosis, and Propolis, wherefore Scaliger was of opinion, that
Commosis and Mity were different things.

Scribonius takes Virgin-wax (as before) for Propolis* Silvaticus* ^^kes it for
the dreggs of the combs, but amiss, says Mouffet, and yet he would have it to
be Hive dros^, but whether of a Swarm or a Stock he declares not; between
which is a great difference; Andreas Bellunensis, the filth or dross of the
sides of the Hive; I subscribe to Sylva^icus; Propolis is as much as suburb
dross, with which the Bees fasten the skirts of the Hive to the board; it is
not says Mouffet now to be found.

Wax is thus made by the Bees; they creeping upon the Flowers with their sangs
and tongue, as Aristotle and others say, extract a gummy and viscu^us matter,
which they receive with their fore-feet, and rubbing them on the thighs of
their hind^ee^, there fasten it, very little at a time, and scarcely visible.

Mouffet says, the burden is of the bigness of a le^til on either thigh, and
that it is of diverse colors, according to the nature of the Flowers, yellow,
pale, red, Saffron color, white, black, etc. but he and many others were
mistaken, taking Bee-bread for Wax.

The best Wax is somewhat yellow, fat, pure, odoriferous, Dioscor. l. ^. ^. ^.
Plin. lib. ^^. c. 14
and expressing in some sort a scent of honey; Dioscorides commends the Pontick
or Cretan, Pliny commends the Punick, and it is called Punick, says Iacobus
Dalechampius, because it is the whitest.

Artificial Wax is that whereto the perfection of it the skill and industry of
man is required, and this is variously performed; Johannes Anglicus in ro^a
anglica, lib. 5. c. 1
two ways are set down by Anglicus, First, that the Wax should be often
melted, every time taking new water until it be white. Another way is thus,
that when it is dissolved in the water by the fire, to dip into it a Glass
vial, or vessel clean rinsed, and that which sticks to it let it be dried in
the Sun, and Moon; and this so long continued until you have gathered up all
the Wax, and then set it abroad in the open air, for it grows white by the
force of the Sun (that I say nothing of water) because so the honey is taken out
of it, and those parts expire by whose thinness the color is made.

Wax as it is newer, so it is better, for it is more odoriferous, pu^rer, and
apt to take impressions, Wax is worst at the bottom, best at the top, so that
it be not frothy.

The Bees gather Wax all the year, from the blowing of the Mr. Remnant.
Willow to the I^i^.

In old Wax says Aristotle, there is bred small white Creatures, the least of
creatures, called Acari, in regard of the smallness, not devisible, I suppose
he means Mites, which are bred also in many other things.

The Kingdom of Cha^dec^^, watered with the river Ganges, Fran^is. Fernandus
is plentifully stored with Wax, which in abundance the people find in the
Woods, and therewith supply Bengala, and a great part of India.

The Li^^nia^^ knew not the use of Wax, and therefore Aloysius Cadomustus.
pressing out the honey threw it away; Cadomustus reports the like ignorance of
the Africans in M^uritania.

From the Coast of M^li^dio, near adjoining to Madagascar, there is brought one
thousand five hundred T^^ of Wax yearly to Indi^. Io. Leo, lib. ^


Tecule^^ a Town of Hea sends Wax into Portingale; and to Temfethne resort
ships from Portingale for Wax.

In F^^* on Mahome^s Birthday the Scholars of every School, Idem, lib. 3.
which are two hundred, celebrate a Feast, when the Fathers are bound to send
each man a Torch unto the School, whereupon every Boy carries a Torch in his
hand, some of which weigh thirty pound; these Torches are most curiously made,
being adorned round about with diverse fruits, of Wax, which being lighted
betimes in the morning do burn till Sun rising, when the solemnity cease.
This day uses to be very gainful unto the Schoolmasters, for they sell the
remnant of the Wax upon the Torches for above a hundred Ducats.

The Persians in old time, and also the Africans had a custom Funeral
^^tich^d^ Tho* (...). ^^^* Goodwin, Romans antiquit. lib. ^. c. 7.
stome to wrap up in Wax their dead, that so they might preserve them for a
long time.

The Romans in the B^rial of a Senator or chief Officer, had certain waxen
Images of all his Predecessors carried before him on long Spears.

Wax was much used anciently, to make the Images of eminent persons deceased,
as also in our days, which by many circumstances (as appears) were borrowed of
the Romans; who when the deceased Emperor was to be consecrated, the whole
City gave over all exercises, as if it had been a Festival day; First, they
burned the dead Body with sumptuous exequies, and then they made an Image of
Wax as like as was possible to the deceased, and set it in the porch of the
Palace upon a great bed of Ivory, placed aloft, and covered all over with
cloth of gold; this Image lay pale on the Bed as if it had been a Sick Person,
about the bed sat a great part of the day all the Senators clothed in black,
and on the left side the Ladies, that in regard of their Husbands, or Fathers,
were most illustrious, and none of them did wear any gold, or any other
ornament about their necks, but were all clothed in pure white garments, and
by their countenance seemed very sorrowful, and they continued thus in this
guise seven days; but every day the Physicians came to the body, and made show
of feeling the sick Parties pulse, and always reported that he grew worse and
worse, until in the end they said he was dead.

As soon as they had declared him dead, the most noble and proper young men of
the Order of the Senators and Cavaleers li^ted the bed on their shoulders, and
carried it by the Sacred way into the ancient Market, where the Roman
Magistrates were accustomed to lay by, and renounce their command and authority.

In this place was erected a Tribunal of Wood, which seemed to be of stone, on
which was framed a certain edifice, sustained on every side with Pillars, and
variously garnished with Ivory and Gold, on which was laid another Bed with
ornaments of Purple and Gold woven together, and about it, were the heads of
diverse Sea and Land creatures; now in this Bed they placed this Image of Wax
triumphantly adorned, which they had brought from the Palace, and there stood
a very fair youth with a fan of Peacocks Feathers to scare away the Flies, as
if the Emperor slept.

In the mean time while the Image lay there, the living Emperor, the Senate,
and their Wives drew near to the Bed, until they were all met together, there
the Ladies ^ate under the Porch, but the Senators open; on both sides of the
Market were set up Scaffolds to ascend on, which on one side were a Quite of
noble youths, all pa^ricians, and on the side a Quite of illustrious Women,
which sung Hymns and other Songs in honor of the dead, with sad and mournful
voices. But I must play the Procrustes with this Discourse, and refer them
that desire to know further, to Dion, or Herodian Greek Historians.

CHAP. XXV. Observations and Discourses Historical, and Fabulous.
BEfore the battle of Phasilon Bees lighted on the Altar, and also Rosir^s
Roman. Antiq. l. 3. c. 9. Dion Rom* histol. 41. Appian l. ^. Julius Capitolinus.
on the ships, pres^ging Pomp^es overthrow; and therefore when in the Army of
Bru^us, there settled a swarm of Bees, the South-sayers bad him to shift his
Camp, le^t he should receive loss and damage in that place.

All the Statues of Antoninus Pius in Hetruria were filled with swarms of Bees,
which were ominous presages of his Empire.

It was ever esteemed as an ill omen for swarms of Bees to Cornel. Tacitus l.
^^.
light in places where they were not accustomed, and therefore reported as a
presage of the death of Cloudius, that a swarm of Bees settled on the Capitol.

One speaking of the prodigies that did precede the battle of Silius Italicus.
Canna, says, that swarms of Bees lighted on their Ensigns.

Nec densae trepidis apumse involvere ^^b^s
Cessarum Aquilis.
Among the many Prodigies ominating Brutu^'s destruction, Appian de be^lo
civili l. 4. Plin.
swarms of Bees lighted in his Camp. Swarms of Bees settled in the Camp of
Diusus when he fought prosperously at Arbala.

Ambrose sleeping in his swaddling clothes having his mouth Baronius Annal.
Eccles. ^. 10. Cicero divina. ^. Val Max. l. ^. c 6. ^ Sa^isher. de nugis cu
^^l l. ^. c 13. Justin l. ^3. ^ (...)* s^^ de n^gis curi^l. l. ^. c* 13.
open, a swarm of Bees came and settled on his mouth, which the father and
mother walking by, forbad the Maid that tended him to brush off, where a while
continuing, at last they flew up into the air, until they could be seen no
more.

Pla^^ sleeping in his swaddling clothes, the Bees brought honey to his lips,
foretelling the singular sweetness of his eloquence.

Hiero sometimes chief Magistrate of Sicilia the son of Hier^cli^u^, a
Nobleman, who drew his original from Celus, an ancient Tyrant of Sicily, but
his mothers stock was mean and contemptible, for he was born of a
Maidservant, and therefore as a disparagement to his fathers race, was cast
forth, whom the Bees (wanting all humane help) sed with honey, which being
known, the father by the A^gurs counsel received again, and brought up as the
Heir of the Kingdom.

Aelian citing Anten^r, reports that the inhabitants of a certain Aelian l. 2.
c. 53
City in Cr^ta were forced to forsake their dwellings by certain Bees called
Chosichoides, which did miserably molest, and sting them.

The Citizens of Marra, two days journey from Antlich, Willer* Tyr* archiep^^*
^i^t* lib. ^9. and R^imun^* de Agiles Hist France ^um Appi^n de bello
Mith^ydat. Bonfin. l. 4. de^ad. 3.
being besieged by Go^frey Duke of Bullen, among other things which they threw
over the walls to drive away their enemies, cast over Hives full of Bees.

Lucul^us Army besieging Themis^yra situate on the banks of the River
Thermod^o^, and by Mines seeking to overthrow the w^lls, the inhabitants opened
them above, and threw in Hives of Bees among them to their great trouble and
vexation.

When Amu^ah the Great Turk besieged Alba Greca, the Inhabitants, besides other
things, cast Hives of Bees among the Turks, whereby they were greatly annoyed.

A Captain of the Emperors being besieged by Giselbert Vitichindus l. 1 gest.
Sax.
the King of Lorrain, restrained the enemies when they entered the place, by
casting hives of Bees; for the horses being enraged with their st^n^s,
overthrew their Riders, or were altother unserviceable.

Lupus Barriga warring with the M^ors in Mauritania, and O orius de ^e^ bus
Em^n. l. 8.
besieging a Town called Torn^t, the Inhabitants being at the last cast, threw
over the walls abundance of hives of Bees, set on fire, wherewith the
P^r^^ng^ls were so burnt, and stung, that they were forced to give over, with
the wounding of their General, and many others.

Cozenours and Cheaters were thus anciently punished, they Suida^.
divested the guilty person of his clothes, and then anointed him with honey all
over his body, and set him in the Sun with his hands and feet fast bound, that
by many reiterated stingings, and the Suns heat, they might receive a death,
worthy of their life. Georgius Brawn l. 4. u^bium pre^i^^ar.


In Sivil a City of Spain; if a woman bears her husband* she is carried on an
Ass through the City naked from the g^dle-sted upwards, and being first
anointed with honey, besides other despights, and injuries, suffers not a little
misery from the Bees, Waspes, and Flies that molest and sting her.

Marcus an old man in the reign of Constantine, overthrew Theo^dore. l. 3. c. 7.
an Idol Temple at Arethusa, and was taken under Julian the Apostate, and first
scourged on his naked body, and after other punishments, in the last place put
in a basket, being all over anointed with honey, and so set abroad, whom the
Bees (thinking he had robbed them) stung therefore to death.

Hermonay the son of Amymer, and Lysodic^ being a child, and coming to the
Hives to rob the Bees, was killed with their stings.

Onesilus the brother of Gorgus King of Salami^ in the Isle Herodot. Hallear.
Terpsichore. l. 5.
of Cyprus, fighting against Artybius a Persian General, was slain, and his
head cut off, and hanged over the gates of Amathusium, a City in the same
Island, which he had sometimes before besieged; into which when it was empty,
a swarm of Bees entered, and filled it with combs, this is reported at a Prodigy
(and does not prejudice the cleanliness of Bees) for consulting the Oracle,
they advised to take down the head and bury it.

Livonia is replenished with stately Woods, and those furnished Purchase
Pilgrims 3. part. l. 3. c 20.
with industrious Bees, which sometimes being numerous, are put to hard shifts
for habitations. Mr. Barkley an English Merchant, did in one of these Woods eat
honey out of a man's skull, wherein a swarm of Bees were, and bred as it hanged.

It is reprorted that in the Sepulcher of Hippocrates, the Prince of
Physicians, for a long time a swarm of Bees lived, and wrought honey in it, and
that this happened extraordinarily, is concluded, because that Nurses anointing
childrens mouths near the grave, with the honey easily cured them.

D^onisius the son of Hermocrates swimming over a River Aelian. var. hist. l.
12. c. 40.
upon his horse, his horse was mired, and could not be pulled out by any
means, he leaped off his back, and go^ safely to the ba^k, and so forsook the
horse as no longer his: But the horse followed after, and neighed, whereupon he
returned, and when h^old on his Ma^^o mount up, a swarm of Bees encompass^d his
hand, which hung on his Man^ a presage of his future command and Empire.

The Tr^ph^nion Oracle was thus found out: When as a P^usanias in Beoticis.
year or two together, there was no rain, some were sent from every City to
Delphos to implore help. To whom desiring a remedy for the drought, Apoll^
commanded them to go to Labadea, and seek a remedy for their evil of
Trophonius. Going therefore to Labadea, but not able to find the Oracle. S^on
one of the Ambassadors an old man, when he had espied a swarm of Bees, resolved
to follow them withersoever they went. When therefore he saw them flying to a
Cave, he entered in, and understood that place was the Oracle which they sought
for.

Comates feeding the flock of his rich Master in Sicily; was Theocritus l 1.
^^rat. Eidyl. 7.
sometimes accustomed to offer somewhat of his flock to the Muses; which when
his Master knew, he reproved him very sharply, whom Comates entreats not to
be angry, for by the Muses help there should be a large remuneration. Go to,
says his Master, let us make trial whether the Muses will feed thee, and
enclosed him in a hollow tree, and there left him to perish with famine. And at
the years end returning, found his servant alive, and well, and many Hony-combs
about him, for the Bees by a hole had entered into the tree, and maintained him.

The Be master being absent, one came and stole the combs Aesop. Fab. 85.
out of the Hive, who afterward returning found his Bees plundered, and while
he stood still a while to examine and corsider concerning the author of i^: The
Bees came home from work and finding their house robbed, and him standing by,
did fall upon him, and cruelly sting him. To whom he thus spoke, Oh you wicked
creatures, you let go unhurt him that robbed you, and punish me ^t a^am
careful of your safety.

Melissa one of the Oread Nymphs finding Hony-combes in Natal. Com. Mythyolog.
l. 5. c. 11.
Pelopenesus, invited her follows to taste thereof, with the sweetness whereof
they were so ravished that the Grecians called the Bees by the name of that
Nymph.

Iacobus Sanno^arius that excellent Poet, has his figure cut Sands relat. l. 4.
to the life in Mergelli^a (near Naples where he lived) from whose mouth the
Bees do seem as it were to suck honey.

Livy does relate that there was found two Coffins of lead in Tet^inius.
a tomb, whereof one contained the body of King N^ma; being some four hundred
years after his death; and the other his books of sacred Rites and Ceremonies.
And that in the Coffin that had the body, there was nothing at all to be seen,
but a little light cinders about the sides, but in the Coffin that had the
books, they were found as fresh as if they had been but newly written, covered
over with watch candles of wax, three or fourfold.

Agesipolis a King of the Lacedemonian^ dying of a Fever Xenophon de rebus
gestis Grecorum, l. 5.
near the City of Clynthia was preserved in honey, and so carried to Sparta,
where he had a royal Funeral.

Claudius Caesar had a Hippocentaure, a Monster, part horse, Cael. Rhod. lect.
ant. l. 6. c. ^
par bull, brought out of Egyp in honey, which Pli^y says he saw.

A^s^ith the widow of King Edgar, sometimes Monarch of this Island,
traitorously slew King Edward his son, that her son Rob. Glecestrensis.
Ethelred his brother in law might (as he did) succeed him. Some ten years of
age was he when his brother Edward was slain, and he out of childish
affection wept for him bitterly; which his mother extremely disliking, being
author of the murder, only for his sake, most cruelly, beat him her self,
with a handful of Wax-candles. So that he would never endure Vit. S. Ed apud
Ranulph. Cestren. l. 6.
Wax-candles. But another Writer says that Ethelred would never endure any
Wax-candles, because he had seen his mother unmercifully with them, whip his
brother in Law, King Edward, either report may be true.

Now the Sword and Scepter is taken from the Jews, instead Purchase Pilgrimage
l. 2. c. 19. ex Buxtorf.
of other penalties they inflict sharp penances according to the nature of the
crime. Thus the Adulterer satisfies for his hot lust in cold water, wherein
he is enjoined to sit some Winter days; and if the water be frozen, the Ice
is cut out, and he set therein up to his chin, as long as an egg is roasting.
In Summer time he is set naked in an ant-hill his nose, and ears stopped, and
after washes himself in cold water. If the penance seem lighter, they enjoin
him further to run through a swarm of Bees, and when the swelling of his body
through their stinging is abated, he must do it again, and again, according to
the measure of his offense. If he has often that way offended, he is bound
to endure that penance many years.

Hunding the 23. King of Sweadland, upon a false report of Krantzius.
his brother in Law Hadings death, King of Denmark, invited all his Nobility to
a sumptuous feast, to conclude which, he had provided a very large vessel of
Mead, of which he drew out himself to them until they were all drunk, and
then in token of love to his supposed dead friend, plunged himself into the
vessel, and so was willingly drowned (but ridiculously and I. Magnus hist.
Suconum.
foolishly) some applaud and prefer him therefore, before many heroical Greeks
and Romans.

Hostilia is a Town in Italy, watered by the River P^, the Plin. Not. hist. l.
21. c. 12.
inhabitants whereof (when meat for Bees grows scarce about them) carry their
Hives into Boats, and by night convey them up five miles against the stream. In
the morning the Bees go forth to their work, and so do they shift places,
ascending up the River, till by the sinking of the Boat, they know their Hives
to be full of honey, and then return they home, and take it.

What is the reason why among the Sarma^ians there is Ambros. Leo Problem. 180.
plenty of honey, and in Africa small store of Bees? And he renders this as a
reason, the plenty of trees, and variety of flowers, which in a few days after
the snow is dissolved, embroider all the fields, and the many Fountains and
Rivers wherewith they are much delighted.

Whereas in Africa, the fruits and the flowers by the violent heat are quickly
withered, and the waters are scarce, so that of necessity those things being
wanting wherein Bees delight, there must needs be few, or in some places none
at all. His reason is not worth an answer, had he been read in history, he
might have learned the contrary. Io. Leo, Ioa^n dos santos would have (besides
many other credible Authors) convinced him of the plenty of Bees in Africa. But
no wonder if he were a stranger abroad that was ignorant of Countries near
home.

He affirms that in Germany, France, Britain, Italy, there are none, or few
Bees, because (if you will believe him) there are few trees, fruits, waters.

In Angola they have great store of honey, which they thus Andrew B^tel in
Purchase Pilgrims second part 17. c. 3.
procure, they hang in the top of the Eliconde tree a hollow piece of wood, or
chest, which the wild Bees being there numerous, quickly find, and
laboriously fill once in a year with honey and wax; which the Negroes then take
with smoke, rewarding the industrious creatures with robbery, exile, death.

It will not be altogether impertinent to give you a description of this tree,
with which the Bees are more delighted than any other. The Eliconde-tree is
very tall, and exceeding great, some as big as twelve men can fathom;
spreading like an Oak, some of them are hollow, and from the liberal skies,
receive such plenty of water, that they are hospitable entertainers of
thousands in that thirsty Region. Once have I known three or four thousand
remain at one of those trees, and thence receiving all their warry provision.
The Negroes climb up with pegs of hard wood (which that softer easily
receives, the smoothness, not admitting other climbing) and I think that some
one tree holds forty run of water. This tree affords no less bountiful
hospitality to the back, than belly, yielding (as her belly to their bellies)
her back to their backs, excepting that this is better from the younger trees,
whose tenderer backs being more seasonable for discipline, are soundly beaten
for man's fault; whence came the first nakedness, whereby one fat home cut from
the tree, is extended into twenty, and is presently fit for wearing, though not
so fine as the the Iuzanda tree yields, which* yields excellent cloth from the
inner bark.

This tree is always green, of a strange form, especially in the Linschoten ^.
Book.
branches that grow very high, and cast down very small threads, which touching
the earth do bring forth roots, from whence other plants o^ trees do spring
forth most abundantly in great numbers. By like beating of their Palm, they
make Velvets, Sattins, Taffeties, etc. But I deviate too far from my subject.
Beat Rhenan. annot. in 1. lib. Tertul. advers. Marcion. And Thevet. Gosmograph^
de Levant. c. 7.


The burning of Waxen-candles on Candlemass-day had its original from the Roman
Sacrifices called Pebruals.

Bears are much tormented in their eyes, which is a principal cause why they so
much desire to eat honey out of the Hives, that being pricked, and stung with the
Bees, their throat, especially receives a phlebotomy, or blood-letting, for
they have no better remedy to ease their brain and eyes burdened, and
overcharged with humo^s.

In the Island of S^ylan are certain barbarous people called Texeira l. 1. c.
35.
Pa^bus, they live naked in the woods and thickets, their principal food is
Dears flesh, whereof there is great abundance, which they shoot and kill with
their arrows, and cutting them in pieces, filling the trunks of old hollow
trees with honey, whereof they have plenty, then they put the flesh therein, and
let it remain there till times of necessity, and then eat it, conserving it
only in the honey, without any corruption.

In the Country of Benin on the coast of Africa, is such plenty Hackluit ^
Voyages, 2. part of the 2 Volume.
of honey, that the Natives bring to the English trading there, earthen pots of
the quantity of two gallons full of honey, and hony-combs for a hundred shells.

About Sofala, and generally in the Oriental Ethiopia, breed Joaon. dos Santos
liuro primeiro da Ethiop. Orient c. 23.
Zangaons (if I be not not mistaken, Bees) after this manner. They make a ball
of clay, and stick it in the walls or tiles of their houses, with many holes
after the fashion of a Bees, or Waspes-comb, and in every hole they put a Worm
or Maggot, like those that breed in Cabbages, some green, others black, others
white, others gray; so that they are not all of one kind, or cast; but
whatsoever they find, they take and carry it unto the comb that they have made
of clay, and in every hole they put a worm, and stop it up with fresh clay, and
so enclose all the worms in their several cells, and there within they generate
other Zangaons, (or Bees) (understand by generation of others, only their
transmutation, whereby they are others from what they were, and the following
words import as much) with legs and wings, which when they are perfected, eat
through the clay, and come forth, and slye, and after they are grown great,
they make a like brood. So that of strange children of diverse casts or kinds,
they make proper children. A thing, says the Author which much amazed me. But
whether these make honey, or are any ways beneficial to them, the Relator is
silent; but being a general practice, it is more than probable that they are
some way profitable.

Great is the profit of Bees in some places, Varro reports of Varro.
two brethren in Spain, who had left them by their father a little Farm house,
and about an Acre of ground which they replenished with Bees, and seldom made
less of their honey, then ten thousand Ses^ertia yearly, a prodigious, and I
think unparelleld increase.

Menna a Hermit in the Province of the Samnites, had for his subsistence, only
a few Hives of Bees, which when a Lo^gobard thief had stolen, he was possessed of
the Devil, till Menna by his prayers freed him.

Heraclius the Emperor having War with the Persia^s, Baron. annal. Eccles.
^. 8
and wanting money (the people being before impoverished by him, sent one
Nicotas to Alexander the Patriarch to borrow of him the Treasures of that
Church (as he did of others) who notwithstanding his refusal, carried away all
he could find but only one hundred pound of Gold; but while they were going
away with it, there were certain men that brought, as a Present, several Pots
of Honey (which by a Miracle) to supply the Patriarks necessities, when they
opened them they found all turned into Gold.

I subscribe not to some Papists, who pretend there is a Valfridus, Strabus,
lib. 2. in vita S. Galli.
great Majesty in their Holies (whole-lyes) from the burning of Waxen Candles,
and that wax candles for that purpose used, cannot without great Sacrilege be
taken away.

A certain Countryman stole a wax candle from the Altar, and found it turned
into a stony hardness, whereby melting, he acknowledged his guilt before many
that stood by, and the wax candle recovered his former softness. I might be
large in such Legendary relations, but these are enough, if not too many.

CHAP. XXVI. Observations Physical and ^hyrurgical.
THe use of Honey with Bread to old folks makes them live long for it keeps and
preserves all the senses sound and entire. It is reported that Pollio being
asked by what means men might live long and healthy, answered, by anointing
their outward parts with Oil, their inward parts with Honey. The fruit
therefore of the Bees, says Ambrose, is desired of all, and is equally sweet
to Kings and Beggars; and it is not only pleasing to Princes, but also
profitable and healthful, it sweetens their mouths, cures their wounds, and
convaies remedies to inward Ulcers.

Democritus continued his life with the frequent eating of Honey; and bread with
Honey was the Pythagorians meat. Aristoxenu^ said, they might live long without
Diseases who Atheneus dipnosophist. l. 2. c. 3 Gorop. Becant Nilostop. lib. 3
always sed of it at dinner.

Goropius commends the honey gathered of the Heath, before the Spanish honey
gathered of Ladanum, and diverse kinds of Costus, and that because it is
sweeter, and not so hot as the honey gathered of Stechados and Thyme; it opens
obstructions, attenuates gross and thick, cuts and cleanses viscuous humors,
and is especially profitable for those that are troubled with the spleen.

Pliny most of all commends that honey which the Bees gather in the Dogg-dayes,
almost thirty days after the Solstice, for says he, after the rising of every
Star, especially the greater ones, or the Rainbow, if showers follow not,
and there be a warm dew with the rays of the Sun, Medicines, not honey are
produced, heavenly gifts for the eyes, ulcers, and bowels, which if it be
preserved, the Dogge-star being risen, and if by chance it fall out in the same
day there be a rising of Venus, or Jupiter, or Mercury, there is no such
sweetness nor virtue in the supposed heavenly Nectar, to keep Mortals from
Diseases, though otherwise deadly; but we have little of this in our Country,
where the Hony-gathering is then almost finished, but that which is found in
the lower parts of the combs, and some little that is not shut up with waxen
covers.

Honey is hot and dry in the second degree, wherefore Galen forbids it such as
were Hectical, have a Fever, or the Jaundies, and young men; but commends it
very much in cold effects, and prescribes it to such as had moist stomachs, for
moderately eating of it, it wonderfully nourishes, and causes both a good
color and constitution.

Honey with age or long boiling becomes bitter; it gives life to Wine when it is
flat, Flowers, Fruits, and all simple and compound Medicines by mixture of it
are preserved from putrefaction.

Honey corrupts by crumbes of Bread, and therefore they that sell honey, are
careful lest children passing by dip their bread in it, and so it is transmuted
into Ants, or little Creatures like them, if we believe Paracelsus. Paracelsus.
Hippocrat.


Honey mixed with other things nourishes, and makes a good color, but eaten
alone attenuates rather than refreshes, for it provokes urine, and purges
too much.

Honey warmes and cleares Wounds and Ulcers, attenuates Galen and Avicen.
and discusseth excrescencies in any part of the body.

It is very effectual to produce hair in baldness, for Quotidian Galen.
Agues, especially oil of honey distilled.

Distilled water of honey makes a smooth skin, provokes urine, diminishes heat
in Fevers, eases the obstructions of the bowels, quenches thirst.

The salt of honey of all Corrosives is least painful, and most energetical, and
therefore in the flesh of the yard by Chymicks, and expert Chyrurgians
especially commended.

The Epicures who chiefly studied health and pleasure, did eat continually
Ambrosia, which consisted of a tenth part of Tzeizes.
honey, as Tzetzes reports, concluding that the daily use thereof would prevent
griefs, and keep them free from Diseases.

Honey infused warm by it self wonderfully helps, exulcerated Galenus.
ears, especially if they cast forth ill favors, as also their singings and
inflammations.

Honey, Butter, and Oil of Roses, of each a like quantity Marcellus Empyricu^.
warm, helps the pain of the ears; he also commends Honey, and infants dung
brayed together in the dullness of the sight, and for white spots in the eyes.

The rheum or droppings of the eyes in men or horses are Vigetius:
hereby helped, I have cured a Horse stone blind with Honey and Salt, and a
little crock of a pot mixed, in less than three days, it has eaten off a
tough filme, and the Horse never complained after.

Honey wherein Bees are drowned, or Ashes of the heads of Marcellus Empyrious.
Bees, with honey, clear the eyes; A^tick honey, with the first dung of a young
infant, and the milk of the Nurse mingled together, and annoint the eyes that
are dull upon what occasion soever, but first bind the party, for such is the
violence of the Medicine that he cannot otherwise patiently endure it, and the
benefit is so forcible, that in the third day it will make a clear sight.

Nothing is better for infants that breed Teeth, or in the Ulcers of the mouth
than butter and honey; Galen prescribes only the gums to be rubbed with it, for
it conduces wonderfully to the generation, conservation, and whiteness of
teeth: for difficulty of breathing, and to cause spitting, honey alone or mixed,
is very Hippocrat.
availeable.

Honey boiled with Bees, or new Cheese, stays a looseness, Galenus and Celsus.
Abynzoar.
helps the Bloudy-flux and Chollick. But before honey be used it is necessary to
clarify it; Thus, take of honey and fountain water of each two pound,
continually scum it as it arises, to the consumption of the water, afterward
clarify it with the whites of twelve eggs.

Honey nourishes not only because it is a kind of nourishment, Valleriola in
locis com. lib. 3
but also because mixed with other things, it is a cause that they are more
easily carried through the body; and he counsels old men to use it much, if
they would have a care of their health, and live long without Diseases, and he
asserts it by the examples of Antiochus the Physician, and Telephus the
Grammarian, who were old men, and did eat Attick honey and bread; and Galen
Galen lib. 3. de sanitat ^uend. c. 4. etc. 8
testifies the same, with often eating honey boiled, seldom raw, and yet Galen
forbids long, or too much boiling, because it will make it bitter.

Celsus reckons up boiled honey among such things as stop a Cornelius Celcus,
lib. ^. c. 3
Lask, the reason is, because the acrimony by boiling is taken away, which is
wont to move the belly, and to diminish the virtue of the food.

The bodies of Bees taken newly from the Hives, and powdered, and drunk with
Diuretic wine, powerfully cures the Dropsy, and breaks the Stone, opens the
fountains of urine, and heals and helps the stoppages in the bladder.

Bees drowned in honey, and so killed, stay vomitings, and are profitable for
deafness.

Bees powdered cure the Wind-collick, mollify hard ulcers in the lips, and
also the Bloudy-flux.

Honey mixed with powdered Bees and so taken, is helpful for Holler^u^.
the crudities of the stomach, it is also good for the stomach.

Pound Bees dead and dry in the combs, mingle them with Galen in Euporistis.
honey, and annoint bald places of the head, and the hairs will spring afresh.

The ashes of Bees ground with oil, make hair white. ^rotis, c. 6. de mo^bis
mulieb^.


Take twelve or fourteen Bees powdered, in any thing every morning, and it
helps such whose retentive faculty is weak, so that they cannot hold their
water.

Oxymel is made of water, vinegar, and honey, now water is Mesue.
mingled with it, that by long boiling that may be resolved or loosened which
the windiness raises up, and that it may be more readily skimmed. In a word,
that the working of the Medicine, by the mixing of water might be weaker, and
more easily dispersed into the body, and honey is added to resist the ^legme.

One ounce of honey and vinegar mixed together arises a certain third faculty
which was in neither of them before, which is most powerful and certain to
attenuate, cut, resolve thick and tough excrements, which have been bred a long
time in the Stomach and Liver, and those that settle on the joints, and cause
lasting Agues.

It is made thus, take of vinegar one part, two parts honey, and twice as much
water as honey; first, let the honey and water be boiled, and when they have been
well skimmed put in the vinegar, and boil them still, continually skimming
them, let them boil till there be an unity of qualities, and the vinegar be
Galen. lib. 4, de sanitat. t^end.
not raw, or crude, it is given from one ounce to three; Galen says, if you
will make it the stronger, add as much vinegar as honey; it drives out thick
and gross humors, and is profitable for the Sciatica, Falling Sickness, and
the Gout; good also to gargarize with, in a Squinancy.

Water distilled of honey four times by a Limbick, so that the honey were first
boiled, makes beautiful hair, kills Lice and Nits; the hair wet there with does
not only become yellow, but softer, and increases likewise, especially if it
be done in the Sun; it heals swollen or bloud-shotten eyes, and helps the hurt
corners of the eyes, it is excellent for burnt places, most of all for such as
are soft and tender, so that no scar will be left.

It must be distilled in a Glass Still, but first mix with it pure and well
washed Sand, and make a soft fire. The first water is cast away, the second is
preserved, which has a golden color, and red at the last; the red purges out
corruption in putrid wounds if they be washed with it, and a linen cloth
moystened in it, be laid upon them, and when it has purged them, it produces
flesh.

Honey when it is distilling is wont to swell, and flow over when it grows hot,
this is prevented when the distillation is performed by a wooden Sieve (made
with hair) being placed within the cover, so that it touches the honey.

Reubeus distilleth it otherwise, and adds other cautions: he Hieron. Rubeus,
sect. 2. c. 8
says, the water is with difficulty drawn out of the honey, because it readily
as the fire grows hot, ascends to the top; wherefore some mingle glass with it,
others sand, the most do annoint the Still within with oil; but it is best
distilled especially where they purpose to use the dregg^, by wetting linen
clothes in water continually, and spreading them on the head and sides of the
Still, and a soft fire below, by which the swelling thereof is resisted, and
leaving much vacu^ty and emptiness in the Still, so that it be filled a fifth,
or at the most a fourth part; but because sometimes a larger fire is necessary,
the cucurbite must be well crusted with clay. It is excellent for a Catarrh,
Cough, Spleen, etc.

Oil also is distilled out of honey, let honey in the combs be Andernacus
dial. 7. com. 2
put into an earthen vessel, and well macerated in warm Horsedung, until the
wax being separated from the honey, swims alost, which being taken off, let
some Flint stones be mi^gled with the honey, and little pieces of glass; the
first water when it is distilled is very sharp, and then comes the oil. It is
singular for the Gout, and for the cure of all Wounds.

Oil of Wax is thus made, let two pound of new odoriserous Aldr. lib. ^* de
Insect.
wax be melted in a Drying Pan, and then poured out into a vessel filled with
Muskadine, or other generous Wine, and let it continue there until it be cold,
after taken out and squeezed well with your hands, and again melted and poured
into the Wine as before, and let it be seven times reiterated; and then let it
be melted again, and three handfuls of beaten Bricks put into it, let them be
well mixed together, and being all cold, let them be put into a Glass Limbeck
well stopped with clay, and the joints well lined therewith, that there be no
expiration; then let a little fire be made underneath until the Cytron phlegm
cease to run, and then let another vessel be set under, and the fire a little
increased, until the drops be first thick, and then of a Cytron color; and
lastly, drop true oil of wax, and let this be received in a proper vessel,
mixed with the thick droppings, and let it be made thick, and like butter
congealed. And now the fire must be enlarged until thick drops dot again
distill, which as soon as you see let the vessel that receives the oil be
removed, and another placed to receive the remainder.

Oil of wax heals the cracks and chaps of the lips or paps, Mizaldus appendix
ad centutias.
and hinder not the child from sucking, and take off all superfluous
excrescences by drying, and are especially good in cold griefs. It is good for
them that are troubled with the stone, provokes urine, helps the Palsy,
Sciatica, contracted nerves by anointing or drinking of it; kills worms of all
sorts, helps the pain of the back, cures a distempered spleen, a drop injected
into the nostrils opens their obstruction. It conserves the memory, confirms
the brain, asswageth the Toothach, brings forth the dead or living child,
opens the veins, frees the lungs from thick superfluities, with sirrup of
Violets, helps the Astmatick, cures running eyes, etc.

Wax, says Galen, after a sort, holds a middle of things that Galen lib. 7. de
simpl.
heat, cool, moisten, and dry, and has some kind of thick and stopping parts,
and therefore it may seem not only to dry, but by accident also perhaps to
moisten, hindering perspirations; and therefore is the matter both of heating,
and also cooling medicines, and although forbidden to be taken inwardly, yet
some make Pills of wax, and others mix it with other costives, and give it for
a violent looseness.

Dioscorides prescribes it in broth for ulcers of the bowels, for Dioscorid. l.
2* c. 75.
all wax says he, mollifies heats, moderately fills the bodies (which as
Dalechampius expounds, produces flesh) in hollow Dalechamp. l. 22. c. 24.
ulcers, and Pliny confirms the same.

New wax, and soft, says Galen, is better than old, for medicines; yellow wax
for the aerie nature, does mollify, more loosen, and resolve the malady. And
therefore new wax is often prescribed, for being often melted, it loses the
aerie nature, is more earthly, and answers white wax: And white wax is most
refrigerating, is most profitable for inflamed rains where the matter is to be
repelled, which yet, says Aldrovandus, is neglected by practitioners in
Physic.

There may be admirable baths made of honey, which are Mr. Remnant.
excellent for Aches, and strong Itches, Mr. Remnant says, that a friend of
his had such a foul itch, that he was like a Leper, whom he thus cured:

He took an empty Wine cask, called a Pipe, and took out one head, and made a
liquor of water and honey, making it pretty strong with the honey, and heat it as
hot as he could endure to stand in it, and put it into the Pipe, and caused
him to stand in it up to his neck a pretty while, and this he did three days
one after another, and he was recovered as clear as ever. The like experience
he made for Aches. If they be renewed with a little honey every day it will
be better.

In the Northern Regions are few Physicians, but the healthful Olao Magno
hist. delle cose sep^entrion, l. 22. c. 16.
air, wholesome food, and especially their Mead are instead of the best
physic.

Mead, the elder it is, being well boiled, some say, ten, or twelve years old,
is most sovereign, and a present remedy for many diseases.

Mead, or Hydromel is of two sorts, the weaker, and the Butler Fem. Mon. part,
2.
stronger, Mead, and Metheglin.

For the making of Mead, if the Must, when it is altogether, be not strong
enough to bear an egg, the breadth of two pence above it, then put so much of
your course honey into it, as will give it that strength, which is sufficient
for ordinary Mead. And afterward until night, ever now and then stir it well
about the tub: According to the quantity that you will make, so must you add a
proportionable measure of honey and water, namely six of water for one. The
learned Physician Lobel, requires this Mathi^s de Lobel.
proportion of six to one to be boiled to four. His receipt of Spices is
Cinnamon, Ginger, Pepper, Grains, Cloves, ana two drams. The second morning put
to the Must the scum of the honey, stir all together, and stop the tub a little
backward. When it has settled an hour or two, draw it out to be boiled. And
when you see the grounds begin to come, stay and let the rest (save the very
thick grounds, which cast to your Bees) run into some vessel by it self, which
when it is settled, pour out into the boiling vessel through the clean sieve,
and east out these grounds also into you garden.

This Must being set over a gentle fire, when you see the scum gathered thick
all over, and the bubbles at the side, begin to break it, having slacked the
fire, to cease the boiling, skim it clean. Then presently make a fresh fire to
it: And when you see the second scum ready, having slacked the fire again, take
it quickly away; then make to it the third fire, and let it boil to the wasting
of a fourth part, if it be made of the washing of combs; and to the wasting of
one fifth or sixth part, if it be made of clean honey; not ceasing in the mean
space to take off the scum as clean as you can. One hours boiling may suffice;
but if the Mead be of clean honey, it may as well be done in half the time.
Instead of twice slacking the fire, you may twice cool the boiling Must with
cold Must reserved; or else be sure that it do boil all the while only at one
side, and not all over. After all this put in the Spices, viz. to a dozen
gallons of the skimmed Must, Ginger one ounce, Cynamon half an ounce, Cloves,
and Mace ana two drams, Pepper, and Grains, ana one dram, all gross beaten, the
one half of each being sowed in a bag, the other loose, and so let it boil a
quarter of an hour more.

The end of boiling is thoroughly to incorporate the boorn and the honey, and to
purge out the dross, which being once done, any longer boiling is unprofitable,
as diminishing more the quantity than increasing the strength and goodness of
the Hydromel.

As soon as it is boiled enough, take it from the fire, and set it a cooling;
the next day when it is settled, pour it through a hair sieve, or linen bag
into the tub (reserving still the Lees for the Bees) and there let it stand
covered three or four days till it work, and let it work two days. Then draw
it through the tapwaze, and run it into a barrel scalded with Bay Leaves,
making the Spice-bag fast at the tap. If there remain much grounds, you may
purify them by boiling and skimming, as before; but this will never be so
good as the first, and therefore you may put it by it self, or with some
remainder of the best, into a small vessel to spend first before it be sour.
If the Mead be not much, you may run it the next day, and let it work in the
barrel. Being tunned it will in time be covered with a mother; which if by
jogging the vessel, or by other means it be broken, the Mead will turn sour.
But so will it make excellent vinegar, and the sooner, if it be set in the
Sun, which the longer you keep, the better it will be.

Metheglin is the more generous or stronger Hydromel, for it bears an egg the
breadth of a groat or sixpence, and is usually made of finer honey, with a less
proportion of water namely four measures for one; receiying also in the
composition as well certain sweet, and wholesome herbs, as also a larger
quantity of Spices, namely to every half barrel, or sixteen gallons of the
skimmed Must, Eglantine, Marjerom, Rosemary, Time, Winter-savoury, ana half an
ounce; and Ginger two ounces, Cynamon one ounce, Cloves, and Mace ana half an
ounce, Pepper, Grains, ana two drams, the one half of each being bagged, the
other boiled loose. So that whereas the ordinary Mead will searce last half a
year; good Metheglin the longer it is kept, the more delicate, and wholesome it
will be; and withal* the clearer and brighter.

One excellent receipt, I will here recite, and it is that which our renowned
Queen of happy memory did so well like, that she would every year have a vessel
of it.

First, Gather a bushel of Sweet-briar leaves, and a bushel of Time, half a
bushel of Rosemary, and a peck of Bay Leaves; See the al these, being well
washed, in a furnace of fair water; let them boil the space of half an hour, or
better; and then pour out all the water and herbs into a fat, and let it stand
till it be but milk-warm, than strain the water from the herbs, and take to
every six gallons of water, one gallon of the finest honey, and put it into the
boorn, and labor it together half an hour, then let it stand two days,
stirring it well twice or thrice each day. Then take the liquor and boil it a
new; and when it does see the, skim it as long as there remains any dross.
When it is clear, put it into the fat, as before, and there let it be cooled.
You must then have in readiness a tub of new Ale, or Beer, which as soon as you
have emptied, suddenly whel^ it upside down, and set it up again, and presently
put in the Metheglin, and let it stand three days a working, and then tun it
up in barrels, tying at every tap hole by a Pack-thred, a little bag of Cloves
and Mace, to the value of an an ounce. It must stand half a year before it be
drunk.

If you marvel that so great a quantity of water is required, it is partly
because of the goodness of the honey, which being pure and fine, goes further
than ordinary; and partly that it may have the longer time in boiling before i^
come to its strength, and therefore some will have eight parts of water to one
of honey, but then they boil it so much the longer. The third part at least
being wasted.

CHAP. XXVII. Of diver^ kinds of Wild-Bee^.
THere is one kind not half so big, as a Hony-Bee, with a bright shining
green head and forepart; she has longer horns than a Hive-bee, she has four
wings, her nether part is of a light shining Carnation on the outside, the
belly of a greenish shining glistring color, almost as bright as the shining
of a Glo-worm, with a very large long sting (not forked) or somewhat like to a
sting* I could not force it to enter it into my hand, whether it will sting I
know not; that which is equivalent to the skin is as it were continued without
ringles; this Be is very strong, gathers as the Hive-Bee sandaracha; and
breeds in holes of old posts, diverse near one another, we may call her the
glistring Be.

There is another sort of Wild-Bee which is very laborious, she is not so great
as a Hive-Bee by a third part, but in shape and making altogether like her, the
mouth opens side-ways, wherewith she holds very fast, like pinchers, her hinder
legs are of a tawny color, the ringles of her hinder part gray, the rest of a
bluish black, her forepart is partly black, and partly gray, she uses to
abide (if my memory deceive me not) in Brick-walls, in holes in the mortar
between the Bricks, many neat one another; we may call her the Mortar-Bee.

There is another sort not half so great as the former, but grayer, she diggs
or mines perpendicularly into stiff clay ground in Highways, or Foot-path
sides, the earth that she works out, lies round about her hole like the casting
of a Worm, but much siner; after she has entered three inches right down, she
makes traverse holes one under another, sometimes two, sometimes three in
breadth, as several cells, or chambers where she breeds her young, which are not
Worms at first, but have a perfect shape of a Be, herein concurring with the
Queen-bee, and though she be laborious, and gathers much Bee-bread, yet could I
never find any thing provided beforehand, or laid up in any cell, but all is
consumed by the young, of which I have found near forty belonging to one
downright hole (not come to maturity, and maintained by one) all in several
cells or Partitions one above another, the transverse holes being open to the
downright, that so they may be visited and fed by the breeding or Mother-Bee,
which confirms my former assertion of the old Bees feeding the young. This
sort of Be is very Political, living by hundreds, nay thousands near one
another, but each in a distinct mansion, we call them the Earth-Bee.

There is another s^r: about the length of a Hive-Bee, but broader and greater
made, like a small Humble-Bee, but differing in color, she has a round head,
broad face, with long horns on the head, a ring of yellow turning upwards,
above the mouth the chaps are indented, and hold like Pincers, the back and
head are of a dark ^usset, six dew-clawed feet of a light brown, she has four
wings, her nether part is of a dark black, with five yellow spots on either
side of the edges of every ringle, she has a broad tail; this kind copulates
often openly, while she is at work all the Summer; she pur^es, or darts too and
fro as she gathers, without a Sting, makes a louder and clearer sound than the
Hive-Bee.

There is also a smaller sort of this kind, in nothing differing but in the
magnitude, these breed in clay-walls of houses and b^rns, in holes in the clay
which they make many together, like several inhabitants to make a Town, but
each has her peculiar house, or hole.

There is another sort of wild Be, altogether as long as a Horne^, but the
nether part not above half so great; it has eight ringles, the three next the
incision of a shining black, the four next toward the tail, which grow all
less one then the other downwards, of a light Orange, and the tail of a bright
brown, the forepart and wings (which are but two) and belly are of an Orange
color, the head not very round, the mouth piked, or like a Birds bill, but the
lower chap longer than the upper, which opens not sidewaies as other Bees, but
one over the other, two short horns on the head, but two wings orange colored,
somewhat shorter than the body, six dew-clawed feet of an Orange color
likewise, she buzzeth not so loud and smart as the Scarabee, she lives by
foot-path sides, and bare places of fields, of a quick sight, and not easily
taken, without a sting, copulates frequently, feeds on Flies and Grasshoppers,
and this observe as a general rule, that few of those sorts that have but two
wings gather Bee-bread; I might describe diverse others, but not being able to
recite any particulars of them, I will not trouble the Reader any longer.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Waspe.
A Waspe is a flying oblong Insect with four wings, of a bright Ash Color, the
two inmost neither half so long, nor so large as the out-most, six yellow
dew-clawed feet mixed with Chesnut-colour toward the extremities, two black
moveable horns on the head, growing on either side as high as the top of the
eyes, the head is black and hairy, the forehead divided into three yellow
spots, with a black stroke down the middle, the jaws yellow without, black at
the mouth, the jaws has not the solidity of a bone, but is like a strong
gristle, indented like a Saw, the back is for the most part of a shining black,
and the belly also, the nether part is a bright yellow in the scales, but
black bars, in the opening of the upper scale, the black in largeth it self
toward the middle of the scale; and lastly, she has a venomous spear where
with she will prick often (contrary to the Be) for it is not barbed.

The Waspes Nest is begun of one, not many mother Waspes or breeders as some
imagine; the mother Waspes go not abroad after they have b^ed many young, but
are maintained by their posterity at home; whether the old breeders continue
longer than a year Aristotle questions, and Scaliger likewise, but determine
not, it being a secret not then known; but it is apparent they continue no
longer, for their wings are worn, and thereby are they disabled for flight,
much more for breeding.

The mother Waspes have stings, and use them, and the reason Arist* de hist.
^nim. lib. 9* c* 65.
of their abode at home, is not because they are great and heavy bodied (as
some) for their wings are proportionable to their bodies, but with their much
working in the Spring, making their Nests alone, breeding and feeding their
young they wear their wings, and therefore after a while stir not abroad, but
order all at home.

The Waspes Nest is made for the most part in the ground, (sometimes in the
thatch of a house) in a hole begun by a Mouse, or Mole, not very deep, about a
foot and a half, sometimes two foot from the entrance, for the manner of their
work, making of their combs, breeding and feeding, they do almost wholly
agree with the Hornet and the Be, for Bees, Hornets, Scalig. comment. in
Arist, de hist, lib. 5. c. 19.
and Waspes are alike in all, as an Ass, Horse, and Ox, and how Hornets
breed. See Cap. 10. page 89.

The Waspes Nest is made Oval, some consist of eight combs or stories one
beneath another, fastened strongly by many peggs, or pins one to another, about
three quarters of an inch distance between comb and comb, the middle combs
are about nine inches in the Diameter, all round, and the whole involved with a
five or six doubled folding, or watered cover, yet all wrought into one entire
piece, consisting of the same matter with their combs, being greenish, russet*
and g^ay, whereas the combs are of a dark russet, with only one hole through
the middle of the cover, big enough for one Waspe to enter at once; the cover
is fastened with some pins to the ground, or roots in the earth.

The middle of each comb is somewhat Piramidall, bending upwards, and hollower
in the inside than the outward part of the comb, and the center has a very
strong pin to fasten it to the next comb, which ^uns like the axeltree or
maine post through them all, and in less space than every inch in the whole
breadth, are rows of pins, or pillasters, which fasten each comb very firmly
to the next, so that they will not easily be separated. And here in they see me
to have been exempla^s of Architecture rather than Bees, fashioning all their
combs orderly, strongly, u^efully* and comely; the pins or props are framed
broader, and bigger, both at the top and bottom, than in the middle, with two
or three butteresles both above and below, where by they hold more strongly,
and being small in the middle, less hinder their passage about the combs.

The Waspes combs are plain on the upper part, but filled and furnished with
hexangle cells downwards, the cells are not so deep, nor yet so long as the
Bees, and they are not made straight but asloop, that the young may not so
readily fall out as they would if they were directly downwards.

The seed is at first almost as small as a Mustard Seed, of a Arist. de hist.
Animal. l. 5. c. 19.
darkish white, not spherical, but oval, and they fasten it not to the bottom
of the cell ( sed ad cella latus apum more, says Aristotle) but to a corner or
angle a pretty distance above the bottom, and observe (for the most part) an
exact order in disposing of their seed, that they keep the same angles in every
cell, not one in an angle of the South Side of a cell, and another in an angle
of the North, or the East, but all in the South, so that the seed lies orderly
in rows: But if one lays her seed in the con^mry angle (as sometimes, though
seldom) then the next takes it for a rule, and it is punctually observed
perhaps through a whole range of cells.

This seed being hatched (for the manner how, see the tenth Chapter) grows a
little while by virtue of the seminal power, it sticks at one end, bending
toward the middle of the cell, but somewhat erected (or rather dejected, for
the head is downward) that it may receive food, and when it fills the breadth
of the cell, it grows loose, and falls (or to speak properly ascend^) to the
bottom of the cell, for the mouth of the cell is downwards raising it self;
and now the mouth of the worm begins to be visible, and it is daily fed, as
we noted of the Bees (for they are Insects of the same nature) but some what
degenerating; Georglus Piscatorius.
and Pliny says, in fae^u, eadem prope natura quae apibus, and grows to the
full dimension of the cell: when as we noted in the Hornet, it grow^ dull and
torpid, and refusing meat is shut up by a cover wrought over the head: But to
return back a little.

At first, after the seed is hatched, it is oval toward the head, near to the
tail there is a blackish spot; It will contract it self almost round, sometimes
as a Caterpiller, when it moves, as if it would go, for indeed the worm makes
no progressive motion.

If you break the worm, in the body is a thick watteish humor, with a harder
substance, like a black list in the middle of it, and that from end to end.

The transmutation begins to be first visible in the superior part, and the
eyes are first discerned, and the incision between the head and the shoulders,
which yet as it grows more perfect, becomes smaller, the middle incision is
scarcely visible, when the eyes may be seen, then the legs, and the horns
begin to be framed, and the wings are last finished. When they are perfect,
they thrust up the covers over their heads which hang at their backs until they
come forth.

They excern an excrement while they feed, which is contained under them in the
bottom of the cells, but as soon as the young cut their way forth, the older
Waspes carry it out of the neast.

The young Waspes (though the combs be taken out of their nensts) that are
shut up (not the other, for they must be fed, or they will dye in three or
four days) will come to life, and perfection, although slowly, because of the
small heat; but for above three weeks I have had them in a chamber successively
come to perfection.

They gather no honey, that is, make it, rob they do, but then Scaliger com. in
Arist. de hist. l. 5 c. 19. Arist. in loc. pred.
they spend it as fast as they get it, yet Scaliger says mellificant, they
begin to breed in the latter end of the Spring, contrary to Aristotle, who
says, they breed not in the Spring, but Autumn, whereas they miscarry by the
end of Autumn.

They breed first their own kind, and by the end of August, ordinarily have
fledge Drones, which are about the greatness of an old working Wasp, but
somewhat longer, whose covers they heighten above the combs when they shut them
up, but in cells no greater than the Waspes.

The Drones have no sting, they have two testicles, which on crushing are
easily discovered, and they are coated with a hard black tunicle, joined
together like a pair of breeches, sharper toward the point, but broader
upwards, and at the upper end not coated, but full of a whitish liquor; the
testicles are somewhat like, but that they are united together to the young
coated Grasshoppers whilst they are in the dams belly.

The Drones are not of so bright a yellow as the Waspes, and their moveable
horns are a great deal longer, yea longer than the mother Wasps horns, which
they spread very wide like a fork, but not right forth, widening them by
degrees, and toward the tops, bending them side-wayes.

Presently after they begin to breed Drones, they breed also mother Waspes,
which are twice, nay almost thrice as great as the Drones, these begin to
forsake the neast about a week in September, and so daily as they come to
perfection, being first made prolifical by the Drones with whom they couple.
The Drones continue in the neast, as long as the working Wasps, namely until
the wet, and cold in October puts a period to their lives. Whereas the mother
Wasps, as soon as they have engendered, with the Drones fly forth, and shroud
themselves in hollow trees, thatch, or such like places, where they lie in a
dead sleep without feeding till March, when the first warm weather revivies
them, and causes them to fly abroad, and then they feed, but if after they
have been a while abroad, the Spring be very cold and wet, they then for the
most part, miscarry, and die.

For the mother Wasps, they make larger hexangle cells in the lowest combs than
for ordinary Wasps, and also enlarge the covers above the combs near a quarter
of an inch higher than the comb, the covers and highings are very white like
fine white paper.

The young Wasps are somewhat gray at first, and after turn to a bright yellow,
and the Bees are more white at first, and after turn to a bright brown.

Aristotle doubted whether the Wasps lost their stings in Arist. de hist.
Animal. l. 9. c. 65.
Winter; while they are in a deep, or dead sleep, they exercise them not, but
revive them by a fire, or in your warm hand, and you may experimentally affirm
the contrary. That they did copulate, Aristotle; acknowledges, but whether the
male and female, both had stings, he professes that he was ignorant.

Waspes are a kind of Canibals, for they rob from all, and eat not the Bees
provision only, but the Bees themselves, nay they will eat the young Wasps of
another neast.

Once, Waspes are very strong, and daring creatures, especially near their
neast, not fearing to anger, nay to injury the most mighty. The Poet elegantly
thus expresses it. Spencers visions of the worlds vanity.


A mighty Lion, Lord of all the wood,
Having his hunger thoroughly satisfied
With prey of beasts, and spoil of living blood
Safe in his dreadless den him thought to hide?
His sternness was his praise, his strength his pride,
And all his glory in his cruel claws:
I saw a Wasp* that fiercely him defide,
And bad him battle oven to his jaws.
Sore he him stung, that it the blood forth draws,
And his proud heart is filled with fretting ire,
In vain he threats, his teeth, his tail, his paws,
And from his bloody eyes does sparkle fire.
That dead himself he wishes for despig^t,
So weakest may annoy the most of might.
CHAP. XXIX. Of the Hornet.
A Hornet is a flying Insect, more than twice as great as a common Wasp, with
four wings, the inmost smaller, and not so long as the utmost by a third part.
For shape she is like a Wasp, but differs in color: All the back wings, and
belly, legs, and horns are of a bright Chestnut color, and some part also below
the division in the middle, and then yellow scales, and Chesnut-coloured
openings, or bars with spots on either side of every yellow scale, on the
upper-side but more Chesnutcoloured on the under-side* Her forehead is of an
iron color, in the middle of her for-head is a yellow spot like a heart, on
either side whereof grows her moveable horns, on the outside are her eyes
oblong, and a little prominent, her face is a yellow square like a plate, her
cheeks or jaws are yellow without, and black in the mouth; her jaws are a very
bone indented like a saw, more thick toothed, and siner than a Grasshoppers,
contrary to Aristotle, and Pliny also, who affirm of all Insects, that they
have Arist de hist. animal. l. 4. c. 1.
no boniness in any part, whereas a Hornets jaw, and also a great Grashopper^,
are a sold bone without, and within of an equal hardness.

Hornets have no fangs, their tongue is divided into small fibers: Their
breathing is visible, cut off one of their heads, and you shall see (a while)
on expulsion out of the neck of a whitish moisture, and then drawn in again, at
first very strongly, and then with more weakness, and at last ceasing, yet life
continuing in either part of the divided body above an hour.

A Hornets intrals is contracted in the body, but extended, is as long as the
body, they have a very large cavitie in the end of the tail, out of the middle
of it, the sting is extended and drawn in also as they please, it is not hollow
(as some think) that I could discern; near to the tail I found in dissecting a
Hornet (and never but once) a white egg as great as a lentill, and just such a
one as I have seen in the combs, but never dissecting diverse Bees, and Wasps
could I find any, nor yet in Hornets (excepting one) perhaps they are very
small (if at all) and quickly grown, and suddenly ejected.

Some suppose them to be bred of a horse: Cardan of dead Cornel. Agrippal. de
occult. Philos. Arist. de hist. Animal. l 9. c. 66.
Mules: Virgil of Asses: Plutarch of a rotten horse; and so also some conceit
Waspes are bred, but with us they are bred for the most part by generation: Of
their copulation Aristotle was ignorant, they breed most commonly in hollow
trees, in thatch, or in houses, in empty Bee-hives, rarely (but sometimes) in
the ground: For the manner of their breeding, see the tenth Chapter, and the
former Chapter of Waspes, with whom for the making of their combs, hatching and
feeding their young, they do altogether agree, they are not so prolifical as
the Wasps, for their combs are never larger, and the cells being much greater
of necessity, they must breed fewer: Their stinging is very dangerous, but
otherwise they are not so mischievous as the Wasps, for though they sometimes
kill a Be, yet they rob not the Hives, they feed on flesh and fruits, and most
of all of ashen trees, feeding of the bark, making the boughs whiter, and in
Autumn gather plentifully of the Ivy, contrary to Aristotle, and others, who
assert, they gather of no flowers, and herein to differ both from Bees and
Waspes.

They sting dangerously, some creatures deadly, Dr. Penny reports, that being
at Peterborough in a public street of the Penni^s apud Muffetum de Insect. l.
1. c. 9.
City, he saw a Hornet pursue a Sparrow, whom at last she struck with her
sting, and therewith presently killed her, and filled her self with the dead
Sparrows blood, to the astonishment and wonder of many beholders.

It is reported by Aristotle, as a strange and almost incredible thing, of
certain Mice in Persia, which being dissected, great with young, those young
not yet kindled, have been gravid, whereas in Hornets and Wasps there is a
greater marvel, for the breeders coupling in Autumn, continue to be prolifical
in the Spring, and the young bred of them, not only in the first, but in the
third and fourth generation have a procreative power from their great
Grand-mothers copulation.

The water of distilled Hornets, or Waspes, or wherein Bil. ca ^t. 7. 17.
they have been boiled, if it do but touch the skin, the place will swell so,
that there will be the symptoms of a dropfie, or poison, or some great
distemper; but Treacle drunk or anointed on the place, is a cure without any
pain; with this Harlots and Beggars deceive the most circumspect and wary, as
if they were with child.

One thing more which I had almost forgot: If the hole in the tree wherein they
breed be large, when they be numerous, they will work it up (all but a small
passage for entrance) with the same matter whereof they make their comb^.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Humble-Bee.
THe Humble-Bee is of various magnitudes and colors, some greater, but shorter
than a Hornet; others as little, but rounder and shorter than a Be. All of
them are very hairy, they have two horns, very strong indented jaws, wherewith
they hold or bite very hard. Some have their heads cole-black, the upper part
of the back yellow, the lower part black, they have four wings, the belly all
black. In the nether part first a division or ringle of shining black without
hair, then a ringle of pale yellow hairy, then a ringle of black, and so black
to the tail, but thick and full of light gray hairs, that it seems gray,
she has six legs with scabrous feet. They carry their Beebread on their legs,
as the Hony-Bee, but no wax, as Scaliger, Plin. Not. hist. lib. 11. cap. 22.
Pliny and others, whether they carry the matter of their combs on their
thighs, I am not certain, but believe it, for they gather only on flowers, but
the Hornet and Waspe carry it in their mouth.

They breed says Aristotle, on the ground among stones, Arist. de hist.
Animal. l. 9. c. 67.
and have two or three entrances to their neast, but it is not so; but they
breed either upon the ground, in the long grass, most commonly in Meadows, and
spared lays, or else in a hole in the ground, much deeper than the Wasps: all
their neast is covered; nay environed with moss.

Aristotle and Pliny are very brief in the history of them, and therefore very
obscure; some imagine the reason hereof was because their nature was well
known, but I rather conclude, because they knew little, or nothing of them.
Sc^liger Comment. in Arist. de hist. l. 9. c. 66.
And it is very evident because they confound the Silkworms, and the
Humble-Bees under the name Bombyx, and Scaliger also as it appears knew little
of them.

The nethermost ringles of the black Humble-Bee, are as black as jeat, clear
and shining; nay more transparent, for it will reflect an image, but the many
long hairs, except it be near at hand, nay in your hand, do somewhat obscure
it.

It seems they are very rare, and scarce known in Italy, for Aldrovandus
glories in a ^east of Humble-Bees that was found by his Apothecary gathering
simples, and Aldrovand* de* Insectis, l. 1. c. 4.
brought to him (as he says) not only to delight him with a novelty, but to
communicate as a secret of nature to posterity.

He supposes them a kind of wild Be, and propounds it as a Q^ery, whether
John Baptist in the wilderness lived not with their honey?

Aldrovand. supposes wax may be had out of their combs; but this he borrowed
from Aristotle, who says, Arist. de hist. Animal. l. 5. c. 19.
they make wax, but paler than Bees, but melt the combs, if you can.

Their combs are oblong cells as big as Acorns, but not altogether so long,
clustering together (one somewhat higher than another, somewhat like a bunch of
grapes inverted, sixteen or eighteen joining together (and then another like
comb lying close, but not fastened to it, and so another) of a dark yellow,
which (if after they have bred their young) they fill with Bee-bread, and some
with honey; their honey is of a bright yellow, very sweet, but not so pleasant as
the Bees, having a rank taste (occasionally) from the ground, their combs are
not wax (as before) though gathered of the flowers, they are as tough brown
paper, but not of so dark a color, broken, they show like Iapan paper made of
Cotton, woolley.

They engender with thei^^ ayls opposite one to another, in the mean time
resting on some plant, or the stump of a tree, they continue long in venery,
and while they copulate, often clap their wings, and make a shrill noise; their
mates they choose in the Nest, and are carried away by them. These as other
Insects before described, after they have done breeding of Females, about the
end of August, breed Drones for the propagation of their kind.

It is remarkable, that though the cells or pipes wherein they breed are of a
like magnitude, yet the Humble-Bees in the same Nest are of various magnitudes,
some more than twice as great as others, herein differing from Bees and Waspes,
which continued in the same dimensions that they were first Metamorphosed into,
only when they are strong and lusty, seem somewhat fuller and plumper, but
when they grow old, then they grow lank and wither; whereas the Humble-bees,
many of them double their first magnitude.

They are very laborious and hardy Creatures, working in such weather when the
Bees dare not, and continuing it many weeks, after Hornets and Waspes are laid
up, or miscarried.

There is another kind of great Humble-Bee, in the forepart exactly agreeing
with the former description, but the nether part is altogether of a shining
black, and not so hairy as the former, it is sharp pointed at the tail, and
has but one cavity, out of the which comes a sting, which grows out of the
under part of the tail, and is forked like a Snakes tongue, having two points
forth-right, not barbed like a Bees, so that it stinges more than once; there
are two covers on either side of the sting to keep it close and safe, and these
are as long as the sting, but bigger, rougher, and spreading on the top, I
conceive to hold the sting in, in the act of generation; there are six
partitions or ringles on the neither part, and on the outsides, especially of
the fourth and fifth golden colored hairs.

The Humble-Bee first described, astords some special rarities not observed by
any, and therefore I must return to her again. In the tail being opened, is a
double cavity or hole, the one (if I mistake not) for generation and
partur^tion, and the other for the evacuation of excrements; in the nether
part (dissecting it) I found as in a Hive Be, a bladder to which adjoyns the
entral, not so white as in a honie-Bee, then you shall have (as I have often
found) their young (but one visible at once) which are not excluded, torpid,
and liveless eggs, but live and grow in the dammes belly; I have found some as
large as great Tares (like the Worms in the combs) so that all the parts of
the Worm are very visible, and these have lived after I have cut them out some
hours, and would continually contract and gather themselves into a ^ound, and
then again extend themselves, but were not able to make any progressive motion*
being without feet.

In the breast I perceived a little thing to pant, and beat a great while after
I severed it from the lower part at the incision, when I after, opened the
breast, I found four several parts like several members, but I was not able (my
sight being weak) to distinguish one member from another, but concluded there
was a heart, liver, and lungs, all were reddish, but some parts were more red
than others.

Under the horny tunicle of the eye is a white moisture, and something white
likewise, like brains in the middle of the head; her tongue is drawn so close,
partly under her neck, and partly into her mouth, that it is scarcely visible,
but when she works; being dead, I found it much longer than a Bees, as long as
a Barley corn; she has two fangs, on either side one, the tongue at the root
is as great as a small pin, underneath of a black color to the middle, where
it is divided into three parts, two shorter on either side, and a longer in the
middle, so that it has a triple tongue; this sort that breed their young
within them, are without a sting; on their bellies near the roots of their
legs, are little round reddish creatures, with very long horns, with six
legs, which run very quick and swift, which (I believe) are a kind of Lice
proper to them; their tail stretched out, is very like their mouth, being as
it were a complement of claws meeting in a round, and this is proper to this
kind without a sting, which I therefore call the Claw-tailed Humble-Bee.

Those which breed a living creature within them, after a sort produce it
egg-fashion, for it is covered with a thin membrane Arist. de generat. Animal.
l. 3. c. 9.
like the shell of an egg, but I discerned no such membrane encircling the worm
in this Humble-Bee.

This gray Humble-Bee in the tail is somewhat broad, and has two circular
horny claws, or pincers not visible, till they be drawn out, and within them
two other shorter but not circular.

Some creatures says Bodinus, conceive eggs within them, Bodinus Theatrum
naturae l. 3.
and there hatch, and bring forth a living creature as the Viper, and all kind
of Whales, but neither he, no^ any other mentions this Humble-Bee.

Whatsoever says Aristotle, brings forth a living creature and Arist. de
hist. l. 2. c. 6.
not first an egg, has breasts, and all that have breasts, have paps or
nepples except the Dolphin, which has two pipes, on either side one, which the
young ones suck: The Philosopher, and Scaliger his Commentator, except not the
Viper, no^ the Slow-worm, because they perhaps concluded, that they hatched the
young of analogical eggs within the dams belly; I am sure they ought to have
excepted this kind of Humble Be as also that Fly that we spoke of before
out of Scaliger.

How they order their young after they be excluded, I cannot yet determine,
for I have not found any of their neasts, since I observed this particular.

The Cells or Pipes wherein the young are bred, are not flat at the top as the
Bees and Waspes, but oval, and are all of one matter and color, whereas the
covers of the Wasps and Hornets are, though of the same substance, yet whiter
and fiuer.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Grasshopper.
IN the production of no creatures is nature more serious, or rather more
wanton than in Grasshoppers, who is able to describe their various colors? or
the diverse forms of their bodies, or can exactly report their walking, leaping,
flying? With us some are green, some tawney, some russet, in Ethiopia red and
yellow, in Africa white.

One has written a Tractate of seven kind of Locusts or Fran. St^^ca^. de
sc^tem generibus locust*
Grasshoppers according to the Scriptures, and Rabbis; and yet mentions, not
those four kinds enumerated among clean creatures, and allowed the Jews for
food, namely Arbeth a most prolifical kind of Grasshopper, which therefore had
this Levit. 11, 22.
name according to Kimchi and Broughton. The second kind is Solaam by the
Seventy, (...), Hieron calls it a Scarabee, but not rightly, for it is a swift
creature, going on the four forefeet, and leaping with the two hindmost which
are longer than the others. The third sort is Chargol, which in our Bible is
translated a Beetle, but there is a great difference between Beetles and
Grasshoppers, the Greeks, translate it (...), for it fights with a Serpent, and
strangles it, as both Aristotle and Pliny record; and Maiolus in his Colloquies
tells us, That his Gardener returning from work, saw one of these Grasshoppers
conflicting with a Serpent, which at last it killed. And therefore Niphus was
too bold to translate it a Scolopendra, or Aspe, when as the Philosopher calls
it a Grasshopper, and the Arist. de hist. Animal. l. 9. c. 6.
Seventy translate it a Locust. The fourth kind is called Chagol, the Greeks
call it (...). It is a cruel devourer, not only consuming the fruits, but
stalks, nay barks of trees.

In the Scripture we find five other kinds, Gaza from shaving* Iel^k from
licking, Chasil from destroying, Thela^sal from rust, which it occasions to the
fruits, and Chenamal from staying, Rhodulph Medius in Levit.
because it never willingly forsakes its place. Modius on Joel, and Levit*
reckons up various kinds of the first sort called Ar^eth.

Moreover in the month of May, out of a ^spittle that hangs upon herbs is
produced a green winged creature, in shape very like the little Grasshopper, it
leaps, and after flies. We use to call the frothy matter wherein they are bred
Wood-se^r, that is the corruption of the woods; I know not the reason of the
name; others call it Cuckow-spittle.

In Norw^y it often rain^s a little four footed beast, as great ^^ a Rat, of
various colored hair, which feeds of all green things Scaliger de Sub^^^.
exerci^at. 1^2.
like Grasshoppers. When their food fails they dye, and the air being corrupted
with their stenth, causes to the inhabitants Meg^^ms, and the Kings-evill.
They call it Lemmer; this though not properly a Grasshopper, yet like them very
destructive.

Of what form was the (...) of Suidas, the (...) of C^lius, the (...) of
Ni^ander, (...) of Hes^cbius, (...) of Aristophanes, (...) of Eusta^bius, (...)
and (...), of Phavorinus, Lud^loc^r^, of Fsid^r^, and many many others
mentioned by authors differing one from another, but yet not fully described,
much less their natures, so that we need an Oedipus to reveal, and discover
them.

A Grasshopper has two very moveable horns, as long as the whole body, on
either side ^f the jaws two short ones; It has two broad lips shutting flat
on the other, and two lesser that shut side-wayes, all which together close the
mouth, and the head, with the lips closed, somewhat resembles a horses head. It
has two round prominent eyes; Nigidius denied that they saw at all, as Pliny
records, when as they have clear and glassie eyes, yet covered with a horny
tunicle (the eyes are not moveable) Plin. Not. hi^^, ^. ^1. c. 37.
there is a visible Pupilla, six feet, the hindmost as great, and as long again
as the foremost to leap withal, and raise it self up, with two joints in every
one, near their setting on to the breast, these two are very near one to the
other. They have also a joint in the middle, the upper part as the thigh
greater at the top, and smaller downwards, and smoothe. The lower parts (which
are their legs) rough and scabrous, and several pliable joints in the feet,
and as it were visible toes, which are rough and dewclawed. A long smooth tail
more than half the length of the body, sharp-pointed, and two short little
tants, or pricks growing near the end of the tail, pointing toward the
extremity of it.

When you hold it by the wings, though it neither stirs, no^ strives, yet shall
you both see and feel the whole body beat and pant, ^s also when it creeps, or
stands still, although not so much, lest of all when it is in motion. It has
four large wings, but the under wings lie folded or doubled, which deceived
Willichius, who unwarily beholding them, took them to be Jodocas Willichius in
suo de Locustis dia^ lo^o,
several, and therefore published that they have six wings; the under wings
being open, they are very fine and membranous, near an inch broad, spreading
like a sail; the upper wings are crusty or shelly.

It has as it were, a scaly Gorget, from the head to the incision or back. The
back is more hard and shelly than the belly, and has several semicircular
equidistant strakes down to the belly. The belly is very soft and white on
either side, all along to the tail, and green in the middle.

On the breast are sharp pricks six in number according to the legs, against
each leg one. When the head is severed from the body, the jaws, the lips, the
horns, all move, but the head dies sooner than the rest of the body. The body
will leap a great while after the head is off. In the stomach is a thick ju^cy
moisture. The breast being opened, first appears the heart, and then other
large members, one like the liver of a reddish color, another less and grayer,
which I suppose to be the lungs. In the belly I have not found fewer than
eighty young ones, in some one hundred. They grow quickly as great as Ant-eggs,
and as long, they are first yellow and soft, full of a yellowish moisture, then
ruby, then of a tawny color, when after a certain space this softer tunicle
hardens into a shining black coat, or shell, long and flattish, and these
alterations are all in the same Grasshopper, for in some you shall find all
without coats, in others, some with coats, and some with none at the same time.

They have three black teeth in either jaw, the teeth and jaw are one piece,
and of a bony substance. In the head is a manifest brain, or at least somewhat
equivalent.

Some Grasshoppers have not the long prick at the tail, but two tants above and
two shorter underneath, and some have stumps instead of wings, but howsoever
they variously differ in their externals, yet in all that I have dissected are
alike, the vitals indeed, and other particulars, are not so visible in the
smaller, as in the greater.

Grasshoppers copulate after the manner of other Insects, the less ascending the
greater; for the male is the lesser. They disclose Arist. de hist. Animal. ^^^.
c, ^8.
their eggs on the earth, fastening a pipe which they have at their tail to it.
The males have none: All lay their eggs together in one place, so that they
make a kind of comb, but not on the superficies of the earth, but a little
underneath, then the form of them as they were first produced, being changed
out of that earthy cover, appear little and black Grasshoppers, and after the
skin being broken on every side, they become greater, they bring forth their
eggs in Autumn, and presently being delivered of them perish, for there breed
certain worms about their necks which strangles them says Pliny, which eat
through them, says Scaliger, and the males also dye; they are quickened, and
come from under the earth in the Spring.

Grasshoppers b eed not much on mountainous, or squallid moist lands, but in
Champion grounds which are apt to chap, for they lay their eggs in the chaps
and cranies, out of which, Winter being past, in the beginning of the Summer
following, of such eggs as are alive, come the Locusts or Grasshoppers.

They copulate thus, the male ascending the female, puts in ^r. V^l^riola.
those two tants or pricks that are eminent in the end of the back, by turning
back of the tail into the females womb, and they are very long and closely
joined together, that they can scarce be severed, neither yet by leaping or
motion, no nor yet without difficulty with your hands.

The female in her venery, moves her belly earnestly, and closes in the lower
part to the male, and holds him very long, sometimes with the opening of her
womb, sometimes with a strait shutting of it, making her dalliance more
delightful; for while her womb opens, the male more deeply insinuates himself
to the bottom of i^, and when it is contracted, is more delighted with the
pleasure of it.

There are seen two passages in the females privity severed each from other,
and covered with a thick coat, it is black on the outside, and hard and
cart^laginou^* but within seems somewhat rough and scabrous, with certain
wrinkles. At the bottom of this covering, the womb growing white, is like a
woman's privy parts. The male after copulation dies; For by a long continued use
of venery, they spend all their radical moisture and spirits also. The females
after they have brought forth either by the violence of the pain, or multitude
of their young, whereby their strength is consumed, perish likewise; or as
Aristotle by little Lice which breed in their necks, and as Pliny says,
strangle them, as Scaliger, eat into them and kill them.

They fly over large Seas, continuing diverse days together in their flight,
and make such a noise with their wings, that they seem to be Fowls, and shadow
the very Sun.

They infest Italy oftentimes out of Africa, consuming all with their bitings,
and with their black, sharp, and burning excrements, and with a sharp slaver,
which they in eating let fall out of their mouths, yet are they not poison, for
both the Par^hians and Ethiopians feed of them.

Willichius assigns them a King, and a Monarchy, but Solomon Proverb. 30* 27
denies it, saying, That they have no King, yet go they forth all by bands, but
though they be sine rege and lege, yet have they a conspiring agreement to do
mischief.

When they wasted Gaul 852. they marched in the air twenty miles a day in an
ordered battle, and formed squadrons, and when they fell on the earth they had
their camp; the Commanders with a few went before the Army a days journey, as
it were to find out fit places to quarter in, and the very same hour that the
forerunners or harbingers came the day before, the whole Troops came the day
after; before the rising of the Sun they stirred not from the place where they
settled, but the Sun being risen, they marched, or flew away in their orderly
Regiments.

Cuspinian observes the same, in the same Country, in the year Cuspinianus.
874. but with this difference, that they marched then but four or five miles a
day.

Of Locusts there are sometimes seen such monstrous swarms I. Leo hist. of
Africa l. 9.
in Africa, that in flying they intercept the Sun beams like a thick cloud.
They devour trees, leaves, fruits, and all green things growing out of the
earth.

At their departure they leave eggs behind them, whereof other young Locusts
are bred, which in the places where they are left, will eat, and consume all
things, even to the very bark of trees.

Their coming is known by the discoloring of the fields long Scaliger
exercitat, 192.
before, for they shine by reflection.

Before the birth of Christ, about a 170. years, the Pastures Julius Obsequens.
of Italy, were covered as it were with clouds of Grasshoppers, and about Cap^a
a hundred years together.

In the Consulship of Marcus Pla^tius Hypsaeus, and Marcus Fulvius Flaccus,
Africa scarce breathing from bloody Paulus Or^sius contra pag^. nos, l. 5* c.
11.
wars, an horrible and extraordinary destruction ensued. For whereas now
throughout all Africa, infinite multitudes of Locusts were gathered together,
and had not only quite devoured the corn on the ground, and consumed the herbs
with part of their roots, and the leaves, and tender boughs of the trees, but
had gnawn also the bitter bark, and dry wood, being with a violent and sudden
wind hoisted aloft in mighty swarms, and carried along time in the air, they
were at length drowned in the African Ocean. Whose loathsome and pu^rified
carcasses being by the waves of the Sea cast up in huge heaps far and wide
along the shore, bred an incredible stinking and infectious smell: whereupon
followed so general a pestilence of all living creatures that the corrupt
bodies of fowls, cattle, and wild beasts dissolved by the contagion of the
air, augmented the fury of the plague. But how great and extraordinary a death
of men there was, I cannot but tremble to report: For in Numidia where Micipsa
was then King, dyed fourscore thousand persons (in the Kingdom of M^ssinissa
according to Eutropius, if I mistake not, eight hundred thousand.) And upon the
Sea*coast next adjoining to Carthage and Utica, above two hundred thousand are
said to have perished. Yea in the City of Utica it self were by this means
swept from the face of the earth thirty thousand brave soldiers, which were
appointed to be the Garrison for all Africa. And the destruction was so sudden
and violent, that out of one gate of Utica, in one and the same day, were
carried above fifteeen hundred dead corpses, of those lusty young gallants.

In the Reign of Basilius the Emperor, the Eastern parts were Georgius Ced^enus
hist. Compend.
consumed by Grasshoppers, that the inhabitants were forced to sell their
children, and at last to pass into Thrace. But afterward a vehement wind
carried them into the H^llesp^nt, where they were drowned and cast up on the
sands which they covered, and prodigiously lived again of themselves, and
wasted all the Countries adjoining, and Thrace, especially three years together.

In May 1350. an innumerable multitude of Grasshoppers F^zellus do ^ebu^ siculis.
of an unwonted greatness, and uncertain original, appeared in the Province of
Catana in Sicllia, which consumed Corn, Vineyards, Woods, Gardens, and Trees,
both domestic and wild, and consumed their barks to the very roots every
where in one day, and then by a sudden wind were carried into the Ionian Sea,
and there drowned; but being after cast upon the Si^^lian shore, caused by
their stink a cruel plague in July following.

Swarms of Grasshoppers came out of Africa into Italy, and also into France
1353. and also 1374. causing such a famine and plague, that the third part of
the people perished, and they O^h^ ^risingensis.
had most of them six wings, and at last were hurried with a violent wind into
the Brit^ish Ocean.

About Misnia, 1543. there were so many Grasshoppers Iacobus Ekcelius.
that they covered the ground about a cubit thick.

In all the Dominions of Prete Ianni is a very great and F^an. Al^r^^* Ethiop.
Hist. ^ cap. 32. and 33*
horrible Plague, which is an innumerable company of Locusts, which eat and
consume all the Corn and Trees, and the number of these Creatures is so great,
as it is incredible, and with their multitude they cover the earth, and fill
the air in such wise that it is a hard matter to be able to see the Sun; and if
the damage which they do were general through all the Provinces of Prete
Ianni, they would perish with Famine, and it were impossible to inhabit the
same, but one year they destroy one Province; sometimes in two or three of
these Provinces, and wheresoever they go, the Country remains more ruinate
and destroyed, than if it had been set on fire.

These Vermin are as great as a great Grasshopper, and have yellow wings, we
know of their coming a day before, not because we see them, but we know it by
the Sun, which shows his beams of a yellow color, which is a sign that they
draw near the Country, and the ground becoming yellow, through the light which
reverberateth from their wings, whereupon the people become suddenly as dead
men, saying, we are undone, for the Locusts come.

During our abode in the Town of Baru^, we saw the sign of the Sun, and the
shadow of the earth, which was all yellow, whereat the people were half dead
for sorrow; the next day, the number of these Vermin which came was
incredible, covering four and twenty miles in compass.

At another time we traveled five days journey, through places wholly wast
and destroyed, wherein M^llet had been sown, which had stalks as great as
those which we set in our Vineyards, and we saw them all broken and beaten
down, as if a Tempest had been there, and this the Locusts did; the trees were
without leaves, and the barks of them were all devoured, and no grass was there
to be seen, for they had eaten up all things, and if we had not carried
Victuals with us, we and our cattle had perished.

This Country was all covered with Locusts without wings, and they told us,
that those were the seed of them which had eaten up all, and that as soon as
their wings were grown, they would seek after the old ones, and the number of
them was infinite.

While we abode in a place called Aquate, at another time came such an infinite
swaime of Locusts, as it is incredible to declare, they began to come about
three of the clock in the afternoon, and ceased not till night, and as they
came they lighted, and the next day in the morning they began to depart, so
that by nine of the clock there was not one of them left, and the trees
remained without leaves.

The same day and hour there came another squadron of them, and these left
neither bough nor tree unpilled, and so they continued for the space of five
days, and they said they were young ones which went to seek the old ones, and
they did the like, where we saw them that were without wings, and the compass
which these Locusts took, was nine miles, wherein was neither leaves, nor barks
on the trees.

This Country seemed not to be burnt up, but rather to be covered with snow,
by reason of the whiteness of the trees, which were all pilled, so that all the
Country remained bare.

At such times the people depart from their own Country, so that we have found
all the ways full of men and women, traveling on foot with their children in
their arms, and upon their heads, going into other Countries, where they might
find food, which was a pitiful thing to behold.

Once, Eutyopius makes mention of great Locusts, which Eutropius l. 4
were seen not far from the Roman Territory, so formidable, and such devourers,
that the inhabitants were frighted with the beholding of them, so that we must
conclude that these small creatures have a chief place among Gods Troops and
Armies. If Pharaoh ask, Who is the Lord? Not Angels, not Men, nor yet fierce
Lions, and Tigers, but devouring Grasshoppers shall be his challengers and
conquerors, and ask, Who is Pharaoh?

They are all females if we believe Vincentius, and Albertus, Vincentius
as the Scarabees all males. Great droughts produce them, at least cause a
prodigious increase of them, 1553. after five years drought, were great Armies
of them; And Paulus Draco^us reports that in the tenth year of Mauritius the
Emperor after a great drought from January to September, there were infinite
multitudes of Locusts, which two years caused a great famine in Italy, by
consuming corn and fruits, and 1542. an innumerable multitude of Locusts
overspread a great part of Europe, at first they wanted wings (being it seems
produced by the drought) after they had two, and then four, and having wasted
one place, went unto another, leaving a terrible stink after Cornelius Gea^^a.
them wheresoever they had been, but at last with Autumns cold were destroyed.

Their extraordinary appearance is (accounted by some) a Hieron. Mercuri^lis.
Georgius Tu^onensi^.
sign of an approaching plague, sometimes of war, for it is reported, that two
Armies passing by Clermont into the Romanaick Territory (a place in France)
there fought together, where many of of them were killed; when Clo^a^ius was
about to fight with his son Chrannus, whom overcoming, he caused to be burnt
with his wife and children.

These eaters are usually eaten by the inhabitants of Arabia deserta, and of
Lybia, who esteem their coming as a fortunate Jo. I. ^o lib. 9.
boading, for seething and drying them in the Sun, they bruise them to powder,
and so eat them.

And they were the food of John Baptist in the Desert, yet there have been
some, as Theop^ylact testifies, who understood by (...), the bud^ o^ tops of
certain herbs, o^ some kind Theophilact.
of wild fruits, in which number was Hermolaus Barbarus, who says
Chrysostom, and A^ha^osius before him, were of the same judgment; but
Chrysostom denies it, and says a Locust is a Hom. ^ in Marc.
small creature, between a flying, and ^ creeping; of which in the De^ar^s of
Iud^a were great store, they were wont to boil them in oil, and they were the
food of the poorer sort.

Augustine confirms it also, that John fed of Locusts. And August in Epist. ad
Romans
Theophilact witnesses the same, who does also interpret the eating of Locusts
allegorically, as also Orig^n.

Diodorus says that the Acrid^^agi, or the Ethiopians bordering A^aman^*
Origines, Diodorus, Siculus. lib. 3. c. 3. Strabo. Geopra^. l. 16. Solinus poly
hist. c. 43.
on the Desert that feed on Grasshoppers, are of lower stature than other men,
l^an, and exceeding black; So also. Str^b^, and adds they are of a very short
life, seldom exceeding forty.

And Solinus also takes notice that the borderers on M^urhania in a certain
season (the Spring) gather great quantities of Locusts which they salt, and
live hereof all the year, but none outlive forty years.

The Parthians of old fed of them, as Pliny* reports. And Scaliger exer^itat.
9. ^.
Scaliger says, the Sirians and Persians eat them before they have wings,
namely the young ones.

It is to be observed, that all Grashopper-eaters are of a Hieron. Mercurialis
lib. 2. v^^. lect. 20.
short life: A learned Physician enquiring what was the cause the people about
the Red Sea are troubled with boyls on their legs and arms, demands if it be
from the air, or the region, or their food, concludes peremptorily it was from
their food. And Diodorus affirms that certain people with frequent eating of
Diodorus l. 3. cap. 3.
Locusts, were not only short lived, but much anguished, and at last consumed,
not only with boyls (mentioned before) but with Agatharsis.
a cruel kind of winged lice, of which one gives a full relation. At the
Vernal equin^x when the South-west-winds blow from an uncertain place, an
incredible number of great Locusts are brought, which in flying differ little
from birds, but much in the shape of their bodies. With these Locusts salted
and otherwise prepared, the people live, they are excellent for footma^ship,
but feeding of so dry nourishment, they live not beyond the fortieth year, for
then they dye, if not before, a miserable death, for a certain kind of winged
lice is bred in their bodies, like unto. Dog-flyes, but somewhat less. They
begin at the breast and belly, and in a short space eat off all the skin of the
face. Some of them are like Lepers, and gievously scratch themselves, and the
disease still continuing, and these vermin increasing, their humors are spent,
and they extremely tormented, till at length they be killed and consumed by
them.

CHAP. XXXII. Of American Bees.
IN the West Indies the Bees are small, about the bigness of Gonc^lo Fernandes
de O^^edo natural^y general ^storia de la Indias. c. ^o.
Flies, or somewhat greater, and the points of their wings cut overthwart, and
have through the middle of the wing, one white line across. They have no sting.

They make great Hony-combs, and the holes in them are four times greater than
the cells of our European Bees, although they be much smaller, their honey is
good and wholesome, but it is very dark, like wine being boiled.

In the Island of Coz^mel, which is near the coast of Iuea^an, Rhamusco
vo^^erzo delle Indie l. 17. c. 1.
there are many Hives of Bees like those of Spain, but less, and much honey, and
wax, the honey is like the Spanish honey, but somewhat sharper.

In the Island of Hispaniola are no Bees, that ever I saw or Goncalo Fern. de
Oviedo ^e^la generale and natural historia della India l. 15 c. 3. ^^^^
Rhamul. 3 vol. P^rch^^ ^^^g. 3 part l. 5 c 3. Jo. ^coll. l. 4. c. 34.
heard of. In the firm land are very many, and of many kinds, as well as in
the form and shape of the creature, as also in the variety of the taste and
color of the honey, and difference of the wax.

But though Oviedo neither saw nor heard of any, yet are there ^^es in
Hispaniola, but as small as Flies, which sting not; their hives are four times
as great as ours, their honey is white.

In the Indies are few swarms of Bees (he understands domestic Bees, which
then were rare, but now in many places common.

Their Hony-combes are found in trees, or under the ground, and not in Hives as
in Castile. The Hony-combes, which I have seen in the Province of Char^^s,
which they call Chiguanas are of a gray color, and have little juice, and are
more like unto sweet straw, then to Hony-combes. The Bees are little like, unto
Flies, the honey is sharp and black, yet in some places there is better, and the
combs better fashioned, as in the Province of Tucuman in Chille, and in
Carthagene.

In Peru, especially about the City C^rtage, are many Bees, Cronica del Peru
per Pedro de Ci^ca, c. 25
which breed in hollow Trees, and make as good Honey as the Bees in Spain;
there is one sort of Bees not much greater than Gnats, these stop up the hole,
or passage into the cavity of the tree, and by a pipe of wax as great as the
middle finger, go in and out to their labors, their Honey is thin and somewhat
sharp, they get usually about a quart of honey out of a tree.

There is another sort of Bees which are somewhat greater, and black (for the
former are white) the entrance into the tree where they work is made up (except
a passage for them) with wax, and some other mixture, whereby it is harder
than a stone, their honey is without comparison better than the former, and a
Tree will afford usually a gallon, and sometimes more.

There is another sort of Bees which are greater than the Spanish Bees, but
none of them stings but when they find that any go about to plunder them,
they will charge upon him that ^nts the tree, and hang about his hair and
beard; these greater Bees yield usually three gallons out of a tree, and it is
^a^ie better honey than any of the former.

In the Province of Guayaquil, which is not far from Quito, An^ D'Herrera
Historia general de los hechos, etc. decad. 5. lib. 10. c. 10.
they breed in Trees, and are not much greater than Flies, the Wax and the
Honey which they gather is red, and although it has a good taste, yet is it not
like to the Honey of Castile.

Near the Rivers of Vasses and Plate, the Bees are not like ours, being not
greater than the small Flies where with we a^ Maximil. Transilvanus in Epist.
ad Episcop. salisburg.
troubled in Summer; they work in Trees, and make larger combs than ours, the
extremities of their wings are blunt, as if they were cut ( Oviedo and T^evet
confirm it) or bitten off, and have in the middle of them a cross spot drawing
toward white, without stings, their wax is as black as pitch. The honey
generally of the Bees, of the new world, candies not, but is always liquid
like oil.

The Country of Mackasies 372. Germane miles from the Huldrichus Smidel.
City of Assumption in the River of Pla^e (near Pern) is so abundant in Bees,
that you shall scarce open any tree with a hatchet, where will not run out five
or six measures of pure honey; the Bees that make it are very little, and
without stings.

Aldrovandus citing Hispanus says, that in the Isle of Cumana, Petrus Hispanus.
the swarms hang on the Trees, and slow down with honey.

In Ty^ona, not far from Quito, the Indians make many conserves A. d'Hertera de
las Indi^s occid decad. 6. l. 3. c. 1^. Lin^coten. l. 3.
of honey, which is somewhat plentiful with them, and send them to sell to the
Countries round about them.

The Indians of Cumana, although their Country be well replenished, with good
bread, corn, fruits, and all kind of fish in great abundance, yet eat Bees,
Lice, Spiders, etc.

The Brasilian Bees are very unlike to ours, and dister not Hist. Navigat. in
Brasil. Letius.
much from the little black flesh Fly, which annoy us in Summer, and make
their combs usually in hollow trees; they call the honey Y^a, which they eat as
we do, their wax is as black as pitch, which they call Ye^i^, they use it not
for candles, as we do, but to stop their great Canes, wherein they keep their
feathers that they be not eaten by a kind of Butter-flye, which they call
Arovers. They come in multitudes to the fire, like Crickets, where they eat
whatsoever they find, especially they gnaw the upper part of leathern
doublets, and shoes. If we negligently reserved hens, or other food, in the
morning, we, should have only bones.

Several sorts of Bees in Brasile: Yeatee is the smallest of Mr. Joh. Stan^s*
my friend, and neighbor who lived many years in Brasil.
all the Bees that ever I have seen in the Country, and is in making much like
a gnat, but of a yellowish color, and has commonly her honey in the hollow of
a tree, either at the root, or not above three or four foot from it; it
stingeth not, and where they enter, they make a pipe of yellowish wax about
four inches long, with the mouth of it, like to the mouth of a Trumpet, the
combs are joined together like clusters of Nuts, and their honey is an excellent
ba^some, for I have had experience of it my self for the curing of very
dangerous green wounds.

Zellab, and Zellobson are the two chief sorts of Bees, and sting not at all;
the lesser is so like our Bees here in England, that I think I should not know
one from the other, the other is bigger, but yet much of the same color; they
have honey in abundance, and the further up into the Country the more plenty; I
have seen more taken out of a tree at a time than a Firkin will hold, as clear
as running water, but if drunken, it is exceeding-strong, and causes thirst,
it must be taken very moderately. They build most commonly in some hollow
bough of the tree, or else in the body of a tree, called by the Indians
Kerauvab, they have their honey in clusters of balls, much like our Humble-Bees,
and their young ones in combs which lie compassed with the balls of honey, and
in the balls you shall find some honey as it is new brought in, very thick and
dry, but taste it, it is very sour, and so some more near ripe, but not fit to
eat, until it come to be clear as water; you may see in the balls or clusters,
the color of the blossom from whence it was gathered.

There are two other sorts of Bees that are but small, and of a black color,
one sort stingeth not, but the other does; they are very like each to other,
and build about the middle of the tree, the honey of them both is much alike,
but not so good as the former, being of a darker color, and their combs are
in manner with the former, and they are called E^ete.

There are other sorts of black Bees called Erepnoh and Erepnohuson, they both
sting, and entangle much in a man's hair, the one builds in the hollow of a
tree, and the other in the branches, that which builds in the hollow of a
tree, will not suffer any man to come within two or three rods of the tree
where they are.

I never saw any of their honey, but the natives have told me, that they have
indifferent store, but it is very laxative, and breeds diseases in the eater,
as bloody flixes, etc. the other builds in the branches, and make their house
of dirt, bigger than one of our large Bee-hives, and enter at the middle of it,
their young* are as it were, in little cells or chambers, and from thence
between several layings of dirt, they have their honey, which is not very much,
but is binding.

There is another small sort of Bees, and they either build in fields, where
there are but small store of trees, and they low ones; they are of an ashy
color, and build in the branches like Erepnohs but their nest is like a film,
or skin, and of the color of the Be, they have not much honey, and have a thin
flat comb, or else they build among the Tobacoes, and from thence they take
their name, being called Tobac^v^.

I Hispaniola their Wasps are greater than ours, and sting Purch^^ Pilg. 3.
part. l. 5. c. 3. Oviedo l. 15. c. 3.
more dangerously. There are many of them, and they very poysonfull, they cause
great pain when they sting, they are like those of Castil^, but somewhat
greater, and under their wings above the yellow toward the end, have a little
Lion-like color. More Oviedo. Suma^* ^^o de la naturaly general istoria de las
Indias c. 49.
fully in another place, he says, There are many Wasps in the West Indies.
They are very hurtful and venomous, and their stinging is without comparison,
more painful than the stinging of Spanish Wasps, they are almost of the same
color, but greater, and the yellow of them is more red, and their wings are
spotted with a black color, and the points of them reddish of a burnt color.

They make very great nests, and the clusters of their combs are as large as
the combs that the Bees make in Spain, but they are dry and white inclining to
russet, they have nothing in them but their young: They breed in trees, and
also in the roofs and timbers of houses.

There are many Hornets in Hispaniola, and their stinging more torments, than
the stinging of their Wasps. Rhamusio l. 15. c. 3. torzo V^l^ Mr. John. Stanes.
^


There are two sorts of Hornets in Brasile, which the Indians call Moribundas,
the one black, and the other much of the color of them we have here in
England, but the black is bigger and longer, and stingeth violently. They make
their house like a Canopy, or much like to the top of a Bee-hive, and they are
fastened to a bough of a very high tree; so that they seldom offend any man,
unless they first offend them; but your herdsmen are sometimes much vexed with
them, in driving their cattle, they are unruly many times, they run among some
Sippoes or* Withes that run into the tree, whereby they disturb them, and then
they come down to the terror of men and beasts. Their house is open below, so
that you may stand under them, and see them go into a comb that lye^ll flat at
the bottom, much like to our Honeycomb.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Sign of the Three Crowns,
over against the Great Conduit, at the lower end of Cheapside.
A Learned Commentary, or Exposition upon the first Chapter of the second
Epistle to the Corinthians, by Dr. Richard Sibbs, published for public good by
Thomas Manton, Folio.

There is newly come forth Mr. William Fenner his Continuation of Christ's Alarm
to Drowsy Saints, with a Treatise of Effectual Calling: The Killing Power of
the Law: The Spiritual Watch: New Birth: A Christians ingrafting into Christ: A
Treatise on the Sabbath, which were never before printed, bound in one Volume,
Fol. and may be had alone of them that have his other Works, as well as bound
with all his former Works, which are now newly Printed in the same Volume with
this.

Truth brought to light, and discovered by time, or an Historical Narration of
the first fourteen years of King James, in 4o.

The Journal or Diary of a thankful Christian, wherein is contained Directions,
for the right method of keeping and using, according to the Rules of Practice;
a Day-book of National and public, personal and private passages of Gods
Providence, to help Christians to thankfulness, and experience. By John Beudle,
Minister of the Gospel at Barstone in Essex, large 8o.

Mr. Robinsons Christians Armor in large 8o.

Book of Emblems, with Latin and English verses made upon ( Lights) by Robert
Farly, small 8o.

Grace to the Humble, as preparation to the Sacrament in five Sermons by Dr.
John Preston.

Picturae Louven^es, or Pictures drawn forth into Characters, 12o.

A most Excellent Treatise containing the way to seek Heavens Glory, to fly
Earths vanity, to seat Hells horror, with godly Prayers, and the Bell-mans
summons, 12o.

Iohnsons Essays expressed in sundry Exquisite Fancies.

The one thing necessary; By Mr. Thomas Watson, Minister of Stephens Walbrook,
8o.

Sion in the House of Mourning, because of Sin and Suffering, being an
Exposition on the fifth Chapter of the Lamentations, by D. S. Pastor of
Uping^am, in the County of Rutland.

Groans of the Spirit, or the Trial of the Truth of Prayer.

A Handkerchef for Parents Wet-eyes, upon the death of their children or
friends.

The Dead Saint speaking to Saints and Sinners living, in several Treatises,
viz. On 2* S^m. 24. 10. On Cant. 4. 9* On John ^. 15. On John 1. 50. On I^a.
58. 2. On Exodus 15. 11. Never published before. By Samuel B^lton, D. D. la^e
Master of Christ's College in Cambridge.

Four profitable Treatises very useful for Christian practice, viz. The
Killing Power of the Law: The Spiritual Watch: The New Birth: Of the Sabbath.
By the Reverend William Fenner, late Minister of R^chford in Essex.

Peoples Need of a Living Pastor, at the Funeral of Mr. John Frost, M. ^. by
Mr. Za^h. Crof^on.

A Treatise against the Toleration of all Religions. By Mr. Thomas Edwards.

Chatechizing Gods Ordinance in sundry Sermons, by Mr. Zachary Crof^on,
Minister of Buttolp^s Aldgate London, the second Edition corrected and
augmented.

A Coppy-Book methodized and engraven, by Thomas Cross, wherein fair Writing
is expressed, by which one may learn to write of himself, that can but read*

Dr. Stoughtons thirteen Sermons containing the form of Sound words, and some
other Treatises.

The Godly Man's Ark, or City of Refuge, in the day of his Distress, discovered
in diverse Sermons, the first of which was preached at the Funeral of Mrs.
Elizabeth Moore. Whereunto is annexed Mrs. Elizabeth Moors Evidences for
Heaven, composed and collected by her in the timeof her health, for her comfort
in the time of sickness; By Ed. Calamy, B. D. and Pastor of the Church at
Aldermanbury.

Enchi^idion Iudicum, or Iehosaphat^ Charge to his Judges, opened in a Sermon
before the Right Honorable the Judges, and the Right Worshipful, the Sheriff
of the County Palatine of Lancaster.

Together with Catastrophe Magnatum, or King David^ Lamentation, at Prince
Abners Incineration. In a Sermon meditated on the Fall, and preached at the
Funeral of the Right Worshipful John Atherton of Atherton, Esquire High-Sheriffe of
the County Palatine of Lancaster. By John Livesey Minister of the Gospel at
Atherton.

There are going to the Press some new Pieces of Mr. William Fenners, late of
R^tchford in Essex, never yet printed, preserved by a special Providence, one
of which is a Second Part of his Wilful Impenitency; being five Sermons more
that he preached upon the 18. of Ezekiel, and the 32, verse,

FINIS.
Mr. Purchase His Theater of Political Flying-Insects.

THE Second Part. BEING Meditations and Observations, Theological, and Moral,
Upon the Nature OF BEES.

By Samuel Purchase Master of Arts, and Pastor of Sutton in Essex.

LONDON; Printed by M. S. for Thomas Parkhurst, and are to be sold at his
Shop, at the sign of the three Crowns, over against the Great Conduit at the
lower end of Cheap Side. 1657.

THE SECOND PART* Meditations and Observations, Theological and Moral, in
three Centries, upon the nature of Bees.
The first Centry.
THere is no creature but may teach a good soul one step toward his Creator.
We ought therefore to make a spiritual use of things natural, and the things
of this present life, by them raising up our minds to heavenly meditations,
and in an holy alchimie (as one says) draw gold out of lead, heaven out of
earth, grace out of nature. The world is a glass wherein we may contemplate
the eternal power and majesty of God; For the invisible things of him from
the creation of the Romans 1. 20.
world are clearly scene, being understood by the things that are made, even
his eternal power and God* head. It is that great book of so large a
character, that a man may run and read it, yea even the simplest man that
cannot read, may yet spell out of this book that there is a God. Every
shepherd has this Calender, and every ploughman this A, B, C. What the French
Poet divinely sung is thus as sweetly Englished. I. Silveste^.


The worlds a school wherein a general story,
God always reads dumb lectures of his glory.
A shame therefore for us to have earthly hearts void of spiritual meditation,
when every creature every where yields us matter enough. All of us can use the
creatures carnally, and so can beasts; the spiritual use is rare.

II.
God humbles us with ignorance in many things, not only divine but natural and
in common use, as in the Loadstones drawing of iron. In that little fish the
Remora, the stay-ship that will arrest a ship when it is going full sail In
the nature of Bees how blind are we? notwithstanding all our observation and
labor. In the production and continuance of the Queen Dr. Dike Evangel.
histories.
Be, in the generation of other Bees, and generally in the forms of all
things. A just punishment of our pride, in affecting and aspiring to knowledge
too high for us. And if there be in nature such secrets, what then in grace?
Let us not be too curious in prying into God's ark, least we smart like the
fly fluttering about the candle, for God is a consuming fire to those that
will be sporting themselves in the quirks of their wit about his sacred
mysteries. Let us wait till the life to come, and the veil shall be taken
from our eyes, in the mean time humble ignorance is better then proud
curiosity.

III.
Many have troubled themselves and others to discover the several kinds of
working Bees, whereas of working Bees in these parts of the world, there is but
one sort. And all Bees agree, if not in a just magnitude, color, and
proportion, yet certainly, in their operations, natural dispositions and
inclinations; So that our Bees and Bees in Spain and other parts make all
their combs with like hexangle cells, and are all industrious to gather honey,
although in some parts according to the Climate they are more retarded from
working then in others.

And all the Saints that are dispersed throughout the whole world, have the
same nature in them (although there be external differences) they have the
same spirit in them, though they be never so remote one from another, and never
saw one another face, yet may they know one another minds, for one mind
dwells in them. And when one mind dwells in diverse, they be of the same
disposition, one nature is common to them all.

IV.
Waspes labor not as the Bees to furnish themselves with provision for the
future, but for the most part live on spoil and rapine; and about this are as
indefatigably diligent and earnest early and late, as the painful Bees in
their profitable labors. So it is with many in the State, who in unlawful
callings, and in the maintenance of their unlawful trades do take as much
pains, nay more then some in lawful. Demetrius his example shows it, Act. 19
and the Proverb is, The belly has no ears.

V.
Many creatures have retireing places; the Bees when winter, night or storms
approach, they have their hives or dwellings in trees, they have their hideing
places. Only a wicked Dr. Sibbs, The poor man's riches.
careless man that has not acquainted himself with God, when troubles come
he has no hideing place, nor no abiding place, but lies open to the storm of
Gods displeasure* therefore he is surprised with fears and cares, and pulled
in pieces with distractions: he is a Meteor that hangs in the clouds, he cannot
tell which way to fall.

VI.
Bees are laborious and industrious in their youth, and yet dispense not with
themselves to be idle in their age, but as their skill is increased by daily
practice, so do they with incessant diligence follow their business* and that
in the most difficult and laborious taskes, being more early at their work
then the younger; and in chilling ayers when they dare not venture forth, will
they be abroad* nay when they are weak, and have over-spent bodies and ragged
wings* yet will they be abroad, although they miscarry in their labors. How
different is the practice of the men of the world? where a new broom sweepes
clean. Their first beginnings are goodly and glorious, but the Dr. Dike,
Evangel. Histories.
end is not answerable. Many are hot professors and zealous in their younger
years, but grow key-cold in their elder years; therefore Eccles. 7. The end
is better then the beginning. This deceitfulness of men is also in their
special callings. Many good Magistrates at the first, as Saul; and Ministers,
as Judas; but they are best at first, like N^buchadnezzar: image, a golden
head, and iron and clayie feet.

VII.
If a man did find an all sufficiency in God, he would never Dr. Preston, Gods
All sufficiency.
turn from him, nor seek to the creature; Even as the Be, if it did find
honey enough in one flower, would not hasten to another; but because it does
not, it goes from flower to flower. And so is the nature of man, as Solomon
expresses it, saying, that he hastened to outward things, that is, when he
fell upon one, he found not enough in it, he made have to another, and to
another. So the nature of man if it did find sweetness and comfort and
contentment enough in God, it would not turn from him to the creature, but
because in his sense the object is too narrow, there is somewhat he would have
more, he looks over the Pale as it were, he sees something he desires, and
that causes him to step out.

VIII.
Bees will endure Waspes abroad, or in other hives, but never willingly in
their own; for antipathie is a perpetual enmity. If the force of antipathie
prevail so far to make an irreconcilable hatred, as great should be our
hatred against sinners and Gods dishonor. It is fearful when we can easily
comport with the wicked and digest their company and society.

IX.
Bees when they are weary of the drones, having no further use of them; and
fearing prejudice and future want by their gourmandizing; at first show their
dislike by molesting and troubling of them, but when this will not cause them
to depart, nor yet give over their wonted courses, then with courage and
confidence do they set upon them, confront, kill, and slay them. Teaching
Christians according to their places, that it is not enough to dislike the
doings and practices of the wicked, but they must, having reproved them,
confront and oppose them, nay strive, contend, and war with them. Many
faintly and coldly show their dislike against wicked men, as Eli against his
wicked sons: But this is (to use S^phocles his comparison) as if in a
festered wound or sore, the Surgeon should only blow upon it with his mouth,
whereas there must be cutting, lancing, searching, burning, and the greatest
violence that can be. Asa was herein famous for not enduring his own mother in
her Idolatry. 2 Chro. 15. 16.

X.
If the Queen Be in a swarm, following after the company (but because of the
weakness of her wings, or tenderness of her constitution, being never abroad
before, and so not able at first to endure the cooler air) fall down; they
that be her present attendants, and saw her fall, stoop with her, encircle her,
(and if she rise not and retrne to the hive, or go to the maine body of the
swarm, (fetled perhaps a little distance with longing and trembling
expectation of her presence) stay with her and starve with her rather then
forsake her, contenting themselves with the condition of their Leader. And
shall afflictions be the way that the Master enters into glory, and the members
find fault with them? shall the head be crowned with thorns, and the members
wrapped in softness? this is an unhandsome indecency, and a disunion too near
an antipathie; who ever will be Christ's Disciple, must take up his cross, deny
himself, his own fonder appetites, and trace his Masters footsteps, though
marked out with blood that he shed for our redemption; for he that will save
his life shall loose it, and he that will loose it shall save it to eterniti^.

XI.
Put a drop of honey into a bottle of Vinegar, it is as sharp as before: so
drop in the sweet word of God into such an heart Dr. T. Tailor, Parable of the
Sower.
as i^ sowred with the world, the taste is not changed, the word is not
over-mastered.

XII.
Bees for the most part feed on honey, which over-liberally eaten turns to
choler, no wonder then if they be fiery furious and chollerick creatures:
There is a power in meats to assimilate Mr. Cotton expos* on the first Epist
of Ioh. c. 2. v. 17.
those that eat them, what we feed on we are often like unto: feed on gross
meats, your spirits will be more gross and dull, feed on light meats, your
spirits will be more quick and agill: so if a man feeds on the world, he can
relish nothing but the world, his spirit is made carnal and stupid and
worldly, and can rise no higher, therefore when Solomon gave himself to seek
Eccles. 2. 3.
pleasures, to try what was in them, though he did not neglect wisdom, as
Eccles. 1. 8. yet he found by experience, deal as wisely as he could, in the
end they did so stupifie him, that he was led away by them to Idolatry. Then is
a man become stupid 1 Kings 11. 4.
when he is serious about trifles, and trifling about serious things: by
pursuit of these his judgment was quick in earthly matters, but in matters of
religion* he began to grow very weak and ignorant; how much more then they that
wholly give themselves to the lusts and pleasures of the world?

XIII.
Bees in violent frosts are torpid and stir not, especially in the Northern
regions, where they are almost all winter, if not in a dead* yet a very deep
sleep, but the mighty power of God in the return of the spring revives and
quickens them. And it is not a less almighty power that keeps the life of
grace in the greatest falls and temptations of the Saints; that keeps life in
David and Peter, that it should quicken and revive again when the Sun of
righteousness with comforting beams refreshes and warmeth them.

XIV.
Bees are patient and harmless creatures, and seldom unprovoked pro^
injurious; but he that shall often stand before the hives in the heat of the
day, when they return home with their labors, may too late repent his
temeritie and fool-hardinesse. Lawful liberty used to the full is exceeding
dangerous, he that will take all the liberty he may, will sometimes take that
he may not. It is not life at all times to go into the high Priests hall. We
are often mistaken in our judgments concerning Dr. I* Tailor, The great Exemplar.
the lawfullnesse or unlawfullnesse of actions; He that will do all that he
thinks he may lawfully do, if he increase in giving himself liberty, will
quickly arrive at doing things unlawful. He that because a man may be
innocently angry, will never refrain his passion, in a little time will be
intemperate in his anger, and mistake both his object and the degree. Thus
facetiousnesse and urbanitie entertained with an open hand, will turn into
jestings that are uncomely. If you will be secure, remove your tent, dwell
further off, God has given us more liberty then we may safely use.

XV.
Let Bees be kept close and imprisoned in their hives, though they have ease
and air in abundance, yet they will not be contented, but still complain and
murmer, gnawing and eating away the stopping and impediments, that they may
apply themselves to their natural and delightful labors: so a river let it
be dammed and stopped up, yet if the course of it be natural to go downwards,
at length it will over-beare the damme and run over. Let water that is sweet
be made brackish, by the overflowing of salt water, yet because naturally it is
sweet, it will in time work out the saltness. Here we have a picture of
every man's nature, look what the constant stream of his disposition is, that
which is natural to him, though he may be p^nt up and hindered from the
practice of it for a time, yet will he break through all impediments that he
may be at it, though some temptations may forcibly break in and b^r^e and stop
up for a time his walking heavenward, yet will he never be at rest, until he
has removed them, and got into his former course again; whereas if a wicked
man step into a good course by some trial, or good education, etc. yet long he
will ^ot hold in it, he will break through the impedim^^^ because his natural
disposition, the stream of his heart runs another way.

XVI.
Bees will not be without a Leader, for in all they act they receive directions
from the Queen Be. As the governor of a ship, he has his hand (sometimes)
to the sterrage, and his eye to the Pole-starre to be directed by that; so is
the life of a Dr. Sibbs.
Christian, he must always be doing that, that God prescribes him, and he must
have his eye to the star to be guided in his course by Gods direction: he
that does not this knows not what it is to trust in God.

XVII.
As the Bear dares hardly intermeddle with his desired honey, for fear of the
stinging of the Bees; so some men dare not commit sin, for fear either of
the laws of men, or in slavish fear of hell, or the prologue to it, terror of
conscience, yet hugges it in his heart, embraces it in the arms of his
affection, suffers it to reign in his heart, and to take up his thoughts as by
a Commission, continually contemplating thereon.

XVIII.
The Drones labor not, but altogether intend their passe-time and recreation,
and then return into the hive, and fill themselves with the purest honey,
whereby they quickly grow foggie, and either cannot when they go forth return
into the hive, and so perish abroad, or after a while are ejected or slain by
the Bees. And such sporting Drones the world is full of, Mr. Bolton, Direct.
for walking with God.
who plunge themselves over head and ears in courses of pleasure, wherein they
unworthily wast the fat and marrow of dear and precious time, the flower of
their age, the strength of their bodies, emasculate and melt the vigor of their
spirits into effeminate sensuality and lust, drown the fair and goodly hopes
of their education, the improvement of their parts in froth and folly, as
though they were placed upon earth, as Leviathan in the Sea, only to take their
sport and passe-time therein. Lovers they are of pleasure, and having their
fools paradise here, must therefore in the equity of a just and holy
proportion, with the rich man look for their payment and torment hereafter.

XIX.
Bees will not continue well nor long without a Leader, nor will they endure
diverse or more then one. Therefore in the union of swarms, and in castlings,
where sometimes many go forth, yet will the Bees dethrone and destroy all but
one, and until it be effected are in a discontented tumult and hurly burly,
yea often in a civil war, and if it fall out the parts to be somewhat
equal, thereby is occasioned (sometimes) a total ruin and destruction. For
look how far any thing goes from unity, so near it comes to perishing, and
any where the more peace and unity, the more safety and security. And if in
the little compass of a hive, there is such need of a governor and unity,
much more in the great hive of the world. And this governor must needs be God,
for by men or Angels it cannot be governed. The preservation of every thing is
in the unity of it; and therefore you see any thing that is divided, that
division is the dissolution of it, as when the soul is divided from the body,
and when the body is divided from it self; so likewise in a family or Common
wealth, much more in the world. If there were not one fountain, there would be
different streams, and if there were diverse principles of things, there would
be a swarving and division in the nature and order of things, and so not an
unity, and so by consequence it would be the destruction of the whole. Of
necessity therefore there must be a governor, and this governor must be one,
and that one is God, who guides every creature under the Sun, even the
smallest of the creatures, and orders and directs them to their several ends
and businesses, to which he has appointed them.

XX.
Bees being little and light creatures, are much agitated and disturbed with
tempestuous and stormy winds, which because they cannot altogether prevent,
they by a natural sagacitie and providence do arm and enable themselves
against them. The Bees of Candie (as it is reported) poise themselves with
smaller Platarch. De solertia animal.
pibbles which they carry in their feet, but our Bees to help themselves fly
very low near to the surface of the earth, and for the most part under the
Lee-side of a hedge, whereby the violence of the wind is much checked and
broken. For as a Ship that is well furnished with tackle and fails, that may
give the motion and advance the swiftness of it; yet if it has not ballast in
it, or weight in it to make it go steady, or a Lee-shore, where (by the height
of the banks) the violence of the wind is somewhat broken, it is up and down
tossed always, and the more fails the more danger and hazard. So Christians
in their voyage to the new Jerusalem, must not only have the wings of love, but
the ballast of fear descending in a low flight to make them go steady. We
must not have love only but fear, (whereby we fly low) least otherwise we
move but want only, skipping and danceing by fits and by spurts in good ways,
and keep not any constant course in our holy voyage. The eminency and
excellency, the security and safety of a Christian conversation arises from a
mixture of fear and love; for as the purest white and fairest red mixed
together, make the Dr. S^^ugh ^^n* R^ghteous ^^n^ plea to t^^e happiness.
beauty of the face in the body: so the mixture of fear and love make the
beauty of the affection in the soul, fear mixed with love, for it must not
go alone. Fear though it be apt to make us careful and cautious, careful
how to please God; and cautious, fearful to offend him, yet if it be alone
will precipitate us into despair, or into the forlorn hope It must be
tempered therefore with love* that we look not only upon the greatness, but
on the goodness and sweetness of God, that as we are affected with the
prospect of the one, viz. his greatness, with an affection of holy humble
fear, and lowly awe and reverence of him, so that that may not beat us down
and overthrow us by despair, we must keep up (advanced by the wings of love)
looking upon his sweetness and his goodness. If we think on nothing but
love, six our eyes on nothing but goodness and sweetness in God, we shall be
ready to charge our sins on his back in our presumption of his goodness,
building on his mercy inordinatly, and so presume to do any thing. I say, love
alone would be too want on except it be poised and balanced with a holy fear
and awe and reverence of God.

XXI.
If a swarm be checked and stunted with bad weather presently after it is
hived, or if it be small, or very late in the year, the Bees will be carelessly
desperate, and gather nothing to purpose, for they are out of hope to get
enough for their winters provision and maintenance, and as good never a whit as
never the better. Good is the Loadstone of all endeavors, a man will Mr.
Ho^ker, Souls preparation for Christ.
not labor for nothing, therefore despair killes a man's labors, and plucks
up the root of all his endeavors; if there be any good present, hope makes us
labor to increase it; if there be any good to come, hope labors to attain
it: but good there must be at least in hope and expectation, or else all
endeavors will flag and wither away to nothing.

XXII.
The field wherein Bees feed, is no whit the barer for their Mr. F^^^ers Med.
biting, when they have took their full repast of flowers or grass, the Ox
may feed, the sheep fat on their reversions. The reason is because those
little Chemists distill only the resined part of the flower, leaving the
grosser substance thereof. So ejaculations bind not men to any bodily
observance, only busy the spiritual half, which makes consistent with the
prosecution of any other employment.

XXIII.
Many observing the Bees flying into their hive, suppose them best furnished,
that they see go home laden on their thighs, and think the other idle that
they see carry nothing; whereas though the former be well busied, yet often times
the other are better who are more deeply more richly laden, being full
fraighted with honey. Gods servants in this life are more in substance then in
show, when they fast, they anoint not their faces; and when they give alms let
not their right hand know, what their left hand does. Good actions are not
always rewarded here, and therefore in vain do men muster and set them out
upon beadroles in this life: labor to get the approbation of God, and so do
good that thy conscience may be well stored in Gods sight, who seeing thee in
secret may reward thee openly, and make thy light shine clear as the perfect
day. The wise Virgins Mr. Iohnston, Parable of the Virgins.
have their oil in their vessels, that is, have their holiness and beauty
hidden, and their actions only to be taken notice of by God.

XXIV.
Bees, if they be not disturbed or provoked, are seldom troublesome or
offensive, especially in a remote distance from their hives, but molest or
disquiet them at home, then they will furiously invade you, and admit of no
terms of peace, but die or prevail in the ruin of that man or creature that
offends them. There are many men in the world, that seem of excellent natures,
quiet spirits, while they are not stirred or moved, but if they be once
provoked, the latent embers be uncovered, then they are implacably mischievous.

XXV.
Bees if they fall into the water and be drowned, or be chilled and dead with
cold (if it be less then the space of a day) if you lay them in the warm
Sun, or bring them near a fire, they will recover life and revive again,
and do well. The affections of Gods children are apt to grow dull and
languish, if Dr. S^^^gh^on, Righteous man's plea to true happiness.
not to be chilled by earthly objects; for our hearts are ponderous, Multum
tra^it de terra, de carne multum, it weighs downward, as the weights of a
clock move downward continually, and if they be once at the ground, the clock
is silent, they must pull it up again every twelve hours, or in such a
certain compass they must wind them up. And so in this case, there must be
courses of winding up holy affections: if the fire be gone, the fire be out
revive it, kindle it again from heaven, reinforce, chase and warm your selves
by the fire of prayer and other holy duties. When the fire on the Altar was
extinguished, it was unlawful to have it kindled but only by the means of
heaven. It must be the fire of heaven, not any other fire that must revive us.
We must often be renewing of our holy affections to keep them vigorous and
lively. We must frequently excite and stir up our selves, when we begin to
faint we must rub and chase our affections, and especially spread our chilled
spirits before the Sun of righteousness, that he may with the M^l. 4. 2.
heat and healing of his wings revive and quicken us.

XXVI.
The little worm or potentiall Be, after a short life of a few weeks,
stirs no more, feeds no more, but lies dead and entombed, in the cell wherein
it was bred: but wait with patience a score of days, and you shall see it
revive, and appear a far more noble creature then it was before. What is
this, but an emblem of the resurrection? Aarons rod which was a dry and
withered stick, in a night buds and blossoms, and brings forth ripe Almonds.
For to every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under heaven.
A time to die, and a time Eccles. 3. 1.
to rise again.

XXVII.
Bees can with ease and facility dart in their stings, but they have no power
to extract or draw them out again; hurt they can, help or ease they cannot.
We are all naturally wise to do evil, but to do good we have no
understanding. We are all as spring-locks, shut we can of our selves, but not
open, for our natural powers (as the Schools speak) are become naturales
A^nin.
impotentiae. And howsoever the sword of the Lord, and the sword of Gideon may
go together, yet the hand of Gideon, or the sword in his hand, or the edge on
his sword, is not able to pierce, unless God give power, non enim tam agimus
quam a deo agimur, says Zanchie; for man is not so properly said to Zanch.
do good, as to be compelled to do it by the good Spirit of God.

XXVIII.
Robbing Bees will desperately adventure to spoil and plunder their
neighbors. But if they find sentinels before the ports to question them, and a
strong guard at the gates to oppose them, and when they have with danger and
difficulty passed through these, numerous forses within stoutly charging the
first assailants with their ruin and destruction. The survivors will be weary
and wary, doubtful and fearful further to prosecute their treacherous
designs. For even naturally all brute creatures avoid that place where they
are sensible by a token that their fellows have miscarried. But how great the
neglect of Gods judgments among men is appears: perhaps at first they are
deeply affected with them, but yet as a pang it is quickly overpast, and as
news it soon grows out of date. Pharaoh was no sooner quitted from one
plague, but presently his heart was hardened to draw on another. The Israelites
that were so affected, flighted and frighted at the horrible end of Corah and
his accomplices, even the morrow after fall on Moses and Aaron, and upbraid them
for the loss of the people of God. Many Dr. Prideaux, Higg^ion and S^loh.
look on others judgments, as furnished with a supersedeas from all arrests,
and argue from their punishment how they have deserved, without the least
reflex upon their own mutable condition.

XXIX.
As Bees are industrious to gather, so what they diligently get, they do not
carelessly and at random disperse about the hive, but discreetly and orderly,
beginning at the top and so downwards, dispose it in their waxen cabinets, and
as soon as they be full of honey close them fast with a waxen lock, both to
prevent robbers, and also to necessitate themselves to further labor as long
as the season of gathering continues. Many hear, but the word heard profits
them not, because they are careless to treasure up the truths delivered, they
quickly forget; such are like unto a man who beholds his natural face in James
1* 23.
a glass, and goes his way, and forgets what manner of man he was. But
would we thrive under the means, we must when we have heard and marked and
understood the truth of duties delivered, lay them up, lock them closely and
safely in our hearts, as in a safe repositary, we must commit good instructions
to memory: had we rich treasures we would not lay them up negligently, but
keep them under locks and keys, bars and bolts, why then should we let holy
instructions slip out of our memories, whereby all former labors, as of the
speaker, so, of the hearer is utterly frustrate.

XXX.
If the Be lights upon a flower where there is no honey (being wasted or
gathered before) she quickly gets off and flies away to another, that will
furnish her. Let us not loose our selves, and forget our errand; our father
Adam lost our happiness, and we are sent to seek it; seek it where it is,
and Mr. Harris, Way to true happiness.
go handsomely to work; say, I am not made for riches, they are made for me;
I am not made for creatures, they are made for me, and I am their Master:
Therefore these cannot make me happy. I am made for eternity, for everlasting
life and happiness. Therefore let me study that, mind that, see that end
beyond inferior ends; Why do men seek wealth, but to be happy? why
pleasures, why honors, but because they would be happy? If these cannot
bless and enhappie me, why should I burn daylight? why should I not off
them, as the Be gets off the plants that yield her no honey, and once at last
see where my business lies, in pursuing happiness, and where my happiness
lies, in Gods ways; the first step whereof is poverty of spirit.

XXXI.
When the wax is mollified and wrought warm, then set the seal on it, for it
will receive the impression. And when God has any ways mollified our hearts,
and made them in a mourning case, close with him; when we find our selves any
whit softened, take the hint, improve that opportunity.

XXXII.
Bees are naturally harmless and patient creatures, each in and for her own
particular will ordinarily receive any prejudice, hurt, or molestation, and
when they suffer are wondrous calm, but near the hive, where the cause seems
to be public and their common wealth to be endangered, then they are
marvelous hot and furious, and notwithstanding the feircest opposition, will
resolutely charge all that stand in their way, in the defense of the public,
although they die in the conflict. But how far short are many Christians in
their practices? in any public cause where the glory of God is concerned, or
the common good interested, you shall have them bear all quietly: Oh, says
he, you must have patience, and bear with small matters: but in a cause that
touches his own particular (say himself be concerned in his penny, in his
peace, in his reputation, or the like) then none are so fiery, none so furious,
he is all upon a flame, then no penalty is thought too great, no disgrace too
heavy for such a person that has done him displeasure. Whereas a meek
Christian in his own cause will be meek and silent, but in Gods cause zealous
and earnest. See it in Moses when he was censured, disparaged reviled, he
bears it quietly, pockets it up without distemper: but at another time when
the cause was public, when it concerned the glory of God, and the good of the
Church, then none so zealous, none so fiery as Moses, he cannot brook nor
bear.

XXXIII.
Bees in July extract honey out of many and various flowers, but yet by little
and little and in a small proportion; but if a honey-dew then falls, in a short
space are they largely replenished, and have a triplication of their sweetes,
and a full refection with their Nectar. Holy prayers, meditations and
intercourses with God, private readings, soule-soliloquies and spiritual
discourses are intertainers and satisfiers of the Saints recessities, Dr. I.
Tailor, The great Exempla^.
but in public solemnities, God opens his treasures, powers out his graces
more abundantly; private devotions and secret offices of religion are like
refreshings of a garden with the distilling and petty drops of a watering pot:
but addresses to the Temple, and serving God in the public communion of
Saints, is like rain from heaven, where the offices are described by a
public spirit, hightened by the greater portion of assistance, and receives
advantages by the adunations and symbols of charity, and increment by their
distinct title to promises appropriate even to their assembling, and mutual
support, by the piety of example, by the communication of counsels, by the
awfulnesse of public observation, and the engagements of holy customs.

XXXIV.
Drones to the eye are goodly creatures, fairer and larger then the working
Bees, they make a great noise and loud buzzing, fly often forth in the heat
of the day, as if they were busy to advance the public good: but they are
all empty and vain glorious shows, for they contribute nothing to the
public store, but when after a few wanton vagaries, they have emptied
themselves and whetted their stomachs, they return into the hive and liberally
feed of the Bees labors. So one writes of young Marius, that by reason of the
stoutnesse of his talk and gesture, he obtained to be called the son of
Mars, but when he came to proof, he gained a new name, and was called the
son of Venus. Thus many in their words appear gracious, but by their actions
are basely effeminate and sickle, wanton and idle.

XXXV.
Some hives will lie out two or three years together and not swarm* or if
they do, very late, and then ten to one but they miscarrie and die, both the
old stock and the swarm too. Now the best way to preserve such a stock, is
timely to drive it into an empty hive, and the Bees being many, will provide
themselves sufficiently against winter, and swarm seasonably another year, so
that in some cases driveing is not an undoing and destruction, but a
preservation of the stock. Thus the gardener cuts off a graft or siens to plant
it into a new stock, not to Mr. Heoke^, Souls preparation for Christ.
burn it. So the Lord sometimes cuts off a sinner from his abominations, but
he will not cast him into hell, and the Lord melts the heart of a poor sinner,
but consumes him not; but as the Goldsmith melts his gold, not to consume it
all away, but to make it a better vessel; so the Lord melts a poor sinner, to
make him a vessel of glory. The Lord will fire this proud heart of yours, and
clip off those knotty lusts, but if you belong to him, he will leave a little
remainder of hope, that you shall be formed and fashioned anew, not consumed.

XXXVI.
The Queen Be is a very amiable creature, and of a brighter color, and more
transparent hue then other Bees, she is somewhat yellow under the belly, and on
her legs, enclining to a golden color, and this color intimates her
princely nature, her royal blood, and sovereign dignity. Some Heralds tell
us, that none ought to bear gold-yellow color in arms but Emperors and
Kings, and such as be of the blood royal. Oh that none would bear the
glittering show of profession Mr. R. Abbot, David's desires.
and holiness, but those that are of the race of Jesus Christ the King of
Kings, then should we not be as the Priests, Prince, and people of Israel, a
snare in Mispah to the simple, and a net spread on mount Tabor to catch them
that know us not, with an opinion of good men and good women, faithful
Christians and true believers, when we are nothing less.

XXXVII.
The Bees work is admirable, orderly, and geometrically proportionable, all
full of wonder; whereas the Waspes and Hornets combs for substance are
unprofitable dross, although they be hexangle cells, and somewhat orderly
framed downwards, yet upwards have no beauty, are nothing so polite and
accurate. But the Humble Bees combs are but rude lumpes, a little hollowed for
their own end and use. To these three sorts may we compare the obedience of
most men professing Religion; there is the obedience of the common Protestant,
perhaps somewhat more then a Pagane performs, yet a rude and indigested
devotion, heaped up together by law and custom. Then there is the obedience of
the hypocrite, in many things resembling true devotion, super-fine carriages,
but yet on one side only, to man-ward somewhat exact and formal, but to
Godward rudely, careless, and negligent. Whatsoever is done is not done with
respect to God and conscience of his commandments. Lastly, there is the
obedience of the true believer, arising from a grounded knowledge of the will
of God and faith, and from a holy fear and love of God, conscientiously and
respectively to approve himself to God in the discharge of his duties, and it
is exactly modelized and squared according to the rule of Gods word.

XXXVIII.
It is an observation that a man cannot draw (even in natural Dr. S^oughun.
things) a long straight line perfectly exact, except he draw it by some rule;
It is not the steddiest hand that can do it exactly, but there will be some
crookes. And therefore men use to take a rule to draw a line by. Certainly it
must be so in spiritual obedience, a man must have an eye to the word of God,
and make that his card and compass to sail by, make that the rule and warrant
of his actions or else though he hit (as it were) hab nab at some
circumstances, it is not formal obedience. Now though a man may (hand over
head, as they say) make some hasty and tumultuous doings, patch up a great
deal of mud together, to make a wall, not caring for a square to make it
perpendicular (as the Humble Bees rudely compose their combs* hand over head
without any great care or art) yet if a man would build a Temple or stately
Palace, he must do it perpendicular, it must be evenly and orderly built
according to an exact line both within and without also (and thus geometrically
and regularly build the Bees as it were by square and plummet) or else one part
will overtop another, and all tumble down. It is so in this cause, whatsoever
is not squared by the rule of Gods word, what ever materiality it may have, it
has little or no formality of obedience.

XXXIX.
How many small things annoy the greatest? even a mouse Dr Hall, Occasional
Meditat.
troubles an Elephant, a Gnat a Lion, a very flea may disquiet a Giant. What
weapon can be nearer to nothing then the sting of a Be? yet what a painful
wound has it given? that scarce visible point how it invenomes and rankles,
and swells up the flesh? the tenderness of the part, adds much to the grief.
And if I be thus vexed with the touch of an angry fly, Lord, how shall I be
able to endure the sting of a tormenting conscience? as that part is both most
active and most sensible, so that wound which it receives from it self, is
most intolerably grievous There were more ease in a nest of Hornets, then under
this one torture: O God, howsoever I speed abroad, give me peace at home, and
what ever my flesh suffers, keep my soul free. Thus pained, wherein do I
find ease, but in laying honey to the part affected? that medicine only abates
the anguish. How near has nature placed the remedy to the offense?
whenever my heart is stung with the remorse of sin, only thy sweet and
precious merits, O blessed Savior, can mitigate, and heal the wound; they
have virtue to cure me, give me grace to apply them; that sovereign receite
shall make my pain happy; I shall thus applaud my grief, it is good for me
that I was thus afflicted.

XL.
Bees (as many other creatures) have wit enough to find out remedies for the
cure of their maladies: to preserve them strong and vigorous, and to recover
themselves being weak; they (if they be near the Sea) delightfully gather of
flowers that grow on the salt marshes, as Thrift, Hogs scurvy-grasse, etc. and
where they are remote from it, they water in st^kes and saw pits, and extract a
nitrous saltness with their water. But man only being wounded by sin, has not
by the light of nature any wit to seek for remedy, yea only man is careless
of his eternal salvation. Every one is wise enough to do evil, Ier. 4. 22.
but to do well they have no understanding: and no marvel, for as the
clearest eye beholds not the brightest object, except Dr. Ienisen, Earths
vanity.
the Sunbeams do come between to enlighten it, so the sharpest wits are not
able to conceive the heavenly mysteries of our redemption, regeneration and
eternal salvation, without the bright beams of Gods Spirit shining into them
to enlighten them.

XLI.
Those hives are in best case where the Bees make most noise; but those
Commonwealths are in best state where least noiso and tumult is.

XLII.
As a man may eat too much honey, so pleasure it self Dr. Hakewill, King
David's Vow.
grows loathsome and distasteful by immoderate use, Nempe voluptatem commendat
rarior usus; moderation is the mother of duration. It is like the steady
burning of a tape^, or the fire upon the Altar, which never went out, whereas
headstrong violence, like a squib or flash of lightning dazels the eyes for a
moment, but is instantly extinct.

XLIII.
It is not good to provoke Waspes and Hornets, but it is Mr. Randall, St. Paul's
triumph.
much worse to provoke Devils. Some rude people will dare the Devil, and
challenge and bid the wicked fiend to come if he dare, and to do his worst,
etc. Silly wretches, the Devil laughs at them, to see how foole-hardy they are
against him* that has them in his clutches already.

XLIV.
Bees out of their unwearied and restless nature are incessantly active for
their future preservation, and therefore when they cannot work (Harvest being
warm but dry, and not affording many flowers) they will steal and plunder.
And for that purpose send forth sundry Emissaries, which search and examine
every hive in their walk. At first these espialls make faint essays, but
finding little opposition or contradiction, they then (yet doubtful) enter,
and finding the access easy, fetch presently a new supply, and still
recruite their forces, so that after a little while, it will be difficult, if
not impossible to withstand them: whereas a guard before the door, a stout
resistance or peremptory repulse at the first, would have not only weakened,
but frustrated all their designs. Would thou get the mastery over thy sin
(whatsoever it be) give it altogether peremptory denialls, suffer it not to
delight thee in the least tickling conceit and pleasing speculation. It will
be easy to abstain from it when the denial is resolute and peremptory; bar
up the doors, give ust no audience, get as much strength to resist, as the
lust hatl power to attempt. If we cannot put Dr. Prest^^, Doctrine of
Mortificat.
out a spark, how shall we put out a flame? if we get not the Mastry over the
first motion to sin, much less shall we be able to overcome when it is
brought to maturity in action. Sin is like the water, give it the least way,
and we cannot stay it, run it will in despite of us. And a stream ri^eth by
little and little, one shower increasing it, and another making it somewhat
bigger, so sin rises by degrees.

XLV.
Bees when they are pleased and contented make an uniforme and delightful
harmony, but being illegally acting as in robbery, or discontented in the
loss or absence of their Leader, they are distracted as it were, in their
flights (nay frights) and uncertain motions, and displeasing and harsh in
their buzzing ^lan^ors* for as when the string of an instrument is out of tune,
then the Music does ja^re: so when discontents predominate, all is in a
confused m^dley, atapie, and disorder. Discontents produce not greater
mischief in the hive of the Bees, or of the Common wealth then evil
concupiscence does in the soul of a man, it ma^res all his good actions: to
mingle water with wine, it makes the wine the worse; to mingle dross with
silver, it makes the silver the more impure: so evil concupiscence being in
the soul of a man, does stain disorder, and blemish his good actions, in that
he performs them either with vainglory, or selfe-respect.

XLVI.
Princes promise any thing to discover a treason, but they never Pet Matthew,
Continuat. of the general hist. of France, in he life of Hen. the 4th.
trust the Traitors, and if happily they favor them for a time, the hatred
which follows after is more violent and irrecoverable: for they use them as
Countrymen do their Bees, when they have drawn out the honey and wax, they
chase them away with fire and smoke.

XLVII.
Many hate not sin, neither fly it because it is sin, but as M Stock, expos.
on Mal. c. 2. v. 16.
children do Bees, not because they are Bees, but because they have a sting;
so do they sin, because it is hurtful.

XLVIII.
When Bees are most angry in their swarming or sighting, Dr. Fea^ly, judges
Charge.
cast but a little earth upon them, and they are presently quiet, and give over
their humming noise and contention. So though nothing else can assuage the
tumor of the proud, or quench the burning desire of honor in the ambitious, of
wealth in the covetous, of pleasure in the volupt^ous; yet the consideration of
the grave can. He that seriously thinks with himself, these goodly roabes of
mine, cloth nothing but dung, all my dainty fare feeds but worms. I who
(perhaps) have power over other men's lives, have no power of my own life, no
not for a moment. Even whilst I sit upon prisoners* and condemn guilty
persons, I am arraigned in my conscience, and plead guilty before God: he that
keeps down his heart with these thoughts, can no more be overthrown with
pride, then a ship which is well ballasted be blown away with a storm.

XLIX.
There are no strains in Music so delightful, as those in which discords are
artificially bound in with concords; nor dishes so dainty as those in which
sweet-things are seasonably mingled with sour; nor pictures so beautiful as
those, in which bright colors with dark shadows are curiously tempered. Nor
would the sweetness of honey be so much commended, if there were not
difficulty and danger in the compassing of it. Did we not fear the sting in
the Bees tail, we would not so much value the honey in her mouth? but what
with peril, if not pain, is procured, is better prized, more praised.

L.
Bees as they are always laboriously painful, so especially when they have
been long shut up and confined by unseasonable weather; then upon the first
approach of a calm Sun-shinie day, do they roufe themselves up from their
(now loathed) rest; or on the fall of a honey*dew in a warm and mild season
do they eagerly pursue their delightful labors. Shall irrational creatures
take the hints of opportunity, and shall we trifle them away: Let us be
jealous and cautious, of these creepings and turnings, these serpentine tricks
of the flesh, and the world, that would slay us: Lay hold when thou have an
opportunity to hear, to read, to pray, Post is it ^ccasia calva, make use, take
the occasion, when God has led thee to privacy, thou art there where thou
may freely have communion with thy God, slight it not negligently, let it not
slip, it is Gods call, does the Spirit of God whisper us, saying, this is a
duty thou must do, and thy conscience does witness with thy spirit, that it
is so, and thy own affections (if thou have any heavenward Dr. Stoughton,
Righteous man's plea to true happiness.
duty-ward) do stir thee also, let not this wind blow in vain over thee*
extinguish not the Spirit by neglect, when God offers thee a hint by his
Spirit take it, take that hint, I say, a man may do more in an hour of
prayer, when he has the motions and the power of the Spirit, when the
forerunner of it is some sweet motion cast into the heart of a man, some
sweet touch of meditation puts him upon duty, o^ then if a man would make use
of the sails of that hint, by that wind he might dispatch a great voyage of
prayer, and return richly laden.

LI.
The first life of a Be is scarce worthy to be called a life, vita est; non
vitali^. She is included in a little narrow cell, without any locomotive power;
she has neither eye to see, nor organ to hear; Is not sensible of danger,
much less able to prevent it; Is only capable of that meat, which is put into
the mouth, whereby it grows but unprofitably, like a plant rather then a
brute: for it can neither help nor hurt, but after it is transmuted by death,
it appears in a more excellent and glorious condition: It is agill and
industrious, beneficial to it self, to others. In a word, the first life is
but a spark raked up in ashes, the other is a spark blown up into a flame;
the first is the sap in the root, the latter like the sap that fills the
branches with leaves and mature fruit Wherefore is it that the Saints desire
death, not that they might be deprived of the comforts of life; they would not
put off their clothes, but to be better apparelled. They desire death to
attain a life, that might swallow up the weaknesses, sicknesses, troubles of
this: not as a gulf swallows up that which is cast into it, or as the fire
swallows up the wood by consuming it; but as perfection swallows up
imperfection, or as manhood swallows up childhood, not extinguishing it, but
drowning it that it is not seen.

LII.
By nature the Bees expel the Drones, because they affect Mr. Sym* Life's
preservative.
only ease and content themselves to do nothing, caring only to avoid labor
which attends upon active and industrious employment. And why was Meroz cursed?
because they came Judge. 5. 23.
not out to the help of the Lord against the mighty; and idle and floathfull
spending of a man's life is every where in Scripture condemned. Will^ull defects
a domissions of doing good bring damnation, he that wanted his wedding garment
was Mat. 22. 13.
thrust out of doors and cast into utter darkness.

LIII.
Soft wax admits any stamp, and simple persons are easily corrupted by
themselves, or deceived by others.

LIVE.
The world is troublesome, it is gall is more then it is honey, Mr. T. Iacombe,
E^^k^ walk.
it is not only vanity but vexation; have all, it is but a vanity, want but a
little it is vexation. Ahab is sick, because he has not poor Naboths vineyard;
Haman wants but a knee from Mordecai, and this imbitters all.

LV.
All the ways of worldly pleasure, are strawed with needles Mr. Bolton,
Directions for walking with God.
and nettles, which ever and anon prick and sting her darlings, as they pluck
her fading flowers: so that at best, they are but like Bears robbing a
Bee-hive, who ravenously rifle the combs, and with much ado suck out a little
honey, but in the mean time are soundly stung, and swollen about their heads
for their painful pleasure.

LVI.
Honey over liberally eaten causes vomiting, the stomach cannot hold it: such
are ill gotten goods to the heart, as the Canaanites were to the good land, the
land groaned till it had spewed them out, the conscience travells till it be
delivered of these. They are to the soul as Jonah to the Whale, the Whale had
devoured him, but could not rest, till he was restored; so it is with the
conscience, if men play the whales, and make fish of all that comes to net, the
conscience will be as weary of such a burden, as the whale of the Prophets
bones.

LVII.
Many lay the whole strength of their affections, upon the Mr. (...), (...)
su^e ^all*
things they fancy (or as the Creeple lays his full weight upon his crutches)
and therefore when they are taken from them (as Pharaohs chariot wheels) they
are drawn upon all four, and stick in the mud: yea they set on their
affections as the Be her sting with all their might and strength, they convey
into others their very bowels and hearts, and therefore when they are gone they
are heartlesse.

LVIII.
He that is pained with the Bees stinging, must for cure speedily Geminianus de
exemplis. lib. ^.
pluck out the sting, and then apply juice of mallows mixed with oil, or
honey to the wound. And the best remedy for a wounded conscience, is first to
pluck forth the sting of sin, and then to wash in Christ's blood, and for the
future keep the heart above all keepings; for as the eye is subject to
infinite distempers, so is the conscience.

LIX.
Bees solitary and alone (especially in the night or winter season) are quickly
benumbed with cold, and die; but many united together are agill and livel; nay
one chilled with cold, put to the many, recovers, and has a new return of
life. So that I do not improperly speak, if I say, they live as much by heat
as by meat. And therefore if there be many in a hive, though there be but a
tolerable supply of food, they will do well, but if they have never so much
meat, and be not many and numerous, they will miscarry and come to nothing.
The communion of Saints puts life into those that have it not, and increases
it in those in whom it is. The health of the body does not communicate it self
to others; it is otherwise in the life of the soul, the life of it makes
others to live more, as iron sharpens iron, so one holy man does another: when
two lie together they keep one another warm, there is action and redaction,
this is a powerful means to get and increase this life.

LX.
Bees in the Spring when the weather is fair will work chearefully, but if
the Sun withdraw his beams, the wind blow hollow, the chilling showers
descend, then they are presently dull and livelesse, scarce appear, if at all
not far from the hive; it is an uncomfortable time, the spirits of the Bees
lower, are heavy and sad: we see it also in the body, that the animal spirits
in the brain, which are the causes of motion and sense, if they be obstructed,
there follows an Apoplexy and death. So it is, between Christ and the soul,
he is the Dr. Sibbs, Bowels opened.
Sun of righteousness, by whose beams we are all comforted and cheared, but
when they are withheld, then our spirits decay and are discouraged. Summer and
Winter arise from the presence and absence of the Sun, the presence of the
Sun when it comes near causes the earth to be clothed with a rich
embroiderie of fruits and flowers. And what makes the Summer and Winter in the
soul, but the absence or presence of Christ? what makes some so vigorous
beyond others, but the presence of the Spirit? As it is in nature so it is
here, the presence of Christ is the cause of all spiritual life and vigor,
but if he withdrawes his presence a little, the soul fails.

LXI.
Bees when they assault a man strike fiercely at the face, the beauty of man;
and principally in the face aim at the eye, the beauty of the face. Thus
Satan though he be malicious against all mankind, yet chiefly against those who
by Christ are conquered out of his hand, and having their garments washed in
the blood of the Lamb are most beautiful. For as the Panther rageing on the
picture of a man, bewrayes the hatred he bears unto him. So the Devil to
testify how much he hates God himself, spends the greatest of his fury on
them that bear the image of God. Thus do Satan's instruments incarnate Devils,
though they care not usually whom they wrong* opprosse, injure, hate, yet most
of all the holy ones in earth are the object of their hatred, they are the
drunkards songs, and a sport to the foolish. What muttering, what whispering,
what censuring, what sinister construction is set upon every action of theirs?
what discovering, what blazeing of infirmities? what so high, but they will
reach it; what so deep, but they will be sounding the bottom of it? but a day
will come when they will cry out with Cicero, O me nunquam sapientem, et
aliquando id quod non eram falso existimatum. Aye me, that indeed was never
wise, but falsely thought to be what I was not. And with those in the book of
Wisdom; We fools thought his life Wisd 5. v. 4, 5.
madness, and his end without honor: how is he accounted among the children
of God, and his portion among the Saints? But the innocent heart shall then
lift up a cheerful countenance, as knowing that though here it were despised,
yet there it shall be justified and rewarded with a crown of glory.

LXII.
Waspes gather not as Bees yet some seeing them running on the tops of flowers,
and sucking in the cells are notably deluded, supposing that they gather as well
as the Bees: Whereas they only suck to satisfy a wanton fancy, but carry away
nothing for a future supply of themselves or Commonwealth. Hypocrites in many
outside duties may comply with believers, and have their conversation in such
actions, that they are usually practical in, and so deceive many, who are
easily beguiled with similitudes. All deceit is from similitude. False wares
having the same die that the true have, deceive the buyers; so falling stars
are like other stars. When we see men that profess religion false hearted,
many are apt to think that all are so; wherefore the Apostle prays that they
might abound in all Phil. 1. 10.
knowledge and judgment to discern of things that differ: this proximitie
makes many deceived.

LXIII.
A lamp or candle by the brightness of it intiseth the Be (as many other
flies) to embrace it, but by that means she is either drowned in the oil, or
burned in the flame. So the shows of sin and the pleasures of the world,
entice the minds of men that their hearts are drowned in many fears and
sorrows, and when they suppose that they have caught all, they themselves are
caught. Finally, corruption and destruction (the natural ends of all things
under heaven) lays hold upon them, Qui lachrimarum causas tripudiantes
peragunt, Greg: Moral. lib. 20. c. d.
et ridentes mortis negotium exequuntur. Who go dancing through the causes of
their mourning, and with laughter act the tragedy of their own death.

LXIV.
The Titmouse is a great destroyer of Bees, and more easily and certainly to
obtain his pray, will in the winter watch at the doors of their hives (their
Castles of security) and as soon as any come forth seizes upon them, and
eats them; If none appear he knocks with his bill, and they feeling the
motion come forth to know the cause, and are presently devoured by him. In the
Spring time he resorts to the willow trees, (whither the Bees come to gather)
and there invade^ them, so that they are no where secure. And thus, and more
active is the great Apollion the Devil to destroy men^ bodies and souls,
sometimes ^itting temptations to men's tempers and constitutions (for he cannot
by force without our own consent prevail over us) As a bait of promotion for
Absolon, because he is ambitious; of pleasure for Sampson, for he is
volupruous; every man will not be drawn to sin by every object; an earth-worme
esteems not pleasure, and a man by temper voluptuous, esteems not profit
much, no^ ^n ambitious man either; and therefore the Devil who is wise (as
Isid^re says) has his (...), Ephesians. 6. 11. and his (...) ^* Rev. 2. 24. his
artificial ly^^^r. lib 1. de ^umm^ b^no.
ways and deep reaches, and presents men with suitable objects, for the love
of which he thinks they will be content Mr. H^^^d, Souls misery.
to strain their consciences, and break Gods laws; and presents them at
sit times and places, for every tune is not a season all places are not
opportunities, there is the hour and power of darkness. And there is the time
of pleasure and prosperity, Luke 22. 53.
when men are apt to be regardlesse of themselves, and the high Priests hall to
work upon Peter, the times of our weakness when we are wholly deprived of
such a friend or governor, as might by their watchful observation of our
courses restrain us from sin, or by their counsel uphold us, by their
rebukes and corrections recover us if we fall.

LXV.
If the Queen Be miscarrie in the hive, or flying out of it for recreation or
evacuation (for otherwise ordinarily she stirs not forth) come to some
mischance. All her subjects are presently in a sad mourning posture; now there
is nothing but confused discursions, a woeful complaining, a cessation from
work, and quickly a miscarriage and death of all. And if Christians sad and
grieve the holy Spirit of God, and cause him by their sins to go away from
them, they cannot (if they be sensible of their condition) but be in a sad and
mournful estate; for as the air is dark and chill, the earth cold and wet,
and the face of the sublunary world uncomfortable* when the Sun, which is the
light and life of it, has withdrawn his light; so must the face and state of
the soul needs be very gloomy, when the Spirit, who is the comforter, has
withdrawn his presence.

LXVI.
When a man crops a flower from the earth, he can get nothing Dr. D^^*
Doomesday.
out of it, but the sweetness of the smell, or the delightfulness of the
color: but when the diligent Be comes, she will make more of it, she will
extract that which is (as it were) the very spittle of the stars. So when
simple carnal minded men, read the Poets and the Philosophers, they gather
nothing but delight and pleasure; but when the diligent Be comes, a wise man,
a serious considerate man, he draws honey out of them.

LXVII.
There is left in the Church, a power and authority, which must be used when
there is occasion, to draw the sword against contumacious rebels which will
not be reclaimed by other means. As St. Ambrose says, The Preacher of the
word must be like unto the Be, he must have both a sting and honey.

LXVIII.
Bees when they have filled themselves with water, they cannot gather honey,
until they have vomited it up. And he that will thrive by the food of the
word, must empty and unburden the stomach of his soul of all things that will
hinder the purity and power of it from taking possession of his heart: he must
bring a heart and a head like two empty buckets to draw with geedinesse and
joy the waters of life out of the wells of salvation: even the honey comb, the
sweetest thing in the world is loathsome to a full stomach.

LXIX.
Many creatures (in particular Bees) by antipathie and instinct of nature
shun that which is contrary or obnoxious to their safety; and men by their
intellectual parts do foresee and diseerne what is hurtful and dangerous to
them or their lives, and decline and oppose things that have a tendency
thereunto.

LXX.
As Sampson met the Lion as an enemy when he was alive, Mr. Renolds, explicat.
of the 110 Psalm.
but after he was slain, he went unto him as unto a table; there was only
terror while he lived, but honey when he was dead. So doubtless many men to
whom the bodily presence of Christ, and the mighty power and penetration of his
heavenly preaching, whereby he smote sinners unto the ground, and spoke with
such authority as never man spoke, would have been unsufferably irksome and
full of terror (as it was unto the Scribes and Pharisees) can yet now that he
is out of their sight, and does not in person, but only by those who are his
witnesses torment the inhabitants of the earth, pretend much admiration and
thankful remembrance of that death of his which was so full of honey for all
that come unto him.

LXXI.
Bees are diligent and painful in their work, but frugall and temperate in
their feeding. Their sood consists of two kinds, or rather one diversified,
wet and dry, honey and Bee-bread, so that you may draw a bill of their fare,
and a catalogue of their provision in setting down bread and water: and having
these they have enough, for they want nothing. But many men lay out on a meal
a years allowance, and wast as much provision in a few hours as were
sufficient to relieve the famine of an army. Quickly do many men devour all
that all other members (the Caters and P^rveyors) can bring in, yea whatsoever
art can devise, luxury, and all the obsequious servant of the idol Belly
invent; So that Judas his purchase, Aceldema, is no way comparable, that indeed
a greedy grave, employed to funeral uses, able in eight and forty hours, as
it is reported, Sandys, page 187 and other travelers.
to consume the flesh of any carcass therein buried: but this in four and
twenty hours consumes many carcasses of fishes and fowls, and generally
twice a day all the flesh therein interred.

LXXII.
What is a Be to a Bear, or a Mouse to an Elephant? and yet if a Be fasten
his sting in the nose of a Bear, or a mouse creep up and gn^w the trunk of
an Elephant, how easily do so little creatures, upon such an advantage,
torment the greatest? certainly the proudest of men have some tender part into
which a sting may enter, the conscience is as sensible of Gods displeasure, as
obnoxious to his wrath, as subject to his word in a Prince as in a beggar. If
the word like David's stone find that open, and get into it, it is able to smite
the greatest Goliath.

LXXIII.
The Drones are a lazy and careless generation, delighting themselves in
sportfull recreations, and delicious dainties: never providing nor forecasting
for themselves how it shall be with them afterward, but think to fare
tomorrow as they have done to day, and so succeeding days, as they have days;
but the provident prudent Be, finding a likely decay of the gathering season,
and observing that the Drones are only spenders and riotous wasters, do at
last violently expel them their hives; which they are unwilling to leave,
having provided nothing for themselves, and therefore readily return again;
but because they will take no warning, they then slay them without pity or
compassion. And as dangerously do many men pretending for wisdom play the
fools, delaying the practice of repentance, procrastinating to take the offer
of grace, and thus deceiving themselves. They think to do it perhaps tomorrow
or afterward, and so often cozening themselves, the Dr. Preston, New Covenant.
time they prefixed sliding away, and then another is determined, which
likewise goes away but nothing is done, and so another, till at last time be
no more. Take heed you be not deceived in this, I will do it now and now, bu^
modo et modo non habet modum. The Chariot wheels when they run, the second
runs near the first all the day long, but never overtakes it. As in a clock
the second minute follows the first, but it never overtakes it; so it is with
us, this doing of it now and now and to morrow and to morrow, these little
distances deceive us and delude us. We think to do it in a short time, and by
reason of the nearenesse and vicinity of the time, we think we shall do it
easily, but we are deceived with it. As Grasshoppers deceive children, when they
think to lay their hand upon them, they hop a little su there and a little
further, that in the conclusion they take them not at all. So it is with us, we
cozen our selves in that manner, we lose our life* we lose our opportunity of
taking grace, because we think it to be so near: we think we can take it the
next week, or the next month* and out of this we are confident it is in our
power, and so our time flies away, and we have never part in it.

LXXIV.
The Bees labor diligently to get food for the supply of their young, they
bring it home to the hive, and lay it up in the combs, but (alas) they are yet
never the better for it, for they are fixed in their cells, they cannot stir
forth to take it: therefore they do more, they bring them food, and put it
into their mouths, as often as they need. The reason why men's hearts are not
wrought upon in the Ministry of the word, is because many Ministers labor not
the right way to show men their sins, and to convince their consciences, they
insist only in generals, whereas a particular application brings every man his
part and portion, and not only sets the dish before him, but cuts him meat and
carves it for him.

LXXV.
If any shall demand why Bees of all creatures are so indefatigably diligent,
and with unwearied pains follow their sweet labors, flying sometimes abroad
in stormy seasons, whereby (often prevented of a return) they miscarry in the
field. Nay when they are old and gray, feeble and faint, they will venture
forth, though they lose themselves, for most of them die at their work --
vitam sub fasce reponunt. May I not answer, first because they hope in winter
delightfully in rest and quiet to enjoy their plenty. Secondly, some say for
fear of punishment, those that are idle being enforced, but a fear of
starving (the worst of punishments) prompts them forth; for if they be not
timely furnished, with a competent provision, they must inevitably perish.
Thirdly, because it is incompatible to their nature to be idle. They have a
natural propensitie and inclination to their honey-gathering labors. Tantus
amor ^lorum et generandi gloria mellis. And this delight, as a watch wound up,
carries them sweetly on through all difficulties and dangers. Three goodly
threads which twisted all together have strength enough to draw the most sleepie
sluggard out of his bed of sloth and idleness. And if it should be
questioned, why the people of God are so constant, so faithful in such
fruitless services (as the world accounts them) and not dashed out of
countenance, nor danted by afflictions, but hold on their practice and
diligence in a course of obedience, maugre the malice and mischiefs the
oppositions and contradictions of men and Devils. First, from the hope of a
blessed reward, which makes them with Heb. 11. 25.
Moses choose rather to suffer afflictions with the people of God, then to
enjoy the pleasure of sin for a season. Secondly, from the fear of a just
punishment and a curse if they should decline and balke the service of God. For
we must all appear 2 Cor. 5. 10, 11.
before the Iudgement-sea^e of Christ, that every one may receive according to
that he has done. And though here were weight enough (as a late learned Divine
observed) to set the most rustie wheels a going; yet because these two may
work in Dr. S^ough^on, The preachers dignity and duty.
base minds, and are in themselves but sinister ends, which many that seem to
go straight may look a squint upon; fear in the fore-ward, and hope and
reward in the rere-ward, marshall all their forces, and love in the maine
battle, or rather tota in toto et tota in qualibet part, animates every one
to valor and victory: punishment is servile, and hope of reward is mercenary.
There is a third motive which is the peculiar character of a Christian mind,
and that is love. And this winds up a Christians affections to that intention
of zeal and fervency. Reward has an attractive, and punishment an impulsive,
but love has a compulsive faculty: reward draws him, punishment drives him,
but love hales him forward to the discharge of his duty; hope like a tender
mother enticeth him with a reward, fear like a severe Master incites him with
a punishment, but love like a sovereign Lord commands him. Hope hales before
him, and fear blows behind him, and both on each side row him, but love
within like the very soul of obedience, teaches him a natural motion.

LXXVI.
Bees are neat and cleanly creatures, and careful to carry forth all dross,
soil, and filth, least their hives should be defiled; yet sometimes because of
long violent colds, many enemies, weaknesses, because of some distempers, it is
requisite for the Be master to help in the purging of them. The Church of God
after a long time of peace is apt to gather and contract corruption, as water
does by standing, as the air it self will, Dr. Sibb^, The Churches visitation.
if it have not the wind to purge it. And as it is in the bodies of men, if
they be not curiously looked unto (after a certain time) they will gather such
a burden of humors, as will rise to a distemper, so that they must be let
blood or purged, etc. Such is the infirmity of men's nature, and the malice of
Satan, that enemy to mankind, that the best of Gods people will quickly gather
some distemper or other, and stand in need of purging. And we are as much
beholding to Gods corrections as to his comforts in this world, without which
we should quickly settle upon our dregs.

LXXVII.
Bees in the honey-season bestirre themselves; the winter is long, and their
enemies many, and therefore much pains must be taken beforehand, or else they
will miscarry. And if they be late swarms, notwithstanding all their
diligence, except there be an additionall supply by timely feeding, want cannot
be prevented. Were the winter short, robbers few or none, ill weather but a few
weeks, as in Sicilia, Ethiopia, and some Southern Climates, small preparation
might serve the turn; but in our colder regions the greatest pains are
seldom too much, sometimes not enough. Whosoever enters upon the profession of
religion with vain hopes of ease and pleasure, does but delude his own soul;
forecast therefore what will fall, and get provision of grace beforehand to
sustain. As if a man were to go a dangerous journey, he provides himself of
weapons and cordialls, and all the encouragements he can, least he should faint
in the way. Whereas he that walks for his pleasure, provides nothing, he cares
not for his weapons, or his cloak, because if a storm comes, he can quickly
run under shelter. He that makes religion a recreation, can walk a turn or
Dr. Sibb^, Difficulty of salvation.
two for his pleasure, and when any difficulty arises, can retire and draw in
his horns again; but a true Christian that makes it the maine act of his life
to please God, arms himself for the worst that can befall him; he is resolved
not to retire for any trouble or perfecution whatsoever that stands between him
and happiness.

LXXVIII.
Man swerving from the end for which he was created, and Mr. ^^l^s, The
worldlings lookingglasse.
serving the Devil, the world, and his fleshly lusts, degenerates from his
nature, and becomes worse then the very beasts, for they stand firm in their
places enjoined them by God in their creation. The Be is careful to do Gods
work, having no tutor nor remembrancer, but man is senseless and careless to
obey his Maker.

LXXIX.
As the Be sucks honey out of every flower, and a good stomach Mr. T. Goodwin
The vanity of thoughts.
sucks* out some sweet and wholesome nourisliment out of what it takes unto it is
self: So does a holy heart, so far as sanctified, convert and digest all
into spiritual and useful thoughts.

LXXX.
There is no vice in a man, whereof there is not some analogy Dr. Hall,
Occasional Meditat.
in the brute creatures: As among us men there are theives by land, and Pirates
by sea, that live by spoil and blood; so is there in every kind among them
variety of natural sharkers: the Hawke in the air the Pike in the river, the
Whale in the sea, the Lion and Tiger in the desert, the Waspe in the hive, the
Spider before the hive, sometimes among the flowers in the Bees walk. And see
how cunningly this little Arabian spreads out his tent for a prey, how
heedfully he watches for a passenger? so soon as ever he hears the noise of
a Be (or a fly) a far off, how he hastens to his den; and if that silly
heedlesse traveller, do but touch upon the verge of that unsuspected walk,
how suddenly does he seize upon that miserable booty? and after some strife
binding him fast with those subtle cords, drags the helpless captive after him
into his cave. What is this but an Emblem of those spiritual freebooters that
lie in wait for our souls; They are the Spiders, we the Bees, they have
spread their nets of sin, if we be once caught, they bind us fast, and hale
us into hell. Oh Lord, deliver thou my soul from their crafty ambushes: their
poison is greater, their webs both more strong, and more insensibly woven:
Either teach me to avoid temptation, or make me to break through it by
repentance; oh let me not be a prey to those fiends that lie in wait for my
destruction.

LXXXI.
The Be gives honey, but sometimes she stings: prosperity Mr. Watson, Art of
divine contentment.
has it is sweetness, and also it is sting. Sunshine is pleasant, but sometime
it scorcheth.

LXXXII.
Bees love their Queen, and therefore will fight courageously in her defense,
is she present with them, and excites them with her voice (like a trumpet) they
will even to the last gasp venture their lives* they are in the eye of their
Leader, and that makes them bold and daring. And shall a Christian pretend love
to his God, and not be courageous in the presence of his great Lord and Master,
who is ever present with him, about him, and in him; undoubtedly, he that has
seen God once in the face of Christ dares look the grimmest creature in the
face, yea death it self under any shape. The fear of all things flies before
such a soule^ only a Christian is not ashamed of his confidence. Why then
should he not be as bold for his God, as others are for the base gods they make
for themselves?

LXXXIII.
Bees long shut up in their hives in winter with extremity of cold, upon a
fair calm day when the Sun has warmed and cheared them with his quickening
beams, will show their thankfulness (as it were) in a pleasing murmur, and
dance Lavolta's in many circumgiring motions and circling vagaries in the air,
and then returning into their hive will make there a loud congratulatory
humming, whereas before they were in a dull and silent posture. And it is as
natural for the new creature Dr. Sibb^, com. in a Epist. ad Corinth. c. 1. v.
2.
(when it feels the Sun of righteousness warming the soul, when it tastes
of God in Christ) to show forth it self in thankfulness and praise: and it
can no more be kept from it then fire can keep from burning, or water from
cooleing. It is the nature of the new creature so to do.

LXXXIV.
Bees when they got forth in a swarm, will sometimes be provided of a
habitation before hand, some hollow tree or hive not far remote where the
Bees dyed in the precedeing winter; but when they come to it (if not before)
they will prepare and purge it of all dead Bees, stinking Sandaracha, rotten
combs* and where the outside* of the combs are dry and crisple* they will
^ate and pare off the rotten wax* as Masons in building^ pare off the
crumbling outsides of the weatherbeaten* stones, (and then make a rue front)
that they may not after build upon a rotten noughty or weak foundation, their
art is not to pull down edifices, but to build them up, but they do that
which belongs not to them properly, that they may do that which belongs to
them; for they will not build upon an unsourd and crumbling foundation. God to
make his children trust in him, casts them cut of themselves, he will not build
on a rotten foundation, he will not build on carnal trust, pride, and
covetousness, but he will demolish that rotten foundation with afflictions and
crosses. He will use such meares that we shall have small joy to trust in
sin; he will force us by crosses and afflictions to go from our sins, he
will demolish that rotten foundation that he may raise up an excellent edifice
and frame of the new creature, that shall endure to everlasting. The work of a
Physician is to cure nature, not to weaken it, but if the body be distempered,
it must be weakened before it be strengthened, to make that sound he must give
them strong purgations, that shall afflict them and affect them as much as the
disease for a while, but all is to make them strong afterward: So God afflicts
us to drive us out of our selves, that we may come at last to trust in him, in
whom is all our good and happiness.

LXXXV.
Bees live like Soldiers in a Camp, and therefore as besieged Cities or Armies
that fear an approaching enemy, never dare give themselves wholly over to
security, but always night and day have their scouts, centiness, corp. du
guard, to keep watch and ward, least some of their many enemies should by a
sudden Camisado surprise or beat up their quarters. We have a hellish enemy
the Devil, a roaring Lion, who waits for a time of drowsy security,
wherein he may suddenly seize on us, and tear us in pieces. Therefore when
the^e seems to be most security and cessation of spiritual arms, let us
conceive the most danger to be at hand, and prepare and arm our selves against
the day of battle. For Hierom says truly, Tun^ maxim expugnaris, Ad Hesied.
lib. 2. c. 6.
cum te expugnari nos^is, thou br^ most assaulted when thou feel^st no assault.
When our adversary seems to sleep, he watches but an opportunity to run
upon us, and destroy us. Mr. Fo^^^^ke, Conflict between man and the Devil.
If we were assured that some fearful enemy was upon his march and
approaching toward us with fire and sword; the trumpets sounding, the drums
thundering, the horses neighing, and the Cannons roaring; what watch and ward
would we keep? how would every one bestirre him, and who would not thrust
himself into the danger, and be ready to stand in the gap to save his
Country, his life, his friends, his liberty, his goods? But Satan our
Arch-enemy, who seeks to destroy that which is far more precious unto us
then all these things, yea then all the world ( For what shall it profit a man
if he shall August Soli^^^. 16. Ini^^ i^us ut (...) semper v^gilat fire so^nn^,
et nos ut ^ st^^ amus (...) erigila^e e s^mno.
gain the whole world, and lose his own soul) is not only approaching, but
also encamped against us with all his forces, and shall we now sleep in sin,
and be senseless in gross security.

LXXXVI.
Be Masters tell us, that they are the best hives which make the greatest
noise; so that is the best conscience which makes the greatest noise with daily
reasonings before it is own bar. Mr. R. Abb^t, The assize at home.
If we never go to bed before we have parlied it out thoroughly with our
hearts, then we shall find of our selves as Alexander said of Antipater, That
he did wear white garments without, and was purple within; so we will give no
rest till we find some comfortable testimony of our amendment.

LXXXVII.
It is observable that the creatures nearest the earth, are most greedy to
accumulate, what creature stores up so much provision as the Be? But the birds
of the air that fly next heaven, neither sow nor reap, nor carry into the
barn, says our Savior. Mat 6 26.
We are next to heaven in profession, let us hate to be furthest off in
conversation.

LXXXVIII.
Bees are small creatures, but have great and dareing spirits, (and almost
deadly poison) though industry and diligence can work much to tame other
creatures, yet little on this; by a continued converse and frequent presence,
their rage and fury may be palliated, but once provoked near the hive, they
acknowledge no respect to any, For the most part those beasts have least
immanitie, that have most strength, Oxen, Horses, Mr. Adams, Poli^^ck hunting.
and Elephants are tame and serviceable; but Bees and Waspes have stings: So
wisely has the Creator disposed, that there might not be a conjunction et
potentiae et malevolentiae, that malice and might may not meet; so they are
suffered to have will to hurt and not power, or power and not will.

LXXXIX.
Religion is the greatest enemy to religion, the false to the true, favos etiam
vespae faciunt, Waspes also make combs, Tertul.
though instead of honey we find gunpowder.

XC.
The grub or worm in it is first state or life is a rude creature, not much
delighting in it self, less delighting others, but when it is shut up to be
transmuted, then it is for a time a formelesse lump, without any beauty or
comeliness: but wait a few days and the parts will appear, life will move
in these yet imperfect members which are at length perfectly formed, and then
it Mr. Conen, Expos. in Epist. John. c. 3. v. 2.
comes forth an agill useful creature. And as God does not make the whole
fabric of the world at once, though it wa^ not impossible to him being a God
almighty, but in the space of six days, so does God deal with his children:
when God creates in his children a new heart, he suffers first their hearts to
be as a rude and massy lump, full of darkness, and then sends his holy
Spirit into their hearts, which illuminates them, and drives away those black
clouds of darkness and ignorance, and then he breathes into them the sweet
air of his Spirit; And thus out of Tohu and B^hu is the new creature formed.

XCI.
We should do as the Be when she has sucked sweetness from the flower, she
better concocts and refires it in her own Mr. Wetson, Christians Charter.
body, and so it becomes pure honey. Thus when we have sucked any precious
truth, we should by holy meditation concoct it in our hearts, and then it would
become pure profitable honey.

XCII.
The young Bees as soon as they have past their second birth, and transmuted
their shape and qualities, and are winged and strengthened to fly abroad,
presently fall to their work, and imitate the elder Bees. And so does the
believing soul, as soon as it is borne again, strengthened and winged with
grace from God, makes after him in works of obedience, holiness and praises,
imitates the examples of the Prophets and Apostles, as they have followed
Christ. Let disadvantages be what will be, you cannot keep young Bees in the
hive when once transmuted and winged, no more can you keep the regenerate
soul from working the works of God, and with holy praises ascending to
heaven, when they are once under the line of Christ's everlasting love and feel
it shine mighty hot in them with full face, with perpendicular rays, but with
a present rapture make holiness their work and Hallelujahs all their language.

XCIII.
Honey is gathered with much art from great variety of trees and flowers; and
joy is a honey, a fragrancy made from above with much picking, choosing, and
composing.

XCIV.
Bees are neat sweet and cleanly creatures, naturally abhorring stinking
places and strong senting herbs. It is true they gather of the flowers of some
weeds which are bitter and offensive, but yet the flowers are not (as Broom,
Henbane, Mayweed) as your taste and smell may inform you. But where the flowers
participate of the ill sent of the herbs they meddle not at all (as Gallopsia,
Cheesrunnet). And Christ puts ^io toades in his bosom (says one) nor
believers wicked men into M. L^^ie^, Useful instruct^ons.
the intimacy of their affections, purity will bosom purity, corruption
cannot delight in uncorruption, Heterogeneals will not incorporate, light and
darkness are inconsistent, gracious and ungodly men cannot live and link
together. A good heart cannot with more pleasure rest it self then in Gods
resting place, in Christ's society, in the way of the Spirit, in the Ministry
of Angels, and fellowship of the Saints.

XCV.
In the Common wealth of Bees all are employed, none are idle; The Commander
directs and orders, the Drones are useful for procreation, and by their heat
very isntrumental for the hatching of the young Cure, every one contributes
somewhat to the public good. And in the Bee-hive of the Church, there is no
pretense for any man to be idle in the profession of religion. Thou have not
riches, thou can not give; thou have not place* thou can not show
countenance to others* but if thou be a child of God, thou have the Spirit
of prayer, the Spirit of adoption, the Spirit of a son in thee, which enables
thee to pray for thy self and others, there is no Christian but he may do
this.

XCVI.
Bees though they freely act in all their undertakings, yet do they all with
reference to the public, and in subordination to the Queen, whom they not
only love, but after a sort live in; for without her they will live no longer
in their old habitation; not at all, except they get under the regiment of
another. And this their Queen they delightfully serve and observe, her
(silent) directions do they readily comply withal; once, their carriage in
and out of the hive is regulated and squared by a love of and awe unto this
their Commandresse. And it should be with believers after this manner,
wheresoever we are, or whatsoever we do in the world, our conversation here
must be directed by a higher aspect. The ship while it is tossed in the Sea i^
ruled by the Pole star, that must guide it: So in our conversation in the
world, the staff of our conversation may be the business we have in the
world, but the rule the regiment of all must be from heaven, with an eye to God.

XCVII.
A little honey is sweet, much ^ulsome: such is pleasure, whose Dr. Hall,
De^^d. ^ epist. ^.
insinuations are so cunning, that you shall not perceive your excess, till
you be sick of a surfeit.

XCVIII.
Revenge commonly hurts both the offerer and sufferer, as we see in the foolish
Be (though in all other things commendable, ^^em Med and Vows, 1. cent.
yet herein the patter^e of fond spightfulnesse) which in her anger invenometh
the flesh, and loses her sting, and so lives a Drone ever after (indeed lives
not long after) I account it the only valor, to remit a wrong, and will
applaud it to my self as right noble and Christian, that I might hurt and will
not.

XCIX.
Have thou found honey, that is, have thou found the sweetness (...) (...) in
Prove^b. 15. 1^.
of a man's familiarity or conversation, eat that which is sufficient for thee,
that is, use his friendship or familiarity to sobriety; not altogether
withdrawing thy self, least he forget thee; not yet too frequently visiting,
least he loath thee; for it is better by seldom coming to make thy presence
desirable, then by frequent visits to make him weary of thee. Whereupon the
son of Sirach says, Be not unsatiable in any Eccles. ^^. 29.
dainty thing, nor too greedy upon meats: but the words which follow make it
clear, Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbors house, least he be weary of
thee, and so hate thee.

C.
Although Bees have small strength, yet have they great anger Calvin C^mem. in
Psalm* 118.
and insatiable wrath, and when they violently pursue any, do not a little
terrify and affright them. Such is the pertinacious and implacable rage of the
enemies of Gods people, that if God did not wonderfully stand by, interpose and
support them, they would unavoydably perish: but they are quenched as the fire
of thorns, which although it makes a great crackling noise in the beginning,
and a greater flame then solid wood, yet is suddenly extinct and consumed, so
that in a word, though wicked men tumultuously set upon Gods people, their
violence in a moment shall come to nothing.

THE SECOND CENTURIE.
I.
Temporal occasions open the mines to dig out spiritual instruction: For
Christians may clime by the stairs of these inferior creatures, to
contemplate the glorious power of the Creator. A good Christian like the Be
works honey from every flower; suffers no action, demonstration, event to step
by him without a question. All objects to a meditating Solomon are like wings
to rear and mount up his thoughts to Mr. Adams, Sinners passing bell.
heaven. As the old Romans when they saw the blew stones thought of Olympus* so
let every object, though low in it self, elevate our minds to mount Sion. A
mean scaffold may serve to raise up a goodly building; it was once said,
Faelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas; now better, Faelix qui potuit rerum
cognoscere casus. It is good to know the casual beginnings of things* it is
better to know their casual ends It is good to be a natural Philosopher, but
better to be a supernatural, a Christian Philosopher, that whiles we
intentively observe the creature, we may attentively serve the Creator.

II.
Some use flowers only for the beauty or the smell* the Physicians Mellif^^ium
similem Ioach. Nisai.
for health, but the Bees for honey. So do wise and p^udent persons apply
their studies for the enriching and feeding of their minds.

III.
As a Spiders web is not therefore better because it is woven out of her
bowels; so neither is the labor of the learned ^ipsius in ^^tis in lib. 1.
P^l^^. c. 1.
more contemptible, because as Bees, they gather much from others.

IV.
Consider a Be (out of a hive) as a solitary Insect, and it is the most
helpless and shiftlesse creature that is; If she works, alone she cannot
frame repositaries to lay up food; would she breed, she cannot both hatch the
young and gather meat. Is she assaulted with enemies, alone she has no
defense nor power: Finally, she cannot secure her self from any, much less
from the many evils and enemies whereto she is obnoxious. And what is a man
out of Christ? as a man in a storm that has no clothes to hide his
nakedness, to cover him from the violence of the tempest. As a man in a
Huricane, that is out of a house to shelter him, as a stone out of the
foundation that is scattered here and there as neglected, as a branch out of
the vine, without sap and influence, ready to be cast into the fire. A man out
of Christ that is not clothed with him, that is not built on him, that is not
grafted into him, is a destitute forelorne and neglected wretch.

V.
The weakest creatures have the strongest shelters. Bees have hives and hollow
trees to secure them; thus weakness occasionally is a help, for conscience of
weakness makes all creatures seek for supply out of themselves. So the Conies
(as Agur says) hide themselves in the rock, they fly to their buroughs; and
the Bees to their hives. Man is a weak creature in himself, weak in
judgment, weak in affection, but the consciousnesse of our weakness should
make us seek for strength out of our selves, go to God in Christ, and then he
is a kind of almighty man. I can do all things (says the Apostle) in Christ
that strengthens me. A Christian is omnipotent if he depend upon the promise,
and commit his ways to God, but he is impotent and weak in himself, it is
God therefore that must establish us.

VI.
Gnats in numerous multitudes (like clouds) do nothing D^. Hall, Occasional
Meditat.
but play up and down in the warm Sun and sing; and when they have done sit
down and sting the next hand or face they can seize upon; see here a perfect
Emblem of idleness and detraction: how many do thus miserably spend their
good hours? who after they have wasted the succeeding days, in vain and
merely unprofitable pass time, sit down and backbite their neighbors. The
Be sings too sometimes, but she works also; and her work is not more
admirable then useful; but those foolish flies do nothing but play and sing
to no purpose: Even the busiest and most active spirits must recreate, but to
make a trade of sport is for none but lasie wantons. The Be stings too, but
when she is provoked, these draw blood unoffended, and sting for their own
pleasure. I would be glad of some recreation, but to enable and sweeten my
work* I would not but sting sometimes, where is just cause of offense; but God
bless me from those men, which will ever be doing nothing or ill.

VII.
The Commandresse of the Bees is a Queen, a royal creature, and therefore she
works not, it is beneath her dignity to drudge and toil as the meaner
subject, she flies seldom abroad, communicates little with the world; state
procures respect and honor to eminent persons. Though she has a sting, yet
rather as an Ensign of power, then an instrument of revenge, for she never
uses it. It is the property of a base and dunghilly Dr. Sibbs, co^. in a
Epist. ad Corinth. c. 1. v. 2^.
spirit to be vindicative. If I be a Christian, I am a King, shall I debase my
self in sinful practiles? shall I cast my crown in the di^t? God has raised
me, and made me an heir of heaven, shall I abase my self to sin, and to base
lusts? (the Devils drudgery) so that I cannot role my own members, and yet
profess my self to be a King? When we are tempted to sin, and to base
courses let us say as good Nehemiah, when he was moved to fly, What shall such
a man as I fly? so should we say to any temptation, to base courses of life,
what shall such a man as I do this? For a Christian that is a King, that has
a guard of Angels about him, that is the most excellent creature in the world,
for him to abase himself to the world. He that is bred from heaven, for him to
have no higher thoughts then the things below, to have an earthly mind or
revengefull thoughts, is a shrewd presumption, that he is only a titular
Christian, and has not received the inward and spiritual anointing.

VIII.
All is one to God to make an Angel or a Be, to create the brightest Cherub,
or t^^^ most contemptible fly; for in every creation, no less then an
omnipotency must be the efficient, and no more then nothing is ever the object.

IX.
If the Queen Be be slain, or any ways miscarry, the whole hive is
overthrown: but if she safe, though they have weaknings, meet with injuries,
suffer from enemies, yet they will recover themselves and out* grow other
dangers. A man's darling sin is Satan's strongest hold, whither, when by the
power of the word he is dislodged out of other parts of the soul, he retires
as to his most impregnable Castle; but if in this he be over powered by the
blessing of God on the word of his Gospel, then is his dominion shaken, and
the man driven to a deep detestation of himself, thrown down to the lowest
step of a penitent dejection, he is inegered with thirsty greediness for
pardon and grace, and at length forced out of his natural estate.

X.
Bees in their private quarrels are patient and regardlesse, they neglect an^
slight personal injuries; but if their hives be assaulted, their Common wealth
beleagered or endangered with Waspes, robbing Bees, or other enemies, they
lustily bestirre themselves, fight it out to the death: whereas the Drones as
they watch against no danger, so they resist none, but love to sleep in a
whole skin, letting all go at six and seven (as they say:) like lazy
passengers in a dangerous leake, will not lay hands to the Pumpe, and yet must
miscarry with the ships destruction. And are not most men in the world Drones
not Bees? affected perhaps with their own troubles or reproaches, but silent
and sloathfull in Gods cause and truth, then they are loath to stir fearing
hatred, trouble, obloquie among men. If their own reputation be called in
question, it will not a little startle them, but if Gods name be blasphemed,
his word traduced, his ordinances violated, the course of the Gospel be
stopped, in the freedom and liberty whereof is the Churches happiness and
glory and the sailing of it the destruction of a people. Yet they are little
affected, it goes not to their hearts, they keep silence as if this of all
other things did least concern them. When Iehu approached near unto Iezabel,
and espied Dr. Sclater, Com* on Mal. c. ^. v. 16. 2 King. 9. 32.
her in her window, after the fashion of harlots; he cries out to them with
her, Who is on my side, who? and the Eunuchs threw her down. The Lord seems
sometimes thus to say to us in the extremities of the Churches affliction, and
he seems to cry to us, who is on my side? If then thou be silent, that which
our Savior has, will be here applied, who is not for him is sure against Mat.
12. 30.
him, and so shall be accepted in the day of accounts.

XI.
Waspes and Hornets are very noisome creatures, and therefore we seek their
destruction, Nay burn up nests and young, and that before they have injuried
us or ours, only because we know, what they would do, if they be suffered to
live and fly abroad. And shall poor Mortals think it much, if God who knows
our thoughts a far off and the principle, within us, and what men would do
if occasion be offered, which for the present they know not of themselves, as
Hazaels answer to Elisha imports, Think thou, etc. No wonder if the Lord
^ut* off ^ King 8. 13.
many in their youth and infancy, because he knows their nature, that they
would do this and this Such passages of his Dr. Preston, G^ds immensitie.
providence there may be, as to cut off children and young men out of the
foresight of the evil that they would do to his Church, because he knows
their thought a far off.

XII.
The Drones are always idle, observe them as often as you will and you shall
never find them carefully endeavoring their present or future good. Bees,
though laborious creatures, yet if you come to the hive in winter, especially
in extreme frosts and colds, are shut up, none appear, or if in a warm day
they fly a little abroad, yet they bring nothing home, contribute nothing to
the public treasury, they then seem to be as careless and as thriftlesse as
the Drones. But the Drones are constantly idle, and therefore at all times you
find them alike careless; come this day and you see them to gather nothing,
and come another time and you find them gathering nothing. But the Bees though
they be sometimes hindered for want of the external favor of the heavens that
they cannot gather, as in the winter time. Yet when the Sun returns in the
Spring, and the plants and trees begin to put on their Summer roabes, and the
heavens are clear and smile upon them, then they diligently follow their
delightful labors. Vigorous and spiritfull actions are not always infallible
characters of life; a man may be a living man and yet in a swoone, no action
left in him: a man may be a living Christian, and yet be in some deficiency of
spirit, and in some swoone, his spirits bound up and not in case for action
always in any kind; so that actions are not sure characters of being in the
right way to true happiness. For a godly man may be like a tree which may have
life in it, when it has neither fruit nor leaves upon it, as in the winter
time; Dr. Stoughton, Righteous man's plea to true happi nesse.
but in another season, they are more or less fruitful, for the Bias of their
soul is set to Godward, and to heavenward, and though it may by a rub be put
out of it is course, yet because the qualification of their souls are heavenly,
their affections are changed and turned, they will be exercising themselves in
spiritual duties: whereas wicked men in whom is no change of hear^ are never
heaven-bound; they may pretend it sometimes and make fair shows and promises,
as the Drones in a fair day fly abroad with many a circling motion, and a
great humming noise; but observe them, it it not to add to the public store,
but that they may with better stomachs devour the Bees labors. Thus the
Pharisees performed many duties, made long prayers, but to devour widows
houses.

XIII.
Every drop of honey is honey, and has the nature and definition of the whole,
it is throughout like to it self; so our felicity above is homogeneall,
heaven is all heaven, every corner of heaven, is a heaven; every thing that is
tasted a heaven; every thing that is smelt a heaven; every thing that is looked
upon or meddled with, a heaven, a full felicity to the soul.

XIV.
Bees are temperate feeders, but when they are violently robbed of their honey,
or forced from their hives, they will then eagerly and glutton-like fill
themselves, and scarce give over without smoking or much disturbance: Now they
are like to lose all which they had painfully labored for, and charily shut up
with waxen covers, as under lock and key, till a time of scarcity; And they
resolve therefore to have a share before all be gone. And thus many wicked men,
having had by legal terrors a fore-tast of hell fire before their time after
their deliverance, grow a great deal worse, and knowing their time to be but
short, fall on earthly delights more furiously, and graspe the pleasures of the
world with more greediness and insatiable importunity.

XV.
A Bees sting easily enters in, and when the Be is flowne away, yet the sting
remains and works it self with more violence deeper, diffusing thereby the
venom more strongly, and causing greater dolor and pain; and the longer it
continues, with more difficulty is it at last extracted: so that no man that
knows the danger, except he have the perfection of a mad man, would run the
hazard of the anguish by delaying to pull it out. And such is sin, it easily
pierces the soul, and when the tempter is gone, yet once entertained, it
easily winds it self further in; And having the plea of continuance and
custom will not be easily shaken off: shall a Blackmore change his skin, or
a Leopard his spots in three or four days, which they have contracted in
twenty or thirty years. Oh no, but (as a late Mr. Bolton, Instruct. for comf.
afflict. consc.
learned and holy Divine observes) the longer thou puts it off and deferrest,
the more unfit thou shall be to repent; thy custom in sinning will exercise
more tyranny over thee, the curse of God for going on still in thy trespasses
will be more heavy on thee; The corruption that lurked in thy own bosom will
be more strong against thee; Thy understanding will be more darkened with
hellish mists of ignorance; Thy judgment more perverted; Thy will more
subborne; Thy memory more stuffed with sensual motions; Thy affections more
rebellious; Thy thoughts more earthly; Thy heart more hardened; Thy conscience
more seared, and thy self more sold to sin, And every day thou conti^s
estate of darkness, thou art much more the child ^an then thou wast before.

XVI.
Bees have many enemies, the Mouse, the Waspe, the Spider, besides robbing Bees
their worst enemies; it is no wonder then if they keep a continual guard,
least they should be surprised, and examine every one that goes in and out, and
are presently in alarmes upon the least motion or disturbance; their safety and
well-being lies at stake. A believers condition is obnoxious to dangers, very
liable to temptations, and shall we not walk circumspectly, and stand always
upon our defense? We are naturally subject to so many b^tteries and breaches,
by the assaults of Original sin, and other implacable enemies to our souls,
that there is extreme need of perpetual watch and ward, of repenting and
repairing daily, least the new man be too much oppressed, and be often surprised
with the many and cunning encounters of the old Adam. The consideration of this
should prevail much with us, to set a daily guard about our souls. David was
very watchful, yet he was surprised unawares by the sudden rebellion of his
heart. We should therefore observe our hearts, as Governors do rebels and
mutinous persons. We see to what an excess sin grows in those that deny
themselves nothing, nor will be denied in any thing, who if they may do what
they will, turn all liberty into license, and making all their abilities
contributaries to the commands of overruling and over-ruly lusts.

XVII.
What a pity it is to see these profitable industrious creatures Dr. Hall,
Occasional Meditat.
fall so furiously upon each other? and thus stinging and biting kill each
other in the very mouth of the hive. I could like well to see the Bees do this
execution upon Waspes, enemies to their common stock, this favors but of
justice; but to see them fall foul upon those of their own wing, it cannot
but trouble their owner, who must needs be an equal loser by the victory of
either. There is no more perfect resemblance of a Commonwealth, whether civil
or sacred, then in an hive: the Bees are painful and honest compatriots,
laboring to bring wax and honey to the maintenance of the public state; the
Waspes are unprofitable and harmfull hang-bies, which live upon the spoil of
others labor, whether as common Barrettours, or strong thieves, or bold
Parasites, they do nothing but rob their neighbors. It is an happy sight
when these feel the dint of justice, and are cut off from doing further
mischief, but to see well affected and beneficial subjects undo themselves
with duells, whether of law or sword; to see good Christians of the same
profession shedding each others blood upon quarrels of religion* is no other
then a sad and hateful spectacle, and so much the more, by how much we have
more means of reason and grace to compose our differences and correct our
offensive contentiousnesse. Oh God, who art at once the Lord of Hosts and
Prince of peace give us war with spiritual wickednesses, and peace with our
brethren.

XVIII.
Creatures have their instincts, there is a natural instinct in every creature
to that feeds it; Bees go naturally to the flowers* by an instinct; so the
spiritual soul that has the lise of Christ, runs to whatsoever may feed
and maintain that life. All the creatures as soon as they are borne, run,
they know whither to go to suck, because that is ordained by nature for their
preservation; so there is an instinct in the soul to carry it, to that that
feeds and maintains it.

XIX.
Let a swarm be hived never so orderly, and the hive beforehand rubbed and
prepared carefully, let it be covered and shadowed from the Sun, and in a
word, in the best manner accommodated, yet if the Queene-Bee be wanting, there
is nothing but discontent, confusion, and hurly-burly, and after a hopeless
search, a final departure. Whereas a mean habitation with her presence will
give full content and satisfaction. Had we a Magazine of comforts, were we
possessed of heaven it Dr. Sibbs, St. Paul's s^^aite.
self, with all it is glory without Christ, yet heaven without him would not be
heaven. It is better therefore to be in any place with Christ, then to be in
heaven it self without him; all delicacies without Christ are but as a
funeral banquet when the Master of the feast is away, there is nothing but
solemness: what is all without Christ? I say the joys of heaven are not the
joys of heaven without Christ, he is the very heaven of heaven.

XX.
Bees by a natural sagacity can foretell a storm, yet sometimes are they
overtaken with unseasonable and rainie weather, but then do they hie
themselves a pace homeward getting under the Lee side of a hedge, and at last
secure themselves in their hives: but as soon as the tempest is over, and the
Sun breaks out they are abroad again, forgetting their former danger. Many
men in their outward crosses and afflictions, while the storm and tempest of
Gods wrath beats sore upon them, run to God as their rock, and enquire early
after him, but when once a hot gleame of former health and prosperity shines
upon them again, they hie as fast out of Gods blessing into the warm Sun
(as they say) from sorrow, to sin, to delight in sensuality, from seeking God
to security in their old ways.

XXI.
He that goes about to cure the wound of his conscience for sin, with
sensual delight; does as one that is stung with a Waspe, and rubbes with a
nettle the smarting place.

XXII.
As Bees when they are once up in a swarm, are ready to light upon every
bough, so rebels being risen up by the commotion of ambitious leaders, are apt
to follow every Sheba. It is unsafe for any State that the multitude should
know the way to an insurrection, the least tract in this kind is easily made a
path.

XXIII.
As Ionathans honey was sweet in the mouth, but bitter in the Dr. Hall,
Contemplat. lib. 12.
soul; for behold his honey was turned into gall. And if the eyes of his body
were enlightened, the light of Gods countenance was clouded by the act: So is
it with every sin, for though stolen waters be sweet, yet he knows not that
the dead are there.

XXIV.
It is observable in the old Law, that God hated the very resemblance of the
sin of pride, he would have no honey mingled in their offerings; Ye shall
burn no leaven, nor any honey in Levit. 2. 11. ^
any offering of the Lord made by fire. Indeed Leaven is sour, Mr. Watson,
Christians Charter.
but what is there in honey that should offend? why no honey? because honey
when it is mingled with meal or flower, makes it to rise and swell; Therefore
the people of Israel must mingle no honey in their offerings: this was to let
us see how God hates the resemblance of the sin of pride.

XXV.
Some Bee-Masters will be over-diligent to kill the Drones, because sometimes
when they are supernumerary, they will not only pester but prejudice the hive;
and at other times deceive the expectation of so large a tribute as they look
for from them: and yet in the mean time are negligent, or not sufficiently
careful to prevent the devouring Waspes or robbing Bees, which in a few days
will consume more then the Drones in a whole Summer. Bee-Masters ought to be
careful about the former, but most of all of these, because of that ruin and
desolation that is quickly occasioned by them. As a Shepherd M^ (...), (...)
Ioh, ^9. ^^.
should watch his lambs from flies, but most of all from Wolves and Foxes:
Sure he is but a sorry Shepherd, to kill the maggots in his sheep, and let
the former worry at pleasure. And surely (says one) he is a sorry Magistrate,
that stocketh and whippeth and hangs poor snakes when they offend (though
that is to be done too) but lets the greater thieves do what they l^st, and
dares not or cares not to meddle with them. Like Saul, who when commanded to
destroy all the Amalekites, both man and beast, slew indeed the Rascality of
both, but spared the greatest of the men and fattest of the cattle, and slew
them not.

XXVI.
Mothes are supposed to be offensive to the Bees; sure I am, if the Bees be few
they will breed their blots in their combs, and quite spoil them, and thereby
force those few to desert the hive; for remedy whereof it is prescribed by some
to smoke the combs, and so to expel and chase them away. Which practice
mystically informs Magistrates that if they would be rid of those Mothes and
Gnats that swarm about the Courts of Justice, and will be offering to buzze at
their ears false reports of their brethren, they should cashiere and smoke
them away. Magistrates should do well therefore to begin reformation at home,
and if any of them have a servant that hears not well deservedly, to put him
away out of hand, and to get an honester in his Room.

XXVII.
Bees, though chilled and dead with cold, or drowned in water, if in a
convenient season they be laid near the fire, or in a hot Sunshine, will
revive after a while, and recover as if they had never miscarried. For there is
some hidden though undiscerned life, and by the aid of that little remainder
of vivifying power (which was more strong originally, and is not yet totally
extinct) now further called forth and wrought upon by adventitious heat, there
is a new quickening and life. So by the awaking of the North wind and coming of
the South, I mean the blessed Spirits breathing upon a regenerate heart,
sti^led dangerously with some pestilent lust, by stirring up and refreshing the
retired and radical power of grace, that immortal seed of God never to be
lost, will sweetly and graciously bring it again to it is former spiritual
comfortable temper and constitution. Dr. ^^llan^ Divinity professor in Oxford.
Moderating in this question holden negatively, An justi fides potest ad tempus
ami^^i, aut fina^iter des^. e^e.
The Lords chosen may fall from their outward prerogatives, and from the
fruits: but that divine nature still abides in them: and it is only with their
grace, as it is with the mind in distempers of Melancholy and Frenzy; with
the Sun in Ecclipses; with the tree, when leaves and fruit fail it; with the
natural life, when it moves not, nor yet breaths sensibly, which in
diseases of the Mother is often discerned.

XXVIII.
The ancients prescribed (as for other causes so for this also) to stop up the
hives every third day; that the Bees might when they were set at liberty, with
greater earnestness and delightful diligence ply their labors. And we find
by experience, when they have been a while shut up and imprisoned by
unseasonable weather, they follow their work more eagerly, on the first
opportunity (as a stream stopped for a little while, will break out with
greater violence after) they will now lose no time, but be at their labors
both more early and late, then when they were not kept in; Nay in such weather
when (had they not been restrained before) they would have lain still asleep
in the bed of ease in their hives. Sometimes the Lord may for a time retire the
light of his countenance, and sense of Mr. B^lton* Instruct. for c^. afflict.
conse.
his graces from his children, for trial, quickening, and exercise of
spiritual graces, that they may put forth themselves with more power,
improvement, and illustriousnesse: the cold comfort of a disertion in this
case, being unto them as water cast upon the Smithes forge, to make some of
them especially to burn inwardly as it were in the mean time with new
intention and heat, to brea^^ out and flame more gloriously: there are many
gracious dispositions and indowments in the Christians heart, which would never
see the light, at least with such eminency, were it not for this darkness: the
brightness of lamps languish in the light but they burn clear in the dark:
the splendour and beauty of the Saints, would never appear were there no night.

XXIX.
Bees troubled a while at the hive will be very angry, and by and by very
numerous, and so unresistible, for their fury and their numbers increase
together; perhaps but a few at first assault you, but being much opposed, they
call out many partakers, and in a little time a few will prove a multitude: as
rivers grow greater and greater, the further they are off from their springs,
the more they enlarge their channels until they empty themselves into the
Ocean. Storms we know arise out of little gusts. The first risings of sin are
to be looked unto, because there is most danger in them, and we have least care
over them: corruption till it be over-powred by grace, swells bigger and
bigger, so that like rust it will by little and little eat out all the Dr.
Sibbi, The Souls conflict.
grace of the soul. There is no staying when we are once down the hill,
until we come to the bottom. When the heart begins once to be kindled, it is
easy to smoother the smoke of passion, which otherwise will fume up into the
head, and gather into so thick a cloud, as we shall lose the sight of our
selves, and what is best to be done. C^ush therefore the first insurrections
before they come to break into open rebellions; little risings neglected cover
the soul, before we are aware, stifle them in their birth, stop the beginning,
and so soon as they begin to rise, let us begin to examine who raised them,
and whither they are about to carry us.

XXX.
The Be never stings, but pays the price of it with her life. Chrysest* com.
in Epist* ^rim^m a^ The^s* c. 5.
By this God instructs us, that we should not wrong our neighbors, for we our
selves shall if not first yet wo^st suffer, and they perhaps receive little or
no prejudice, but we shall be as sure as the Bees to dye for it. And yet the
son of Syrach praises that creature, saying* The Be is small among fowls,
and her fruit has the beginning of sweetness. But this gives her no security
to escape death, if she sting^ the must p^rish; And if her many excellencies
will not exempt or free her from destruction if she does ill, much less shall
we. We are most savage beasts, we first wrong our neighbors, who never
injuried us; Nay we are far worse in this respect then Bees; For if you
suffer them to live in their hives, and by molesting and vexing of them put
them not upon a necessity of defense, they will never hurt, never injure,
never sting, but go their ways and follow their business. But thou who art a
reasonable man, dignified with so much honor and gl^^y imitates the beasts,
and that toward those that are of the same rank with thee; wrongest, hurtest,
devourest thy brother; what says Paul, 1 Cor* 6. 7.
Why do ye not rather take wrong? why do you not suffer your selves to be
defrauded, nay you do wrong and defraud, and that your brethren. You see then
you wrong your selves, when you wrong others, and that you receive a courtesy
when you are injuried.

XXXI.
Bees will not continue in a stinking or impure hive, and therefore Ejusdem.
com. in Epist Pa^li ad Ephesians c. 4. 1. 4.
they that delight in them prepa^e the stools where they set them with
perfumes, sweet smelling ^oughs, and fragrant flowers, and other delightful
things, whereon the Bees when they go forth of the hive may light, least ill
favors should force them to forsake their stations. And thus deals the holy
Spirit, our soul is the hive, accommodated and fu^nished with sweet spiritual
gifts and graces, but if there be bitterness and anger and wrath, he will
forsake such hives. And therefore the blessed and wise husbandman (namely, St.
Paul) does endeavor to trim and prepare our hives (our souls) and that
without knife or any other iron instrument; And calls us a spiritual Bee-fold,
which yet he first purges with prayers, with Ephesians. 4. 30, 31.
labors and all other things necessary hereunto.

XXXII.
Bees with their swift and nimble wings fly from flower to Eju^dem Com. in
Psalm. 115. 1. 1^.
flower, and draw out the latent native sweetness with a harmless
unprejudiciall robbery, that therewith at length they may provide and afford
sweet honey for the sons of men: So the Ministers of the Gospel are
sollicitously careful with the light wings of meditation, to light on the
pleasant and delightful gardens of the Scriptures, that they may pleasingly
instill and drop in the sweet honey of faith into the hearts of their hearers.

XXXIII.
Bees prepare their food in Summer, they borrow not, they beg not, but
exercising their natural endowments, are diligent in labor, and that without
force or compulsion, and never give over while the weather and season serves.
And although they be weak and small creatures, yet with their nimble wings
fly through the valleys, and over the mountains, the woods and forests,
though some miles remote and distant from their habitations, gathering of every
profitable tree and flower, and not only the elder but the younger also. And
are images herein of and patterns to thristie householders, who diligently
labor themselves and excite and encourage all theirs from their youth to
provide for future; secondly, their great prudence appears in understanding
the seasons for their gathering, providing in the Summer against winter, for if
weather would give leave, they should in vain seek for honey in the winter;
thirdly, so great is their sedulity and diligence, that they are not altogether
idle in the night, but then trim their hives by biting off the staring and
offensive strawes, eating down their rotten combs where there be any, pulling
forth their dead spet which they carry forth in the day, hatching their young,
and probably feeding of them: fourthly, their justice, they rob not those that
are laden, but each gathers for her self and all the rest, for they are
political: fifthly, their astrology in foreseeing change of weather, when
they will not venture far from their hives: sixthly, this is also
praiseworthy and imitable, that they carry forth their de^d to burial, and
not only the Pismire as Franzius Franzius * ani^^l tract. 4. c. 14.
^^firmes.

XXXIV.
Waspes are bold and saucy, whatsoever fruits, flesh, plummes sweet meats you
have, they will impudently intrude, and if they ^e not prevented carry away a
portion. And such are troublesome and vain thoughts, crowding into our best
and most religious services. Abraham must drive away the birds from the Genesis
1^. 11.
sacrifices, and we must continually watch against vain and evil thoughts,
which will always come before they be sent for, but let them find
entertainment accordingly.

XXXV.
If nature te^ch Bees, not only to gather honey out of sweet flowers, but out
of supposed bitter; shall not grace teach us to draw even out of the bitterest
condition something to better our souls.

XXXVI.
Bees are affected with a deep degree of love to their Leader, with whom
(having nothing) they esteem themselves happy; but without her (in the
greatest plenty and fulness) are full of perplexity and trouble. If she
goes forth of the ^ive, they (leaving house, children, goods) follow after,
and stay where she abides; If she being weary and faint fall by the way, they
will encompasse her, stay with her (and returning no more to their forsaken
full-stored hives) starve with her, rather then leave and desert her. This
ardent love and affection planted in them by nature, eats up and devoures all
other desires, and over-eager delights in any contentments as worthless and
empty. So that the Sun-flower does not more naturally turn toward the Sun,
and the iron to the Lodestone, and the Loadstone to the Pole star, then the
domestic honey*Bees embrace and affect the Queene*Bee. And a believing soul
is as much nay more deeply and dearly enamoured of her beloved, advancing
Jesus Christ highest in his thoughts, and prizing him far above the pleasures
and profits and glories of the whole world; he so sets his eye and longing upon
him, as to hold himself for ever lost without his love, and for the gaining of
it if need were would he pass through a piece of hell. Thus are the current of
his best affections and all the powers of his humbled soul bent and directed
toward him. He vows and gives up the flower and prime of all his abilities,
loves, joys, endeavors, performances in any kind to his highest Majesty. He
consecrates all the powers and possibilities of body and soul to do him the
best and utmost service he can any ways devise, and still grieves and walks
more humbly, because he can do no better service.

XXXVII.
Bees work all in common, feed in common, breed up their young in common: Each
provides for his fellow as for her self, every one is affected and
sympathizeth in a common danger, as if it were her own alone. In a word, each
does fight with undanted resolution, in the defense and preservation of her
fellow as if it were her own particular injury. How many bastard-Christians
are there that sympathize not with their brethren, whose hearts are neither
enlarged with lightsomnesse, nor yet ecclipsed with grief, as they hear of
the prosperity or oppression Mr. B^^^^n, Instruct for comf. afflict. consci.
of Gods people. Pitilesse and hard-hearted Canniballs, who all this while so
many noble limbs of that blessed body of the reformed Churches have lain in
tears and blood, did never take to heart, to any purpose, or trouble
themselves at all with their grievous troubles, but have sottishly and securely
lain at ease in Sion, not helping the people of God so much as with a hearty
fellow-feeling, wrestling with God in prayer, set days to seek the return of
Gods face and favor, men they are of the world which have their portion in
this life, who feel nothing but worldly losses, know nothing but earthly
sorrows, relish nothing but things of sense. If they be stung with a dear
year, they howl and take on immoderatly: but let Joseph be afflicted, Gods
people in disgrace, the daughter of Sion weep bitterly, and have none to
comfort her, these merciless men are no whit moved, they have not a tear, a
groan or sigh to spend in such a woeful case.

XXXVIII.
Waspes are very dangerous enemies to Bees, being bold and strong, they will
first prey on dead Bees, which they divide and carry by halves to their nests;
but they quickly proceed further and venture into the hives, and rob the
combs, and will after come with such numbers that they will destroy the whole
stock, unless they be timely prevented, which must be done not so much by
observing and killing them near their hives, but finding out their nests, and
destroying them altogether. For the subduing of our selves it is good to follow
sin to the first hold and Castle, which is corrupt nature, the streams will
lead us to the springhead: indeed the most apparent discovery of sin is in the
outward carriage, we shall see it in the fruit before in the root; as we see
grace in the expression before in the affection, but yet we shall never hate
nor subdue sin thoroughly, till we consider and fight against it in the poisoned
root from whence it arises. It is a good way upon any particular breach of our
outward peace, presently to have recourse to that which breeds Dr. Sibbs, The
Souls conflict.
and foments all our disquiet: Lord, what do I complain of this my unruly
passion, I carry a nature about me subject to break out continually on any
occasion. Lord strike at the root, and dry up the fountain in me, for
otherwise, though the streams were stopped, and the branches cut off, and the
sparkles quenched, yet there would be a perpetual supply, as long as the
poyson-full root remains.

XXXIX.
Many Bees (especially when the gathering season is over, and the state of
flowers decayed, about August will be curiously prying into their fellows
hives: at first a few give the onset, and if they be let alone unresisted, or
weakly opposed, then they double and treble their forces, fetching at their
return more of their company, and violently make a prey of all. But if these
scouts and ring leaders, as they press in be beaten out, roughly entertained
and st^utly opposed and fought withal, they will then by degrees desist, and
at last quite give over. Vain and wicked thoughts, if men give way unto them
without checking the motions of them, will p^esse (as busily as flies in
Summer) into the heart, but a good heart will not own them, nor allow himself
in them, but stands at staves end with them, casts them off as hot water does
the scumme, or as the stomach does that which is noisome unto it. They find not
in it that intertainment which they have in carnal hearts, where the scumme
seeths in, which are stews of unclean thoughts, shambles of cruel and bloody
thoughts, exchanges and shops of vain thoughts, a very forge and min^ of false
politic and undermining thoughts, yea often a little hell of confused and
black imaginations.

XL.
See you that narrow mouthed glass which is set near to the Dr. Hall,
Occasional M^di^a^.
hive, mark how busily the waspes and flies resort to it, being drawn thither
by the smell of that sweet liquor wherewith it is baited; see how eagerly they
creep into the mouth of it; and fall down suddenly from that slippery
steepinesse into that watery trap from which they never rise; there, after some
labor and weariness they drown and die; you do not see many of the
laboring Bees look that way; they pass directly to their hives, without any
great notice taken of such a pleasing bait. Idle and ill disposed persons* are
drawn away with every temptation, they have both leisure and will to
entertain every sweet allurement to sin; and wantonly prosecute their own
wicked lusts, till they fall into irrecoverable damnation: whereas the diligent
and laborious Christian, that follows hard and conscionably the works of an
honest calling, is free from the danger of these deadly enticements, and lays
up honey of comfort against the winter of evil: happy is that man who can see
and enjoy the success of his labor, but how ever, this we are sure, if our
labor cannot purchase the good we would, it shall prevent the evil we would
avoyde.

XLI.
A Be stinging a dead body takes no hurt, but stinging a live Dr. Physe^^* The
mean in mourning.
body loses both sting and life together. In like manner, death so long as it
stung mortal men only, which were dead in sin was never a white the worse,
but when it stung Christ once who is life it self* by and by it lost both
sting and strength. Therefore as the Brazen Serpent was so far from hurting
the Israelites, that contrariwise it healed them; after the same sort death is
so far from hurting any true Israelite, that on the other side, if affliction
as a fiery Serpent sting us, or any thing else hurt us, it is helped and
redressed by death.

XLII.
That honey is sweet, it is not a conceit only, but the natural quality of
it is so; yet out of a taste of the sweetness, to think we cannot take too
much of it is a misconceit paid home with loathsome bitterness; though our
fancy be ready to conceive a greater blessing in outward good things then
indeed there is, yet we must not deny them to be blessings.

XLIII.
Bees when they are abroad at their work, if the clouds overcast, the air
grow dark, there be any prelude of a storm which they are very sensible and
apprehensive of, speedily and in have, thick and threesold repair to their
hives for shelter and security. And believers never pray so heartily, deny
themselves so thoroughly cling so fast to God, as when a storm is toward, or
when they are overtaken by a tempest of persecution.

XLIV.
Bees are not querulous complaining or discontented creatures, for when they
have with many a sore days labor and heavy burden filled their hive, and
thereby furnished themselves against a winters want: yet if they be driven and
robbed of all, have left neither meat nor materials to put in any, yet will,
if the weather serve, speedily and chearefully renew their labors, and with
double diligence seek out for a future supply. And shall believers think much
to suffer the spoiling of their goods, all that they have traveled and sweat
for, and when they have by many a dear days labor got a little somewhat
together, then to be spoiled of all in a moment, seeing they know they have in
heaven a better and more endureing Heb. 10. 34.
substance.

XLV.
When the worm dies, which is a more imperfect creature, then it revives
again, but is quite another from what it was before in every part and member:
before it was unable to act for it is own preservation, or the good of others,
could not move out of it is place; in a word, do nothing but eat what was
brought unto it; but after a transformation and renovation, it is agill and
active, laborious and profitable. And in the new birth, si licet parvis
componere magna, there must be a mortification of the old man, and then an
universal change and alteration in the whole man. For a new Spirit is
universal, it Mr. Harris, Treatise of the new Covenant.
goes through the whole man, leavens the whole lump, the new nature is common
to all the powers, not like a little spring that takes beginning in some piece
of ground, and ends in the same, but like the great Ocean that encompasseth the
whole world. And as it is universal, so it is alterative too, it amends not
the outside only, but the inward man also. It gives a man a new temper, it
makes him that was fearful and timorous, become bold and courageous, him that
was peevish and passionate, to be of a meek and quiet spirit, him that was
dull and cold, to be zealous and fervent; it makes him with Onesimus profitable
to himself and others.

XLVI.
Bees have a natural and inbred love to their Queen, which makes them in her
absence long after her, nay unweariedly seek for her without any other content
or satisfaction, but her presence and company, and finding her they will not be
severed nor sundered, pull them away as often as you will from her, yet still
they will draw near and cling to her. Carry her whither you will, if they be
sensible of it, you have their company also. How does this condemn the want of
love and affection of many subjects to their Governors, of many people to
their God? whom a little pleasure or profit shall easily divide. But Dr.
Prest^n, New Covenant.
though it be thus with the most, yet there is a disposition in the Saints to
long after the Lord, and it is not an empty choice that consists only in
affection, or in the nak^d resolution of the mind, but it is such a choice as
has strong affections running together with it, a strong inclination carrying
the soul to him; so that though he be hindered many times, and often in his
life unruly lusts come, and make a separation between the Lord and him, yet he
cannot abide to be long from him. It is the Lord that he loves, he cannot for
his heart choose another Master, but it is he with whom he will dwell, live,
and die. And if some have quite lost their natural affections to their God, no
wonder then, if they are weak in their affections to their Governors, and
bandy them as Tennis-balls of State, and smite them into every hazard. I
believe it not to be the practice of knowing people or Christian Nations, among
whom we look not to hear of a king killing position, except from the upstart
Commentari^s Reales por G^r^ilass^ de la Vega lib. 1. de ca. 2. part. c. 33.
brood of perverted statising Loyalist^. To pass therefore out of the old
world, we will instance in the new, where among much affection and singular
love and loyalty to their Princes, it is yet strange to hear of one
dissembling Zimri and politic Iehu, I mean Atahuallpa, who ambitiously
opposed, and at last by his agents overthrew and flew his Sovereign Huasear.

XLVII.
No worldly pleasure has any absolute delight in it, but as Dr. Hall, Medita^*
and Vows. 2 cent*
a Be, having honey in the mouth, has a sting in the tail. Why am I so
foolish to rest my heart upon any of them? and not rather labor to aspire to
that absolute God, in whom is nothing savouring of grief, nothing wanting to
perfect happiness.

XLVIII.
The godly man lives hardly, and like the Be toiles here during the Summer of
his year, holding himself short of his pleasures, as looking to provide for a
hard winter, which when it comes he is able to wear out comfortably, whereas a
wicked man does prodigally lash out all his joys in the time of his
prosperity and (like the Grasshopper) singing merrily all Summer is starved in
winter. I will so enjoy the present that I will lay up more for hereafter.

XLIX.
It is not good to eat much honey, because it is flatuous and H^er Ca^^*
p^^l^^ in Pro verb 25. 17.
windy, so he which is a searcher of Majesty shall be oppressed with glory; for
as too much light dulls and dazels the sight, so too great inquiry into the
Majesty and secrets of God blinds the understanding; therefore says Paul, Let
no man Romans 11. 3.
more highly think then he ought to think, but to think soberly, and seek
not out the things that are too hard for thee, neither search the things that
are above thy strength. And as honey is Eccles. 3. 23.
sweet while it is tasted, but if it be taken too much, it swelles and kills,
so the inquisition of the divine Majesty, and of heavenly secrets is
delightful, but if it be too much it killes with error, or swells with pride.
Knowledge pusses up, but charity 1 Cor 8.
edifies.

L.
Bees are molested with many evils and enemies, some endanger them at or near
their hives others assault and often surprise them in the fields, as the
Hornet, Titmouse, Spider, but many mo^e mis^arry by frosts and snowes in
winter, by cold storms chilling and tempestuous winds in the Spring, so that
they are never secure (though they help themselves in their troubles, by the
Lee-side of a hedge, encompassing a hill, and especially with the nimblenesse
of their wings) but in their hive, nor always there, except their keeper be
more careful. How many are the miseries of the sons of men, Ben Adam, Ben
En^sh, if the son of Adam, presently the subject of sorrow. A wicked man
sometimes in lesser distresses may find shelter in earthly comforts, but if
the storm grow black and raging, these will prove an Egyptian ree^, which not
only deceives but wounds us with the splinters; a deceitful brook then fails
the thirsty passenger, when there is most need of refreshing; I^bs miserable
comforters And he will be beaten out of all help from them, and be as a naked
man in a storm, as an unarmed man in the field, or as a ship tossed on the Sea
without an anchor, which presently dasheth upon rocks, or falle^h upon
quicksands. But a believer when he is driven out of all comforts below, nay
when God seems to be angry with him, can appeal from God angry to God
appeased, he can wrestle and strive with God by Gods own strength, plead with
God by his own arguments. Finally, when he is beaten out of all Dr. Sibbs, The
souls conflict.
comfort, he has (a hive) a God to run to; and therefore can with David in his
greatest exigencies comfort and encourage himself in the Lord his God. In this
he takes Sanctuary, that he is is in covenant with him, who sits at the stern
and rules all, and has committed the government of all things to his Son,
our brother, our Joseph, the second person in heaven. We may be sure no hurt
shall be fall us, that he can hinder, and what cannot he hinder that has the
keys of hell and of death? unto whom we are so near, that be carries our
names in his breast, and on his shoulder, as the high Priests did those of the
twelve Tribes: though his Church seem a widow neglected, yet he will make the
world know that she has a husband will right her in his good time, for when
men know us least, God will know us most, he knows our souls in adversity,
and knows them so as to support and comfort them, and that from the
Springhead of comfort, whereby the sweetest comforts are fercht.

LI.
There is nothing more dangerous then honey mixed with poison; T. S^^t, Ser, on
Mat 10. 1^.
and there is no man more perilous then a flattering fair tongued man, that
speaks out of a hollow heart.

LII.
As Bees of diverse (supposed) noisome flowers, make one Dr. James, on 1 Cor
1^. ^^.
sweet honey; so nature the best Schoolmistres of many contraries has made one
the most sweet and pleasant mixture in the body, and that therefore least there
should be any division in the body.

LIII.
We must be diligent in our calling, not like the sluggard, or Mr. Holbr^ke, on
Genesis 4. ^2.
the Drone in the hive, but like the laboring Be, taking the time while time
is, whilst the Sun shines making hay: which condemns such, that though
they will not be altogether without a calling, nay more then that will
sanctify it by the word and prayer evening and morning, yet will be negligent
in it, either too late at it, lying in their beds, turning them with the
sluggard (like the door on the hinges) folding their hands, and crying yet a
little more sleep, or else tatlers in their business (omitting many days)
with a show of walking in their calling, but in truth nothing less.

LIVE.
There is in the regiment of Bees an intrusive and troublesome Mr. Milles, on
Deuteronomy. 1. 16, 17.
Drone, which eats up the sweet honey, for which the poor painful creatures
have labored long before. And in the curious Bee-hive of this Commonwealth,
there are four sorts of idle Drones, much like the four sects of Philosophers
which sometimes flourished in Athens; The Academick, Epicure, Peripatetick, and
the Stoic. The first, were greatly given to study and contemplation, and
these are the idle gamsters who are all night in speculation, devising new
tricks, and inventing strange conveyances by Cards and Dice, which next day
they put in practice; God says* in the sweat of thy face, thou shall Genesis 3.
19.
eat thy bread, and these idle Drones live by the sweat of other men's brows,
only by playing. David with one smooth stone out of his bag discomfited the
whole host of the Philistines; and this idle Gamster with a blind bone out of
his juggling box, with the activity of a polypragmaticall ^inger, can in one
hour undo many an hopeful heir. The second Philosopher is an Epicure, who
daily gluts himself till the surfeiting reversions of fat trenchers are cast
under the table to dogs. This was Baltazars sin, who at his riotous banquet in
excess of wine among his Princes, wives and Concubines, forgot the Lord so
far, as Gods anger chalked his folly on the walls. In this fulness sinned
churlish Nabal, in forgetfulness of poor David, and his tried followers. And
in this fullness perished the gluttonous belly-god in the Gospel, who would
rather cho^ke with the crust, then hunger-bitten Lazarus should have the
crummes. These were those beasts with whom the Apostle encountered at Ephesus
after the manner of men. Their chief School-point was this; Let us eat and
drink, for tomorrow we shall die. Against these gourmandizeing Epicures God
grieveth and denounces a woe; Woe to them that eat the lambs of the slack,
and calves out of the stall, drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves very
costly, but no man says he is sorry for the affliction of Joseph.

The third is the Peripatetick, who used to dispute walking, and in this order
are Cunnycatchers, who like the Devil are always compassing the earth, and
still goeing up and down seeking whom they may devour. These cunning
Philosophers walk from Inn to Inn, from East to West, and with Satan can
turn themselves into an Angel of light, full of good words, and with Judas
embrace a man with a courtly boone-congee, and at parting cut a man's throat,
and empoverish many a plain dealing Country ghest, with cosenage in
copartnership.

The fourth idle Drone or sect of Philosophers, is the Stoic, who used to
keep their acts and disputations standing, and these I call your Minicall
Comedians and Apish Actors, who with Thraso thunder out sesquipedalia verba, a
heap of inkehorne terms, to the terror of a poor Collier, and with a
ridiculous tu quoque, move many a fool to laugh at their own follies.

LV.
Drones have larger bodies then Bees, seem fairer creatures, fly often in and
out of the hives, with a great noise and humming sound, but yet ^il dignum
tanto sonitu, they labor not, gather nothing, are all in appearance, nothing
in work or worth. And many hypocrites by common gifts planted in their wills
and affections, by excellent moral virtues of justice, temperance and
patience, may many times exceed the godly in outward appearance; as dead bodies
are greater and longer then living bodies, then the same bodies living, but yet
want a soul to actuate and quicken them.

LVI.
Bees when they are new driven, or go forth in a swarm, if they be not
desperately few, or the season quite gone, labor more diligently and improve
their time more carefully then other hives that are well provided for, and
therefore will be more early and late at their work then others; so by
diligence redeeming the time. Thus do these unreasonable creatures teach
reasonable men, by their continued care and providence, and laborious
paines-taking to increase their little; for if the iron be blunt then he must
put to the more strength, says the Preacher, and Maximum medi^^ris ingenij
subsidium diligentia; Eccles. ^^ 10 Sen. ^n cent^.
It is most incredible what industry and diligence and exercise, and holy
emulation are able to effect for the bettering and increasing of our spiritual
gifts. There is no usury so lawful as Mr. Sanders^n, on 1 Cor. 12. 19.
of spiritual talents, nor do I know any so profitable usury, or that
multiplyeth so fast as this does, your use upon use that doubleth the
principal (almost) in seven years is nothing to it. Oh then cast in thy
talents into the bank, make thy returns as speedy, and as many as thou can,
lose not a Market or a Tide if it be possible, be instant in season and out of
season, omit no opportunity to take in and put off all thou can, so though
thy beginnings be but small, thy latter end shall wonderfully increase, by this
means thou shall not only profit thy self in the increase of thy gifts unto
thy self, but (which no other usury does beside) thou shall also profit
others, by communicating of thy gifts unto them, which is the proper end for
which they were bestowed.

LVII.
If the Pismire must be praised and imitated for her industry and diligence, in
that she carefully provides her food in Summer, and her meat in harvest, when
as yet neither man nor beast (as far as I know) is any whit the better, the
fuller, the richer for all her labors: How much more worthy of praise and
imitation is the industrious Be, which in diligence is more abundant, in
paines-taking more earnest, in profit above measure? Let as many then as desire
true praise and imitation, cast gifts into the common treasury of the Church,
employ their good parts and spiritual graces, so as they be some way or other
profitable and serviceable to their brethren, and fellow servants in Church and
Commonwealth.

LVIII.
Delays in any thing that is good are ill, and in the best things worst. Wax
when it is chafed will take an impression, but if the seal be not speedily put
to it, it returns to it is former hardness; and the best affections of the
best men, if they be not taken in the heat, abate and lessen and die.

LIX.
The Waspes after their aged mother is unable to fly abroad (having her wings
worn with former labors) provide for her, and bring her food as long as they
themselves subsist, really performing what is reported of the Storke: But how
many worse then brutes are to be found in this last age without natural
affection? if at all relieving their parents, yet after such a niggardly and
sparing manner, that a man shall never come where their parents are, but hear
them cry out like Rebecca, that they are weary of their lives, or like Jonah,
it is better for them to die then to live. Nay the world swarms with some men
(or Monsters rather) such as Ezekiel speaks of and reproves, Ezekiel. 21. 7.
as set light by father and mother, such as, as soon condescend to relieve a
vag^ant by the high way side, as their own father or mother.

LX.
Sampson had not found his honey, if he had not turned aside Dr. Ha^l.
Con^empl. lib 10.
to see his Lion* And we shall lose the comforts of Gods benefits, if we do
not renew our perils by meditation. The mercies of God are ill bestowed upon
us, if we cannot step aside to view the monuments of his deliverance; dangers
may be at once past and forgotten.

LXI.
As the Be Master on occasion of want will feed his Bees, but never the
Drones; so true charity relieves those poor men that will labor, but not at
all, or rarely those last beggars that will take no pains.

LXII.
As Sampson eat the honeycomb out of a dead beast, and disdained not those
sweets because he finds them uncleanly laid; so good may not be refused because
the means are accidentally evil; honey is honey still though in a dead Lion.
Those are less wise and more scrupulous then Sampson which abhor the graces
of God, because they find them in ill vessels. One cares not for the Preachers
true doctrine, because his life is evil. Another will not take a good receipt
from the hand of a Physician, because he is given to unlawful studies. A third
will not receive deserved contribution from the hands of an Usurer. It is a
weak neglect, not to take the honey because we hate the Lion; Gods children
have right to their fathers blessings wheresoever they find them.

LXIII.
Jonathan out of the honey drew the danger of death, and we draw evil out of
good, and turn the grace of God into wantonness; our wealth and honors make
us proud; our favors with great men to disdain our betters; and our powers to
oppress the innocent; from the length of days we draw forth a multitude of
sins; from beauty just, and from the abundance of Gods mercy, presumptuous
perseverance in sin; but as the* Be suckes honey out of the Henbane, and
Sampson Dr. Willia^s* The best religion, Ps. 2.
out of the eater drew meat, and out of the strong drew sweetness; so God
which commanded the light to shine out of darkness, did from the death of
Christ bring eternal life, to as many as believe in him, for he gave his Son
that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life.

LXIV.
Bees are the most harmless and laborious, the most orderly and profitable
creatures that the world affords; and yet have more adversaries and enemies
then (almost) any other creature, as in the enumeration of them in the former
book has been discovered: and herein are they Emblemes of believers, who
though they hurt none, profit all; yet are opposed and persecuted by many.
Satan (first) like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour, and his
Emissaries are still compassing sea and land, endeavoring their destruction.
If Israel will needs go out of Egypt to serve his God, Pharaoh will be
presently up in arms and pursue after him. This Serpent has a brood of his
own bowels, that like the Mole can creep under the earth, and transform
themselves into Angels of light, to perform deeds of darkness; which made
Esaiah cry out he was undone; David, woe is me; and why? for they dwelt among a
people of polluted lives, and that abhorred peace, their throats were an open
sepulcher, their tongues like razors hot as the coals of Juniper, the poison
of aspes under their lips, and their mouth full of cursing and bitterness.
And beside these foreign foes that seem the further from us, there be
homebred and domestical, and therefore more dangerous adversaries: First,
corruption the old man, that daily sends forth whole swarms of lusts to
destroy the new. And secondly, death the last enemy that is to be destroyed.

LXV.
It is a common but fabulous conceit, that Bees once losing their stings, lose
their natural diligence and industry and become idle and lasie Drones. But it
is really true of too many men, who sometimes with their faces to Sion-ward
make profession of holiness and religion, but fear of the loss of fame,
estate, honor, or life, makes them with Demas and Hymeneus embrace the world,
and make shipwreck of says and a good conscience.

LXVI.
Bees are acknowledged to be a Commonwealth, and manifest it, as in many
particulars, so in th^^e that they watch and work, provide and labor,
procreate and educate one for another; once, do all for the benefit and
advantage of the whole body. I would our Commonwealth were comparable to a
hive of Bees even in these things, then we would be content to watch and labor
one for another; all, for the safety of the whole body. In a Ship no man's
safety is in single care for himself, Dr. Page, Zebulons blessing.
but in the common good of the company, so ought it to be in the Commonwealth
also. Therefore no politic body can prosper or make a good Voyage where
private respects make prize and Monopolies of public projects, where the
little finger will wear a Diamond, though the stomach which feeds all,
wants meat to sustain the whole body. This St. Paul so earnestly
diss^adeth, that he calls the mutual love of Christians, the band of love,
tying us together.

LXVII.
The robbing Be and the Waspe, (though there be between them, if not an
antipathie, yet certainly a desperate hatred and enmity) will without strife
or difference concur together together to rob a hive of Bees, deserving ill
of neither, but only through paucitie and weakness obnoxious to their
insolence and rapine. Do you wonder then if men wickedly disposed (though ill
affected each to other) to compass their particular designs, with formalities
of concord, comply and agree together, as Herod and Pilate were made friends to
crucify Christ, to compass the destruction of another, by whose ruin they
may greaten and enrich themselves.

LXVIII.
Bees in extremity of winter lie still in a deep (but not dead) sleep,
stir not from their places, eat not, make no noise, but on the alteration of
the weather, when the Sun shines chearely on them, then these sleepers awake
and revive. Many men finding some change in themselves, because such lusts as
have been formerly vigorous and lively are now dull and torpid, they thereupon
comfort themselves, as if they were dead, whereas they are but covered and laid
asleep for a time, and will awake and rise again. As Sampson when he was tied
with Dr. Preston, The New Creature.
cords rose again, and was as strong as ever he was when the opportunity
came, and it was told him the Philistines are upon thee Sampson. So lusts are
often laid asleep till the opportunity comes, when all the threads of good
purposes break, and they rise again in their strength, therefore if there be
not a new creature brought within thy soul, thy lusts are but asleep, they
will rise again.

LXIX.
It Is not the wax but the impression of the seal that fortifies Dr. H. King,
Exp s. of the L. Prayer.
a Conveyance, and makes the Deed. And temptation however in it self, it be
less then the fact, yet considered in the Author that invites sin by these
opportunities does far outgoe it. The infirmity of a sinner may sometimes
find excuse or pity, but what shadow of excuse can shelter his malice, that
drew him to the act? Man is a thing easily persuaded to error, Cereus in vitium
fl^cti, like wax wrought to a softness Iuvenal*
that will receive the figure of any vice. And yet we blame not his softness,
but lament him whose credulity and easy temper betrays him to every
temptation. If we lay the occasion of man's fault aright, we must lay it on the
tempter. At his allurements did Adams obedience relent, his persuasions heated
him with the inordinate desire of knowledge; he chaft this wax, mollifying it
with such art that it received his authentical seal of damnation, by which
sin was made current in the world.

LXX.
A man finds God in his word as he seeks him by prayer, and no otherwise; wax
receives impression as it is prepared.

LXXI.
If Bees be once provoked they are fiery and furious, violent and virulent,
though to their own ruin and destruction, implacable and unappeasable with
opposition and resistance. And such is the impatient man, he has his spirit
set on fire of Mr. L^^kier, Useful instruct.
hell, he has a short possession, he is a mad man for so many years, that
will not stick at any thing that the Devil and depraved nature bids him do;
he will fly in the face of servants, children, wife, Magistrate, God, any one;
his heart brings forth sin by troops.

LXXII.
Bees will not admit of strangers into their society, except they come with
submission and resolution to live under their Leader, and assimilate themselves
to their manners, without any after-commerce or fellowship with the hives from
whence they departed. And God receives none under the tuition of his love and
favor, but such as are wholly emaucipated from the world, and with full
purpose of heart give up themselves to be guided by him, without having any
further fellowship with their former works and companions of darkness: heaven
is bestowed upon none but upon such who are thus both willing and capable;
holiness makes capacity of happiness.

LXXIII.
Bees are contented with a simple food procured by their own industry, of
which they feed sparingly, but work laboriously and diligently: Whereas the
Drones work not at all, but liberally fill themselves, and that daily with the
purest honey, and to sharpen their stomachs take many a vagary in the heat of
the day, with a loud buzzing, as if they were acting somewhat to purpose, but
it is only to empty their bodies, and quicken their appetite, whereby they
often grow unweildy, and after a while (though the Bees let them alone) cannot
return back again into the hive. And are not many reasonable men defective in
their imitation of the unreasonable Bees? who frequently eat to furfeting and
drink to drunkenness, and exceed the limits of temperance in the use of the
creatures, denying themselves no pleasing nor desirable thing, that so they
might prevent such evils, as admitting these exorbitancies will bring
inevitable mischief upon them: But Drone-like live idly and intemperately, not
considering the Apostles exhortation; Be sober, be vigilant, says he, for your
adversary the Devil, as a Ephesians. 5. 5.
roaring Lion, goes about seeking whom he may devour. As if he should have
said, you are all in a warfaring condition in the Mr. H^ard, Souls misery.
field with an adversary, and he no simple one, but a Lion, a roaring Lion; a
diligent adversary, who is always going about seeking whom he may devour,
drawing into sin, for he has no way to devour men by, but that: therefore do
you as Soldiers in the field with an enemy would do, they plie not their
bellies, but use their meat and drink and sleep very sparingly, because
though this be not enough to prevent the mischief that is intended them by
their enemies, yet it is one very good means of their safety, for it
preventeth a sudden surprizal, and enableth them to make resistance, and so
would a moderate use of meat, drink, pleasure, etc. keep you wakeing and
give you liberty to prepare for all encounters with the Devil.

LXXIV.
As the humming Be having lost her sting in another, does Mr. R. Greenh^m,
Comfort for afflict* consci*
still notwithstanding make a fearful and grievous noise by her often buzzing
about us, but is nothing able to hurt us: so sin and death having lost their
sting in Christ Jesus, do not cease at all, even in the height of the parching
heat of our consciences to make a murmuring and with furious storms of
temptations to terrify us and our consciences, albeit they can never sting us.

LXXV.
A man by discourse can never possibly persuade another of the sweetness of
honey so fully as if himself did taste it. And it cannot be told how sweet a
thing grace is, do but try, and Mr. Harris, Way to true happiness.
you shall soon perceive a difference between it and all outward comforts,
therefore come and taste, says the Prophet, how good the Lord is.

LXXVI.
Bees though (many times) they have sufficiently stored and replenished their
hives, yea sometimes to a superabundant redundancy; hindering for want of
empty cells the future generation, and so suffer because of their plenty; yet
will they not give over working; nay some, not leave robbing and that from the
weaker and wanting hives. Have we not here a fair picture of a covetous man,
who is never at rest, never satisfied and contented.

LXXVII.
The Be a nice and dainty creature, builds her cells sometimes Dr. Hall,
Contemplat. lib. 10.
in an unfavoury carcass, and the carcass that promises nothing but stench
and annoyance, now offers comfort and refreshing, and in a sort pays Sampson
for the wrong offered. Oh the wonderful goodness of our God, that can change
terrors into pleasures, and can make the greatest evils beneficial. Is any
man under his humiliation, under the hand of God grown more faithful and
conscionable? there is honey out of the Lion. Is any man by his temptation or
fall become more circumspect? there is honey also out of the Lion: There is no
Sampson to whom every Lion does not yield honey: Every Christian is the better
for his evils, yea Satan himself in his exercising of Gods children
advantageth them.

LXXVIII.
If robbing Bees charge a neighbour-hive, and find a resolute opposition, with
the slaughter and destruction of the prime Leaders and forward invaders, the
scattered residue and broken triarij will be timorous and fearful to
reattempt, or if at all but faintly, and quickly found a final retreat. And
he that Dr. Featly, The Check of Conscience.
has felt the sting of sin in his conscience, and been formerly confounded
with the shame thereof, dreadeth and flees and seeks by all means to shun
those sins which have left so sad a remembrance behind them, for the smart of
the wound of conscience for sin past, is a special means, through grace, to
keep us from sin to come; for (as Lactantius writes) Lactan.
the ashes of a burnt Viper are a present remedy against the sting of the
Viper, so the remains of sin in the conscience, viz. remorse and shame are a
present remedy against sin; as we may see in David, I know mine own
iniquity, and my sin is ever Psalm. 51. 3.
before me.

LXXIX.
Bees are very little creatures, and their sting is very small, not visible
except it be very near, and yet this sting affects with grievous smarting
pain. And if the sting of a Be swell and rankle, and smart so much, what will
the teeth of the Adder, or the tail of the Scorpion? if those little sins
that are so small that we can scarce discern them to be sins, put the
conscience to so much pain and anguish, what will great sins do? If
whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the
Judgment; and whosoever shall say unto his brother, Racha, shall be in danger
of the Counsel; And whosoever shall say, thou fool, shall be in danger of
hellfire: What punishment is he like to endure, who bears malice in his
heart against his brother, envieth his prosperity, undermineth his estate,
wounds his good name, nay spilleth his blood, this is a crimson sin, and
mortal in a double sense; not only because it slays the soul, but also
because it kills the body.

LXXX.
Plutarch writes that though Time be a most dry and bitter Platarch de animae
^^an^^il.
herb, yet that not only the Apothecaries draw an wholesome oil out of it, but
also that the Bees extract from thence sweet honey. This dry and bitter herb
is affliction to the taste of most men: yet out of it men may draw both a
wholesome oil to cure a wounded conscience, and honey also to delight the
spiritual taste. Oil out of the nature of afflictions which are chastenings;
and honey out of the cause Gods love: As Revel. ^ 19.
many as I love I rebuke and chasten.

LXXXI.
If you do but take any piece of Gods word, and do but D^. P^ed^n, New
Covenant.
stay upon it, as the Be does on the flower, and will not off till you have
got somewhat out of it; if you be still digging in this mine, this will make
you rich in knowledge, and if you be rich in knowledge, it will make you rich
in grace.

LXXXII.
The word of God, says the Prophet, is good, yea and pleasant too, to every
one that walks uprightly, as sweet as honey, yea sweeter then the purest
honey to such; as David professes of himself But even honey it-selfe, though
of it self good and Mr. Ga^^ker, on Psalm 82. 6.
pleasunt, and wholesome and medicinal, yet causes pain and smart to an
exulcerate part. And children therefore that at other times much desire and cry
for it, yet will not endure to have it come near their lips, when they have
sore mouths. It is man's love of his own corruption and impatience of cure,
that makes the word of God ha^sh and unpleasant unto any.

LXXXIII.
Look upon the silly Bees the best Emblemes of obedient creatures, painful in
their labor, dutiful in their life, their ^* Garey, on ^os 7. 5.
king being sase, they are at unity: So long as their king is well, they follow
their work, but being dead, they leave and ^^ath their honey-combes. Behold
how nature has stamped obedience by instinct to Bees to be subject to a
superior in their kind; how much more should nature, reason, and grace, stamp
obedience in the hearts of Christians, knowing that without a government,
Kingdoms and States are thraldomes, Remota justitia August. de civi^a^. dei.
lib 4. c. 6.
quid sunt regna nisi^magna latr^cinia, take away ^justice, and what are
kingdoms but dens of thieves, take away obedience to government, and that were
miscere terris tartara, make earth and hell all one, but only in name.

LXXXIV.
Bees will not be forced to communion with others, except they voluntarily
forsake their own hives in a swarm; for take them at other times, as when
they lie out and sweep them into another hive, yet they will (at furthest) the
day following all return back to their own and proper hive: it is with them
as with a stream that has made it self a channel wherein to run, it may
indeed by a strong hand be turned out of it is course, but yet it will be still
bending toward it is own way, and never leave working and winding till it be
where it was before: so Mr. Harris.
howsoever the upright person may be unsettled for a time and put besides his
course, yet he strives and labors to be where he should be, and never finds
himself well, till he be in his first path: like the Needle in the Compass,
though it be jog'd aside for a season, yet it makes toward the North again,
and is in a perpetual trepidation, till it be where it should: So the children
of God, though they be subject to manifold declensions, manifold desertions,
manifold stops and stays in their course to heaven, yet still set their faces
thitherward, though the wind may sometimes violently oarry them besides the
way, yet it does not dismay them, nor do they find any rest or content in
their souls, till they be in their right course again.

LXXXV.
Bees of all politic creatures most unanimously comply and combine together,
live and love together, mutually protect and provide for one another, always
agree among themselves, and act and work all for the public good and
welfare of the whole body: they (as it were) throw down all enclosures, lay
all in common, not selfish, look not on their own things, but on the things
of others, tendering their well-doing as their own; neither are they apt to
give offense carelessely, nor to take it causelessly. And shall men, shall
Christians be so unnatural as to enveigh one against another, to entrap one
another, to desame, disgrace, and devour one another, tantaene animis
coelestibus irae? as he said in another cause, this is all one as for one eye
to pull out another, one hand to cut off another; know we not that perfection
and safety depends in union? as on the other side, danger and destruction
inevitably follows on distraction. Union like the wise woman Solomon speaks,
builds up the house, but division as the foolish woman pulls it down with
her hands.

LXXXVI.
The Waspe loves not the Apothecaries Gally-pot, but the sweets contained
therein: If we love any for our pleasure, we love indeed our pleasure and not
him, if we love him for our profit, we love our profit and not him, if we love
him for any end of our own, we love our selves not him: Thus the Jews loved
not Christ, but the loaves which he multiplied by miracle.

LXXXVII.
Some Naturalists observe, that the thickest and best honey is that which is
squeezed last out of the comb, so usually the daintiest dish is served in at
the last course; and Musicians reserve the sweetest strain for their close;
the last speech of a dying friend leaves a deep impression in our hearts; and
art imitating nature holds out the last note of the dying sound in the Organ or
voice.

LXXXVIII.
The Israelites coming into a wood, where they saw the honey dropping, and
found the meat as ready as their appetite, Dr. Hall, Contemplat. lib. 11.
yet dare not touch the sustenance, and will rather endure famine and fainting,
then an indiscreet curse: So the truly righteous, though great temporal
advantages present themselves with the breach of Gods Law, yet rather choose a
contented poverty then riches with the appurtenances of everlasting sorrow.

LXXXIX.
As Sampsen took honey out of the carcass of the Lion; Idem. The Imprese of
God.
so it becomes the Magistrates to pull the honey of the Church out of the jaws
of all sacrilegious Lions. But if the cunning conveyances of sacrilege have
made that impossible, since it lies not now entire in the combs, but is let
down and digested by these ravenours. Let him whose glory it is not to be
pater patriae, but pater ecclesiae, provide that those few pots we have may
still sees, and that if nothing will be added, nothing can be recovered, yet
that nothing may be purloyned from the Altars of God.

XC.
Thy lips, my Spouse, drop as the honey-combe; honey and Hug^ Card. Postil.
in Cant. c. 4. 11.
milk are under thy tongue. He commends the Spouse for her lips and her
tongue: Now her lips are the Preachers and Doctors, and other Teachers of the
Church, who ought to be a honey-combe to their people with the sweetness of
love, and distilling with gentleness and affability. The lips of Moses Exodus
4. 10.
were not an honey-combe, because they had more bitterness then sweetness, I
am not el^quent. Also the Law of Moses had bitterness, for it required eye for
eye, tooth for tooth. Again, Exodus 21. 24.
though the lips of Moses were a honey-combe, yet not dropping, but dry and
stony and mysterious, that is, in stony Tables, where in truth the secret of
the divine Law was hidden, so that he made him to suck honey out of the Rock.
But now the Deuteronomy 32. 13.
lips of the Church drop as a honey-combe: A honey-combe is honey in the
wax, that is, the divinity in the humanity. Or by honey-combe is understood
the secret of divine wisdom, which is melted from the lips of the Church,
whence it follows, Honey and milk are under thy tongue; by tongue is to be
understood the same with the lips; by honey is signified the instruction of
the perfect, but by milk the teaching of the simple. The Apostle had honey
under his tongue when he said, As unto Babes in Christ I have fed you with
milk. A honeycombe 1 Cor. 3 2, 3.
dropping, not dilated and spread abroad: For the words of Doctors or Preachers
ought to drop according to the capacity of the hearer, not to be powered out
all at once.

XCI.
Bees are not only profitable for our bodies, but moral uses are by Divines
made of them. The Queene-Bee only uses not her sting, has a body greater then
the rest, wings not answerable Polani Syn^ag. lib. 5. c. 25.
to her body, works not, yet though throned in the top of the hive, makes a
continued progress or walk over it, after a sort over-seeing, directing,
exhorting others in their several stations and employments. So kings and great
men ought to I Ia. G^yn pa^te. ^^. Theo^emat. et pr^b^emat. theo og.
have innocent hands readily extended for the good of all, valiantly defending,
wilfully hurting none, with counsel and authority presiding and profiting
whenever there is need and occasion.

XCII.
The Be, says the son of Syrach, is little among winged creatures, she
composeth her works admirably, and observes a wonderful polity and order in
government: So some men that have little bodies, and less strength, yet have
acute wits and working brains.

XCIII.
Bees gather of many flowers, but hurt none: so ought the Governors among Gods
people, have a care of all their subjects, but wrong and prejudice none.

XCIV.
Bees ordinarily delight not in dead carcasses, nor gather of dead flowers: so
ought heroical natures to abominate vices and vicious persons.

XCV.
Bees gather not all things of every thing; but Bee-bread of some flowers,
honey of others, water elsewhere: so ought the Governors of kingdoms to
exact and expect some services from Divines, others from Lawyers* others from
the Nobility, others from Citizens, and others from men of inferior rank and
quality. Now it is a singular part of judgment and prudence to observe what
beseemes each order, what every man can perform, and to draw all orders to a
pleasing harmony.

XCVI.
Bees are diligent in their labors whenever fair weather invites them, and
not only on some set times or days, taking liberty to be idle on others. So
ought the Governors of kingdoms always attend and procure the good of the
Commonwealth, and of each particular person in the same, but without hypocrisy
and dissimulation. Friderick the third Emperor of Germany not without cause
when he saw his Counselors enter into the Court at Vienna* was wont to wish,
that every man of them before they entered in, would put off two plagues of the
Commonwealth, simulation and dissimulation.

XCVII.
Bees as some other Insects will fly so long about a Candle till they burn
their wings, and lose their lives. And a wandering mind growing wanton with
curious care about the flame of hidden secrets, often befooles, nay destroys it
self.

XCVIII.
A wise soul in his thought-worke is as a Bee-hive, all the Mr. S^r^^he^,
Christian Observations.
powers are in labor, and continually going out and returning, no power idle,
and none return empty, and all their observations as honey said up for use:
it gathers and digesteth in it self a substance and mass of purified
knowledge, and that for affection and action, and all of them for the obedience
of God and union with him.

XCIX.
Bees are not only laborious when they are in want, and their provision small,
but when they are largely supplied, they are as earnestly bent on their
gathering as if they had nothing. Believers are not to stint their endeavou^s,
when they have attained to a competency of knowledge, but to go on still
forward and grow, for though they have enough to make them thankful, yet never
enough to make them remiss and negligent, they must still press forwards,
like runners in a race, and look not how much they have run, but how much
remains: let it always displease thee to continue as thou art, if thou
meanest to arrive where thou art not.

C.
Bees have a common house, a common ear^ of posterity, common labor, common
food, common generation, a common use and fr^ition of all things, and therefore
entirely and cordially love one another, if one be wronged they will all,
though with the loss of their own lives, vindicate the injury and vanquish
the adversary. And shall not professors of the same religion who are in so
near a relation one to another* be tenderly affected one to another, and love
one another? They have the Mr* Elion, Expos. on Coloss. c. ^. v. 15.
same God for their father, the same Church for their mother, Christ their
elder brother, are begotten of the same immortal seed, nourished with the same
milk of the word, eat the same bread of the Sacraments, and look for the
same blessed inheritance, and therefore must needs, by the teaching and work
of the Spirit, love one another heartily and mutually.

THE THIRD CENTURIE.
I.
THere is something of God in every creature, Dr. Sibbs, Bowels opened. Ser.
16.
this makes the meditation of the creature to be useful* There is none, even
the meanest (much more the Be) but it has a being, and thereby in a sort sets
out the goodness of God: God likens himself to many, to show that there is
something of him in these, and therefore to teach us to rise from them to him
in whom all the excellencies that are scattered in them are united. In
innocence we knew God, and in him we had knowledge of the creature, but now we
are feign to help our selves from the knowledge of the creature, to rise to
the knowledge of God.

II.
Our eyes should like a Be upon infinite variety of flowers, Mr. Bolton*
Saints soul exalt. humila.
from every creature it looks upon collect much sweet matter of heavenly
meditation, for the magnifying of the Creator, his wisdom, power, etc.

III.
Bees provoked near the hive, will be very troublesome, and according to their
power dangerous; striveing, striking, or contending further exasperates, but
yiedling or giving place pacifies them. And if we aim at peace with men in
case of controversy with another, let us apply our selves to a cool language,
speak softly, speak wisely, speak silently and in secret: this will cool
the great heat of another, and disarme him of his excessive indignation; hard
to hard will never yield, but lay hard to soft, and you may break even a slint
upon a bed or cushion which cannot be done by laying one flint upon another; So
let a man's heart be never so hard and obdurate if we use soft words to him,
give him mild speeches, he cannot but be mollified and melted toward us; In so
doing you shall heap coals of fire on his head, which shall melt and soften
him.

IV.
Bees though the; be engaged in a hot and mortal skirmish with other Insects,
yet ordinarily use not their stings, but wre^k their spite with biting and
breaking of their enemies legs, but when they are transported with rage, and
blinded with passion, then they sting, but always with their own certain
ruin and destruction: And not less prejudicial is the fire or passion of
zeal to professors and the Church of God, where it wants knowledge to direct
it. What Iscorates spoke sometimes (...) ad (...).
of valor or strength, is as true of zeal, viz. that zeal and resolution
with wisdom does much good, but without it, it does much mischief to our
selves and others, like Grenades and other fire-workes, which if they be not
well looked to and ordered they break and do more hurt to them that cast them,
then to the enemy. No man can be ignorant of the direful effects Dr. Fea^y,
The true Zealor.
of blind zeal, when an unskilful Phaeton takes upon him to drive the chariot
of the Sun, he sets the whole world in a combustion. What a metled horse is
without a bridle, or a hot spurred rider without an eye, or a ship in a high
wind and swelling sail without a rudder, that is zeal without knowledge,
which is like the eye in the Rider to choose the way, or like the bridle in the
hand to moderate the pace, or like the Rudder in the ship to steer safely
the course thereof. St Bernard Bernard in Cant. Ser. 22.
hits full on this point, Discretion without zeal is slowpaced, and zeal
without discretion is heady, let therefore zeal spurte on discretion, and
discretion reign in zeal.

V.
Be of the same hive live together with the greatest love and agreement that
can be conceived, never contending, never quarrelling: whereas sheep of the
same fold when they are wanton will dash one against another, and almost break
one another heads; yea men that live in the same house, of the same family,
will jarre and jangle; yea children that tu^bled in the same belly, for very
trifles sometimes will fall out and sight one with another. Nay true Christians
(with shame and grief be it published) though they will not persecute the
cause of religion, yet will molest and disquiet their fellows, through
passion, pride, self-love, and other corruptions drawing them thereunto.

VI.
Wax must be chafed and tempered between your fingers Mr. Harris, Treatise of
the new Covenant.
if you mean to set an impression upon it, and if you continue not to temper
it, it will be hard again nevertheless. And so it is with our hearts,
therefore use the means of grace constantly, do it day by day, estrange not
your selves from God by intermission of holy duties.

VII.
Hardness is not intrinsecall to wax, but there is a natural tendency to
softness: Let it be hardened through cold, yet bring it to the fire, or let
the Sun smile a while upon it, with it is beams and warmth, and it will
relent, and if the heat be strong return to it is liquid nature. But now it is
far otherwise with a stone, for let the Sun shine never so hot upon it, lay
it by the fire it melts not, it yields not, nay it is rather made the harder.
The wicked man has the hardness of a stone, let him enjoy never so many
mercies, he is not a whit moved the more to amend his life, let God speak to
him, let him smile upon him, all is one to him; nay he grows every day under
the best means more hard and impenitent. Contrarily, the faithful Christian,
how ever by sin he may for a time contract hardn^sse, yet bring him to the
Word and Ordinances a while, let God shine upon him with the light of his
countenance, and he will resolve presently and recover his former tenderness.

VIII.
Bees are frequently endangered by Spiders who weave their cobwebbs near the
flowers where they use to gather, and also just over their passage out of their
hives, and so at their going forth, but especially at their return home laden
and weary, make a prey of them. And earthly things prove snares to many,
because of their daily presence. In the way wherein I walked, Psalm. 141. Mr.
Hoard, Souls misery.
have they privily laid a snare for me, says the Psalmist, and in the way and
places wherein we are daily walking and traveling do these baits lie, they
are the things which we continually look upon, hear of, handle, taste, feel,
and therefore as those snares which are laid for a bird in the place where it
is frequently hopping up and down, do much endanger it, so those necessary
evils which therefore we live among, and make continual use of, because they
are necessary, do the more strongly allure us unto danger, because they are
always before us.

IX.
Whenever any people did forget to lean upon Gods Mr. E. Reynolds explicat.
of the 110 Psalm.
Word, and betook themselves to humane confederacies, to correspondence with
idolatrous people, to facility in superslitious compliances, and the like
fleshly counsels, they find them always to be but very lies, like Waxe^
feasts made specious of purpose to delude ignorant comers, things of so thin
and unsolide a consistence, as ever were broken with the weight of those that
did lean upon them.

X.
Lusts ever bring inconstancy with them, and make the soul Idem.
like weary and distempered bodies, never well in any posture or condition;
wicked men fly like Bees from one flower to another, from one vanity to
another, and can never find enough to satiate the endless intemperancy of
unnatural desires, only the Gospel being spiritual^y apprehended, has
treasures enough for the soul to rest on, and to seek no further.

XI.
A Be when she has once stung can sting no more, yet will testify an angry
disposition by loud buzzings and frequent strikings at the face of the party
(stung before) sometimes to his trouble and perhaps to his fear, also being
already sensible of his present smart, and suspecting further danger. So many
froward men when they have to their utmost injuried others, and intended more;
but when their causes are tried and prove desper^te in right, they will yet
still create perverse matters to molest their neighbors, and the more they
sink in the maine of their intendment, the more impetuously will they seek to
perplex and trouble them.

XII.
All relations and conditions have a mixture of some Wormwood Mr. Rey^er,
Precepts so^ Christian practice.
wood or Gall with them, they are not all honey; but like Bees they have a
sting of grief and trouble. A man may have bitterness with his sweetest
comforts; so had Abraham with his good wife Sarah, she was twice taken from him.

XIII.
There is a magneticall attractive force in the Queen Be, so that what the
Loadstone is to the iron, is she to the rest of the Bees, and therefore
wheresoever she is will they be also. And Dr. Sibbs, Bowels opened.
no less attractive and powerful is Christ's love in us, our hearts are heavy
and downwards of themselves, but his love draws us upwards and makes us
heavenly minded, it makes us desire further and further communion with him,
still there is a mag^eticall attractive force in Christ's love wheresoever it
is, it draws the heart and affections after it.

XIV.
Waspes and Hornets feed on flesh, car^ion, dead Bees, flies, almost any thing;
but the Be is a neat and curious feeder, she sucks and extracts the
quintessence of flowers, which she chimically distills in the Limbeck of her
belly; and thus prepared lays it up for future food. So the Christian soul in
this respect is a Be that will not feed on worldly carrion or sinful
pleasure, but on Christ and spiritual things. The soul of a carnal and
natural man uses to feed upon dust, carrion, earth, and earthly things, when
the soul of a true Christian that has the taste of grace, feeds neatly, it
will not feed on that which is base and earthy, but upon heaven and spiritual
things. The perpetual everlasting intercourse between Christ and a Christian,
is his maine happiness here, and his eternal happiness in heaven.

XV.
Temptations to sin come about us like Bees (buzzing into Mr. Heard, Souls
misery.
our minds evil thoughts, and preparing to sting by drawing us into consent)
but it is in the name and by the power of the Lord that we do destroy them;
and therefore the Apostle says expressly; The God of peace shall tread down
Satan under Rom 16. 20.
your feet. If he be trodden down, it is God that does it for us.

XVI.
Whosoever dallies or plays with the Bees at the hives mouth, does it with his
own peril, for although at first he be perhaps neglected or assaulted but
with one or two, yet if he persists in his folly or fool-hardinesse, he shall
quickly find more fists about his ears then his own, and not escape
scot-free. Would we not be overcome and foiled by temptations, conjure them not
up, daily not with them, but if they be risen, quickly lay them, stifle them in
their birth and they will expose us to no further trouble or danger; Though
flax (says one) be never so catching, a spark of fire may fall in, and yet
not inflame if it be espied and taken out suddenly ere it have time to
ins^^uate its force into the combustible matter, and so evil motions if
quenched at the first kinding, seldom break out into a flame of rebellion.
But if we neglect them, bid them welcome, or parlie with them, or please our
selves in them (though with no intent to commit sin) lust will incal^scere
wax hot and conceive, and then the next thing we are like to hear of, will be
the birth of some soul sin or other.

XVII.
There is a kind of life in the Worm (the first but imperfect birth of a Be)
but yet neither seeing nor heareing, nor locomotive faculty, though it stirs
in it is cell and receives the food that is brought to it, yet can it do
nothing for it is benefit or defense, or others pleasure or profit. And as life
is thus shut up in this imperfect creature, till by a further birth and
transmutation it receives a new and better life; so is the light in a natural
man shut up before regeneration, all the light they have does but glowe in
their breast, showing it self there (as a late reverend Divine) and making it
evident that they have such Dr. Preston, Saints qualification.
knowledge, but it is not a candle that enlightens all the room, that
enlightens all the corners of the soul. Take the light of a Star in a dark
night, and compare it with the light of the Sun, though never so little:
Look in what measure it appears, it scatters the darkness from East to West:
So there is a light in the minds of earnall men, which is but as a Star in a
dark night, which does not take away the darkness, but in the regenerate it
is a sanctified light, like the light of the Sun, not shut within a narrow
compass, but spreading it self unto all the parts of the soul: Or as if a
Candle be brought into a dark room it lightens all the house, but if it be a
spark of fire, it shows it self, and glowes and does no more, it does not
enlighten the house.

XVIII.
Many things in the nature of Bees when we have most studiously enquired after
them, can we not find out and certainly resolve and determine of, as concerning
their manner of generation, the duration and continuance of the Queene-Bee,
with their methods and orders in sending forth their first swarm, yet do we
where we are unable to find out certain grounds conclude all to be done
discreetly and orderly, wisely and wonderfully. And shall we not suspect and
check our shallow conceit and judgment? when it carries us to question and
reason about Gods providence, about diverse things below, and not scruple our
wisdom, when we cannot see the causes of things, and Gods course in disposing
of them, when he deals diversely, and not as we would think in our reason, yea
and ceasing from our wisdom to search into thing, more then we can comprehend.
If in finite and small creatures we poor mortals are often nonplust and at a
stand, let us not be too busy to know the reason of his counsels and doings,
but ascribe all to his infinite wisdom.

XIX.
God exhibits evident tokens of his goodness to all men, Dr. Challoner on Act.
14. 17.
even then when they are afflicted with diverse and sundry calamities, that
when others like Drones do gather honey but from the hive; a true believer
should gather it even from thistles; and when weaker vessels bear sail only
in a calm, a true vessel of Christ should sail best to his wished port in a
storm.

XX.
Almost of the shadow, says Pliny (rather then substance) of a very small
living creature, nature has made an incomparable thing. The Bees never lose a
day from labor, if the air Dr. I. King, Lectures on Io^^.
will give them leave to work. And when the weather is louring and
troublesome, they cleanse their h^ves, and carry out the filth; They keep
watch and ward at the gates, as they do in Camps; The Drones they give
house-roome unto, but (because they labor not) when they have no need of them
they drive them from their dwellings. Go to the Bees. O sluggard, consider
their ways, and be wise, they are but small among so^les, yet does their fruit
exceed in sweetness* (says the son of Syr^ch) and their labor in
greatness. And go to the Bees you Magistrates of the earth, and l^arne from
that little kingdom of theirs, to use the vigor and sharpness of Discipline
against our unserviceable Drones, who like paralytick members in the body of
man, loose and unbound in the joints of obedience, say to the head command us
not, for we will not stir at thine appointment.

XXI.
Many courteous natures are as wax, sooner able to receive Mr. Green^am, Grave
Counsels.
the impression of an admonition, but less able to retain it. Again, a more
heroical nature is as wax, not so soon admitting the print, but surely
keeping the print being made. Many at the first receiving of an admonition most
hardly, have after most profited by it; and others receiving an admonition very
gently, have lost the fruits of it very negligently.

XXII.
Experience may make us blush to see how the Bees naturally foresee storms and
tempefluous weather, and therefore either fly not abroad at all, or not far
from their hives; that they may presently on the first alteration of the
weather repair home in safety: but man alone either unsensibly does not
foresee, or unadvisedly will not avoid the perilous times to come. This folly
of the Pharisees our Savior reproved, saying, When it is evening ye say fair
weather, for the sky is red; and Mat. 16. 2, 3.
in the morning ye say, to day shall be a tempest, for the sky is red and
louring. O hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky, and can ye not
discern the face of the times?

XXIII.
God never suffers evil, but for some great and secret good, as Moses says,
He caused him to suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of the hardest stone.
Oh the infinite wisdom and St. John Hayward, David's tears.
power of God! out of the dry and ragged rock of our sins, he draws the
sweet sap of humility from us, and of mercy from himself to the sweet safety
and felicity of our souls.

XXIV.
Riches cannot make men happy by their own nature, not only because they are
unsatisfactory, deceitful, and inconsistant, but because in the indisposition
in our selves; they are like the eating of honey to assuage the boiling of a
chollerick stomach, a little pleasing to the taste, but much increasing both the
pain and danger of the disease.

XXV.
When a Be has once lost her sting she may trouble a while with her buzzing
and violent striking, but can do no further hurt; so afflictions and troubles,
whose sting is pulled out in the Mr. Roberts on 130 Psalm.
things that Christ suffered and was conqueror for the Elect. I say, the sting
of harm is taken out of the crosses that God sends for the humbling of his
Children or Church. And they are sent to fear them, not to destroy them, as
the destructions that come on the ungodly with their sting in them.

XXVI.
Set your mind and thoughts on heavenly things, which are Mr. Ha^^is* Theorie
and pract. of prayer
able to satisfy you; else like the Be, you will fly from place to place,
because earthly things do not satisfy you.

XXVII.
Most men will commend the Be when they feed of her honey, and perhaps with
some cost and trouble seek her preservation, but if she once cause a little
smart with her sting, then they are quickly out of patience, and exclaim as
much against her, and will be at no further pains and cost for her safety: So
many men will be content to serve God, as long as they may withal advantage
themselves, but to serve him and deny themselves, is a work which they have
not learned. Ephraim loves to tread ^os. 10. 11.
out the corn, says the Prophet; you know the mouth of the Ox was not to be
musled that trod out the Corn, he had his work and reward together.

XXVIII.
When honey is expressed from the combs, if there be any corruption or dross
in it, that will quickly being lightest ascend upmost, but the purest honey
will sink (unseene) to the bottom. So when Satan disquiets the heart, that
which is purest and should most comfort will sink, and be out of sight, but
our sins and corruptions will ever be before our faces.

XXIX.
The industrious Be is diligent to gather honey, and when she has filled her
hive is chased out of it and her life often times by fire and smoke, that the
profit may be ours: so that the pains and labor are only hers, but the
advantage and profit is ours. And the pains of Christ's wounds were his, but
the benefit ours, the holes in his hands and side were his, but the honey which
issued out was ours: in one word, the price which he paid August.
was his, but the inheritance which he purchased was ours, he alone without any
demerit of his suffered our punishment, that we without merit of ours might
obtain his grace.

XXX.
Bees diligently apply themselves to their work early and late, neglecting no
occasion, they are exceeding intent upon it, much taken with it, and almost
overwhelmed in their eager and delightful pains, and that all the time the
season continues, for storms and rainy weather may come, and then they will
be necessitated to lie still, or winter will come, and then there is nothing to
be gotten, and if they have not sufficiently beforehand provided and furnished
themselves, they must needs starve and dye. And shall not men do good and get
good, while they have liberty and opportunity, even give themselves up unto
it, and that with all their might. Many a Christian is kept from doing good, by
restraint, by sickness, by worldliness, by business, by an unwilling and
hard heart, howsoever by death, when the winter, when night comes, there is no
more working. How doleful will the prison, sickness and death be, when
conscience shall pinch us for our liberty, health, and life abused? We may
therefore justly use the argument of the Epicure; Whatsoever thy hand finds
to do, do it Eccles 9.
with all speed, because there is no knowledge, wisdom, nor invention in the
grave whither thou go: but here is that which adds D. Dike, Evang. hist.
weight unto it, before we come unto the grave, we may come into this or that
strait, that shall disable us almost as much as our grave. And therefore while
we have any ability or opportunity in any kind to glorify God, let us not be
negligent, but say with the Psalmist; As long as I have any breath I will
praise the Lord. And with that Valiant Captain that defended his Ship with his
left hand, when his right hand was cut off, and with his teeth when his left
hand was gone. If we are disabled one way for doing good, let us try what we
can do another, if by our tongues, our pens, our hands, our gestures.

XXXI.
Some young Queene-Bee in the departure of the last Colonie, will steal forth
with her that is designed Leader, because in her present state (by staying
behind) she is sure to perish; In her going forth there is room for hope, and
possibility of life, if she can attain the throne. Believers that have been
formerly reduced unto extremities and impossibilities within themselves,
looking upon God as omnipotent, and so able to save; as merciful, and in
Christ reconcilable, and so likely to save if he be sought unto: resolve as
the Lepers in the famine of Samaria, not to continue in the state they are in,
nor yet to return to the City, to his wonted hants and way, where they shall
be sure to perish, and in the latter is a possibility not to perish. Therefore
take up a conclusive purpose to trust Christ, and if I must perish, yet he
shall reject me, I will not reject my self, I will go unto him.

XXXII.
When Bees rob other hives, a special way to divert them, and cause them to
desist and give over, is by making them work at home, by running a pen knife
through the hive, and so (opening their combs) let out their honey, which they
will seek presently to stop up again, and let their neighbors alone. Thus
Hambal was wont to say, that the only way to fight against Rome was in Itake,
and this Scipio happily experimented upon the Carthaginian^.

XXXIII.
If our lips drop honey by the preaching of Gods Word, Dr. Wall, Ser. on
Cant. c. 8. 6.
and the sweetness of his Doctrine, it is good and commendable; but if our
hands drop Myrrh by the crucifying of sin, and the mortification of our
earthly members to the obedience of Christ, and the perfect imitation of
Christian holiness, it is most comfortable and heavenly.

XXXIV.
As the witty Bees when they go about to fill their combs R. Meredeth on
Ioh. ^6. ^3.
with sweet honey, suck first upon the sweetest flowers of the fields and
gardens, and then carry the sweet juice into their hives; so ought believers
before they enter on their prayers to fix their cogitations upon the two sweet
flowers of power and love, which they find in the name of the Father, and then
carry the pure juice of them, into the inward hives of their souls and
consciences, and so shall they make a most precious honey comb of all
spiritual devotion.

XXXV.
Honey and oil are used by the Spirit of God for the two Emblemes of p^^ce and
plenty, as we may read in the song of Moses, saying He made him r^a^^n the high
places of the earth, Deuteronomy. 32. 13.
that he might eat the increase of the field, and he made him to suck honey
out of the Rock, and oil out of the st^nty Rock.

XXXVI.
I eat my honey-combe with my honey: hereby is understood Mr. Rollenson* Se^.
on Cant. 5.
that peace which ou^ Savior has made betwixt our Savior and us. The sin
of Adam and I^ve in Paradise made the breach between God and mankind, the death
of Christ made the atonement and reconciliation; When we were enemies we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son. As then Sampson in his Riddle said
unto his companions; Out of the eater came meat, and out of the strong one
came sweetness: which was meant of a dead Lion, in whose belly Bees had hived
and made honey: so I may say of Christ, for he was the Lion of the tribe of
Judah, and from him being crucified for our sins, and slain for our
redemption, we receive our honey and our honeycombe, that is to say, peace with
God the Father. But for the honey-combe, why should Christ eat it? Wolves are
very Zeph. 3. 3.
hungry that will not leave the bones till the morrow: and so is Christ, though
he be not a Wolf, yet he is a Lamb, that is both hungry and thirsty, till he
have taken away the sins of the world: and therefore he eats his honey-combe
with his honey: so greedy is he to cancel the handwriting which was against
us, so desirous of our peace and reconciliation.

XXXVII.
Believers must not fly low and close to the ground, like Bees against a
storm, but raise their flight to a high pitch, even as high as the most high;
as did Moses when he saw him who is invisible; for men's quavis ave levior cum
deus pennas aptarit, Chrysostom.
praetervolat montes, says Chrysostom. The soul when God has once furnished
her with wings flies higher then any bird over the highest mountains, and so
(as the same father says Idem. hom. 16. in Epist. ad Hebr.
elsewhere) as God is said to be in heaven, and yet is also bear on earth, so
we that are here on earth are yet also in heaven.

XXXVIII.
As honey is not truly honey when it has lost its sweetness, Dr. Kilbie, Ser.
o^ 1 Cor. 15. 55.
no more is the death of the righteous truly death, having lost it is
bitterness and fearfullnesse and terrors in the godly.

XXXIX.
The Spider is never the more commendable, because he Dr. Cleland on John 4. 6.
weaves his web out of his own bowels: neither the Be despised, because she
gathers her honey out of diverse flowers. The citing of humane Writs for
illustrating points of Divinity, is not so common as commendable, if it be
done without vanity and ostentation, making choice of the best Authors, for
better understanding of the Text, and more clear declaration of the truth.

XL
The Be for her honey pleases many, but for the sting displeases not a few;
so mildness has bent, where severitie could not break.

XLI.
As one will know more of the sweetness of honey by one Dr. Bal^an, Qual. on
Psalm. 26. 5.
taste of it, then by a hundred disputations and discourses of it, so to speak
of spiritual joys to such as have not felt them is ridiculous, because they
are known by apprehension not by discourse, and to them who have felt them, it
is needless to discourse of them, for this doctrine is better known by one
experience, then by a hundred rules.

XLII.
Mors is Morsus, death is but a biting, not a consuming Sen.
and utter devouring, as he that biteth takes some and leaves some, so death
gets a morsel of flesh, as the Kite takes Dr. King B. of London on Isai.
38. 1^.
garbadge from the dunghill, and the Dogs offall from the shambles, but the
soul it meddleth not with. I cannot therefore better compare the grave then to
the honey-combe, where is both honey and wax. The honey of the soul is taken
out, the wax of the flesh remains behind, till the resurrection of just men.

XLIII.
The wax that is affixed to Letters patents, howsoever for substance it be the
very same, that which is to be found every Dr. U^her on 1 Cor. 10. 17.
where, yet being applied to this use, is of more worth to the Patentee, then
all the wax in the Country beside: so stands it with the outward Elements
in the matter of the Sacrament; The bread and wine are not changed in substance
from being the same with that which is served at ordinary Tables, but in
respect of the sacred use whereunto they are consecrated, such a change is made
that now they differ as much from common bread and wine as heaven from earth.

XLIV.
As Waspes making music about a gally-pot* show plainly that they came only
for the honey that is in it: So the rich man Dr. Hall, Med. and Vows, Cent. 3.
has many friends; although in truth riches have them, and not the man. As the
Ass that carried the Egyptian goddess had many bowed knees, yet not to the
beast, but to the burden; For separate the riches from the person, and thou
shall see friendship leave the man, and follow that which was ever her object:
while he may command and can either give or control, he has attendance and
profer of love at all hands; but which of those da^es acknowledge him when he
is going to prison for debt.

XLV.
As they who temper bitter cups for children, first rub the Mr. S^^^k, Com. on
Mal. c. 3. v. 5.
mouth with honey, that that heedlesse age when it shall perceive the
sweetness, shall not feel and fear the bitterness: so deal witches and
wizards* using good words, lawful means Chrysostom. ad pop. A^^o. hom. 21.
and prayer, but as Chrysostom. for that cause hate and detest them the more,
because they vi^ely abuse the name of God, professing themselves Christians
they do the works of Heathens; for so the Devils confess the name of God,
and yet were Devils still.

XLVI.
Gods Law, says David, is sweeter then boney and the honeycombe; Dr. L^ke,
Expos. of fust Psalm.
the meaning whereof is, we must not be mercenary in his service, but the
pleasure we take in it, must be the cause why we intertaine it, therefore it is
not without cause that God requires the heart, yet he will have it seasoned
with love. Thou Deuteronomy. 6. 5. 1 Timothy 1. 5.
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart: and love it the fulfilling of
the Law.

XLVII.
He that will have a good conscience, that shall give in good evidence for him,
and pronounce a comfortable sentence on August. in Psalm. 31.
him, must believe well and live well, faith does purify the heart, and a good
life bears the fruit that abounds to our reckoning, when we judge our own
souls. But a man must not look to have this blessing of a good conscience
suddenly, Vade ad formicam piger; some read it, Vade ad apem, Go to the Be, O
sluggard, she gathers her food in summer, whereof she makes use in winter.
Gods Be, that is a man that will have such a good conscience, rises early,
hastes to the Church, hears often, prays often, meditates often, and so does
acquire this absolving conscience, Colligentem in aestate videre potes, August.
comedentem in hieme videre non potes. The outward means which he uses are
visible, but the inward which when time serves he reapeth are invisible.

XLVIII.
Bees are not like the Bramble that receive all good and yield none to others,
to their dependants: but are like the figtree, the vine, the olive, they that
belong to them, that care for them, are all the better, for ^^ey are enriched
by them. If the Bees have any excellency, the Bee-master shall communicate with
them. A good pattern for Kings and Governors, who should herein imitate the
Bees; when a man sees an excellent work, he guesseth that the workman was
excellent, though he sees him not: so the eminency of the Governor may be
seen when he is not seen, it may be seen in the eminency of his people.

XLIX.
Bees sometimes sting, but ordinarily without any great or long prejudice. The
danger is nothing in comparison of the biting of an Adder, which is even unto
death, death speedy, death painful and woeful, and that as naturally and as
inevitably as Opium procures sleep, or Ellebore purges, or any poison
kills. So though every sin (unrepented) has wrath and judgment following
of it hard at the heels, yet some sins are more pernicious, Woe and alas,
sorrow and strife, shame, poverty, and diseases are enough as Solomon notes to
make drunkenness odious, but because (as he observed) drunkards are men past
shame and grace, senseless of blows, and therefore much more of reasons and
words, being bewitched and besotted with the love of wine, will easily over-see
and over-leape these petty woes, therefore Solomon sets before their eyes, the
diresull end and fruit, the black and poyson-full tangle of this sin; In the
end it stingeth like a Serpent, it biteth Dr. S Ward, Se^. on Pro* ^ ^^. ^9.
like an Adder; if once a custom, ever a necessity. Wine takes away the
heart, and spoils the brain, overthrowes the faculties and organs of
repentance and resolution. And it is just with God, that he that will put out
his natural light, should have his spiritual extinguished, he that will
deprive himself of reason, should lose also the guide and Pilot of reason,
Gods Spirit and grace.

L.
Bees (howsoever some conceit to the contrary) are much advanced and
advantaged by the winter: there is thereby not only a preparing of the earth
for a vigorous production of flowers: but a long rest and sleep does strongly
dispose and fit them both for breeding and also honey-gathering. Whereas we may
observe, especially in dry seasons, though the weather be very fair, and there
be some flowers, yet are they not very beneficial. And it is needful for
Christians to find the presence Dr. Sibb^, Bowels opened.
of Christ in the way of humiliation and debasement, causing us to afflict our
own souls, as to seele his presence, joy and comfort. In this life we cannot
be without this gracious dispensation. We may therefore comfort our selves,
that howsoever Christ leaves us, yet he will always leave somewhat behind him,
as he left Myrrh after him upon the handle of the door, ^^pt. 5. 6.
some Myrrh is left always behind upon the soul, which keeps it in a frame
and state of grace and sweetness. Myrrh was one of the ingredients in the
holy oil, as it is; and so this leaving of Myrrh behind him, signifies the
oil of grace left upon the soul; that enabled the Church to do all those
things which are spoken of Cant. 5. 6.

LI.
Mercy comes naturally from God like honey from the Be; Mr. Swift, Ruin and
repair of kingdoms.
but justice like the sting, only when she is provoked.

LII.
Bees in their first being (while worms) are incapable of any excellency, of
any ability to profit themselves or others: yet they must for a time abide in
it, and then they must dye that they may be changed, and so become agill, able,
useful creatures. As they which dye cloth do not immediately change one
contrary into another, but first turn a white into an azure, and that into a
grain color: And as those that work in wax, cannot frame any new impression
in it, till the old be defaced: So the image of the Prince of this world the
Devil must first be defaced, before the image of Christ can be formed in us,
we must dye, before we can live.

LIII.
The Be being to fly home to her hive, and fearing least if Ambros* do
Virginita^. quoted by* Dr. Playsere in his pathway to perfection.
she should be taken by the way with a rough wind, she might perhaps be blown
about in the air, counterpoiseth her self with a little stone, and so flies
strait home It is true only of the Candian Bees, if of any. Howsoever the
Moral is not amiss. Act. 9. 11, ^
. This teaches us what we ought to do, we must not be wavering and carried
about with every blast of doctrine, like a reed shaden in the wind, but as the
Be is balanced with a little stone, so we must be built on the chief corner
stone, and grounded upon a rock and established with grace, that howsoever the
rain fall, or the floods arise, or the winds blow, or what times soever come,
yet we may stand fast in the street which is called straight, always following
Christ directly toward the mark.

LIVE.
Honey is very sweet and pleasant to the ^ast, but eaten overmuch is bitter in
the stomach, and the maker of it the Be has a sting in her tail. Such are
the delights and pleasures of the world; therefore says Martial an ancient
Bishop, Quid ad Ma^^ia^. Epist, ^d Tolos. c. 18.
nos delectatio mundi, what have we to do with the delights of the world? you
may call it as you will, pleasure, passe-time, mirth, joy, but in Gods
Dictionary it has no such name; but is there called Adams goodly Apple, which
be^^g eaten deprived them of Paradise: Esaus red pottage, which being supt up,
bereaved him of his birthright: Ionathans sweet honey which being but tasted,
was like to cost him his life. It may delight thee for a while, but it shall
torment thee for ever. As any solid body, though it have never so fair a
color as crimson, purple, azure, yet always the shadow is black; so any
earthly thing, though it have never so fair a show, yet always the shadow of
it is black, and the delight thou take in it, shall prove to be grievous in
the end, there is bitterness in this sweetness, a sting in this Be. And
therefore Philo calls the Philo.
world, A sweet bitter thing: let us then account worldly delights not Naomie
but Mara, because it is nothing so much Naomie, sweet and pleasant at the
first, as it is Mara and Amara, bitter and loathsome at the last.

LV.
An heavenly mind turns earth into heaven, like a Be that D^ Dyke, Evang.
hist.
sucks honey out of (supposed) bitter herbs, and like unto fire that turns
into fire that which is cast into it. As the good stomach does turn even
grosser meats into good nourishment, whereas an ill stomach would turn the
finest meats into bad juice.

LVI.
Let a swarm remain at the place where it was hived a day or two, and then be
removed to another standing; yet for two or three days after will they either
sullenly keep in (except the weather be very fair) or if they fly abroad and
gather, repair with their labors to the first place, hankering and flying
about it most part of the day, some not at all returning back to the hive, but
desperately dying there, and the rest for many days lingering about their first
mansion. And are there not many in the world, who having stood in the way of
sinners, and sat in the chair of the scornful, cannot be moved or persuaded
to alter their choice, but will do well (to be angry) to be evil. And if
fear of hazard or hell, or love of benefit, a^^ures and with-drawes them from
the public practice, yet shall they not from the inward liking and
approbation, so that when he alters his standing gives over the practice of his
sins, seems to be divorced from them, because he has a station, an abiding
elsewhere, in his open carriage somewhat altered, yet he flies about his
former standing, his thoughts and imaginations feed all day long upon his
lusts, he relisheth speculative wickednesses, so that when he has withdrawn
himself from his sin, and given it over, he may have a months mind after it,
he may do with it still as the husband of Mich^l did, when by a strong power,
she was taken from him, it would have hazza ded his life to have refused, yet
says the Text, he came weeping after her a far off, he longed after her
still, and loved her still. So a man may part with his sin after such a
manner, that still he goes weeping after it, he would have it again, he would
fair enjoy it, if it were not for some greater danger, or some greater trouble
that he exposes himself unto: as you see in Phal^iel, it was not for want of
love to his wife, that he parted with her, but it was out of a desire he had to
save himself, to escape the danger of the Kings wrath, imprisonment, and
death, that would have followed upon it.

LVII.
Bees are creatures fitted with natural instruments for the getting of honey;
they have long tongues to draw it out of the sockets of the flowers, and they
have nimble wings to carry them from place to place, that so what is not in
one field may be found in another, and they have quick sights to discern, but
most active is their smell. And they have a little bottle within them to
contain the honey, when they have extracted it, and (which is more then all)
delightful willingness to employ all these abilities for the compassing of
this end, and the thriveing in their labors by all the means and
opportunities they have. But the fool has a precious price in his hand, but
knows not Dr. Stoughton, Righteous man's plea to true happiness.
how to use it, he lets slip many golden opportunities, letting them run like
water besides the Mill, driveing no trade of knowledge with them, making no use
of them for that purpose, and so soon loses all the benefit of these means
he has: it is admirable to think how under the droppings of the Pipe a man
should be dry, how that under the continued means of grace, a man may
continue in deep ignorance; it is terrible, I say, to think, that whereas
delicious Manna, heavenly Nectar falls daily about our tents, as it were, that
if a man would vouchsafe to step out of his door, and carry his Omer in his
hand, he might fill it every day. But if men will not vouchsafe the gathering
of it, never make use of the means of grace that God offers, but will be as
childish and as foolish as those that go to the Market, they go there for
some business, but when they come there (like fools) they go see this gay
thing, and the other gaudy thing and so forget utterly their errand, and go
home again without it; they come to Gods house to see and to be seen, to
prate with this party, and gape on another, and so let all fall besides them,
without minding what they hear, or to know and remember it; they may have
excellent means, and yet thrive not, make no advantage of them: but he that
will thrive and increase in knowledge, must make precious account of the
means, laying up something out of every opportunity that he has.

LVIII.
There can be no habit of some sins, as in parracide, and in Dr. ^. Iayl^^,
The doctrine of repentance.
the wilful murder of our selves: all their malignity is spent in one act,
and the event is best declared by one of them. The man dies in his sin, in
that sin which excludes him from heaven. Every act of these sins is like
the stinging of Bees.

-- Animamque in vulnere ponit. He cannot strike again, he can sin that
sin over no more, and therefore it is a single act that dammes in that cause,
unless he repent truly and effectually.

LIX.
Bees sting seldom when they conflict with Insects, but when they contend with
men or beasts they sting readily, their rage is as high as their supposed
enemies power, so that it is evident (by an instinct of nature) they are not
ignorant of their own danger, and yet to satisfy their spite, out of a bad
custom, though natural, will undo themselves. Such is the violence of
custom in sin, which is the Law of sin, that by it, a man is overruled
against his will, he cannot leave sin if he would. For as an old disease has
not only afflicted the part of it is proper Id^^n in ^^^
residence, and by it is abode made continual diminution of his strength, but
made a path also, and a channel for the humors to run thither, which by
continual defluxion have dug an open passage, and prevailed beyond all the
natural powers of resistance. So is an habitual vice, it has debauched the
understanding, and made it to believe foolish things, it has abused the will,
and made it like a diseased appetite, in love with filthy things. It is like an
evil stomach, that makes a man eat unwholesome meat against his reason.
That Is a sad calamity when a man sees what is good, and yet cannot follow it,
nay that he should desire it, and yet cannot lay hold upon it, for his
faculties are bound in fetters, the habit has taken away all those strengths
of reason and religion, by which it was hindered, and all the objections by
which it was disturbed, and all that tenderness, by which it was uneasy; and
now the sin is chosen, and believed, and loved, it is pleasant and easy,
usual and necessary; Scibam ut esse me diceret, facere non quibam miser,
P^^atus in ^^^umo.
I knew it well enough, how I should comport my self, but I was so wretched,
that I could not do it.

LX.
Bees and Waspes, though they sting not in the extremity of winter, nor when
they are benumbed with cold, yet are full of poison; so that it is not want of
desire to do mischief, nor yet want of malice, but only want of abilities.
And there be sons of Belial, that will fawn and humble themselves with a
pretense of much affection; Ioab-like, Art in health my brother* yet believe
him not, for there are seven abominations in his heart; he waits but an
opportunity or ability, and his sword shall be in thy sift rib, they were not
void of malice before, but only wanted power.

LXI.
Bees and Flies are often entangled in the Spiders Cob-web, and miscarry; but
Waspes being stronger creatures easily break through and escape: poor men
ordinarily being taken in their crimes, endure the severity of the Law, but the
wise and great ones hide their counsels ^^epe, or carry their actions
cunningly, or if they be found out, yet as Auacharsis said, by their greatness
they break through the Laws, and so escape.

LXII.
If the Waspes rob, and the Drones profusely spend too much, to the prejudice
of the Commonwealth, the Bees then bestirre themselves, and chase away some
and chasten others. And it is Mr. Down, Subjection to the higher Powers.
no less the Magistrates duty to procure the public good, Et videre ne quid
respublica detrimenti capiat. To provide that the Commonwealth suffer no
detriment or harm. If therefore any hinder the public good, or shall work
any disadvantage or damage unto the State, the wrath of the Magistrate ought
to turn against such a man. And as God when his Laws are broken, or himself
any way dishonored, waxes angry with men: so these Gods on earth, when men by
contemning their authority, and denying them due subjection, go about to
disturb and set combussion in the State, have just cause to be angry, and to
seek revenge upon them.

LXIII.
Drones, though meek creatures, yet (provoked by their fellows) will fight and
grapple together. But Drones never voluntarily offend any, nor yet (provoked)
turn again, all their fight is flight, either to go out of the hive, or to
lie many together in a heap in a corner of the hive, that so their numbers
(holding together by their feet) may in some sort secure them. And in vain
were resistance where nature has denied a sting. Wrath and desire of revenge
in him that wants power, is vain and foolish, according to that of the Poet:

Quid stulti proprium? non posse et velle nocere. It is the property Auson.
of a fool wanting ability, to desire to do hurt.

LXIV.
The Bees combs are perpendicular from the top of the hive to the bottom, and
so they are very long, but yet they have a breadth likewise, the depth of the
cells on either side, which yet holds no proportion with the length: The
repletion of the cells with various fillings, some with Bee-bread, some with
honey, some with brood, some half full, others are empty, notes the variety
of comforts and blessings, which in this life men enjoy, but some more and some
less. There are vicissitudes and changes in the life of a Christian* a
diversity of dispositions and dispensations, to which they are subject in this
life. Sometimes with the Disciples on Mount Tabor ravished with joy, and by and
by, when the cloud over-shadowes them, they are afraid. When the Lord lets us
feel his mercies, we are alive, but if he hides his face, and sets our sins
in order before us, we are sore Psalm. 50. 21.
troubled: but ordinarily we dwell more in the valley of Bacha then of Beracha,
our mourning exceedes our mirth. The life W. Cowper, B. of Galloway. Heaven
opened.
therefore of a Christian may be compared to a web so mervellously mixed and
woven of comforts and troubles by the hand of God, that the long threads thereof
reaching from the day of our birth to the day of our death, are all of trouble,
but the west interjected with manifold comforts.

LXV.
Wax left to it self grows hard, how much more the stony heart of man? God
not ruling and working in his heart, it grows hard.

LXVI.
Amnon had a strong lust to his sister Tamar, but when he Mr. Collo^, Expos on
first Epist. of John c. 2. v. 17.
had fulfilled it, he hated her more then he loved her. So when we have
fulfilled a lust, we are not satisfied with it, but say to it, arise, be gone;
As a Be having sucked something from one flower, goes to another, and then to a
third; so we are soon weary of lusts, there is an emptiness in the creature,
it is no way able to satisfy the desires of man's heart, but they are soon
weary, and therefore desire variety.

LXVII.
Diverse hives will conspire together to rob their harmless and innocent
neighbors, but oftentimes when they have plundered and worried others, then
do they vex one another, and war among themselves. It is impossible that
any true peace should be among the wicked, whilst they want the solder that
should glue them together, faith; it is therefore no wonder to see the
Egyptians against the Egyptians. And they (...)
shall fight every one against his brother, and against his neighbor, City
against City, and Kingdom against Kingdom. And they (...)
shall eat every man the flesh of his own arm, Manasseh Ephraim, and Ephraim
Manasseh; for agreement in evil is not peace, but conspiracy, wicked men's
combining themselves, may be a faction, no unity, no amity.

LXVIII.
As humility, like the Be, gathers honey out of rank weeds, very sins
moving to repentance: So pride, like the Spider, sucks poison out of the
fairest flowers, the best graces, and is corrupted with insolence.

LXIX.
Bees are painful creatures, but they enjoy not all their labors, but readily
contribute (out of their plenty) a portion to their keepers. Sic vos non vobis.
Still supplying their owners necessity out of their fruitful and useful
store. And shall a man of more singular graces and faculties be idle, a burden
to the world and himself. If happiness consisted in doing nothing God that
meant Adam so happy, would never have set him about business, but as Paradise
was his storehouse, so also Mr. Adams, The ba^ten tree.
his workhouse, his pleasure was his task, there is no state of man that can
privilege a folded hand* our life is vita palveris non pulvinaris, Hands,
means, and moneys, men make the protection of idleness, when as Adam
commanded the whole earth, yet work expected him.

LXX.
Robbing Bees of diverse hives will join hands, and league together without
jarring or discord, though at another time their hostility is continual, their
fewd implacable, their difference is irreconcilable. Nay Waspes also, though
there be a natural antipathie between them, yet to do a mischief to a
neighbor hive, will comply and unite together with them. There is a
combination of the ungodly, even so far as to the very participation of their
estates; Cast in thy lot with us, we Prove. 1. 14.
will all have one purse, they are entangled in mutual amity, like beds of
Eeles, nothing but thunder can break their knotts. Is it much, says Christ,
that you love them that love you? Robbing Bees and Waspes do it, even
Publicans do the same.

LXXI.
Bees are often sustocated and drowned in their own honey, that which with
industry and labor they had gathered (the combs being melted with the heat
of the Sun or casually broken) And the sins of many, which they had wearied
themselves to act, often prove their ruin and destruction. Sodom might have
stood for all the five Kings that bad her battle, if the unnatural fire of
lust had not drawn down upon her unnatural Salvian de Guber. dei lib. 1.
Josephus de bell. I^da^e^.
fire, I mean the fire of hell (as Salvian speaks) from heaven it was not.
It was not Titus siege without, but the Zelots sedition within the walls that
dispeopled Jerusalem, strowing her streets with dead carcasses, and dying her
common Dr. Featly* Pandora her box.
Sewers with blood. It was not the Assyrian horse and Chariots, but Ieroboan:
golden Calves, together with their sorceries, witchcrafts, and other sins
unrepented of which destroyed Mat. 10. 36.
Israel. The enemies of a man, says our Savior, are those of his own house.
Plaucus Plautius hideing himself in Camerarius Med. hist. cent. 1. c. 20.
the time of the proscription, was found out only by the smell of his sweet
oils, wherewith he used luxuriously to anoint himself.

LXXII.
Bees (as almost all other Insects) are in their first estate and condition
very rude and imperfect creatures, they have none of the senses, except feeling
and tasting, they only eat to live, and live to eat, and again after a time
they neither eat nor live, but dye to live. But as soon as they have
transmuted their shape, they come forth goodly and beautiful creatures. In the
valley of tears it is not perfect day, no not with the best Christian under
heaven, but it grows by degrees till it be perfect day with them, which is at
the day of their dissolution. Like to the earthen pitchers of Gideons men, when
they brake Judge. 7. 16. 20.
their pitchers, the lamps gloriously shone forth and dazzled their eyes; thus
it is with a Christian, when these earthen pitchers and carcasses are broken,
his light will shine forth gloriously, in the mean time we have light, we have
lamps, but they are pitchers shining very dimly.

LXXIII.
The first death or transmutation of the Bees, is their profit and advantages,
their excellency and glory, they dye but yet to live more nobly. And death to
the godly is not the death of the man, but the death of sin in the man: More
est sepultura Amb^. de bono morti^. c. 4.
vitiorum. As the Worm which is bred in the tree (says Chrysostom) does at
last consume it, so death which is brought out by sin, does at the length
consume and destroy sin in the children of God.

LXXIV.
The Mother-Waspes and Hornets after they have wrought a while and procreated
their kind, give over laboring and are maintained by the industry and piety of
their offspring. But Bees never sue out a quietus est when they are old to
discharge them from their labors, but as they are best acquainted by
experience, what flowers are most advantageous and profitable, so are they more
willing and able by practice to undergo the honey-gathering labor, thus does
exercise increase strength and diligence. Hypocrites with Iehu may drive on a
while furiously, with Ioash may hold out a great while, but at last they will
give in, and be weary: but let a believer exercise himself in grace, and he
will grow up in the Lord, and increase in spiritual strength. A tree the more
holdfast it has with his root in the earth, the more fruit it brings forth.
They that walk daily in a Christian course increase strength, they walk from
strength to strength, till they meet their God in Sion.

LXXV.
The honey in Sampsons Lion is very fitly likened to the profit of afflictions;
The assaults of affliction may be terrible like Sampsons Lion, but they yield
much sweetness to those that dare encounter and overcome them, who know how to
overlive the witherings of their gowrds without discontent or peevishness,
while they may yet converse with God.

LXXVI.
Nothing is created for it self, but so placed by the most wise providence,
that it may confer somewhat to the public good, the poorest creature yields
some good wherein it does imitate the goodness of the maker, every thing is
enabled with some gift for the universal benefit. Kine give us their milk,
Sheep their wool, Bees their honey and wax, every one paies a tribute to man
their usufructuary Lord.

LXXVII.
Gods power was no less in creating a little Be then a great Mr. St^^k,
Com^on Mal. ^3. v. 11.
Lion; as the Clock-makers skill is seen in a little Watch, as in a great
Clock; so Gods goodness is in the smallest and most ordinary matters, as in
the greatest and most extraordinary.

LXXVIII.
Bees smelling a field of Cole-feede, though a mile remote from their hives,
will directly fly thither, tempted with no other blossoms by the way, though
much nearer; see them perhaps they may as they fly, but will not be diverted
or withdrawn by them. And so many things are to be observed in our course in
this world with our eye, which are not to be entertained into our delights and
affections.

LXXIX.
Bees, while they are numerous and full, endure without regret or discontent
the royal issue, but when by the emission of two or three Colonies, they find
their numbers greatly empaired, their strength much weakened, then without
delay they do either destroy or chase them out of their hives. Believers while
they are in a natural estate, easily admitted the fellowship of any lust, were
not much troubled nor vexed with Satan's wiles. But as soon as their
enlightened eyes begin to see and discern their misery and danger from
them, they labor to kill and mortify, to subdue and crucify every sinful
passion, and all the hellish brood of lust.

LXXX.
These are Natures unwritten Laws, that every man the greater he is in place
and power, the more slack he ought be to punish. Basil.
And Seneca, the greater powers ought not to be hurtful, S^r. de Clem.
if they be disposed according to Natures Law. The Bees have a Queen differing
from the vulgar in greatness and brightness, but herein especially is she
different from them, for they are according to their bodies the most
quarrelsome and angry creatures that are, stinging those that offend them. But
the Queen has no sting (uses it not) for nature would not have her feirce or
revengefull; Which ought to be a president to all Kings and Commanders in the
world. Let them be ashamed not to take example from such small animals, for
men's minds ought to be more moderate and composed because of the great hurt,
that they otherwise occasion to them that they are displeased with. Oh that
men, says one, did lose their power with their anger, and could hurt (as the
Bees sting) but once. M. Antonius, Surnamed the Philosopher, said, that there
was nothing that did more become a Commander then clemency: and therefore as
Claudian reports, Theodosius gave his son Honorius this counsel; Though we
be overcome in every thing, yet in mildness and clemency to yield to none.
Pyrrhus king of Epirus for this is commended that being derided and reproached
by certain young men in their cups, he let them go unpunished, when one
pleaded it was in their wine.

Tiberius as C. Tacitus witnesses in the beginning of his Empire expressed the
like patience, for he dissembled bitter and s^urrilous writings, and would not
have the Authors questioned, saying, in a free City their tongues ought to be
free* A certain Poet called Magus, girded at Philemon in his public plays,
afterward being in Philemons power, he commanded his servant openly to cut off
his head, but in private that he should touch his neck with a naked sword, and
so unhurt to dismiss him, first giving him nuts, cockalls, and balls and other
childish toys: wherein the Prince openly showed A. Aki^^: Emblema^. 48.
that he had a sting but would not use it. And to speak evil of a Ruler is
rather childish then manly. The same kingly virtue as in many other heroical
actions, so in their letters, Theodosius Arcadius, Honorius, the Emperors
notably approved. This was the sum of their Letters to Rufinus, if any
reproached or disgraced them out of levitie he should neglect it; if out of
anger and madness, he should compassionate and pity it; if out of wrong and
injury remit and pardon it.

LXXXI.
Solomon the wisest among the sons of men says, Go to the Prove. 6. 6.
Pismirt, etc. so thou shall learn providence, in a fair day to provide a
cloak for the tempest; in peace to foresee war, and in youth to lay up
somewhat for old age. And may thou learn so much from the Pismire? And when
thou walk into thy Garden, and beholdest the industrious Be, which with
unwearied diligence fetches her food from a far, and that (not as the
Pismire) for her alone behoof and supply, but for the necessities and
superfluities also of the sons of men; Nay do thou behold their admirable
government, chaste procreation, motherly affections to their issue, stout
defense of their hives and houses, with many other occurring passages from
their birth to their death, which are in this Treatise more largely dilated,
and can thou learn nothing? surely if thou (whosoever thou art) seriously
meditates on the particulars herein exhibited, thou can not but acknowledge
that God is Maximus in minimis, etc.

LXXXII.
As a true friend is the sweetest contentment in the world, so Dr. Hall, Med.
and Vows, Cent. 3.
in his qualities he well resembles honey, the sweetest of all liquors.
Nothing is more sweet to the taste, nothing more sharp and cleansing, when it
meets with an exulcerate sore. For my self I know I must have faults, and
therefore I care not for that friend that I shall never smart by For my
friends, I know they cannot be faultlesse; and therefore as they shall find me
sweet in their praises and encouragements, so sharp also in their censure.
Either let them abide me no friend to their faults, or no friend to themselves.

LXXXIII.
An evil man is clay to God, Wax to the Devil; God may Idem in codem. ^^ns.
stamp him into powder, or temper him anew; but none of his means can melt
him. Contrariwise, a good man is Gods wax, and Satan's clay: he relents at every
look of God, but is not stirred at any temptation I had rather bow then break
to God: but for Satan, or the world, I had rather be broken in pieces by their
violence, then suffer my self to be bowed unto their obedience.

LXXXIV.
Bees observe a martial posture in all their carriages; some keep guard at
the gates, others like scouts watch at a remoter distance: Some within the
hive, as Soldiers in Garrison observe who goes in and out. So though that many
follow their labors at home and abroad, yet others are warlikely employed
least they should suffer from an unknown or unsuspected adversary, for want of
foresight and preparation. Thus Iphicrates an Athenian General encamped in
time of peace, and among his friends: yet still entrenched his Army, ordered
his outworkes, set his watch, kept his corpse du guard, laid out his sentinels,
and in a word, observed all Martial Discipline, as if he had been in the heat
and height of war: and being asked by one of his familiars, what he feared,
he answered to be surprised, and least it should fall out that he should be
constrained to say, I thought not on it. Oh that Believers were thus wise to
think of their latter end, and always to mind when the appointed time of
their change shall come, then would they be always prepared to intertaine
death, either secretly or openly. Jesus Christ our grand Captain, who
valiantly triumphed over it, often inculcates this watchfullnesse upon his
Disciples and Apostles, and in them on all believers; Be ye also ready, for in
Mat. 24. 49.
such an hour as you think not, the son of man comes. And again, Watch
therefore, for you know neither the day nor the Mat. 25. 13.
hour, wherein the son of man comes. And elsewhere, What I say unto you, I
say unto all, watch. The Sybarites which were P. Cotton, Ser. de la M^rt.
not enlightened with such a Sun, yet always observed this custom in their
banquets, to have a deaths-head delivered from hand to hand by all the guests
at the Table, to the end to admonish them not to be transported with
intemperance, and to cause them to remember, that as they were nourished of the
flesh of dead creatures, that they lived in dying, and dyed in living. And the
Egyptians for the same reason carried in their processions a vessel of gold
full of earth, which was as if a Herald should proclaim to all the assembly
in the words of the Prophet, O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord.

LXXXV.
The enemies of the Church are compared to Bees, fear not I^ Tarnovius in
Psalm. Passion.
their multitude nor their rage; they are Bees not Lions, they buzze, they make
a noise, they have stings but they cannot do what they would, their power is
less then their spite and malice, and they hurt not but with their own
certain death and destruction. Believe then God in the midst of their
machinations, and applaud thy self in their tumultuous projects, that all
shall be frustrate and abortive. Pulveris exigui jactu compressa quiescunt.
When God pleases he can but blow on selfeconceited Nymrods, mighty hunters,
oppressing and tyrannical ^rid. Span^en dabia Ev^ngelica.
enemies, and easily overthrow them, and crush them to the earth, and break in
pieces all their counsels. If Pharaoh vex Gods people, asking Who is the Lord?
Flies, Lice, and Caterpillars shall be his challengers and Conquerours, and
ask, Who is Pharaoh?

LXXXVI.
Honey was an usual food for little children among the Jews, wherefore Isaiah
says of Christ, Butter and honey shall Isai. ^. 51.
he eat. By honey some say was designed the Divinity of his Sa^^eren. tract.
3^.
birth, and by butter his humanity, but foolishly and besides the mind of the
Prophet, whose words are clear, and the sense open. As if he had said,
Immanuel shall not only be a true God, but also a true man, that is, he shall
feed of such meats as your children use to eat of, so that his education
shall be common and ordinary, for sat and sweet meats are usually provided for
infants, and especially honey among the Eastern people. So that by these words
synecdochically at least is noted that his conception shall be miraculous, but
not his education. The Prophet subjoynes that there should be found in him
progress or proficiency like unto other infants, namely, imbecillitie of
knowledge to be limited and terminated till he was grown to ripeness of
years, for then he should be endowed with an excellent judgment not only to
distinguish good and evil, but to choose the good and refuse the evil. The
complement of all which is found, Luk 2. 52. Phil. 2. 7. To be equal with God
on one side, and on the other that he humbled himself. All which the Prophet
would here have noted, although in somewhat obscure words, with respect to the
times and prophetical style. Whence it is also evident that they do
altogether wrest the words of the Prophet that insert to that, and take it
finally, as if the child should therefore eat honey and butter, that he might
know to refuse the evil and choose the good. In a word, Christ is said to eat
the butter and honey, that is to be frugally educated with such meats as were
naturally afforded, for there was nothing more common among the Jews then
Butter, for most of them kept cattle. And as plentiful was honey, which their
woods and forests did sufficiently furnish them withal.

LXXXVII.
Figuratively the sudden and unavoydable destruction of the Rivet. Com. in
Psalm. 68.
wicked is often in Scripture expressed by the melting of wax. In some places
it is spoken of the mountains, to set forth Gods Power and Majesty. First,
Learn hence that God does arm himself as it were in the defense of his
people, but not as men are wont to do, because he is furnished with so great
power, that with a nod he can confound his adversaries. Although therefore
sometimes he seems to dissemble, or not to take notice of their danger, yet
will he in due time appear in their behalf, nor needs he much preparation
for their overthrow, for the mountains melt like wax before him, much more
shall crawling worms. Secondly, let us be humbled before the powerful hand of
God, and acknowledge our frailty, for we are in evaporating smoke, a vanishing
shadow, a melting wax. And if we have any stability, let us acknowledge that
we have it from God, who alone confirms, defends and preserves us, who
otherwise would quickly come to nothing, who were at first made of nothing, and
have our present support and subsistence in our God alone.

LXXXVIII.
The Queene-Bee never uses her sting; and is therein a monitor to Great men
and Princes, to labor for a meek and merciful behavior. Let Princes use
their power for, not against their subjects.

Non hos quaesitur munus in usus. Virgil Aenead. 4.
Let them not hold too strict a hand over the oppressed people, let it not be
said of their subjects, as it was said of the Roman soldiers under Severus,
that they were more afraid of their Captain then of their enemies: if they
dishearten them who shall comfort them, or stand for them? Yet many Princes use
their people (though such as the world cannot parallel) as the Hawke in Hesiod.
dealt with the melodious Nightingale, Hesiod. op. et dies l. 1. Sen. l. 1. de
Clemen. Camden hist. reg. Elizab.
they plume them, and then devour them. Seneca in his books of Clemency which
Q. Elizabeth so highly esteemed that she gave them the next place to the holy
Scriptures, says, Let thy sword not only be put in thy sheath, but also tied
fast in it; be sparing of the meanest and basest blood. It is for men of lower
condition to fall into quarrels and stri^es; equals may exchange blows one
with another without much danger. It stands not with the Majesty of a Prince
to engage himself in any quarrel or fight, because he has no equal to
contend with him: so far ought it to be from a Prince to brawle or wrangle,
that the straining of his voice is unbefitting him upon any occasion whatsoever.

LXXXIX.
Bees are industrious in their season, for they well know that the neglect of
it is their irrecoverable overthrow and destruction. And this life is the
summer and harvest, wherein we must labor and watch against temptations. The
deathbed or dying hour is a sharp combat; unless we have gathered into the
hives of our souls the graces of faith and love, etc. Whereby we may live
after death, and expect a certain recompense: He which does not this shall
experimentally find in his winter, the darkness of his mind, the Clouds of
fear, the wind and frost of judgment. The Bees draw out of the cells the old
and stinking Bee-bread, so must we in our lives mortify unprofitable and
sinful lusts, whence great sins may arise and be fomented. The Be being
weak with long shutting up in the winter, on the first opportunity of a
Sunne-shinie day, renewes her strength by coming forth and flying abroad in
the heat thereof. And we must learn to raise up our dull and drowsy spirits
by the word of the Sun of righteousness. Let us therefore diligently
bestirre our selves in the summer and fair weather of the means, whilst
Christ the son of grace shines, while God and his Ministers call upon us,
otherwise another day many with Esau shall seek repentance with tears, and
shall not find it.

XC.
The Commander has a sting, but uses it not for revenge: Basil. hexamer. hom.
8.
she rules not by written but by natures Laws, teaching that they must be slow
to punish who are exalted to the highest Powers: and whatsoever Be follows
not the Queens example, presently repents of her temeritie, for she no sooner
stings but pays the price of it with her life. Let Christians hear and
learn, who have a command not to render evil for evil, but to overcome evil
with goodness.

XCI.
To find honey is to taste the sweetness of a holy understanding, Greg. expos.
M^^al in Job. c. 22.
which then is sufficiently eaten, when our understanding is kept under
government or moderation, according to the measure of our sense; for he is
satiated with honey and vomits it, who desires to dive into things he cannot
conceive, and so loses that whereby he might be nourished, and therefore
weak understandings ought not to search into mysteryes above their capacity
and comprehension.

XCII.
We may read the writings of Poets and Philosophers, but Greg. Nazian. G^gnene.
Ca^min. liber. ^. 3^.
yet wisely, to cull out of them, whatsoever is profitable, as also with a
discerning judgment to avoyde whatsoever is hurtful; and so to imitate the
witty Bees, who whatsoever flower they gather of, following nature as their
guide, with a singular wisdom suck out only that which is profitable.

XCIII.
The doctrine of wisdom by Solomon is compared to honey Hieron. Com. in P^o.
c. 24* 13.
and the honeycomb, because that as honey sweetens meats, so the word all
other learning, but yet there is this difference in the signification of both,
for honey because it is already prepared to eat, signifies the more
superficies of the Letter, but the honey-combe where the honey is not expressed
from the wax, does figuratively point forth the allegorical signification,
that the Veil of the Letter being withdrawn, the sweetness of the spiritual
sense, but with some delay and labor may be perceived.

XCIV.
Honey too liberally eaten killes; so the searching after the Idem Com. in
Proverb. c. 25. v. 26. 27.
knowledge of the Divinity is sweet, but he which desires to search further
then the nature of man is capable; his glory will oppress and crush him; for
as honey taken immoderately bursts the eater, so this inquiry the
understanding that cannot comprehend it.

XCV.
Have thou found honey? Eat so much as is sufficient for thee, Idem Com. in
Proverb. c. 25. ^^.
least thou be filled therewith and vomit it? have thou found the sweetness of
the understanding of heavenly things, which is afforded and made known to the
pains and labors of the spiritual fathers? As prudent Bees take heed thou
desire not to know more then thou ought to know (be wise unto sobriety)
least whilst thou seek to understand the highest wisdom, beyond thy
abilities, thou losest the knowledge of that which thou did thoroughly
understand.

XCVI.
Epiphanius likens that man that finds out in others works Epiphan^ contr*
Hares. l. 1. c. 3.
any thing profitable, to the prudent Be, which flies to and fro and lights on
every flower, but gathers only that which is profitable for her self. Whereas
imprudent persons receive that which is hurtful sooner then the good: Like the
Scarabee that delights and lives in dung and stink, and makes it her content
and food, whereas to the Be it is loathsome and offensive.

XCVII.
Cyprian reasoning against the Polytheisme of the Heathen, Cyprian tract.
quart. de idolo^um vanita^^.
faith, there is but one Lord God, for such Majesty will not endure a
corrivall. And this oneness of the Deity he cleares from the earth. Was there
ever a partnership in ruleing begun in faith and ended without blood? The
Thebane fraternity was quickly broken, as a token of the deadly hatred between
them. One kingdom could not hold Romulus and Remus, whom one womb contained
and nourished together. Pompey and Caesar, though ^eare allied, yet in their
jealousy and emulation of Command brake asunder all relations. Nay the
Commonwealth of Bees is so jealous of the Principality, that it suffers not
the royal Infants to survive, but with an Ottoman cruelty murders all.

XCVIII.
The wise Be gathers sweet and wholesome nourishment from those places and
flowers which a vulgar judgment deemes worthless and good for nothing; and a
wise Christian from those passages of the Scriptures where the words seems
Hila^. in Psalm. 134.
carnal discernes spiritual excellencies. For as an unskilful man coming
into a field abounding with wholesome herbs, passes by all as of no more use
then grass, but a skillful Botanist does otherwise. So does a spiritual
reader find spiritual advantage from every sentence; to the pure all things
are profitable and pure, and if any place seems uncomely, it is only to those
that are such in themselves.

XCIX.
Mice are very hurtful enemies to Bees, but not at all times alike. In Summer
when the hives are full, and the Bees lusty and keep a constant guard and
watch, they seldom meddle with them; but in the winter when they are (benumbed
with cold) shut into the hives, and almost bereaved of their lives, then do
they without fear or hazard rob and plundder them. And Satan our constant
adversary takes advantage of professors: when they keep a continual watch and
course in prayer, they do not so often miscarrie, but in the night of their
ignorance, in the sleep of their peace and security, when they can least
epsy him, does he take advantage and by his wily, unseene stratagems overthrow
many.

C.
The seeds of discord were scattered in every surrow of the De H^st*
Occasional Med.
creation, and came up in a numberless variety of antipathies. Bees are a
continual prey to the Titmouse, often a morsel to the Spider: their
habitations are dug through and plundered by Mice and many other enemies
have they, whereby they daily suffer: yet no contest and hostility is so
destructive and dangerous, as that which exercised with Bees, creatures of
their own kind. What is this but an image of that woeful hostility which is
exercised between us reasonable creatures, who are conjoined in one common
humanity, if not religion. We fight with and destroy each other more then
those creatures that want reason to temper their passions. No beast is so
cruel to man as himself, where one man is slain by a beast, ten thousands
are slain by man. What is that war which we study and practice, but the art
of killing? What ever Turks and Pagans may do, O Lord, how long shall this
brutish fury arm Christians against each other? Whilst even Devils are not
at enmity with themselves, but accord in wickedness, why do we men so
mortally oppose each other? Oh thou that art the God of peace, compose the
unquiet hearts of men to an happy and universal concord, and at least refresh
our souls with the multitude of peace.

FINIS.

