

Read in this Image him, whose dearest blood
Is thought noe price to buy his Countries good,
Whose name shall flourish, till the blast of Fame
Shall want a Trumpet, or true Worth, a name.
Edw. Bower pinxit
G. Glouer fecit
THE SPEECH OR DECLARATION OF JOHN PYMM, Esquire, To the LORDS of the upper
House, upon the delivery of the Articles of the Commons assembled in
Parliament, AGAINST WILLIAM LAVD, Archbishop of Canterbury, in maintenance of
their Accusation, whereby he stands charged of High Treason.

TOGETHER With a true Copy of the said ARTICLES.

London, printed for Ralph Mabb, 1641.

A TRVE COPY OF THE Articles of the Commons assembled in Parliament, against
WILLIAM LAVD Archbishop of CANTERBVRY in maintenance of their Accusation,
whereby he stands charged with HIGH TREASON.
TOGETHER With a true Copy of the Speech or Declaration of JOHN PYMM, Esquire,
upon the same.
My Lords,

I Am commanded by the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses now assembled for the
Commons in Parliament, to deliver to your Lordships these Articles, in
maintenance of their Charge against the Archbishop of Canterbury. Their desire
is, that first your Lordships would be pleased to hear the Articles read, and
then I shall endeavor to present to you the sense of the Commons concerning
the nature of the Charge, and the order of their proceedings.

Articles of the Commons assembled in Parliament, in maintenance of their
Accusation against WILLIAM LAVD, Archbishop of Canterbury: Whereby he stands
charged with high treason:
I.
THat he has traitorously endeavored to subvert the fundamental Laws and
Government of this Kingdom of England, and instead thereof to introduce an
Arbitrary and tyrannical Government against Law; and to that end, has
wickedly and traitorously advised his Majesty, that he might at his own will,
and pleasure, leavie, and take money of his Subjects, without their consent in
Parliament; and this he affirmed was warrantable by the Law of God.

II.
He has for the better accomplishment of that his traitorous design,
advised, and procured sermons, and other discourses to be preached, printed,
and published, in which the authority of Parliaments, and the force of the
Laws of this Kingdom, have bin denied; and, absolute and unlimited Power over
the persons and estares of his Majesty's subjects maintained, and defended, not
only in the King, but himself, and other Bishops, against the Law: And he
has been a great protector, favourer, and promoter of the publishers of such
false and pernicious opinions.

III.
He has by Letters, Messages, Threats and Promises, and by diverse other ways
to Judges, and other Ministors of Justice, interrupted and perverted, and at
other times by means aforesaid, has endeavored to interrupt, and pervert the
course of Justice in his Majesty's Courts at Westminster, and other Courts, to
the subversion of the Laws of this Kingdom, whereby sundry of his Majesty's
subjects have been stopped in their just suits, deprived of their lawful
rights, and subjected to his tyrannical will, to their ruin and destruction.

VI.
That the said Archbishop has traitorously and corruptly sold Justice to those
who have had causes depending before him, by color of his Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, as Archbishop, High Commissioner, Referee, or otherwise, and has
taken unlawful gifts and bribes of his Majesty's subjects, and has (as much
as in him lies) endeavored to corrupt the other Courts of Justice, by advising
and procuring his Majesty to sell places of Judicature, and other offices,
contrary to the Laws and Statutes in that behalf.

V.
He has traitorously caused a Book of Canons to be composed, and published
without any lawful warrant and authority in that behalf; in which pretended
Canons, many matters are contained contrary to the Kings Prerogative, to the
fundamental Laws and Statutes of this Realm, to the right of Parliament, to
the propriety, and liberty of the subject, and matters tending to sedition, and
of dangerous consequence, and to the establishment of a vast, unlawful, and
presumptuous power in himself, and his successors; many of which Canons, by
the practice of the said Archbishop, were surreptitiously passed in the late
Convocation, without due consideration and debate; others by fear and
compulsion, were subscribed by the Prelates and Clerks there assembled, which
had never been voted and passed in the Convocation, as they ought to have
been.

And the said Archbishop has contrived and endeavored to assure and confirm
the unlawful and exorbitant power, which he has usurped and exercised over
his Majesty's Subjects, by a wicked and ungodly oath in one of the said
pretended Canons, enjoined to be taken by all the Clergy, and many of the Laity
of this Kingdom.

VI.
He has traitorously assumed to himself a Papal and tyrannical power, both
in Ecclesiastical and temporal matters, over his Majesty's subjects in this
Realm of England, and in other places, to the disherison of the Crowns,
dishonor of his Majesty, and derogation of his supremeauthority in
ecclesiastical matters; and the said Archbishop claims the Kings
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction as incident to his Episcopal and Archiepiscopal
office in this kingdom, and does deny the same to be derived from the Crown
of England, which he has accordingly exercised, to the high contempt of his
royal Majesty, and to the destruction of diverse of the Kings liege people, in
their persons and estates.

VII.
That he has traitorously endeavored to alter and subvert Gods true Religion,
by Law established in this Realm, and in stead there of to set up popish
superstition and Idolatry. And to that end has declared and maintained in
Speeches and printed Books, diverse popish doctrines, and opinions contrary to
the Articles of Religion established by Law. He has urged and enjoined diverse
popish and superstitious ceremonies, without any warrant of Law, and has
cruelly persecuted those who have opposed the same, by corporal punishments,
and Imprisonments, and most unjustly vexed others, who refused to conform
thereunto by Ecclesiastical censures of Excommunication, Suspension,
Deprivation, and Degradation, contrary to the Laws of this Kingdom.

VIII.
That for the better advancing of his traitorous purpose and design, he did
abuse the great power, and trust his Majesty reposed in him, and did intrude
upon the places of diverse great officers, and upon the right of other his
Majesty's Subjects, whereby he did procure to himself the nomination of sundry
persons to Ecclesiastical Dignities, Promotions, and Benefices, belonging to
his Majesty, and diverse of the Nobility, Clergy, and others; and has taken
upon him the commendation of Chaplains to the King, by which means he has
preferred to his Majesty's service, and to other great promotions in the
Church, such as have been Popishly affected, or otherwise unsound, and corrupt
both in doctrine, and manners.

IX.
He has for the same traitorous and wicked intent, chosen and employed such
men to be his own domestical Chaplains, whom he knew to be notoriously
disaffected to the reformed Religion, grossly addicted to Popish superstition,
and erroneous and unsound both in judgment and practice, and to them, or some
of them, has he committed the licencing of books to be printed; by which
means diverse false and superstitious Books have been published, to the great
scandal of Religion, and to the seducing of his Majesty's subjects.

X.
He has traitorously and wickedly endeavored to reconcile the Church of
England, with the Church of Rome; and for the effecting thereof, has
consorted, and confederated with diverse popish Priests, and Jesuits; and has
keptsecret intelligence with the Pope of Rome, and by himself, his Agents, and
Instruments, treated with such, as have from thence received Authorty, and
instruction, he has permitted, and countenanced a popish Hierarchy, or
Ecclesiastical government to be established in this Kingdom, by all which
traitorous and malicious practices this Church and Kingdom has been
exceedingly endangered, and like to fall under the Tyranny of the Roman Sea.

XI.
He in his own person and his Suffragans, Visitors, Surrogates, Chancellors,
and other Officers by his command, have caused diverse learned, pious, and
Orthodox Ministers of Gods word to be silenced, suspended, deprived, degraded,
excommunicated, and otherwise grieved, without any just and lawful cause: and
by diverse other means he has hindered the preaching of Gods word, caused
diverse of his Majesty's loyal Subjects to forsake the Kingdom, and increased
and cherished Ignorance, and profanesle amongst the people, that so he might
the better facilitate the way to the effecting of his own wicked and
traitorous design, of altering, and corrupting the true Religion here
established.

XII.
He has traitorously endeavored to cause division, and discord betwixt the
Church of England, and other Reformed Churches; and to that end has suppressed,
and abrogated the Privileges, and Immunities, which have been by his Majesty,
and his royal Ancestors granted to the Dutch, and French Churches in this
Kingdom; and diverse other ways has expressed his malice and disaffection to
these Churches, that so by such disunion, the Papists might have more advantage
for the overthrow, and extirpation of both.

XIII.
He has maliciously and traitorously plotted, and endeavored to stir up
war and enmity betwixt his Majesty's two Kingdoms of England, and Scotland,
and to that purpose has labored to introduce into the Kingdom of Scotland,
diverse Innovations both in Religion, and government, all or the most part of
them tending to Popery, and superstition, to the great grievance, and
discontent of his Majesty's Subjects ofthat Nation: And for their refusing to
submit to such Innovations, he did traitorously advise his Majesty to subdue
them by force of Arms, and by his own Authority, and Power, contrary to Law,
did procure sundry of his Majesty's Subjects, and enforced the Clergy of this
Kingdom to contribute toward the maintenance of that war, and when his
Majesty with much wisdom and Justice had made a Pacification betwixt the two
Kingdoms, the said Archbishop did presumptuously censure that pacification, as
dishonorable to his Majesty, and by his counsels, and endeavors, so incensed
his Majesty against his said Subjects of Scotland, that he did thereupon (by
advice of the said Archbishop) enter into an offensive war against them, to
the great hazard of his Majesty's person, and his Subjects of both Kingdoms.

XIIII.
That to preserve himself from being questioned for these, and others his
traitorous courses, he labou^ed to subvert the rights of Parliament, and the
ancient course of Parliamentary proceeding, and by false and malicious slanders
to incense his Majesty against Parliaments.

By which words, counsels, and actions, he has traitorously and contrary to
his Allegiance labored to alienate the hearts of the Kings liege people from
his Majesty, and to set a division between them, and to ruin and destroy his
Majesty's Kingdoms; for which they do impeach him of high Treason, against
our Sovereign Lord the King his Crown and dignity.

The said Commons do further aver that the said William Archbishop of
Canterbury, during the times that the crimes aforementioned were done, and
committed, has been a Bishop, or Archbishop of this Realm of Eng land, one
of the Kings Commissioners for Ecclesiastical matters; and one of his
Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, and has taken an Oath for his
faithful discharge of the said Office of Councellor, and has likewise taken
an oath of supremacy, and Allegiance.

And the said Commons by protestation saving to themselves the liberty of
exhibiting at any time hereafter, any other Accusation or Im^peachment against
the said Archbishop, and also of replying to the Answers, that the said
Archbishop shall make unto the said Articles, or to any of them, and of
offering further proof also of the Premises, or any of them, or of any other
impeachment, or Accusation that shall be exhibited by them, as the cause shall
according to the course of Parliament require, do pray that the said
Archbishop may be put to answer to all and every the Premises, and that such
proceedings, examination, trial, and Judgment may be upon every of them, had
and used, as is agreeable to Law and Justice.

The Articles being read; he proceeded as follows.
My Lords,

THERE is an expression in the Scripture, which I will not presume either to
understand, or to interpret; yet to a vulgar eye it seems to have an Asspect
something suitable to the Person and Cause before you: It is a description of
the evil Spirits, wherein they are said to be spiritual wickednesses in High
Places. Crimes acted by the spiritual faculties of the Soul, the Will and the
Understanding, exercised about spiritual matters, concerning Gods Worship, and
the Salvation of Man, seconded with power, authority, learning, and many other
advantages, do make the party who commits them, very suitable to that
description, Spiritual wickednesses in high places.

These Crimes (my Lords) are various in their Nature, heinous in their
quality, and universal in their Extent. If you examine them Theologically, as
they stand in opposition to the Truth of God, they will be found to be against
the rule of Faith, against the power of godliness, against the means of
Salvattion.

If you examine them Morally, as they stand in opposition to the light of
Nature, to right, reason, and the principles of humane saciety, you will then
perceive pride without any moderation; such a Pride as that is which exalts it
self above all that is called God. Malice without any provocation; Malice
against virtue, against innocence, against piety: Injustice without any means
of restitution; even such injustice as does rob the present times of their
possessions; the future, of their possibilities.

If they be examined (my Lords) by Legal Rules in a Civil way, as they stand
in opposition to the Public good, and to the Laws of the Land, He will be
found to be a Traitor against his Majesty's Crown, an Incendiary against the
Peace of the State; he will be found to be the highest, the boldest, the most
impudent oppressor, that ever was an oppressor both of King and People.

This Charge (my Lords) is distributed and conveyed into fourteen several
Articles, as you have heard; and those Articles are only general: It being
the intention of the House of Commons (which they have commanded me to declare)
to make them more certain and particular by preparatory Examinations to be
taken with the help of your Lordships house, as in the Case of my Lord of
Strafford.

I shall now run through them with a light touch, only marking in every of
them some special points of venom, virulency, and malignity.

1 The first Article (my Lords) does contain his endeavor to introduce into
this Kingdom an Arbitrary power of Government, without any limitations or
Rules of Law. This (my Lords) is against the safety of the Kings person, the
honor of his Crown, and most destructive to his people.

Those Causes which are most perfect have not only a power to produce effects,
but to conserve and cherish them. The Seminary virtue, and the Nutritive virtue
in vegetables, do produce from the same principles. It was the defect of
Justice, the restrayning of oppression and violence that first brought
government into the World, and set up Kings, the most excellent way of
Government. And by the maintenance of Justice all kinds of government receive
a sure foundation and establishment. It is this that has in it an ability to
preserve and secure the royal power of Kings, yea, to adorn and increase it.

2. In the second Article, your Lordships may observe absolute and unlimited
power, defended by Preaching, by Sermons, and other discourses, printed and
published upon that subject. And truly (my Lords) it seems to be a prodigious
crime, that the Truth of God, and his holy Law should be perverted to defend
the lawlessnesse of men. That the holy and sacred function of the Ministry,
which was ordained for instruction of men's souls in the ways of God, should
be so abused, that the Ministers are become the trumpets of sedition, the
promoters and defenders of violence and oppression.

3 In the third Article (my Lords) you have the Judges, who under his Majestic
are the dispersers and distributers of Justice, frequently corrupted by fear
and solicitation; you have the course of justice in the execution of it,
shamefully obstructed. And if a wilful Act of injustice in a Judge be so
high a crime in the estimate of the Law, as to deserve death; under what
burden of guilt does this man lie, who has been the cause of great numbers
of such voluntary and wilful Acts of unjustice.

In the fourth Article, he will be found in his own Person to have sold
Justice in Causes depending before him. And by his wicked counsel,
endeavoring to make his Majesty a Merchant of the same commodity, only wi^h
this difference, that the King by taking money for places of Judicature, should
sell it in gross; whereas the Archbishop sold it by retalle.

5 In the fifth Article, there appears a power ufurped of making Canons; of
laying obligations on the Subjects in the nature of Laws: and this power
abused to the making of such Canons as are in the matter of them very
pernicious, being directly contrary to the Prerogative of the King, and the
liberty of the People. In the manner of pressing of them, may be found fraud
and shuffling: in the conclusion, violence and constraint; Men being forced by
terror and threatening to subscribe to all: which power thus wickedly gotten,
they labored to establish by perjury, injoyning such an Oath for the
maintenance of it, as can neither be taken nor kept with a good conscience.

6 In the sixth Article, you have the King robbed of his Supremacy: you have a
Papal power exercised over his Majesty's Subjects in their consciences, and in
their persons: You have Ecclesiastical jurisdiction claimed by an Incident
right, which the Law declares to proceed from the Crown.

And herein your Lordships may observe that those who labor in civil matters
to set up the King above the Laws of the Kingdom, do yet in Ecclesiastical
matters endeavor to set up themselves above the King. This was first procured
by the Archbishop to be extrajudicially: declared by the Judges, and then to be
published in a Proclamation. In doing whereof he has made the Kings Throne but
a footstool for his own and their pride.

7 You have (my Lords) in the seventh Article, Religion undermined and
subverted: you have Popery cherished and defended: you have this seconded with
power and violence, by severe punishment upon those which have opposed this
mischievous intention: and by the subtle and eager prosecution of these me^,
has the power of Ecclesiastical Commissioners, of the Star. Chamber and
Council Table been often made sub servient to his wicked design.

My Lords,

8 You may observe in the eight Article great care taken to get into his own
hand the power of nominating to Ecclesiastical Livings and promotions: you
have as much mischievous, as much wicked care taken in the disposing of these
preferments, to the hinderance and corruption of Religion. And by this means
(my Lords) the Kings facred Majesty, instead of Sermons, fit for spiritual
inftructours, has often had invectives against his people, encouragement to
injustice, or to the overthrow of the Laws. Such Chaplains have been brought
into his service, as have as much as may be labored to corrupt his own
Household, and been eminent examples of corruption to others; which has so
far prevailed, as that it has exceedingly tainted the Universities, and
been generally dispersed to all the chief Cities, the greatest Towner and
Auditories of the Kingdom. The grievous effects whereof is most manifest to
the Commons House, there being diverse hundred complaints there depending in the
House against scandalous Ministers; and yet (I believe) the hundred part of
them is not yet brought in.

9 The ninth Article sets out the like care to have Chaplains of his own,
that might be promoters of this wicked and traiterous design: Men of corrupt
judgments, of corrupt practice, extremely addicted to superstition: And to
such men's cares has been committed the Lycensing of Books to the Press; by
means whereof many have been published that are full of falsehood, of
scandals; such as have been more worthy to be burnt by the hand of the Hangman
in Smithfield (as I think one of them was) then to be admitted to come into
the hands of the Kings people.

10 In the tenth Article it will appear, how he having made these approaches
to Popery, comes now to close and join more nearly with it; he confederates
with Priests and Jesuits; He, by his instruments negotiates with the Pope at
Rome, and has correspondence with them that be authorized from Rome here. He
has permitted a Roman Hierarchy to be set up in this Kingdom. And though he
has been so careful that a poor man could not go to the neighbor parish
to hear a Sermon, when he had none at home; cou^ not have a Sermon repeated,
nor prayer used in his own Family, but he was a fit subject for the High
Commission Court, yet the other has been done in all parts of the Realm, and
no notice taken of it, by any Ecclesiastical Judges or Courts.

My Lords,

11 You may perceive Preaching suppressed in the eleventh, diverse godly and
orthodox Ministers oppressedin their persons and Estates: you have the Kings
loyal Subjects banished out of the Kingdom, not as Elimeleck, to seek for
bread in foreign Countries, by reason of the great scarcity which was in
Israel; but traveling abroad for the bread of life, because they could not
have it at home, by reason of the spiritual Famine of Gods Word, caused by
this man and his partakers. And by this means you have had the trade, the
Manufactury, the industry of many thousands of his Majesty's subjects carried
out of the Land.

It is a miserable abuse of the spiritual Keys, to shut up the doors of
heaven, and to open the gates of hell; to let in profaneness, ignorance,
superstition, and error. I shall need say no more: These things are evident,
and abundantly known to all.

12 In the twelfth Article (my Lords) you have a division endeavored between
this and the foreign reformed Churches. The Church of Christ is one Body, and
the Members of Christ have a mutual relation, as members of the same body.
Unity with Gods true Church every where is not only the beauty, but the
strength of Religion: of which beauty and strength he has sought to deprive
this Church by his manifold attempts to break this union. To which purpose he
has suppressed the privileges granted to the Dutch and French Churches. He
has denied them to be of the same Faith and Religion with us; and many other
ways has he declared his malice to those Churches.

13 In the thirteenth Article, as he has sought to make an Ecclesiastical
division, or religious difference between us and foreign Nations, so he has
sought to make a civil difference between us and his Majesty's subjects of
the Kingdom of Scotland. And this he has promoted by many innovations, there
pressed by himself and his own authority, when they were incapable of such
alterations. He advised his Majesty to use violence. He has made private and
public Collections toward the maintenance of the war; which he might justly
call his own war. And with an impudent boldness has struck Tallies in the
Exchequer for diverse sums of money, procured by himself, pro defensione Regni;
when by his counsels the King was drawn to undertake not a defensive, but an
offensive war.

14. He has lastly, thought to secure himself and his party, by seeking to
undermine Parliaments; and thereby has labored to bereave this Kingdom of
the Legislative power, which can only be used in Parliaments: and that we
should be left a Kingdom without that which indeed makes and constitutes a
Kingdom; and is the only Mean to preserve and restore it from distempers and
decays. He has hereby endeavored to bereave us of the highest Judicatory;
such a Judicatory, as is necessary and essential to our government. Some Cases
cannot be tried in any inferior Court; as diverse Cases of Treason, and others
concerning the Prerogative of the Crown, and liberty of the People. It is the
supreme Iudicatory to which all difficult Cases resort from other Courts. He
has sought to deprive the King of the Love and Council of his People, of that
assistance which he, might have from them; and likewise to deprive the People
of that relief of grievances which they most humbly expect from his Majesty.

My Lords,

The Parliament is the Cabbinet wherein the chiefest lewels both of the Crown
and Kingdom are deposited. The great Prerogative of the King, and the liberty
of the People are most effectually exercised and maintained by Parliaments.
Here (my Lords) you cannot pass by this occasion of great thanks to God and
his Majesty for passing the Bill whereby the frequent course of Parliaments is
established; which I assure my self, he will by experience find to be a
strong foundation both of his honor, and of his Crown.

This is all (my Lords) I have to say to the particulars of the Charge. The
Commons desire your Lordships that they may have the same way of Examination
that they had in the Case of the Earl of Strafford: That is, to examine
members of all kinds, of your Lordships House and their own, and others, as
they shall see cause. And those Examinations to be kept secret and private,
that they may with more advantage be made use of, when the matter comes to
trial.

They have declared that they reserve to themselves the power of making
Additionall Articles; by which they intend to reduce his Charge to be more
particular and certain, in respect of the several times, occasion, and other
circumstances of the Offenses therein Charged. And that your Lordships would be
pleased to put this Cause in such a quick way of proceeding, that these great
and dangerous Crimes, together with the offenders, may be brought to a just
Judgment.

FINIS.

