A DECLARATION Presented to the Honorable House of COMMONS.

With A Speech delivered at conference with the LORDS, January 25. 1641.

By occasion of the Petitions from the City of London, and the Counties of
Middlesex, Essex, and Hartford.

BY JOHN PYM Esquire.

Published by Order of the House of COMMONS, and enlarged in the end since the
last Edition by the Author, Whereunto are annexed two Orders of the said House,
The one containing the thanks of the House given to those of HARTFORD-SHIRE,

The other for punishing of those, who Printed a false Copy of that Petition
and other libellous Pamphlets.

Published by a true Copy, February 22. 1641.



LONDON, Printed for Richard Lownes, at his Shop next without LVD-GATE, 1641.

A Declaration of the Grievances of the Kingdom, delivered in Parliament, by
John Pym ESQUIER.
NEver Parliament had greater businesses to The precedent consideration of
grievances will further the supply.
dispatch, nor more difficulties to encounter; therefore we have reason to take
all advantages of order and address, and hereby we shall not only do our
own work, but dispose and enable our selves for the better satisfaction of
His Majesty's desire of supply. The grievances being removed, our affections
will carry us with speed and cheerfulness, to give His Majesty that which
may be sufficient both for his honor and support. Those that in first place
shall endeavor to redress the grievances, will be found not to hinder, but to
be the furtherers of his Majesty's service: he that takes away weights, does
as much advantage motion, as he that adds wings.

Diverse pieces of this maine work have bin already propounded, Great works are
first to be considered in the model.
his endeavor should be to present to the House a model of the whole. In the
Creation God made the world according to that Idea or form, which was eternally
preexistent in the divine mind. Moses was commanded to frame the Tabernacle
after the pattern showed him in the Mount. Those actions are seldom well
perfected in the execution, which are not first well molded in the design and
proposition.

He said, he would labor to contract those manifold affairs both of the
Church and State, which did so earnestly require the wisdom A double method
compounded of grievances and cures.
and faithfulness of this House, into a double method of grievances and cures:
and because there wanted not some who pretended, that these things wherewith
the Commonwealth is now grieved, are much for the advantage of the King, and
that the redress of them will be to His Majesty's great disadvantage and loss
(he said) he doubted not but to make it appear, that in discovering the
present Public grievances disadvantagious to the King.
great distempers and disorders, and procuring remedy for them, we should be no
less serviceable to his Majesty, who has summoned us to this great Council,
than useful to those whom we do here represent: for the better effecting
whereof, he propounded three The first general division.
maine branch^s of his discourse.

In the first (he said) he would offer them the several heads of

In the second, he undertook to prove, that the disorders from

In the third, he would advise such a way of healing and removing

In the handling whereof he promised to use such expressions as might mitigate
the sh^rpenes and bitterness of those things whereof Sharp matters to be
mitigated in the expression. The K. can do no wrong.
he was to speak, so far as his duty and faithfulness would allow. It is a
great Prerogative to the K. and a great honor attributed to him in a Maxim of
our Law, that he can do no wrong, he is the fountain of Iustied, and if there
be any injustice in the execution of his Commands, the Law casts it upon the
Ministers, and frees the King. Activity, life, and vigor, are conveied into
the sublunary creatures, by the influence of Heaven: but the malignity and
distemper, the c^use, of so many Epidemicall diseases, do proceed from the noy
some vapors of the earth, or some ill affected qualities of the air, without
any infection or alteration of those pure, celestial and incorruptible bodies.
In the like manner (he said) the authority, the power and countenance of
Princes may concur in the actions of evil men, without partaking in the
injustice and obliquitie of them. Hurtful projects presented to the King under
plausible notions.
These matters where of we complain, have bin presented to his Majesty,
either under the pretense of Royal Pretogatives, which he is bound to
maintain, or of public good, which is the most honorable object of Regal
wisdom. But the covetous and ambitious designs of others, have interposed
betwixt his Royal intentions, and the happiness of his people, making those
things pernicious and hurtful, which his Majesty apprehended as just, and
profitable.

He said, the things which he was to propound, were of a various A promise of
moderation.
nature, many of them such as required a very tender and exquisite
consideration, In handling of which, as he would be bold to use the liberty of
the place and relation wherein he stood, so he would be careful to express
that Modesty and humility, which might be expected by those, of whose actions
he was to speak. And if his judgment; or his tongue should slip into a
particular mistake, he would Submission to reformation.
not think it so great a shame, to fail by his own weakness, as he should
esteem it an honor and advantage, to be corrected by the wisdom of that house,
to which he submitted himself, with this protestation, that he desired no
reformation so much as to reform himself.

The greatest liberty of the kingdom, is Religion; thereby we are Religion.
steed from spiritual evils: and no impositions are so grievous, as those that
are laid upon the soul. The next great libert^, is Justice, whereby Justice.
we are preserved from injury in our persons, and estates, from this is
derived into the Commonwealth, peace, and order, and safety, and when this is
interrupted, confusion and danger are ready to overwhelme all. The third great
liberty consists in the power and privilege of Parliaments, this is the
fountain of law, the great Council Privilege of Parliament.
of the kingdom, the highest Court: this is enabled by the Legislative and
Conciliary power, to prevent evils to come; by the Judiciary power, to
suppress and remove evils present. If you consider these three great liberties
in the order of dignity, this last is inferior to the other two as means are
inferour to the end; but if you consider them in the order of necessity and
use, this may justly claim the The order propounded in handling these three
great liberties.
first place, in our care, because the end cannot be obtained without the
means: if we do not preserve this, we cannot long hope to enjoy either of the
other. Therefore (he said) being to speak of those grievances which lie upon
the kingdom, he would observe this order.

1. To mention those, which were against the privilege of Parliaments. 2.
Those which were prejudicial to the Religion established in the Kingdom. 3.
Those which did interrupt the justice of the Realm, in the liberty of our
persons, and propriety of our estates.
The privileges of Parliament were not given for the ornament The necessity
and importance of the privilege of Parliament.
or advantage of those, who are the members of Parliament, they have a real
use and efficacy, toward that which is the end of Parliaments: we are free
from suits, that we may the more entirely addict our selves, to the public
services: we have therefore liberty of speech, that our Counsels may not be
corrupted with fear, or our judgments perverted with self respects: those
three great faculties and functions of Parliament, the Legislative Judiciary,
and Consiliary power, can not be well exercised without such privileges as
these. The wisdom of our Laws, the faithfulness of our Counsels, the
righteousness of our judgments can hardly be kept pure and untainted, if they
proceed from distracted and restramed minds.

It is a good Rule of the Moral Philosopher, Et non laed as mentem
gubernatricem omnium actionum: These powers of Parliament are to the body
politic as the rational faculties of the soul, to a man. That which keeps
all the parts of the Commonwealth in frame, and temper, ought to be most
carefully preserved in that freedom, vigor, and activity, which belongs to it
self. Our predecessors in this house, have ever bin most careful in the first
place, to settle and secure their privileges: and (he said) he hoped that we
having had greater breaches made upon us than heretofore, would be no less
tender of them, and forward in seeking reparation for that which is past, and
prevention of the like for the time to come.

Then he propounded diverse particular points wherein the Privilege Particular
breaches of privilege 1 Restraint of speech. 2 Interdict of questions
of Parliament had bin broken.

First, in restraiaing the members of the House from speaking.

Secondly, in forbidding the Speaker to put any Question.

These two were practiced the last day of the last Parliament (and, as was
alleged, by his Majesty's command) and both of them trench upon the very life
and being of Parliaments, for if such a restraining power as this should take
root, and be admitted, it will be impossible for us to bring any resolution to
perfection in such matters as shall displease those about the King.

Thirdly, by imprisoning diverse Members of the House for matters Imprisonment
of members. Judicial proceedings Order to be bound to the good behavior.
done in Pa^liament.

Fourthly, by indictments, informations, and judgments in ordinary and
inferior courts for speeches and proceedings in Parliaments

Fifthly, the dis^racefull order of the Kings Bench, whereby some members of
this House were enjoined to put in security of the good behavior, and for
refusal thereof, they were continued in prison, diverse years, without any
particular allegation against them: one of them was freed by death, others not
dismissed till his Majesty had declared his intention, to summon this
Parliament. And this he noted not only as a breach of privilege, but as a
violation of the common justice of the Kingdom.

Sixthly by the sudden and abrupt dissolution of Parliaments, contrary Abrupt
dissolutions of Parliament.
to the Law and custom. It has bin often declared in Parliaments, that the
Parliament should not be dissolved, till the petitions be answered. This (he
said) was a great grievance, because it does prevent the redress of other
grievances. It were a hard case, that a private man should be put to death
without being heard: As this representative body of the Commons, receives a
being by the summons, so it receives a civil death by the dissolution. Is it
not a much more heavy doom, by which we lose our being, and have this civil
death inflicted on us, in displeasure, and not to be allowed time and liberty
to answer for our selves? that we should not only dye, but have this mark of
infamy laid upon us, to be made Intestabiles, disabled to make our wills, to
dispose of our business, as this House has always used to do, before
Adjournments or dissolutions? yet this, has often bin our case, we have not
bin permitted to power out our last sighs and groans, into the bosom of our
dear Sovereign, the words of dying men are full of piercing affections: if we
might be heard to speak, no doubt we should so fully express our love, and
faith fulness to our Prince, as might take off the false suggestions and
aspersions of others: at least we should in our humble supplications, recommend
some such things to him in the name of his people as would make for his honor,
and the public good of his Kingdom.

Thus he concluded the first sort of grievances, being such as were Grievances
concerning Religion.
against the privilege of Parliament, and passed on to the next, concerning
Religion: all which he conveyed under the four heads.

1 The first, was the great encouragement given to popery, of Encouragement of
popery. Suspension of Laws.
which he produced these particular evidences.

1 A suspension of all Laws against Papists, whereby they enjoy a free, and
almost public exercise of that Religion, and those good Statutes which were
made for restraint of Idolatry, and superstition, are now a ground of security
to them, in the practice of both, being used to no other end, but to get money
into the Kings purse: which as it is clearly against the intentions of the
Law, so it is full of mischief to the Kingdom.

By this means a dangerous party is cherished, and increased, who are ready to
close with any opportunity or disturbing the peace and safety of the State.
Yet (he said) he did not desire any new laws against popery, or any rigorous
courses in the execution of those already in force; he was far from seeking the
ruin of their persons or estates, only he wished they might be kept in such
a condition, as should restrain them from doing hurt.

It may be objected, there are moderate and discreet men amongst There can be
no security from papists.
them, men of estates, such as have an interest in the peace and prosperity of
the Kingdom, as well as we. These (he said) were not to be considered
according to their own disposition, but according to but In their disability.
the nature of the body, whereof they are parties. The Planets have several
and particular motions of their own, yet they are all rapt and transported
into a contrary course, by the superior Orb which comprehends them all. The
Principles of Popery are such, as are incompatible with any other RELIGION:
there may be a suspension of violence, for some by respects, but the ultimate
end, even of that moderation, is, that they may with more advantage extirpate
that which is opposite to them. Laws will not restrain them, oaths will not,
the Pope can dispense with both these, and where there is occasion, his command
will act them, to the disturbance of the Realm, against their own private
disposition, yea, against their own reason and judgment to obey him, to whom
they have (especially the Jesuiticall party) absolutely and entirely obliged
themselves, not only in spiritual matters, but in temporal, as they are in
order ad Spiritualia. H. the 3d. and H. the 4th. of France, were no Protestants
themselves, yet were murdered, because they tolerated the Protestants, by
which and many other presidents it appears, that the King, that the Kingdom
can have no security but in their weakness and disabilite to do hurt.

2 A 2d. encouragement is, their admission into places of power Admission into
places of power.
and trust in the Commonwealth, whereby they get many dependants and
adherents, not only of their own, but even of such as make profession to be
protestants.

3 A third, their freedom of resorting to London, and the Court, Free resort
to London and the court
whereby they have opportunity, not only of Communicating their Counsels, and
designs one to another, but of diving into his Majesty's Counsels, by the
frequent access of those who are active men, amongst them, to the tables and
company of great men, and under subtle pretenses and disguises, they want not
means of cherishing their own projects, and of endeavoring to mould and
biasse the public affairs to the great advantage of that party.

4 A 4th, that as they have a Congregation of Cardinals at Rome, to consider of
the aptest ways and means of establishing the Popes authority and Religion in
England: so they have a Nuncio here, to act and dispose that party to the
execution of those Counsels, and by the ass^stance of such cunning and
Jesuiticall spirits as swarm in this town, to order and manage all actions,
and events, to the furtherance of that maine end.

2 The second grievance in Religion, was from those manifold innovations lately
introduced into several parts of the Kingdom, all Innovations in matters of
Religion
inclining to Popery, and disposing and fitting men to entertain it: the
particulars are these.

1 Diverse of the chiefest points of Religion in difference betwixt Maintenance
of popish tenets.
us and the Papists have bin publicly defended in licensed Books, in Sermons,
in University acts and disputations.

2 Diverse Popish Ceremonies have bin not only practiced, but Practice of
popish ceremonies.
countenanced, yea little less than enjoined, as Altars, Images, Crucifixes,
bowings, and other gestures and observances, which put upon our Churches a
shape and face of popery. He compared this to the dry bones in Ezekiel, first
they came together, then the sinews and the flesh came upon them, after this
the skin covered them, and then breath and life was put into them: so (he said)
after these men had molded us into an outward form and visage of popery, they
would more boldly endeavor to breath into us the spirit and life of popery.

3 The third grievance, was the countenancing and preferring those Preferment
of men popishly inclined. Discouragment of true professors. Inlargment of
differences among our selves.
men, who were most forward in setting up such Innovations, the particul^rs
were so well known, that they needed not to be named.

4 The fourth was, the discouragement of those who were known to be most
conscionable, and faithful professors of the truth: some of the ways of
effecting this, he observed to be these.

1 The courses taken to enforce and enlarge those unhappy differences, for
matters of small moment, which have bin amongst our selves, and to raise up new
occasions of further division, whereby many have bin induced to forsake the
land, not seeing the end of those voluntary and humane Injunctions in things
appertaining to Gods worship: whereas those who are indeed lovers of Religion,
and of the Churches of God, would seek to make up those breaches, and to unite
us more entirely against the common enemy.

2 The over rigid prosecution of those who are scrupulous in using Over-rigid
prosecution of the scrupulous for things indifferent.
some things enjoined, which are held by those who enjoin them, to be in
themselves indifferent. It has bin ever the desire of this House, expressed in
many Parliaments in Q. Elizabeth's time and since, that such might be renderly
used. It was one of our petitions delivered at Oxford to his Majesty that now
is: but what little moderation it has produced, is not unknown to us all, any
other vice almost Unjust punishments for matters not by law. Reading the Book.
The Table set Altarwise. Coming to the railes Preaching upon the Lords day.
Varying from the catechism. Abuse of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction.
may be better endured in a Minister than Inconformitie.

3 The unjust punishments, and vexations of sundry persons for matters
required, without any warrant of Law: as

For not reading the book ^oncerning recreation on the Lords day.

For not removing the Communion Table to be set Altarwise at the East end of
the Chancell.

For not coming up to the Railes to receive the Sacrament.

For preaching the Lords day in the afternoon.

For Catechizing in any other words and manner than in the precise words of the
short catechism in the Common Prayer book.

The fifth and last grievance concerning Religion, was the incroachment and
abuse of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction: the particulars mentioned are these.

1 Fining and imprisoning in cases not allowed by Law.

2 Their challenging their jurisdiction to be appropriate to their In fining
and imprisoning Claiming jurisdiction to be Iure Divine. Articles of the
Visitations.
order, which they allege to be jure Divine.

3 The contriving and publishing of new articles, upon which they enforce the
Churchwardens to take oaths, and to make inquiries and presentiments, as if
such articles had the force of Canons: and this, he said, was an effect of
great presumption and boldness, not only in the Bishops, but in their
Archdeacons, Officials and Chancellors, taking upon themselves a kind of
Synodall authority: and the Injunctions of this kind, might well partake in
name with that part of the common Law, which is called the Extravagants.

Having dispatched these several points, he proceeded to the third Grievances
concerning the liberty of persons and estates.
part of grievances, being such as are against the common justice of the Realm,
in the liberties of our persons, and propriety of our estates, of which (he
said) he had many to propound: In doing whereof, he would rather observe the
order of time, wherein they were acted, than of consequence: but when he
should come to the cure, he should then persuade the House to begin with
those, who were of most importance, as being now in execution, and very much
pressing and exhausting the Commonwealth.

He began with the Tonnage and poundage, and other impositions Tonnage and
Poundage impositions
not warranted by Law: and because these burdens had long lain upon us, and the
principles which produced them, are the same from whence diverse others are
derived, he thought it necessary to promise a short narrative, and relation of
the grounds and proceed^ngs of the power of imposing herein practiced. It was
(he said) a fundamental Not to be taken but by consent in Parliament.
truth essential to the constitution and government o^ this kingdom, an
hereditary liberty and privilege of all the free borne subjects of the Land,
that no tax, tallage, or other charge might be laid upon us, without common
consent in Parliament, this was acknowledged by the Conqueror, ratified in that
contract which he made Acknowledged by the Conqueror. Sometimes broken by
other Kings but never denied. Those breaches repaired by succeeding Parliaments.
with this Nation, upon his admittance to the Kingdom, declared and confirmed
in the Laws which he published.

This has never bin denied to any of our Kings, though broken and interrupted
by some of them, especially by K. John, and Hen. 3. then again confirmed by
Mag. Chart. and other succeeding laws: yet not so well settled, but that it was
sometime attempted by the two succeeding Edwards, in whose times the subjects
were very sensible of all the breaches made upon the common liberty, and by
the opportunity of frequent Parliaments, pursued them with fresh complaints,
and for the most part, found redress, and procured the right of the subject to
be fortified by new Statutes.

He observed that those Kings, even in the Acts whereby they did Some mixture
of evidence for the subject in these very breaches.
break the Law, did really affirm the subjects liberty, and disclaim that
right of imposing, which is nowchale^ged, for they did usually procure the
Merchants consent, to such taxes as were laid, thereby to put a color of
justice upon their proceeding, and ordinarily they were limited to a short
time, and then propounded to the ratification of the Parliament, where they
were cancelled or confirmed, as the necessity and state of the Kingdom did
require.

But for the most part, such charges upon merchandise, were taken The grant by
Parliament most usual.
by authority of Parliament, and granted for some short time, in a greater or
lesser proportion, as was requisite for supply of the public occasions, 6 or
12 in the pound, for one, two, or three years, as they saw cause, to be
employed for the defense of the Sea, and it was acknowledged so clearly, to be
in the power of arliament, that they At first variously limited in respect of
time and persons Afterward Confirmed to the King for life. No contrary
practice between Ed. 3 and Q Mary
have sometimes bin granted to Noble men, sometimes to Merchants to be disposed
for that use. Afterward they were granted to the King for life, and so
continued for diverse descents, yet still as a gift and grant of the Commons.

Betwixt the time of Ed. the third, and Q. Mary, never Prince (that he could
remember) offered to demand any imposition, but by grant in Parliament: Q. Mary
laid a charge upon cloth, by the equity of the Statute of Tunnage and Poundage,
because the rate set upon wool was much more than upon cloth, and there being
little wool carried Pretended equity for the Custom upon cloth.
out of the Kingdom unwrought, the Q. thought she had reason, to lay somewhat
more, yet not full so much, as brought them to an equallity, but that there still
continued a less charge upon wool wrought The grounds of the pretermitted
Custom.
into cloth, than upon wool carried out unwrought; until K. James' times, when
upon Nicholsons project, there was a further addition of charge, but still upon
pretense of the Statute, which is that we call the pretermitted custom.

In Q. Eliz. time, one or two little impositions crept in, the general Bates
Case.
prosperity of her reign overshadowing small errors and innovations: one of
these was upon Currants, by occasion of the Merchants complaints, that the
Venetians had laid a charge upon the English cloth, that so we might be even
with them, and force them the sooner to take it off: this being demanded by K.
James, was denied by one Bates a Merchant, and upon a suit in the Exchequer,
was The judgment therein for the King.
adjudged for the King.

The manner of which judgment was thus: There were then but three Indges, in
that Court, all differing from one another in the grounds of their sentences.
The first was of opinion, the King might impose upon such commodities as were
foreign, and supersluous Resulting from different opinions of the Judges.
as Currants were, but not upon such as were native, and to be transported, or
necessary, and to be imported for the use of the kingdom. The second Judge was
of opinion, he might impose upon all foreign Merchandise, whether supersluous
orno, but not upon native. The third, that for as much as the King had the
custody of the Ports and the guard of the Seas, and that he might open and shut
up the ports as he pleased, he had a prerogative to impose upon all
Merchandise, both exported and imported.

This single, distracted and divided judgment, is the foundation of The only
foundation of the power of imposing.
all the impositions now in practice: for after this, K. Iam. laid new charges
upon all commodities outward and inward, not limited to a certain time, and
occasion, but reserved to himself, his heirs and successors for ever; the
first, impositions in fee simple, that were followed with complaints, and
preserved by breaches of Parliaments
ever heard of in this kingdom. This judgment, and the right of imposing
thereupon aslumed was a question in septimo and duodecimo of that King, and was
the cause of the breach of both those Parliaments, In 18. and 21. Jacobi, it
was declined by this House, that they might preserve the favor of the K. for
the dispatch of some other great businesses, upon which they were more especially
attentive.

In 1. of his Majesty, It necessarily came to be remembered upon the The
redress desired without diminution of the Kings profit.
proposition on the Kings part, for renewing the bill of Tonnage and Poundage,
but so moderate was that Parliament, that they thought rather to confirm the
impositions already set by a law to be made, than to abolish them by a
judgment in Parliament, but that and diverse ensuing Parliaments have been
unhappily broken, before that endeavor could be accomplished, only at the last
meeting, a Remonstrance was made concerning the liberty of the Subject, in this
point, and it has always been expressed to be the meaning of the House, and so
it was (as he said) his own meaning in the proposition now made, to settle
and restore the right according to law, and not to diminish the Kings profit,
but to establish i^ by a free grant in Parliament. New burdens since the last
Parliaments.


Since the breach of the last Parliament, his Majesty has by a new book of
Rates very much increased the burden upon Merchandise, and now Tonnage and
Poundage, old and new impositions Diverse mischiefs from these grievances
are all taken by Prerogative, without any grant in Parliament, or authority of
law, as we conceive, from whence diverse inconveniences and mischiefs are
produced.

1 The danger of the president, that a judgment in one Court, The Kingdom
bound by one private case:
and in one case, is made binding to all the Kingdom.

2 Men's goods are seized, their legal suits are stopped, and justice
Interruptiod of Justice.
denied to those, that desire to take the benefit of the Law.

3 The great sums of money received upon these impositions, Misimployment of
the sums received.
intended for the guard of the Seas, claimed and defended upon no ground, but
of public trust, for protection of Merchants and defense of the ports, are
dispersed to other uses, and a new tax raised for the same purposes.

4 These burdens are so excessive, that trade is thereby very much The burdens
excessive.
hindered, the commodities of our own, grows extremely abased, and those
imported much inhaunsed, all which lies not upon the Merchant alone, but upon
the generality of the subject, and by this means the stock of the Kingdom is
much diminisht, our exportation being less prositable, and our importation
more chargeable. And if the wars and troubles in the neighbor parts had not
brought almost the whole stream of Trade into this Kingdom, we should have
found many more prejudicial effects of these impositions, long before this
time, than yet we have done; especially they To the American plantations
especial.
have been insupportable to the poor plantations, whither many of his
Majesty's subjects have been transported, in diverse parts of the Continent, and
Istands of America, being a design tending to the honout of the Kingdom, and
the enlargement of his Majesty's dominions: The adventurers in this noble
work, have for the most part, no other support but Tobacco, upon which, such a
heavy rate is set, that the King receives twice as much, as the true value of
the commodity to the owner.

5 Whereas these great burdens have caused diverse Merchants Impositions upon
trade intercoursory.
to apply themselves to a way of trassique abroad by transporting goods from
one Country to another, without bringing them home into England. It has been
lately endeavored to set an Imposition upon this trade: so as the King will
have a duty out of those commodities which never came within his dominions, to
the great discouragement of such active and industrious men.

The next general head of Civil grievances, was enforcing men Compositions
for Knighthood
to compound for Knighthood, which though it may seem past, because it is
diverse years since it was used, yet upon the same grounds the King may renew
it, as often as he pleases, for the composition looks backward, and the
offense continuing, is subject to a new fine. The state of that businesle, he
laid down thus.

Heretofore when the services due by tenure, were taken in kind, The Original
ground of the charg
it were fit there should be some way of trial, and approbation of those, that
were bound to such services. Therefore it was ordained, that such as were to do
Knights service, after they came of age, and had possession of their lands, and
should be made Knights, that is, publicly declared, to be fit for that
service, diverse ceremonies and solemnities were in use for this purpose; and if
by the parties neglect this was not done, he was punishable by Fine: there
being in those times an ordinary and open way to get Knighthood, for those who
were borne to it.

Al^hough the use of this has for diverse ages been discontinued, yet there
have past very few Kings, under whom there has not bin An old grievance in the
kind,
a general Summons, requiring those who had lands of such value as the Law
prescribes, to appear at the Coronation, or some other great solemnity, and to
be Knighted, and yet nothing intended but New in the manner and excess,
the getting of some small fines: so as this grievance is not altogether new in
the kind, though it be new in the manner, and in the excess of it, and that in
diverse respects.

1 First, It has been extended beyond all intention of and color of law, not
only Inne-holders, but likewise Lease-holders, Copyholders, Merchants and
others, scarce any man free from it. Respect of


2 The Fi^es have been immoderate, far beyond the proportion, The generality.
of former times.

3 The proceedings have been without any example, president, or rule of
justice: for though those that were summoned did appear, Greatness of fines.
Multiplication of distresses and issues.
yet distresses infinite were made out against them; and issues increased and
mul^iplied, and no way open to discharge those issues, by plea or otherwise,
but only by compounding with the commissioners at their own pleasure.

3 The third was, the great Inundation of Monopolies, whereby heavy burdens
are laid, not only upon foreign, but also native Monopolies introduced by the
soap patent undertaken by papists.
commodities. These began in the Sope-Patent; the principal undertakers in
this, were div^rs popish Recusants, men of estate and quality, such as in
likelihood did not only aim at their private gain, but that by this open
breach of Law, the King and his people might be more fully divided, and the
ways of Parliament men more thoroughly obstructed. Amongst the infinite
inconveniences and Full of mischeife.
mischiefs which this did produce, these few may be observed.

1 The impairing the goodness, and inhancing the price of most 1 the price of
commodities increast and goodness abated, Restraint of trade.
of the Commodities and Manufactures of the Realm, yea of those, who are of
most necessary and common use, as Salt, Soap, Beer, Coals, and infinite others.

2 That under color of Licenses, Trades, and Manufactures are restrained to a
few hands, and many of the Subjects deprived of their ordinary way of
livelihood.

3 That upon such illegal grants, a great number of persons had bin unjustly
vexed by Pursevants, Imprisonments, attendance upon Illegal imprisonments and
vexations Shipmony.
the Council Table, seizure of goods, and many other ways.

4 The fourth, that great and unparalleld grievance of the Shipmoney, which
though it may seem to have more warrant of Law than the rest, because there
has a judgment past for it, yet in truth it is thereby aggravated, if it be
considered, that Aggravated not supported by the Judgment. Which is not
grounded upon any law custom president or author^ty of law books.
that judgment is founded upon the naked opinion of some judges, without any
written Law, without any custom, or authority of Law broken, yea without any
one president for it. Many express Laws, many Declarations in Parliaments, and
the constant judgment and practice of all times being against it, yea in the
nature of it, it will be found to be disproportionable to the case of necessity
which is pretended to be the ground of it.

Necessity excludes all formalities and solemnities, it is no The course
unproper for a case of necessity.
time then to make Levies and Taxes to build and prepare Ships, every man's
person, every man's Ships are to be employed for the resisting of an invading
enemy: the right on the Subjects part was so clear, and the pretenses against
it so weak, that he thought no man would venture his reputation or conscience
in the defense of that judgment, being so contrary to the grounds of the Law,
to the practice of former times, and so inconsistent Abounding in variety of
mischiefs.
in it self. Amongst many inconveniences and obloquies of this grievance he
noted these.

1 That it extends to all persons, and to all times, it subjected The general
extent and remediless condition,
our goods to distress, and our persons to imprisonment, and the causes of it
being secret and invisible, referred to his Majesty's breast alone, the Subject
was left without possibility of exception, and relief.

2 That there was no rules or limits for the proportion, so that Arbitrary
proportion.
no man knew what estate he had, or how to order his course or expenses.

3 That it was taken out of the Subjects purse, by a writ, and Imposed by writ
disposed by instructions.
brought into the Kings Coffers by instructions from the Lords of his most
honorable privy Council. In the legal defense of it, the Writ only did
appear; of the instructions, there was no notice taken, which yet in the real
execution of it, were most predominant. It carries the face of service in the
Writ, and of Revenue in the instructions: if this way had not been found to
turn the Ship, into money, it would easily have appeared how incompatible this
service is with the office of a Sheriff, in the inland Improper for the
Sheriffs:
Counties, and how incongruous and inconvenient for the inhabitants. The law in
a body politic is of like nature, which always prepares and disposes proper
and sit instruments and Organs, for every natural operation; if the Law had
intended Unprovided for by law.
any such charge as this, there should have been certain rules, suitable
means and courses, for the levying and managing of it.

5 The fifth was the Enlargement of the Forests beyond the Enlargement of
Forests.
bounds and perambulations appointed and stablished by act of Parliament,
twenty seven and twenty eight Edward the first, and that this is done upon the
same reasons and exceptions Against express Statutes.
which had been on the Kings part propounded, and by the Commons answered in
Parliament, not long after that establishment. It is not unknown to many in
this House, that those perambulations were the fruit and effect of that famous
Charter, which is called Charta de forresta, whereby many tumults, troubles,
Charta de forresta, made useless.
and discontents had been taken away, and composed between the King and his
subjects, and it is full of danger, that by reviving those old Questions we may
fall into the like diststempers.

He said, that hereby no blame could fall upon that great Lord Justice in Eyer
clered
who is now Justice of Air, and in whose name these things were acted, it
should not be expected that he should take notice of the laws and customs of
the realm, therefore he was careful The Answer lies upon the Judges.
to procure the assistance and direction of the Judges, and if any thing were
done against law, it was for them to answer, and not for him.

The particular irregularities and obliquities of this business Particular
obliquities.
were these.

1 The surreptitious procuring a verdict for the King, without Surreptitious
proceedings.
giving notice to the Country, whereby they might be prepared to give in
evidence for their own interest and indemnity; as was done in Essex.

2 Whereas the Judges in the Ius^ice seat in Essex were consulted A judgment
pretended.
with, about the entry of the former verdict, and delivered their opinion
touching that alone, without meddling with the point of right, this opinion was
after enforced in other Counties, as if it had been a judgment upon the
matter, and the Council for the County discountenanced in speaking, because
it was said to be already adjudged.

3 The inheritance of diverse of the Subjects have been hereupon The Subject
disturbed.
disturbed after the quiet possession of three or four hundred years, and a
way open for the disturbance of many others.

4 Great sums of money have bin drawn from such as have lands Enforced to
compound for great fines.
within these pretended bounds, and those who have forborne to make
composition, have been threatened with the execution of the forest laws.

5 The fifth, was the selling of Nusances, or at least, some such Selling of
Nusances.
things as are supposed to be Nusances.

The King as Father of the Common wealth is to take care of the publik
commodities, and advantages of his subjects, as Rivers, The legal trial of
Nusances omitted,
Highways, Common Sewers, and such like, and is to remove whatsoever is
prejudicial to them, and for the trial of those, there are legal and
ordinary writs, of Ad quod damnum: but of late a new A new extrajudiciall way
practiced,
and extrajudiciall way has been taken of declaring matters to be Nusances,
and diverse have thereupon been questioned, and if they would not compound they
have been fined; If they do compound, that which was first prosecuted as a
common Nuisance, is taken into the Kings protection, and allowed to stand, and
having Compositions enforced, and
yielded the King Money, no further care is taken, whether it be good or bad
for the common wealth. By this a very great and public trust is either broken
or abused: if the matter compounded A public trust broken or abused.
for be truly a Nuisance, then it is broken to the hurt of the people: if it be
not a Nuisance, then is it abused to the hurt of the party, the particulars
mentioned, were:

1 The Commission for buildings in and about this town, which The particulars.
heretofore has bin presented by this House as a grievance in K. James his
time, but now of late the execution has been much Commission for building
more frequent and prejudicial than it was before.

Secondly, Commission for Depopulations, which began Depopulations.
some few yearers since, and is still in hot prosecution.

By both these, the subject is restrained from disposing of his The several
mischiefs of both.
own, some have been commanded to demolish their houses, others have been
forbidden to build, other after great trouble and vexation, have been forced to
redeem their peace with large sums, and they still remain by law, as liable
to a new question as before, for it is agreed by all, that the King cannot
license a common Nuisance: and although in deed these are not such, yet it is a
matter of very ill consequence, that under that name they should be compounded
for, and may in ill times be made a president for the Kings of this Realm to
claim a power of licencing such things as are Nusances indeed.

The seventh, the Military charges laid upon the several Counties Military
charges
of the Kingdom, sometimes by warrant under his Majesty's signature, sometimes
by Letters from the Council Table, and sometimes (such has been the boldness
and presumption of some men) by the order of the Lord Lievtenants, or deputy
Leivtenant alone.

This is a growing evil still multiplying and increasing from a few
particulars to many, from small sums to great: it began A growing evil. Coat
and conduct money how practiced by Q Eliz.
first to be practiced as a loan, for supply of coat and conduct money, and
for this it has some countenance, from the use in Q Eliz. time, when the Lords
of the Council did often desire the deputy Lievtenants to procure so much money
to be laid out in the Country as the service did require, with a promise to pay
it again in London; for which purpose there was a constant warrant in the
Exchequer. This (he said) was the practice in her time, and in a great part of
K James, and the payments so certain, as it was little otherwise, than taking
up money upon bills of exchange; at this day they follow these presidents, in the
manner of the demand (for it is with a promise of a repayment) but not in the
certainty and readiness of satisfaction.

The first particular brought into a tax (as he thought) was the Muster masters
wages,
Muster Masters wages, at which many repined, but being for small sums, it
began to be generally digested: yet in the last Parliament, this House was
sensible of it, and to avoid the danger of the president that the Subjects
should be forced to make any payments without consent in Parliament, they
thought upon a Bill that may be a rule to the Lieutenants what to demand, and
to the People what to pay. But the hopes of this Bill were dashed in the
dissolution of that Parliament, Now of late diverse other particulars are
growing into practice, which make the grievance much more heavy: those
mentioned were these.

1 Pressing men against their will, and forcing them which Pressing,
are rich or unwilling to serve to find others in their place. 2 The provision
of public Magazins for powder, and other Public magazins,
Munition, Spades and Pickaxes. 3 The Salary of Diverse officers besides the
Muster-Master. Salary of officers Cart-horses and Carts,
4 The buying of Cart-horses and Carts, and hyring of Carts for Cariages.
The eighth, the extrajudiciall declarations of Judges whereby Extrajudiciall
declarations of Judges.
the subjects have been bound in matters of great importance without hearing
of Counsel or Argument on their part, and are left without legal remedy, by
writ of error or otherwise: he remembered the expression used by another member
of the House of a teeming Parliament: this (he said) was a teeming grievance:
from hence have issued most of the great grievances now in being, A teeming
grievance.
The Shipmoney, the pretended Nusances already mentioned, and some others which
have not yet been touched upon: Especially that concerning the proceedings of
Ecclesiastical Courts.

The ninth, That the authority and wisdom of the Council Table, Monopolies
countenanced by the Council Table. The ancient oath of cou^cellours.
have bin applied to the contriving and managing of several Monopolies, and
other great grievances (he said) The insticution of the Council Table, was
much for the advantage and security of the subject, to avoid surreptions and
precipitate Courts in the great affairs of the Kingdom: That by Law an oath
is to be taken by all those of the Kings Counsel, in which amongst other
things it is expressed, that they should for no cause forbear to do right, to
all the Kings people, and if such an oath be not now taken, he wished it might
be brought into use again.

It was the honor of that Table, to be as it were incorporated Their trust
and dignity.
with the King, His royal power and greatness did shine most conspicuously in
their actions, and in their Counsels: We have heard of Projectors and Resurees
here to fore and what opinion and relish they have found in this House is not
unknown. But that any such thing should be acted by the Council Table, which
might give strength and countenance to Monopolies, as it has not been used
till now of late, so it cannot be apprehended without the just grief of the
honest subject, and encouragement of those who are ill affected.

He remembered that in Tersio of King.

A Noble Gentleman, then a very worthy member of the Commons House, now a Great
Lord and eminent Counselor of State, Much diminished and debased.
did in this place declare this opinion concerning that clause used to be
inserted in Pattents of Monopoly, whereby Justices of Peace are commanded to
assist the Pattentees, this he urged as a great dishonor to those Gentlemen
which are in Commission to be so meanly employed, with much more reason, may
we in jealousy of the honor of the Council Table, humbly desire that their
precious By being employed in matters of such ill report.
time, their great abilities designed to the public care and service of the
Kingdom, may not receive such a stame, such a diminution, at to be employed in
matters of so ill report, in the estimation of the law: of so ill effect, in
the apprehension of the people. Star chamber a great Council.


The tenth, The High Court of Starchamber, which some think, succeed that,
which in the Parliament Rolls is called, Magnum Concilium, and to which,
Parliaments were wont so often to refer those important matters, which they
had no time to determine. This Court which in the late restoration or erection
of it, A court erected against oppression.
in Henry the seventh's time, was especially designed to restrain the
oppression of great men, and to remove the obstructions and impediments of the
Law. This which is both a Court of Council and a Court of Justice, has been
made an instrument of erecting and defending Monopolies and other grievances;
to set a face of right upon these things, which are unlawful in their own
nature: a face of public good, upon such as are pernicious in their use and
execution. The Soape-Patent, and diverse other Applied the establishing of
Monopolies
evidences thereof may be given, so well known, as not to require a particular
relation: And as if this were not enough, this Court ha^h lately intermedled
with the Ship money, diverse Sheriffs have been questioned, for not levying,
and collecting such sums, as their Co^nties have been charged with, and if
this beginning be not prevented, the Star Chamber will become a Court of
Revenue, and it shall be made crime not to collect or pay such taxes, as To the
recovery of ship money.
the State shall require.

The Eleventh, He said, he was gone very high, yet he must The Kings edicts
and Proclamations.
go a little higher: that great and most eminent power of the King of making
Edicts and Proclamations, which are said to be Leges Temporis, with whom our
Princes have used to encounter with sudden and unexpected danger, as would not
endure so much delay, as assembling the great Council of the Kingdom, This
which is one of the most Glorious beams of Majesty, rigorous in commanding
Reverence, and subjection, to our unspeakeable grief, has been often
exercised for the enjoining and maintaining For the erecting of Monopolies.
sundry Monopolies, and other grants, exceeding burdensome, and prejudicial to
the people.

The Twelfth, Although he was come as high as he could upon The word and truth
of God.
on earth, yet the presumption of evil men did lead him one step higher, even
as high as Heaven, as high as the Throne of God. It was now, he said, grown
common, for ambitious and corrupt men of the Clergy, to abuse the truth of
God, and the bond of Conscience, preaching down the Laws and liberties of the
kingdom, pretending Divine authority, for an absolute power in the King, to
do what he would with our persons, and goods, this has Pretended for the
absolute power of Kings.
been often published in Sermons, and Printed books, and is now the high way to
preferment.

The last Parliament, we had a sentence for an offense of this kind, against
one Mannering, then a Doctor, now a Bishop, concerning whom (he said) he
would say no more but this, that when he saw him at his Bar, in the most
humble dejected posture, The offense of D. Mannering.
that ever he observed, he thought he would not so soon have leapt into a
Bishops Chair, but his success has emboldened others, therefore (he said)
this may well be noted as a double Now practiced by others. To the great hurt
and grievance of the people.
grievance, that such doctrine should be allowed, that such men should be
preferred, yea as a root of grievances whereby they endeavor to corrupt the
Kings Conscience, and as much as in them lies, to deprive the people of that
Royal protection, to which his Majesty is bound by the fundamental Laws of
the Kingdom, and his own personal Oath.

The thirteenth: The long intermission of the Parliaments, contrary The
Intermission of Parliaments
to the two statutes yet in force, whereby it is appointed there should be
Parliaments once a year, at the least, and most contrary to the public good
of the Kingdom, for this being well remedied would produce remedies for all
the rest.

Having put through the several heads of grievances, he came The subjects
grievances hurtful to the King.
to the second maine branch, propounded in the beginning. That the disorders
from whence these grievances issued, were as hurtful to the King, as to the
people, of which he gave diverse reasons.

1 The interruption of the sweet communion which ought to B. interrupt their
communion.
be betwixt the King and His People, in matters of grace and supply.

They have need of him by His general pardon, to be secured from projectors,
and informers, to be freed from obsolete Laws, from the subtle devices of
such as seek to restrain the Prerogative to their own private advantage, and
the public hurt; and he has need of them for counsel and support, in great
and extraordinary occasions. This mutual intercourse would so weane the
affections and interests of His Subjects, into his actions and designs, that
their wealth and their persons would be his, his own estate would be managed
to most advantage, and public undertakings would be prosecuted at the charge
and adventure of the Subject: The Victorious attempts in Queen ELIZABETH'S time
upon Portugal, Spain, and the Indies, were for the greatest part, made upon
the poor Subjects purses, and not upon the Queens, though the Honor and
profit of the success, did most accrue to her.

2 Those often breaches and discontentments betwixt the King By domestical
breaches and discontents.
and the people, are very apt to diminish his reputation abroad, and
disadvantage his treaties and alliances.

3 The apprehension of the favor and encouragement given to By weakening his
party abroad.
Popery, has much weakened his Majesty's party beyond the Sea, and impared that
advantage which Queen Elizabeth and His Royal Father has heretofore made, of
being hea^s of the Protestant union.

4 The innovations in Religion and rigor of Ecclesiastical Courts, have
forced a great many of his Majesty's Subjects to forsake By forcing his
subjects to leave the kingdom.
the Land, whereby not only their persons, and their posterity, but their
wealth, and their industry are lost to this Kingdom, much to the demolishing
of His Majesty's Customs and Subsidies. Amongst other inconveniences, this was
especially to be observed, that diverse Clothiers driven out of the Country,
had set up the manufacture of Cloth beyond the Seas, whereby this State is like
to suffer much by abatement of the price of Woolls, and by want of employment
for the poor, both which likewise tend to his Majesty's particular loss.

5 It puts the King upon unproper ways of supply, which being By unproper
ways of supply.
not warranted by Law, are much more burdensome to the subject, than
advantageous to h^s Majesty. In France not long since, upon a survey of the
Kings Revenue, it was found that two parts in three, never came to the Kings
purse, but were diverted to the profit of the officers or Ministers of the
Crown, and it was thought a very good service and reformation, to reduce two
parts to the King, leaving still a third part to the Instruments as were
employed about getting it i^. It may well be doubted, that the King may have
the like or worse success in England: which appears already in some
particulars.

The King has reserved upon this Monopoly of Wines, 30 thousand Pound Rent a
year, the Vintner pales 40. Shillings a Tun, which comes to Ninty thousand
pounds: the price upon the Subject by retaile, is increased Two pence a Quart,
which comes to Eight pound a Tun, and for 45000. Tun brought in yearly,
amounts to 3. hundred 60. thousand pounds, which is 3. hundred and 30. thousand
pounds loss to the Kingdom, above the Kings Rent; other Monopolies, as that
of Soape, have been very chargeable to the kingdom, and brought very little
Treasure into his Majesty's Coffers.

The Law provides for that revenue of the Crown; which is Natural and proper,
that it may be safely collected, and brought to Account, but this illegal
Revenue; being without any such provision, is left to hazard, and much
uncertainty, either not to be retained, or not duly accounted of.

6 It is apt to weaken the Industry and Courage of the Subject, if By weakening
the industry and courage of the subject.
they be left uncertain: whether they shall reap the benefit of their own
pains, and hazard those who are brought into the Condition of slaves, will
easily grow to a slavish disposition, who having nothing to lose, do commonly
show more boldness in disturbing, than in defending a kingdom.

7 These irregular Courses do give opportunity to ill Instruments By
introducing ill Instruments into the Kings service.
to insinuate themselves into the Kings service, for we cannot but observe,
that if a man be officious in furthering their inordinate burdens of Ship
money, Monopolies, and the like: it varnisheth over all other faults, and makes
him fit both for Employment and preferment: So that out of their offices, they
are furnished for vast expenses, purchases, Buildings; and the King loses often
more in desperate debts at their deaths, than he got by them all their lives,
whether this were not lately verified in a Western man, much employed while he
lived, he leaves to the Knowledge of those who were acquainted with his Course,
and he doubted not but others might be found in the like case.

Those that are affected to Popery, to profaneness, and to superstitious
innovations, in matters of Religion. All kind of Spies and intelligencers have
means to be countenanced and trusted if they will be but zealous in these
kind of services, which how much it detracts from His Majesty, in honor, in
profit and prosperity of public affairs, lies open to every man's
apprehension: and from these reasons or some of them, he thought it proceeded
that through the whole course of the English story it might be observed, that
those Kings who had bin most respectfull of the Laws, had bin most eminent in
greatness, in Glory and success, both at home and abroad; and that others,
who thought to subsist by the violation of them, did often fall into a state of
weakness, poverty, and Infortunitie.

8 The differences and discontents betwixt his Majesty, and the By diverting
the KINGS thoughts from diverse great and hopeful enterprises.
people at home, have in all likelihood diverted his Royal thoughts and
Counsels from those great opportunities which he might have, not only to
weaken the House of Austria, to restore the Palatinate, but to gain to himself
a higher pitch of power and greatness, than any of his Ancestors.

It is not unknown how weak, how distracted, how discontented the Spanish
Colonies are in the West Indies. There are now in those parts in New England,
Virginia, and the Caribe-Islands, and in the Barmudos, at least 60000 able
persons of this Nation many of them well armed, and their bodies seasoned to
that Climate, which with a very small charge might be set down in some
advantageous parts of these pleasant, rich and fruitful Countries, and easily
make his Majesty Master of all that treasure, which not only foments the war,
but is the great support of Popery in all parts of Christendom.

9 Lastly, Those courses are apt to produce such distempers in the By producing
many chargeable distempers.
state, as may not be settled without great charge and loss, by which means
more may be consumed in a few months than shall be gotten by such ways in
many years.

Having past through the two first general Branches, he was now come to the
third, wherein he was to set down the ways of healing The ways of remedying
their grievances.
and removing those grievances, which consisted of two maine Branches, first in
declaring the Law where it was doubtful: The second in better provision for
the execution of Law, where it is clear: But (he said) because he had already
spent much time, and began to find some confusion in his Memory, he would refer
the particulars to another opportunity, and for the present only move that,
which was general to all, and would give weight and advantage to all the
particular ways of redress; that is, that we should speedily desire a
Conference with the Lords, and acquaint them with the Miserable condition
wherein we find the Church and State, and as we have already resolved to join
in a religious seeking of God, in a day of fast and humiliation, so to entreat
them to concur with us, in a Parliamentary course, of petitioning the King as
there should be occasion, and in searching out the causes and remedies of
these many insupportable grievances under which we lie, that so by the united
wisdom and authority of both Houses, such courses may be taken, as (through
Gods blessing) may advance the honor and greatness of His Majesty, and
restore and establish the peace and prosperity of the Kingdom.

This (he said) We might undertake with comfort and hope of success: for
though there be a darkness upon the Land, a thick and palpable darkness,
like that of Egypt; yet as in that, the Sun had not lost his light, nor the
Egyptians their sight, the interruption was only in the Medium, so with us
there is still (God be thanked) light in the Su^ne, Wisdom and Justice in H^s
Majesty to dispell this darkness, and in us there remains a visuall faculty,
whereby we are enabled to apprehend, and moved to desire light, and when we
shall be blessed in the enjoying of it, we shall thereby be incited to return
His Majesty such thanks, as may make it shine more clearly in the world, to
His own glory, and in the hearts of his people, to their joy and contentment.

FINIS.
JANUARY 25. 1641. At a Conference betwixt both Houses, concerning diverse
Petitions presented to the House of Commons; Master PYM appointed to manage
that Conference. My LORDS,
J Am commanded by the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses assembled for the
Commons in Parliament, to present to your Lordships diverse Petitions, which
they have received from several parts, concerning the state of the Kingdom:
whereunto they are chiefly moved by that constant affection, which they have
always expressed, of mayntaining a firm union and good correspondence with your
Lordships; wherein they have ever found much advantage and contentment; but
never held it more important and necessary, then at this time, wherein the
Wisdom and Resolution of Parliament have as many great Dangers and
Difficulties to pass through, as heretofore.

We are united in the public trust, which is derived from the Commonwealth,
in the common Duty and Obligation whereby God does bind us to the discharge of
that trust: and the Commons desire to impart to your Lordships whatsoever
information or intelligence, whatsoever encouragement or assistance, they have
received from those several Countries, which they present, that so likewise
we may be united in the same intentions and endeavors of improving all to the
service of his Majesty, and the common good of the Kingdom.

The Petitions which I am directed to communicate to your Lordships, are four:
from London, Middlesex, Essex, and Hertfordshire. We have received many more,
but it would take up too much time, and be too great a trouble to peruse all;
and in these four you may perceive the Effect and Sense of all: First, I am to
desire your Lordships to hear them read; and then I shall pursue my
Instructions in propounding some Observations out of them.

To the Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of the House of Commons
assembled in Parliament, The humble Petition and Answer of the Major, Aldermen,
and the rest of the Common Council of the City of LONDON,
Shows,
THat the Committee of this Honorable House, upon Saturday the two and
twentieth of this instant January, sent a Message to the Petitioners for the
loan of one hundred thousand pounds, or so much thereof as could conveniently
be forthwith raised, for levying of forces to suppress the Rebels in Ireland,
To which Message something was then answered, and a further Answer in writing
promised.

In performance whereof they humbly present the Answer following, together with
the reasons thereof, desiring that the same (being the best that for the
present they are able to give) may favorably be accepted.

And they shall ever pray, etc,
The Answer.
THe Petitioners are duly and deeply sensible of the great miseries of their
Brethren in Ireland, and or the imminent danger, not only of the total loss
of that Kingdom, but of the ruin of this also, if that of Ireland should
(which God forbid) be lost. And as they have hitherto showed themselves ready,
even beyond their abilities, to serve the King and Parliament; so shall they
ever continue to the utmost of their power, with all cheerfulness and duty.
But at the present they are compelled to repeat their former Answer, That they
have no power to raise any sums by way of Tax for any foreign use; and do
further answer that they have no means to do it, otherwise then by the
immediate personal Consent of every particular Lender, which they cannot hope
to obtain in regard of these obstructions following: Which the Petitioners
humbly present, together with this their further Answer, as the Reasons thereof.

1 THat immediately before the Parliament, and sithence, diverse great Sums for
the service of the King and Kingdom have been already lent by the Citizens of
London, besides fifty thousand pounds for the supply of Ireland, in particular;
a great part whereof some of the Lenders were compelled to borrow, and cannot
to this day repay.

2 That, such part of those moneys as are already due to the Citizens from the
Parliament, and should have been repayed out of the Pole-moneys and Subsidies,
is not yet done, because there is not any considerable Sum come in from the
Country as was expected to satisfy the same.

3 That the said fifty thousand pounds lent for Ireland was hastened and
speedily paid within near about two thousand pounds upon this ground then
urged by the Parliament; that if it were forthwith lent, it might be of more
use to preserve that Kingdom then the lone of two hundred thousand pound could
be, if deferred but six Weeks; ye no considerable Forces are sent thither to
this day. And we find that men will not be willing to lend any thing till they
be assured that a good strength be sent thither with full Commission to relieve
London Derry and other parts of that Kingdom.

4 The general withholding of very great Sums of money from the Petitioners,
and many others, which moneys have been long due, not only from Chapmen and
other debtors in England, but from very many in Ireland, (who owe many hundred
thousands of pounds to the Citizens of London) does render diverse persons of
good Estates and credit hardly able to go on with Trade, or to pay their debts
and maintain their charge.

5 The brotherly offer of Scotland to send ten thousand men into Ireland, nor
yet so accepted as to produce any relief to that bleeding Kingdom, while yet
our Brethren are daily massacred there, discourageth most men from lending any
Money, were they never so able.

6 The not passing the Bill for pressing of Soldiers here, whereby such forces
as are requisite might be timely sent from hence into Ireland, puts many men
into fears, that there may be some design rather to lose that Kingdom, and
to consume this in the losing of Ireland, than to preserve either the one or
the other; for that it cannot be conceived, that the Rebels (being grown so
powerful) will be suppressed by Volunteires.

7 The slow issuing of Commissions to those who being in Ireland, or going
thither, are willing to enter the field against the Rebels, disables them from
doing any effectual execution upon the enemy, unless in their own defense;
and so all the moneys that have bin, or may be sent thi^her, are exhausted to
mayntain our forces to do little or nothing worthy of them, rather then
employed to chastise the Rebels, and to reduce them to obedience, by means
whereof the number and power of the Rebels are greatly increased, diverse
Castles and Towns are by them taken, much Protestant blood is daily spilt,
many thousand Families destroyed, the malignant part of papists and their
adherents here are encouraged, and those Rebels so much imboldned, that they
boast, they will extirpate the British Nation there, and then make England the
seat of war.

8 The not disarming of papists here in England, after many Discoveries of
their Treacheries, and bloody Designs upon the Parliament and Kingdom, the
great decays of Fortifications, Blockhouses, and other Sea-forts, the not
managing of them, nor furnishing them with Ordnance and Ammunition, the not
placing all of them in such hands in whom the Parliament may confide, and the
not settling this Kingdom in a posture of defense, in times of so many fears
and jealousies of foreign invasions and intestine conspiracies, the not
removing the present Lieutenant of the Tower, and putting such a person into
that place, as may be well approved by the Parliament, notwithstanding the
earnest petitions exhibited to this Honorable House for that purpose, which
has produced a forbearance to bring Bullion into the Tower in this time of
scarcity of moneys; all which cannot but overthrow trading more and more, and
make moneys yet more scarce in the City and Kingdom.

9 The Kings Ships which ought to be a wall of Defense to this Kingdom, and a
convay to the Merchants (for which Tonnage and Poundage was granted) are not
fitted and employed, as the present condition of this Kingdom and Ireland
requires, but some of them for the conveying away of Delinquents, who durst not
abide the test of the Parliament, to the great encouragement of the rest of the
malignant party here, who when their Designs and themselves be detected, know
how to escape the hand of Justice through the abuse of a Royal conduct.

10 The not questioning those many thousands of unknown persons, who are
sheltered in Covengarden, and there abouts, which do not employ themselves in
any lawful calling, and its very probable, lie in a readiness to adventure upon
some desperiue attempt, to the indangering of the welfare, peace, and safety of
the Kings Majesty^, Parliament, and City.

11 The misunderstanding between the King and Parliament, the not vindicating
the privileges of Parliament, the not suppressing of Protections, the not
punishing of Delinquents, and the not executing of all Priests and Jesuits,
legally condemned, while others contrary to privilege of Parliament have bin
illegally (as the Petitioners conceive) charged wi^h Treason, to the deferring
of worthy Members from discharging their duties* and to the destroying of the
very being of Parliaments, do exceedingly fill the minds of men well affected
to the public, with many fears and discouragements throughout the Kingdom,
and so disable them from that cheerful assistance which they would be glad to
afford.

12 By means of the premises there is such decay of Trading, and such scarci^y
of Money (neither of which can be cured, till the former Evils be removed) as
i^ is l^kely in very short time, to cast innumerable mul^itudes of poor
Artifi^ers into such a depth of poverty and extremity, as may enforce them upon
some dangerous and desperate attempts, not fi^ to be expressed, much less to
be justified: Which they leave to the wisdom of this House speedily to
consider and prevent.

THese are the Evils under which the Petitioners do exceedingly labor and
languish, which they humbly conceive to have sprung from the employing of ill
affected persons in places of Trust and Honor in the State, and near to the
sacred person of his Majesty; and that these Evils are still continued by
means of the Votes of Bishops and Popish Lords in the House of Peers.

And now, that the Petitioners have faithfully represented the true Reasons
which do really enforce them to return this Answer, most of which have been
formerly The Copy of Middlesex Petition was never printed, and therefore not
inserted.
offered to this Honorable House in sundry Petitions; and that they have done
all that in them lies (even beyond all president) to serve the King, Parliament
and Kingdom; They humbly crave leave to protest before God and the High Court
of Parliament, that if any further miseries befall their dear Brethren in
Ireland, or if any mischief shall break in upon this Kingdom, to the
endangering or disturbing thereof, it ought not to be imputed to the
Petitioners, but only to such as shall endeavor to hinder the effectual and
speedy cure of the evils before recited, that so much disable and discourage
the Petitioners from doing that which by this Honorable House is desired.

To the Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons
assembled in Parliament, The humble Petition of the Knights, Gentlemen,
Freeholders, and other the Inhabitants of the County of Hertford,
Shows,
THat this Church and Kingdom being by the Prelates, those multitudes of
corrupt and scandalous Ministers (their Creatures) and the Popish party,
concurring with them on the one hand; and by wicked Counselors, evil
Ministers of State, and great swarms of Projectors, and others ill affected to
the peace of this Realm, on the other hand, brought to a sad, and almost
desperate condition, and thereby the splendor of his Majesty's Crown and
Dignity dangerously weakened and eclypsed, It pleased his Majesty, having
repect to the Petitions of Nobles and people in that behalf, to call this
present Parliament, the only able means (under God) to reform the many
pressures and grievances of the Church and Kingdom, and to remove the causes
thereof.

In which Parliament, to the honor of his Majesty, and comfort of his good
Subjects, exemplary Justice has been executed, Arbitrary Courts, Ship Money,
Monopolies, and other illegal Impositions removed, the shedding of much blood
prevented, by the late union between the two Kingdoms of England and
Scotland, and further hopes given us of perfecting what remayns by the happy
continuance and much desired progress of this Parliament.

And although that malignant party of Prelates and Papists, and their adherents
(whose present standings, and the happy success of this Parliament, as the
Petitioners humbly conceive, are inconsistent) have by their manifold wicked
practices and designs endeavored to hinder all through Reformation in Church
and Commonwealth, to stifle in the birth and progress all those good Bills,
and other preparations made by this Honorable Assembly for that purpose, and
especially for the relief of the Kingdom of Ireland, (the ruin whereof will
endanger this Kingdom also) To stop the insluence of his Majesty's Royal
favor in giving life thereto, to divide between his Majesty and this
Honorable Assembly, and to render you not only contemptible, but also
burdensome to the people; yet the Petitioners, and as they verily believe, all
well affected to his Majestly, and the peace and prosperity of this Kingdom,
have, and still shall continue an high and honorable esteem of this worthy
Assembly, and of your great and unwearied endeavors, and do with the utmost
expressions of their thankfulness acknowledge the same, and the progress and
perfecting thereof, to be of great consequence, and deep necessity to the peace
and welfare of this Church and Kingdom, and such as without which not only a
refluxe of the former calamities, but even utter ruin and desolation, like
that, being too long continued in sad and much lamented Ireland, will
apparently ensue.

From the sense whereof, and of the great and unheard of breaches lately made
upon ^he privileges of Parliament, even to the endangering of the being
thereof, wherein your Petitioners and their post itie are much concerned; The
Petitioners take upon them the humble boldness ^o declare their readiness and
great engagements according to their Protestation, to stand to, and defend to
the utmost peril of their lives and Estates, the Kings Majesty and high Court
of Parliament, withal the power and privileges of the same, and all your
Honorable proceedings for the common good, against all Popish and other
malignant opposers, who endeavor, either by evil Counsel, secret Plots, or
open force, to hurt or prejudice the same, or to make divisions between his
Majesty and the Parliament.

And the said Petitioners humbly pray, that the Papists may be fully disarmed,
the Laws against them executed, the Kingdom, and especially this County,
according to their late Petition in that behalf, put into a posture of war for
their defense; the Forts and strength of this Kingdom put into safe hands,
which the Parliament may conside and trust in; the privileges of Parliament
repaired and thoroughly vindicated, and that this Honorable Assembly (as has
been lately desired of you by the Citizens of London) will be a means unto his
Majesty and House of Peers, that life may be speedily given to your good
endeavors by their concurrence with you in taking away of the Votes of Popish
Lords and Bishops out of the House of Peers, the speedy and strong relief of
Ireland, the further punishment of Delinquents, the removal of the pressures
and grievances in Church and Commonwealth, and reforming of what is therein
amiss.

For all which your Petitioners shall daily pray, etc.
To the Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons
in the High Court of Parliament.
The humble Petition of the Knights, Gentlemen, Ministers, and other
Inhabitants of the County of ESSEX.
SHOWS,
TO this Honorable House, that we are truly sensible of your great care and
extraordinary endeavors to settle our Religion and peace, and daily bless God
Almighty, and the Kings Majesty, the Peers, and this honorable Assembly, for
the same. And we do further in all humility represent to your honorable
consideration, that, not withstanding your abundant care and industry, we do
still apprehend a great stop of reformation in matters of Religion, and our
selves, together with you, and the whole Kingdom, to be in great danger from
the Papists, and other ill affected persons, who are every where very insolent,
and ready to act the parts of those savage blood-suckers in Ireland, if they be
not speedily prevented; by means whereof our tradings, especially of clothing
and farming, grow apace to so great a damp, as many thousands are like to come
to sudden want: Nor can we expect any redress thereof, unless the Bishops and
Popish Lords be removed out of the House of Peers.

Therefore we humbly pray, that you would earnestly mediate with his Majesty
and the House of Peers, that our Brethren in Ireland may be speedily relieved;
The Papists throughout this Kingdom may be disarmed, and the Kingdom be put
into such a warlike posture, for defense, as may be for it is safety; And that
the Bishops and Popish Lords, who (as we conceive) have hindered the success
of your godly endeavors, may be excluded the House of Peers; Not doubting,
but that then our Petitions formerly presented to this House will receive the
more full and speedy answer.

And your Petitioners resolving in all just and honorable ways (according to
our late Protestation) to assist you in your Rights and Privileges, with our
estates and lives against the enemies of God, the King and State, humbly pray,
etc.

The Petitions being read by four several Members of the House, M. Pim
reassumed his Discourse.

MY LORDS, England, and you cannot wonder if the urgencie, the extremity of the
condition wherein we are, do produce some earnestness and vehemency of
expression more then ordinary; the agony, terror, and perplexity in which the
Kingdom labors, is universal, all parts are affected with it; and therefore
in these, you may observe the groans and miserable complaints of all.

Diverse reasons may be given why those diseases which are Epidemicall, are more
dangerous then others: The Cause of such diseases is universal and supernall,
not from an evil constitution, or evil diet, or any other accident: and such
causes work with more vigor and efficacy, then those which are particular and
inferior. 2. In such diseases there is a communicative quality, whereby the
Malignity of them is multiplied and enforced. 3. They have a converting,
transforming power that turns other diseases and evil affections of men's
bodies into their own nature.

The common and Epidemicall disease wherein this Commonwealth lies now gasping,
has a superior and universal cause from the evil Counsels and Designs of
those, who under his Majesty bear the greatest sway in Government. 2. It has
a contagious and infectious quality, whereby it is diffused and dispersed
through all parts of the Kingdom. 3. It is apt to take in the discontents,
evil affections, and designs of particular persons to increase and sortifie
it self.

I shall take occasion from several Branches of those Petitions which your
Lordships have heard, to observe.

1. The variety of Dangers to which this Kingdom is now subject. 2. The
manifold distempers which is the cause of those dangers. 3. The Multiplicity of
those evil Influences which are the Causes of that distemper.
The first danger is from enemies abroad; this may (...) causeless and
impertinent observation at this tim^ seeing (...) The variety of Dangers.
peace with all Nations about us: But (my L^rds) you may b^ pleased to consider
that the safety of the K^^^dom ought no^ to d^p^nd upon the will and
disposition of our Neighbors, but upon our own strength and Provision;
Betwixt States there are often sudden changes, from peace to war, according
to occasion and advantage. All the States of Christendom are now Armed, and we
have no reason to believe, but that those of greatest Power have an evil Eye
upon us in respect of our Religion: And if their private Differences should be
composed, how dangerously, how speedily might those great Armies and other
Preparations now ready, be applied to some Enterprise and Attempt against us?
and if there were no other Cause, this were sufficient to make us stand upon
our Guard; but there are diverse more especial symptoms of dangers of this
kind.

We may perceive by several Advertisements from abroad, that they did foresee
our dangers many Months before they broke out; they could foretell the Time
and Manner of them, which is a clear Evidence, they held Intelligence with
those which were the Contrivers and workers of the present troubles.

We have many dangerous Traitors and Fugitives now in other parts, who can
discover the weakness and distemper of the Kingdom; who hold Intelligence with
the ill-affected party here, and by all cunning and subtle practices endeavor
to incite and provoke other Princes againstus.

Some of the Ministers of our neighbor Princes may be justly suspected to have
had a more immediate hand and operation in the Insurrection and Rebellion of
Ireland, many of the Commanders and most of the Soldiers levied for the
service of Spain are now joined with the Rebels there: and those Irish Friars
which were employed by the Spanish Ambassador for the making of those Levies,
are known to have bin chief Incendiaries to this Rebellion, and are still very
active in the prosecution and encouragement of it.

The Rebels have a ready and speedy supply from some of our Neighbors. Two
Convoyes of Munition and Arms we are certainly informed of: one from Dunkirk;
the other from Nantes in Britany: and certainly those that are so forward to
enable others to hurt us, will not forbear to hurt us themselves, as soon as
they shall have means und opportunity to do it.

Another danger is from the Papists and ill-affected Parties at home. The
Papists here are acted by the same Principles with those in Ireland; many of
the most active of them have lately been there; which argues an intercourse
and communication of Counsels. They have still store of Arms and Munition at
their disposing, notwithstanding all our endeavors to disarm them, they have a
free resort to the City and to the Court, they want no opportunities to
consult together; they have the same or greater encouragements from above, and
from about them, then ever, in respect of the example and success of the
Rebels in Ireland, and the great confusions and divisions which by their
cunning and subtle practices are raised and fomented amongst our selves at
home.

3. A third danger is of Tumults and Insurrections of the meaner sort of
people, by reason of their ill vent of Cloth and other Manufactures, whereby
great multitudes are set on work, who live for the most part by their daily
gettings, and will in a very short time be brought to great extremity, if not
employed; nothing is more sharp and pressing then necessity and want; what they
cannot buy they will take, and from them the like necessity will quickly be
derived to the Farmours and Husbandmen; and so grow higher, and involve all in
an equality of misery and distress, if it be not prevented. And at this time
such Tumults will be dangerous, because the Kingdom is full of disbanded
Soldiers and Officers which will be ready to head and to animate the Multitude
to commit violence with more strength and advantage, and if they once grow into
a Body, it will be much more difficult to reduce them into order again, because
necessity and want, which are the Causes of this disturbance, will still
increase as the effects do increase.

4. A fourth danger is from the Rebels in Ireland, not only in respect of that
Kingdom, but in respect of this. They have seized upon the Body of that Kingdom
already, they abound in men of very able bodies, they increase in Arms and
Munition, they have great hopes of supplies from abroad, of encouragement here,
and are sure of good entertainment from the Popish party, so that they begin to
speak already of the transporting themselves hither, and making this Kingdom
the seat of the war.

The distemper which has produced these dangers is various and 2 The distemper
procuring the former dangers.
exceeding violent Whenever nature is hindered in her proper operations and
faculties, distempers will necessarily follow.

The obstructions which have brought us into this distemper are very many, so
that we cannot wonder at the strength and malignity of it. Some of the chiefest
of these obstructions I shall endeavor to remember.

1. The obstruction of Reformation in matters of Religion. No grievances are
sharper then those that press upon the tender consciences of men; and that
there was never Church or State afflicted with more grievances of this kind,
then we have bin. And though they are by the wisdom of this Parliament partly
cased and diminished, yet many still remain: and as long as the Bishops and
the corrupt part of the Clergy continue in their Power, there will be little
hope of freedom either from the sense of those which continue, or the fear of
those which are removed. And of this obstruction, (my Lords) I must clear the
Commons, we are in no part guilty of it: some good Bills have past us, and
others are in preparation, which had bin past before this, if we had not found
such ill success in the other. Whatsoever mischief this obstruction shall
produce, we are free from it: we may have our part of the Misery, we can have
no part in the guilt or dishonor.

2. An obstruction in Trade. It is the Trade that brings food and nourishment
to the Kingdom, It is that which preserves and increases the stock of the
whole, and distributes a convenient Portion of maintenance to every part of it:
therefore such an obstruction as this must be dangerous; the Freedom of Trades
being so necessary, the benefit so important, as that it gives life, strength,
and beauty to the whole Body of the Commonwealth: but I must protest the House
of Commons has given no Cause to this obstruction; we have cased Trade of
many Burdens, and heavy Taxes which are taken off; we have freed it from many
hard restraints by Pattents and Monopolies; we have bin willing to part with
our own Privileges, to give it encouragement; We have sought to put the
Merchants into security and confidence in respect of the Tower of London, that
so they might be invited to bring in their Bullion to the Mint as heretofore
they have done: and we are no way guilty of the Troubles, the fears, and
public dangers which make men withdraw their Stocks, and to keep their money
by them, to be ready for such sudden Exigents, as in these great distractions
we have too much Cause to expect.

3. The obstruction in the Relief of Ireland. It must needs be accounted a
great shame and dishonor to this Kingdom, that our Neighbors have showed
themselves more forward to supply the Rebels, then we have bin to relieve our
distressed brethren and follow-Subjects. But I must declare that we are
altogether innocent of any neglect herein. As soon as the first news of the
Rebellion came over, we undertook the War, not by way of Supply and Aid, as in
former Rebellions the Subjects have used to do, but we undertook the whole
charge of it, and we suffered not four and twenty hours to pass, before we
agreed to a great Leavy of Money and Men, to be employed against the Rebels,
even in a larger proportion then the Lord Justices and Council there did
desire: and from time to time we have done all for the furtherance thereof,
though in the midst of many distractions and diversions, but the want of
Commissions for leavying Men, for issuing Arms, and diverse other Impediments,
have bin the Causes of that obstruction; and I wish we had not only found
Impediments to our selves, but also Encouragements to them. Many of the chief
Commanders, now in the Head of the Rebels, after we had with your Lordships
Concurrence stopped the Ports against all Irish Papists, have been suffered to
pass by his Majesty's immediate Warrant, much to the discouragement of the
Lord justices and the Council there; and, this procured, as we believe, by
some evil Instruments, too near his Regal Person, without his Majesty's
knowledge and intention.

4. The obstruction in prosecution of Delinquents: many we have already
brought up to your Lordships, diverse others we have bin discouraged to
transmit; such difficult proceedings have we met withal; such terrors and
discountenance have been cast upon our selves and our witnesses; and those who
have showed themselves, their friends, and Patrons, have found it the most
ready way to preferment; yea, his Majesty's own hand has bin obtained, his
Majesty's Ships employed for the transporting of diverse of those who have fled
from the Justice of the Parliament.

5. A general obstruction and interruption of the proceedings of Parliament,
by those manifold designs of violence (which through Gods mercy we have
escaped;) by the great and frequent breaches of Privilege; by the subtle
endeavors to raise parties in our House, and jealousies betwixt the two Houses.

6. The obstruction in providing for the Defense of the Kingdom, that we might
be enabled to resist a foreign Enemy, to suppress all Civil Insurrections:
and what a pressing necessity there is of this, the exceeding great decays in
the Novie, in the Forts, in the Power of ordering the Militia of the Kingdom,
and Means of furnishing them with Munition, are sufficient evidences, known to
none better then to your Lordships, and what endeavor we have used to remove
them (but hitherto without that success and concurrence which we expected:)
and where the stop has bin, and upon what good grounds we may claim our own
innocence and faithfulness in this, we desire no other Witnesses but your
selves.

Lastly, I come to the evil Influences which have caused this distemper, and I
shall content my self to mention some few of those which are most Apparent and
Important.

1. In the first place, I shall remember the evil Counsels about 3 The
Influences that have caused so great Distemper.
the King, whereof we have often complained. Diseases of the Brain are most
dangerous, because from thence Sense and Motion are derived to the whole Body.
The malignity of evil Counsels will quickly be infused into all parts of the
State. None can doubt but we have exceedingly labored under most dangerous and
mischievous Counsels. This evil Influence has bin the cause of the
preparation of War with Scotland, of the procuring a Rebellion in Ireland, of
corrupting Religion, suppressing the Liberty of this Kingdom, and of many
fearful and horrid Attempts, to the subverting the very being of Parliament,
which was the only hopeful Means of opposing and preventing all the rest: And
this does appear to be a most predominant evil of the Time; whereat we need
not wonder, when we consider how Counselors have been preferred and
prepared. And I appeal to your Lordships own Consciences, whether the giving,
and the countenancing of evil Council, has not been almost the only way to
favor and advancement.

2. The discouragement of good Council: diverse honest and approved
Counselors have bin put from their places: others so discountenanced, as that
the way of favor has bin shut against them, and that of danger and
destruction only open to them.

3. The great Power that an interressed and factious Party has in the
Parliament, by the continuance of the Votes of the Bishops and Popish Lords in
your Lordships House; and the taking in of others both out of the House of
Commons, and otherwise, to enc^ease their strength.

4. The fomenting and cherishing of a malignant Party throughout the whole
Kingdom.

5. The manifold jealousies betwixt the King, his Parliament, and good
Subjects, whereby his protection and favor has in a great measure bin
withheld from them: their inclination and resolution to serve and assist him
has been very much hindered and interrupted: We have often suffered under the
mis-interpretation of good actions, and false imputation of evil, which we
never intended. So that we may justly purge our selves from all guilt of being
Authors of this jealousy and misunderstanding: We have bin, and are still
ready to serve his Majesty with our lives and fortunes, with as much
cheerfulness and earnestness of affection, as ever any Subjects were; and we
doubt not but our proceedings will so manifest this, that we shall be as clear
in the apprehension of the world, as we are in the testimony of our own
consciences.

I am now come to a conclusion, and I have nothing to propound to your
Lordships by way of Request or desire from the House of Commons; I doubt not
but your judgments will tell you what is to be done; your Consciences, your
Honors, your Interests will call upon you for the doing of it; The Commons
will be glad to have your help and concurrence in saving of the Kingdom; but
if they should fail of it, it should not discourage them in doing their duty.
And whether the Kingdom be lost or saved (as through Gods blessing I hope it
will be) they shall be sorry that the story of this present Parliament should
tell Posterity, that in so great a Danger and Extremity, the House of Commons
should be enforced to save the Kingdom alone, and that the House of Peers
should have no part in the honor of the preservation of it, you having so
great an Interest in the good success of those endeavors, in respect of your
great Estates, and high degrees of Nobility.

MY Lords, consider what the present necessities and dangers of the
Commonwealth require, what the Commons have reason to expect, to what
endeavors and counsels the concurrent desires of all the people do invite
you: so that applying your selves to the preservation of the King and Kingdom,
I may be bold to assure you in the name of all the Commons of England, that you
shall be bravely seconded.

FINIS.
Die Martis 25. January. 1641.
IT is this day ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, that M. Speaker in
the name of the House, shall give thanks unto M. Pym for his so well performing
the service he was employed in by the Commons of this House, at this
Conference. And it is further ordered, that M. Pym be desired to put the Speech
he made at this Conference into writing, and to deliver it into the House, to
the end it may be printed.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


