FIGVRE OF SEVEN.

Very Pleasant to Read, Plain to Understand, And Profitable to Practice.

By M. P.

Three, Four, Five, Six, sufficient proof have given Of their acceptance;
what should hinder Seven?

PROVE. 9.1. Wisdom has built her an house, she has hewn out her seven
Pillars.

LONDON, Printed by E. P. for Fr. Coals, dwelling in the Old Bailey, 1647.

THE FIGVRE OF SEVEN.
1. THere be seven things which (especially) mode any Reader to buy (or read)
a Book: Affection to the Author, Conceits of the Theme, A promising Title,
Performance in the Discourse, The pleasure of the Fancy, The elegancie of the
Style, And increase of Knowledge.
2. There be seven excellent Motives toward the Government of the World: The
People in good order, The Rich faithful, The Youth obedient, Clergy honest,
The old folks wise, The Poor humble, And the Women shame-fac'd.
3. By seven manner of means man is wisely taught to know God: Trust in God,
and love him, Use prayer, and honor him, Deny the World for love of him, Rule
rightly, and dread him, Sorrow discreetly, and seek him, Wake, weep, and
please him, And even in trouble thank him.
4. There be seven things incident to an old man who marries a young Wife: He
has a Toy to play with, A Child to nourish, A Ship to deck, A Windmill to
keep, A Lute to string, A Colt to break, And a Servant to teach.
5. There be seven things in which a man ought not to be rash or over-hastie:
In unnecessarie words, In undecent swearing, In entertainment of Quarrels, In
conceiving an ill opinion of his friend. In Barga^nes, In Marriage, Nor in
giving Counsel.
6. There be seven sorts of Creatures, that the more they are in company, the
more trouble: Many Women much babbling, Many Geese much gaggling, Many Youths,
much wanton fashion, Many Sects, much alteration, Many lewd Priests, much ill
teaching, Many Gamesters, much o'r-reaching, Many Thieves, much
Hal^er-stretching.
7. There be seven worthy Documents fit for every Christian to learn and
practice: To think on the time past, To use well the time present, To provide
for the time to come, To reveal things doubtful, To think on God and serve
him, To think on Heaven, to obtain it, And to think on Hell, to avoid it.
8. There be seven Lesson^ which the Father ought to learn and teach his
Son. To learn him laudable Customs, To give him good Education, To keep
him under Obedience, To reach him Divine Duties, To correct him with
discretion, To provide for his future welfare, To nourish (and feed) him with
sobriety.
9. There be likewise seven especial Duties which the Son does owe unto his
Parents: To bear them respect and reverence, To obey all their lawful
Commands, To hearken to their good Counsels, Not to despise them in any
thing, Not to slight them in old Age, Nor to scorn them in Poverty, But to
provide for their Sustenance.
10. There be seven Duties of a Husband to his Wife: To Love her as himself,
To provide for her to his Power, To nourish her in Soul and Body, To Apparel
her honestly, To avoid causeless Jealousy, To consider her as the weaker
Vessel, And to give her due benevolence.
11. There be also seven Duties of a Wife to her Husband: To love him above all
other men, To hearken to his Sayings, To be patient, and forbear Anger, To
give no occasion of (and to shun) Jealousy, To be sober and temperate, To
look well to his House, Children, and Servants, And to honor his person.
12. There be seven things which every young man desires when he intends to
marry: That his Wife be young and beautiful, That she be modest and
shame-fac't, That she bear correspondent affection, That she be no tatling
Gossip, That she be no Scold, That she order well his Family, And above all,
that she be constant to him.
13. There be also seven other things which a married man delights in: To be
sure that his Wife loves him well, To see fine Children prosperous, To have
them well instructed, To have obedient servants, To live in peace and unity,
To thrive by his Calling, And (chiefly) to be Master of the House.
14. There be seven things which keep a woman honest: Not to listen to
Flatterers, Not to be too conversant with men, Not to use audacious words, Not
to demean her self immodestly, Not to wear gawdie Apparel, Not to eat
delicious Diet, And especially not to forget God nor her Husband.
15. There be seven things which cause either man or woman to be well thought,
and spoken of: Justice in dealing, Courtesy in behavior, Modesty in speech,
To abstain from Lying, To abhor Blasphemy, To loath obscene discourse, And
to be faithful in friendship.
16. There be on the contrary seven things which make them odious to good
society: Fraud in buying and selling, Rudeness in carriage, Churlishness in
words, To be a noted Liar, To be a common Swearer, To use filthy talk, And to
be treacherous in trust.
17. There be seven things which a ^^n ought to consider of, when he is asked
any question: Who it is that demands? whether superior, e^uall or inferior.
What it is that he does demand? The cause why he does demand it, Whether his
demand be to his benefit or detriment? What will be the issue, if he grant?
What the end, if he deny? And to answer or not answer accordingly.
18. There be seven things requisit^ in a Judge: To hear patiently, To answer
wisely, To declare intentively, To shun Partiality, To hate Briberie, To
incline indifferently, And to Judge justly.
19. There be seven things necessary for a Clyents Instruction: To tell his
Case punctually, To shun therein selfe-flatterie, To Fee his Lawyer
bounteously, To prosecute with equity, To use his opposite courteously, To
seek no means dis-honestly, And to take the Issue patiently.
20. There be seven things which most men desire, yet none can ever obtayn^ in
this World: Riches enough to suffice him; without wishing for more, To be
perfect in all Sciences and Learning, To have his mind always permanent, To
suffer no Cross nor Affliction, To have Ease and Rest continually. To enjoy
constant Felicity, And to have Peace of Conscience perpetually.
21. There be seven things that the more they be sought for, the less they be
sound. The number of Friends, The peace of the Froward, The guilt of the Miser,
The truth of a Flatterer, The ways of the Wind, The submission of the Proud,
And wisdom in a Fool.
22. There be seven things world then Death: Poverty in old Age, Desperation
after Sin, Want of Patience in Adversity, Insultation of ones Enemies,
Labor in vain, Sickness in Prison, And to lie continually in Fire.
23. There be seven things to be had without buying, which being gotten, will
seares be sold for Money: An evil Name, An evil Behavior, An evil Custom,
An evil Conscience, An evil Companion, An evil Disease, And an evil (Wife)
or Husband*
24. There be seven things which bring a man to wisdom: Study of Sciences,
Experience of many things, Observation of other men's affairs, Examples of the
wise, Advices of the prudent, Enriching the intellect, And the marking of
ambiguous Chances.
25. There be seven duties required in a King or great Potentate: That he
render unto God more then he expects from his subjects, That he remember whose
Vicegerent he is, That he be ever mindful^ of his account to God, That he
govern his people with Justice, That he utterly hate Covetousness, as the
root of all evil, That he be courteous and affable to all people, And that he
obtain^ friendship of neighbor Natio^^.
26. There be (also) seven duties requisite in a Princely Heir Apparent: To
remember his Creator in the days of his youth, To be exceedingly well Learned,
To know al^ Arts and Sciences, To exercise Military Discipline, To be liberal
and bountiful, To be easily spoken withal, And to get favor of the common
people.
27. There be seven things necessary for all Nobles and Gentry: To put
discr^et and trusty men in Office, To order their Family with wisdom and
credit, To be kind loving, and reasonable to their Tenants, To pay Servants
their Wages justly, To have no unpay'd Tradesmen exclaim on them, To keep
good Hospitality, And to succor the Poor with Charity.
28. There be seven things incident to a good Governor of a City: To seek
Peace, and pursue it, To gain the assistance of grave and honest Counselors,
To procure (to his power) plenty of Victual, To see Justice in Weights and
Measures, To mix Mercy with Justice in all his actions, To punish Vice and
cherish Virtue, And to procure the love of all people.
29. There be seven things to be considered (...) in (...): To have Money
enough, To have able and willing Soldiers at command, To have experienced
Commanders and Officers, To have plenty of Victual, To be well furnished with
Munition, To have often intelligence from the Enemy, And especially to have a
good Cause.
30. There be seven things commendable in the Captain General of an Army: To
have Nobilltie, of Blood, To have large Revenues, To have a faithful and stout
heart, To have the four Cardinal Virtues in esteem, To have confidence in
his Cause, To unite Clemency and Victory together, And to have the love of
his Soldiers for his virtue.
31. There be seven things requi^^te (...) Physician: To know the nature of the
Disease, To judge the complexion of his Patient, To be well versed in
Anatomy, To visit his Patient often, To give Medicines according to the
Disease, To comfort his Patient with hopes, And to cure poor people for Gods
sake*
32. There be seven things to be observed by a sick Body: To obey the
Physicians instruction in Diet and Exercise, To spare nothing for Healths sake,
To be a true Patient, not only in name but in practice, To have confidence in
the Physician^ Judgment, To be careful of bre^king his Pr^scriptions, To be
quiet and comfortable. And chiefly, to rely upon God for Cure, or calling
away.
33. To conclude, there be seven things which extenu^teth the credit of
(other-wayes) wis^ men: To commit error in Knowledge, To be over-sway'd by
Opinion, To be partial in Judgment, To be lavish in Conjectures, To seek
Justice for him who has not des^rv'd it, To disprayse others without cause,
And to credit all things over-lightly.

FINIS.

