THE SPEECH OR DECLARATION OF JOHN PYM, Esquire: After the Recapitulation or
summing up of the Charge of High Treason, AGAINST THOMAS, EARL OF STRAFFORD,
12. APRIL, 1641.

Published by Order of the COMMONS HOUSE.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN BARTLET, 1641.

THE SPEECH OR DECLARATION OF JOHN PYM, Esquire etc.
MY LORDS,
MAny days have been spent in maintenance of the Impeachment of the Earl of
Strafford, by the House of Commons, whereby he stands charged with High
Treason: And your Lordships have heard his Defense with Patience, and with as
much favor as Justice would allow: We have passed through our Evidence, and
the Result of all this is, that it remains clearly proved, That the Earl of
Strafford has endeavored by his words, actions, and counsels, to subvert the
Fundamental Laws of England and Ireland, and to introduce an Arbitrary and
Tyrannical Government.

This is the envenomed Arrow for which he inquired in the beginning of his
Replication this day, which has infected all his Blood: This is that
Intoxicating Cup, (to use his own Metaphor) which has tainted his Judgment,
and poisoned his Heart: From hence was infused that Specificall Difference
which turned his Speeches, his Actions, his Counsels into Treason; Not
Cumulative, as he expressed it, as if many Misdemeanors could make one Treason;
but Formally and Essentially. It is the End that does inform Actions, and does
specificate the nature of them, making not only criminal, but even
indifferent words and actions to be Treason, being done and spoken with a
Treasonable intention.

That which is given me in charge, is, to show the quality of the offense, how
heinous it is in the nature, how mischievous in the effect of it; which will
best appear if it be examined by that Law, to which he himself appealed, that
universal, that supreme Law, Salus populi: This is the Element of all Laws,
out of which they are derived; the End of all Laws, to which they are designed,
and in which they are perfected. How far it stands in opposition to this Law, I
shall endeavor to show in some Considerations which I shall present to your
Lordships, all arising out of the Evidence which has been opened.

The first is this: It is an offense comprehending Treasons, Murders, Rapines,
Oppressions, Perjuries.

The Earth has a Seminary virtue, whereby it does produce all Herbs, and
Plants, and other Vegetables: There is in this Crime, a Seminary of all evils
hurtful to a State; and if you consider the reasons of it, it must needs be
so: The Law is that which puts a difference betwixt good and evil, betwixt
just and unjust; If you take away the Law, all things will fall into a
confusion, every man will become a Law to himself, which in the depraved
condition of humane nature, must needs produce many great enormities: Lust will
become a Law, and Envy will become a Law, Covetousness and Ambition will
become Laws; and what dictates, what decisions such Laws will produce, may
easily be discerned in the late Government of Ireland: The Law has a power to
prevent, to restrain, to repair evils; without this all kind of mischiefs and
distempers will break in upon a State.

It is the Law that does entitle the King to the Allegiance and service of his
people; it intitles the people to the protection and justice of the King. It is
God alone who subsists by himself, all other things subsist in a mutual
dependence and relation. He was a wise man that said, that the King subsisted
by the field that is tilled: It is the labor of the people that supports the
Crown: If you take away the protection of the King, the vigor and
cheerfulness of Allegiance will be taken away, though the Obligation remain.

The Law is the Boundarie, the Measure betwixt the Kings Prerogative, and the
Peoples Liberty: Whiles these move in their own Orb, they are a support and
security to one another; The Prerogative a cover and defense to the Liberty of
the people, and the people by their liberty are enabled to be a foundation to
the Prerogative; but if these bounds be so removed, that they enter into
contestation and conflict, one of these mischiefs must needs ensue: If the
Prerogative of the King overwhelm the liberty of the people, it will be turned
into Tyranny; if liberty undermine the Prerogative, it will grow into Anarchie.

The Law is the safeguard, the custody of all private interest: Your Honors,
your Lives, your Liberties and Estates are all in the keeping of the Law;
without this, every man has a like right to any thing, and this is the
condition into which the Irish were brought by the E. of Strafford: And the
reason which he gave for it, has more mischief in it then the thing it self,
They were a Conquered Nation. There cannot be a word more pregnant, and
fruitful in Treason, then that word is: There are few Nations in the world
that have not been conquered; and no doubt but the Conqueror may give what
Laws he please to those that are conquered: But if the succeeding Pacts and
Agreements do not limit and restrain that Right, what people can be secure?
England has been conquered, and Wales has been conquered, and by this reason
will be in little better case then Ireland. If the King by the Right of a
Conqueror gives Laws to his People, shall not the people by the same reason
be restored to the Right of the conquered, to recover their liberty if they
can? What can be more hurtful, more pernicious to both, then such Propositions
as these? And in these particulars is determined the first Consideration.

The second Consideration is this: This Arbitrary power is dangerous to the
Kings Person, and dangerous to his Crown: It is apt to cherish Ambition,
usurpation, and oppression in great men, and to beget sedition and discontent
in the People; and both these have been, and in reason must ever be causes of
great trouble and alteration to Princes and States.

If the Histories of those Eastern Countries be perused, where Princes order
their affairs according to the mischievous principles of the E. of Strafford,
loose and absolved from all Rules of Government, they will be found to be
frequent in combustions, full of Massacres, and of the tragical ends of
Princes. If any man shall look into our own Stories, in the times when the
Laws were most neglected, he shall find them full of Commotions, of Civil
distempers; whereby the Kings that then reigned, were always kept in want and
distress; the people consumed with Civil wars: and by such wicked counsels as
these, some of our Princes have been brought to such miserable ends, as no
honest heart can remember without horror, and earnest Prayer, that it may
never be so again.

The third Consideration is this, The subversion Laws; And this Arbitrary
power, as it is dangerous to the Kings Person and to his Crown, so is it in
other respects very prejudicial to his Majesty in his Honor, Profit, and
Greatness; and yet these are the gildings and paintings that are put upon such
counsels; These are for your Honor, for your service; whereas in truth they
are contrary to both: But if I shall take off this varnish, I hope they shall
then appear in their own native deformity, and therefore I desire to consider
them by these Rules.

It cannot be for the Honor of a King, that his sacred Authority should be
used in the practice of injustice and oppression; that his Name should be
applied to patronize such horrid crimes, as have been represented in Evidence
against the Earl of Strafford; and yet how frequently, how presumptuously his
Commands, his Letters have been vouched throughout the course of this Defense,
your Lordships have heard. When the Judges do justice, it is the Kings
justice, and this is for his honor, because he is the Fountain of justice;
but when they do injustice, the offense is their own: But those Officers and
Ministers of the King, who are most officious in the exercise of this
Arbitrarie power, they do it commonly for their advantage; and when they are
questioned for it, then they fly to the Kings interest, to his Direction: And
truly my Lords, this is a very unequal distribution for the King, that the
dishonor of evil courses should be cast upon him, and they to have the
advantage.

The prejudice which it brings to him in regard of his profit, is no less
apparent: It deprives him of the most beneficial, and most certain Revenue of
his Crown, that is, the voluntary aids and supplies of his people; his other
Revenues, consisting of goodly Demeanes, and great Manors, have by Grants been
alienated from the Crown, and are now exceedingly diminished and impaired: But
this Revenue it cannot be sold, it cannot be burdned with any Pensions or
Annuities, but comes entirely to the Crown. It is now almost fifteen years
since his Majesty had any assistance from his people; and these illegal ways
of supplying the King were never pressed with more violence, and art, then they
have been in this time; and yet I may upon very good grounds affirm, that in
the last fifteen years of Queen Elizabeth, she received more by the Bounty and
Affection of her Subjects, then has come to His Majesty's Coffers by all the
inordinate and rigorous courses which have been taken. And as those Supplies
were more beneficial in the Receipt of them, so were they like in the use and
employment of them.

Another way of prejudice to his Majesty's profit, is this: Such Arbitrary
courses exhaust the people, and disable them, when there shall be occasion, to
give such plentiful supplies, as otherwise they would do. I shall need no
other proof of this, then the Irish Government under my L. of Strafford, where
the wealth of the Kingdom is so consumed by those horrible exactions and
burdens, that it is thought the Subsidies lately granted will amount to little
more then half the proportion of the last Subsidies. The two former ways are
hurtful to the Kings profit, in that respect which they call Lucrum Cessans,
by diminishing his receipts; But there is a third, fuller of mischief, and it
is in that respect which they call Damnum emergens, by increasing his
Disbursements: Such irregular and exorbitant attempts upon the Liberty of the
people, are apt to produce such miserable distractions and distempers, as will
put the King and Kingdom to such vast expenses and losses in a short time, as
will not be recovered in many years: We need not go far to seek a proof
of this, these two last years will be a sufficient evidence, within which time
I assure my self, it may be proved, that more Treasure has been wasted, more
loss sustained by his Majesty and his Subjects, then was spent by Queen
Elizabeth in all the War of Tyrone, and in those many brave Attempts against
the King of Spain, and the royal assistance which she gave to France, and the
Low Countries, during all her Reign.

As for Greatness, this Arbitrary power is apt to hinder and impair it, not
only at home, but abroad. A Kingdom is a society of men conjoined under one
Government, for the common good: The world is a society of Kingdoms and
States. The Kings greatness consists not only in his Dominion over his
Subjects at home, but in the influence which he has upon States abroad; That
he should be great even among Kings, and by his wisdom and authority so to
incline and dispose the affairs of other States and Nations, and those great
events which fall out in the world, as shall be for the good of Mankind, and
for the peculiar advantage of his own people. This is the most glorious, and
magnificent greatness, to be able to relieve distressed Princes, to support his
own friends and Allies, to prevent the ambitious designs of other Kings; and
how much this Kingdom has been impaired in this kind, by the late
mischievous counsels your Lordships best know, who at a nearer distance, and
with a more clear sight, do apprehend these public and great affairs, then
I can do. Yet thus much I dare boldly say, that if his Majesty had not with
great wisdom and goodness forsaken that way wherein the Earl of Strafford had
put him, we should within a short time have been brought into that miserable
condition, as to have been useless to our friends, contemptible to our
enemies, and incapable of undertaking any great design either at home or
abroad.

A fourth Consideration is, That this Arbitrary, E. of Strafford did exercise
in his own person, and to which he did advise his Majesty, is inconsistent with
the Peace, the Wealth, the Prosperity of a Nation; It is destructive to
Justice, the Mother of Peace; to Industry, the spring of Wealth; to Valor,
which is the active virtue whereby the prosperity of a Nation can only be
procured, confirmed, and enlarged.

It is not only apt to take away Peace, and so entangle the Nation with Wars,
but does corrupt Peace, and puts such a malignity into it, as produces the
Effects of war. We need seek no other proof of this, but the E. of
Straffords Government, where the Irish, both Nobility and others, had as little
security of their Persons or Estates in this peaceable time, as if the Kingdom
had been under the rage and fury of war.

And as for Industry, and Valor, who will take pains for that, which when he
has gotten, is not his own? Or who fight for that wherein he has no other
interest, but such as is subject to the will of another? The Ancient
encouragement to men that were to defend their Countries was this, That they
were to hazard their Persons, pro Aris and Focis, for their Religion, and for
their Houses; But by this Arbitrary way which was practiced in Ireland, and
counseled here, no man had any certainty, either of Religion, or of his House,
or any thing else to be his own; But besides this, such Arbitrary courses have
an ill operation upon the courage of a Nation, by embasing the hearts of the
people: A servile condition does for the most part beget in men a slavish
temper and disposition. Those that live so much under the Whip and the Pillory,
and such servile Engines, as were frequently used by the E. of Strafford, they
may have the dregs of valor, sullenness, and stubbornness, which may make
them prone to Mutinies, and discontents; but those Noble and gallant
affections, which put men on brave Designs and Attempts for the preservation
or enlargement of a Kingdom, they are hardly capable of. Shall it be Treason
to embase the Kings Coin, though but a piece of twelve-pence, or sixe-pence,
and must it not needs be the effect of a greater Treason, to embase the spirits
of his Subjects, and to set a stamp and Character of servitude upon them,
whereby they shall be disabled to do any thing for the service of the King or
Commonwealth?

The fifth Consideration is this, That the exercise Arbitrary Government, in
times of sudden danger, by the invasion of an enemy, will disable his Majesty
to preserve himself and his Subjects from that danger. This is the only
pretense by which the E. of Strafford, and such other mischievous Counselors
would induce his Majesty to make use of it; and if it be unfit for such an
occasion, I know nothing that can be alleged in maintenance of it.

When war threatens a Kingdom by the coming of a foreign Enemy, it is no
time then to discontent the people, to make them weary of the present
Government, and more inclinable to a Change; The supplies which are to come in
this way, will be unready, uncertain; there can be no assurance of them, no
dependence upon them, either for time or proportion: And if some money be
gotten in such a way, the Distractions, Divisions, Distempers, which this
course is apt to produce, will be more prejudicial to the public safety,
then the supply can be advantageous to it; and of this we have had sufficient
experience the last Summer.

The sixth, That this crime of subverting the Laws, and introducing an Arbitrary
and Tyrannical Government, is contrary to the Pact and Covenant betwixt the
King and his people. That which was spoken of before, was the legal union of
Allegiance and Protection; this is a personal union by mutual agreement and
stipulation, confirmed by oath on both sides: The King and his people are
obliged to one another in the nearest relations; He is a Father, and a child
is called in Law, Pars Patris: He is the Husband of the Commonwealth, they
have the same interests, they are inseparable in their condition, be it good or
evil; He is the Head, they are the Body; there is such an incorporation as
cannot be dissolved without the destruction of both.

When Justice Thorpe, in Edw. the thirds time, was by the Parliament condemned
to death for Bribery, the reason of that Judgment is given, because he had
broken the Kings Oath, not that he had broken his own oath, but that he had
broken the Kings oath, that solemn and great obligation, which is the security
of the whole Kingdom: If for a Judge to take a small sum in a private cause,
was adjudged Capital, how much greater was this offense, whereby the E. of
Strafford has broken the Kings Oath in the whole course of his Government in
Ireland, to the prejudice of so many of his Majesty's Subjects, in their Lives,
Liberties, and Estates, and to the danger of all the rest?

The Doctrine of the Papists, Fides non est servanda cum Haereticis, is an
abominable Doctrine: yet that other Tenet more peculiar to the Jesuits is more
pernicious, whereby Subjects are discharged from their Oath of Allegiance to
their Prince whenever the Pope pleases; This may be added to make the third
no less mischievous and destructive to humane society, then either of the
rest; That the King is not bound by that Oath which he has taken to observe
the Laws of the Kingdom, but may when he sees cause, lay Taxes and burdens
upon them without their consent, contrary to the Laws and Liberties of the
Kingdom. This has been preached and published by diverse; And this is that
which has been practiced in Ireland by the E. of Strafford, in his Government
there, and endeavored to be brought into England, by his Counsel here.

The seventh is this; It is an offense that is end of Government; The end of
Government was to prevent oppressions, to limit and restrain the excessive
power and violence of great men, to open the passages of Justice with
indifferency toward all; This Arbitrary power is apt to induce and encourage
all kind of insolences.

Another end of Government is to preserve men in their estates, to secure them
in their Lives and Liberties; but if this Design had taken effect, and could
have been settled in England, as it was practiced in Ireland, no man would have
had more certainty in his own, then power would have allowed him: But these two
have been spoken of before, there are two behind more important, which have not
yet been touched.

It is the end of Government, that virtue should be cherisht, vice suppressed;
but where this Arbitrary and unlimited power is set up, a way is open not only
for the security, but for the advancement and encouragement of evil; Such men
as are aptest for the execution and maintenance of this Power, are only
capable of preferment; and others who will not be instruments of any unjust
commands, who make a conscience to do nothing against the Laws of the
Kingdom, and Liberties of the Subject, are not only not passable for
employment, but subject to much jealousy and danger.

It is the end of Government, that all accidents and events, all Counsels and
Designs should be improved to the public good: But this Arbitrary Power is
apt to dispose all to the maintenance of it self. The wisdom of the
Councell-Table, the Authority of the Courts of Justice, the industry of all the
Officers of the Crown have been most carefully exercised in this; the Learning
of our Divines, the Jurisdiction of our Bishops have been molded and disposed
to the same effect, which though it were begun before the E. of Straffords
Employment, yet it has been exceedingly furthered and advanced by him.

Under this color and pretense of maintaining the Kings Power and Prerogative
many dangerous practices against the peace and safety of this Kingdom have
been undertaken and promoted. The increase of Popery, and the favors and
encouragement of Papists have been, and still are a great grievance and danger
to the Kingdom: The Innovations in matters of Religion, the usurpations of the
Clergy, the manifold burdens and taxations upon the people, have been a great
cause of our present distempers and disorders; and yet those who have been
chief Furtherers and Actors of such Mischiefs, have had their Credit and
Authority from this, That they were forward to maintain this Power. The E. of
Strafford had the first rise of his greatness from this, and in his Apology
and Defense, as your Lordships have heard, this has had a maine part.

The Royal Power, and Majesty of Kings, is most glorious in the prosperity and
happiness of the people; The perfection of all things consists in the end for
which they were ordained, God only is his own end, all other things have a
further end beyond themselves, in attaining whereof their own happiness
consists: If the means and the end be set in opposition to one another, it must
needs cause an impotency and defect of both.

The eight Consideration is, The vanity and absurdity of those excuses and
justifications which he made for himself, whereof diverse particulars have been
mentioned in the course of his Defense.

1. That he is a Counselor, and might not be questioned for any thing which he
advised according to his conscience; The ground is true, there is a liberty
belongs to Counselors, and nothing corrupts Counsels more then fear; He that
will have the privilege of a Counselor, must keep within the just bounds of a
Counselor; those matters are the proper subjects of Counsel, which in their
times and occasions, may be good or beneficial to the King or Commonwealth;
But such Treasons as these, the subversion of the Laws, violation of Liberties,
they can never be good, or justifiable by any circumstance, or occasion; and
therefore his being a Counselor, makes his fault much more heinous, as being
committed against a greater Trust, and in a way of much mischief and danger,
lest his Majesty's conscience and judgment (upon which the whole course and
frame of his Government do much depend) should be poisoned and infected with
such wicked principles and designs: And this he has endeavored to do, which
by all Laws, and in all times has in this Kingdom been reckoned a Crime of
an high Nature.

2. He labors to interest your Lordships in his cause, by alleging, It may be
dangerous to your selves, and your Posterity, who by your birth are fittest to
be near his Majesty, in places of Trust and Authority, if you should be subject
to be questioned for matters delivered in Counsel. To this was answered, that
it was hoped their Lordships would rather labor to secure themselves, and
their posterity, in the exercise of their virtues, then of their vices, that so
they might together with their own honor and greatness, preserve the honor
and greatness, both of the King and Kingdom.

3. Another excuse was this, that whatsoever he has spoken was out of a good
intention; Sometimes good and evil, truth and falsehood lie so near together,
that they are hardly to be distinguished: Matters hurtful and dangerous may be
accompanied with such circumstances as may make it appear useful and
convenient, and in all such cases, good intentions will justify evil
Counsel; But where the matters propounded are evil in their own nature, such
as the matters are wherewith the E. of Strafford is charged, to break a
public faith, to subvert Laws and Government, they can never be justified by
any intentions, how specious, or good soever they be pretended.

4. He alleges it was a time of great necessity and danger, when such
counsels were necessary for preservation of the State. Necessity has been
spoken of before, as it relates to the Cause; now it is considered as it
relates to the Person; if there were any necessity, it was of his own making;
he by his evil counsel had brought the King into a necessity, and by no Rules
of Justice, can be allowed to gain this advantage by his own fault, as to make
that a ground of his justification, which is a great part of his offense.

5. He has often insinuated this, That it was for his Majesty's service in
maintenance of that Sovereign Power with which he is entrusted by God for the
good of his people. The Answer is this, No doubt but that Sovereign Power
wherewith his Majesty is entrusted for the public good, has many glorious
effects, the better to enable him thereunto; But without doubt this is none of
them, That by his own will he may lay any Tax or Imposition upon his people
without their consent in Parliament. This has now been five times adjudged by
both Houses: In the Case of the Loanes, In condemning the Commission of Excise,
In the Resolution upon the Saving offered to be added to the Petition of Right,
In the sentence against Manwaring, and now lately, In condemning the
Ship Money; And if the Sovereign Power of the King can produce no such effect
as this, the Allegation of it is an Aggravation, and no Diminution of his
offense, because thereby he does labor to interest the King against the just
grievance and complaint of the People.

6. This Counsel was propounded with diverse limitations, and Provisions; for
securing and repairing the liberty of the people. This implies a contradiction
to maintain an Arbitrary and absolute Power, and yet to restrain it with
limitations, and provisions; for even those limitations and provisions will be
subject to the same absolute Power, and to be dispensed in such manner, and at
such time, as it self shall determine; let the grievances and oppressions be
never so heavy, the Subject is left without all remedy, but at his Majesty's
own pleasure.

7. He alleges, they were but words, and no effect followed: This needs no
answer, but that the miserable distempers into which he has brought all the
three Kingdoms, will be evidence sufficient that his wicked Counsels have had
such mischievous effects within these two or three last years, that many years
peace will hardly repair those losses, and other great mischiefs which the
Commonwealth has sustained.

These excuses have been collected out of the several parts of his Defense;
perchance some others are omitted, which I doubt not have been answered by some
of my Colleagues, and are of no importance, either to perplex or to hinder your
Lordships judgment, touching the heinousness of this Crime.

The ninth Consideration is this, That if Treason, in the nature of it, it does
exceed all other Treasons in this, That in the Design, and endeavor of the
Author, it was to be a constant and a permanent Treason; other Treasons are
transient, as being confinde within those particular actions and proportions
wherein they did consist, and those being past, the Treason cease.

The Powder Treason was full of horror and malignity, yet it is past many years
since; The murder of that Magnanimous and glorious King, Henry the fourth of
France, was a great and horrid Treason; And so were those manifold attempts
against Qu. Elizabeth of blessed memory; but they are long since past, the
Detestation of them only remains in Histories, and in the minds of men; and
will ever remain; But this Treason, if it had taken effect, was to be a
standing, perpetual Treason, which would have been in continual act, not
determined within one time or age, but transmitted to Posterity, even from
generation to generation.

The tenth Consideration is this, That as it is Law; To alter the settled frame
and constitution of Government, is Treason in any estate; The Laws whereby all
other parts of a Kingdom are preserved, should be very vain and defective, if
they had not a power to secure and preserve themselves.

The forfeitures inflicted for Treason by our Law, are of Life, Honor, and
Estate, even all that can be forfeited, and this Prisoner having committed so
many Treasons, although he should pay all these forfeitures, will be still a
Debtor to the Commonwealth: Nothing can be more equal then that he should
perish by the Justice of that Law which he would have subverted; Neither will
this be a new way of blood; There are marks enough to trace this Law to the
very original of this Kingdom: And if it has not been put in execution, as
he alleges, this 240. years, it was not for want of Law, but that all that
time has not bred a man bold enough to commit such Crimes as these; which is a
circumstance much aggravating his offense, and making him no whit less liable
to punishment, because he is the only man that in so long a time has ventured
upon such a Treason as this.

It belongs to the charge of another to make it appear to your Lordships, that
the Crimes and Offenses proved against the Earl of Strafford, are High Treason
by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, whose learning and other abilities are
much better for that service. But for the time and manner of performing this,
we are to resort to the Direction of the House of Commons, having in this which
is already done, dispatched all those instructions which we have received; and
concerning further proceedings, for clearing all Questions and Objections in
Law, your Lordships will hear from the House of Commons in convenient time.

FINIS.

