AN EXPOSITION OF THE POURING Out of the Fourth VIAL: MENTIONED In the
Sixteenth of the Revelation.

By Master ROBERT PARKER.

Wherein he differs from M. Brightman, and other Protestant Divines, which
hold, That these Judgments are to be poured out upon the Church of Rome, and
that Party. But he conceives they have Reference unto these Times, and are to
be poured out upon some Protestant Princes and Churches.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Pierrepont at the Sun in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1650.

To the Reader.
MAster Parker the Author of this discourse is well known by his other works
published, wherein though he show himself an adversary to Ceremonies and
Popery, yet he concurreth not with Mr. Brightman and others, in exposition of
this Vial; who affirm, that all the Vials shall fall only, or most upon the
Papists: but his conjecture, is that the fourth Vial shall fall upon some
Protestant Prince or state, who enjoyed the benefit of the Gospel, but did not
obey it; perhaps he might have said truly, upon all the Protestant Princes or
Churches, there being scarce any one that has not been scorched with fire, and
burnt with heat, by the great Wars and troubles that have happened these last
thirty years past, since the blazing Comet, which appeared 1618. because they
enjoyed the light of the Gospel, but brought not forth fruits worthy of
repentance and amendment of life. It is therefore most worthy our serious
consideration, to hearken to the interpretation here offered, especially seeing
the Vials do concern us of this last age; for after the seven seals with their
effects are past, and also six of the seven Trumpets have sounded; the seven
Vials to be poured forth, do certainly concern us most, to consider the
effects of them, and apply things so, as may most co^duce to our admonition,
and amendment of life, seeing the mighty hand of God is now stretched forth
over us, and some Vial of Gods wrath is now pouring out, in these wonderful
Wars and Troubles, raised up in most parts of the world.

Imprimatur ista (quae D. Parkeri perhibetur esse) phialae quartae expositio,
una cum adjectis animadversionibus.

Tho. Gataker.
Aprilis 30. 1650.
Master Parkers EXPOSITION of the FOURTH VIAL,
Revelation 16.8, 9. And the fourth Angel poured out his Vial on the Sun, and
it was given unto him to torment men with fire. And men boiled in great heat,
and blasphemed the name of God, which has power over these plagues, and they
repented not, to give him glory.


THough I am not worthy to be named with Mr. Brightman, yet I trust I may crave
leave under correction, to differ from him in the exposition of this Vial; I
prosecute his memory with all the benediction that is due to so great a light
in the Church of God, and behold himself (for his clearing of this Apocalypse)
the chief Angel of this Vial, in case it be meant of Protestant Writers (as he
would have it) making the Scripture as clear as the Sun, to the confounding and
tormenting of the Papists. Howbeit there be some reasons that lead me to
interpret it rather of the wasting of some Protestant or Lutheran State, not
long hence to be accomplished, which I crave liberty to set down.

First, the confounding and tormenting of the Papists botch, what is it else,
but an Ulcer of mind in the Papists, to see the grouth of the Gospel, and the
fall of Popery, especially here at home in England, by the death of Queen Mary,
and the succession of Queen Elizabeth to the Crown; And it is general, whereas
this Vial poured is poured on the Sun, a particular Star in the heaven, to
note a plague on some special State of some true Church, or at the least some
Church disunited from Popery.

Jer. 44.17. He fitly here designeth some King or State, even as he does else
where; so Jacob (the most heroical man in his days) is resembled to the
Sun, Genesis 37. and David 2 Samuel 21.17. and Hezekiah King of Israel 2 Kings
20.11. Who is the Angel standing in the Sun Apoc. 19.17. out of doubt some
great man in power and place; for as much as the writing of bare Divines,
cannot so effectually draw people and nations to join in war against the
Pope. What that the darkning of the Sun Apoc. 6.12. is the fall of the
persecuting Roman Empire* And the third part of the Sun smitten, Apoc. 8.12.
is the wasting of Africa, the third part of the world by the Vandalls.

Romes ruin is fore showed, howbeit the Sun not extinguished by this Vial,
but distempered only, to scorch with heat, does seem to imply, that the plague
of this Prince or State, shall not cast them down so much, as irritate and
stir them up to an heat of revenging, laying wast the men that did hurt them.

to them, that the sore fell upon the men which had the mark of the Beast, and
who worshipped his Image, here is no such limitation, it is only said in
general, power was given to the Sun to Torment men, to wit, men of the same
heaven, where this Sun shines, that is, men, in that visible Church where
this Prince or State does govern, nevertheless here is hope given, that the
Godly of this Church shall escape, in that it being said of the plagued, that
they gave no glory to God; there is probability, that the Judgment of this
Vial shall light only or chiefly on Papists and wicked men, mingled with this
State or Church, who had before no care of Gods glory, or the Gospels good, but
sought only their own glory, wealth and pleasures.

Fifthly, the plague here is not only described by heat, Apoc. 14.18. is
Cranmer triumphing in the fire of Martyrdom. And the burning of the flesh of
the Whore, is the sacking of Rome, Apoc. 17.16. so the Angel of the waters, in
the fifth verse going before, resembles the States of Low Germany, seated in a
watery Country.

The effect of this plague in the wicked, is boiling heat, Rome comes to, for
as much as, as a great plague is described here, as in the fifth Vial, and that
in the same terms and words, as appears by comparing this ninth verse with
the eleaventh following. Add to this, that the plague of this Vial is uttered
in the plural (they blasphemed the name of God, who has power over these
plagues) as if it contained many confusions in it. And this answers to the
justice of God, who begins judgment at his own house, and at them who make
profession to be of his household: By this Revelation, the Pope shall be
destroyed before the Turk, because he professed Christianity, which the Turk
did not. In like manner before God destroys the Pope, he shall pour his Vial
upon some Protestant or Lutheran Church, which made profession of the Gospel
against Popery, but obeyed it not; by this means it shall come to pass what
was done of old, then God afflicted Jewrie his own Church, before he destroyed
the Earth by Babylon; now he shall punish one of his own Churches, before he
proceeds against Rome, the Babylon spiritual.

Seventhly, I conjecture, that this Sun of the fourth Rome, shall be one and
the same. First, because the fifth Vial is immediately adjoined and expressed
with the very same terms, which probably induces to think, that it shall be
wrought by the same means: this conjecture is helped by this; that the
rebelling against the Sun of the fourth vial, shall be procured by Pope and
Papists, which shall be the cause that this man as soon as he has subdued his
domestical enemies, shall address himself to an expedition against Rome.
Secondly, the ruin of Rome arises from a wilderness, Apoc. 17.3. that is (as
I conjecture) out of some Country laid wast like a wilderness.

This Country must be the State wasted by the Sun of the fourth Vial, for we
have no other Prophecy of any other State to be laid wast immediately before
Romes sacking; but only of that: Now that John's carrying into the wilderness
to see the ruin of Rome, does show that Romes ruin shall arise out of a Land
brought to a wilderness, may thus appear; wherefore is John set on the sea
shore, Apoc. 12.18. when he is to see the rising of the Beast, but because the
Beasts rising is out of the sea, ( Ergo) in that Apoc. 17.3. John is placed in
a wilderness to see Romes ruin; it is a sign that Romes ruin shall arise
out of some Country reduced to a wilderness; so when John is to see the
beauty of the Jewish Church, he is carried to a great high mountain to see it,
Apoc. 21.10 to wit, because this Church shall be set on high like a mountain,
Isaiah 2.2.

Thirdly, this is the description of him that sacketh Rome, 18.1. I saw another
Angel come down from heaven, having great power; so that the earth was lightened
with his glory, which agrees with the Sun of this fourth Vial; He comes
down from heaven, that is, suddenly, beyond all expectation of man, so the
Sun of the fourth Vial arises suddenly out of his plague, when the world
thought he could never have recovered, he has great power given him; this is
the power of the Sun of the fourth Vial, both by glory of Conquering, and by
the wealth of the Conquered, which he shall get into his hands.

He has light and brightness, which what, is it else but the light and
brightness of the Sun of the fourth Vial. Lastly, he replenisheth the earth
with his glory, which implies the great Admiration of the world, and the
Astonishment of the Papists and earthly men, when they shall see the Sun of
the fourth Vial rise so extra ordinarily out of this plague.

Fourthly, and last of all, Apoc. 17.18. it is said, that Rome, and whom shall
the States of Christendom sooner choose for their General, or proclaim their
Emperor against Rome, then the Sun of the fourth Vial, plagued by Papists,
and enraged against them, and furnished with the greatest authority, power, and
wealth to subdue them.

Thus I presume to deliver my conjecture concerning this fourth Vial. (I say
conjecture) because it cannot certainly be known until it be executed.
Nevertheless, because the time thereof approaches, it becomes every
Christian man to strive, by prayer, meditation, study, and all other means, for
some understanding of it, considering that God has not written this prophecy
only to instruct us when it is past, but also to forewarne us aforehand; The
revealer of secrets that unsealed this Book to John, open unto us this mystery
of it, that we may foresee the evil that is to come, and hide our selves from
it, as also keep our selves pure from offense against our Sun, lest we
partake of the plagues that this Vial does denounce against all such
transgression.

To God only wise, be all Honor and Glory for ever and ever, Amen.
Some Annotations upon Mr. PARKERS discourse.
SEeing Mr. Parker has proposed his opinion modestly, by way of conjecture,
and forborne to determine till the event should manifest the truth, he is the
rather to be hearkened unto; especially because the reasons for his conjecture
do seem very probable, now after the great troubles, which have happened of
late years, in Germany, France, Poland, Denmark, and many other Countries, and
also among our selves, wherein the greatest loss has fallen upon the
Protestant Churches.

Whereas Mr. Parker says* [that he does behold Mr. Brightman as the chief
Angel of this Vial.] He perhaps took this, from Mr. Brightman himself, who
Chap. 17. does not spare to say. I that am an obscure man, and unknown to all,
and of no reckoning in my own Country, do exhort you most mighty Princes to
attempt against the whore, etc. Which seems more then fitting for one to speak
of himself.

Whereas most of our writers do affirm, that all the Uials of Gods wrath shall
fall upon the Papist. Yet Mr. Parker says, that the first Uial seems
especially to be intended against the Papists, in regard it is said, in the
text, verse 2. that a grievous sore fell upon the men, which had the mark of
the Beast, and upon them which worshipped his image; but no such restraint is
mentioned upon this Vial.

Parker says, Sect. 6. That God begins judgment at his own house, and at
them who make profession to be of his household: by this revelation, the Pope
shall be destroyed before the Turk, because he professed Christianity, wh^^^
the Turk did not; in like manner, before God destroys the Pope, he shall pour
out his Uial upon some Protestant or Lutheran Church, which made profession of
the Gospel against Popery, but obeyed it not.

This may be seen to be true by the lamentable condition and great troubles,
which have fallen upon the Protestant Churches of late years: For in Germany,
besides the horrible Plundering of their rich and spacious Country, the
Protestants have lost many thousand Churches and Ministers. In France the
Protestants have suffered extremely; for though they are left alive, and not
prosecuted to death universally, yet Deodatus says, in his Epistle from
Geneva, that they are alive but during pleasure only, and that they are like
poor Callow Birds stripe of all their feathers: for whereas they had formerly
eighty nine strong Towns and Castles allowed them for their security, yet now
they are all lost, through their wars, whereunto they were persuaded, through
the fiery zeal of some amongst them, who had the guiding of their Consciences;
says the French History. [ Grimston.] Their great Noblemen have deserted
their cause, and become Papists: as the Duke of Bovillon the Duke Lesbigners,
who when a Protestant took up arms against them, and was made great Constable
of France; the Duke of Trenovill, and the Duke of Suilly, once Lord Treasurer
under Henry the fourth, who much dissuaded from war: besides many others of
great quality, so that now they want Protectors, and leaders, of the Nobility,
which they had in former times.

The fifth Vial is to be poured out upon the seat of Mede says, is Rome, and
that the holy Ghost does not hide the matter any longer; but this is yet to
come; for the Pope after all the troubles, has greatly increased his party,
and is very powerful, and this year 1650. he celebrates a Jubilee at Rome, and
all his adherents do flock in great numbers to him, to receive his benediction,
pardons and holy water, etc. Master Brightman says, that before this yeear
1650. the Jews should be called; and that the whore of Babylons nose should be
slitt; and that the Pope should fly from Rome to Avignion, or to Bononia, or to
some other of his Cities: But we see not the Pope disturbed, nor the Jews
called. But some are so hasty and rash in their opinions and predictions, that
they seem to be guided more by passion, then reason. Napier of Scotland kills
the Pope, 1639. Brightman kills him, 1650. Arthur Dent kills him within the age
of a man, and thinks that the sixth Vial is now pouring out. Philippus Nicolaus
kills him about the year, 1650. which is twenty years hence. But these
peremptory opinions prove false hitherto, and do give no satisfaction to wise
and sober men. It is more probable that Master Mede says, that the fifth Vial
shall fall on the Pope; and that under the sixth Vial the Turks shall be
destroyed, and the Jews converted, whom he accounts to be the Kings of the
East, verse 12. for whom the way must be prepared, when that Vial shall be
poured out on the great River Euphrates.

Brightman says, that the Beast the Pope of Rome, did spring up with
Constantine, the first Christian Emperor; and was made great by the first
Nicene Council.] This is much to the dishonor of the truth, for Popery is of
a far later date and growth. And Master Brightman does confess, Chap. 13.
that his opinion is new, and himself the first man that durst adventure to say
so: If he had said from the second Nicene Council, wherein Images were
established, he had come nearer the truth.

Philippus Nicolaus a Lutheran Divine, (an acute and learned man, says Master
Mede) that wrote above thirty years ago, does lay great imputations upon the
Calvinists, saying, Cap. 10. De Regno Christi; Ecclesia militantis Novissima
calamitas a Calvinianis promanabit: That the last calamity of the Church
Militant shall be occasioned by the Calvinists; and much more he adds against
them, as well as against Papists and Turks, Brightman, Nicolaus and Parker do
all agree in this, that there shall come great Calamities upon the Church. Hoc
tantum addo, quod inevitabilis quaedam malorum mensura nostris cervicibus
incumbit, as Nicolaus says.

Parker says, that the Sun upon whom this fourth Vial falls, shall be
distempered with heat; not extinguished.] God grant that the Sun of the Gospel
be not totally eclipsed, nor our Candlestick removed from us; but that these
troubles prove no more then a distemper; mean while to prevent the worst, the
Text says plainly, verse 9. that only Repentance can do it, and to give God
the glory, who has power over these plagues: Which that he would moderate and
stop, and put an end to these great troubles, is earnestly to be begged by
humble and fervent prayers.

But whatsoever the Interpretation be of these abstruse Papists or any others,
whom they imagine to be designed by the Holy Ghost.

FINIS.

