THE Weavers SHUTTLE DISPLAYED; And the Swiftness thereof Unfolded: Or, the
Words of a Dying man, to a Dying People, in the midst of a Dying Nation.

Wherein is held forth,

I. That the time is short, the way is narrow, the Prize is great, the Runners
are many, the Obtainers are few.

II. That Repentance and turning to God, is not in one Call or Command;
wherefore wait upon the means appointed by God to work it, and that diligently
and constantly; this Work deferred will be still greater; the Time to do it in
will be shorter; the strength to do it by will be less.

III. If we endeavor to the uttermost to improve the present opportunity and
ability that the Almighty gives us, we shall, for ought I know, live with more
comfort here, and die in full assurance hereafter: for the greatest evil
threatened or feared, may through wisdom be timely prevented.

By Robert Purnel.

Job 14. 1. Man that is born of a Woman, is of few days, and full of trouble.

Psalm. 39. 5. Verily every man at his best estate, is altogether vanity.

Job 7. 6. For his days are swifter then a Weavers Shuttle.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his Shop at the black
spread Eagle near the West end of Paul's, 1652.

The Epistle to the Impartial READER*
Courteous Reader.
AS death is the King of Terrors to Christless Souls, who have made the World
their portion, and Lies their Refuge, etc. To Christians it is but a Servant
sent from their Father to put them to Bed, or sleep for a little time, till
Corruption put on Incorruption, and Mortality Immortality; to the first, Death
comes in full Power, Force, and Virtue to execute all the Plagues written, and
so puts a period to all his good things. But to the latter it puts a period to
all his Troubles, of what kind or nature soever they are; for Christ has born
all their griefs, iniquities, transgressions, sorrows, stripes, and
chastisements, etc. Fear not me, says death to a Saint, I come from your
Father who has taken away my sting; I am come to tell you that God and Christ
does love you: and they love you so well, that they can not suffer you any
longer to be out of the full enjoyment of their love; I have but one thing more
in my Commission, and that is only to crack the clay Walls which is the Prison,
that you may fly home and be at rest: and this will be to the advantage both
of thy body and soul: thy body shall be healed of all its diseases, of what
nature or kind soever. Death puts an end to all hunger and thirst, cold or
nakedness, labor and weariness; and then thy soul shall be taken up into the
perfection of Gods eternal Love, free Grace, full Glory, and everlasting
Purity, and so be for ever with the Lord; in a word, Death comes to put an end
to a dying life, which finisheth that work which begins so soon as we begin to
live; for the whole life is but a progress of death: all the time we live we
die invisibly; and when we die indeed, it is but a completing of what we have
been doing all our life long. So that all the sons of men may say, as once
Jacob to Pharaoh, Genesis 47. 9. Few and evil have the days of my life been; few
in comparison of his forefathers, evil in the respect of his manifold crosses:
first, in his Infancy: secondly, in Youth: thirdly, of Manhood: fourthly, of
old Age; each of those states accompanied with as many miseries as an hour is
with minutes, as does appear by those words of Christ, Mat. 6. 34. Sufficient
to the day is the evil thereof, etc. And as for the things of this life, when
we have taken all the pains we can to rake and scrape them together, it will be
with us as with the children of Israel; they that gathered little had no lack,
and those that gathered much had nothing over. The Scripture tells us that the
World was made of nothing, Heb. 11. 3. and Job tells us it does hang on
nothing, Job 26. 7. Therefore to depend upon it, is to depend on nothing, Prove.
24. 5. VVilt thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? I have endeavored in
this Treatise to hold forth the frailty of man, and the miseries that do
accompany all men and women that do take up their rest in any thing beneath
God. I have exhorted all to improve the present opportunity, and ability to the
best advantage, that all their good meanings and purposes might end in speedy
performances: in all which I do not say, or mean, that man should or could act
without the Lords enabling him: for we cannot get life by any action as it is
man's, without God: for there is a flaming sword, so that there is no coming to
the Tree of Life, but by Jesus Christ, the new and living Way, the true and
only way. We may as soon stand upon the Earth and touch the Sun in the
Firmament, as perform any Spiritual action without him, or have any Acceptance
either of our persons or performances but only in him. Look upon whatsoever I
have written, as my thoughts or judgment, who am a man knowing but little; I
must confess, I rather lisp then speak plain in the things of God: wherefore
cover all my imperfections with a Mantle of Love; this Piece is the only Work
of a few redeemed hours, compiled in the midst of many personal trials: if thou
find any imperfections, yet let not the Truth of God suffer through my
weakness; but ascribe them to me, even to me, to whom of due they belong:
wherefore to the Law and to the Testimonies; wherein I come short of speaking
according to that Rule, it is for want of light. I am content to decrease, so
the glory of God may increase: let my name perish, so his may flourish: let me
cut off like a Weaver, and die, so his Name and Glory may live.

R. P.

THE Weavers Shuttle Displayed. And the Swiftness thereof Unfolded.
Job 7. 6. My days are swifter then a Weavers Shuttle.
THE Book of Job, whereof this Text is a Part, in general lays before us these
things, viz.

1. Gods Omnipotency.

2. Man's uncharitableness.

3. Jobs Patience and Thankfulness, arising from his living in the will of God;
He gives and takes away, blessed be his name, Job 1. 21.

Now there were many things very eminent in Job.

1. Uprightness of life, in these words, And Job was an upright and just man,
one that feared God, and hated evil, Job 1. 1.

2. Patience in Affl^ction, Shall we receive good at the hands of God, and not
evil? Job 2. 10.

Job further holds forth, viz.

3. The vanishing frailty of man's Nature.

4. The envy of the Devil, Job 1. 11.

5. The mercy of Almighty God in these words, He makes the wound, and binds
it up, Job 5. 18.

In the first of these (to wit) the Uprightness of his Life, there are these
things considerable.

1. His Holiness toward God, in his Uprightness toward the World. 2. His
Sobriety toward himself. 3. His Patience, in bearing the mutability, and change
of his state.
1. Of the first, his Holiness toward God in his Uprightness toward the World.
He was the eye of the blind, and the feet of the lame; he fed the hungry; he
clothed the naked; he harbored strangers, Job. 31. 17, 19. and Job 31. 32.
and Job 31. 16, 17, 21.

2. In sobriety toward himself, his heart was not infected with lust, Job 31.
7. Nor suffered he his feet to walk in deceit, Job 31. 5. Nor made he gold his
hope, Job 31. 24.

3. Here also have you his Patience, in bearing the mutability and change of
his state, viz.

1. He lost his children, and then his wealth; then his body became leprous;
his friends also upbraided him, his wife forsook him, his own servants despised
him, Job 19. 15, 16.

Job was in affliction, and he expected pity from his friends; but all his
friends proved like a River that in Summer was dry, and in Winter frozen, Job
6. 15.

Next, here is the vanishing frailty of man's age, viz.

1. He compares it to the vanishing and consuming of a cloud, Job. 7. 9.

2. He compares it to the swiftness of a Post, Job 9. 25.

3. He compares it to the sailing of a Ship, Job 9. 26.

4. He compares it to a flower, that springs in the morning, and withers
before night, Job 14. 2.

5. He compares it to a shadow, Job 8. 9, 12

6. And lastly, He sets forth the shortness thereof, by its being swifter
then a Weavers Shuttle, saying, My days are swifter then a Weavers Shuttle: and
here I will fix.

What the Weavers Shuttle is, most men do know.

What the swiftness thereof is, a few do know.

But the swiftness of man's days being swifter then the Weavers Shuttle, there
be but few, yea very few do know or consider.

Now the Weavers Shuttle is an Instrument of a very swift, and sudden motion,
which passes the Lomb or Web with such speed that it is grown a Proverb, What
is swifter then a Weavers Shuttle? Now as the Shuttle flies to and again,
forward and backward, until the Cloth is fully wove, which for the most part
is done in a few days; so nights and days passes this Shuttle of our life,
forward and backward, to and fro again. The night casts it to the day, and the
day to the night, and the night to the day; and so from one to the other,
forward and backward, to and again; and between these two, time quickly wears
off the thread of our life, the Cloth comes to be filled or cut off, and just so
is our life, Isa. 38. 12. I have cut off like a Weaver.

Our days fly away swift, and our time is short, that man is not master of one
day; and yet how slow are we to take notice of the swiftness of time! It is a
wonder that such a plain familiar Doctrine as this should be handled so often,
and that the Holy Ghost should, as it were, endeavor by so many similitudes
and comparisons to hold it forth to us, and fetch in all things that are more
then ordinarily transitory in nature, to teach us the mutability of our
condition: yet how few believe it? When the Weavers Shuttle is once out of his
hand it is gone presently; so our time flies away swiftly, and passes away
irrecoverably. A Weavers Shuttle flies swift, but our days are swifter then a
Weavers Shuttle, Psalm. 78. 39. Oh remember that my life is but wind, says
David; this is a Proverbial speech, like that before of the Weavers Shuttle.

Now the life of man is like the wind in two things.

1. The wind passes away speedily, so does man's life.

2. The wind when it is past, returns no more: so man passes away, and shall
not return again: they whose heads are highest must lie down in a bed of earth,
and rest their heads on a pillow of dust. Most sleep in the dust while they
live; but all must sleep in the dust when they die. Earthly men have earthly
minds, and they cannot rest but in Earth, for it is their Center: only take
notice, that he who has laid up his heart in Heaven can comfortably think of
laying down his head in the dust.

We no sooner come into the World, but we are going out again; and as soon as
we begin to live, we begin to die; as soon as we begin to breathe, our breath
is departing. Yea, all the Prophets and Apostles, that have written any thing
for our learning, have more or less written of the mutability and uncertainty
of of our life: As to instance;

Genesis 18. 27. I which am but dust and ashes (said Abraham) have taken upon me,
etc.

1 Chronicles. 29. 15. All our days are on the earth as a shadow, and there is no
abiding.

2 Samuel 14. 14. For we must needs die; we are as water spilt upon the ground,
which cannot be gathered up again.

Job 16. 22. When a few years are come, then I shall go the way whence I shall
not return.

Psalm 102. 3. For my days are consumed like smoke.

Psalm. 70. 9. We spend our days like a tale that is told.

Job 7. 7. Oh remember that my life is but wind! mine eye shall no more see
good.

Prove. 27. 1. Boast not thy self of to morrow; for thou know not what a day
may bring forth.

Isa. 4. 6, 7. All flesh is grass, and the goodliness thereof as the flower of
the field: the grass withers, and the flower thereof fades away.

Isa. 64. 6. But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness is
as filthy rags; and we all do fade as a leaf, and our iniquities as a wind
have taken us away.

Isa. 51. 6. Lift up your eyes to the Heavens, and look upon the earth beneath;
for the Heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the Earth shall wax old like
a garment, and they that dwell therein shall die; but my salvation shall be for
ever, and my righteousness shall not decay.

Hos. 10. 7. Our life is cut off as the foam upon the water. At the best we are
but a Bubble; and it is no wonder to see a Bubble break.

And so in the New Testament we have it frequently laid before us. I shall
instance in one or two places for all.

Jam. 4. 14. For what is your life? It is even a vapor that appears for a
little time, and then vanishes away.

1 Pet. 1. 24. For all flesh is grass, and all the glory of man as the flower
of grass: the grass withers, and the flower thereof falls away.

Now all these Scriptures being well considered, we may all break forth in the
words of Job, My days are not only swift, but swifter then a Weavers shuttle.

Now to avoid all curious and nice division of the words, which for the most
part does darken the truth rather then discover it, and set up the wisdom of
man rather then the wisdom of God; we will take the words as they lie, without
any division or subdivision, etc. My days are swifter then a Weavers shuttle.
From which words we may naturally draw this Conclusion or Doctrine:

That such is the swiftness of man's days, and shortness of man's life, and
frailty of his nature; that the swiftest, shortest, and frailest things for the
most part that we read of in Scripture, are not swift, short, and frail enough
to compare man's life unto.

This Observation might be proved by Scripture and Reason abundantly: but I
shall endeavor to contract what I understand in it in few words. Job tells us,
Job 16. 22. When a few years are come, then I shall go the way whence I shall
not return. But as if a few years were too long a time, the Prophet Isaiah
says, Isa. 64. 6. We all do fade as a leaf. But as if that were too long a
resemblance, the Prophet tells us, 2 Samuel 14. 14. We are as water spilt upon the
ground, that cannot be taken up again.

Now as if this were too long a Comparison, (for water may lie in the Pool a
pretty distance of time before the ground drinks it up) Job tells us, that Man
that is born of woman, is of few days, and full of trouble.

Now as if a few days were too long a time to set forth the short life, David
brings it within the compass of one day. Psalm. 90. 6. Our life is as grass,
which flourishes in the morning, and in the evening is cut down and withered.

But as if this were too long a resemblance, David tells us, Psalm. 102. 11. Our
days are like a shadow that declineth, and I am withered like grass.

But none of these are swift, short, and frail enough to compare man's life
unto: wherefore James says, Jam. 4. 14. For what is your life? it is even a
vapor that appears for a little time, und then vanishes away.

But as if this were too long, we find it written for our further learning, Ps.
102. 3. My days are consumed like smoke. Now smoke will appear as a cloud in
the air, but speedily consume away.

But this is yet too durable a thing to compare man's frailty unto; therefore
another Scripture tells thee, it is but a span long.

But as if a span was too much, the Holy Ghost tells us, it is but a
hand-breadth, Ps. 39. 5.

But a hand-breadth is too large a thing to compare man's little time unto: and
therefore Job tells us, Job. 7. 7. that our life is but as a puff of wind, which
flies away as swift as lightning.

But this is yet too permanent a thing to hold forth our life by: therefore
David says, Mine age is nothing before thee.

Let us a little lay these things together, and we shall soon conclude with
Job, My days are swifter then a Weavers Shuttle. Lo here is the Anatomy of our
life; it is a shrub, a leaf, a reed, a rush, a grass, a smoke, a Post, a cloud,
a wind, a water, a bubble, a vapor, a shadow, a nothing; it is swift, yea more
swift then a Weavers Shuttle. We no sooner have our Being, but we are going to
our End; and our strength is but as the grass, and our beauty is but as the
flower; the grass fades, and the flower withers; and so our glory is gone;
and life is uncertain, but death is certain; for we are more sure to die then
live; for what is more certain then death? and what is so uncertain as life?

All Creatures observe their time but man; and yet man is the most noble of
Creatures, having time and all things attending him to mind his Creator: but
alas poor Creatures! we do countenance our greatest Enemy; for we are a friend
to our Flesh, and it is an enemy to God: How much time do we take in clothing
it? what cost do we bestow on it to cloth it, and to make it fine? we rob, or
at least borrow of every, Creature to adorn our selves, viz. we go to the
Sheep, and take his wool, and from another Creature his skin, from another his
furr; then we go down to the ground for gold and silver; and turn up the Sands
for precious stones; and having borrowed all this of other Creatures, we jet up
and down, and look so big and so lofty, as if all this were our own; when the
stone shines upon our finger, we will seem forsooth thereby to shine; when the
silver and silk does glister upon our backs, we look big, as if all that beauty
came from us: and as we walk in the Streets and meet with men that be not so
richly arrayed as our selves, we expect Cap and Knee, as Haman did of Mordecai,
or else we will seek their ruin as he did, Esther 3. 5. How often do we change
our habit, and how bravely do we endeavor to adorn our selves? How careful
are we of our diet? how softly do we lay us down? In a word, we seek to save
that which does seek to destroy us, and so we are a friend to our flesh, and it
is an utter enemy to God; and so we come to be carnally minded, which is death,
Romans 8. 6. The word, Fashion not your selves according to this world, is
forgotten: and also that of Christ is slipped out of our memory, Matthew. 6. 31,
32. Take no thought, saying, what shall we eat, or what shall we drink, or
wherewithal shall we be clothed; for after all these things do the Gentiles
seek: It is a wonder to consider the different proceedings of God and the World
herein; the Almighty was the first that ever made apparel in the World, Genesis 3.
He made it for the most noble of all our Ancestors in Paradise, and yet he made
it but of Beasts skins. And Saint Paul testifies of the noblest Saints of old,
Heb. 11. how that they were clothed with Goats skins and Camels hair: what
vanity is it then for us to be so curious in apparel? and to take such Pride
therein, as most do at this day; never considering those words, Isa. 40. 6, 7.
The voice said, Cry. And he said, what shall I cry? All flesh is grass, and all
the goodliness thereof as the flower of the field: The grass withers, the
flower fades, because the Spirit of the Lord blows upon it; surely the
people is grass. Psalm. 90. 9. We spend our days as a tale that is told; but a
tale is sometimes longer in telling then a man is dying. Let them that have
wives, be as if they had none, says Paul: there is the Doctrine.

My days are swifter then a Weavers Shuttle, says Job: there is the Reason.

Oh teach me so to number my days, says David, Psalm. 90. 12. that I may apply
my heart to wisdom: there is the Use.

Oh earth, earth, earth, hear the voice of the Lord, Jer. 22. 29.

Why does the Prophet mention the earth three times; is it not for this cause?
viz.

1. Because we came from the earth. 2. Because at the best we are but earth. 3.
Because we shall speedily return to the earth, which is our proper Center.
Man is born to trouble, as the sparks fly upward; and all these troubles come
in thick one after another, like Jobs Intelligencers, Job 1. 13, 14, 15, 16,
17, 18, 19.

And each of these summons the soul to come forth of that rotten house the
body: when thy tooth does ache, one of the best beams in thy house does begin to
crack; and soon after, some incurable disease or other fastens upon thy body;
and then the Spirit ascends upward, and thy body downward, even to the earth
thy mother, Job 17. 14. I have said to corruption, thou art my father; and to
the worm, thou art my mother, sister and brother. So the earth returns to its
earth, the fire to its center, the water to its water, the air to its own
place: and so that which was dust at first, becomes dust again. Genesis 3. 19. For
dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall return: And that speedily; for thy
days be not only as swift, but swifter then the Weavers shuttle.

Consider, how many thousand souls had their being in this life many weeks,
yea many months, yea many years since thou had thy being, and they be
already turned to the dust from whence they came, and thou do yet remain
going up and down thy Mother the Earth: Let this teach thee two things.

First, Admire the pleasure of God; and say, What should be the cause that I
remain upon the earth? surely the Lord expects something to be done by me: Oh
let me do it speedily, before I die, and be no more seen!

Secondly, consider, That although thou art yet alive, thy time is even at an
end: for thou must cut off like a Weaver, and be no more seen, Isa. 38. 12.

Now if if it be so, that our days are swifter then the Weavers shuttle; and
our life so short, that the swiftest and shortest things we read of in
Scripture, are not swift, short, and frail enough to compare man's life unto: I
say, if this be true, then by way of Use there be many considerable things for
us to know and do.

Use 1. First then, the serious consideration of these foregoing things does
bespeak our care and diligence immediately to setabout the doing of that which
most men do wish they had done when they lie a dying; saying, Oh that I were to
live again, how circumspectly would I walk! how careful, vigilant, and diligent
would I be! says the dying soul. Wherefore whatsoever thy hand finds to do,
do it quickly with all thy might. If ever you will give attendance to Reading,
Exhortation, and Doctrine, do it faithfully, thoroughly, and presently. If ever
you will be pitiful and charitable to the poor, sow plentifully and presently.
If ever you will declare your self to be a true Disciple of Christ, by
manifesting your love to Saints and Siners, do it presently. If ever thou
intendest to examine whether thou art in Christ, and to give all diligence to
make thy calling and election sure, or to run the race that is set before thee,
or to strive to enter in at the strait gate, set about it presently; do not so
much as eat or drink or sleep, until thou have begun the work: for thou do
not know whether ever thou shall live one year, one month, one day, one hour,
one minute. Time past cannot be recalled; Time to come is uncertain; Time
present is only thine: To day then if thou will hear his voice, harden not thy
heart; before the silvercord be loosed, or the golden-bowl be broken, or the
pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the wheel broken at the cistern, Eccl.
12. 6. Work while it is day, the night comes in which thou can not work:
Turn, turn presently to the Lord with thy whole heart: while it is called to
day, hearken to his voice, lest thou art hardened through the deceitfulness of
sin, as in Heb. 3. 13.

Lest it be said to thee and I, as in Rev. 22. 11. He that is unjust, let him
be unjust still. Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, says Christ, Luke 13. 34. how often
would I have gathered thy children together, as a Hen does gather her chickens
under her wings, and you would not! Behold your house is left unto you
desolate. So again, Prove. 1. 24, 25, 26. Because I have called, and ye refused;
I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded, but ye have set at naught
all my counsel, and would none of my reproof: I also will laugh at your
calamity, and mock when your fear comes: when they shall call upon me, I will
not answer; they shall seek me early, but shall not find me, ver. 30. They
would none of my Counsel, they would none of my reproof. ver. 31. Therefore
shall they eat of their own doings, and be filled with their own devices. For
the further confirmation of this, see Heb. 12. 16, 17.

Nay further, if thou look upon thy self as one elected by the Father,
Redeemed by the Son, sanctified by the Spirit, and so can not fall finally
from God: yet if thou improve not the present inch of time, thou will loose
abundance of thy sweet consolation, and bring thy self into great straits, and
it may be die in despair of mercy, and so loose the manifestion, apprehension,
and enjoyment of thy interest in God for many days at least, Cant. 5. 1. 2.
Christ he comes, and calls, saying, Open to me my sister, my love, my dove, my
undefiled one: well the Spouse answers, I have put off my coat, how shall I
put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them: well, Christ
immediately withdraws himself, then the Spouse sought him, but could not find
him; she called him, but he gave no Answer. Well, what follows? she seeks him
sorrowing, but could not find him; ver. 7. The watchmen that were about the
City smote her and wounded her, as in Cant. 5. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 So also one of
the Apostles, Thomas by name, would not embrace the present opportunity,
neither believe the report that he heard of the Resurrection of Christ, Joh.
20. 25. well, Thomas he lost the sight of Christ for many days, Joh. 20. 26,
27, 28. If ever thou intendest then to believe in Christ, and to relieve Christ
in his Members, do it presently, for if thou stay till to morrow, either thy
house and all that thou have may be burned, or it may be thou may not have an
opportunity to give, or else thou will have but little mind to do it; thou
may not live till to morrow, seeing thy days are swifter then a weavers
Shuttle; surely this relieving of poor Saints, is acceptable with God, although
it be so neglected by men; this duty would not be so slighted, if these four
things were well considered.

1. First make their case thy case, their necessity thy necessity. Matthew. 7.
12. Whatsoever that ye would that men should do to you, do ye so to them.

2. Secondly, Consider, whatsoever ye do for them, the Lord takes it as done to
himself, Matthew. 25. 40. Forasmuch as ye have done it to one of the least of
these my brethren, ye have done it to me.

3. Thirdly, Consider, that whatsoever we give, it shall be paid us again with
interest. Luke 6. 38. Give, and it shall be given to you again, good measure,
pressed down and shaken together, 2 Cor. 9. 6. He which sows bountifully
shall reap bountifully.

4. Fourthly, Consider, that which you have in your Possession is not your own,
thou and I are but Stewards; and we must give an account of our Stewardship,
Prove. 3. 27, 28. Withhold not good from him to whom it is due, when it is in
the Power of thy hand to do it, etc.

5. Fifthly, Consider, that in Scripture phrase, he that considers the poor,
the Lord will deliver that man in the time of trouble, Ps. 41. 1. Also consider
that Scripture, 2 Cor. 8. 2, 3. How that in a great trial of affliction, the
abundance of their joy, and their deep poverty abounded to the riches of their
liberality: For to their power, I bear record, they were willing of themselves;
Praying us with much entreaty, that we would receive the gift, and take upon us
the ministering to the Saints. Therefore as you abound in every thing, in Faith,
and Utterance, and Knowledge, and in all diligence, and in your love to us, see
that ye abound in this also, and set speedily about the work, make no delay,
for the time is short, our days are very swift, yea swifter then the Weavers
Shuttle: It will be said shortly, that Time shall be no more; so Revel. 6. 7.
And the Angel lifted up his hand to heaven, and swear by him that lives for
ever and ever, who created heaven and earth, and the things that therein are,
and the sea, and the things that are therein, that there shall be time no
longer. But in the days of the seventh Angel, when he shall begin to sound,
the mystery of God shall be finished, as he has declares to his servants the
Prophets.

Methinks I see the words of Christ come to pass, Mat. 24. 29. Immediately
after the tribulation of those days shall the Sun be darkened, and the Moon
shall not give her light, and the Stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers
of heaven shall be shaken; and then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in
heaven, and all the Tribes of the earth shall mourn, for they shall see the Son
of man coming in the clouds with power and great glory. Then he shall send his
Angels with the great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his
elect from the one end of the earth to the other, Mat. 24. 30, 31. O let all
the inhabitants of the earth tremble, for the day of the Lord comes, lo it is
nigh at hand: A day of darkness and of gloominess, a day of clouds and of thick
darkness; there has not been ever the like, neither shall there be the like
again: A fire devoureth before him, and behind him a flame burns: before his
face the people shall be much pined, all faces shall gather blackness; the
Earth shall quake before him, the Heavens shall tremble, the Sun and Moon shall
be dark, and the Stars shall withdraw their shining. Oh this day of the Lord is
great and very terrible, who can abide it? yea, where will you find a man that
can abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appears? for he
is like a Refiners fire, and Fullers soap. Oh what a terrible day will this be
to most of the sons and daughters of men! 2 Pet. 3. 12. The heavens shall be on
fire and dissolve; the earth shall melt with fervent heat. If the rocks and
mountains would fall on thee, thou would think it a favor, to hide thee from
the face of him that sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, for
the great day of his wrath is come, Rev. 6. 16, 17. All, both small and great
shall be gathered together before the Judgment Seat of Christ, Mat. 25. 32, 33,
34, etc. yea, the Sea shall give up her dead, and the grave shall give up their
dead, death and hell shall give up their dead, Rev. 12. 13, 14, etc. So we
shall all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, and all that ever we have
done, good or evil, shall be laid open before all the world: yea, all our sins
shall be brought to light, and each man shall give an account of himself to
God, and be judged according to his works, Mat. 25. 32, 33, 34. and Rev. 20.
12, 13.

If ever thou will improve time, do it presently. Luke 21. 34, 35, 36. Take
heed to your selves lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting
and drunkenness and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares.
For thy days are swifter then the Weavers shuttle: and as a snare shall it come
upon all them that dwell upon the earth. Watch ye therefore and pray always,
that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all those things, and to stand before
the Son of man. This day will come as a thief in the night.

Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons
ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness, looking for, and
hastening to the coming of that day, wherein the heavens shall be on fire, and
the lements shall melt with fervent heat. Seeing then that ye look for such
things, be diligent, that ye may be found in him in peace, without spot, and
blameless.

But if any say, I will be diligent hereafter: Let me tell thee, If ever thou
intendest to do any thing for the glory of God, the good of thy self, and the
benefit of others, do it presently, for the time is short.

Oh then get oil in your lamps, grace in your hearts, that you may not be like
the foolish Virgins, Mat. 25. 7, 8, 9, 10. The wise Virgins considered that
their time was short, and their days swift; and so made it their present work
to get oil in their lamps, which was grace in their hearts: But the foolish
Virgins put it off from day to day, never minding that their days were swifter
then the Weavers shuttle.

Our time is short, wherefore bid adieu to the world. For what is the World,
but vanity? All the Honors are but as so many dishonours; all the Riches but
poverty; and all the Joys but sorrows; and all the Pleasure is but pain: And
if in this life only thou and I have hope, we are of all men most miserable.
Our days are but as a bubble: we no sooner have our being, but we are going to
our end: All our strength is but as grass, and all our beauty is as the flower
of the field: the grass fades, the flower with ereth, and our strength and
beauty is gone: Death will bring us to the grave, and our deeds to judgment;
and as death does leave us, so shall judgment find us.

All creatures observe their time but man; the Stork, the Crane, the Swallow,
the Pismire, these observe their time: and yet Man, the most noble of all
creatures, none above or higher then himself but only the Lord God Almighty,
who has given to man time and all things else to attend him to bring him to
glory: but most men turn Prodigals, and spend their little inch of precious
time with Harlots, and hope to return to their Father hereafter, not
considering that death stands in the way to put a period to his days, which
fly away swifter then the Weavers shuttle.

Oh what a dreadful day will that be, when thee and I shall stand before the
Judgment seat of Christ, if not prepared for it: If we look about us, beneath
us, on the right hand, or on the left, all will increase our misery: above us
shall be our Judge, offended with us; beneath us, Hell open, and the Furnace
ready burning to receive us; on our right hand, shall be our sins accusing us;
on our left hand, the Devils ready to execute Gods eternal Sentence upon us;
within us our conscience gnawing; without us millions of damned souls
bewailing: on every side the World burning, what way shall we take, to go back
is impossible; to go forward is intolerable: what then shall we do? If we seek
death, death shall fly from us; if we cry to the Hills to fall on us, they
will refuse to do us so much pleasure: and then immediately the Judge will say
to all the Goats, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for
the Devil and his angels. Then there will be the greatest separation that ever
was upon the earth: the husband and wife, the fathers and sons, the mothers and
daughters, masters and servants, Priest and people, friends and companions, the
one to glory, and the other to confusion, without ever seeing one the other
again. Oh what an eternal separation will this be! Whose heart can read these
lines, and not melt? whose eyes can behold these words, and not weep? Nay it
may be these be the last lines that ever thou shall read: for thy days be
swifter then the Weavers shuttle. 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31. But this I say,
brethren, the time is short: it remains, that both they that have wives be as
though they had none; and they that weep, as though they wept not; and they
that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they that buy, as though they
possessed not; and they that use this world, as not abusing it: for the fashion
of this world passes away. Wherefore be without earthly carefulness.

But as Peter and Jude speak, there are a generation of Scoffers, which lately
went under the name of Levellers, and now have taken to themselves the name of
Ranters: These men, for the most part of them, say that there is no Hell,
neither day of Judgment, nor Devil; but all is God, and God is all things. And
to these men I have but these two words to say.

First, that although they will not see or believe there is a Hell and a Devil
here, they are most like to know it by woeful experience hereafter. The second
word is this:

When thou turnest over the leaves of the Bible, and find mention made of
Hell, and of the day of Judgment, and of evil Angels, called Devils, and yet
wilt not be persuaded that there is any such thing; thou may as well raze out
those Scriptures for untruths, for thou art wise above what is written.

And to the rest of that heady, highminded, unbelieving, and vainglorious Crew,
I say as in Eccles. 11. 9. Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thy
heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine
heart, and follow the sight of thine eyes: but know thou, for all these things
God will bring thee to judgment. Oh miserable is that man, whose life is almost
wasted, and daily wasting, and he thinks not of it: often saying, I thought no
more of this that is now fallen out, then of my dying day. Never minding what
Job says, My days are swifter then the Weavers shuttle. Neither does he mind
that, Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed unto all men once to die, and after death to
judgment.

And let me tell thee, thou art in a thousand thousand casualties here every
moment, ready to take away all the comforts of the earth from thee. When
Nebuchadnezzar was blessing himself in the Palace that he had built for his
honor, then there comes a Messenger from the Lord, and he was presently outed
of all his comforts. The wheel is turning, the grass is withering, the flower
fading, the smoke consuming, and the shuttle swiftly flying; and yet thy days
are swifter then the Weavers shuttle. We have but a little time, and a great
deal of work to do: let us work then while it is day, for the night comes in
which no man works.

If we did but know what Eternity means, and if the fear of Eternity did but
once fall on us, we should clearly see it had been better for us that we had
never been born, or that we had been made Toads or Serpents, or the vilest
beast that creeps upon the earth, then Reasonable creatures: Seeing we were
born in sin; and as if that was not enough, we live in sin, and at last die in
sin: and so as Death leaves us, the Judgment finds us. There depends upon our
little short uncertain inch of time, matters of more consequence then all the
world is worth. I do not say, upon the spending or mis-spending this inch of
time depends our eternal being either in blessedness or misery: but this I say,
that our well-being, whiles we remain here, depends much upon it. See Joh. 14.
21. and 2 Pet. 1. 11. Oh then consider, such is the swiftness of man's days,
shortness of his life, and frailty of his nature, that the swiftest, shortest,
and frailest things for the most part that we read of in Scripture, are not
swift, short, and frail enough to compare man's life unto.

Use 2. And if so, in the second place by way of use, this does teach us to
carry our selves toward all in a way of love, as if this were the last
opportunity that ever thou should have to be helpful to them either in
spirituals or temporals. Have thou a Father or Mother yet alive? If ever thou will obey the command of God in honoring them, do it presently; for before one
day is past, they may be taken from thee, or thou from them: and then how will
thy heart smite thee, and thy conscience accuse thee, and thy carelessness often
trouble thee? Let me tell thee, I know some that can speak this by woeful
experience, whose hearts do even bleed for their omissions herein. And as for
you Parents that have Children, if ever you will express your love to God in
bringing them up in his fear, teach your Children their duty both toward God
and man: If there be ever a word of God within you, endeavor to fasten it upon
them. Prove. 22. 6. Train up a Child in the way he should go, and when he is old
he will not depart from it. And what thou intendest to teach them, do it
speedily, make no delay; for they are but as a flower of the grass, alive and
green in the morning, and many times cut down and withered before night: your
Childrens days are short, and swifter then the Weavers shuttle. And so likewise
for Husbands and Wives, Masters and Servants, superiors and inferiors, old and
young; if there be any Grace in your Heart, and power in your hands, improve
both to the best advantage. Be pitiful, as your heavenly Father is pitiful;
make it your business as Christ made it his business, to take all opportunities
to do good, both to Saints and Sinners, Matthew 5. 45, 48. Oh let all your good
intentions end in actions, and all your Resolutions in speedy performances; for
the glass is almost run, the day of our life is even done, and thou must cut
off like a Weaver, as in Isa. 38. 12.

Verily every man at his best estate is altogether vanity: Oh all ye Parents,
then look upon your selves and children, as upon a Flower that quickly
withers: endeavor to acquaint your selves of one Lord Jesus Christ, who is
the portion of his people, Psalm. 16. 5. compared with Psalm. 17. 14. Walk with
God your selves, and so apply those promises that he has made to his Seed;
they will live more comfortably with one grain of Grace in the want of the
abundance of these outward things, then they could with the Kings Ransom if the
other be wanting: cleave closer unto Christ, hang looser to your children, that
so nothing may be able to separate the one, though death will separate the
other: And let not your lives, O ye Parents, be bound up in the lives of your
children, but let your wills be resigned up unto Gods Will, that if your
children cut off like a Weaver, ye may say as once Job in the same case said,
Ioh 1. 21. The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, bleSed be the name of the
Lord; and endeavor by your further care and diligence in training them up in
the way of Christ, instructing them in the way which they ought to walk. Shall
I appeal to your consciences now O ye Parents! has your care been, to provide
in a suitable way for the souls of your children, for their Spiritual estate as
you have for the earthly? you are loath to die before you can bring your estate
so clear, that you may leave it to your children: but rather you should be loath
to die before such time as you see some work of Grace wrought in their hearts;
verily, these would your thoughts be, if you were spiritual. It is reported of
Augustines Mother, that the great thing she desired to live for, was to see her
son converted, and the Lord granted her desire, and then she found her self
willing to die. One Mr. Staughton a Minister, in his Epistle to the Reader,
prefixed to the Treatise called David's love to Gods word, affirms upon his own
knowledge, that there was a young Gentlewoman in Kent, but ten years old, could
say all the New Testament by heart; yea at that Age she was so perfect therein,
that being asked where any word were, she would presently name Book, Chapter
and Verse. Master Staughton writes this upon his own knowledge and examination
of her, in above forty places at one time, wherein she never missed Book,
Chapter, and Verse. Truly if we would have the word of Christ dwell richly in
us, we must ever and anon call home our wandering thoughts, and unprofitable
desires and disordered affections, and gather them up, and establish them upon
something that Moth and Rust cannot corrupt, nor Thieves break through and
steal; for most of us are like unto Peter, we toil all night and catch nothing,
because we do not cast down our nets at Christ's Command: which that we may do,
let us stand upon our guard, and guard our Thoughts, our Hearts, our Wills, our
Affections, our Judgments, our Memory, our Lips, that we speak considerately,
advisedly, and not so vainly.

Use 3. By way of Use. If our days be so swift and short, let us endeavor to
be in a continual readiness, that we may have nothing to do, but to resign up
our souls into the hands of our Creator, in the name of our dear Savior, by
the help of the blessed Spirit: and although death does look ghastly upon us
when he comes to Summon us to appear before the Tribunal Seat of Justice, there
to give an account of all our Actions; yet let us smile upon Death, for he will
but destroy our last Enemy; Christ has tasted death for us: It is true, Death
is a dark entry that we must pass through: but all trouble on the other side
death is taken away: the worst thing it can do for one prepared to die, is but
this, namely, to shut up the door of earthly comforts, and open the door of
Heavenly: to deprive us of Temporalls, that we may be invested with Spirituals:
to deprive us of the society of a few imperfect Friends, that we might enjoy
the society of all the Saints and Angels in a state of perfection; and that
which is ten thousands time more then all the rest, we shall enjoy the presence
of the Almighty God, whose glory and excellency is such, that the tongues of
men and Angels are not able to express. It is life to know him, it is melody to
hear him, it is heaven to behold him, it is endless happiness to enjoy him. Oh
then improve the present opportunity and ability that the Lord has lent to the
uttermost: that when thou come to die, and to cut off like a Weaver, thy
days being swifter then a shuttle, thou may be in some good measure so
prepared; That,

1. If thou can not say with thy Lord Christ, Joh. 17. 4. I have glorified
thee on earth, I have finished the work that thou gave me to do.

2. If thou can not say with thy brother Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. I have fought
the good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: there is laid
up a Crown of glory not for me only, but for all those that wait for his
appearing:

3. Yet thou can say with Simeon, Luke 2. 29. Lord, now let thou thy
servants depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

4. Or else, if thou can not say in the sincerity of thy soul with Hezekiah,
Isa. 38. 3. Remember, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in
truth and with a perfect heart:

5. Yet thou can say with David, Psalm. 39. 13. Oh spare me a little, that I
may recover my strength before I go hence and be no more seen.

6. There are but few men saying with the Prophet, Psalm. 90. 12. So teach us to
number our days, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom.

7. But most men and women, when they are cutting off their life like a Weaver,
fall a praying with Balaam, Numb. 23. 10. Lord, let me die the death of the
Righteous, and let my latter end be like his. Never considering that none can
die the death of the righteous, but only those that live the life of the
righteous. It is true, we read of one, as the Thief upon the Cross, that no man
might despair; and we read but of one, that no man may presume.

Surely, Death sends many messengers to you and me, to tell us that he is
coming. One while in comes the Ague, after that the Fever; and before we can
shake them off, many times in comes the Headache, and it may be the Toothache,
raging, and shaking the best beam in thy natural building. Well, after a while
thou and I have, it may be, shaken them off, and now it is pretty well with us
again, we begin to smile, and to feather our nests: and while with Martha we
are troubled about many things, Death sends another Pursuivant, and he
terrifies us with Crosses and Losses, troubles within and without. Well, we
have scarce got over these torments, but in comes Sir Thomas Gout, or Sir
William Cramp, or both; and these unwelcome guests will sit at the table with
us, and lie in the bed with us, and night and day lie trouble us: when we think
to sleep, then they will be talking, and saying, Our days are swifter then the
Weavers shuttle. Well, if all these be shut out of doors, through long patience
and great charges, and thou begin to cheer up, in comes another Pursuivant, and
turns thy nearest and dearest Friend into thy greatest Enemy; and so this cross
in thy nearest Relation from whom thou did expect thy greatest assistance and
help, now proves thy greatest enemy. So that put all thy Crosses, Losses,
Sicknesses, Persecutions, etc. that ever befell thee, in one balance, and this
Cross in thy nearest Relation in the other balance, and this latter will weigh
down the former ten times over.

In a word, I do know a man that lost his tender Father, and after that he lost
his Estate that his Father gave him; then he was in a banished condition at
least 26 months; then he lost some of his Children; not long after he lost his
tender Mother, and a little before he lost one of his dearest Brethren: since
that he lost his only Son: not long after he lost his dearest Sister: and
between each of these Losses, for the most part he was visited with Sickness,
and often brought even to the gates of death* Then a little after this, some of
his most intimate Friends, with whom he had sweet converse about S^ul-work,
these turned Ranters: besides these, at least an hundred Crosses more came in
the one upon the neck of the other. And yet this man does profess, that all
these, put them together, are but a Fleabiting to that one Cross in his nearest
Relation, and that but in her little member, to wit, the Tongue. See Jam. 3. 5,
6. and Eccles. 7. 26.

Death does often summon us to be in a continual readiness to lay down these
crazie, brittle, dusty Bodies in their own Center the Earth. And for my own
part, I must confess, that the Weavers Shuttle has been preaching to me almost
these 25 years; still telling me, that my days fly away faster then my
shuttle. And now at last it having prevailed with me a little for my attention
at least, I had no sooner silenced my own thoughts, but I heard a voice from
Heaven saying, All flesh is grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of
the field. And when I lift up mine eyes to the Heavens, (as in Isa. 51. 6.) and
look upon the Earth beneath; the Heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the
Earth shall wax old like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall dye: but
my Salvation shall be for ever, and my Righteousness shall never be abolished.

Men and women are like a bubble upon the water: they would fain get above
their element, and swim a loft; but they shall be cut off as the foam upon the
water. Man's life is like a Candle in a Paper-lanthorn, full of crannies: there
comes on a sudden but a little puff of wind, and blows the Candle out. Oh
then, let this little inch of Time be improved to the best advantage: seeing
Time is one of the most precious herbs in the garden of the World. And yet by
most men there is not one thing more slighted in the World; surely, if we did
see time so precious as it is, we should take the counsel of the Holy Ghost,
and redeem the time, because the days are ev^l, Ephesians. 5. 16. And if in truth,
thou and I did redeem the time, there would be no room or time for so many idle
words; there would be no room or time for so many idle thoughts and
unprofitable musings: our thoughts are the eldest, and most noble off spring of
our souls, and so are too worthy to be cast away upon base objects; did we
indeed see time precious, short, and swifter then the Weavers Shuttle, we
should redeem a little from our ordinary sleep, and a little from our worldly
business; and to make all our dealings in worldly business, subservient to
Religion, and not to grasp so much of the world, as to distract our head with
cares, or engage our heart in sin: we should redeem a little time from our
usual lawful recreations, and so from all things else that drink up our time:
and improve this redeemed time to the best advantage, for the glory of God, and
thy own good, and benefit of others.

Let me tell thee what I know upon found ground, we shall find all little
enough.

I once read of a man that did trifle away his time as most of us do, not
seeing the worth of it, until he was about thirty years of age; and then
hearing a Sermon of the shortness of man's life, being a little troubled, makes
his request to a Godly man, whom he looked upon as a Prophet, to tell him how
long he should live, that so before death came he might repent of his sins, and
make his Peace with God. The Minister asked him how long he desired to live:
and he said he would fain live sixty years at least: well, the Minister told
him that there were more did die before they came to fifty, then there was that
did live to fifty; yet, says he, thou shall have thy request, thou shall live
till sixty: Well, with that the man was very thankful, conceiving he had time
enough to take the pleasures of the World, and to repent hereafter. The
Minister asked him how old he was? he answered thirty; then says he, take out
thirty of sixty, and there remains but thirty years that thou have yet to live;
then consider, that half of this thirty years will be slept out, and then there
remains but fifteen years; and the half of this fifteen years will be spent in
pains and care to provide for thy self and Family, and then there remains but
seven years and a half; and in the half of this thou will have some unexpected
sickness, and weakness which man that is born of a woman is subject unto, and
then there remains but three years, three quarters: and the half of this will
be spent in mourning for some losses or crosses, in thy Wife, Children, Kindred
and Friends: and so there does not remain so much as two years of peace and
quiet, for thee to mind thy soul: this struck the man into such a damp, that
he went away sorrowful, as the young man in the Gospel did from Christ, Matthew.
19. 22. Oh let us redeem that precious jewel of time which we have formerly
lost: Travelers that have staid a little too long at their Inn, when they do
find the night approaching they mend their pace, and go as many miles in one
hour as they did before in two; so let us do, we have staid too long in doting
upon the things of this life, and in setting our eyes and hearts upon that
which is not: the World, it was Created of nothing, says the Lord, and it
hangs upon nothing says Job; Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not?
says Solomon, Pro. 23. 5. I remember a passage that many years since I read in
a little Book, called, Good News from Heaven, between Wealth and his worldly
Master, at the point of death.

1. First, Wealth seeing his Master dying, says, Well Master, thus long have I
served you, or rather you have served me: for you have loved me too much, and
doted upon me, and therefore now you be like to speed the worse; you was my
Master in show, but I was yours indeed: for you did what I would have you do;
thus far have I gone with you, but further I will not; I have nothing to do in
another world; now therefore Master, shift for your self; if you go to Hell, I
cannot help it, I will go seek me a new Master: adieu.

Ans. Master. Nay, says his Master, I hope thou will not serve me so now I
have most need of thee; many a nights rest have I broken for thee, many an hour
have I bestowed on thee, many a good Feast; yea, many a Sermon and good
opportunity for my soul have I lost for thee, Wealth.

Wealth. The more fool thou Master: who bid you do so? not God I am sure, but
the Devil; and therefore to him you are like to go that set you on work: or
whither you go I know not, nor care not; but further to go with you I will not.

Master. Nay Wealth, I pray thee say not so, that goes to my very heart; go
answer for me, or at least speak a good word for me.

Wealth. Not I, nay I am sure you shall answer for me, and your self too; and
to tell you the truth, I doubt the place is too hot for me where you are going;
but go try Master first how you shall speed, and if you do not like the place,
if you can get leave to come back again, I may chance to serve you again,
believe it who list; look, look, here comes death quivering in your lips,
quaking in your joints, staring in your eyes: I cannot endure the sight of him;
oh draw the Curtains, shift for thy self Master: I will shift for one.

Master. What do thou mock me to increase my misery and dolor? What will thou
leave me thus in the straits? Oh that I were to live in the World again, I
would care as little for thee as thou do now for me: Oh base Vagrant! have I
thus entertained thee like a Prince for this? Oh all ye People of the World! be
admonished by me a dying man, take heed how you give entertainment as I have,
to this Vagabond cheating Wealth, that wanders up and down the World; but lay
up treasure in Heaven, not on the earth, and that speedily: For man that is
born of a woman is of few days, says David; and they pass away faster then the
Weavers Shuttle, says Job; and thou shall cut off thy life like a Weaver,
says the Prophet Isaiah: and then if thou have improved thy talent, redeemed
thy time, and given all diligence to make thy Calling and Election sure; for
ought I know thou may die in full assurance of true blessedness, which
consists, not in honor, for then Pharaoh had been blessed: not in wit, for
then Achitophel had been blessed: not in wealth, for then Ahab had been
blessed: but herein will thy blessedness be, that thou indeavourest to be found
clothed with the Robe of Christ's righteousness, in comparison of which thy own
is as dung, Phil. 3. 8, 9. Looking upon thy self as thou art in thy self, as a
Tree, the body where of is iniquity, the Leaves of it is Atheism: the Rine
pretends perfection: the Sap thereof, is Humane Reason: the Buds swelling
words: the Fruit of it uncleanness: but as thou art taken off from the old
stock the first Adam, and grafted into the new stock the second Adam, thy
blessedness lies here in this Root, from whence thou receivest sap, and
becomest a new Tree, which may be known by its Root, which is Christ: by its
soil in which it grows, which is Free Grace, planted in the House of the Lord:
and by its body which is Faith: by its Bark, which is Hope: by its Boughs which
is Charity: by its Leaves, which is Spiritual Virtues: by its Branches, which
is good words: by its Fruit, which is good works: This Tree shall stand up with
boldness, when the other Tree shall fear and shake: if he look up, there is his
Judge offended with him: beneath him Hell open, and the Furnace boiling ready
to receive him: on thy right hand thy sins accusing: on thy left hand the
Devils ready to execute Gods Sentence upon thee: within thee, thy conscience
gnawing: without thee, all damned souls bewailing on every side: the World
burning: and this dreadful day will come suddenly, as a thief in the night, 2
Pet. 3. Therefore while thou have thy legs, let them carry thee to the
Assemblies of Zion: run to and fro that thy knowledge may be increased: thy
legs may be taken from thee. While thou have thy hearing, listen diligently:
thou may speedily be deaf, as many be already. While thou have thy hands, let
them minister to the necessity of the Saints: while thou have any estate, give
something of it, lest thou do repent too late. All these things be mutable and
fleeting; thy days be swifter then the Weavers shuttle; and thou may lose
these before thou do lose thy life. All men had one entrance into life, and
shall have the like going out.

In a word, thou and I have forfeited our lives many times: The wages of sin is
death; Every sin we commit, we make a forfeit of our life. Here is the sad
condition of the sons of Adam. O Adam, what have thou done! For though it was
thou that have sinned, yet thou art not fallen alone, but all we that come of
thee, as being then in thee, and so infected by thee: And we become guilty not
only of original, but also of actual transgression; and so many of us have
forfeited our lives ten thousand times over: from which there is no redemption
but by faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; and it is to be feared, that not one of
twenty do truly believe in him, and make it their work to follow him: hence it
is that death finds us so unprepared; we never considering, that there is but a
breath between us, and Heaven or Hell.

Use 4 If our days be so short and swift, let us so account of it, that when
death comes and sweeps away some of our nearest Relations, it may not be so
tedious unto us, as to cause us to mourn excessively; because we saw their
days to be short and swift before: So that in stead of grieving that they be
gone so soon, we should give thanks to God that he did spare them to us so
long; and say with David, I shall shortly go to them. The consideration of
these ensuing things will much abate our mourning, and take off the edge of our
excessive grief for Friends of any Relation that are deceased.

1. Let us consider, that whatsoever does come to pass, is by the sovereign
will and pleasure of God, 1 Samuel 3. 18. And Eli said, it is the Lord, let him
do what seems him good. In the foregoing verses, the Lord had told Samuel,
that the iniquity of Eli's house should not be purged, because his sons made
themselves vile, and he restrained them not. Well, says Eli, good is the word
of the Lord, let him do as seems him good: as if he had said, The Lord is
infinitely wise, and therefore knows better then I how to dispose of me and
my family, for his own glory, and our everlasting good: And although those
Judgments be very heavy which he has denounced against me and my family, yet
we have no just cause to complain; for doubtless he will bring glory to his
name, and good to us by it, according to his promises.

So said David, 2 Samuel 15. 26. Behold here I am, let him do to me as seems
him good. So again, Psalm. 39. 9. I was silent and opened not my mouth, because
thou did it. So said Hezekiah, Isa. 39. 8. the Lord had told him by the
Prophet Isaiah, that all his goods should be carried to Babylon; and his sons
that did issue from him, they, though near and dear to him, should also be
carried to Babylon: Well, says he, good is the word of the Lord. So our dear
Savior himself, Mat. 26. 39. O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass
from me! Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will. Psalm. 68. 20. He that
is our God, is the God of salvation; and unto God the Lord belong the issues
from death. Job 30. 23. I know that thou will bring me to death, and to the
house appointed for all living; and that speedily too, for my days are swifter
then the Weavers shuttle.

2. Let us consider that we our selves and our friend or friends that now we
grieve for; I say, we and they received our lives from God, and must be
accomptable to him for them again. Eccl. 12. 7. and Job 1 21. and 1 Timothy 6, 7.

3. Consider, All men have one entrance into the world, and the like going out:
Death is certain and appointed to all; the greatest Kings and Emperors under
the Sun must taste of this cup; nay the Lord Christ himself, if he will be
veiled in flesh, must die. And that it is certain and appointed to all, will
appear by these Scriptures. Heb. 9. 27. and Job 30. 23. and Job 7. 1. Genesis 3.
19. and Psalm. 90. 3.

4. Let us consider the fullness of the Lord Jesus Christ, answering every
relation; and the many and excellent promises that are suitable to our
particular condition. He is bread to the hungry, water to the thirsty, cloths
to the naked, eyes to the blind, legs to the lame, strength to the weak, life
to the dead; he is peace in trouble, joy in sorrow, health in sickness, riches
in poverty; he is a friend to the friendless, a husband to the widow, a father
to the fatherless: I had thought to have brought chapter and verse to have
proved each of these to thee: but I would have thee to search for them thy
self, that so thou may find many more sweet Promises, suitable to thy present
state and condition; for he is all thy tongue can ask, thy heart can wish, or
thy mind conceive; he is light in darkness, and Heaven in Hell; if thou can
but see thy Interest in him, and Relation to him, thou will be ready to say
within thee in the midst of all thy troubles, Let friends forsake me, let
enemies deride me, let all worldly comforts leave me; nay the plagues of Egypt,
the botches of Job, the enemies of David, the imprisonment of Joseph, the
poverty of Lazarus, the bands of Paul cannot hurt me: for the Lord is my
portion; his grace is sufficient for me; wherefore I will even say with David,
Psalm 18. 2. The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer, my God, my
strength in whom I will trust; my buckler, and the horn of my salvation, and my
high tower, etc.

5. Consider, though I have lost a near and deer Husband, or Wife, Father, or
Mother, Son or Daughter, Brother or Sister, Kinsman or Neighbor; yet I cannot
say as once Jeremy did, Was ever sorrow like unto my sorrow? but I can say,
There is nothing has befallen me, but what is common to man: nay God has
dealt more favorably with me, then he did with Job, Job 1. 19. 20, 21. for he
lost all; and he has dealt more kindly with me then he did with his servant
Eli, 1 Samuel 4 17. For he lost at once his two Sons, and the Ark of God, which
went nearest to his heart: and at last his own life too.

6. Let us consider, that many of the Saints have desired death; and if we love
our friends departed, shall we grieve that their desire is answered? Read and
well consider, Phil. 1. 23. and Job 14. 14. and 2 Cor. 5, 1, 2, 3, 4. Again in
another Scripture, we find these and the like words, Now let thy servant depart
in peace: for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. 1 Kin. 19. 4. Take away my
life, for I am no better then my fathers. For such as die in the faith, we
should not mourn for as men without hope, 1 These. 4. 13. But I would not have
you to be ignorant concerning them which are asleep, that you sorrow not as
others that have no hope. ver. 14. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose
again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. The Holy
Ghost in this place forbids not Christian sorrow for the dead, but
Heathenish sorrow; not moderate, but excessive and immoderate, either in
respect of time, or measure of our grief; we may water our plants for our
deceased Friends, but not drown them.

7. Let us consider the privileges of Believers after death: for death is unto
them but a Porter opening a door into a dark entry, or a servant of thy Fathers
sent to put thy dear friend to bed for a little while, till corruption shall
have put on incorruption, and mortality shall have put on immortality. Death is
but a sleep, and the grave a bed, and all things that be on the other side
death are taken away by Jesus Christ; Death opens the great gate that leads
to thy Fathers house, that so thou may go home: for we are but Sojourners,
Pilgrims, and Strangers here in this World: it is true, unbelievers are at home
whiles they live here: they be called the inhabitants of the earth, and
dwellers upon the earth; when they die, they do not go home as thou do: it
is true, they go to their own place, and to their own Father: so that death to
them is the King of Terrors: but to thee and thy believing deceased Friend,
death should be looked upon as the Messenger of glad tidings, which is come
only to crack the clay walls, which is our Prison, that you may fly home and
be at rest; and when thou come home, to enjoy the presence of thy Father and
Savior Christ, and to be filled with the Spirit, and to be with all the holy
Saints of Heaven; thou will then rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory.

8. Let us consider, that although I and thee be like to loose our own lives,
or else have lost some of our nearest and dearest friends, yet let this comfort
us, this also shall work together for our good, Romans 8. 28. Wherefore let us
not so fear death: but hearken what death does whisper in thy ears, saying,
fear not me, I came from the Father, and have no Commission to hurt you;
although my countenance be grim, my message is sweet and pleasing: Christ your
beloved husband has taken my sting from me before he would let me come to you:
I am come without a sting, to tell you, that God and Christ loves you, and has
sent me on purpose to invite you into their presence, where is fullness of joy
and pleasures at his right hand for evermore; only you must put off your filthy
garments, that the earth may return to its earth, the fire to its fire, the
water to its water, the air to its air: for these were the Elements thy body
was made of, and so thou must endure a little pain in putting off these
clothes; they be somewhat little and strait, but thou must with Paul put off
this earthly Tabernacle; for that must be dissolved before thou can be with
Christ, in whose presence there is fullness of joy, where all relations will be
made up in God: there is no complaining in the Streets of this new Jerusalem,
no want of Relations: God will be a Father, Christ will be a Husband, Saints
gloryfied our Brethren, Sisters and associates: so we shall want no Relation,
neither shall any Relation want Perfection. There is but a breath between thee
and this condition.

9. Let us consider, that the Scripture does pronounce them blessed that die in
the Lord, Rev. 14. 13 For from henceforth they rest from their labors. See
Eccles 4. 2. and Job 3. 17. The greatest evil death can bring unto us, is but a
more speedy way to happiness.

Lastly, let us consider, that our dear beloved brother David, although he
mourned, fasted, and prayed whilst his Child was sick, yet as soon as it was
dead, he arose and began to comfort himself, saying, I shall go to it ere long:
for my days are swifter then the Weavers shuttle, says Job. Then shall the
dust return to its earth, says Solomon, Eccles. 12. 7. The dust, that is the
body, to show the original of it, Genesis 2. 7. and the weakness of it; Dust is
the weakest part of the earth, Psalm. 103. 14. the basest and vilest of it, Job
4. 19. and Phil. 3. 21. and Job 30. 19. Our original from the dust; our return
unto the dust; This should humble us in our own eyes, and should warn us to
improve all our ability, and every opportunity to make our calling and election
sure, that there might be nothing wanting in us to secure a better life before
this be ended; and not to put off the endeavors toward it, as most do, unto
old age, which happily we may never attain unto; and if we do, it will bring it
self work enough for us to do. Death comes swift and uncertain: Sin, the longer
lived in, does the more harden: Repentance is not in our call or command when
we please; it is a work of the whole man, and of the whole life: this work
deferred will be greater, the time to do it in will be shorter; the strength to
do it by, will be less; bodily infirmities will disinable spiritual actions:
God will have less honor and service from us, and we our selves shall have
more sorrow, and less comfort.

For my own part, I can speak something by woeful experience, of the sad effect
of not embracing the present opportunity and ability that God has given me: I
am assured that I have lost much of my comfort here, for hearkening to the
motions of my own spirit, and slighting the motions and strivings of the Lords
Spirit; by which means I have deprived my self of manifestations and
apprehensions of heavenly and spiritual things that the Lord begun to pour out
upon me. And now, if I would give all the world, I cannot recall one day that
is past, nor one of those blessed opportunities that I have lost. Only I
desire, if the Lord will, to redeem this little inch of time yet remaining,
like an idle servant that has loitered all the forenoon, begins to work twice
as hard in the afternoon.

I have two Requests within me to make unto thee, whosoever thou art, that
read these lines.

If there be in thee any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercy; then my first Request is: I
do beseech thee and beg thee in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, if thou
mindest his glory, or thy own good, that thou would seek the Kingdom of
Heaven in obedience to his command, in the first place; for in so doing, the
Lord will be glorified, thy light shining before men, that they seeing thy
obedience to him, may glorify thy Father which is in heaven: that so while the
whole World, with Martha, are troubled about many things, thou may with Mary
choose the better part: That so while some are giving all diligence to get
earthly treasure, thou may give all diligence to get heavenly: And while some
are spending their time in vanity, one endeavoring to exceed another in folly,
thou may redeem precious time for spiritual ends, endeavoring to excel
others in piety: That so while others that have great possessions, are with the
Young man in the Gospel going from Christ sorrowful, thou may with Zacheus
receive Christ joyfully, and be willing to part with some of thy goods
cheerfully.

My second Request is, That in thy addresses to the Father, and approaches to
the Throne of Grace in the name of the Son, by a lively faith in him, in whom
are all our springs, from whom are all our supplies, that among all thy
requests to the Lord of Hosts, both for a supply of spiritual things and
natural things, for thy self and friends, that thou daily stand in need of,
thou would have one request, one ejaculation, one sigh, one breathing, or
one petition for me also; That the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Lord of glory, would give unto me a more full, clear, powerful knowledge of his
will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding, that I might walk worthy of the
Lord, being fruitful in every good work; that he would pour out upon me that
Spirit of Faith spoken of in the Gospel, which was once given to the Saints,
which we are commanded to contend for, and that Spirit of wisdom and revelation
in the knowledge of him, the Spirit of council and might, the Spirit of
knowledge and of the fear of the Lord: that I might act for God, from a pure
principle of love to God; that so not only sinful self might be denied in me,
but that also natural self and religious self might be laid at the feet of the
Lord Jesus Christ, as dung and dross in point of justification and salvation,
which is all of free grace: That so when I come to cut off my life like a
Weaver, (for my days fly away swifter then his shuttle) I may say with
Simeon, Luke 2. 29, 30. Lord, let thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes
have seen thy salvation. Or at least I might say with Hezekiah, Isa. 38. 3.
Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth,
and with a perfect heart: or else that I might say in the sincerity of my soul
with Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. I have fought the good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the faith: there is laid up for me a crown of glory.

O that our Parliament would consider with Job, that although they have sat
long; yet now their days are swifter then the Weavers Shuttle, and they shall
shortly cut off like a Weaver, Isa. 38. 12. that so they might mind what David
says, Psalm. 15. 4. He shall abide in Gods tabernacle, and dwell in his holy
hill, that keeps his word and Promises: Oh that it might be your study so to
do; and that you would yet further improve the present opportunity in
discharging the Trust reposed to you by God and his People for his Glory and
their Liberty; and this will bring you more comfort in the end, then all your
honor and estates: which has been, now is, and ever shall be my request to
God for you.

O that our Armies, whom God has made so victorious, would now pay their Vows
that they made to the Lord of Hosts in the day of their distress, and that
speedily, because their days are swifter then the Weavers Shuttle.

O that Magistracy and Ministry would consider, how swift this Shuttle flies,
and yet their days fly swifter; that so the one might not judge for Reward,
and the other teach for hire: that so the first wheel that moves them to act,
might be out of conscience unto God, and faithfulness to his People, whose
servants they are.

O that all men of all Opinions, by what nickname soever they be known, viz.
Episcopacy, Presbytery, Independency, Lutherans, Socinians, Arminians,
Anabaptists, Antinomians, would consider, that their days are swifter then the
Weavers Shuttle, and give off that excessive contending about the garment of
Religion, and the Form in which they are to Worship, which is but as paying
Tithe of Commin and Annis, and the while the Power of Religion is much abated,
and the weighty matters of the Law neglected; Faith and Repentance,
Self-denial, and an holy Conversation, these by many are shut out of doors; and
so whiles we lie contending for the Form, the Power of Religion is much abated;
and so the gravy, marrow, and sap of our souls is almost eaten out, so that we
had need, and that speedily, to take the Council of Christ, Rev. 3. 2. Be
watchful, and strengthen the things that be ready to die; for I have not found
thy works perfect before God: thou have a name that thou live, but thou art
almost dead; for thou have but a little strength, ver. 8.

Now my Brethren let me tell you, that I fear most of you, instead of
considering the great work that you have yet to do, and the little time
allotted you to do it; and how swift that little time passes away. I say,
instead of considering this, you all fall a weaving of the Spiders Web, Isa.
59, 5. that is, you are contriving Plots as may entangle others, as the Spiders
do the Flies, to their damage and detriment, or to their utter undoing and
destruction: but let me tell you, as in Isa. 59. 6. Your Web shall not become
garments; which is, your devices, plots, and practices, though they may hurt
and mischieve others, yet they shall not help or avail your selves; all the
good or gain you gather by them shall stand you in no stead; they will not be
able to shelter you against Gods wrath, no more then a coat of Cobweb is able
to shelter you from a fierce storm, or a thick volley of shot: they shall all
prove in conclusion as Cobwebs to your selves, for any succor or benefit that
you shall receive from them, or reap by them: See Isa. 28. 15. 18. 20.

Use 5. Forasmuch, as the soul is a more excellent piece then the body, it is
but reason that we should spend more time and pains in seeking the well being
of the one before the other; and if men did so indeed, they would make Religion
their business: In seeking first the kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness
thereof: knowing that all things that concern the well being of the body, shall
be added unto them: But alas! we serve the world, which was made to serve us,
and so we become our servants servant: Religion is not our business: but the
world and the things thereof, is our business: and Religion is a thing but by
the by: when we have nothing to do about our particular calling, we will a
little look after our general calling: if we be called upon to hear such a
Sermon, to confer with such Christians about the business of our souls, and our
thriving in Spiritual things, why we have many put offs: the business
concerning our souls must wait upon us from day to day, from week to week, from
month to month: nay, sometimes from year to year, before we be at leisure to
take that into our consideration: it is easier for a man to prefer a Petition
to the Parliament, and to get a promise of taking ones business into serious
consideration, and to answer our desires, then it is to get our stubborn hard
hearts (so glewed to the World) to be at leisure to consider the state of our
souls: we think every minute spent about that to be an hour, and every hour a
whole day, and every day a year.

I remember the words of a man (now with the Lord) speaking to this, from that
Genesis 27. 38, 39. You shall find there, that Isaac blessing of Jacob and Esau,
he blessed them both: but see with what difference he blessed Jacob, v. 28. God
give thee of the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the earth. Then look to
Esau's blessing: Behold (says Jacobs father) thy dwelling shall be the fatness
of the earth, and of the dew of heaven from above, v. 39. Mark, they were both
blessed with the dew of heaven, and fatness of the earth: but now in Jacobs
blessing, the dew of heaven is first, and the fatness of the earth is in the
second place; but in Esaus blessing* the fatness of the earth is first, and the
dew of heaven in the second place. Noting this, that a godly man indeed, the
greatest thing that he should mind in the first place, is the dew of heaven,
and then in the second place the blessing of the earth: But an earthly man in
the first place seeks for the fatness of the earth, and in the next place the
dew of heaven. Hence it is that the choicest of our thoughts are carried forth
and busied about earthly things, etc. And in order thereunto, how will men rise
early, and lie down late, and eat the bread of carefulness, and travail night
and day, far and near, through heat and cold, thick and thin, deprive
themselves of sleep, and many times of necessary food; and all to gather a
little Moths-nest together; which once gotten, the Moths soon consume it,
unless it takes wings and flies away, before the Moths can enter, as in Prove.
23. 5.

Are not most men and women in England like Corah, Dathan, and Abiram? we read
of them, that they were swallowed up of the earth: and so at this day there be
many millions of souls, both rich and poor, old and young, male and female,
swallowed up of the earth; for they make it their great business, and therefore
the strongest endeavors of their spirits are employed to effect and accomplish
their own carnal ends: yea, the whole man both soul and body is laid out to the
uttermost; they will neglect no time, spare no pains to increase their earthly
treasure.

Indeed I have stood almost amazed, when I have a little considered the temper
of my own heart and the state of others: wherein I find, that we are very
diligent and ready to do that which we have no command for; and that which we
have warrant for, we are negligent to do. As to instance; We have no command
(as I can remember) to make the things of this life so sure to us and our
posterity, although in a moderate sense it may be lawful and expedient so to
do: but for our Evidence for Heaven, and our assurance of our interest in God,
to this we have many commands. Give all diligence to make your calling and
election sure, as 2 Pet. 1. 10 And again, 2 Cor. 13, 5. Examine your selves
whether you be in the faith, prove your own selves: know you not your own
selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? 1 Col. 23.
Continue in the faith grounded and settled, and be not moved away from the hope
of the Gospel which ye have heard, etc. Now for our assurance of earthly
things, men never think them sure enough; but how careful are we to make all
things infallible, as there can be no way (as we think) wherein we can be
deceived? And to secure this earthly treasure, how do men toil and labor, and
their thoughts run in the night? and as soon as you arise in the morning, you
run headlong about the world, having so many things to do, you know not which
to do first: But the business of our souls and the assurance for heaven, we
either think not of it at all; or if we do, we make that but a business by the
by: but as for the matters of the earth, men will go from this Lawyer to
another, to ask counsel, and to see whether it be sure, and to see whether
there can be any thing done to make it more sure; so that most men never think
it to be sure enough: but as for our assurance in spiritual things, either we
are contented with none at all, or else any slender assurance will serve the
turn. Go from one seat to another, and enquire of the People, what evidence
have you of Peace made between God and your souls? What evidence have you that
you are gone beyond any formal Professor? What assurance have you that the
saving work of God is wrought in you? Why these be either Paradoxes or
Mysteries: the people know not what this does mean: many of them saying in
effect, it is an impossible thing for a man upon earth to have assurance of his
salvation, and so poor souls they drop into the grave one after another, having
no more assurance of Gods love to them, or of their interest in him, then the
beasts of the field: they came first from the earth: and all the while they
lived their hearts were upon it, and so they die and return unto it, never
obeying that voice, Ier. 22. 29. O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the
Lord.

These men have denied Christ here while they lived in the body: now he will
deny them, Mat. 10. 33. and 2 Timothy 2. 12.

They were ashamed to own him in his people here, now he will not own them,
Luke 9. 26.

Christ called upon them to repent, and they would not; and now they shall not
repent if they would.

They would none of his ways here: and he will not accept of their persons
hereafter, Mat. 7. 23.

O then let Religion be our business: Let us seek the Kingdom of Heaven in the
first place, Mat. 6. 33. And again, 3 Ep. John, ver. 2. I wish even above all
things thou might prosper in thy body, even as thy soul prospers. Mark,
here was a soul flourishing, growing and thriving, and that in the first place;
and next unto that is the moderate care of the body; and this is Gods order:
but man's care is most for the body first, and then a little for the soul
afterward when thou have nothing else to do: but know God will have the first
fruits or none; all thy after-services, are but like Cain's Sacrifices,
procuring a curse rather then a blessing.

In a word, we were not made to serve the world; the world was made to serve
us, and we were made to serve God. Let every creature, especially Man, continue
in his place; for man is the most excellent creature of all on earth: Let him
then transcend all in his holy obedience to his Maker: We are not our own, we
ought not to live to our selves; we have forfeited our lives many a time; the
wages of the least sin is death and cursedness, and yet our lives have been
restored to us again. For what end? why, says the Scripture, that we might not
live to our selves, but unto God.

Oh how often times does he call, how earnestly does he knock at the door of
our hearts? how powerfully does he strive? how long does he wait upon us to get
us to yield unto him? namely, to have our hearts dis-ingaged from all things
beneath himself: and yet such wretches as we are, we will not yield. What is
become of that frame of Spirit that was upon the Saints in former days? Nathan
used but one parable to David, and he was converted: Jonah preached but few
days to Nineveh, and they repented: Christ looked back once upon Peter, and he
wept bitterly: but there is such a spirit of slumber fallen upon most of the
people in these days, that nothing will prevail, unless it be that place, Rev.
21. 11. He that is unjust, let him be so still: and he which is filthy, let him
be filthy still: And so they make good this place, as it is spoken by way of
precept, and not by way of caution; never considering what will become of them
in the end thereof.

O ye sons and daughters of men, did not our tender loving Lord God make us
Lords of the Creation? and are not we become Servants unto it? Did not he make
man the wisest of all Creatures? and is there any Creature under the whole
Heaven so unwise as man? Did he not put a fear and a dread upon every creature,
Genesis 9. 2. And the fear of you, and the dread of you, shall be upon every beast
of the earth, and upon every fowl of the air, and upon all that moves on the
earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea: into your hands are they delivered:
But how is poor silly man afraid of, and become a Servant to the meanest of all
these Creatures in a Spiritual sense!

These were made our servants, and have been faithful in their service to us:
we were Created in the Image of God, and appointed by him to be serviceable
unto him: and yet the whole Creation are more serviceable unto him, and do not
dishonor him as man does, Jer. 8. 6, 7. I hearkened (says the Lord) and
heard, but (the most excellent piece of my workmanship) man spoke not aright:
no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have I done? So I was fain
to repent my self that ever I made man: for every one runs into sin, as the
horse rusheth into the battle: Yea, the Stork in the heavens knows her
appointed times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the
time of their coming; but my People know not the judgments of the Lord. Man,
that was made the wisest of all, is become the variest fool of all. And oh that
we saw it! 1 Cor. 3. 18. Let no man deceive himself* If any man among you
seems to be wise, let him become a fool that he may be wise. We like fools
take a great deal of pains to make our selves miserable: We forsake the
Fountain of living endurable waters, and ride and run through thick and thin,
labor and toil, dig and hew unto our selves Cisterns, yea broken Cisterns that
will hold no water, Jer. 2. 12, 13.

If John were to write an Epistle to the Professors of our days, as once he
did to Gaius, 3 Ep. Joh. v. 1, 2. Beloved, I wish above all things, that thou
may prosper and be in health, even as thy soul prospers: I say, if he were
to write to us, he would undoubtedly change his voice, and say, O ye Professors
now extant in the English Nation, I wish above all things that ye may prosper
in your souls, even as your bodies prosper. O thou have a flourishing body, but
a starved soul: thy eyes stare out with fatness, thou have more then heart can
wish; thou art like the green Bay tree, or the Willows by the water side; thou
have given thee thy hearts desire: but thou have a lean, famished, starved
soul; and I could wish above all things that thy soul prospered as thy body
prospers. Oh, is it not better to go to Heaven with poor Lazarus, then to
Hell with rich Dives? Is it not better, O sons and daughters of men, to be
often saying with our head Christ, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the
air have nests, but the Son of man has not where to lay his head; then to be
saying in effect as most do at this day, with that rich man, Luke 12, 17. 18,
19, 20. Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years: take thine ease,
eat, drink, and be merry? but God said unto him, Thou fool, this night shall
thy soul be required of thee, etc. We have forgotten those words, 1 John 2. 15.
Love not the world, neither the things of the world: if any man love the world,
the love of the Father is not in him. O how few such can we find in a whole
Parish, in a whole City, in a whole Shire! nay how many (think you) are there
in a whole Nation, that love the world, and so have not the love of the Father
abiding in them?

In this Epistle of John, the Spirit of the Lord (in the mouth of his servant)
calls to all the sons of men, and craves their diligent attention: I have
written to you Fathers, I have written to you Children, I have written to you
Young men: Why? what is the Spirit of the Lord about to make out unto us? Only
here is the sum, ver. 15. Love not the world, nor the things of the world: for
if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.

Object. But some will be apt to say, We do love God, we do not love the World.
Answ. How shall that appear? If I should try thy practice by the Scriptures, I
shall find that thou do love the world, and not God. 1 Ioh. 3. 17. Whosoever has
this worlds good, and sees his brother in need, and shuts up his bowels of
compassion, how dwells the love of God in him? That thou have faith, show it
to me by thy works; and if thou have love, show it by its fruits. Indeed there
is abundance of Faith and Love in the Nation; but I can find but little in my
self and others, in the powerful operation. The Power of Godliness is but here
and there in a corner: and when it does but a little peep out, or put forth its
head, the Dogs of Egypt begin to bark for a long space without any
intermission; and these Dogs are as cunning as Achitophel, and as eloquent as
Herod, and so make the poor ignorant people believe that they do bark at
Thieves, that would break open their Church-doors, and steal away their
Religion: when indeed they bark at the Sheep, that would hear Christ's voice,
and follow him. (But no more of this at present.)

Again, consider, that the love of the world is brought in by the Apostle to be
the root of all evil. 1 Timothy 6. 10. For the love of money is the root of all
evil, etc. Now by money we commonly understand gold and silver, which is the
purest metal of all: and one would think in reason, if any thing of the world
were to be beloved, then the most choice things should be the object of our
love: but gold and silver, although the purest and choicest thing of all, that
will buy any thing in the world; nay, Solomon said of it, Eccles. 10 19. Money
answers all things. Yet to love this (says the Spirit of the Lord in his
word) is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6. 10.

In a word, consider, A man takes a great deal of pains in getting goods, and a
great deal of care in the keeping of them, and a great deal of sorrow in losing
them, and but a very little comfort in the enjoyment of them. We may look back
upon them all, as Solomon did Eccles. 2. 11. Then I looked upon all the works
that my hand had wrought, and on the labor that I had labored; and behold,
all was (not only) vanity, (but also) vexation of spirit, and there was no
profit under the Sun. Here wise Solomon writ Vanity upon the Crown of all
worldly treasures and pleasures: and why is this written but for our learning,
upon whom the end of the world is come?

But there are but few of us of Solomon's mind: and that will appear in our
taking so much pains in gathering wealth, and then we set our affections and
minds abrood upon them, until (as a hen her chickens) we have hatched them, and
then a little while after they get themselves wings and fly from us. Oh why do
we set our eyes upon that which is not! See Prove. 23. 5.

In a word, the Scriptures which are written for our learning, and are
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, and for correction, and for instruction,
that the man of God might be thoroughly furnished unto every good work: These
Scriptures so excellent, if you read them, you shall find there is contained in
them at least ten precepts or commands to look to the being and well-being of
our souls, for one command to look to our bodies; and at least ten promises for
a blessing upon that, for one promise of a blessing upon us in point of a large
enjoyment of outward things; and yet such fools are most of us, we take ten
times the pains and care for the latter, more then we do for the former. Gods
order is, Seek ye first the kingdom of heaven (and then in the second place)
those things shall be given unto you: but our practice is, to seek the things
of this life first, and the Kingdom of heaven at last, when we have nothing
else to do. The Lord says, Lay up treasures in heaven first: but we will lay
up treasures on earth first. Oh, how contrary is our practice to the Commands
of our Creator! It would be endless for a man to instance in what is written in
Scripture to this thing: therefore I shall instance in one Scripture for all:
and that is in Mat. 6. in which Chapter from the ninth verse to the 34. our
blessed Savior draws at least ten Arguments against Covetousness.

1. Says he, Lay not up treasures on earth; for the moth, and rust will
corrupt it, and thieves will steal, Matthew. 6. 19, 20.

2. Says he, If your treasure be in the world, your hearts will be in the
world, ver. 21.

3. Christ tells us, we cannot obey him and the world too: No man can serve two
masters, God, and Mammon. ver. 24.

4. He bids us, Take no care what ye shall eat, and drink; or for raiment what
ye shall put on, ver. 25. And that for these Reasons, The fowls of the air do
not sow, nor reap, nor gather into barns: Are you not better then they? (says
our Savior) ver. 26.

5. He demands of us, why we do take such thought for raiment: Consider (says
he) the Lillies of the field how they grow: they toil not, neither do they
spin; and yet Solomon in all his royalty was not arrayed like one of these,
verses 28, 29.

6. He demands this question of us, Which of you by taking thought, can add
one cubit to his stature? ver. 27.

7. Wherefore if God so cloth the grass of the field, shall he not much more
cloth you, O ye of little faith? ver. 30.

8. Therefore says the Lord Christ, if this be true, as most true it is) Take
no thought at all, what ye shall eat, or drink, or wherewithal ye shall be
clothed; for after all these things do the Gentiles seek, ver. 31, 32.

9. If for all this ye will be seeking these things: Be sure you seek first the
kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness thereof: and then ye need not seek so
earnestly for these, they shall be added unto you, ver. 33.

10. Take therefore no thought for the morrow (nor pray for no more then daily
bread; for the next day shall take thought for it self) sufficient to the day
is the evil thereof, ver. 34.

Then let our conversation be without covetousness; for he has said, He will
never fail us nor forsake us, Heb. 13 5.

Some of our humane Scholars say, that in the original of this Text, the words
(I will never leave thee) is mentioned five times: but I have searched the
Scripture: and I find it written in the Scriptures above five times five, I
will never leave thee nor forsake thee. The candle that gave me light to read
it was lighted in Heaven: and the key that opened the book, for it was sealed,
was the Spirit of God: the eyes by which I saw it, was the eyes of my
understanding, being enlightened according to the that Ephesians. 1. 18.

Also mind those words of (...) Luke 12. 15. And he said unto them (...) heed
and beware of covetousness (...) man's life consists not in the abund (...)
things which he possesses: nor in (...) for then Pharaoh had been ble(...) in
wit, for then Achitophel h(...) blessed: nor in wealth, for th(...) had been
blessed: but true bless(...) from above: The blessing of the Lord (...) ^^keth
rich, and brings no sorrow with ^^ Prove. 10. 22.

Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in
his might: let not the rich man glory in his riches; but let him that glories,
glory in this, that he understands, and knows me, that I am the Lord that
exercises loving kindness, judgment, and righteousness in the earth; for in
these things I delight, says the Lord, Ier. 9. 23, 24.

But I see the glory of most men, both (...)ders and Followers to be in this,
(...) their dung mixtion is bigger and (...) then their neighbors. Oh that
(...)n should be such fools to glory (...)p of dung, which does not (...)nk,
but breed noysom Crea(...) Yet if a man's Dunghill be a (...)er then his
neighbors, he gets (...)op of it, and stands with one, (...)is arms on kimble,
and looks (...) if any of his poor neighbors (...) has not scraped so much
toge^^^^ come to speak with him, he must ^ome with his hat in his hand, and his
leg scraping, and his head bowing, or else he cannot find acceptance with his
rich neighbor. I have observed these things not only in the Laity, but also in
the Clergy: if one of the Ministers have gotten a fatter Benefice then the rest
about him: how fine will he go clothed? how daintily will he fare? how big
will he look? And if any of his Brethren, that has not so much per annum as
himself, come to speak with him, he must knock at the door, and if admitted in,
he must stand in the Court, and it may be have a Message brought him, Sir, the
Doctor is in his Chamber, or newly entered into his Study, you must stay a
while: and why so? why this Minister, and many more here in the Country have
but small Dunghils, and are but as so many journey men, they serve but at small
Chapels of ease; but the Doctor serves, and is Curate of the mother Church;
the other Churches are but the daughters, and must pay Tribute to the Mother:
So that all sorts, all ranks and degrees of men, young and old; noble and
ignoble; professing people, as well as profane; Clergy as Laity, are more or
less laying up Treasures in the earth, and account themselves more or less
honorable, not according to the measure of Grace they receive, but according
to the measure of wealth they have: and yet these men would not be accounted
worldly men.

And what shall I say to these things? shall I say of you, as in Gen 6. 5. And
God saw the wickedness of man was great, and that every imagination of the
thoughts of his heart was only evil continually, etc. Or else shall I speak to
you, as in 1 John 5. 19. The whole world lies in wickedness: Or shall I not
rather speak to you in the language of the Prophet, Isaiah 56. 11. Yea, they be
greedy dogs which can never have enough, and they be shepherds that cannot
understand: they all look to their own way, every one for his gain from his
quarter, Isa. 56. 11.

Thus I see men be content to endure any labor, and to hazard themselves to
innumerable dangers, and to suffer many and grievous miseries, that they may be
assured of earthly things: and yet their strongest assurances be but
uncertainties, and the best things of the world assured, but trifling vanities:
the Merchant is content to compass Sea and Land, and to run many hard and
hazardous Courses, and all to get some Wealth, which he is uncertain whether he
shall obtain; or if obtained, whether he shall retain or enjoy it one day to
his comfort.

Oh then, why shall the choicest of our thoughts be so busied about earthly
things, and so we let our hearts cleave to the earth, and so the whole man
filled with distracting cares! It puts men upon great temptations, 1 Timothy 6. 9.
They that will be rich, fall into temptation and a snare. Again, it is a
dishonor to God, and a scandal to Religion: besides, it hinders our
preparation for death; for we are thinking upon the world, when we should be
thinking on that Text, Job 7. 6. My days are swifter then a Weavers shuttle.
See Luke 21. 34. And so in the end the World will drown thee in destruction, 1 Timothy 6. 9. It choaketh all the good we have, either public or private, Mat.
13. 4. If all this be too little to set forth the sad condition of worldliness,
consider, it is the root of Apostacy: when Demas embraced the world, he
forsook God, 2 Timothy 4. 10. If that be too little, the Scripture calls it
Adultery, Jam. 4. 4. And if all this be yet too short, consider another
Scripture calls it Idolattie, Ephesians. 5. 5.

Object. 1. What should a man do, or what means should I make use of, that I
might hang loose to the world?
Object. 2. How far is it lawful for a Christian to use the world? To be
diligent in our Calling, is Gods Command: and idleness is forbidden as sinful.
1. Of the first of these, what means should I make use of, to take off my heart
and affections from these worldly things?

Answ. When a man has pitched his highest thoughts, and dearest affections
upon any thing which he esteems most highly, he cannot dis-ingage his entire
love unto that thing, until he be convinced of something that there is which
is more excellent: we cannot forsake a lesser, until we see a greater good. If
the world or any thing in the world be highest in our thoughts, dearest in our
affections, and strongest in our Wills, then our Wills will will that: our
affections will affect that; and our thoughts will be upon that, and there they
cannot but center, until there is something discovered unto us, to be more
excellent.

Now if Christians, so called, had but the least knowledge of the glory of the
Almighty, how excellent he is in his Attributes, as Wisdom, Righteousness,
Truth, and Faithfulness, Mercy, and Justice, etc. I say, were but the back
parts of the Almighty God unvailed, and did we see him, and though but at a
distance, we should presently see him to be the fountain of all excellency, and
the true object of all love, so that all the excellence in all the whole
Creation, which we like fools had pitched our hearts upon, is but as one drop
of water to the whole Ocean sea, to the beauty, sweetness, and glory of the
Creator, God blessed for ever. Now this most glorious Being has promised to
manifest himself to us: and the Scripture tells us it is life to know him: it
is heaven to behold him: it is melody to hear him: it is endless happiness to
enjoy him: to know him, is to know all things; for they had their beings from
him, and center in him: if thou come but to know his name once; see what
follows, 1 Cant. 3. Because of the savor of thy good ointment: thy name is
as ointment poured forth; therefore do the virgins love thee. Mark, therefore
do they love thee for the excellency that is in thee.

O then, taste and see, how good the Lord is; and when thou have seen his
beauty, and tasted of his excellency, we need not bid thee love him: all the
men and women in the world could not quench thy love to him: thy love would be
as strong as death: many waters could not quench it: and when once thou come
to love him purely for himself, because he loved thee first, then thou will
cease loving the world, knowing that if any man love the world, the love of the
Father is not in him: and so while Martha is troubled about many things; thou will with Mary choose the better part: and as once he was satisfied and
contented with the world without God, so now he endeavors to be contented with
God, without the world. The world was once thy portion, now the Lord is thy
portion, Psalm. 16. 5. and Psalm. 119. 57. Lam. 3. 24.

The loss of the things of this world did once trouble thee; now thou can
suffer the spoiling of thy goods joyfully, Heb. 10. 34.

The glory and excellency of all things under the Sun, are not so precious as
the light of his countenance; if all the world smile upon me, and my Father
seem to frown or hide his face, I shall be troubled: but, if all things frown
on me, and He but a little smile, I shall rejoice with joy unspeakable and full
of glory. Let friends forsake me, let enemies deride me, let all worldly
comforts leave me, if thou hide not thy face, O Father, it is enough: I shall
say with Paul, I have learned in whatsoever state I am in, to be content
therewith, Phil. 4. 11.

I was once earthly in spiritual things, I am now Spiritual in earthly things,
says the sanctified Soul: I did once hate the Saints, I do now love them: And
I know that I have passed from death to life, because I love the brethren, 1
Epist. Joh. 3. 14.

I did lately delight in the company of sinners; now all my delight is in the
Saints that excel in virtue; and the more spiritual any Christian is, the more
entirely do I love him, says the enlightened soul.

I did lately envy that man that did outstrip me in getting goods: I could
heartily wish how that all the Saints would double and trebble their diligence
in getting this heavenly treasure: I did esteem my self better then others; I
endeavor now to esteem others better then my self, according to that 2 Phil. 3.

And so much for answer to the first Objection or Quaere.

Object. 2. How far is it lawful for a Christian to use the world? because to
be diligent in ones Calling is Gods Command, and idleness is forbidden as
sinful.
Ans. Under correction, and with submission to better judgments: I humbly
conceive, that we having made it our great business to improve our Talent or
Talents, in working out the manifesta^ion of our salvation: and having given
all diligence to make our Calling and Election sure, in waiting for the
appearances of the love of God the Father through his son Jesus Christ by the
Holy Spirit, in the use of all the Ordinances and appointments of Christ:
having I say in the first place made this the main of our business, not so much
that we might be saved by him, but rather that hereby we might appear more
capable to answer that great end for which he gave us a being, namely, that his
name might be glorified by Jesus Christ in us.

In the next place we are look to our bodies, and in order thereto, to betake
our selves to labor, that so we might in a sense get our livings by the sweat
of our brows: this made Paul labor, working with his hands, night and day,
that he might eat his own bread, and not be chargeable to others, and so make
his glorying void: And the same Almighty that bids us hear, read, meditate, and
pray, bids us also to be diligent in our Callings, and provide for our selves
and Families, or else we come short of Infidels: And again, Let him that has
stolen, steal no more, but work with his hands, that he may have for himself,
and something over for him that needs: This is so known a thing that no man,
unless those that have renounced their reason, and made nonsense the mother of
their Devotion, will deny it; wherefore it will be needless to write any more
for the probation of it, only a word or two, how far it is lawful for a
Christian to be diligent in it: For I suppose that a Christian may honor or
dishonor the Almighty in the lawful use, or sinful abuse thereof, as well in
his particular Calling, as in his general Calling.

First then, follow thy particular Calling, and be diligent therein, purely in
obedience to the Command of God, that so if thou were to have no profit by it
yet thou would follow it, because he commands it.

2. Be diligent therein, that so thy self and Family may eat your own bread;
pray and work for daily bread.

3. Be diligent in your particular Calling, that so you may be helpful to
others.

4. Be sure that in following this earthly Calling, thou do it with an Heavenly
mind in every part of it.

I had thoughts to have been large in every one these, because there be few
that have learned this Lesson; but I have a persuasion even now darted in upon
my spirit to write but a little more of each.

1. Then let us follow our particular Calling, and be diligent therein purely
in obedience to the Almighty; that so, if we were but to have our labor for
our pains, yet we would labor because the Lord Commands us, Exodus 20. 9. Six
days shall thou labor, etc. See again, Deuteronomy. 5. 13. and 2 These. 3. 11. 1 These.
4. 11. And to work with our own hands as we commanded you.

2. Be diligent in your Callings, that so your selves and families may eat your
own bread. Though not in the first, yet in the second place, thou may have
respect to the recompense of reward. 2 These. 3. 11, 12. For we hear that there
be some that walk among you disorderly, working not at all. ver. 12. Now them
that be such, we command that with quietness they work, and eat their own
bread: and if they will not work, let them not eat, 2 These. 3. 10. etc. I have
often considered what should be the cause that many men and women in some
sense, are in a worse condition then the beasts of the earth, or the fowls of
the air; for most times they have plenty of food and to spare; and man which is
Lord of these things, is often in want, so that many steal for want: and I have
at last found, that their poverty does arise from these or the like things.

1. Either from Covetousness, There is that withholdeth more then is meet, and
it tends to poverty. Prove. 11. 24.

2. Or else from wastefulness, or excess in eating or drinking, Prove. 23. 21.

3. Or from the oppression of the rich, Jam. 5. 4.

4. Or else, from idleness, and slothfulness in their Callings. Prove. 20. 4.
The sluggard will not sow because of the cold; therefore he shall beg in
harvest. The diligent hand makes rich.

But these are not diligent, and therefore are poor: See 1 Timothy 5. 8. He that
provideth not for those of his own house (by his lawful Calling) mark that
man, he has denied the faith, and is worse then an infidel.

3. Be diligent in your particular Calling (as first and chiefly, in obedience
to the Command of God: and secondly, that so you might provide for your own
selves and families:) thirdly, so be diligent in it, that you may be helpful
to others in their needs and wants, Ephesians 4. 28 Let him that stole, steal no
more, but labor working with his hands, that he may have to give to him that
needs; or to distribute (as in the margent;) next to our selves and families,
we are to look to others; for although charity begins at home; it should spread
abroad, only in giving: observe the Rule, Gal. 6. 10. Do good unto all, but
especially to them that are of the household of faith: and for thy encouragement
herein, read these and the like Scriptures, Luke 6. 38. and Mat. 25. 34, 35, 36.

Fourthly and lastly, be sure that you follow this earthly Calling with an
heavenly mind: when thou look upon the world or any thing therein, consider
it is a natural Book, wherein thou may read God; thou may see him, and
learn of him something in all thou put thy hand unto: A man merely natural
is earthly in Spiritual things: but a godly man is Spiritual in earthly things:
An earthly man when he is hearing, praying, or reading, his thoughts and
affections are upon the things of the earth: but a godly man when he is about
his Calling, though the meanest, as Weaving, Spinning, Hedging, Ditching, or
using his Ax or Hammer, he is more Spiritual then, I say, then a wicked man is,
when he is praying, or hearing, or preaching, or administering, or receiving
Sacraments: that it is so, I know by woeful experience; and thou whosoever thou
art that read these lines, shall shortly know it (if thou do not already)
to be true: or else by woeful, and most woeful experience in the highest degree
it will appear to thee to be so at the day of Judgment, when the secrets of all
hearts shall be disclosed. Truly, I conceive that there is no one thing under
Heaven that a man puts his hand unto, or beholds with his eyes, but we might
behold our Creator in it, and learn something from it: I will instance in a few
Callings, leaving the industrious Reader to instance in the rest, as occasion
offers it self.

I will begin with the Husbandman; as he in ploughing up the grounds to prepare
it for feed, the ground does even tell him, that the fallow ground of his heart
must be ploughed up, and fitted to receive Spirital seed, Jer. 4. 3. Hos. ^0.
12.

And as he is sowing the Corn, even the grain does preach to him, saying, I
must die before I can bring forth fruit, and so must you that sow me, die to
the flesh, before you can bring forth fruit unto God, Romans 7. 4.

Then when a man comes to pluck up the weeds, every weed tells him, the ground
was cursed for his sake, and that there be many spiritual weeds in his soul
that must be plucked out, or it will undo him in the end, Mat. 5. 29, 30.

Then when he has reaped, and is making a separation between the Tares and the
Wheat, this does preach to him, so will the Lord of Heaven and earth shortly
put a difference between the godly and the wicked, Mal. 3. 17. 18. and Mat. 3.
12.

Come to those that spin, and enquire of them, and they will, or might tell
thee, that they may see and learn by the thread they spin, as in Mat. 6. 18. and
Luke 12. 27. Consider the Lillies of the field, for they toil not, neither
spin; and yet Solomon in all his glory, was not arrayed like one of these.

Then the Weaver, as he is Weaving, may think as if his Shuttle running should
say unto him, as in Job 7. 6. Thy days are swifter then the Weavers Shuttle:
and when he has woven out his Piece, and is cutting it off, he may thereby
learn, that as he is come to the end of his piece, so he shail shortly come to
the end of his life, and so cut off like a Weaver, as in Isa 38. 12. I have cut
off like a Weaver my life.

I might instance in every state, in every condition, in every particular
Calling, in every particular Creature: but for brevity sake, I shall leave it
to the prudent Reader.

NOw that we may make Religion our business indeed, and so have our
conversation in Heaven, whiles we live on the earth, and that we might be freed
from all distracting cares, and so use the world, as if we used it not, that we
might I Have above the world, even whiles we are in the world, and that our chief
trading might be for heaven, that so our portion and treasure might be there,
that our hearts might be there also. Consider seriously these ensuing
particulars, viz.

1. That we are all in the presence of God always, who takes a view of all our
thoughts, words and deeds.

2. That we have but few days to live in the body, and they fly away swifter
then the weavers Shuttle; wherefore if there be any thing for us to do, do it
whiles it is called to day, Heb. 3. 13. 15.

3. If we make not Religion our business, we shall lose much of our comfort
here, in point of our well being; for if we were not wanting to our selves, we
might live in Heaven, whiles our bodies were upon the earth. Consider, that the
Lord that made us, has undertaken the care of us; He bids us wait on him, and
he will feed us and clothe us.

5. Consider, that this God that has taken the care of us by way of promise,
is a faithful God, he cannot deny himself.

6. If we do belive this, we shall with Job and Paul, behold a hand of
Providence in, and read love under every dispensation. (First of the first of
these.)

1. That we are always in the presence of Almighty God, who takes a view of all
our thoughts, words and deeds: and if this were believed by us, we should do
all things as in his presence, endeavoring to behave our selves so as is not
only good and commendable in the sight of men, but of God also, who looks not
only on the outward action, but at the inward intention: Also this will cause
us not only to put a watch over the door of our mouth, but also to put another
watch over the thoughts of our hearts; that so we may with Enoch walk with God,
that is, set him before us. See Psalm. 16. 8. I have set the Lord always before
me, that I might not fall. There are two things to be considered for the
clearing of this first point.

1. That the Almighty God does fill heaven and earth with his presence.

2. That it is one of the greatest engagements to engage a Christian to walk in
all well-pleasing to God, to consider he is always in the presence of God. 1.
That he is present in all places, at all times, beholding all actions, will
appear by these Scriptures. Prove. 15. 3. The eye of the Lord is in every place,
beholding the evil and the good. Jer. 23, 23 Am I a God at hand says the Lord)
and not afar off? Can any hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see
him (says the Lord)? do not I fill heaven and earth? 2 Chr. 16. 9 For the eyes
of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth, etc. Psalm. 139. 7.
Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy presence?
If I ascend up unto Heaven, thou art there; if I make my bed in Hell, behold
thou art there, v. 8. If I take the wings of the morning, and fly to the
uttermost parts of the earth, even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right
hand hold me. If I say, surely the darkness shall cover me, even the night
shall be light about me, v. 11. Yea, the darkness hides not from thee, but the
light shines as the day, the darkness and the light are both alike to thee,
etc,

Thus we see the Lords presence is every where: and yet where is there a man or
woman that does believe it, or see him? The men and women yet in the state of
darkness (which is the greatest part) these neither see it nor believe it: And
then for the Saints, (which are but few, a little flock) I dare say, not one of
ten of them have so set to their seals to this truth, that the Lord God
Almighty is present in all places, at all times, beholding all actions
whatsoever. Genesis 28. 16. And Jacob said, Surely the Lord is in this place, and
I knew it not. Job 9. 11. Lo, he goes by me, and I see him not; He passes on
also, and I perceive him not. And as he is by us, and we do not see him, so he
speaks often unto us, and we do not hear him. Sometimes he speaks to us by
a voice, Isa. 30. 21. sometimes he speaks to us by the motions of the Spirit
within us: sometimes he speaks to us by men in our own likeness, Luke 10. 16.
Sometimes he speaks to us when we be asleep on our beds, Job 33. 14, 15, 16.
God speaks once, yea twice, yet man perceives it not: In a dream, in a
vision of the night, when deep sleep falls upon man, then he opens their
ears, and seals their instructions. Oh let us then see his face, and hear his
voice; for sweet is his voice, and his countenance is glorious, etc.

2. Let us consider, that it is one of the greatest engagements to engage a
Christian to walk in all well pleasing to God, to consider he is always in the
presence of God.

I have kept thy precepts (says David) How so, David? why, (says he) All my
ways are before thee, Psalm. 119. 168. Psalm. 16. 8. I have set the Lord always
before me, and because he is at my right hand I shall not fall. Psalm. 26. 3.
Thy loving kindness is before mine eyes, so I have walked in thy truth.

Now these men that do not behold the presence of the Lord still before them,
are ready upon all occasions to rebel against him. Psalm. 86. 14. The proud
men, and the malicious violent men are risen against me; for they do not set
the Lord before them. As of God, in the sight of God, speak we in Christ. 2
Cor. 2. 17. As if he had said; When we come to do any thing, we do it so, as
knowing the allseeing eye of God is taking notice not only of the action that
we do, but also of the principle from which we act: he endeavors in all his
actions to have the same ends in all he does, as God has commanded him to
have. When a soul apprehends it self to be in the presence of his Maker, it
labors to compose it self, as beseeming the presence before whom it is. So it
endeavors to make the will of God his rule, and the glory of God his greatest
design, and his word and Spirit his guide: It comes to God for direction,
saying, O Lord, lead me in thy way! It expects from God protection; And do thou
protect me in this way of thine: And so it depends upon God for assistance in
what it does, and for a blessing upon all it does. Exodus 33. 14, 15. The Lord
said unto Moses, My presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest.
Moses was so taken with that word, that he breaks forth, v. 5. If thy presence
go not with us, carry us not from hence.

In a word, the Lord, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, is always
present, and the holy Ghost is always present: I fill heaven and earth with my
presence, says the Father, Jer. 23. 24. So, I am with you to the end of the
world; says the Son: But the manifestation of this is by the Spirit; and there
are but very few that have this Spirit; and so no wonder that men are so
ignorant of Gods presence; the Spirit would have discovered it; but men, what
lies in them, do either quench it, or resist it.

My friends, we live in an Age, wherein men are talking much of perfection;
behold, here is the way to attain it, to put thy self always in the presence of
God, and let all thy walks be before him. Genesis 17. 1. I am God Alsufficient (or
the Almighty God;) walk before me, and be thou perfect.

If we walk not in the presence of God, then we walk in darkness, and do the
works of darkness. Now God is light, and in him there is no darkness at all:
those then that set the Lord always before them, are in the light, and so do
walk in the light, as children of the light.

2. The second thing to be considered, that so we might be taken off the world,
and make Religion our business, is, That we have but a few days to live in this
world, and they fly away faster and swifter then the weavers Shuttle, Job 7.
6. Wherefore if we do think or judge, that there be any thing for us to do,
either for God, or our selves, do it presently, work whiles it is day; for the
night comes in which no man can work, Joh 9. 4. If thou will hear his voice,
let it be as in Heb. 3. 13. 15, To day, etc.

Thou know not whether thou shall have another day; for none of us do know
what a day may bring forth: but because I have written so long of this subject
in the first part of this Book (called The Weavers Shuttle displayed, or the
swiftness thereof unfolded,) I shall in this place only cite a few Scriptures,
that speak of our frailty, and so pass this point over. Job 7. 6. and Isa. 38.
12. and Isa. 64. 6. and Isa. 40. 7. and Psa. 102. 3. and Job. 7. 7. 2 Samuel 14.
14. and Hos. 10. 7. and Jam. 4. 14. and 1 Chronicles. 29. 15. and Ps. 39. 5.

3. If we make not Religion our business, we shall lose much of our comfort
here, in point of our well being; for if we were not wanting to our selves, we
might live in heaven while our bodies were here upon earth, Phil. 3. 20. For
our conversation is in heaven; and this caused the Saints exceedingly to
rejoice, 2 Cor. 1. 12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our
Conscience, that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, we have had our
conversation in the world. Psa. 119. 6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I
shall have respect unto all thy Commandments: What is the matter that one is
crying, another is sighing, and a third perplexed, and a fourth in despair?
why, sin is the cause; if a man made Religion his business, so that his ways
did please the Lord, even his enemies should be at peace with him, Prove. 16. 7.

Nay further, He shall deliver thee in six troubles, yea in seven, there shall
be no evil touch thee: in famine he will preserve thee from death; and in war,
from the power of the sword; thou shall be hid from the scourge of the tongue,
neither shall thou be afraid of destruction when it comes: thou shall be in
league with the stones of the field, and the beasts of the earth shall be at
peace with thee: thy tabernacle shall be at peace, and thou shall not sin, Job
5. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, etc.

In a word, what brings all the miseries upon our bodies, and plagues upon our
souls, but sin? and how shall we refrain from sin, unless we make Religion our
business? which if we did do, we should

1. Not fear the faces of men, Mat. 10. 28.

2. When we did suffer either in our bodies or estates, we should be so far
from murmuring or complaining, that our hearts would be taken up altogether
with singing, praising, and rejoicing, Acts 6. 25. and Luke 6. 22. 23. and 1
Pet. 3. 14, 17. and 1 Pet. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.

3. We should have a fellowship with Christ in all our sufferings, as in Phil.
3. 10.

4. We should be great gainers by all our sufferings, Romans 5. 3. 1 Pet. 2. 19.
20.

5. We should account the worst of them both light and short, 2 Cor. 4. 17. For
our light afflictions which are but for a moment, work for us a far more
excellent and eternal weight of glory, Romans 8. 8.

If we made Religion our business with Paul, we should should say in our
sufferings as he did, 2 Cor. 4. 8, 9. We be troubled on every side yet not
distressed, we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted but not forsaken:
cast down, but not destroyed, etc.

In a word, I know nothing that keeps all good things from us, and brings all
miseries upon us, but sin. Jam. 4. 1. From whence come wars and fightings among
you? Come they not hence, even of your lusts that war in your members? Oh then,
let Religion be thy business, and not sin.

1. Because sin is contrary to the nature of God; it does dishonor him.

2. It Is most injurious to thy self, as has been proved: for it brings all the
miseries upon thee, that have, do, or shall ever befall thee: As soon as ever
thou sinnest, the punishment lies at the door. Oh then, if the love of Christ
will not constrain, yet let the fear of punishment compel thee and me to
refrain from sin. Romans 2. 9. Tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man
that does evil, both of the Jew and the Gentiles. Oh let us not do that
abominable thing, which the Lord does hate. Sin makes a man abominable both in
the sight of God and good men. Better it were to suffer a thousand wrongs, then
to commit one sin: Thou may have comfort in thy sufferings wrongfully, thou
ought to rejoice in it; but when thou do sin, thou shall suffer as an
evil doer, thou art buffeted for thy faults: in this thou can not glory, but
blush with shame. Wherefore if thou art not able to say with Joseph, How shall
I do this great evil, and sin against God? yet say with Thamar, How shall I do
this evil, and cause my name to slink among the sons and daughters of men? Do
but a little mark diligently, and thou shall find (if thy Conscience be not
feared,) as soon as ever sin is committed, thy conscience checks thee, thy
heart smites thee, thy foes laugh at thee, thy friends grieve and pity thee;
nay, more then this, thou do crucify afresh Christ Jesus, and put him to
an open shame, as Heb. 6. 6.

What is the reason thou have so many enemies, and so few friends? Sin is the
cause; as Prove. 16. 7. and Job 5. 20, 21, etc. Thou art deprived of many
comforts that others do enjoy: Why? sin is the cause of it, Ier. 5. 25. Does
the Almighty hide his face from thee? Why, what is the cause? Your sins and
iniquities have made him to hide his face. Wherefore does the living man so
complain, but for the punishment of his sin? Lam. 3. 39.

Wherefore is there so much weeping in this Nation? One weeps for his father,
another for his mother, one for his brother, another for his sister; some for
one Relation, some for another: Why do thou weep for them? Oh, they be be
dead, or dying! Why, what brought this unavoidable Death into the world?

Ans. It was sin, it was sin: The wages of sin is death, Romans 6. 23.

In a word; Sin has slain our father, deceived our mother, cheated and almost
undone all our brethren, and defiled our sisters, wounded our children, and
plundered all our kindred to the skin, and left them as poor as Job. One sin
caused Adam to fall, and so infected the whole world: One sin caused the Angels
to be cast out of Heaven: One sin caused Saul to be utterly cast off from being
King, although he was anointed King by the Lord his special appointment:
Ananias and Sapphira for one lie were stricken with present death. Besides, sin
defiles a man totally: it begins at the understanding, and so to the will
and affection: it will take in every faculty of the soul, and endeavor to act
in every member of the body; it does defile a man eternally, it robs us of the
Image of God, it robs us of his presence: it will promise us peace, and bring
us into trouble; it will promise us honor, and bring us into disgrace; it will
promise us liberty, and bring us into bondage; it will promise us life, and
bring us to death: it will hide Pride under the name of decency; it will bring
in Covetousnes under the name of good husbandry; it will clothe Drunkenness and
Gluttony under the name of good-fellowship; it will hide Frowardness under the
name of zeal. In a word, as the acts of sin be numerous, so the effects of sin
are viperous: Sin was the first founder of hell, and laid the first stone
thereof, and is the sole cause of all the torments therein; and yet all this is
but the effect of sin; the essence of it, which is the cause of all these
evils, must needs be much more abominable: hence sin is called poison, and
sinners are called serpents; sin is called mire, and sinners swine; sin and
sinners are called darkness, blindness, shame, nakedness, folly, madness. In a
word, whatsoever is filthy, defective, infective, painful and hurtful, proceeds
from this nasty, filthy, and stinking fountain: and one sin vertually more or
less, contains in it the nature of all sin.

No sooner did one sin sit upon our father Adam his heart, but he had all sin
in him, which infected him and all his posterity, and so defiled him and all
his posterity eternally; so that as I said before, nothing can wash away the
stain thereof, but the precious blood of the Lord Jesus Christ: shall we then
live in that for which Christ died? shall that be our life which was his death?
shall we indeed enjoy the pleasure of sin; and Christ undergo the torment of
sin? No, no, let us improve the present motions of the Spirit in us against
sin; least the Spirit of God cease striving with thee, and me, and so we shall
fall to commit sin with greediness, without any reluctance.

O all ye sons and daughters of men, put on all the armor of God, stand on
your guards; make ready for your soul-murthering enemy, whose name is Legion,
never be at peace with him, maintain a continual war against him; acquaint all
the men and women in the world of his base deceitful cheating tricks, that
their ill savor in the nostrils of all men and women under the Sun may make
them loath it, and stand upon their guards to oppose it; and if the love of
Christ does not constrain you, yet let the fear of punishment compel you to
refrain from that abominable thing called sin: If thou can not say with
Joseph, Genesis 39. 9. How shall I do this great evil, and sin against my God? Yet
thou can say with Thamar, 2 Samuel 13. 12. and 13. verses. If I should commit
this sin, whither should I cause my shame to go? So much shall serve at present
to be written of the third particular, to wit, that if we made it our business
to follow the Lord, and were not wanting to our selves, we might have our
conversations in heaven, even whiles we live upon the earth, and be more then
Conquerors over those sins that do often conquer us.

4. That Religion may be our main work, let us consider that the Lord that made
us has undertaken the care of us: He commands us to wait on him, and he will
feed us and cloth us.

We have but a body and a soul, and both we received from the Almighty God, who
has undertaken to provid^ for not only the being, but also the welbeing of
both: only he requires of us to seek unto him, and to wait upon him in the use
of those means instituted by himself, without too much carefulness, 1 Cor. 7.
32. But I would have you without carefulness; that is, so to use this world, as
if we used it not: ot not so using it as most do, by too much doting upon it,
and cleaving unto it, as Martha did; but rather with Mary choose the better
part: and so much the rather, because of those many promises of so many
legacies left us by the Lord in his word: as to instance in a few; Psalm. 37. 5.
Commit thy way unto the Lord; trust in him, and he shall bring it to pass.
Commit or roll thy way upon him. Psalm. 55. 22. Cast thy burther upon the Lord.
Prove. 16. 3. Commit thy works unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be
established. 1 Pet. 5. 7. Cast all thy care upon him, for he cares for thee;
and has said, that He will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13. 5.

Some Expositors upon this Text do affirm, that the Greek word has five times
together, I will never, never, never, never, never fail thee nor forsake thee:
to assure us of the truth of this. O my friends, does God take care for Oxen,
and feed Ravens, and clothe Lillies, and take care of Sparrows? and will he not
much more take care for Man, whom he has made Lord of all these creatures?
Read, and well consider from the 19. to the 34. verse of Matthew. 6. There we
find in that one Chapter ten arguments that Christ has laid down to assure us
that he takes care of us. Psalm 27 3. Trust in the Lord, and do good, and
verily thou shall be fed, and so shall thou dwell in the land. See 1 Timothy 6, 7,
etc.

We brought nothing into the world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out;
and having food and raiment, let us be therewith content: But they that will be
rich, fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and noisome lusts,
which drown men in perdition and destruction For the love of money is the root
of all evil, etc. But thou O man of God, flee these things, and follow after
righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness, etc.

5. Consider, that this God that has undertaken the care of us, is a faithful
God, and will make good every tittle promised: He has not only said, but
sworn, and sealed that oath with his blood, to assure us that he will make good
whatsoever he has promised. Besides, that he is a faithful God, keeping
promise in every tittle to a hairs breadth, both Old and New Testament does
abundantly declare and testify: so that we have not only witnesses, but clouds
of witnesses, besides our own experiences and inward evidences, that we have
not only read, but experimentally found him to be a God keeping covenant, a God
keeping promise, yea a God giving more then we were able to ask or think: so
that we can truly say, we never found him worse then his word, but often
better; for he never said unto us, Seek ye me in vain: He has often knocked at
the door of our hearts, and waited upon us to show mercy to us: there is no one
thing that he has promised either for soul or body, for our being or well
being, but shall be made good to us in its time. And that he has promised to
give us food and raiment, and all things necessary for us; you may see it does
clearly appear in the foregoing head, to wit, the 4. particular. And that he is
faithful and true, and will make it good, does clearly appear by these and the
like Scriptures. 1 Timothy 1. 15. Heb. 10. 23. Mat. 24. 35. Luke 16. 17. Tit. 1.
2. 1 Cor. 10. 13. Deuteronomy. 7. 9. 1 Cor. 1. 9. 1 These. 5. 24. 2 These. 3. 3. 2 Timothy
2. 13. Heb. 11. 11. 1 John 1. 9.

6. If we consider these five things seriously, it will beget in us this
unspeakable benefit, namely, To behold a hand of Providence in, and read love
under every dispensation: You, and I should say with Job, when we loose all,
blessed be the name of the Lord; and with Paul Phil. 4. 11. I have learned in
whatsoever state I am, therewith to be contented: and so we shall serve him
without fear, and not be afraid of Armies of men, and Legions of Devils. Psalm.
3. 6. He will not fear death and hell: Why? because he will see both overcome
by Jesus Christ. Death that was the King of terrors, has now lost his sting,
1 Cor. 15. 56. and the Devil has lost his power, as to one that is in Christ,
for he is overcome by Christ, Heb. 2. 14. Sin also, the cause of death, which
did shut the door of Gods mercy and grace upon us is overcome for us by Christ,
upon whom it was laid, Isa. 53. 6. And so he made an end of transgression and
sin.

The world also that did so often deceive us, and perplex us, is overcome for
us by Jesus Christ, Joh. 16. 33.

The Law also which brought in many Bills of Indictment against us, is
fulfilled by Christ for us, Romans 10. 4.

The Justice of the Almighty, that did lie in the way of our peace and quiet,
until it was satisfied, is now taken away quite, and appeased toward all true
Believers by the Lord Jesus Christ, Psalm. 85. 10 So that now, come what will
come, all shall work together for the good of those that love God. If
prosperity come, let us behold God smiling upon us, and trying of us: If
imprisonment come, let us with Paul and Silas sing Psalms: if tribulation come,
let us rejoice, knowing that tribulation shall work patience, and patience
experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed.

In a word, if our wills were resigned up into his will, we should be saying
such words: Good is the word of the Lord, let him do what seems him good; for
nothing can separate me from the love of God in Christ, Romans 8. 38, 39. Neither
can any thing do me harm, Romans 8. 28.

7. This is the way to have our conversation in Heaven, whilst we live on the
earth. Now what makes Heaven, but Union and Communion with God in Jesus Christ:
now this being attainable in this life, what hinders but a Christian may live
in Heaven whilst he lives upon earth, 1 Ioh. 1. 3. Truly, our fellowship is
with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. Phil. 3. 20. Our conversation
is in heaven: again, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me: and the life
which I now live in the flesh; I live by the Faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.
20. All these were men on earth, subject to infirmities, as we are, and yet
they lived in Heaven; and these things are left written in the Scriptures for
our learning, to wind up our hearts to the like frame. Let Religion be our
business then; and more time spent on that, and less time on the world. For as
has been said before, the time is short: the remainder of our season is now
folding up, as a Sail or Curtain into a narrow room: time is short, and life
shorter, and the end of all things is at hand: Thus have I endeavored as
briefly as I could, to lay before thee whosoever thou art that read these
lines, viz. the shortness of man's life, or fewness of his days, and the many
miseries that do befall him, and how a Christian might, if not escape them, yet
have them lessened and sweetened unto him; so that he might walk through these
Seas of troubles and winds, and floods of afflictions and fiery trials, by open
and secret buffettings from thy many enemies, and sometimes from pretended
friends, and near relations with comfort, etc. Was not Abel murdered by his
brother; Noah mocked by his sons: Job and David scoffed by their wives? was not
Jacob threatened by his brother, banished from his Father, abused by his uncle?
in the day he was consumed with heat, Genesis 31. 40. in the night with frost:
then there arose a division betweeen his two wives, two sisters brawling for
one husband; after this, they both run from their father, and now see a fresh
pursuit behind him, Laban following him with an hue and cry, before him, Esau
coming with four hundred men; to go forward intolerable; to go backward
unavailable; then a little after his wife Rachel dies: his daughter Dinah is
ravished; his son Reuben lies with his Concubines: then his son, his Joseph
they report is lost: and now see a man of sorrows indeed! I will go down, says
he, to the grave, unto my sons, mourning: after this a Famine begins, and
another of his sons in prison, and nothing can redeem him but his only
Benjamin: here was loss of son after son: Joseph is not, Simeon is not, says
he, and now ye take away Benjamin: all these things are against me: Thus every
Christian more or less; though he be a few days, yet they are full of trouble,
and both fly away faster then the Weavers shuttle: which if well considered will
rouse up those many sleepy professors, living in these, crazy times, and
slippery days, wherein both lives and liberties, health, friends, wealth,
pleasures, honors, and privileges are in such extremity of extraordinary
uncertainties: I say, the serious consideration hereof, might serve to rouse up
all sorts of men, to improve the present time to the best advantage; that so
they might have an unshaken foundation of true spiritual peace and consolation:
For we must al die, and that speedily; our days fly away swifter then the
weavers Shuttle. It is said, that when the Egyptians found their first born
dead in their Families, there was a great cry throughout Egypt, a great cry in
every Family: Now were we as sensible of our souls as we are of our bodies, oh
what a great cry would there be in most of our Families! one crying out, and
saying, O Lord, I have a dead child! another, O Lord, I have a dead servant!
another, O Lord, I have a dead wife in my Family, whose soul is dead: another,
I have a dead husband, a dead friend; and if the Lord does not raise them
speedily, I fear they will die the second death, from whence there is no
redemption: for they shall be cast into everlasting fire, which is an
intolerable eternity: our life is like a candle in a paper Lanthorn; there is
but a breath between us and heaven or hell. Wherefore, O earth, earth, earth,
hear the voice of the Lord, even while it is called to day, which is swifter
then the weavers shuttle.

FINIS.

