Mr. PYM HIS Speech in Parliament the XXV of January MDCXLI. Against the
Bishops Charge, hastening their Trial.

Printed in the year 1641.

Mr. PYM his Speech In PARLIAMENT IANVARY 25. 1641. Against the 12 Bishops
charge
M. SPEAKER,
WHereas there has been presented to the House a most faithful and exact
report of the Conference we had the other day concerning the 12 Bishops which
is apeached of high Teason and with the opinion of the Committees that were
appointed, and employed in that service for the maintaining of the chardge
against them.

And they conceived it sir that the Bishop of Lincoln and the rest should be
brought to their trial this day, I must second the motion, and with the favor
of the House, I shall be bold to offer my reason why I conceive it more
necessary that we should proceed against them in their trial.

M. Speaker, Long introductions are not suitable to weighty businesses, we are
fallen upon the great M E, the Lord Bishop of York and the rest of them, look
upon them as they are in their highness, and you shall see that they are the
stye of all pestilent filth, and has infected the State and the government of
the Church and Common wealth, look upon them in their dependances, and they are
the only mar and the only men that has raised and advanced all those, that
together with themselves have been the authors, and causers of all these ruins,
miseries and calamities which we do now groan under.

Who is it, but in only these men that have brought in all these seditious
into the Church, and have caused other godly, ministers both to preach and
teach men in their heresies to side with them in their bloody designs. Who is
it M. Speaker, but they only that have advanced all Popish Ministers to their
preferment, and the chiefest of all that has raised all these tumults of
Papists and other sectaries to revolt against his Majesty.

These are men that should have fed Christ's flock, but they are the wolfs that
have devoured them, the sheep should have fed upon the mountains, but the
mountains have eaten up the sheep, it was the happiness of our Church when the
zeal of Gods house did eat up the Bishops, glorious and brave Martyrs went to
the stake, in defense of the Protestant Religion, but the zeal of these Bishops
have been to eat up and persecute the Church.

Who is it M. Speaker, but these Bb. that has sit at the helm to guide and
steare them to all their managing of their Proiects, that has been set on foot
in this Kingdom these Two years last past, and rather then they would stand
out, they have most unworthily trucked and chaffered in the meanest of them, as
for instance, that of Tobacco, wherein thousands of poor people have been
stripped and turned out of their trades, for which they have served as
Apprentice; We all know that they were then men that comprehended and
contracted with them for their Licenses: Certainly Mr. SPEAKER, they might have
spent their times better, and more for their grace in the Pulpit, then thus
raking and plotting of mischief.

Mr. SPEAKER, We all know what they have been charged withal here in this
house, they be crimes of a dangerous Consequence, and of a transcendent nature,
no less than the subverting of the government of this Kingdom, and the
alteration of the Protestant Religion, and this not upon bare information
only, but much of it comes before us already, upon clear and manifest
proofs, and there is scarce any businesses, grievances, or complaints come
before us in this place, wherein we do uot find them intermingled, and as it
were twisted into it, like a busy and angery Waspe, his sting in the tail of
every thing.

We have this day heard the Report of the Conferrence which We had the last
week, and in it the accusation which is laid against them, and we do all
know, that they are guilty of the same.

Mr. Speaker, they have beer, and are still the common enemy to all goodness
and good men, and it is not safe that such vipers should have been near his
Majesty's person, to distill their poison into his sacred Ears, nor were it
safe for the Common Wealth, that they should sit in so eminent a place of
government, being thus wickedly bent, these men are the corrupt fountain, that
has infected all the streams, and until the fountain be purged, we cannot
expect to have any clear Channells, I shall be bold therefore, to offer my
opinion, and if I err, it is the errrour of my Judgment, and nor my want of
zeal and affection to the public good.

I conceive it most necessary and fit that we should now take up a Resolution
to do somewhat, and to strike whilst the Iron is hot: to go to the Lords in
the Name of the Commons of this House, to desire their Lordships, that these
men might proceed in their trial.

FINIS.

