AN ABSTRACT OF Certain Depositions, By virtue of His MAJESTY'S Commission,
taken upon Oath, Concerning the Traitorous intention of the Rebels in Ireland,
in rejecting the Government of His Majesty, in having a King of their own: And
who that King should be.

With an Extract of a Letter from Rome, 4. Jan. 1642.

YORK: Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty:
And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. 1642.

An Abstract of the Depositions, by virtue of His Majesty's Commission, taken
upon Oath, Concerning the traitorous intention of the Rebels, in rejecting the
Government of His Majesty, in having a King of their own: And who this King
should be.
GEorge Cook of Lissignie, Cavan. 71 Jan. 22. 1641.
inter caerera, deposes, that one Tirlagh O Gown, alias Smith, a Popish
Priest, said, That the Papists would have their Churches, Lands, and Kingdom to
themselves from the English, and be no more slaves to the English, as they had
been, or else they would lose their lives.

Richard Colley, Fermanagh 90. Febr. 2. 1641.
of the Parish of Kinnallie, inter caet. deposes, that Bryan O Cormacke of
Dristernan, and other Rebels, said, They would never submit to any English man.

Thomas Magill, Lowth 4. Febr. 21. 1641.
Clerk, inter caet. deposes, that Collogh, Mac Brian, Mac Mahowne, and
several other Rebels, said, That they would not be subject to any Parliaments
in England, and that they would have none to Govern over them, but a born Irish
man.

Matthew Brown of Clonisse, Monaghan 36. March 24 1641.
Gent. inter caet. deposes, that he heard Peter Bath say, That they looked to
have the King to put out the words Defender of the Faith, for none was supreme
of the Church, and Defender of the Faith, but the Pope.

Richard Whitton of Kilvane, VVickloe 8. Jan. 11. 1641.
inter caet. deposes, that Luke Birne of Kilvane said, He would have their
Religion flourish, no thanks to the King.

Edward Deaselye, inter caet. deposes, VVickloe 39. Feb. 5. 1641.
That Luke Tool and Luke Birne offered a Pass to this Examinant, which they
said, would be better then the Kings Pass.

Thomas Tailor of Kilmore, inter caet. Cavan. 47 Jan. 12. 1641.
deposes, that he heard Mulmore O Kely say, That if the said Deponent would
deny the King he should speed as they did.

William Wright of Culmonyn, inter caet. Queens 31. April 12. 1642.
deposes, that John Good of Clonay-sawne, and Dermot Mac Phelmi said, That
they hoped to have all Protestants hanged within one fortnight, and he that did
protect them to.

Richard Knowles of Newtowne, inter caet. Fermanagh 60. 10. Jan. 1641.
deposes, that Rory Magwire, Richard Nugent, Donogh Magwire, by whose means he
was robbed, some of the said Robbers said, That they had a King of their own in
Ireland.

Nicholas Michaell of Farnam, Cavan. 57 15. Jan.
inter caet. deposes, that he heard the parties that robbed him say, They had
an Irish King amongst them, and they regarded not King Charles, the King of
England.

Robert Barton of Newtowne, Fermanagh 41. 5. Jan.
inter caet. deposes, that some of the Rebels said, They had a new King, and
had Commission from him for what they did.

Thomas Middlebrooke, Fermanagh 18. 4. Jan.
inter caet. deposes, that about the 26. of October last past, he heard one
Cahell Boy Mac-Demot of Killrout say, That within one fortnight they should
have a new King of Ireland crowned, one of the O Neales, or words to that
effect.

Avis Brashaw, Fermanagh 19. 4. Jan.
inter caet. deposes, That she heard the abovesaid Cahall Boy say the same, or
words to that effect.

Alice Tibbs, Fermanagh 20. 4. Ian.
inter caet. desposeth, That she heard the abovesaid Cahall Boy say the same,
or words to that effect.

Alice Champin, Fermanagh 27. 14. April.
the relict of Arthur Champin, inter caet. deposes, that she heard the
Rebellious Irish say, That Sir Phellomy Roe of Neale should be King of Ireland,
and that they would give a great sum of Money, on condition they had our
gracious King Charles his head.

Elizabeth Gough, inter caet. deposes, Cavan. 85 8. Feb.
that Cahir O Kelay, and Thomas Mac-Encorr said, They purposed to have a King
of their own, and that Sir Phelmi O Neale should be he.

John Gregg of Clovenedan, inter caet. Ardmagh 3. 7. Ian. 1641.
deposes, that Captain Shane O Neale, styled, Sir Phelmi O Neale His Majesty.

Martha Culme, inter caet. deposes, Monaghan 21. 14. Febr.
that one Art. Mac Patrick, Mac Tool Boy, Mac Mahowne, speaking to her in
Irish, she desired him to deliver himself in English, for she understood not
Irish: Who answered her in English, That such as spoke in English, should pay
ten shillings to the King: And the Deponent demanding of him, What King? He
answered, What King but the Earl of Tyrone.

Hugh Culme inter caet. Monag. han. 16. 25. Ian.
deposes, that he was credibly told that Art. Mac Mahowne said, That they that
spoke English should pay ten shillings to the King: The party to whom it was
spoken, desiring to know what King, his answer was, What King but the Earl of
Tyrone.

Anne Gill inter caet. Fermanagh 69. 29. Ian.
deposes, that Rory Magwire in the presence of this Deponent, and a great many
of her Neighbors, gave forth, That it was to no purpose for them to fly to
Dublin for succor, for Dublin was taken by the Lord Magwire, who was to be
King of Ireland.

Roger Puttock, John Stern, Jo. Watson, Will. Aldrich, Henry Brereton, William
Hitchcock, Randall Adams.

An Extract of a Letter written 4. Janu. 1641.
From Isidores College in Rome, by Bonaventure O Connye, to Feylmi Roe O Neill
in Ireland.
THe holy Father and his two Nephews, Cardinal Anthony Barbarinus Protector of
Ireland, and Cardinal Francis Barbarinus, who has all the power here in such
matters as concern the Pope, have heard of the War and Confederation which
you make for your Religion and Liberty: And truly I cannot express the
greatness of the Joy (no wonder) which they conceive thence in such manner,
That if they had received Letters, or if you had sent an Agent unto them to
express your Will or Designs, you should want no help for your better
proceedings. Wherefore I would have you to send some able man, with a
Declaration of your Grievances in form of Law.

Be sure to have a great heart, and make some chief head among you, but reserve
the Crown for Con his side the Neills. Remember the old slavery wherein you
have lived of long time, and the destruction which will generally come upon
you, except you get the upper hand: You will prevail, if you join together as
you ought, God send it. I would advize every chief Officer among you to have a
Secretary along with him to write a Diurnall of your passages; and overthrows,
which your Enemies receive; which will redound much to your Glory. Spoil not
the country for fear of Famine. I will not fail to write according as I shall
hear from you. We would send unto you a Bull, after the form of the Bull which
Hugh Mac-Baron got, if we had received your Letters. If the Church do well,
they will turn over the Election of Prelates there to the Nobility, and will
give them Authority in that point.

FINIS.

