A brief Sum of Certain Wormwood Lectures.

Which Women use to sing and say
Unto their Husbands every day.
Translated out of all Languages into Billings-Gate Dialogue. By Martin Parker.

Out Rogue spend thy Money


O good wife


a man kneels under a tree and petitions his wife who threatens him with a
household implement

London, Printed for J. Whight, W. Thackeray, and T. Passenger. 1582.

Certain Wormwood Lectures Translated out of several Languages into
Billings-Gate DIALOGVE.
1. Dialogue. Of a Woman finding her Husband in company with another Woman whom
she likes not
HA, ha, have I found you together in faith? here is a goodly sight I Will promise
you, a Knave and a Queen together: Is It possible good man Rascal that you could
give me the slip so neatly, and sneak hither to your Trull? But I am glad that
now at the last my good fortune has brought us together, we will have about on it
before we part. Thou impudent Whore, how dare thou keep company with my
Husband? What business have you together? none that is honest I doubt: Come out
to me thou brazen faced Jade, or I Will send the Pot to thee with a vengeance;
let me come to her you Rascal, or else give me the Pot: Will Not you, you Rogue
you, will not you? s'light I Will have my will if it costs my life. O thou villain,
such bold-fac'd huswives (as this) makes me live such a life (at home) as I do:
I Will be revenged on you both before George, or I Will want will or strength,
before I Will let slip this opportunity, I Will want breath to keep me alive: Let
me come to her, I say, thou slave, or I Will do that which I never thought of
before; if thou will protect thy Minion from my Fury, thou shall taste of it
thy self. What, shall the proud Harlot (think thou) out-brave me to my face?
You were best to let me have my Peny-worths on her, for by this light I Will give
her a mark that thou may know her by another time, least perhaps thou may
forget her: I says Mistress Minks, it were a good deed to slit your nose, and
spoil that tempting face of yours. Why do thou not let me come to her, thou
white liver'd Knave? Don't prevent my spleen upon her, least thou urge it
against thy self, Come away, I say, for i will not leave her as I found her; no,
i will pull a Crow with her, if I be hanged for it.

His excusive Answer.
I Prithee Wife abate thy furious spl^^^
Let temperance sway thy passion at (...)
Alas, what by this woman have thou (...)
That moves thee to commit that (...)
Have thou observed any dishonest ca^^
Or that I have infringed my vow in (...)
I met her in the street by chance, and (...)
Would needs bestow on her a pint of (...)
I vow to Heaven no dishonesty,
Was in my thoughts; then do not thou divine
Such evil, where no evil thought once was,
This jealousy, 'twere sit thou should ore-pass.
What I have done to her, to mine own Sister
I might have done, and in a lawful Sort,
In The way of salutation once I Kissed her,
Having no mind of any sordid Sport;
And will thou then (without examination)
Like an intemperate Beast be ruled by passion?
Consider what is done in word, and what (...)
Without prevention thou have done indeed:
Think what repentance comes after that,
When women in rash fury do proceed:
Upon my life the woman is (for me)
As honest as thy self; or any she,
Her husband I have known this dozen years,
If I meet with him, or he with me,
Drink must be had; then leave thy childish fears
(...) ^^rry thou'st such ill conceit of me,
(...) I hope may with a woman drink
(...) ^^^t dishonesty, may not they do think?
(...) I should have suffered thee to have
(...) at thy overweening wrath does urge,
(...) ^^^u not made fine work; thou villain knave
(...) ^^^cal, thou did call me, I can purge
(...) ^^om that crime, my lenity is such,
(...) ^rong a harmless woman, that is too much,
^^^'d not for five pounds her husband should
^^ar of this injury done unto his Wife,
And in my company, perhaps it would
Occasion be to set all friends at strife,
Thou know the man I am sure; it is Mr. Pell,
Who wedded her of late, and loves her well.
Now therefore Madge (to excuse the crime)
Sit thou down by us, and call for thy pint,
And I will make atonement for this crime,
Thee with his wife henceforth I Will well acquaint:
We Will all be friends, I Will make this bargain so,
Her husband of this business nere sha'l know.
Dialogue 2. This is between a jealous old Woman and her young Husband; and
thus she begins.
I, I, follow thy idle course of life still, and see what will come on it in the
end: Alas, alas, youngster, I can see day at a little hole, and as far into a
Millstone as an other woman can; I observe how every day more and more you
slight me, you regard not my company neither at home nor abroad, neither at
bed, nor board: you are ashamed forsooth that I (because I am somewhat ancient)
should walk and be seen to go along with you in the streets: but i will warrant
you if Mrs. A. or Mrs. B. or Mrs. C. or any of those idle Gossips entreat your
company, oh the request is no sooner made but it is granted; on go; your Cloak,
and out of doors you go with any of these so hastily and willingly, as if you
were to receive a thousand pounds: but if I speak to you, nay desire you, and
woo you as it were for my life, to walk with me into the Town to visit my
acquaintance, or in the fields, or to Islington, to be merry and recreate my
self, oh, what business is pretended? What excuses are framed? What Letters we
have to write, what men we have appointed to meet (about earnest occasions)
just at the very time? And if I do chance to get you once in a month or six
weeks to walk with me any where, don't I perceive how you march before me after
four miles an hour? if I can limp after within sight of you, well and good, if
not, I may lose my self for any care that you take, and why is all this Sir,
think you? but because I poor old wretch, should not be taken notice of to be
your wife; and I observe (thank you) what nods and winks you use to other women
in the streets: As who should say, take warning, the old woman is behind,
therefore pass by and take no acquaintance: and when we are in company to be
merry; not a smile, nor a cheerful look shall we get from you, no, you are then
in your melancholy dumps: behaving your self rather like an Hermit in his Cell,
or a Monk in his Cloister, then a merry man at the Tavern or Alehouse: But do
you think Sir, that I cannot hear what a merry companion you are in my absence?
Oh! then especialy if such a one, or such a one, or any other handsome woman be
in your company, you will sing, dance, tell merry tales, kiss, dally, complement,
drink healths to that Mistress Fart, and this Mistress Fiss, and if the time and
place be suitable; Well, well, I say no more for shame, and in faith, in faith i will
turn away that fine Mrs. Minks your Maid, for something that I have ta'n notice
of within these few days: your Nose bled forsooth the other day, and you must
needs through your foul Hankercher to her, but she (with a wanion to you both)
must hold the Basin till you wash your hands, marry gip with a murrain, but for
that matter let me alone, i will remedy that, or else I Will want of my will i will
keep no such fine snouted minions as she is, i will have a homely, huswively
wench, that has more honesty than beauty, and a better heart than a face, i will
not be thus plagued long, out upon it that a woman that has out-lasted the date
of four husbands, and now comes to be slighted by a boy of two and twenty;
well, thy unkind dealing will be the death of me, before nature has appointed,
I took thee to be the staff of my age, but I doubt shortly thou will prove a
rotten one with a pox: you marry an old Rich Widow for a comfort: well I have
done, it is but folly to speak any more now.

His Answer.
NO more for shame fond fool I think
Thou can produce from that foul sink,
Which makes thy very words to stink of malice
Were I a single man again,
I Would not have thee I tell the plain,
Were thou worth more than the K. of Spain's chief Palace.
I do confess I am served but just,
Who for that cursed Pactolian dust,
Must like an Ass my free neck thurst in the halter.
Old Widows, marry hang them all,
That will bring young men into thrall,
This will the stoutest heart appall, and alter,
Fond jealousy I plainly find,
Is incident to women kind,
Chiefly old women are inclined unto it.
Whose conscience tells them that they can
Not give content to a young man:
Experience since the World began does show it.
Precious Woman must I be
Kept in subjection by thee?
I who before could travel free at pleasure.
Now whether go you is the word,
That my old Wife does me afford,
I now repent my hasty accord at leisure.
I see this great despairity
In Wedlock brings much misery;
For I am not full twenty three till Easter.
And thou art fourscore and two years old,
A shameless tale it is to be told,
Nay, that is the least on it I dare hold a Teaster.
And yet forsooth I dare not walk
Abroad, or with woman talk:
Lest I take Cheese instead of Chalk, you doubt it.
I cannot blame love, nay, says the Elf
Was cause of the match, no 'twas thy pelf:
O would that I had kept my self without it.
For I have sold my liberty,
My freedom's changed for slavery.
Though I have nere so honestly suspicion
Arising from the forenam'd cause;
Still matters of dissension draws
No love, but quite against all Laws division.
This is the life that I live in.
No woman dares give me a Pin, to maunder.
But presently you do begin to
And if a man familiar be,
Especially one of mean degree,
Then strait you judge that he is for me a Pander:
But since there is no remedy,
I now must bare it patiently,
And make so much hilarity as may be,
If these ill words I don't observe,
Nor from the rules of Wedlock swerve,
My self I will not pine nor starve By'r Lady.
No, say or do what thou think fit,
(According to thy childish wit)
I will be sorry near a whit the less for it,
So long as thou do live, I will
Be constant, kind, and loving still,
I pass not (though thou wish me ill not this for it.
Thus wife my resolution now
Thou'st heard, all true to thee I vow, believe on it.
If thy good nature can allow,
Then cease to make this needless stir,
If thou will not, say I Am a Cur,
If for the same I do not further grieve on it,
And let all young men for my sake,
Especial heed and warning take,
How they with Widows matches make for Riches.
Unless with patience they can bear
Some wrong, such men do find Hell here,
If she brings Wealth, (though old) she will wear the Breeches.
Dialogue 3. Between a proud Woman and her Husband about Apparel. She thus
begins
WHy thou Whoreson Rascally fellow, did thou marry me to make me a shame to my
self and all my Kin? Other men's wives forsooth (of an inferior rank to you)
can go gallant and brave, and have what apparel they ask for, while I go like a
very Drudg: Nay, almost as bad as a Dunghill-raker. I Will warrant you there is
Mrs. G. at the Horns, Mrs. F. at the Goat, and Mrs. S. at the Ram, these can
change Gowns as often as the Earth does her Livery, that is twice in a year, Hats,
Aprons, and new Dressings, are ordinarily altered with the Moon; and Saturday
night sets not a period to the week more certainly than the Shoo-maker brings
new shoes, but I poor silly wretch must go like Joan hold my staff, with a
gown and a hat of the fashion in Eighty eight. A pair of hose and shoes at
Easter, (I am sure I had none since) now it is Midsummer; I have never a pair of
Gloves worth the drawing on my hands; thou never bestowest above eight-pence or
ten-pence (at the most) of a pair for me. Now to be brief, mark what I say to
thee, I have complained so long in vain, that I am weary of that way: But i will
try another in faith, thou had been better to have been a little more free of
thy purse, for I know what I know; well there is enough said for this time: go
to, i will want no apparel goodman Rascal, I wont in faith, pick English out of
that if thou can: if thou will not bestow a new fashioned hat upon me, i will
bestow an old fashioned cap upon thee in troth, and that quickly too, there is
more, crack me that Nut sirrah.

His Answer.
WHy how now Joan, what do in earnest speak?
Then I perceive thy judgment is but weak,
Do threaten me? then I were best to look
About me, so I will in every nook.
Thoud'st better to have held these words within,
Can thou imagine any good to win:
That to extremity was never yet put,
I have maintain'n thee in an honest sort
As I was able, now i will keep thee short;
Seeing thou telst me whereto I shall trust,
I Will put thee to it in faith; and it is but just,
Thou Map of impudence is this the way
To get fine clothes, and must you needs betray
Thy sordid thoughts; well, mark the end on it Jug,
Think not that I will keep thee fine and smug,
To please the fancy of my rivals: no,
I Am very glad so much thy mind I know:
Now should I give thee Apron, Gown, or Hat;
Then I were worthy to be pointed at.
Since to my face thou dare presume to say,
That thou will get new clothes another way,
Go to thy chance, my heart shall have no share in
Thy gains, this is no place to sell thy ware in;
For (though I cannot deny thee for my wife)
Yet since thou gav'st me such a cause I may
Abjure thy company, begone I say.
Poor Joan, (though proud before perceiving well
How matters went, upon her knees she fell;
Husband says she, though I speak more than's fit;
Excuse my tongue which runs before my wit.
I never wronged you John by this good light,
Nor never intend to do although in spite
I spoke these speeches, vexed through want of clothes,
Yet if you will credit me by all the oaths
That can be sworn, for all my idle brags,
Ere i would perform my words i will go in rags:
No, no, sweet John, use me even as thou will,
Although my tongue (in choler) runs a tilt,
I will be loyal to thee, yet I must
Confess that this thy anger is but just:
I have deserved through my o're-weening speech
Thy constant hatred, yet let me beseech
(Upon my meek acknowledge o'th crime)
That thou will but excuse my fault this time.
John moved with her Crocodilian tears,
Her corpse dejected by the hand uprears.
Well Jugg, says he, upon this Protestation,
I am contented to suppress my passion
And re-admit thee into favor: thou
Must be content with what clothes I allow,
I, I, says Joan, and think my self unworthy
Of the worst rags I have had sweetheart from thee:
I will refuse to do no lawful thing,
Such fruits of discord henceforth shall not spring
From my fond fancy; then all that is amiss,
Quoth John, I freely pardon, and this Kiss
Shall seal our new contract of love, and none
By my consent shall break it, Amen, says Joan.
So John and Joan do like a loving pair
Jointly agree, (and now with speaking fair)
Against next Sunday she is promised that
He Will buy her a new fashioned Gown and Hat.
Let all wives take a president of Joan,
Fair words can get new clothes, foul words get none
Which was the wiser of this couple, I
Leave to their judgment who both causes try.
Dialogue 4. A pining covetous Woman to her Husband for Money to maintain her
self and Children.
I Have brought my self to a fine pass, have I not think you? What must I be
kept at my allowance? Why thou hard-hearted wretch, do think that I with my
three Children and a Maid and thy self when thou please, can be maintained
with twelve shillings a week, as the time is now? What do thou think I can
buy for this Money, unless we can make shift with Rye Bread, Essex Cheese, and
small bear: and if I buy any flesh, my Money would not reach any higher then
Sheeps-heads, Ox-cheeks, and Midriffs: if I attain to a Leg, or piece of
Neck-beef, then I think we are daintily fed* oh, but do thou imagine, that I
am so senseless to think, that (though now and then for fashion sake thou eat
of that hard fare without finding fault) thou have no better cheer abroad i will
warrant thee in faith, thou shall shift for one; and leave me to deal with the
rest so well as I can: for before I will endure this course long, i will leave
thee and go far enough: Think with thy self how a woman is able to endure it,
that thou should sit in a Tavern, Alehouse, or Tobacco-shop, there
quaffing, bouzing, and smoking your Nose, many times from morning till night,
not regarding your family; but in faith, in faith, hereafter I will follow you more
narrowly than I have done, and find you if you be above ground, or in any blind
Celler under ground, and make the place too hot to hold you and your Companions
also for the time; and make the pots, cups, and glasses fly about, and break
them all in pieces, pay for them who list, I care not, it shall not be your
smooth words then shall qualify the fury of my spleen, as sit down, sit down
by me Sweetheart, and be patient, i will drink but the other Pot, and be gone;
no sir, i will have you away with me, no excuses shall serve turn, you have too
often deceived me in that kind already. For, now I intend to take a new course
with you, that the World may be better with us than it is, and we may live in
better fashion and credit amongst our neighbors than we do, or else you shall
see that i will perform, what I have formerly spoken, and be no whit less than my
word: but this course shall not continue long, i will set something flying in faith,
'le do something e'reit be long that shall vex every vein in thy heart, thou
churlish Miser, don't think that I like a poor drudge will famish my self and
my small Children, while thou spendest thy money abroad, or savest it for some
worser end. If thou will get brats (with a wanion to thee) allow means to keep
them: (for according to the old Proverb) i will not take all the care, and keep
the Child too. Construe my words to what sense thou will, seeing thou put test
me to it, i will speak, and do too more then I speak: well, few words are best,
but in faith give me better maintenance, or else i will go shift for my self, and
leave thee and thy family to share it by the teeth; i will to service in faith, if
I must needs be a drudge and a slave, it shall not be under one that took me to
maintain me like a woman: twelve shillings a week among five or six on's: No
more of that if you love me.

His Answer.
HEy day, Nell, what up aloft?
How does thy tongue at random run?
I do confess thou'st often spoke,
Yet nothing for redress is done,
Nor nothing shall by my consent,
For i will know how my means is spent:
2.
Is It not a wonder, that three Barns,
A Maid, thy self, and I (who seek
To get it, and the money earns)
Should on twelve shillings live a week?
Alas, I earn (and work full hard)
But sixteen, so but four is spared.
3.
Were thou a House-wife; as thou do
Profess thy self, (well I can tell)
I know our Household with that cost
May be maintained and live full well.
But thou thy self do something spare,
For which we all the worse do fare.
4.
Now women are naturally bent
To pining, though they have no need,
They seldom are in heart content;
However they be clothed or feed.
For certainly did thou not hoord
This stipend would good fare afford.
5.
Were thou examined aright,
(As that to do I am unwilling)
Thou of that means thou make so slight,
Yet out of twelve thou sav'st a shilling.
I know most women thus proceed,
They still complain before they need.
6.
And since thou do abuse me so
Of parsimony without a cause,
Before i will let my money go,
Upon the matter I will pause:
Though I confess all things are dear,
That means might buy us better cheer.
7.
(I plainly find unto my grief)
That slender fare thou do provide,
Instead of wholesome powdered beef,
Thou dressest what I cannot abide:
And 'cause thou would prevent the worst,
Thou (with the Proverb) call'st Whore first.
8.
Come, i will my self be Caterer,
And take my charge out of thy care;
Upon my life (for all this stir)
Less Money shall buy better fare
Her projects failing, pining Nell
Did cry peccavi, all is well.
Dialogue 5. A Woman to her Husband finding him at the Tavern or Alehouse.
SO, so now it is as it should be, this is your good Husbandry, is it not? Now
the work goes well forward, doth't not? This is the way to maintain your Wife
and Children, wilt not? in faith you drunken Rascal, I Am glad I have (at the
last) found out your haunt, this way your Money goes; it is no marvel you are so
sparing at home, there you grudge a penny to fetch milk for your Children; nay,
you will hardly allow Soap and Candle, but every thing is too much; this groat is
grumbled at, that two pence is pined at. But here among your poor companions,
twelve or eighteen pence is not thought much of; but in faith i will take an order
with you, i will ferret you out in all your hole, come, will you come away, Sir?
I protest if you come not altogether the sooner, mark the end on it, if I come
again and find you here, i will break all the juggs, classes, pots, and pipes
that I can find upon the Table, I will in troth; and now I think on it, i will
have you with me, or i will never go away alive, you shall not put me off with
your whimsies, you shall not, you drunken beast, you shall not, etc.

His Answer.
1.
I Prithee good Wife,
Leave making of strife,
And sit down by me if thou please,
But if thou will not,
^^en be gone like a Trot,
^n my company much thou displeasest.
2.
that come thou for,
^^owing I abhor
(...) be thus pursued and reproved?
^^^n leave off thy prate,
I tell thee old Kate,
(...) patience is very much moved.
3.
It Is in vain to resist,
(...) i will come when I list,
^^en drink and be gone without scolding:
(...) sure what I spend,
^et, there is an end,
^o thee I am nothing beholding.
4.
When she did perceive
That he would not leave
His company to go home with her;
She sat to him close,
And fudled her nose,
And both went home reeling together.
Dialogue 6. A Woman to her Husband, coming home drunk.
ARE you come, good man Pot-shaker? it is very well done, how hard you labored
to day, are not your arms weary with lifting the pot? I do not think but they
be, out you filthy beast, art not ashamed to be abroad all day, and then come
home at night so drunk that thou art scarce able to stand on thy legs? you have
been in some good company, I believe, if the truth were known: I have been in
all the houses through the whole Parish to seek you, and could hear no news of
you; at the Fox you have not been this six days, at the Feathers, not since
Friday last, at the Drying Pan you were never seen since Shrove-tuesday; no,
no, you have gotten some new haunt. Well, I shall smell out all your holes,
come you drunken beast, get you to bed: I see no supper will down with you to
night, indeed it is better well saved, than id^^^ spent: Come away thou foul
sot, thou wilt nod so long till thou wilt fall in the fire anon: why do not come,
thou drunken Pispot? etc.

His drunken Answer.
1.
THou musty, rusty, dusty drab,
Why do thou look so like a crab?
this my welcome home?
^ay then in faith i am gone again,
I can speak, i will tell thee plain,
^^e not be thus or'e-come.
2.
Why a a-am I drunk thou dirty slut,
that thou such tricks on me do put?
^^e make the eat thy words:
^m as sober (I suppose)
(...) in the morning when I rose;
^o more of these discords.
3.
(...), a-am I not quietly come in?
and but that thou did first begin
^^o abuse me in this kind,
and since thou do my humors thwart,
(...) could almost find in my heart
^oo beat thee lame or blind.
4.
When she saw what her words had wrought,
and to what humor he was brought,
She wisely changed her note,
And with fair words got him to bed:
But in the morning what she said,
The second part shall shew't.
An Advice for Women.
A Woman's rule should be in such a fashion,
Only to rule her Household and her passion:
And her obedience never out of season,
So long as either Husbands lasts or reason,
Ill fares that harmless Family, that shows
A Cock that is silent, and a Hen that crows,
I know not which live more unnatural lives,
Obedient Husbands, or Commanding wives.
The Conclusion.
And now my Muse with me is like to scold,
For using her assistance at this time,
In railing Prose, and flattering pleasing Rhyme*
Though feminine, yet she is not of that mould*
For she holds froward language for a crime,
And says, with her I have been over bold:
The forked Mountains she in haste does clime,
And at her partings thus to me she told,
I doubt (my Friend thou't purchase) women's hatred,
When these my lines are amongst the people scattered.
FINIS.

