Mr. Pim's Speech, Deliverd at a Conference betwixt both Houses, concerning
diverse Petitions presented to the House of COMMONS* He being appointed to
manage that Conference. IANU. XXV. MDCXLI.
My Lords,
I Am commanded by the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses assembled for the
Commons in Parliament, to present to your Lordships diverse Petitions, which
they have received from several parts concerning the State of the ^ingdom:
whereunto they are chiefly moved by that Constant affection, which they have
always expressed, of maintaining a firm Union and good Correspondence with your
Lordships; wherein they have ever found much advantage, and contentment; but
never held it more important and necessary, than at this time, wherein the
Wisdom and Resolution of Parliament, have as many great Dangers and
Difficulties to pass through, as ever heretofore.

We are United in the public trust, which is derived from the Commonwealth
in the common Duty and Obligation whereby God does bind us to the discharge of
that trust: and the Commons desire to impart to your Lordships whatsoever
Information or Intelligence, whatsoever Encouragement or Assistance they have
received from those several Countries, which they represent, that so likewise
we may be United in the same Intentions and Endeavors of improving all to the
service of his Majesty, and the common good of the Kingdom.

The Petitions which I am directed to communicate to your Lordships, are four:
from London, Midlesex, Essex and Hertforashire* We have received many more, but
it would take up too much time, and be too great a trouble to peruse all; and,
in those four, you may perceive the Effect and Sense of all. First, I am to
desire your Lordships to hear them read, and then I shall pursue my
Instructions in propounding some Observations out of them.

The Petitions being read by four several Members of the House, Mr. PIM
reassumed his Discourse.
My Lords,
IN these four Petitions you may hear the voice or rather the cry of all
England, and you cannot wonder if the urgency, the extremity of the condition
wherein we are, do produce some earnestnes and vehemence of expression more
than ordinary; the agony, terror, and perplexity in which the Kingdom labors,
is universal, all parts are affected with it; and therefore in these you may
observe the groans and miserable complaints of all.

Diverse reasons may be given why those diseases which are Epidemicall are more
dangerous than others. The Cause of such diseases is universal and supernall,
not from an evil constitution, or evil diet, or any other accident: and such
causes work with more vigor and efficacy, than those which are particular and
inferior. 2. In such diseases there is a communicative quality, whereby the
malignity of them is multiplied and enforced. 3. They have a converting,
transforming power that turns other diseases and evil affections of men's
bodies into their own nature.

The common and epidemical disease wherein this Commonwealth lies now gasping,
has a superior and universal cause from the evil Counsels and designs of
those, who under his Majesty bear the greatest sway in Government. 2. It has
a contagious and infectious quality, whereby it is diffused and dispersed
through all parts of the Kingdom. 3. It is apt to take in the discontents,
evil affections and designs of particular persons to increase and fortify it
self.

I shall take occasion from several branches of those Petitions which your
Lordships have heard, to observe.

1 The variety of Dangers to which this Kingdom is now subject. 2 The manifold
distempers which is the cause of those dangers. 3 The multiplicity of those
evil Influences which are the Causes of that distemper.
The first danger is from enemies abroad; this may seem a causeles and
impertinent observation at this time, seeing we are in peace with all Nations
about us: But (my Lords) you may be pleased to consider that the safety of the
Kingdom ought not to depend upon the will and disposition of our Neighbors,
but upon our own strength and provision; betwixt States there are often sudden
changes, from peace to war, according to occasion and advantage. All the States
of Christendom are at now armed, and we have no reason to believe but that
those of greatest power have an evil Eye upon us in respect of our Religion:
And if their private differences should be composed, how dangerously, how
speedily might those great Armies and other preparations now ready, be applied
to some Enterprise and Attempt against us? and if there were no other Cause,
this were sufficient to make us stand upon our Guard; but there are diverse more
especially symptoms of dangers of this kind.

We may perceive by several Advertisements from abroad, that they did foresee
our dangers many Months before they broke out; they could foretell the time and
Manner of them, which is a clear evidence, they held Intelligence with those
which were the Contrivers and workers of the present troubles.

We have many dangerous Traitors and Fugitives now in other parts who can
discover the weakness and distemper of the Kingdom; who hold Intelligence with
the ill-affected party here, and by all cunning and subtle practices endeavor
to incite and provoke other Princes against us.

Some of the Ministers of our neighbor Princes may be justly suspected to
have had a more immediate hand and operation in the Insurrection and Rebellion
of Ireland, many of the Commanders and most of the Soldiers levied for the
service of Spain, are now joined with the Rebels there: and those Irish
Friars, which were employed by the Spanish Ambassador for the making of those
levies, are known to have been chief Incendiaries to this Rebellion, and are
still very active in the prosecution and encouragement of it.

The Rebels have a reay and speedy supply from some of our Neighbors. Two
Convoyes of Munition and Arms we are certainly informed of: one, from
Dunkirke, the other, from Nantes in Brita^y: and certainly those that are so
forward to enable others to hurt us, will not forbear to hurt us themselve,
as soon as they shall have means and opportunity to do it.

Another danger is from the Papists and ill-affected Party at home. The Papists
here, are acted by the same principles, with those in Ireland; many of the most
active of them have lately been there; which argues an intercourse and
communication of councels. They have still store of Arms and Munition at their
disposing, notwithstanding all our endeavors to disarm them, they have a free
resort to the City and to the Court, they want no oportunities to consult
together; they have the same or greater encouragements from above, and from
about them, than ever, in respect of the example and success of the Rebels in
Ireland, and the great consusions and divisions, which by their cunning and
subtle practices, are raised and fomented amongst our selves at home.

3 A third Danger is of Tumults and Insurrections of the meaner sort of people:
by reason of their ill vent of Cloth and other Manufactures, whereby great
multitudes are set on work, who live for the most upon their daily gettings,
and will in a very short time be brought to great extremity, if not employed:
Nothing is more sharp and pressing than necessity and want; what they cannot
buy they will take, and from them the like necessity will quickly be derived
to the Farmours and Husbandmen; and so, grow higher, and involve all in an
equality of misery and distress, if it be not prevented. And at this time such
Tumults will be dangerous, because the Kingdom is full of disbanded Soldiers,
and Officers, which will be ready to head and to animate the Multitude to
commit violence with more strength and advantage: and if they once grow into a
Body, it will be much more difficult to reduce them into order again, because
necessity and want, which are the causes of this disturbance, will still
increase as the effects do increase.

A fourth Danger is from the Rebels in Ireland, not only in respect of that
Kingdom, but in respect of this, They have seized upon the Body of that Kingdom
already, they abound in men of very able bodies, they increase in Arms and
Munition, they have great hopes of supplies from abroad, of encouragement here,
and are sure of good intertainment from the Popish party, so that they begin to
speak already of the transporting themselves hither, and making this Kingdom
the seat of the war.

The Distemper which has produced these dangers is various and exceeding
violent. Whenever nature is hindered in her proper operations and faculties,
distempers will necessarily follow.

The obstructions which have brought us into this distemper, a^e very many, so
that we cannot wonder at the strength and malignity of it. Some of the
chiefest of these obstructions, I shall endeavor to remember.

1. The obstruction of Reformation in matters of Religion: no Grievances are
sharper than those that press upon the tender consciences of men; and there
was never Church or State afflicted with more Grievances of this kind, then we
have been. And though they are by the wisdom of this Parliament partly eased
and diminished, yet many still remain: and as long as the Bishops and the
corrupt part of the Clergy continue in their Power, there will be little hope
of Freedom either from the sense of those which continue, or the fear of
those which are removed. And of this obstruction, (my Lords) I must clear the
Commons, we are in no part guilty of it: some good Bills have past us, and
others are in preparation, which might have been past before this, if we had
not found such ill success in the other. Whatsoever mischief this obstruction
shall produce, we are free from it: we may have our part of the Misery, we can
have no part in the guilt or dishonor.

2. An obstruction in Trade, it is the Trade that brings food and nourishment
to the Kingdom. It is that which preserves and increases the stock of the
whole, and distributes a convenient Portion of maintenance to every part of it:
therefore such an obstruction as this must needs be dangerous; the Freedom of
Trades being so necessary, the benefit so important, as that it gives life,
strength, and beauty to the whole Body of the Commonwealth: but I must protest
the House of Commons has given no cause to this obstruction; we have eased
Trade of many Burdens, and heavy Taxes which are taken off; we have freed it
from many hard restraints by Pattents and Monopolies; we have been willing to
part with our own Privileges, to give it Encouragement; we have sought to put
the Merchants into Security and confidence in respect of the Tower of London,
that so they might be invited to bring in their Bullion to the Mint, as
heretofore they have done:) and we are no way guilty of the Troubles, the
fears, and public dangers which make men withdraw their Stocks, and to keep
their money by them, to be ready for such sudden exigences, as in these great
distractions we have toomuch cause to expect.

3. The obstruction in the relief of Ireland. It must needs be accounted a
great shame and dishonor to this Kingdom, that our Neighbors have showed
themselves more forward to supply the Rebels, then we have been to relieve our
distressed brethren and Fellow Subjects. But I must declare that we are
altogether innocent of any neglect herein. As soon as the first news of the
Rebellion came over, we undertook the War, not by way of Supply and Aid, as
in former Rebellions the Subjects have used to do, but we undertook the whole
charge of it, and we suffered not 24 hours to pass, before we agreed to a
great Leavy of Money and Men, to be employed against the Rebels, even in a
larger proportion, then the Lord Justices and Counsel there did desire: and
from time to time we have done all for the furtherance thereof, though in the
midst of many distractions and diversions, but the want of Commissions for
leavying Men, for isluing Arms, and diverse other impediments, have been the
Causes of that obstructions; and I wish we had not only found impediments to
our selves, but also encouragements to them. Many of the chief Commanders, now
in the Head of the Rebels, after we had with your Lorps. concurrence stopped the
Ports against all Irish Papists, have been suffered to pass by his Majesty's
immediate Warrant, much to the discouragement of the Lord Justices and the
Counsel there; and, this procured, as we believe, by some evil Instruments,
too near his Regal Person, without his Majesty's knowledge and intention.

4 The obstruction in prosecution of Delinquents: many we have already brought
up to your Lordships: diverse others we have been discouraged to transmit; such
difficult proceedings have we met withal; such teerors and discountenance have
been cast upon our selves and our witnesses; and those who have showed
themselves their friends Patrons, have found it the most ready way to
preferment; yea his Majesty's own hand has been obtained, his Majesty's Ships
employed for the transporting of diverse of those who have fled from the justice
of the Parliament.

5 A general obstruction and interruption of the proceedings of Parliement, by
those manifold designs of violence (which through Gods mercy we have escaped;)
by the great and frequent breaches of Privilege; by the subtle endeavors to
raise parties in our House, and jealousies betwixt the two Houses.

6 The obstruction in providing for the defense of the Kingdom, that we might
be enabled to resist a foreign Enemy, to suppress all Civil insurrections:
and what a pressing necessity there is of this, the exceeding great decays in
the Navy, in the Forts, in the power of ordering the Militia of the Kingdom,
and means of furnishing them Munition, are sufficient evidences, known to none
better than to your Lordships, and what endeavor we have used to remove them
(but hitherto without that success and concurrence which we expected:) and
where the stop has been, and upon what good grounds we may claim our own
innocence and faithfulness in this, we desire no other Witnesses but yourselves.

Lastly, I come to the evil influences which have caused this distemper, and I
shall con^ent my self to mention some few of those which are most Apparent and
Important.

1 In the first place, I shall remember the evil Counsels about the King,
whereof we have often complained. Diseases of the Brain are most dahgerous,
because from thence Sense and Motion are derived to the whole Body. The
malignity of evil Counsels will quickly be infused into all parts of the
State. None can doubt but we have exceedingly labored under most dangerous and
mischievous Counsels. This evil influence has been the cause of the
preparation of War with Scotland, of the procuring a Rebellion in Irelrnd, of
corrupting Religion, suppressig the Liberty of this Kingdom, and of many
fearful and horrid attempts, to the subverting the very being of Parliament,
which was the only hopeful means of opposing and preventing all the rest: And
this does appear to be a most predominant evil of the Time; whereat we need
not wonder, when we consider how Councillors have been preferred and prepared.
And I appeal to your Lordships own Consciences, whether the giving, and the
countenancing of evil Council, has not been almost the only way to favor
and advancement.

2 The discouragement of good Council: diverse honest and approved Councillors
have been put from their places: others so discountenanced as the way of favor
has been shut against them, and that of danger and destruction only open to
them.

3 The great Power that an interessed and factious party has in the
Parliament, by the continuance of the Votes of the Bishops and Popish Lords in
your Lordships House; and the taking in of others both out of the House of
Commons, and otherwise, to increase their strength.

4 The someting and cherishing of a malignant party throughout the whole
Kingdom.

5 The manifold jealousies betwixt the King, his Parliament, and good Subjects,
whereby his protection and favor has in a great measure been witheld from
them: their inclination and resolution to serve and assist him, has been very
much hindered and interrupted: We have often suffered under the
mis-interpretation of good actions, and false inportation of evil, which we
never intended. So that we may justly purge our selves from all guilt of being
Authors of this jealousy and misunderstanding: We have been, and are still
ready to serve his Majesty with our lives and fortunes, with much cheerfulness
and earnestness of affection, as ever any Subjects were; and we doubt not but
our proceedings will so manifest this, that we shall be as clear in the
apprehension of the world, as we are in the testimony of our own Consciences.

I am now come to a Conclusion, and I have nothing to propound to Your
Lordships by way of Request or desire from the House of Commons: I doubt not
but yout judgments will tell you, what is to be don; your Consciences, your
Honors, your interests will call upon you for the doing of it; the Commons
will be glad to have your help and concurrence in saving of the Kingdom; but
if they should fail of it, it should not discourage them in doing their duty.
And whether the Kingdom be lost or saved (as through Gods blessing I hope it
will be) they shall besorry that the story of this present Parliament should tell
Posterity, that in so great a danger and extremity, the House of Commons should
be enforced to save the Kingdom alone, and that the House of Peers should
have no part in the honor of the preservation of it, you having so great an
interest in the good success of those endeavors, in respect of your great
Estates, and high degrees of Nobility.

FINIS.

