A Modest Account FROM PENSYLVANIA, OF The Principal Differences In Point of
Doctrine, BETWEEN George Keith, And those of the People CALLED QUAKERS, From
whom he Separated: SHOWING His great Declension, and Inconsistency with Himself
Therein.

Recommended to the Serious Consideration of Those who are Turned Aside, and
Joined in his SCHISM.

If any man draw back, my Soul shall have no plasure in him. LONDON, Printed
and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart Count in Gracious-Street. 1696.

A Modest Account FROM PENSYLVANIA, OF THE Principal Differences BETWEEN George
Keith, And those of the People called QUAKERS, From whom he Separated.
SOme Assertions and Expressions touching Points of Doctrine, being agreeable
to the Writings of Faithful Friends and Brethren, as also the Writings of G. K.
himself, with some Observations thereon, written here, and proposed to the
Consideration of You that differ with us about Doctrinal Points, and yet
profess your selves to be at Unity with all Faithful Friends and Brethren in
all parts of the World, both in Spirit and Doctrine; that you may heartily and
impartially consider thereof, and by which you may see clearly how G. Keith is
contradicting not only himself, but also Faithful Friends and Brethren, in
several Points of Doctrine, but especially about one part of that you call the
main matter of Controversy. Also several Reasons offered to show that G. K.
designed either to conform Friends to some New Matter, or else to separate long
before he took the occasion against W. S. and T. F. wherein his Insincerity is
manifest in pretending to be One with all Faithful Friends, both in Spirit and
Doctrine.

Here is also shown my sense of his Confusions about the Resurrection; with
some Remarks upon the Almanack-Makers accusing Friends for Persecuting their
Brethren.

Unto which is added, A very good way and means proposed by G. K. himself, to
bring the Difference among Christians, in point of Judgment, to a small
compass: With some Observations and Queries thereon, etc.

Note, I have been careful to cite the Book and Pages of the following
Passages, by which it may be seen (though for brevity's sake I have not
sometimes taken in the whole Paragraphs, yet, as is premised in the Title) it
is nothing but what is agreeable to them.

IN the First place then, As concerning one part of that which you call The
main matter of Controversy with us, to wit, Of the universal necessity of the
Knowledge and Faith of Christ's Death and Sufferings without us, to Salvation,
as by your Books, Plea of the Innocent, page 17. and Some Fundamental Truths,
etc. page 14. appears: Now you may see what R. Barclay and G. K. have laid down
in this matter, to wit,

As the Light, and Grace, and Seed, R. Barclay's Apology, page 90.
comes to be received and not resisted, it works the Salvation of all, even of
those who are ignorant of the Death and Sufferings of Christ.

Who receive him in his Inward Coming, G. K's Light of Truth, etc. page 12.
and become subject to him, receive the benefit of his outward Coming, receive
the benefit of his Sufferings and Death, his Sufferings and Death is theirs.

But that the express knowledge and belief of his taking on him the Form Page 6.
of a Man, and his Obedience and Sufferings therein, is of absolute necessity
unto Salvation, so as none could be saved without the express knowledge, though
it was never revealed to them; This I deny; and how can thou prove it by
Scripture?

For why may not the benefit of Christ's taking on him the Form of a Man,
redound unto many who do not expressly know it, even as a diseased Person may
receive benefit of a Cure applied to him, though he has not an express
knowledge of all the means and ways how, from first to last, it has been
prepared? And even as many have suffered hurt through the Disobedience of the
First Man Adam, who have not known expressly that ever such a Man was, nor the
manner of his Disobedience; so even why may not many receive benefit through
the Obedience of Christ in the Outward, who have not known expressly his Outward
Coming and Sufferings? Otherwise Adam's Disobedience was more effectual for
Man's Destruction, than the Obedience of Christ was for his Salvation.

Again, G. K. frames an Objection, G. K.'s Universal Free Grace of the Gospel,
page 116, 117.
and answers thus:

Object. This Light cannot discover the Birth, Suffering, Death, Resurrection,
and Ascension of the Lord Jesus Christ, in the Outward, the knowledge of which
is essentially necessary to Salvation.

To which G. K. concludes his Answer after this manner: That the Unbelievers
that had not the Scriptures (says he) neither know him nor the Scriptures that
testified of him, being gone from his inward appearance of his own Light in
their hearts, which would have discovered both him in the Outward, and the
Scripture's Testimony of him: But that the knowledge of him, as in the Outward,
to be of necessity to Salvation, We Grant not.

Secondly, As concerning the sufficiency Edw. Burrough's Works. p. 54
of the Light, without something else (that you have made such a pudder about
of late.)

There is a Light in every Man sufficient of it self to bring Eternal Life and
Salvation.

It is a real degree of Blasphemy to G. K.'s Refutation, p. 38, 39.
say, This Light cannot make Satisfaction for the Sins that are past, nor lead
into Evangelical or Gospel Truths, or give Eternal Peace and Salvation.

We believe and acknowledge him G. K.'s Light of Truth, p. 113.
who was manifest in the Body of Flesh, to be the true and only Christ and
Savior, as manifest in us, (mark) (As manifest in us.)

The Light within is God and Christ.

Here with open Mouth thou speak G. K.'s Here^y of Hatred* p. 1^. G. K's
Light of Truth, page 8.
against our Principle, the Light that Enlightens every Man that comes into the
World, being the true Christ our only Savior, Mediator and Redeemer; and that
there is not another: And that Man is to heed and be joined to this Light, as
that which as it condemns him, so is able of it self to redeem him, as he
becomes obedient thereunto.

Thou say, This Doctrine declaring the Light and Power and Spirit within,
Ibid. p. 8.
to be Christ the only Mediator and Savior, asserts another Christ, another
Savior, than him, Jesus Christ of Nazareth, who was born of the Virgin Mary,
etc. But (says G. K.) if thou were indeed for this Mystery Christ within, as
he is the Seed, the Light, the Power and the Life, thou would not say this
asserts another Christ, etc.

God and Christ can do all things, and G. K.'s Refutation, p. 32.
both God and Christ are in all Men.

Thirdly. As concerning Christians and Preachers being Magistrates; you Edw.
Burbough's Works, p. 75.
may see what E. B. and G. K. says, to wit, Such we would have to Reign who
Rule for the Lord, Exercising and Executing Righteous Judgments by the Spirit
of God (says E. B.)

This is our Faith, That Magistrates G. Keith's Looking-Glass for Protestants,
p. 10.
may Preach (says G. K.)

Fourthly. G. K. concludes concerning Christ's Body now in Heaven, thus.

It being no more a Body of fllesh, blood G. Keeth's Way cast up, page 113.
and bones, but a pure ethereal or Heavenly body, like unto which the bodies of
the Saints are to be at the Resurrection, G. K's Way cast up, p. 131.

Fifthly. Concerning the Resurrection of the Dead, William Penn says, W. Penn's
Reason against Railing, p. 124.
For our parts, a Resurrection we believe, and that of Bodies too, unto Eternal
Life; what they shall be, we leave to God, who will give every one a Body as it
pleases him; and [thou Fool] belongs to the unnecessary medler.

It is enough that we believe a Resurrection, And his Key.
and that of a Glorious and Incorruptible Body, without farther Nicities.

But to tell of these bodily Eyes to be made Spiritual, and then of seeing G.
W. Life and Light of Christ, Book 64.
God with them, and that they must be so Spiritual, and yet be the same they
are for Matter and Substance; this is a strange Doctrine, and that which we
could never have demonstrated from any Maxim in Divinity, nor yet from any
general Rule in Philosophy.

That we deny the Resurrection of the Dead, this is a most false Charge, G. K's
Presbyterian and Independent Chapter c. 8. p. 229.
which they can never prove; but because we deny their Carnal Conceptions
(meaning the Professors) of the Resurrection, and hold us to Scripture words
(which is most safe) therefore they have so belyed us.

The Flesh that is Mortal, Gross and G. Keeth's Testimony against the false and
absurd Opinions, etc. page 10.
Corruptible, is not the Flesh that shall be raised up Immortal and
Incorruptible.

Now Friends, do but consider the above Expressions and Assertions, and if you
are One with all Faithful Friends in all parts of the World, both in Spirit and
Doctrine, and are in dear Unity with them, and if you faithfully believe your
Faith does well agree with them, and that yours is the Real, Sound and Upright
Faith, as has been received by the most Sound, Ancient, and Present Priends,
called (in scorn) Quakers; I say, if you are thus One with them, as in the Book
called, Some Page 17. and 28.
Reasons, etc. you positively say, you are; nay, if you are but one with G. K.
himself in what he has written, as to points of Doctrine; or if G. K. himself
be but consistent with himself (as he boasts he is) then surely these things
being sincerely considered by you, I see no reason you have to to differ with
us about the Doctrines aforesaid. But that you are not One with them, and that
G. K. is not consistent with (but in manifest contradiction against) himself
about it, methinks may easily be made appear by what follows, viz. by comparing
the former Assertions with his other Books, etc. as thus;

First. If all be saved who receive, R. B's Apology, p. 90.
and not resist the Light, Grace and Seed, though they are ignorant of Christ's
Death and Sufferings, how is it, that none are saved who are faithful Improvers
of this Light and Grace, etc. without the Faith and Knowledge of his Death and
Sufferings? Now pray, consider, whether you are One with that Faithful,
Ancient, and Sound Friend, R. Barclay, or not, in this matter? Again,

Secondly. If the express Knowledge G. Kieth's Priest and Independen visib^e
Chapter etc. p. 133.
of Christ becoming Man, and Suffering, etc. was positively denied to be of
necessity to Salvation; how is it now that he says, That express Knowledge is
indispensibly necessary to Salvation, or Perfect Justification?

Since the Knowledge of him in the Outward, in another Book, was then not
granted to be of necessity to Salvation, how is it that he does not only grant
it, but furiously quarrels with Friends about it, and confesses it himself to
be a main matter of Controversy with Friends here, as aforesaid?

But now to conclude this Head, I do say, That many are, or may be saved, who
are ignorant of Christ's Death and Sufferings, according to R. Barclay, His
Apology.
and yet that none are, or can be saved, but such who have the Knowledge of his
Death and Sufferings, according to G. K. who says, He does not contradict R.
Barclay; as also that the express Truth and Innocence, page 17.
Knowledge of him in the Outward, is of necessity unto Salvation, according to
G. K's late Books, and that the express Knowledge of him, as in the Outward, is
not of necessity to Salvation, according to his former Books; and yet that he
does not contradict himself, nor R. Barclay neither, in these matters, is such
a Riddle, that I know not how to unfold.

Fourthly, Seeing according to those faithful Friends, Edw. Burrough's and
Samuel Fisher, the Light is sufficient of it self; how is it that you are or
can be One with them, to say, it is not sufficient without something else?
Seeing, (according to G. K.) it is Blasphemy to say, this Light cannot make
Satisfaction for the sins that are past, nor give Eternal Peace and Salvation:
Then surely, by the Rule of Contraries, the Light can do these things; how then
is it not sufficient without something else?

Fifthly. Again, seeing (according to G. K.) he is not only the true Christ who
was manifest in the Body of Flesh, but also, that he is that only true Christ
(as manifest in us) how is it then that he that is manifest in us, is something
else, then he that was manifest in that Body of Flesh, seeing, in both
respects, he is so confessed to be the only true Christ and Savior? And surely
the word [only] is alone, and admits of nothing else.

Sixthly. Seeing it is our Principle, which (G. K. says) Robert Gordin with
open Mouth smites against, viz. That the Light is the true Christ or only
Savior, Mediator and Redeemer, and that there is not another; and that, as it
condemns, so is able, of it self, to save and redeem, as Man becomes Obedient
thereunto: Now I say, if this Light be able of it self, to save and redeem, as
Man becomes Obedient thereunto, how is it, that it is not sufficient to save
without something else? His Comparison of ones saying, (John Delaval's) not
being a Man without his Soul, denies him not be a Man, halts too much to reach
the matter; for the Question should not be, whether a Man be a Man without his
Soul, because the Question is not, whether Christ be Christ without the Man
Christ? But, whether the Man Christ be become something else besides Christ?
For he says, the Light is Christ, but the Man Christ is something else -- But
to wave such Comparisons.

Seventhly, Seeing G. K's Answer to R. Gordin, implies, that the Light, Power
and Spirit within, is Christ the only Mediator and Savior, and that so to
assert, is not to assert another Christ than Jesus of Nazareth, etc. Then
surely Jesus of Nazareth cannot be something else than the Light, Power and
Spirit within; because Jesus of Nazareth is the only Christ, Mediator and
Savior; and so is the Light, Power and Spirit within acknowledged to be -- And
if the same, then not any thing else.

Eighthly. Seeing (according to G. K.) the Light within is God and Christ, and
yet not sufficient without something else; is not this as much as to say, God
and Christ is not sufficient without something else, or something besides? For
so he says, the word (else) signifies And how it is then said in Hosea c. 13.
4. Thou shall know no God but me, for there is no Savior besides me? Where is
now (the something else?) And whereas he owns the Light within to be Christ in
express words, but by that (something else) he says, he means the Man-Christ;
does not this imply two Christ's, to wit, Christ one thing, and the Man Christ
some other thing, or something besides Christ? But now though we cannot yield
to G. K. in these his Terms, that the Light is not able of it self, and
consequently, that God, by G. K's own words, who says, the Light is God, is
not able to save, because we believe, besides him there is no Savior; yet we
do not in the least question, but dearly own and acknowledge and believe the
way and means that the Lord was pleased out of his infinite Love and Good Will
to Mankind, to take, in order to redeem him from Sin and Death, as sending his
only begotten Son into the World, not only as a Light to show us the way we
should go, and a Spirit to convince and reprove us of our Sins, and enable us
against the Act thereof; But also as Man, in the prepared Body to offer up
himself a most acceptable Sacrifice for the Sins of the whole World; Which
Offering the Lord was pleased to accept of, and by his Spirit and Power it is
made effectual for the Reconciliation and Salvation of all those that repent of
their Sins, and truly believe in his Name: And that God does not save any
without respect to that great Offering, we all grant, and truly believe: For
as G. K. says, The Lord having Light of Truth, p. 6.
ordained it so to be, how can or dare we say therefore, That he was or is not
sufficient by his Light, Power, and Spirit, to save, without something else?

Surely this seems to me too presumptuous Acts 2. 22.
ptuous an Expression; For was not that Body prepared of God? And what was done
in it, is it not said, God did it by him?

So that the scruple with us is not in the least what God has done, or does do
for lost Man, (as G. K. often dis-ingeniously words it) by altering the state
of the Controversy, which never was, What God or Christ has done for us, nor
of the Way and Means he has taken to Redeem us, according as it is recorded in
the Holy Scripture; but, What He by his Light and Spirit is sufficient to do:
For we say, He being God, can do as he pleases, else how is he God Almighty
and Omnipotent? Therefore let us not undertake to argue as if there were any
thing that God by his Light, Spirit, and Power, is not sufficient to do; and we
need not debate any longer about it.

Ninthly, If, according to that Faithful Friend and Brother, Edward Buroughs,
That We (meaning the Quakers) would have such to Reign, who Rule for the Lord,
Exercising and Executing Righteous Judgments by the Spirit of God: Then must it
not be such who are lead by the Spirit of God? And if so, then Sons of God: And
surely, as Edward Buroughs says, such are of us.

Now how does your Faith agree with his in this matter, that say, No Christians
can Rule?

And if it be our Faith, (as G. K. says it is) That Magistrates may preach,
then surely it is our Faith that Preachers may be Magistrates.

Against which Practice it self, G. K. has (all of a sudden) very Unmanly; as
well as Unchristianly, appeared; exposing Friends to the World in Print about
it, without ever admonishing them beforehand of it: For was not that his place
to have done, when he reckoned himself an Elder in the Church among us, as well
as that he was a Neighbor inhabiting in the Town among Friends, that then were
in place of Government?

But (which is most to be observed) that instead of reproving them for Retaking
a Sloop, (for which Act he has since exposed them) or admonishing about it, he
comes to them and Commended them for what they did, and said, It was very well
done, etc. -- Methinks you should consider these things.

But to the matter, How it should be our Faith that Magistrates may preach,
according to G. K's former Doctrine, and yet against our Faith that Preachers
should be Magistrates, according to his latter Doctrine; and yet that there is
no Contrariety between his present and former Doctrine (as he says there is
not) is sure too hard to reconcile.

Tenthly, Since, according to G. K's express words, Christ's glorified Body now
in Heaven, is no more a Body of Flesh, Blood, and Bones; but a pure, ethereal
or Heavenly Body, like unto which the Bodies of the Saints are to be at the
Resurrection, as before; and that we firmly believe that one Mediator between
God and Man to be the Man Christ Jesus, according to the express Testimony of
Scripture; and that he ever lives to make Intercession for us according to the
will of God; so we desire to rest satisfied therein, without aspiring to attain
to high things beyond our reach; or (as David said) Not to exercise our selves
in things too high for us,

Eleventhly, Concerning the Resurrection, since it is enough, according to that
Faithful Friend and Brother, William Penn, That we believe in the Resurrection,
and that of a Glorious and Incorruptible Body, without farther Nicities: And if
in Spirit and Doctrine you are one with him herein, why then do you obtrude
such Questions upon us, Shall the same Body rise? Or, Shall any thing of this
Body rise?

But seeing it is safest in this, and all At the Bank Meeting House in the 4th
Month, 1693.
other matters of Faith, to keep to Scripture-words, according to J. C. why
then would not our Faith be taken, when so often offered, to be delivered in
the very words of Scripture? But more of this hereafter.

I shall now sum up, in short, the substance of some of the aforesaid Passages,
etc. wherein he is, to me, so clearly inconsistent with the Doctrine of
Faithful Friends, as also greatly in contradiction to himself; as well as that
he is guilty of strange Absurdities therein, which take as follows, viz.

Men may be saved who are ignorant R. Barclay.
of Christ's Death and Sufferings.

None are saved but who have the The Places cited before.
knowledge of Christ's Death and Sufferings.

The express knowledge of his Sufferings and Death, as Man, in the Outward, is
universally necessary to Salvation.

The express knowledge is not universally necessary to Salvation.

The Light is sufficient of it self.

The Light is not sufficient without something else.

The Light is able to save and redeem of it self.

The Light is not sufficient without something else.

The Light within is God and Christ.

The Light within is not sufficient without something else.

The Light, Power, and Spirit within, is Christ the only Mediator and Savior.

The Light is not sufficient to save, without something else.

It is our Faith that Magistrates may G K. A ^estim^ny (...) p. 3.
preach.

It is our Faith that Preachers may not be Magistrates.

That which rises is the Corruptible, Truth Advanced, page 118.
that puts on Incorruption.

That which rises is a pure noble part, that consumes not, nor corrupts.

Note, now, pray Friends, and consider, how does your Faith well agree with the
Faith of all faithful Friends, in all parts of the World? And how inconsistent
is G. K's Faith and Doctrine, surely the impartial among you may easily
discern. But again,

It is a real degree of Blasphemy to say, Refutation, page 33.
The Light cannot make satisfaction for the sins that are past, nor give
Eternal Peace and Salvation.

But the Light is not sufficient without something else.

The Light or Principle in Man being God, can do all things.

But the Light is not sufficient to save, without something else.

And now notwithstanding, the Pretenses G. K. has made for this Separation,
was for want of having Justice against 2 Ancient Ministers, with some other
Reasons in his Book called, Some Causes and Reasons, etc. Yet when we call to
mind the many expressions that he has uttered to several Friends, upon
distinct Discourses with them, as also some passages that are dropped here and
there in his late Books, we cannot but conclude that he did either intend to
conform Friends to some Doctrine, of which, by what follows, the 12 Revolutions
may be supposed to be not the least in his Eye, or else to separate from them;
Some of which Passages and Expressions from whence we so conclude, are to this
purpose as follows, viz.

Because in this Catechism he concludes, 1st. G. K. p. 8.
That the Sons of the first Covenant cannot perish, though they die in that
State; and yet the State of the second Covenant being absolutely necessary for
them to Witness, is in order to the perfecting their Salvation. Page 10.
Then I ask, When must they obtain that second Covenant-State, if they die
without it, unless they come again, seeing, in the Grave there is no Repentance?

And in another Book he says, That G. K 's Presbyterian Independent, p. 115.
Men have been in a State of Salvation and Acceptance with God, who have not
had the Mystery of Christ's Death and Resurrection made known unto them, and
surely these Men continuing faithful to what they had received, when says he,
they could not perish.

And in another Book he says, They Refutation, paga 4.
could not perish, though they died in that State.

Now I say, If they could not perish, though they died without Faith and
Knowledge, and yet that Faith and Knowledge is absolutely necessary to perfect
their Salvation: I again ask, Where must they have that Faith and Knowledge,
unless they come again to receive it? And if they do, what will then become of
that Text G. K's Presbyterian and Independent visible Chapter c. 8. p. 259.
brought by G. K. against the New England Professors, arguing for
Non-Perfection in this Life, viz. Eccl. 11. 13. where it is said, As the Tree
falls, so it lies. Now according to this Text brought by G. K. himself, if an
honest Indian, or poor Infant, die or fall without that outward Knowledge, so
they must lie. And then if they cannot be perfectly saved without it, then
their lying must be but as Souls saved in part, and that to be their State for
ever; because, as they fall, so they lie. Again, his strange way of expressing
Page 100.
himself in the aforesaid Book, where he says, God has given sufficient to
all Men, whereby they may be saved one time or other [before the end of the
World.]

And in another Book he says, Whosoever Pretended Antidote, p. 98.
is not saved one time or other before the end of the World, the cause and
fault is in themselves, etc. Much more might be instanced, which is taken
notice of elsewhere. But now, as to what he has said to Persons.

Because he told Ebenezer Slocam of Road-Island, as he affirms, to this purpose
-- That it was God*s great Mercy to the Jebusites, Amorites and Hittites of
old, in that he destroyed them so much at once by the Israelites, for that by
so doing, their Souls might be sooner come into the Bodies of the Jews
Children, and so consequently become the sooner to be Members of the Visible
Church, etc.

Because he told John Delaval, as he affirmed, That he believed, God would lay
it upon him to Preach the Doctrine of the Revolution of Souls, for though he
has denied it, yet we have reason to believe John Delaval before him, because
we know he has denied since, what he has spoken to other Persons.

Because he told my self and John Delaval, That there were not above six
Friends in the World that Preached Christ aright, which he has since denied.

Because he called George Fox a good Gentile Preacher; which he also denied,
till Jedediah Allen proved it upon him at the Bank great Meeting, the 7th Day
of the 4th Month, 1693.

Because he told John Wilford, That Friends were not the People, but that there
must come another People.

Because he told John Kinsey, That if he could but get a Company to stand by
him, he would leap over them that stood in opposition against him, as so many
Straws.

Because with some Disgust he took with Margaret Beardsley, in discourse with
her, he said after this manner, I Will promise you, if you serve George Keith so,
George Keith will leave you, and then you shall wander about for lack of
Knowledge, and shall not find it.

Surely now Friends, these things considered impartially by you, how can you
think George Keith sincere, when he says, he is in dear Unity with all
faithful Friends and Brethren in all parts of the World, both in Spirit and
Doctrine; and can he be sincere now, or in his last Answer to Cotton Mather
too? For now he says, We are Unbelievers, Heretics and holders of false
Doctrine: But then he said, he did not only know us and our Principles, far
better than Cotton Mather and all his Brethren, but solemnly challenges him at
the same time, to give him but one single Instance of any one fundamental
Article of the Christian Faith denied by us a People; or by any one of our
Preachers or Writers, as generally owned or approved of by us -- Thus far
George Keith, in Praise of the Quakers Doctrine, and that from the great
Reason, he said, He had to know them, by the near intimacy he has had with
them, not only in Europe, but for these diverse years (says he) in America.

Observe this, his Praising our Doctrine, was Printed few Months (if any)
before he separated from us, under pretense of our being Heretics,
Unbelievers, and holders of false Doctrine.

Now is it not strange, that such a great Body of People, hereaway at least,
should be so soon degenerated in point of Doctrine, especially as we must needs
be, if we are such Heretics and Unbelievers as he renders us to be?

But now a little concerning the Clamor he has made of late against Friends
in his Books for their denying (as he falsely says) the Resurrection of the
Dead. For my part, I really think it had been better he had kept himself more
close to Scripture in it, as well as more consistent with himself about it,
before he had gone about unjusty to quarrel with us concerning it.

For I must needs say, I cannot see how he can reckon himself consistent with
himself in this matter, if you seriously consider what follows.

For whereas he says in one place, A Testimony against that absurd Opinion, p.
3.
where he goes about to demonstrate what part of a Man's body shall rise; says
he, That which rises, is the Mortal that puts on Immortality, and the
Corruptible which puts on Incorruption: But in another place he says, The
Flesh that is Mortal and Corruptible, is not that Flesh that shall Ibid. p. 10.
be raised up Immortal and Incorruptible. And in another Book he says Truth
advanced, etc.
of that which rises, That it is a pure noble part, that consumes not, nor
corrupts -- Now I ask, If that which rises be the corruptible, how is it that
that which rises is incorruptible and corrupts not again?

Whereas he says from Phil. 3. 21. Ibid. p. 10.
where the Apostle says, He shall change our vile bodies, etc. Now (says
George Keith) It is clear from this, that the change is not a Commutation of
one thing for another, but a Transmutation from one thing to another, even as
the Soul when Sanctified, is the same for Substance, as it was before the filth
of sin, etc. was separated from it; and as Ashes or Sand is turned into Glass,
and yet the same for Substance as before: Now as he is proving this as a thing
yet to come, he says, The bodies of the Saints remain low, weak, mortal and
corruptible, and not made like to Christ's Glorious body, till the Resurrection
of the Dead; importing that then will be the change (meant in the Text) of this
low, weak and corruptible body into an incorruptible one; Then I say, How is it
that he says, That the Flesh which is Corruptible, is not that Flesh which
shall be raised up Incorruptible; and yet, that the Text must mean, That this
Vile and Corruptible, must be changed into Incorruptible? But if the
Corruptible be laid aside, and that which corrupts not, but is separated (as
he says) in about a years time, more or less, and laid by Divine Providence in
some certain invisible place till the Resurrection: How then does it receive
the change meant by him in the Text, at the Resurrection? viz. If it be
Incorruptible before the Resurrection (for he says, It corrupts not) and the
change must be a Transmutation from one thing to another; must it not then
needs be, from an Incorruptible body to an Incorruptible body? And what change
is that?

For if it be a Transmutation, what is it which is Transmuted? It cannot be the
Noble and Pure part, because the Apostle says, It is our vile Body: And
according to George Keith, it cannot be that which corrupts, because he
says, That which rises corrupts not: Now whereas he goes about to
demonstrate the matter of the Soul's being the same for Substance as it was
before its being purified from sin, etc. and also of Ashes and Sand being the
same for Substance (when made into Glass) as before, and such like.

Now to me this is very short of the matter; for, as for the Soul, it was a
Spiritual Substance in its self, before its Sanctifying, as after; (so is not
the Body) so that such a change is surely rather a Purification than a
Transmutation, even as the washing of a body besmeared with Dirt, when
cleansed, is a Purification, and not a Transmutation.

And as for Ashes and Sand, it is still of a Temporal and Corruptible Nature
after it is Transmuted into Glass, as well as before: So that unless he could
demonstate how a Natural and Corruptible Substance, (as suppose Ashes or Sand)
can be turned into a Spiritual and Incorruptible One, and yet be the same for
matter and Substance as it was before that change: All that I find he has
said, is (to me) far from the Matter in hand: Again, if the grossy Ibid. p. 114
113. 117.
part (which he says, is called by Paul, Corruption) is not proper to Man as
Man (as he intimates) nor no proper part of Man's body, and the other part
corrupts not; then no proper part of Man's body, nor nothing of Man, as Man,
corrupts; How then is it said of David, That he slept with his Fathers and
saw corruption? And if Acts 13. 36
nothing that is proper to Man, as Man, Romans
corrupts; How is Man in Scripture called corruptible Man? And how is it that
Job said in his day, I Job.
have said of corruption, Thou art my Father, and to the Worms, Thou art my
Sister? Again, whereas he says (speaking of the Principle or Substance of the
body, which he calls the visible part) Though the Man-eater Truth advanced, etc
(says he) may eat the gross part of Man's body, yet that more subtle and
invisible part, they cannot eat: Now what is this, but to say, they may eat
Man's body, but they cannot eat the Substance of Man's body? And is not this as
contrary to that common Understanding God has given Man to judge of, and
distinguish things by, as the Popish Doctrine of Transubstantiation?

For the Papists say, Though as to their Sense, they eat the very Bread, it
having the very color, the smell, the taste and show of Bread, yet the
Substance of Bread they eat not: So G. K. holds, That though Man-eaters may eat
the visible part of Man's body, which is seen with the outward Eyes, yet the
Matter and Substance of Man's body they cannot eat; What strange Doctrine is
this? And if any say, things that are impossible to Man, are possible with God;
so say the Papists for their Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

Now to conclude this matter, I do say, Though the Scripture is very plentiful
of Testimonies and Proofs of the Resurrection of the Dead, and that, according
thereunto, we firmly believe there shall be a Resurrection both of the Just and
of the Unjust, the one to Eternal Life, the other to Condemnation; and that
herein it is, that we exercise our selves to have a Conscience void of offense
toward God, and toward Man: And that, if in this life we have hope only, we
are of all Men most miserable: Yet I say, though we firmly believe this
according to Scripture; we do not think it a necessary business to be curiously
prying into the manner of it, neither do we find the Primitive Christians come
to any express Result about what their bodies should be. For,

First. If it was the common belief of the Primitive Christians, That the very
same Matter and Substance of this corruptible body, should be the body that is
raised, why should any (among themselves especially) have asked such a needless
Question, as [With what body do they come?]

Secondly. But then such a Question ^eing asked, would not the Apostle think
you (who was ready to give every Man an answer of the hope that was in him)
have answered more to the matter, and said, Thou Fool, what do thou ask that
for? Inasmuch as it is our common belief, that it is the very same body for
Matter and Substance, which is buried in the Grave: The Matter and Substance
whereof being, in common acceptance, the same Flesh, Blood and Bones. But
instead of that, said he, Thou Fool, that which thou sowest, is not quickened
except it die: And thou sowest not the Body that shall be: So that as a Grain
sowed in the Field, is not quickened except it die; So Mankind, (on whom,
through the envy of the Devil, came Death) being sown in the Field of the
World, as unless he first come to die unto sin, is not quickened or raised to
the Life of Righteousness here in this World; so nor until he come to die the
bodily death, is he raised to the State of Glory with such a Spiritual body as
it shall please God to give in the World to come: And so that which is sown, is
not quickened except first it die.

Thirdly. Because, as to what body it shall be, he answers in the Negative, to
wit, That which thou sowest, is not that body that shall be, but bare Grain,
etc. and then concludes, that God gives a body, as it pleases him, and yet to
every Seed its own body; so that none shall be invested with another body, but
its own proper, yet a Spiritual body, and such a one as it shall please God to
give; with whose good pleasure I desire my Soul may rest satisfied in all
things (as long as I have a Being) viz. Concerning what bodies he will be
pleased to give at the Resurrection of the Dead.

Now Friends, methinks you may easily see what a strange Babel G. K. is a
building.

And why was not the Almanack-Maker so Ingenious and Impartial, since he would
needs be doing and meddling with things so impertinent to an Almanac, and
instead of such silly idle stuff he there puts in, to have taken notice of some
of the confused work which G. K. has made of late amongst us also; but it is a
true saying, Prejudice blinds Men. But now farther, as to the Almanack-Maker, I
shall take a little notice of the noise he makes therein concerning some
Quakers at Philadelphia, who (he said) persecuted their Brethren about a
Religious difference, etc. A high Charge, but sooner said than proved: For all
Men that are brought before Magistrates and Courts, are not sufferers for
Religion, though true it is, Men on the one hand may be Petsecutors for
Religion, and yet pretend other matters for their doing so; on the other hand,
Men may be Abusers of Christian Liberty, by doing things under pretense of
Conscience and Religion, for which the Magistrates may be Justifiable both to
call them to an Account, and (if occasion be) to punish them for it: This
surely G. K. will not deny; for does not he himself, (in his late Answer to
Cotton Mather, when speaking of a Woman that went stark naked into a Public
Assembly) say, That we (meaning the Quakers) all judge that any such Practice
does deserve Corporal Punishment, and that she deserved much more punishment
than Imprisonment for it; yet this Woman pretended Religion for what she did:
Now admit the Magistrates here had been full as bad in other matters, as you
have rendered them to be, yet that would not justify them in abusing of them,
in those matters for which they were called to an Account; nor did I ever read,
that I can remember, That any were Recorded as Sufferers for Conscience sake,
when it was for abusing and belying of Magistrates both in Print and otherwise,
as these did at Appeal it in the 2^. etc. p. ^.
Philadelphia, Printing that the Magistrates not only countenanced the hireing
of Men to fight, but also gave them a Commission so to do, Signed by Three
Justices of the Peace, whereof one was a Preacher, and that the Worldly
Government was here engrossed by the Ministers, in all which are these
falsehoods against the Magistrates.

First. That they Signed a Commission to fight: This falsehood was of very bad
tendency, thus to Print abroad to the World, That the Magistrates, and that
Quakers too, signed a Commission to fight, for this is more than they had Power
to do, being Civil Magistrates, for that Power was given by the King to none
but the Governor, his Captains or Officers; so that they might have been
called to an Account for it, and rendered ridiculous to the World about it.

The second falsehood was, That it was Signed by three Justices of the Peace,
whereof one was a Preacher; whereas it being but a Warrant of the Hue and Cry,
Signed but by two Justices, and neither of them a Preacher.

The third falsehood was, That the Ministers here had engrossed the Worldly
Covernment, for there were many that were not Ministers, nor Quakers neither,
then in Government: And does not the Almanac Maker say himself, That there
were then Justices who were not Quakers? Consequently the Government was not
engrossed by them. Neither did I ever read, That any were Recorded as Sufferers
for Conscience sake, when it was for falsely insinuating against Magistrates;
as, That one should be carried to Bed Drunk, and another to be as Drunk, that
he could scarce get over the Ships side he was in, and that he Waged his Horse
with John Slocam, but being Drunk, the said Slocam would not take the advantage
of the Wager against him. Now though he may say, This was but by way of Quaery,
yet to insinuate such gross and false things, especially against Magistrates,
though by way of Quaery, surely is not justifiable: For as Will. Penn says in
his late little Book, It were intolerable to be a Minister of State, if every
body must be Accuser and Judge: Let therefore (says he) the false Accuser no
more escape an examplary punishment, than the guilty Minister; for (says he)
it prophanes Government, to have the Credit of the Leading Men in it subject to
vulgar Censure, which is often ill grounded; besides whatever he may say
concerning Quaerying, ^e concludes his Letter more peremptorily than so,
saying, Let these Actions be also condemned (meaning as well as G. K's Actions
were.)

Again, I never read that any were Recorded as Sufferers for Conscience sake,
for being either published by Authority as a person publicly reviling the
Governor, calling him, Impudent Man, telling him, he was not fit to be a
Governor, and that his Name would stink, etc. Or for being called to an account
for exposing the Reputation of a Judge, Printing him to be an Ignorant,
Presumptuous, and Insolent Man; and also for falsely accusing another
Magistrate, of putting his hand under Women's Petticoats bidding him go home to
his Whores: This or suchlike stuff was the matter they call a Religious
Difference, or Religions Dissent, for which they are called to an account: And
surely in vain it is, as well as that it is ridiculous, to say these things
were not done or spoke against them (as Magistrates:) For if that might be
allowed, might not Magistrates at any time be abused at the pleasure of every
idle person, and then come off with the like Excuse? More might be said about
these things, but my chief intent at this time is to show his inconsistencies
in Doctrinal points, that it may be seen, he is not a Man of such a sound
Judgment, nor of so true a Spirit neither, as some have taken him to be.

For though a man may have much read Prophecies and Chronologies concerning
things past or to come, and may by comparing things and times one with another
(which may be useful in its place) speak or write his sense of it, and that
sometimes it may accordingly so come to pass; yet such a man may be of a wrong
Spirit for all that, as some Jews were; for we read, when Christ Matthew. 2.
was born, Herod called the Chief Priests and Scribes of the People together,
to demand of them where He should be? Who readily and rightly answered, In
Bethlehem: for thus it is written, etc. yet we read that it was the Chief
Priests and Scribes consulted how they might kill him, it was the Scribes that
mocked him; it was the Scribes that said, He cast out Devils by Beelzebub the
Prince of Devils; in short, it was the Elders, Chief Priests and Scribes that
rejected him and caused him to Suffer, notwithstanding it was the Scribes could
tell so well where he should be born. Then again, may not there be much Erring
in Judgment in taking of Prophecies with a sense too literally, as the People
did, when Christ told them of his being lifted up: Now the Scriptures speaking
of Christ's being a Priest for ever; say they, We have read in our Law, That
Christ abides for ever; and how say thou. The Son of Man must be lifted up?
Imagining that the Scripture meant he was to continue for ever in Person among
them.

Doubtless from such kind of Mistakes it was that they imagined the Messiah was
to redeem them from outward Bondage and Subjection: For whereas we read that
the Government was to be upon his Shoulders, and that he was to Rule the
Nations with a Rod of Iron, and be the Restorer of Paths to dwell in; so they
imagined this Restoration to be from outward Bondage, as aforesaid; which made
them say to Christ, That they hoped it had been He that should have redeemed
Israel: Nay his very Disciples to the last day of his being among them in
Person, had not a right understanding of it, when they said, Lord, will thou at
this time restore the Kingdom again to Israel? Unto which Christ answered
plainly, It is not for you to know the Times and Seasons, which the Father has
put in his own Power, etc.

Again, As some Men have, and others may, in some things hit right as to the
meaning of Prophecies, etc. and yet be of a wrong Spirit; So may there not be
others who may not see so far into those things, as a wrong spirited Man may
do, who may be of a right Spirit? As in the case of Nathaniel, who, though it was
spoken by the Prophets, that Christ should be called a Nazarine, yet when
Philip told him They had found Jesus of Nazareth, his Answer was, Can any good
thing come out of Nazareth? Now Christ did not presently call him Heretic,
Unbeliever, Denier of the Man Christ, or the like; but on the contrary, having
regard to the sincerity of his heart, he said of him, Behold an Israelite
indeed, in whom there is no guile.

Now to be plain, This is to show that G. K may be (as well as others have
been) a Man of great Knowledge in Chronology, yet being led by a wrong Spirit,
what does it profit? Even as the Apostle says, Tho I have the Gift of
Prophecy, and understand all Myste^ies, and 1 Cor. 13. 1.
all Knowledge, and though I have all Faith so that I could remove Mountains, and
have not Charity, I am (says he) Nothing. Now how far G. K. is a Man of
Charity, even in such things wherein he himself allows Charity ought to be used
(as I am now coming to show) so let all that read it compare it with his late
Treatment of Friends, and then judge of it.

I am now coming to it, by adding to what I have writ, a very good way and
means proposed by G. K. himself, to bring the Differences (of those called
Christians) in point of Judgment, to a very small compass, taken word by word
out of his Book called Truth's Defense, etc. beginning in page 169.

Thus (says he) as to the most Weighty and Necessary Things, to wit, Such as
are the General Principles of the Christian Faith and Doctrine; and which as
such, are generally to be received by all Christians, as well of those of the
meanest Capacity, as others of the greatest Note; We see the Lord has not left
it to Man's Industry, to search after them by Consequences long or short; nor
has not left it to Man's Industry to search after them, but delivered them to
us in plain express Scripture-Words and Terms, over and over again, as in
respect of many of them in the holy Scriptures; And why is it that the
Scriptures are so full and large in their Testimony to the Doctrines and
Principles of Religion, but to let us understand that all the Principles and
Doctrines of the Christian Faith, which God requires in common of all
Christians, are expressly there Delivered and Recorded, and put as it were in a
Public Register. And therefore for my part, what I cannot (...) ^^presly
delivered in Scripture, I see no reason why I should receive and believe it as
any common Article or Principle of the Christian Faith or Life; And for such to
whom God has given that Divine Skill to dive or dip into the Depth of the
Scriptures, so as to Collect or Gather by Just and True Consequences other
things, that lie out of the view of their weaker Brethren, they ought not to
obtrude them upon any, to be received as Principles of Faith, but in that case
to have Faith to themselves, and receive them as peculiar Discoveries or
Revelations of the Spirit to them, and such others as God has so enlightened.
That which by the Apostle Paul is called, The Word of Wisdom, to wit, Such a
peculiar Degree of Wisdom or Understanding in the Depth of the Scriptures,
which others (who yet are true Christians) did not reach unto; And concerning
such a peculiar Gift of Divine Wisdom, he said, We speak Wisdom among the
Perfect; This certainly could be no common Article of Faith, eIse he should
have preached it unto all; And this by the same Apostle is called The Knowledge
of Mysteries, as distinguished from the common Faith and Knowledge of the whole
Church.

Now if this were but received among those called Christians, That nothing
should be required by one sort from another, as an Article of Faith, or
Doctrine, or Principle of the Christian Religion, in common to be believed, but
what is expressly delivered in the Scripture, in plain express Scripture-Terms;
of how great an Advantage might it be to bring a true Reconcilement among them,
and beget true Christian Unity, Peace, Love and Concord? And as for the
Consequential part of peculiar Doctrines, whether True or False, to leave every
one a Freedom or Latitude, without Imposing the Affirmative or Negative, as any
Bond or Tie of Christian Fellowship.

For if such Consequential be false, it is more Unreasonable to impose it; and
therefore in Observe, this is Charity, which G. K. now wants for us.
that Case, a Dissenter should have his Liberty to differ in Judgment, without
any Breach of Brotherly Unity and Society; And if it be true, yet not being
Opened or Revealed to another, it cannot be in Justice pressed upon him, where
God has not given him the true Freedom and Clearness of Mind to receive it: And
to do otherwise, is to transgress that Golden Rule delivered by Paul, viz. To
walk by the same Rule, according to what we have attained; And if any be
otherwise minded (says he) God will reveal it unto him. Or if this Advice
could find place, it would bring the Differences (among those called
Christians) in point of Judgment, to a very small and narrow compass; and they
would derstand one another far better than now they do.

Thus far G. Keith in his said Book.

Now, pray Friends, consider of it, for if this advice either had, or yet could
find place with you that are gone after G. K. or could it have found place with
G. K. himself, when so often desired it might, it is well known, the difference
had never come to this furious Printing and Separation as it did: But if you
say, G. K. is of another Mind now, we do not Question that in the least, but
then surely the more insincere Man he, still to pretend to be of the same Mind;
for in his Answer to the New England Priests, he speaking of the Fall of Adam,
etc. says thus, What the Scripture says of it is readily believed and
granted, and it is safest (says he) in this and all other Matters of Faith to
keep to Scripture Words, especially in all Cases and Matters that are in
Controversy; for the Scripture is a Rich Treasure or Storehouse sufficient to
afford us Words, whereby to express our Faith in all Matters of Christian
Doctrine; and (says he) it is not safe to leave the Scripture Words, etc. Nay
in his last great Book so much talked of before it came out, for a profound
piece of Divinity, though as little heeded by many, since they see what it is;
I say, in that Book he has these Words, viz.

But against the Doctrine of the Resurrection Truth advanced, page 118.
here delivered and opened, by plain evidence of Holy Scripture Words and
Terms, to which it is only safe in this and in all other matters of Faith to
keep close, etc. Thus far again G. K. Again

Now whereas you say, we have given you to understand, We have a sense
contrary to Scripture Words, it is surely more likely, contrary to your
Meanings upon Scripture Words: But what uncharitableness is this, when we
offer to express our Faith in Scripture Words, for you to say, we have another
sense then what we speak? Now I ask, how do you know that? did we either at any
time make, or offer to make, any Confession, but in Scripture Words expressly?
For though here and there a particular Man may have dropped an unadvised
Expression contrary to the Principles of the Church they belong to, both among
us, you, and others; yet certainly in this Case, I verily believe the fault
has been chiefly in you, for perverting our Words.

Now whereas you allege, The Papists say they keep to Scripture Words, when
they say from Christ's Words, This is my Body, etc. that the very Bread they
eat in the Sacrament, is the very Body of Christ that was crucified on the
Cross, etc.

Now I say, the Papists erring here, is not by keeping, but adding to Scripture
Words, because the Scripture says no such things, only (This is my Body, etc.)
Now in what sense Christ called the Bread of the Passover his Body, in that
sense 'twas his Body; even as in what sense he called himself a Door and a
Vine, in that sense he is a Door and a Vine; and so we may conclude, without
any danger of perverting the Text, or running into Error about that or such
like Texts of Scripture. But if some of you think yet, That it is not safe
enough to express our Faith in the express words of Scripture, and should offer
any Reasons for it; let them be offered to G. K. and see how you can reconcile
your Reasons with the Method he has laid down, as the only Means to reconcile
differences, as abovesaid; and if you are one with G. K's Method, then I say,
it being according to him, not only safest, but the only safe way, to reconcile
differences in Religion, to keep to express Scripture; Then surely all other
ways are unsafe, and why should not this only safe way be accepted of us, when
we so often offered to take that way to express our Christian Belief by? And
seeing, according to G. K. there is no other Truth advanced, page 17.
safe way to express our Faith, but in express Scripture Words: Let me
therefore a little Query with you about it.

First, Where are the express Words of Scripture, that say, The same Body for
Matter and Substance shall rise?

Secondly, Where are the express Scripture Road Island ^^eet, page 7.
Words, that say, None but those that have the Faith of Christ crucified and
raised again, can love Enemies, etc. according to G. K's Doctrine? G. K.
himself says, That many of the Gentiles of old did not only teach things, but
also, in a large measure, practice them.

Thirdly, Where are the express Scripture Testimony (...) that (...) opinion,
page 3.
Words, that say, The four hundred pieces of Silver, that Abraham purchased the
Burying-place with, signifies four hundred Virtues, and that those that have
not those four hundred Virtues, etc. cannot have the Privilege to be buried in
that most excellent Burying-place?

Fourthly, Where are the express Scripture Truth advanced, pag^ 1.
Words, that say, Adam and Eve were not naked before the Fall? And also the
Garden that God placed Man in in the beginning, was no part of this visible
Earth, nor is the Dust, of which he was made, such Dust as we go upon; both
which he says, are hurtful and dangerous Errors, false Doctrine, etc.

Fifthly, Where are the express Scripture Ibid.
Words, that say, Men may not have [that] Holy Ghost, which was given to
believe in Christ Crucified, without the Faith of Christ Crucified; for what
was that Holy Ghost that the wicked Jews always resisted? And what was that
Holy Ghost which Christ told his Disciples, should speak in them, Luke
when he sent them out by two and two to Preach the Gospel, even before they
understood he was to rise from the Dead, neither did they understand it for
some time after he was risen?

And what was that G. K. says, the Heathen once had, and that Pharaoh had
before his Heart was hardened? where he says, It is our Faith, that the Heathen
once had the Spirit of God, and that Pharaoh, before his Heart was hardened, had
the Spirit of Grace; for is not the Spirit of Grace the Holy Ghost, or Holy
Spirit? And was not the Spirit of Grace that which was to be poured forth in
the Gospel-Days, by which they should see him whom they had pierced, and mourn
over him? Was not this the Holy Ghost which Pharaoh had, having (as is
confessed) the Spirit of Grace? Though they had it not in that peculiar Degree,
as true Believers in Christ had, is not denied; even as it is said, That Christ
should give those Light that did awake Ephesians.
out of Sleep, and arise from the Dead; not but that he enlightens all men,
though not all in like Degree. But alas, what does he drive at? or how many Holy
Ghosts, would he make us believe there are?

Sixthly, Where are the express Scripture Words, that say, The Light is not
sufficient without something else? Seeing G. K. says, The Light is God and
Christ, and the Scripture expressly says, God is Almighty or Omnipotent.

Seventhly, Now as to that part of that you call the main Matter of
Controver^^e.

Where are the express Scripture Words and Terms, that say, No Man ^an attain
to Eternal Life and Happiness without the Knowledge of Christ's outward
Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, etc? But the Scripture says expressly, Glory,
Honor and Peace to every Man that works good, to the Jew first, and also to
the Gentile: And which Words G. K. says) do import, That some of those
Gentiles did work good, and re^eived the Reward of Glory and Honor ^hereof:
Therefore (says he) it fol^ows, they were justified.

Now I say, this being called by your selves, the main Matter of Controversy,
and that to hold the contrary, is great Heresy, how is it that you in the
first place do not so deal with G. K. for hold^ng this Heresy, so as either to
cause him to condemn what he has writ so ^ositively for it, or else, to
declare your ^elves out of Unity and Fellowship with ^im about it, and not only
about that, but about diverse other Doctrinal Points written by him, as before is
shown, which are the Doctrines you so quarrel with, and Unchristian us about:
And really, I could never yet see how you can be in partial in the Case, to
find such fault with us about these things, so as to separate and divide your
selves from us, and that one of your Chief Reasons pretending for your so
doing, was for that some had spoken unsound Words among us, as W. S. and T. F.
For which they were not brought to such Condemnation, as to Time and Manner, as
pleased you: And yet to join with and extol G. K. (as you do) whilst he lies
under the guilt of the same Errors (as you call them) especially about the main
Matter of Controversy he is directly positive, as is aforeshewed; for though
much of it was formerly writ, yet he justifying still all written in his former
Books, how can you then deny and separate from us about Words spoken, so as the
saying of them might be forgotten, and yet justify him in such Words written,
that cannot be easily blotted out? Let me desire you ingeniously to consider
this matter without prejudice or affection to either Me^ or Parties, for Men or
Parties sake. For if the Doctrine of G. K. then held ^e false, how can you
justify him in it, and yet condemn us for holding the ^ame thing? For, do we
hold, The Light is sufficient of it self?

So does G. K. too. It being God, the Word, and Holy Spirit.

Do we say, he is the only true Christ and Savior, as manifest in us?

So does G. K. too.

Do we hold, the Light, Power and Spirit within to be Christ the Mediator and
Savior?

So does G. K. too.

It is our Faith, That Magistrates may Preach.

So it is G. K.'s too.

Do we deny the Professors carnal Conceptions of the Resurrection, and hold us
to Scripture Words for that and all other Matters of Faith, judging it most
safe so to do?

So does G. K. too.

Do we hold, that nothing should be required among us for an Article of Faith,
but what is expressly delivered in Scripture in plain express Scripture Words?

So does G. K. too.

Do we hold, That where the Scripture is not express to the contrary, a
Dissenter should have his Liberty to differ in Judgment? And that to do other
wise is to transgress that golden Rule delivered by Paul, as aforesaid?

So does G. K. too.

And now Lastly, As to the main Matter of Controversy: Do we say, That the
Knowledge of Christ's Death, Resurrection, etc. in the outward, is not
indispensibly necessary to all and every one to Salvation, so as none can be
saved without it.

So does G. K. too.

Now to conclude, I do say, The Premises being thoroughly and impartially
considered, methinks you may easily see that G. K's separating was not from any
solid weighty Ground in Truth, nor that he did intend in it, to maintain the
Doctrine of the most found, ancient and present Friends of Truth, called in
scorn Quakers; neither as to Doctrinal Points did he intend to keep to the
express Words of Scripture, for if he had, what need had he to have differed
with us about them?

Since First, we offered so often to express them on^y in Scripture Words. Then

Secondly, Because, he cannot be so ignorant, but must needs know, having (as
he confesses) these eight Years been so intimate with those of Chief Note
among us, not only in Europe, but for these diverse Years in America, I say
therefore, How is it but he must needs know, that according to express Words
of Scripture, We really own and unfeignedly believe in one God, that made the
World and all things therein, and in one Lord Jesus Christ, who is called the
Word of God, in whom is Life, and which Life is the Light of Men, and that he
is the true Light that enlightens every Man that comes into the World, who
commanded us to believe in the Light, that we might be Children of the Light:
This is express Scripture.

And that we believe, that as the Children were partakers of Flesh and Blood,
he himself also took part of the same; being Conceived by the Holy Ghost, Born
of the Virgin Mary in Bethlehem; and by wicked Hands was Crucified and Slain;
and that he died for the Sins of the World, whose Body Joseph of Arimathea
begged; and that he was buried, and the third Day he rose gain from the Dead,
and showed himself to his Disciples, being seen o^ them forty Days, and whilst
they beheld, he was taken up into Heaven, and a Cloud received him out of their
sight; and that this Man Jesus Christ is the Mediator between God and Man, and
that he ever lives to make Intercession for us: And that by him it is, who is
the Life and Light of Men, who said to his Disciples, I will come again and
receive you; I go away and come again unto you; I in them, and thou in me; he
that is with you shall be in you, John 14. and Chap. 18. and promised to be
with his own to the end of the World, Mat. 28. he, even he it is who died and
was buried, rose again and ascended, and sits on the right Hand of God; Him,
Jesus our only Savior, and no other, it is that we believe God will judge the
World by at the Day appointed; or great Day of Judgment. But how or after what
Manner his Body was changed after it was taken up out of their sight, we think
no need to undertake, as well as that it is impossible for us to determine; But
G. K. says, It is no more a Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones.

And again according to express Scripture Words; We believe that there is no
Salvation in any other, nor no Name given under Heaven, whereby we must be
saved, but this Name Jesus. But G. K. says, It is not the outward Name that
saves, but the inward Name Virtue and Power signified thereby.

And according to the express Words of Scripture, We believe there shall be a
Resurrection of the Dead, both of the Just and Unjust, as is before expressed,
and that in such a Body as God pleases to give, this is Scripture. Now I say,
how can G. K. be ignorant, but that this he must needs know we believe? Though
this (I cannot find) will do with him, unless we say, The Light is not
sufficient without something else, or unless we say, God will not give Eternal
Life and Salvation to honest and conscientious Heathens; no more to Infants
neither, that dye in that State, unless they have first the Knowledge of
Christ's outward Sufferings, etc.

I shall now conclude with a few Words more particularly to those that are most
Sincere amongst you, for whose sakes I was chiefly drawn forth thus to write,
and lay before you these things. Let me entreat you to begin a little to
consider what you have been doing, and how you have caused many to stumble at
the way of Truth, and how you that could so easily and rashly run into this
Separation and Division, dividing your selves from your Brethren, and then
exposing the weakness of some, and perverting the Words of others, with such
cruel and uncharitable Aggravations, that I do not remember I ever heard the
like. Now I say, You that could so easily thus divide from, and on this manner
deal with your Brethren, without that true Regard had, as you ought, for the
Fame of Truth, the way of it; or to the afflicted People in remote Parts, that
live therein: Pray consider this and lay it to Heart, and what has been the
Effect of it. And you that were so much contending about Doctrinal Points, not
being content with the Expressions of Scripture concerning them, how are you
now rent and shattered among your selves about them?

What shall I say more? But come, return again, and let us be content to
receive for Doctrine, what the Holy Ghost moved the Holy Men of Old to lay down
for us in the Holy Scripture, and that by a measure of the same Spirit, in
which they were right, we may be enabled to follow the Lord in the narrow Path
of Regeneration; why should you thus turn aside from the Flocks of the
Companions? I hope you may see, by what is here written, G. K. had not any
matter of weight in Truth, nor Matter consistent in it self, to draw you thus
aside: Therefore do but return in the way of Truth, and then it may please the
Lord we may yet meet together, and sit down in deep Humility before him, every
one being upon his Watch Tower, guarding strongly in the Strength of the Lord,
against our common Enemies, the World, the Flesh and the Devil; and so may yet
be a People of one Judgment, one Heart, and one Mind, Worshipping and Serving
the Lord our God with one Consent.

Now my Friends, if what is here written may prevail upon any of you for your
good, I shall be glad; if not, we must leave our Cause with God, who judges
righteously.

Thus truly desiring Truth, Peace and Concord may be restored, kept and remain
in the Churches of Christ, I remain one that heartily Wishes for all your
welfares, and Rest your true Friend

Caleb Pusey.
The 23d. 12th. Month, 1695.
Romans 16. 17. NOW I beseech you, Brethren, mark them which cause Divisions
among you, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. Acts
20. 30. Also from your own selves shall Men arise, speaking perverse things to
draw away Disciples after them. Coll. 2. 18. Intruding into those things which
he has not seen. 1 John 3. 2. Beloved, now are we the Sons of God, and it does
not yet appear what we shall be. John 8. 13. If ye continue in my Word, then
are ye my Disciples indeed, and ye shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall
make you free. John 3. 21. But he that does Truth, comes to the Light, that
his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God. Acts 20. 32. And
now Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the Word of his Grace, which is able
to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance among all them which are
Sanctified. The End.

