THE DECLARATION OF JOHN PYM Esquire, UPON THE WHOLE MATTER of the Charge of
High Treason, against THOMAS EARL OF STRAFFORD, APRIL 12. 1641.

WITH An ARGUMENT of Law concerning the Bill of Attainder of High Treason of
the said EARL of STRAFFORD, Before a Committee of both Houses of Parliament,
in WESTMINSTER Hall, BY Mr St-Iohn his Majesty's Solicitor General, on
Thursday, April 29. 1641.

Both Published by Order of the Commons House.

Printed at London for John Bartlet, and are to be sold at the gilt Cup near S.
Austins Gate, in Paul's Churchyard. 1641.

THE SPEECH OR DECLARATION OF JOHN PYM, Esquire: After the Recapitulation or
summing up of the Charge of High Treason, AGAINST THOMAS, EARL OF STRAFFORD,
12. APRIL, 1641.

Published by Order of the COMMONS HOUSE.



LONDON, Printed for JOHN BARTLET. 1641.

THE SPEECH OR DECLARATION OF JOHN PYM, Esquire: etc.
MY LORDS,
MAny days have been spent in maintenance of the Impeachment of the Earl of
Strafford, by the House of Commons, whereby he stands charged with High
Treason: And your Lordships have heard his Defense with Patience, and with as
much favor as Justice would allow: We have passed through our Evidence, and
the Result of all this is, that it remains clearly proved, That the Earl of
Strafford has endeavored by his words, actions, and counsels, to subvert the
Fundamental Laws of England and Ireland, and to introduce an Arbitrary and
Tyrannical Government.

This is the envenomed Arrow for which he inquired in the beginning of his
Replication this day, which has infected all his Blood: This is that
Intoxicating Cup, (to use his own Metaphor) which has tainted his Judgment,
and poisoned his Heart: From hence was infused that Specificall Difference
which turned his Speeches, his Actions, his Counsels into Treason; Not
Cumulative, as he expressed it, as if many Misdemeanors could make one Treason;
but Formally and Essentially. It is the End that does inform Actions, and does
specificate the nature of them, making not only criminal, but even
indifferent words and actions to be Treason, being done and spoken with a
Treasonable intention.

That which is given me in charge, is, to show the quality of the offense, how
heinous it is in the nature, how mischievous in the effect of it; which will
best appear if it be examined by that Law, to which he himself appealed, that
universal, that supreme Law, Salus populi: This is the Element of all Laws,
out of which they are derived; the End of all Laws, to which they are designed,
and in which they are perfected. How far it stands in opposition to this Law, I
shall endeavor to show in some Considerations which I shall present to your
Lordships, all arising out of the Evidence which has been opened.

comprehending all other offenses; here you shall find several Treasons,
Murders, Rapines, Oppressions, Perjuries.

The Earth has a Seminary virtue, whereby it does produce all Herbs, and
Plants, and other Vegetables: There is in this Crime, a Seminary of all evils
hurtful to a State; and if you consider the reasons of it, it must needs be
so: The Law is that which puts a difference betwixt good and evil, betwixt
just and unjust; If you take away the Law, all things will fall into a
confusion, every man will become a Law to himself, which in the depraved
condition of humane nature, must needs produce many great enormities: Lust will
become a Law, and Envy will become a Law, Covetousness and Ambition will
become Laws; and what dictates, what decisions such Laws will produce, may
easily be discerned in the late Government of Ireland: The Law has a power to
prevent, to restrain, to repair evils; without this all kind of mischiefs and
distempers will break in upon a State.

It is the Law that does entitle the King to the Allegiance and service of his
people; it intitles the people to the protection and justice of the King. It is
God alone who subsists by himself, all other things subsist in a mutual
dependence and relation. He was a wise man that said, that the King subsisted
by the field that is tilled: It is the labor of the people that supports the
Crown: If you take away the protection of the King, the vigor and
cheerfulness of Allegiance will be taken away, though the Obligation remain.

The Law is the Boundarie, the Measure betwixt the Kings Prerogative, and the
Peoples Liberty: Whiles these move in their own Orb, they are a support and
security to one another; The Prerogative a cover and defense to the Liberty of
the people, and the people by their liberty are enabled to be a foundation to
the Prerogative; but if these bounds be so removed, that they enter into
contestation and conflict, one of these mischiefs must needs ensue: If the
Prerogative of the King overwhelm the liberty of the people, it will be turned
into Tyranny; if liberty undermine the Prerogative, it will grow into Anarchie.

The Law is the safeguard, the custody of all private interest: Your Honors,
your Lives, your Liberties and Estates are all in the keeping of the Law;
without this, every man has a like right to any thing, and this is the
condition into which the Irish were brought by the E. of Strafford: And the
reason which he gave for it, has more mischief in it then the thing it self,
They were a Conquered Nation. There cannot be a word more pregnant, and
fruitful in Treason, then that word is: There are few Nations in the world
that have not been conquered; and no doubt but the Conqueror may give what
Laws he please to those that are conquered: But if the succeeding Pacts and
Agreements do not limit and restrain that Right, what people can be secure?
England has been conquered, and Wales has been conquered, and by this reason
will be in little better case then Ireland. If the King by the Right of a
Conqueror gives Laws to his People, shall not the people by the same reason
be restored to the Right of the conquered, to recover their liberty if they
can? What can be more hurtful, more pernicious to both, then such Propositions
as these? And in these particulars is determined the first Consideration.

second Consideration is this: This Arbitrary power is dangerous to the Kings
Person, and dangerous to his Crown: It is apt to cherish Ambition, usurpation,
and oppression in great men, and to beget sedition and discontent in the
People; and both these have been, and in reason must ever be causes of great
trouble and alteration to Princes and States.

If the Histories of those Eastern Countries be perused, where Princes order
their affairs according to the mischievous principles of the E. of Strafford,
loose and absolved from all Rules of Government, they will be found to be
frequent in combustions, full of Massacres, and of the tragical ends of
Princes. If any man shall look into our own Stories, in the times when the
Laws were most neglected, he shall find them full of Commotions, of Civil
distempers; whereby the Kings that then reigned, were always kept in want and
distress; the people consumed with Civil wars: and by such wicked counsels as
these, some of our Princes have been brought to such miserable ends, as no
honest heart can remember without horror, and earnest Prayer, that it may
never be so again.

Consideration is this, The subversion of the Laws; And this Arbitrary power,
as it is dangerous to the Kings Person and to his Crown, so is it in other
respects very prejudicial to his Majesty in his Honor, Profit, and
Greatness; and yet these are the gildings and paintings that are put upon such
counsels; These are for your Honor, for your service; whereas in truth they
are contrary to both: But if I shall take off this varnish, I hope they shall
then appear in their own native deformity, and therefore I desire to consider
them by these Rules.

It cannot be for the Honor of a King, that his sacred Authority should be
used in the practice of injustice and oppression; that his Name should be
applied to patronize such horrid crimes, as have been represented in Evidence
against the Earl of Strafford; and yet how frequently, how presumptuously his
Commands, his Letters have been vouched throughout the course of this Defense,
your Lordships have heard. When the Judges do justice, it is the Kings
justice, and this is for his honor, because he is the Fountain of justice;
but when they do injustice, the offense is their own: But those Officers and
Ministers of the King, who are most officious in the exercise of this
Arbitrarie power, they do it commonly for their advantage; and when they are
questioned for it, then they fly to the Kings interest, to his Direction: And
truly my Lords, this is a very unequal distribution for the King, that the
dishonor of evil courses should be cast upon him, and they to have the
advantage.

The prejudice which it brings to him in regard of his profit, is no less
apparent: It deprives him of the most beneficial, and most certain Revenue of
his Crown, that is, the voluntary aids and supplies of his people; his other
Revenues, consisting of goodly Demeanes, and great Manors, have by Grants been
alienated from the Crown, and are now exceedingly diminished and impaired: But
this Revenue it cannot be sold, it cannot be burdned with any Pensions or
Annuities, but comes entirely to the Crown. It is now almost fifteen years
since his Majesty had any assistance from his people; and these illegal ways
of supplying the King were never pressed with more violence, and art, then they
have been in this time; and yet I may upon very good grounds affirm, that in
the last fifteen years of Queen Elizabeth, she received more by the Bounty and
Affection of her Subjects, then has come to His Majesty's Coffers by all the
inordinate and rigorous courses which have been taken. And as those Supplies
were more beneficial in the Receipt of them, so were they like in the use and
employment of them.

Another way of prejudice to his Majesty's profit, is this: Such Arbitrary
courses exhaust the people, and disable them, when there shall be occasion, to
give such plentiful supplies, as otherwise they would do. I shall need no
other proof of this, then the Irish Government under my L. of Strafford, where
the wealth of the Kingdom is so consumed by those horrible exactions and
burdens, that it is thought the Subsidies lately granted will amount to little
more then half the proportion of the last Subsidies. The two former ways are
hurtful to the Kings profit, in that respect which they call Lucrum Cessans,
by diminishing his receipts; But there is a third, fuller of mischief, and it
is in that respect which they call Damnum emergens, by increasing his
Disbursements: Such irregular and exorbitant attempts upon the Liberty of the
people, are apt to produce such miserable distractions and distempers, as will
put the King and Kingdom to such vast expenses and losses in a short time, as
will not be recovered in many years: We need not go far to seek a proof
of this, these two last years will be a sufficient evidence, within which time
I assure my self, it may be proved, that more Treasure has been wasted, more
loss sustained by his Majesty and his Subjects, then was spent by Queen
Elizabeth in all the War of Tyrone, and in those many brave Attempts against
the King of Spain, and the royal assistance which she gave to France, and the
Low Countries, during all her Reign.

As for Greatness, this Arbitrary power is apt to hinder and impair it, not
only at home, but abroad. A Kingdom is a society of men conjoined under one
Government, for the common good: The world is a society of Kingdoms and
States. The Kings greatness consists not only in his Dominion over his
Subjects at home, but in the influence which he has upon States abroad; That
he should be great even among Kings, and by his wisdom and authority so to
incline and dispose the affairs of other States and Nations, and those great
events which fall out in the world, as shall be for the good of Mankind, and
for the peculiar advantage of his own people. This is the most glorious, and
magnificent greatness, to be able to relieve distressed Princes, to support his
own friends and Allies, to prevent the ambitious designs of other Kings; and
how much this Kingdom has been impaired in this kind, by the late
mischievous counsels your Lordships best know, who at a nearer distance, and
with a more clear sight, do apprehend these public and great affairs, then
I can do. Yet thus much I dare boldly say, that if his Majesty had not with
great wisdom and goodness forsaken that way wherein the Earl of Strafford had
put him, we should within a short time have been brought into that miserable
condition, as to have been useless to our friends, contemptible to our
enemies, and incapable of undertaking any great design either at home or
abroad.

E. of Strafford did exercise in his own person, and to which he did advise his
Majesty, is inconsistent with the Peace, the Wealth, the Prosperity of a
Nation; It is destructive to Justice, the Mother of Peace; to Industry, the
spring of Wealth; to Valor, which is the active virtue whereby the prosperity
of a Nation can only be procured, confirmed, and enlarged.

It is not only apt to take away Peace, and so entangle the Nation with Wars,
but does corrupt Peace, and puts such a malignity into it, as produces the
Effects of war. We need seek no other proof of this, but the E. of
Straffords Government, where the Irish, both Nobility and others, had as little
security of their Persons or Estates in this peaceable time, as if the Kingdom
had been under the rage and fury of war.

And as for Industry, and Valor, who will take pains for that, which when he
has gotten, is not his own? Or who fight for that wherein he has no other
interest, but such as is subject to the will of another? The Ancient
encouragement to men that were to defend their Countries was this, That they
were to hazard their Persons, pro Aris and Focis, for their Religion, and for
their Houses; But by this Arbitrary way which was practiced in Ireland, and
counseled here, no man had any certainty, either of Religion, or of his House,
or any thing else to be his own; But besides this, such Arbitrary courses have
an ill operation upon the courage of a Nation, by embasing the hearts of the
people: A servile condition does for the most part beget in men a slavish
temper and disposition. Those that live so much under the Whip and the Pillory,
and such servile Engines, as were frequently used by the E. of Strafford, they
may have the dregs of valor, sullenness, and stubbornness, which may make
them prone to Mutinies, and discontents; but those Noble and gallant
affections, which put men on brave Designs and Attempts for the preservation
or enlargement of a Kingdom, they are hardly capable of. Shall it be Treason
to embase the Kings Coin, though but a piece of twelve-pence, or sixe-pence,
and must it not needs be the effect of a greater Treason, to embase the spirits
of his Subjects, and to set a stamp and Character of servitude upon them,
whereby they shall be disabled to do any thing for the service of the King or
Commonwealth?

Consideration is this, That the exercise of this Arbitrary Government, in
times of sudden danger, by the invasion of an enemy, will disable his Majesty
to preserve himself and his Subjects from that danger. This is the only
pretense by which the E. of Strafford, and such other mischievous Counselors
would induce his Majesty to make use of it; and if it be unfit for such an
occasion, I know nothing that can be alleged in maintenance of it.

When war threatens a Kingdom by the coming of a foreign Enemy, it is no
time then to discontent the people, to make them weary of the present
Government, and more inclinable to a Change; The supplies which are to come in
this way, will be unready, uncertain; there can be no assurance of them, no
dependence upon them, either for time or proportion: And if some money be
gotten in such a way, the Distractions, Divisions, Distempers, which this
course is apt to produce, will be more prejudicial to the public safety,
then the supply can be advantageous to it; and of this we have had sufficient
experience the last Summer.

crime of subverting the Laws, and introducing an Arbitrary and Tyrannical
Government, is contrary to the Pact and Covenant betwixt the King and his
people. That which was spoken of before, was the legal union of Allegiance and
Protection; this is a personal union by mutual agreement and stipulation,
confirmed by oath on both sides: The King and his people are obliged to one
another in the nearest relations; He is a Father, and a child is called in
Law, Pars Patris: He is the Husband of the Commonwealth, they have the same
interests, they are inseparable in their condition, be it good or evil; He is
the Head, they are the Body; there is such an incorporation as cannot be
dissolved without the destruction of both.

When Justice Thorpe, in Edw. the thirds time, was by the Parliament condemned
to death for Bribery, the reason of that Judgment is given, because he had
broken the Kings Oath, not that he had broken his own oath, but that he had
broken the Kings oath, that solemn and great obligation, which is the security
of the whole Kingdom: If for a Judge to take a small sum in a private cause,
was adjudged Capital, how much greater was this offense, whereby the E. of
Strafford has broken the Kings Oath in the whole course of his Government in
Ireland, to the prejudice of so many of his Majesty's Subjects, in their Lives,
Liberties, and Estates, and to the danger of all the rest?

The Doctrine of the Papists, Fides non est servanda cum Haereticis, is an
abominable Doctrine: yet that other Tenet more peculiar to the Jesuits is more
pernicious, whereby Subjects are discharged from their Oath of Allegiance to
their Prince whenever the Pope pleases; This may be added to make the third
no less mischievous and destructive to humane society, then either of the
rest; That the King is not bound by that Oath which he has taken to observe
the Laws of the Kingdom, but may when he sees cause, lay Taxes and burdens
upon them without their consent, contrary to the Laws and Liberties of the
Kingdom. This has been preached and published by diverse; And this is that
which has been practiced in Ireland by the E. of Strafford, in his Government
there, and endeavored to be brought into England, by his Counsel here.

offense that is contrary to the end of Government; The end of Government was
to prevent oppressions, to limit and restrain the excessive power and violence
of great men, to open the passages of Justice with indifferency toward all;
This Arbitrary power is apt to induce and encourage all kind of insolences.

Another end of Government is to preserve men in their estates, to secure them
in their Lives and Liberties; but if this Design had taken effect, and could
have been settled in England, as it was practiced in Ireland, no man would have
had more certainty in his own, then power would have allowed him: But these two
have been spoken of before, there are two behind more important, which have not
yet been touched.

It is the end of Government, that virtue should be cherisht, vice suppressed;
but where this Arbitrary and unlimited power is set up, a way is open not only
for the security, but for the advancement and encouragement of evil; Such men
as are aptest for the execution and maintenance of this Power, are only
capable of preferment; and others who will not be instruments of any unjust
commands, who make a conscience to do nothing against the Laws of the
Kingdom, and Liberties of the Subject, are not only not passable for
employment, but subject to much jealousy and danger.

It is the end of Government, that all accidents and events, all Counsels and
Designs should be improved to the public good: But this Arbitrary Power is
apt to dispose all to the maintenance of it self. The wisdom of the
Councell-Table, the Authority of the Courts of Justice, the industry of all the
Officers of the Crown have been most carefully exercised in this; the Learning
of our Divines, the Jurisdiction of our Bishops have been molded and disposed
to the same effect, which though it were begun before the E. of Straffords
Employment, yet it has been exceedingly furthered and advanced by him.

Under this color and pretense of maintaining the Kings Power and Prerogative
many dangerous practices against the peace and safety of this Kingdom have
been undertaken and promoted. The increase of Popery, and the favors and
encouragement of Papists have been, and still are a great grievance and danger
to the Kingdom: The Innovations in matters of Religion, the usurpations of the
Clergy, the manifold burdens and taxations upon the people, have been a great
cause of our present distempers and disorders; and yet those who have been
chief Furtherers and Actors of such Mischiefs, have had their Credit and
Authority from this, That they were forward to maintain this Power. The E. of
Strafford had the first rise of his greatness from this, and in his Apology
and Defense, as your Lordships have heard, this has had a maine part.

The Royal Power, and Majesty of Kings, is most glorious in the prosperity and
happiness of the people; The perfection of all things consists in the end for
which they were ordained, God only is his own end, all other things have a
further end beyond themselves, in attaining whereof their own happiness
consists: If the means and the end be set in opposition to one another, it must
needs cause an impotency and defect of both.

Consideration is, The vanity and absurdity of those excuses and justifications
which he made for himself, whereof diverse particulars have been mentioned in
the course of his Defense.

1. That he is a Counselor, and might not be questioned for any thing which he
advised according to his conscience; The ground is true, there is a liberty
belongs to Counselors, and nothing corrupts Counsels more then fear; He that
will have the privilege of a Counselor, must keep within the just bounds of a
Counselor; those matters are the proper subjects of Counsel, which in their
times and occasions, may be good or beneficial to the King or Commonwealth;
But such Treasons as these, the subversion of the Laws, violation of Liberties,
they can never be good, or justifiable by any circumstance, or occasion; and
therefore his being a Counselor, makes his fault much more heinous, as being
committed against a greater Trust, and in a way of much mischief and danger,
lest his Majesty's conscience and judgment (upon which the whole course and
frame of his Government do much depend) should be poisoned and infected with
such wicked principles and designs: And this he has endeavored to do, which
by all Laws, and in all times has in this Kingdom been reckoned a Crime of
an high Nature.

2. He labors to interest your Lordships in his cause, by alleging, It may be
dangerous to your selves, and your Posterity, who by your birth are fittest to
be near his Majesty, in places of Trust and Authority, if you should be subject
to be questioned for matters delivered in Counsel. To this was answered, that
it was hoped their Lordships would rather labor to secure themselves, and
their posterity, in the exercise of their virtues, then of their vices, that so
they might together with their own honor and greatness, preserve the honor
and greatness, both of the King and Kingdom.

3. Another excuse was this, that whatsoever he has spoken was out of a good
intention; Sometimes good and evil, truth and falsehood lie so near together,
that they are hardly to be distinguished: Matters hurtful and dangerous may be
accompanied with such circumstances as may make it appear useful and
convenient, and in all such cases, good intentions will justify evil
Counsel; But where the matters propounded are evil in their own nature, such
as the matters are wherewith the E. of Strafford is charged, to break a
public faith, to subvert Laws and Government, they can never be justified by
any intentions, how specious, or good soever they be pretended.

4. He alleges it was a time of great necessity and danger, when such
counsels were necessary for preservation of the State. Necessity has been
spoken of before, as it relates to the Cause; now it is considered as it
relates to the Person; if there were any necessity, it was of his own making;
he by his evil counsel had brought the King into a necessity, and by no Rules
of Justice, can be allowed to gain this advantage by his own fault, as to make
that a ground of his justification, which is a great part of his offense.

5. He has often insinuated this, That it was for his Majesty's service in
maintenance of that Sovereign Power with which he is entrusted by God for the
good of his people. The Answer is this, No doubt but that Sovereign Power
wherewith his Majesty is entrusted for the public good, has many glorious
effects, the better to enable him thereunto; But without doubt this is none of
them, That by his own will he may lay any Tax or Imposition upon his people
without their consent in Parliament. This has now been five times adjudged by
both Houses: In the Case of the Loanes, In condemning the Commission of Excise,
In the Resolution upon the Saving offered to be added to the Petition of Right,
In the sentence against Manwaring, and now lately, In condemning the
Ship Money; And if the Sovereign Power of the King can produce no such effect
as this, the Allegation of it is an Aggravation, and no Diminution of his
offense, because thereby he does labor to interest the King against the just
grievance and complaint of the People.

6. This Counsel was propounded with diverse limitations, and Provisions; for
securing and repairing the liberty of the people. This implies a contradiction
to maintain an Arbitrary and absolute Power, and yet to restrain it with
limitations, and provisions; for even those limitations and provisions will be
subject to the same absolute Power, and to be dispensed in such manner, and at
such time, as it self shall determine; let the grievances and oppressions be
never so heavy, the Subject is left without all remedy, but at his Majesty's
own pleasure.

7. He alleges, they were but words, and no effect followed: This needs no
answer, but that the miserable distempers into which he has brought all the
three Kingdoms, will be evidence sufficient that his wicked Counsels have had
such mischievous effects within these two or three last years, that many years
peace will hardly repair those losses, and other great mischiefs which the
Commonwealth has sustained.

These excuses have been collected out of the several parts of his Defense;
perchance some others are omitted, which I doubt not have been answered by some
of my Colleagues, and are of no importance, either to perplex or to hinder your
Lordships judgment, touching the heinousness of this Crime.

Consideration is this, That if this be Treason, in the nature of it, it does
exceed all other Treasons in this, That in the Design, and endeavor of the
Author, it was to be a constant and a permanent Treason; other Treasons are
transient, as being confinde within those particular actions and proportions
wherein they did consist, and those being past, the Treason cease.

The Powder Treason was full of horror and malignity, yet it is past many years
since; The murder of that Magnanimous and glorious King, Henry the fourth of
France, was a great and horrid Treason; And so were those manifold attempts
against Qu. Elizabeth of blessed memory; but they are long since past, the
Detestation of them only remains in Histories, and in the minds of men; and
will ever remain; But this Treason, if it had taken effect, was to be a
standing, perpetual Treason, which would have been in continual act, not
determined within one time or age, but transmitted to Posterity, even from
generation to generation.

Consideration is this, That as it is a Crime odious in the nature of it, so it
is odious in the judgment and estimation of the Law; To alter the settled frame
and constitution of Government, is Treason in any estate; The Laws whereby all
other parts of a Kingdom are preserved, should be very vain and defective, if
they had not a power to secure and preserve themselves.

The forfeitures inflicted for Treason by our Law, are of Life, Honor, and
Estate, even all that can be forfeited, and this Prisoner having committed so
many Treasons, although he should pay all these forfeitures, will be still a
Debtor to the Commonwealth: Nothing can be more equal then that he should
perish by the Justice of that Law which he would have subverted; Neither will
this be a new way of blood; There are marks enough to trace this Law to the
very original of this Kingdom: And if it has not been put in execution, as
he alleges, this 240. years, it was not for want of Law, but that all that
time has not bred a man bold enough to commit such Crimes as these; which is a
circumstance much aggravating his offense, and making him no whit less liable
to punishment, because he is the only man that in so long a time has ventured
upon such a Treason as this.

It belongs to the charge of another to make it appear to your Lordships, that
the Crimes and Offenses proved against the Earl of Strafford, are High Treason
by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, whose learning and other abilities are
much better for that service. But for the time and manner of performing this,
we are to resort to the Direction of the House of Commons, having in this which
is already done, dispatched all those instructions which we have received; and
concerning further proceedings, for clearing all Questions and Objections in
Law, your Lordships will hear from the House of Commons in convenient time.

FINIS.
AN ARGUMENT of Law concerning the Bill of ATTAINDER of HIGH TREASON of THOMAS
Earl of Strafford: At a Conference in a Commit of both Houses of Parliament.

By Mr. St. JOHN his Majesty's Solicitor GENERAL.

Published by order of the Commons House.



LONDON, Printed by G. M. for John Bartlet at the sign of the gilt Cup, near
S. Austins-gate in Paul's Churchyard, 1641.

Mr. St. John's Argument.
My Lords,
THE Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House of Parliament, have
passed a Bill for the attainting of Thomas Earl of Strafford of High Treason.
The Bill has been transmitted from them to your Lordships. It concerns not
him alone, but your Lordships and the Commons too, though in different Respects.

It is to make him as miserable a man, as man or Law can make him.

Not loss of life alone, but with that, of honor, name, posterity, and
estate, Of all that's dear to all.

To use his own expression, an eradication of him both root and branch, as an
Achan, a troubler of the State, as an execrable, as an accursed thing.

This Bill as it concerns his Lordship the highest that can be in the penal
part, so does it on the other side as highly concern your Lorships and the
Commons in that which ought to be the tendrest, the Judicatory within, that
that judge not them who judge him: And in that which is most sacred amongst
men, the public Justice of the Kingdom.

The Kingdom is to be accounted unto for the loss of the meanest member, much
more for one so near the head.

The Commons are concerned in their Account for what is done, your Lordships in
that which is to be done.

The Business therefore of the present Conference, is to acquaint your
Lordships with those things that satisfied the Commons in passing of this Bill,
such of them as have come within my capacity, and that I can remember, I am
Commanded from the Commons at this time to present unto your Lordships.

My Lords, in Judgments of greatest moment, there are but two ways for
satisfying those that are to give them, Either the Lex lata, the Law already
established, Or else the use of the same power for making new Laws, whereby the
old at first received life.

In the first consideration, of the settled Laws; In the degrees of punishment
the positive Law received by general consent, and for the common good is
sufficient to satisfy the Conscience of the Judge in giving Judgment
according to them.

In several Countries there is not the same measure of punishment for one and
the same offense. Wilful murder in Ireland is Treason, and so is the wilful
burning of a house or stacke of Corn. In the Isle of Man, it is felony to
steal a Hen, but not to steal a Horse; and yet the Judge in Ireland has as
just a ground to give Judgment of high Treason in those Cases there, as here
to give Judgment only of Felony, and in the Isle of Man of Felony for the
Hen, as here of petty Larceny.

My Lords, in the other consideration of using the Supreme power, the same Law
gives power to the Parliament to make new Laws, that enables the inferior
Court to judge according to the old. The rule that guides the conscience of the
Inferior Court is from without, the prescripts of the Parliament and of the
Common Law; in the other the rule is from within; That salus populi be
concerned; That therebe no wilful oppression of any the fellow members, that
no more blood be taken then what is necessary for the Cure, the Laws and
Customs of the Realm as well enable the exercise of this, as of the ordinary
and Judicial power.

My Lords, what has been said is because that this proceeding of the Commons
by way of Bill implies the use of the mere Legis-Lative power, in respect new
Laws are for the most part past by Bill.

This, my Lords, though just and Legal, and therefore not wholly excluded, yet
it was not the only ground that put the Commons upon the Bill, they did not
intend to make a new Treason, and to condemn my Lord of Strafford for it, they
had in it other Considerations likewise, which were to this effect.

the Statute of the five and twentieth year of Edward the third, of Treasons;
the Statute of the Prerogative, and of late the petition of right. If the Law
were doubtful in this Case, they conceived the Parliament (where the old may
be altered, and new Laws made) the fittest Judge to clear this doubt.

Henery the fourth, the seventeenth Chapter, and more fully in the Roll, number
144. The proceedings in Parliament have usually been upon an Indictment first
found, though in Cases of Treason particularly mentioned in the Statute of the
five and twentieth year of Edward the third, which had not been done in this
Case: Doubts likewise might rise for Treasons, not particularly mentioned in
the Statute of 25. Edw. 3. whether the declaratory power of Parliament be taken
away, and if not taken away, in what manner they were to be made and by whom.
They find not any Attainders of Treason in Parliament for near this 200
years, but by this way of Bill. And again, they knew that whatsoever could be
done any other way, it might be done by this.

Thirdly, in respect of the proofs and depositions that have been made
against him, for first, although they knew not but that the whole Evidence
which has been given at the Bar, in every part of it is sufficiently
comprehended within the Charge, yet if therein they should be mistaken, if it
should prove otherwise, use may justly be made of such Evidence in this way of
Bill, wherein so as Evidence be given in, it is no way requisite that there
should have been any Articles or Charge at all. And so in the Case of double,
Testimony upon the Statute of the first of Edward the sixth, whether one direct
witness with others to Circumstances, had been single or double testimony; and
although single Testimony might be sufficient to satisfy private Consciences,
yet how far it would have been satisfactory in a judicial way where forms
of Law are more to be stood upon was not so clear, whereas in this way of Bill
private satisfaction to each man's Conscience is sufficient, although no
Evidence had been given in at all.

My Lords, the proceeding by way of Bill, it was not to decline your Lordships
Justice in the judicial way; In these Exegencies of the State and Kingdom, it
was to husband time by silencing those doubts, they conceived it the speediest
and the furest way.

My Lords. These are in effect, the things the Commons took into their
Consideration, in respect of the manner, and way of proceeding against the
Earl. In the next place I am to declare unto your Lordships, the things they
took into their consideration, in respect of the matter and merits of the
Cause, They are comprehended within these 6. heads.

1. That there is a Treason within the Statute of 25. E. 3. by Levying of war
upon the matter of the fifteenth Article.

2. If not by actual Levying of war, yet by advising and declaring his
intention of war, and that by Savils warrant, and the advice of bringing over
the Irish Army, upon the matter in the 23. Article, The intending of a War if
not within the Clause of Levying War in the Statute of 25. E. 3. yet within
the first Treason of compassing the death of the King.

3. If neither of these two single Acts be within the Statute of 25. E. 3. yet
upon putting all together, which has been proved against him, That there is a
Treason within the first clause of compassing the death of the King.

Et si non prosunt singula juncta juvant.

4. That he has fessed and laid Soldiers upon the Subjects of Ireland against
their will, and at their Charge, within the Irish Statute, of the eighteenth
year of Henry the sixth. That both person and thing are within the Statute,
That the Statute remains in force to this day, That the Parliament here has
Cognizance of it, And that even in the ordinary way of Judicature, that if
there be a Treason, and a Traitor, that the want of jurisdiction in the
Judicall way, may justly be supplied by Bill.

5. That his endeavoring to subvert the fundamental Laws and Government of
the Realms of England and Ireland, and instead thereof, to introduce a
tyranicall Government against Law, is Treason by the Common Law. That Treasons
at the Common Law are not taken away by the Statutes of 25. E. 3. 1. H. 4. c.
10. 1^. Mar. c. 1. nor any of them.

6. That as this Case stands, It Is just and necessary to resort to the Supreme
power in Parliament, in case all the rest should fail.

Of these six, five of them are Treason, within the Compass of the Laws
already established, Three within the Statute of 25, E. 3. One within the Irish
Statute, the other by the Common Law of England.

If but any one of these 6. Considerations hold, The Commons conceive that
upon the whole matter they had good cause to pass the Bill.

My Lords, for the first of levying War, 1. The Case.
I shall make bold to read the Case to your Lordships before I speak to it,
its thus.

The Earl did by warrant under his hand and Seal give authority to Robert
Savill a Sergeant at Arms, and his Deputies to sesse such number of Soldiers,
horse and foot of the Army in Ireland together with an officer, as the
Sergeant should think fit, upon his Majesty's Subjects of Ireland against
their will: This warrant was granted by the Earl to the end to compel the
Subjects of Ireland to submit to the unlawful Summons and orders made by the
Earl upon paper Petitions exhibited unto him in case of private Interest
between party and party; This warrant was executed by Savill and his Deputies
by sessing of Soldiers both horse and foot, upon diverse of the Subjects of
Ireland against their will in warre-like manner, and at diverse times the
Soldiers continued upon the parties upon whom they were sessed, and wasted
their goods, until such time as they had submitted themselves unto those
Summons and orders.

My Lords, This is a levying of war within the statute of 25o. E. 3. The
words of the Statute are, If any man do levy war against our Lord the King
in his Realm, this is declared to be Treason.

I shall endeavor in this to make it appear to your Lordships.







It will be granted in this of levying of war, That forces may be raised,
and likewise used in a warre-like manner, and yet no levying of war within
the Statute, that is, when the forces are raised and employed upon private ends
either of revenge or interest.

Before this Statute in E. 1. time. The Title of a Castle was in difference
between the Earls of Hereford and Gloucester, for the mainetaining of the
possession on the one side, and gayning of it on the other, Forces were raised
on either side of many hundred men, they marched with Banners displayed one
against the other. In the Parliament in the 20. year of Edw. 1. this adjudged
only trespass, and either of the Earls fined a 1000. marks a piece.

After the Statute in Hillary Term, the fiftieth year of Edward the third, in
the Kings Bench, Rot. 3. Nicholas Huntercome in a warre-like manner, with 40.
men armed, amongst other weapons, with Gunnes, (so ancient as appears by that
Record they were,) did much spoil in the Manor of the Abbee of Dorchester, in
the County of Oxford: This no Treason: So it has been held by the Judges,
that if one or more Towneships upon pretense of saving their Commons, do in a
forecible and warre-like manner, throw in Enclosures; This is only a Riot,
noe Treason.

The words of the Statute of 25. E. 3. clear this Point, that if any man ride
armed openly or secretly with men at Arms against any other to kill and rob,
or to detain him until he has made fine and ransom for his deliverance;
this is declared not to be Treason, but Felony or Trespass, as the case
shall require, all the printed Statutes which have it covertly or secretly are
mis-printed; for the words in the Parliament Roll, as appears n. 17. are
Discovertment on secreretment openly or secretly.

So that my Lords, in this of levying war, the Act is not so much to be
considered, but as in all other Treasons and Fellonies, quo animo, with what
intent and purpose.

If any man levy war against the King.

the Person of the King appears by the words of the Statute, which in the
beginning declares it to be Treason to compass and imagine the Kings death,
and after other Treasons, this is to be declared to be Treason, to levy war
against the King. If the levying of war extend no further then to the person
of the King. These words of the Statute are to no purpose, for then the first
Treason of compassing the Kings death had fully included it before, because
that he which levies war against the person of the King does necessarily
compass his death.

Its a war against the King when intended for alteration of the Laws or
Government in any part of them, or to destroy any of the great Officers of the
Kingdom. This is a levying of War against the King.



Contrapacem Domini Regis, the Kings peace for exorbitant offenses, though not
intended against the Kings Person, against the King his Crown and Dignity.

My Lords, this construction is made good by diverse Authorities of great
weight ever since the statute of 25. E. 3. down-wards.

In R. the 2ds. time Sir Thomas Talbot conspired the death of the Dukes of
Gloucester and Lancaster, and some other of the Peers, for the effecting of it,
he had caused diverse people in the County of Chester to be armed in
warre-like manner, in Assemblies. In the Parliament held the seventeenth year
of Richard the second, number the 20. Sir Thomas Talbot accused of high Treason
for this; Its there declared, that insomuch as one of them was Lord high
Steward of England, and the other high Constable of England, that this was done
in destruction of the estates of the Realm, and of the Laws of the Kingdom,
and therefore adjudged Treason; and the judgment sent down into the Kings
Bench, as appears Easter-Tearme in the seventh year of Richard the second in
the Kings Bench, Rott. 16. These two Lords had appeared in the eleventh year
of Richard the second in mainetenance of the Act of Parliament made the year
before, one of them was of the Commissioners appointed by Parliament, and one
of the Appellours of those that would have overthrown it: The Duke of
Lancaster likewise was one of the Lords that was to have been indicted of
Treason for endeavoring the maintenance of it, and therefore conspiring of
their deaths is said to be in destruction of the Laws; This there declared to
be a Treason that concerned the Person of the King and the Commonwealth.

In that great insurrection of the Villains and meaner people in Richard the
seconds time, they took an oath, Quod Regi and Comunibus fidelitatem
servarent, to be true to the King and Commons, that they would take nothing
but what they paid for, punished all theft with death, here is no intendment
against the person of the King, The intent was to abolish the Law of villinage
and servitude, to burn all the Records, to kill the Judges, this in the
Parliament of the fifth year of Richard the second, number the one and
thirtieth and two and thirtieth, the first part, is declared to be Treason
against the King and against the Law.

In the eleventh year of Richard the second, in Parliament the raising of
forces against the Commissioners appointed by act of Parliament the year,
before adjudged Treason by all the Judges.

The Statute of 1. Mar. cap. 12. inacts, that if twelve or more shall endeavor
by force to alter any of the Laws or Statutes of the Kingdom, he shall from
such a time there limited be adjudged only as a fellon; This act was to
continue but to the next Parliament, it is expired; it shows by the words
only that the offense was higher before the making of it.

My Lords, In Queen Elizabeth's time, Grant and diverse Prentices of London to
the number of 200. rose and assembled at Tower Hill, carried a Cloak upon a
Pole insteede of a banner, their intent was to deliver diverse Prentices out of
prison that had been committed upon a sentence in Star Chamber for ryots, To
kill the Lord Major of London, and for setting prices on victuals. In Trinity
Term 37. Eliz. diverse of the Judges consulted withal, and resolved that this
was a levying of war against the Queen, being intended against the
government and officers of the Queen, and thereupon Grant and others executed
as Traitors.

Afterward in that Queens time, diverse of the County of Oxford consulted
together to go from house to house in that County, and thence to London and
other parts to excite them to take Arms for the throwing in of all enclosures
throughout England, nothing was done, nor no Assembly: The Statute of 13. Eliz.
cap. 1. during the Queens life made it Treason to intend or advise to levy war
against the Queen.

In Easter Term, 39. Eliz. All the Judges of England met about the case, it
was resolved by them, that this was a war intended against the Queen, they
agreed that if it had been of one Towneship or more upon private interest and
claim of right of Common, it had not been Treason; But this was to throw in
all enclosures thorough the Kingdom, whereto these parties could pretend no
claim; that it was against the Law, in regard that the Statute of Merton gave
power of Enclosures in many Cases. Upon this Resolution Bradshaw and Burton
were executed at Aynestowe hill in Oxfordshire, the place where they intended
their first meeting.

So that, my Lords, if the end of it be to overthrow any of the Statutes, any
part of the Law and settled Government, or any of the great Officers entrusted
with the execution of them; this is a war against the King.

My Lords, it will be further considerable, what shall be accounted a leavying
of war in respect of the Actions and things done; There Is a design to alter
some part of the Laws and present Government, for the effecting thereof
people be provided of Arms, gathered together into troops, but afterward
march not with Banners displayed, nor do Bellum percutere. Whether the arming
themselves and gathering together upon this Design, whether this be a war or
such prosecution of the Design with force as makes it Treason within the
Statute?

First, If this be not a War in respect that it necessarily occasions hostile
preparations on the other side?

2. From the words of the Statute, shall levy war, and be thereof probably
attainted of open Deed by people of their Condition, although the bare
conspiring be not an open Deed, yet whether the arming and drawing men together
be not an open Declaration of War?

In Sir Thomas Talbots case before cited in the seventeenth year of Richard
the second, The Acts of force are expressed in the Parliament Roll. That he
caused diverse of the people of the County of Chester to be armed in a
warre-like manner in assemblies; here is no marching, no bauners displayed.

In the 28. year of Henry the 6th. William Bell and Thomas Lacy in Com' Kanc.
conspired with Thomas Cheney, called the Hermit of the Queen of Faires to
overthrow the Laws and customs of the Realm, and for the effecting of it,
they with two hundred more met together, and concluded upon a course of raising
greater forces in the county of Kent, and the adjacent Shires, this adjudged
Treason, these were open Acts.

My Lords, for the application of both these to the Case in question.

First in respect of the end of it, here was a war against the King, It was
to subvert the Laws, This being the design, for the effecting of it, he
assumed to his own person, an arbitrary power over the lives, liberties and
estates of his Majesty's Subjects, and determined Causes upon paper petitions
at his own will and pleasure, obedience must be forced by the Army, this
declared by the Warrant.

If it be said, That the Warrant expresses not any intent of subverting the
Laws, It expresses fully one of the principal means whereby this was to be
done, that is, obedience to his arbitrary orders upon paper petitions, this was
done in reference to the maine design.

In the Cases of the Town of Cambridge and Sr. William Cogan, that have
formerly been cited to your Lordshippes, upon other occasions, the things in
themselves were not Treason, they were not a levying of War.

In that of Cambridge, the Townsmen met together, and in a forcible manner
broke up the University treasury, and took out of it the Records and Evidence
of the liberties of the University over the Town.

In the other, they of Bridgewater marched to the Hospital, and compelled the
Master of the Hospital to deliver unto them certain Evidences that concerned
the Town, and forced him to enter into a bond of two hundred pound.

These, if done upon these private ends alone, had not been Treason, as
appears by the very words of the Statute of 25. Edw. 3. before mentioned of
marching openly or secretly.

But my Lords, these of Cambridge and Bridgewater, they were of the conspiracy
with the villains, as appears in the Parliament Roll of the fifth year of
Richard the second, number the one and thirtieth, and two and thirtieth, where
the Towns of Cambridge and Bridgewater are expressly excepted out of the
general pardon made to the Villains. This being done in Reference to that
design of the villains of altering the Laws, this it was that made it Treason.

If the design went no further then the enforcing obedience to these paper
orders made by himself, It was sufficient, it was to subvert one fundamental
part of the Laws, nay in effect the whole Law, what use of Law if he might
order, and determine of men's estates at his own pleasure; This was against the
Law notoriously declared in Ireland.

In the close roll in the Tower, in the five and twentieth year of Edw. 1. a
Writ went to the Justices in Ireland, (that Kingdom at that time was governed
by Justices) declaring that upon petitions they were not to determine any
titles between party and party upon any pretense of profit whatsoever to the
King.

In the eight and twentieth year of Henry the sixth the second Chapter, Suites
in equity, not before the Deputy, but in Chancery, Suits at Common Law, not
before him, but in Cases of life in the Kings Bench, for title of land or goods
in the proper Courts of the Common pleas, or Kings Bench.

This declared in the Instructions for Ireland in the latter end of King James
his time, and by the Proclamation in his Majesty's time, my Lord took notice of
them, called the Commissioners narrow hearted Commissioners.

The Law said, he should not thus proceed in subversion of it, he says, he
will, and will enforce obedience by the Army. This is as much in respect of the
end as to endeavor the overthrow of the Statutes of Laborers, of victuals, or
of Merton for Enclosures. Here is a war against the King in respect of the
end.



My Lords, there was an Army in Ireland at that time of two thousand horse and
foot, by this Warrant there is a full designation of this whole Army, and an
Assignement of it over unto Savill for this purpose. The Warrant gives him
power from time to time to take as many Soldiers, horse and foot, with an
Officer, throughout the whole Army as himself shall please, here is the
terror and awe of the whole Army to enforce obedience. My Lords, if the Earl
had armed two thousand men, horse and foot, and formed them into companies to
this end, your Lordships would have conceived that this had been a war, It Is
as much as in the case of Sir Thomas Talbot who armed them in assemblies.

This is the same with a breach of trust added to it. That Army was first
raised and afterward committed to his trust for defense of the people, is now
destined by him to their destruction. This assignation of the Army by his
Warrant under his hand and seal is an open Act.





Your Lordships observe a great difference where six single men go upon a
design alone, and when sent from an Army of six hundred, all engaged in the
same service, so many were sent as were sufficient to execute the Command, if
upon a poor man fewer, more upon a rich, if the six had not been able, the
whole Army must make it good; the reason that the Sheriff alone, or with but
one Bayliffe to do execution, is, because he has the Command of the Law, the
Kings Writ and the posse Comitatus in case of Resistance; here is the warrant of
the General of an Army, here is the posse exercitus, the power of the Army,
under this awe of the whole Army, six may force more then sixty without it, and
although never above fix in one place, yet in the several parts of the
Kingdom at the same time might be above sixty; for sessing of Soldiers was
frequent, it was the ordinary course for execution of his orders.

The Lord Lieutenant of a County in England has a design to alter the Laws
and government, nay admit the design goes not so high, he only declares
thus much, that he will order the freeholds and estates of the Inhabitans of
the County at his own will and pleasure, and does accordingly proceed upon
paper petitions, foreseeing there will be disobedience; he grants out warrants
under his hand and seal to the deputy Lievetenants and Captains of the train
bands, that upon refusal they shall take such number of the train bands
through the County with Officers as they shall think good, and lay them upon the
lands and houses of the refusers; Soldiers in a warlike manner are frequently
sessed upon them accordingly. Your Lordships do conceive that this is a
levying of War within the Statute.

The Case in question goes further in these two Respects.

Ireland, not only against the Common Law, but likewise against the Statute of
the eight and twentieth year of Henry the sixth, against the Acts of the
Commissioners, against Proclamations in pursuance of the Law, against that
himself took notice of, narrow hearted Comissioners.



My Lords, I have now done with the first of levying war.

Savill, and the advice in the 23 Article.

The Warrant shows a resolution of employing the old Army of Ireland, to the
opprossion of his Majesty's Subjects and the Laws.

In the 23 Article having told his Majesty that he was loosed and absolved from
rules of Government and might do every thing which power might admit, he
proceeded further in speech to his Majesty, in these words; You have an Army in
Ireland You may employ to reduce this Kingdom.

My Lords, both being put together, there is a machination, a practice, an advise
to levy war, and by force to oppress and destroy his Majesty's Subjects.

Edw. 3. is a penal Law, and cannot be taken by equity and Construction,
there must be an actual war; the Statute makes it Treason to counterfeit the
Kings Coin, the conspiring, the raising of furnaces is no Treason, unless he
does nummum percutere, actually coin.

Henry the sixth, fol. 47. there adjudged that the conspiring and ayding to
counterfeit coin was Treason, and Justice Stamford, fol. 3. and 44. is of
opinion, That this or conspiring to counterfeit the great Seal is Treason. The
Statute is, If any shall counterfeit the great Seal, conspiring to do it by
the book is Treason; if a man take the broad Seal from one Pattent, and put it
to another, here is no counterfeiting, its tuntamount, and therefore Treason,
as is adjudged in 2. Henry 4. fo. 25. and by the opinion of Stamford.

If machination or plotting a war be not within that clause of the Statute of
levying war, yet its within the first of compassing the death of the King, as
that which necessarily tends to the destruction both of the King and of the
people, upon whose safety and protection he is to engage himself: That this is
Treason has been adjudged both after the Statutes of the first of Henry the
fourth Chapter the tenth, and the first of Queen Mary the first Chapter, so
much insisted upon on the other side. In the third year of King Henry the
fourth, one Balshall coming from London, found one Barnard at plough in the
Parish of Ofley in the County of Hertford, Bernard asked Balshall, what news,
he told him the news was; That King Richard the second was alive in Scotland
(which was false, for he was then dead) and that by Midsomer next he would come
into England; Bernard asked him, what was best to be done, Balshall answered,
get men, and go to King Richard. In Michaelmas Term, in the third year of
Henry the fourth in the Kings Bench, rot. 4. this advise of war adjudged
Treason.

In Queen Mary's time. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton conspired with Sir Thomas
Wyat to levy war within this Realm for alteration in Religion, he joined not
with him in the execution. This Conspiracy alone declared to be Treason by the
Judges. This was after the Statute of the first of Queen Mary so much insisted
upon. That Parliament ended in October, this opinion was delivered the
Easter-Tearme after, and is reported by Justice Dyer, fo. 98. It Is true, Sir
Thomas Wyat afterward did levy war, Sir Nicholas Throgmorton he only
conspired, this adjudged Treason.

Story, in Queen Elizabeth's time, practiced with Forreiners to levy war
within the Kingdom, nothing done in pursuance of the practice. The intent
without any adhering to Enemies of the Queen or other cause adjudged to be
Treason, and he executed thereupon. It Is true my Lords, that year 13.
Elizabeth by Act of Parliament, it is made Treason to intend the levying of
war, this Case was adjudged before the Parliament. The Case was adjudged in
Hillary Term, the Parliament began not until the April following; This my
Lords, is a Case adjudged in point, That the practicing to levy war, though
nothing be done in execution of it is Treason.

included the Queen, and was a compassing her destruction, as well as of the
Kingdoms, here the advice was to the King.



host is patriae, he would have made the Father of it so too; nothing more
unnatural, more dangerous; To offer the King poison to drink, telling him that
it is a Cordial, is a compassing of his death. The poison was repelled, there
was an antidote within, the malice of the giver beyond expression. The
persuading of Forreiners to invade the kingdom holds no proportion with this,
Machination of war against the Laws or kingdom is against the King they
cannot be severed.

My Lords, if no actual war within the The 3. General Head
Statute, if the counselling of a war, if neither of these single Acts be
Treason within the Statute; The Commons in the next place have taken it into
their consideration, what the addition of his other words, Counsels, and
Actions do operate in the Case, and have conceived, That with this addition all
being put together, that he is brought within the Statute of 25. Edward 3.

The words of the Statute are, if any man shall compass or imagine the death
of the King, the words are not, if any man shall plot or consult the death of
the King, no my Lords, they go further then to such things as are intended
immediately, directly, and determinatively against the life and person of the
King, they are of a larger extent, to compass is to do by Circuit, to consult
or practice another thing directly, which being done, may necessarily produce
this effect.

However it be in the other Treasons within this Statute, yet in this by the
very words there is room left for constructions, for necessary Inferences and
Consequences.

What has been the judgment and practice of former times concerning these
words of compassing the Kings death will appear to your Lorships by some Cases
of attainders upon these words.

One Owen in King James his time in the 13. year of his reign at Sandwich in
Kent, spoke these words, That King James being excommunicated by the Pope, may
be killed by any man; which killing is no murder: being asked by those he
spoke too, how he durst maintain so bloody an assertion, he answered that the
matter was not so heinous as was supposed; for the King who is the lesser is
concluded by the Pope who is the greater, and as a Malefactor being condemned
before a Temporal Judge may be delivered over to be Executed, so the King
standing convicted by the Popes sentence of excommunication may justly be
slaughtered without fault, for the killing of the King is the execution of the
Popes supreme sentence, as the other is the execution of the Law; for this,
judgment of High Treason was given against him, and execution done.

My Lords, here is no clear intent appearing that Owen desired the thing
should be done, only Arguments that it might be done, This is a Compassing,
there is a clear Endeavor to corrupt the judgment, to take off the bonds of
Conscience, the greatest security of the Kings life; God forbid says one of
better judgment then he, That I should stretch out my hand against the Lords
anointed, no says he, the Lord does not forbid it, you may for these reasons
lawfully kill the King.

He that denies the Title to the Crown, and plots the means of setting it
upon another head, may do this without any direct or immediate desiring the
death of him that then wears it, yet this is Treason as was adjudged in 10.
Henry 7. in the case of Burton and in the Duke of Norfolkes case. 13. Elizabeth.

This is a compassing of his death, for there can no more be two Kings in one
Kingdom, then two suns in the Firmament, he that conceives a title, counts
it worth ventring for, though it cost him his life, he that is in possession
thinks it as well worth the keeping. John Sparhauke in King Henry the fourths
time, meeting two men upon the way, amongst other talk said, that the King was
not rightful King, but the Earl of March, and that the Pope would grant
indulgencies to all that would assist the Earls title, and that within half a
year there would be no Liveries nor Conizances of the King, that the King had
not kept promise with the people but had laid taxes upon them. In Easter
Term in the third year of Henry the fourth in the Kings Bench Rot. 12. this
adjudged Treason. This denying the title with motives though but implyedly of
Action against it, adjudged Treason, this is a compassing the Kings death.

How this was a compassing the Kings death is declared in the reasons of the
judgment, That the words were spoken with an intent to withdraw the affections
of the people from the King, and to excite them against the King, that in the
end they might rise up against him in mortem and destructionem of the King.

My Lords, in this Judgment and others which I shall cite to your Lordships;
It appears that it is a compassing the Kings death by words, to endeavor to
draw the peoples hearts from the King, to set discord between the King and
them, whereby the people should leave the King, should rise up against him to
the death and destruction of the King.

The cases that I shall cite prove not only that this is Treason, but what is
sufficient evidence to make this good.

Upon a Commission held the 18. year of Ed. 4. in Kent, before the Marquess
of Dorset and others, an Indictment was preferred against John Awater of
High Treason, in the form before mentioned, for words which are entered in the
enditment, sub hac forma, That he had been servant to the Earl of Warwick,
that though he were dead, the Earl of Oxford was alive, and should have the
government of part of the Country, That Edward whom you call King of England
was a false man, and had by art and subtilty slain the Earl of Warwick and the
Duke of Clarence his brother without any cause, who before had been both of
them attainted of High Treason.

My Lords, this Indictment was returned into the Kings Bench in Trinity Term
in the eighteenth year of Edward the fourth, and in Easter Term in the two
and twentieth year of Edward the fourth he was outlawed, by the stay of the
outlawry so long it seems the Judges had well advised before whether it were
Treason or not.

At the same Session, Thomas Heber was indicted of Treason for these words; That
the last Parliament was the most simple and insufficient Parliament that ever
had been in England. That the King was gone to live in Kent, because that for
the present he had not the love of the Citizens of London, nor should he have
it for the future. That if the Bishop of Bath and Wells were dead, the
Archbishop of Canterbury, being Cardinal of England, would immediately loose
his head. This Indictment was returned into the Kings Bench in Trinity Term
in the eighteenth year of Edward the fourth. Afterward there came a Privy
Scale to the Judges to respit the proceedings, which as it should seem was to
the intent the Judges might advise of the Case, for afterward he is outlawed
of High Treason upon this indictment.

These words were thought sufficient evidence to prove these several
Inditements, That they were spoken to with draw the peoples affection from the
King, to excite them against him; to cause risings against him by the people in
more^ and destructions of the King.

Your Lordships are pleased to consider that in all these Cases, the Treason
was for words only, words by private persons, and in amore private manner, but
once spoken and no more, only amongst the people, to excite them against the
King.

My Lords, here are words; Counsels more then words, and actions too, not only
to disaffect the people to the King, but the King likewise toward the people,
not once but often, not in private, but in places most public, not by a
private person, but by a Counselor of State, a Lord Leivetenant, a Lord
President, a Lord Deputy of Ireland.

1. To his Majesty, That the Parliament had denied to supply him; a slander
upon all the Commons of England in their affections to the King and Kingdom,
in refusing to yield timely supply for the necessities of the King and Kingdom.

2. From thence, that the King was loose and absolved from rules of
government, and was to do every thing that power would admit, My Lords, more
cannot be said, they cannot be aggravated, whatever I should say would be in
diminution.

You have an Army in Ireland, you may employ to reduce this Kingdom.

To counsel a King not to love his people is very unnatural, it goes higher,
to hate them, to malice them in his heart; the highest expressions of malice,
to destroy them by war: These coals they were cast upon his Majesty, they were
blown, they could not kindle in that breast.

Thence, my Lords, having done the utmost to the King, he goes to the people:
At York the Country being met together for Justice, at the open Assizes upon
the Bench, he tells them, speaking of the Justices of the Peace, that they were
all for Law, nothing but Law, but they should find that the Kings little finger
should be heavier then the loins of the Law.

They shall find, my Lords, who speaks this to the people, a Privy Counselor;
this must be either to traduce his Majesty to the people as spoken from him, or
from himself, who was Lord Leivetenant of the County and President, entrusted
with the forces and Justice of those parts, that he would employ both this way;
add, my Lords, to his words there the exercising of an arbitrary and vast
Jurisdiction before he had so much as Instructions or color of warrant.

Thence, we carry him into Ireland, there he represented by his place the
sacred person of his Majesty.

1. There at Dublyn the principal City of that Kingdom, whether the Subjects
of that Country came for Justice, in an Assembly of Peers and others of
greatest rank, upon occasion of a Speech of the Recorder of that City
touching their Franchises and Legal Rights, he tells them, that Ireland was a
Conquered Nation, and that the King might do with them what he pleased.

2. Not long after, in the Parliament 10. Car. in the Chair of State, in full
Parliament, again, That they were a conquered Nation, and that they were to
expect Laws as from a Conqueror, before, the King might do with them what he
would, now, They were to expect it, that he would put this power of a Conqueror
in execution. The Circumstances are very considerable, in full Parliament, from
himself in Cathedra, to the representative body of the whole Kingdom.

The occasion adds much, when they desire the benefit of the Laws, and that
their Causes and Suites might be determined according to Law, and not by
himself, at his will and pleasure upon paper Petitions.

3. Upon like occasion of pressing the Laws and Statutes, That he would make
an Act of counsel board in that Kingdom as binding as an Act of Parliament.

4. He made his words good by his actions, assumed and exercised a boundless
and lawless Jurisdiction over the lives, persons, and estates of his Majesty's
Subjects, procured judgment of death against a Peer of that Realm, commanded
another to be hanged, this was accordingly executed, both in times of high
Peace, without any process or color of Law.

5. By force for a long time he seized the yarne and flax of the Subjects, to
the starving and undoing of many thousands, besides the Tobacco business, and
many Monopolies, and unlawful Taxes, forced a new Oath not to dispute his
Majesty's royal commands, determined men's estates at his own will and
pleasure upon paper Petititions to himself, forced Obedience to these, not
only by Fines and Imprisonment, but likewise by the Army, sessed Soldiers upon
the refusers in a hostile manner.

6. Was an Incendiary of the war between the two Kingdoms of England and
Scotland.

My Lords, we shall leave it to your Lordships Judgments, whether these words,
Counsels, and Actions would not have been a sufficient Evidence to have proved
an Indictment drawn up against him, as those before mentioned, and many others
are; That they were spoken and done to the intent to withdraw the Kings heart
from the people, and the affections of the people from the King, that they
might leave the King, and afterward rise up against him to the destruction of
the King; if so, here is a compassing of the Kings death within the words of
the Statute of the five and twentieth year of Edward the third, and that
warranted by many former judgments.

My Lords, I have now done with the three The 4. General Head.
Treasons within the Statute of the five and twentieth of Edward the third. I
proceed to the fourth upon the Statute of the eighteenth year of Henry the
sixth, Chapter the third in Ireland; I shall make bold to read the words to your
Lordships,

That no Lord, nor any other of what condition soever he be, shall bring or
lead hoblers, kerves, or hooded men, nor any other people, nor horses to lie on
horseback or on foot upon the Kings Subjects without their good wills and
consent, but upon their own costs, and without hurt doing to the Commons, and
if any so do he shall be judged as Traitor.

1. The Argument that has been made concerning the Person, That it extends not
to the King, and therefore not to him; weighs nothing with your Lordships Rex
non habet in regno parem, from the greatness of his office to argue himself
into the same impossibility with his sacred Majesty of being incapable of
High Treason, it is an Offense, no reason; The words in the Statute, No Lord nor
any other of what condition soever he be, includes every Subject.

In Trinity Term in the three and thirtieth year of Henry the eight, in the
Kings Bench; Leonard Lord Gray, having immediately before been Lord Deputy of
Ireland, is attainted of High Treason, and Judgment given against him for
letting diverse Rebels out of the Castle of Dublin, and discharging Irish
hostages and pledges that had been given for securing the Peace, for not
punishing one that said the King was an Heretic. I have read the whole
Record, there is not one thing laid to his charge but was done by him as Lord
Leivetenant: He had the same Plea with my Lord of Strafford; That these things
were no adhering to the Kings Enemies, but were done for reasons of State, That
he was not within those words of the Satute of the five and twentieth year of
Edward the third, himself being Lord Lieutenant there, they cost his life.

Hoblers, Kerves, and hooded men, these rascal people.

Nor any other people, neither horse nor foot, his Lordship sessed upon them
both horse and foot.

Savill led them, my Lord only gave the warrant.

plus peccat author quam actor, by the rule of Law, agentes and consentientes
pari plectuntur paena, if consent, much more a command to do it, makes the
commandor a Traitor. If there be any Treason within this Statute, my Lord of
Strafford is guilty.

It has been therefore said, That this Statute like Goliab's sword has been
wrapped up in a cloth and laid behind the door, that it has never been put in
execution.

Ireland had certified your Lordships that upon search of the Judgments of
Attainders in Ireland, he could not find that any man had bin attainted upon
this Statute, your Lordships had had some ground to believe it, yet its only
my Lord of Straffords affirmation: Besides your Lordships know that an Act of
Parliament binds until it be repealed.

It has bin therefore said, that this Statute is repealed by the Statutes of
the eight year of Edward the fourth, the first Chapter, and of the tenth year
of Henry the seventh, the two and twentieth Chapter, because by these two
Statutes, the English Statutes are brought into Ireland.

The Argument, (if I mistook it not,) stood thus; That the Statute of the first
of Henry the fourth, the 10. Chapter, says, that in no time to come, Treason
shall be adjudged otherwise, then it was ordained by the Statute of the 25.
year of Edward the third, That the Treason mentioned in the 18 year of Henry
the sixth in the Irish Statute is not contained in the Stat. of the 25 year of
Ed. the 3. and therefore being contrary to the Statute of the first of Henry the
fourth, it must needs be void.

My Lords, the difference of the times wherein the Statute of the first year of
Henry the fourth, and that of the 18 year of Henry the sixth were made, cleares
the Point, as is humbly conceived; that of Henry the sixth was made 40 years
after the other.

The Statute of the eighth year of Edward the fourth, and the tenth of Henry
the seventh, bringing in the English Statutes in order and series of time, as
they were made one after another (as afterward is prooved they did) it cannot
be that the Statute of the first year of Henery the fourth made forty year
before, should repeal or make void the Statute of the 18. H. 6. made so long
after. The rule of Law is that Leges posteriores priores abrogant, that latter
laws repeal former, but by this construction a former Law should repeal and
make void a Non ens, a Statute that then was not.

If this were Law, then all the Statutes that made any new Treason after the
first year of Henery the fourth were void in the very fabric, and at the
time when they were made, hence likewise it would follow that the Parliament
now upon what occasion soever has noe power to make any thing Treason not
declared to be so in the Statute of the five and twentieth year of Edward the
third; This your Lordshippes easily see would make much for my Lord of
Straffords advantage; but why the Law should be, so your Lordshippes as yet
have only heard an affirmation of it, no reason.

But some touch was given that this Statute of the tenth year of Henery the
seventh in words makes all the Irish Statutes void, which are contrary to the
English. The Answer to this is a denial that there are any such words in the
Statute: This Statute declares, that the English Statutes shall be effectual
and confirmed in Ireland, and that all Statutes, before time, made to the
contrary shall be revoked; this repeales only the Irish Statutes of the tenth
year of Henerie the fourth, and the nine and twentieth year of Henerie the
sixth, which say that the English Statutes shall not be in force in Ireland,
unless particularly received in Parliament, It makes all the Irish Statutes
void, which say that the English Statutes shall not be in force there.

It is usual when a Statute says, that such a thing shall be done or not
done, to add further that all Statutes to the contrary shall be void.

No likeli-hood that this Statute intended to take away any Statute of Treason;
When but in the Chapter next before this, Murder there is made Treason, as if
done upon the Kings Person.

That this Statute of the eighteenth year of Harry the sixth remains on foot
and not repealed either by the Statute of the eighth year of Edward the
fourth, or this of the tenth year of Henerie the seventh appears expressly
by two several Acts of Parliament made at the same Parliament of the tenth
year of Henry the seventh.

By an Act of Parliament in Henry the sixth time, in Ireland it was made
Treason for any man to procure a privy Seal, or any other Command whatsoever,
for apprehending any person in Ireland for Treason done without that Kingdom,
and to put any such Command in execution; Diverse had been attaineted of
Treason for executing such Commands: Here is a Treason so made by Act of
Parliament in Henry the sixth time: In the third Chapter of this Parliament of
the tenth of Henry the seventh an Act is passed for no other end then to
repeal this Statute of Henry the sixth of Treason.

If this Statute of Henry the sixth of Treason, had been formerly repealed by
the Statute of 8. Edw. 4. or then by the two and twentieth Chapter of this
Parliament of 10. H. 7. by bringing in the English Statutes, the Lawmakers
were much mistaken now to make a particular Act of Parliament to repeal it, it
being likewise so unreasonable an Act as it was.

In the eighth Chapter of this Parliament of the tenth of Henry the seventh;
It Is enacted, That the Statutes of Killkenny and all other Statutes made in
Ireland (two only excepted, whereof this of the eighteenth of Henry the sixth
is none) for the Commonweal shall be enquired off and executed. My Lord of
Strafford says, that the bringing in of the English Statutes has repealed
this Statute of the eighteenth year of Henry the sixth, the Act of Parliament
made the same time says noe; it says that all the Irish Statutes, excepting
two, whereof this is none, shall still be in force.

Object. Oh! But however it was in 10. Hen. 7. yet it appears by Judgment in
Parliament afterward, That this Statute of the eighteenth year of Henry the
sixth is repealed, and that is by the Parliament of the eleventh year of Queen
Elizabeth, the seventh Chapter, That by this Parliament it is enacted, that if
any man without license from the Lord Deputy, lay any Soldiers upon the Kings
Subjects, if he be a Peer of the Realm, he shall forfeite one hundred
pounds, if under the degree of a Peer 100. marks. This Statute as is
alleged declares the penalty of laying Soldiers upon the Subjects to be
only a hundred pounds; and therefore its not Treason.

Answer. My Lords if the offense for which this penalty of one hundred pounds
is laid upon the offender be for laying Souliders, or leading them to do any
acts offensive or invasive upon the Kings people, The Argument has some
force; but that the offense is not for laying Soldiers upon the true Subjects,
that this is not the offense intended in the Statute will appear to your
Lordshippes, Ex absurdo, from the words of it.

The words are, That if any man shall assemble the people of the Country
together to conclude of peace or war, or shall carry those people to do any
Acts offensive or invasive, then he shall forfeite one hundred pounds; If
concluding of war and carrying the people to Acts invasive, be against the
Kings Subjects, this is high Treason within the words of the Statute of the
five and twentieth year of Edward the third; For if any Subject shall assemble
the people and conclude a war, and accordingly shall lead them to invade the
Subject, this is a levying of war within the words of that Statute; and then
the Statutes of the five and twentieth year of Edward the third; the first of
Henry the fourth; and the first of Queen Mary which the Earl of Strafford in
his Answer desires to be tried by, are as well repealed in this point as the
Statute of the eighteenth year of Henry the sixth, he might then without
fear of Treason have done what he pleased with the Irish Army; for all the
Statutes of levying war, by this Statute of the eleventh Year of Queen
ELIZABETH were taken out of his way.

Ireland a Subject gathers forces, concludes a war against the Kings people,
actually invades them; blood-shedde, burning of houses, Depredations ensue; two
of those, that is murder and burning of houses are Treason, and there the other
felony; by this construction the punishment of Treason and felony is turned
only into a fine of one hundred pounds; from loss of life, lands and all his
goods, only to loss of part of his goods.



here is no damage to the Subject that is robbed and destroyed.

My Lords, the Statute will free it self and the makers of it from these
absurdities.

The meaning of this Statute is, That if any Captain shall of his own head
conclude of peace or war against the Kings Enemies or Rebels, or shall upon
his own head invade them, without warrant from the King of the Lord Deputy of
Ireland, that then he shall forfeite a hundred pounds.

The offense is not for laying of Soldiers upon the Kings people; but making
of war against the Irish Rebels without warrant; the offense is not in the
matter, but in the manner, for doing a thing lawful, but without mission.

1. This will appear by the general scope of the Stat. all the parts being
put together. 2. By particular clauses in the Statute And, 3. By the Condition
of that Kingdom at the time of the making of that Statute.
For the first, The preamble recites that in time of Declination of Justice
under pretext of defending the Country and themselves, diverse great men
arrogated to themselves regal authority under the names of Captains, that they
acquired to themselves that government which belonged to the Crown, for
preventing of this Its enacted, that no man dwelling within the Shire grounds,
shall thenceforth assume or take upon himself the authority or name of a
Captain within those Shire grounds, without Letters Pattents from the Crown,
nor shall under color of his Captainesship make any demand of the people of
any exaction, nor as a Captain assemble the people of the Shire grounds; nor
as a Captain shall lead those people to do any acts offensive or invasive
without warrant under the great Seal of England or of the Lord Deputy upon
penalty that if he do any thing contrary to that act, then the Offender shall
forfeite a hundred pounds.

My Lords, the Rebels had been out, the Courts of justice scarce sat, for
defense of the Country diverse usurped the place of Captains, concluded of
war against the Rebels and invaded them without warrant; invading the
Rebels without authority is the crime.



That that had anciently been so continued to this time, that is the Irish and
the English pale, they within the Shire grounds were within the English pale,
and ad fidem and legem Angliae; the Irish that were without the pale were
enemies always either in open act of hostility or upon leagues, and hostages
given for securing the peace, and therefore as here in England, we had our
marches upon the frontiers in Scotland and Wales, so were there Marches
between the English and Irish pale, where the inhabitants held their Lands by
this tenure to defend the Country against the Irish, as appears in the close
Rolls of the Tower in the 20. year of Edward the third, membrana 15. on the
backside, and in an Irish Parliament held the 42. year of Edward the third.
Its declared, that the English pale was almost destroyed by the Irish enemies,
and that there was no way to prevent the danger, but only that the owners
reside upon their Lands for defense, and that absence should be a forfeiture,
this act of Parliament in a great counsel here was affirmed, as appears in
the close Roll, the 22. year of Edward the third, membrana 20. dorse.

Afterward as appears in the Statute of the eight-and-twenty year of Henry
the 6. in Ireland, this hostility continued between the English marches and
the Irish enemies, who by reason there was no difference between the English
marches and them in their apparel, did daily not being known to the English,
destroy the English within the pale. Therefore its enacted, that every
Englishman shall shave the hair of his upper lip for distinction sake. This
hostility continued, till the tenth year of Henry the seventh, as appears by
the Statute of the tenth of Henry the seventh, the seaventeenth Chapter; and
so successively downwards, till the making of this very Statute of the
eleaventh year of Queen Elizabeth, as appears fully in the ninth Chapter.

Nay immediately before, and at the time of the making of this Statute, there
was not only emnity between those of the Shire grounds that is the English
and Irish pale, but open War and Acts of hostility, as appears by History of
no less authority, then that Statute it self, for in the first Chapter of
this Statute is the Attainder of Shane O Neale, who had made open War, was
slain in open War. Its there declared, that he had gotten by force all the
North of Ireland for an hundred and twenty miles in length, and above a 100. in
breadth, that he had mastered diverse places within the English pale; when the
flame of this war by his death immediately before this Statute was spent, yet
the fire brands were not all quenched for the rebellion was continued by John
Fitz. Gerard called the white Knight, and Thomas Queverford, this appears by
the Statute of the thirteenth year of Queen Elizabeth in Ireland, but two
years after this of the eleaventh year of Queen Elizabeth, where they are
attainted of high treason for levying War this eleaventh year, wherein this
Statute was made.

So that my Lords immediately before, and at the time of the making of this
Statute, there being War between those of the Shire grounds mentioned in
this Statute; and the Irish, the concluding of War and Acts offensive and
invasive there mentioned can be intended against no others, but the Irish
enemies.

Again the words of the Statute are no Captain shall assemble the people of
the Shire grounds to conclude of peace or war, is it to be presumed that
those of the Shire grounds will conclude of War against themselves? nor says
the Statute shall carry those of the Shire grounds to do any Acts invasive; by
the construction which is made on the other side, they must be carried to
fight against themselves.

Lastly the words are, as Captain none shall assume the name or authority of a
Captain, or as a Captain shall gather the people together, or as a Captain
lead them. The offense is not in the matter, but in the manner: If the acts
offensive were against the Kings good subjects; those that went under command
were punishable, as well as the Commanders, but in respect, the Soldiers knew
the service to be good in it self being against the enemies, and that it was
not for them to dispute the authority of their commanders, the penalty of a
100. pounds is laid only upon him, that as Captain shall assume this power
without warrant, the people commanded are not within the Statute.

My Lords, the logic whereupon this argument has been framed stands thus,
because the Statute of the eleaventh year of Queen Elizabeth inflicts a
penalty of a 100. pound, and no more upon any man, that as a Captain without
warrant, and upon his own head shall conclude of, or make War against the
Kings enemies: therefore the Statute of the 18. year of Henry the sixth, is
repealed, which makes it treason to lay Soldiers upon, or to levy war
against the Kings good people.

But my Lords observation has bin made upon other words of this statute, that
is that without license of the deputy; these things cannot be done: This
shows, that the deputy is within none of these Statutes.

My Lords, this Argument stands upon the same reason with the former, because
he has the ordering of the Army of Ireland for the defense of the people, and
may give warrant to the Officers of the Army upon eminent occasions of invasion
to resist or prosecute the enemy, because of the danger that else might ensue
forthwith by staying for a warrant from his Majesty out of England; Therefore
it is no treason in the Deputy to employ the Army in Ireland whenever he
pleases for the subversion of the Kings good people, and of the laws.

My Lords, the Statute of the tenth year of Henry the seventh, the
seaventeenth Chapter touched upon for this purpose, cleares the business in both
points, for there it is declared, that none ought to make war upon the Irish
rebels and enemies without warrant from the Lieutenant, the forfeiture a
hundred pounds as here the Statute is the same with this, and might as well
have been cited for repealing the Statute of the eighteenth year of Henry the
sixth, as this of the eleaventh year of Queen Elizabeth: but if this had been
insisted upon it would have expounded the other two clear against him.

Ireland, therefore not triable here.

John Perrot his predecessors in the 24. year of Queen Elizabeth was tried in
the Kings bench for treason done in Ireland, when he was Deputy; and Orucke in
the 33. year of Queen Elizabeth judged here for treason done in Ireland.

Henry the eight, which enacts, that treasons beyond sea may be tried in
England.

Gray was tried and adjudged here in the Kings bench, that was in Trinity
term in the three-and-thirtie year of Henry the eight, this was before the
making of that Statute.

England, but this is not for anything, that is treason by the Law of England,
but by an Irish Statute.

So that the question is only whether your Lordships in Parliament here have
cognizance of an offense made treason by an Irish Statute in the ordinary way
of judicature without bill, for so is the present question.

For the clearing of this, I shall propound two things to your Lordships
consideration;

Irish Statutes and customs be one, and the same in England as in Ireland.

England have cognizance or jurisdiction of things there done in respect of the
place, because the Kings writ runs not there.

For the first, if in respect of the place, the Parliament here has cognizance
there; And secondly, if the rules for expounding the Irish Statutes and
Customs be the same here as there, this exception as I humbly, conceive must
fall away.

In England there is the common law, the Statutes, the acts of Parliament and
customs peculiar to certain places differing from the common law, if any
question arise concerning either a custom or an act of Parliament, the common
law of England; the first, the primative and the general law, that is the rule
and expositour of them and of their several extents, it is so here, it is so
in Ireland; the common law of England, is the common law of Ireland likewise;
the same here and there in all the parts of it.

It was introduced into Ireland by King John, and afterward by King Harry the
third, by act of Parliament held in England as appears by the pattent Rolls of
the 30. year of King Henry the third, the first membrana. The words are, Quia
pro communi utilitate terrae Hiberniae, and unitate terrarum Regis, Rex vult,
and de communi consilio Regis provisum est, quod omnes leges and consuetudines
quae in regno Angliae tenentur, in Hibernia teneantur, and eadem terra eisdem
legibus subjaceat, and per easdem regatur, sicut Dominus Johannes Rex cum
ultimo esset in Hibernia statuit, and fierimandavit. Quia etc. Rex vult quod
omnia brevia de communi Jure quae currunt in Anglia, similiter current in
Hibernia sub novo sigillo Regis, mandatum est Archiepiscopis, etc. quod pro
pace and tranquillitate ejusdem terrae, per casdem leges eos regi and deduci
permittant, and ea (...) omnibus sequantur. In cujus etc. Test Rege, apud
Woodstock, decimo none die Septembris.

Here Is an union of both Kingdoms, and that by act of Parliament, and the same
Laws to be used here as there, in omnibus.

My Lords, That nothing might be left here for an exception, that is, that in
treasons, felonies, and other capital offenses concerning life, the Irish
laws are not the same as here, Therefore it is enacted in a Parliament held in
England in the fourteenth year of Edward the second (it is not in print
neither, but is in the Parliament book) That the Laws concerning life and
member shall be the same in Ireland as in England.

And that no exception might yet remain, in a Parliament held in England, the
fifth year of Edward the third, It is enacted, quod una and eadem Lex fiat tam
Hibernicis quam Anglicis. This Act is enrolled in the Patent rolls of the fifth
year of Edward the third, part. 1. memb. 35.

The Irish therefore receiving their Laws from hence, they send their Students
at Law to the Innes of Courts in England, where they receive their degree; and
of them, and of the common Lawyers of this Kingdom are the Judges made.

My Lords, The petitions have been many from Ireland, to send from hence some
Judges more learned in the Laws then those they had there.

It has been frequent in cases of difficulty there, to send sometimes to the
Parliament here, sometimes to the King by advice from the Judges here, to send
them resolutions of their doubts: Amongst many I Will cite your Lordships only
one, because it is in a case of Treason upon an Irish Statute, and therefore
full to this point.

By a Statute there made in the fifth year of Edward the fourth, there is
provision made for such as upon suggestions are committed to prison for
Treason, that the party committed, if he can procure 24. Compurgators, shall be
bailed, and let out of prison.

Two Citizens of Dublin were by a grand Jury presented to have committed
Treason; They desired the benefit of this Statute, that they might be let out
of prison upon tender of their Compurgators. The words of the Statute of the
fifth year of Edward the fourth in Ireland being obscure, the Judges there not
being satisfied what to do, sent the case over to the Queen, desired the
opinion of the Judges here; which was done accordingly: The Judges here sent
over their opinion, which I have out of the Book of Justice Anderson, one of
the Judges consulted withal. The Judges here delivered opinion upon an Irish
Statute in case of Treason.

If it be objected, That in this case the Judges here did not judge upon the
party; their opinions were only ad informandum conscientiam of the Judges in
Ireland; that the judgment belonged to the Judges there:

My Lords, with submission, this and the other Authorities prove that for which
they were cited; that is, That no absurdity, no failer of Justice would ensue
if this great Judicatory should judge of Treason so made by an Irish Statute.

The common Law, the rule of Judging upon an Irish Statute, the pleas of the
Crown for things of life and death, are the same here and there. This is all
that has yet been offered.

For the second point, That England has no power of Judicature for things done
in Ireland; My Lords, the constant practice of all ages proves the contrary.

Writs of error in Pleas of the Crown as well as in civil causes, have in
all Kings reigns been brought here, even in the inferior Courts of
Westminster Hall, upon judgments given in the Courts of Ireland: The practice
is so frequent, and so well known, as that I shall cite none of them to your
Lordships: no president will I believe be produced to your Lordships, that
ever the case was remanded back again into Ireland, because the question rose
upon an Irish Statute or custom.

But it will be said, That writs of error are only upon a failer of justice in
Ireland; and that suits cannot originally be commenced here for things done in
Ireland, because the Kings writ runs not in Ireland.

This might be a good plea in the Kings Bench, and inferior Courts at
Westminster Hall; the question is, whether it be so in Parliament. The Kings
writ runs not within the County Palatine of Chester and Durham, nor within the
five Ports; neither did it in Wales before the union in Henry the eighth's
time, after the Laws of England were brought into Wales in King Edward the
first's time, suits were not originally commenced in Westminst. Hall, for
things done in them, yet this never excluded the Parliament: suits for life,
lands, and goods within those jurisdictions are determinable in Parliament, as
well as in any other parts of the Realm.

Ireland, as appears by the Statute of the thirtieth year of Henry the third,
before mentioned, is united to the Crown of England.

By the Statute of the eight and twentieth year of Henry the sixth in Ireland,
it is declared in these words; That Ireland is the proper Dominion of England,
and united to the Crown of England, which Crown of England is of it self,
and by it self, fully, wholly, and entirely endowed with all power and
authority sufficient to yield to the subjects of the same full and plenary
remedy in all debates and suits whatsoever.

By the Statute of the three and thirtieth year of Henry the eighth, the first
Chapter, when the Kings of England first assumed the title of King of Ireland,
it is there enacted, That Ireland still is to be held as a Crown annexed and
united to the Crown of England.

So that by the same reason, from this, that the Kings writ runs not in
Ireland, it might as well be held, that the Parliament cannot originally hold
plea of things done within the County Palatine of Chester and Durham, nor
within the five Ports and Wales; Ireland is part of the Realm of England, as
appears by those Statutes, as well as any of them.

This is made good by constant practice. In all the Parliament rolls, from the
first to the last, there are receivers and tryers of petitions appointed for
Ireland. For the Irish to come so far with their petitions for justice, and
the Parliament not to have cognizance, when from time to time they had in the
beginning of the Parliament appointed receivers and tryers of them, is a thing
not to be presumed.

An appeal in Ireland brought by William Lord Vescye against John Fitz Thomas
for treasonable words there spoken, before any Judgment given in the case
there, was removed into the Parliament in England, and there the defendant
acquitted, as appears in the Parliament pleas of the two and twentieth year
of Edward the first.

The suits for lands, offices, and goods, originally begun here, are many; and
if question grew upon matter in fact, a Jury usually ordered to try it, and the
verdict returned into Parliament, as in the case of one Balliben, in the
Parliament of the five and thirtieth year of Edward the first. If doubt arose
upon a matter triable by Record, a writ went to the Officers in whose custody
the Record remained, to certify the Record, as was in the case of Robert Bagot
the same Parliament of the five and thirtieth year of Edward the first, where
the writs went to the Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer.

Sometimes they gave judgment here in Parliament, and commanded the Judges
there in Ireland to do execution, as in the great case of petition between the
coparceners of the Earl Marshall, in the Parliament of the three and thirtieth
year of Edward the first, where the writ was awarded to the Treasurer of
Ireland.

My Lords, The Laws of Ireland were introduced by the Parliaments of England,
as appears by three Acts of Parliament before cited.

It is of higher jurisdiction dare Leges, then to judge by them.

The Parliaments of England do bind in Ireland, if Ireland be particularly
mentioned, as is resolved in the Book case of the first year of Henry the
seventh, Cokes seventh Report, Calvin's case, and by the Judges in Trinity
Term, in the three and thirtieth year of Queen Elizabeth: The Statute of the
eighth year of Edward the fourth, the first Chapter in Ireland recites, that
it was doubted amongst the Judges, whether all the English Statutes, though not
naming Ireland, were in force there; if named, no doubt.

From King Henry the third his time downward to the eighth year of Queen
Elizabeth (by which Statute it is made felony to carry sheep from Ireland
beyond seas) in almost all these Kings reigns there be Statutes made
concerning Ireland.

The exercising of the Legislative power there over their lives and estates, is
higher then of the Judicial in question. Until the nine and twentieth year
of Edward the third, erroneous judgments given in Ireland were determinable no
where but in England; no, not in the Parliaments of Ireland, as it appears in
the close rolls in the Tower, in the nine and twentieth year of Edward the
third, membr. 12. Power to examine and reverse erroneous judgments in the
Parliaments of Ireland is granted from hence; Writs of error lie in the
Parliament hereupon erroneous judgments after that time given in the
Parliaments of Ireland, as appears in the Parliament rolls of the eighth year
of Henry the sixth, no. 70. in the case of the Prior of Lenthan. It is true,
the case is not determined there, for it is the last thing that came into the
Parliament, and could not be determined for want of time; but no exception at
all is taken to the jurisdiction.

The Acts of Parliament made in Ireland have bin confirmed in the Parliaments
of England, as appears by the close rolls in the Tower, in the two and fortieth
year of Edward the third, memb. 20. dorso; where the Parliament in Ireland,
for the preservation of the Country from the Irish, who had almost destroyed
it, made an Act, that all the land owners that were English should reside upon
their lands, or else they were to be forfeited: This was here confirmed.

In the Parliament of the fourth year of Henry the fifth, chap. 6. Acts of
Parliament in Ireland are confirmed, and some privileges of the Peers in the
Parliaments there are regulated.

Power to repeal Irish Statutes, power to confirm them, cannot be by the
Parliament here, if it has not cognizance of their Parliaments, unless it be
said, That the Parliament may do it knows not what.

Garnesey and Jersey are under the Kings subjection, but are not parcels of the
Crown of England, but of the Duchy of Normandy; they are not governed by the
Laws of England, as Ireland is; and yet Parliaments in England have usually
held plea of, and determined all causes concerning lands or goods. In the
Parliament of 33. H. i^ there be plactia de Insula Jernesey; and so in the
Parliament 14. E. 2. and so for Normandy and Gascoyne; and always as long as
any part of France was in subjection to the Crown of England, there were, at
the beginning of the Parliaments, receivers and tryers of petitions for those
parts appointed.

I believe your Lordships will have no cases showed of any plea to the
jurisdiction of the Parliaments of England, in any things done in any parts
wheresoever in subjection to the Crown of England.

The last thing I shall offer to your Lordships is the case of 19. El. in my
Lord Dyer 306. and Judge Cromptons book of the jurisdiction of Courts, fol. 23.
The opinion of both these Books is, That an Irish Peer is not triable here.
It Is true, a Scottish or French Nobleman is triable here as a common person; the
Law takes no notice of their Nobility because those Countries are not governed
by the Laws of England; but Ireland, being governed by the same Laws, the
Peers there are triable according to the Law of England, only per pares.

By the same reason the Earl of Strafford, not being a Peer of Ireland, is
not triable by the Peers of Ireland; so that if he be not triable here, he
is triable no where.

My Lords, In case there be a Treason and a Traitor within the Statute, and
that he be not triable here for it in the ordinary way of judicature, if that
jurisdiction fails, this by way of Bill does not; Attainders of Treason in
Parliament are as legal, as usual by Act of Parliament as by Judgment.

I have now done with the Statutes of 25. E. 3. and 18. H. 6. My Lord of
Strafford has offended against both the Kingdoms, and is guilty of high
Treason by the Laws of both.

5 My Lords, In the fifth place I am come to the Treasons at the common Law,
The endeavoring to subvert the fundamental Laws and government of the
Kingdom, and to introduce an arbitrary and tyrannical government.

In this I shall not at all labor to prove, that the endeavoring by words,
counsels, and actions to subvert the Laws, is treason at the common Law; if
there be any common Law treasons at all left; nothing treason, if this not, to
make a Kingdom no Kingdom: take the politic and government away, England's
but a piece of earth, wherein so many men have their commorancy and abode,
without ranks or distinction of men, without property in anything further then
possession; no Law to punish the murdering or robbing one another.

That of 33. H. 8. of introducing the Imperial Law, sticks not with your
Lordships: It was in case of an appeal to Rome; these appeals in cases of
marriages, and other causes counted Ecclesiastical, had been frequent, had in
most Kings reigns been tolerated; some in times of Popery put a conscience upon
them, the Statutes had limited the penalty to a Praemunire only: Neither was
that a total subversion, only an Appeal from the Ecclesiastical Court here
in a single cause to the Court at Rome; and it treason or not, that case proves
not; a treason may be punished as a felony, a felony as a trespass, if his
Majesty so please; the greater includes the lesser: In the case of Praemunire in
the Irish reports, that which is there declared to be treason, proceeded upon
only as a Praemunire.

The thing most considerable in this, is whether the treasons at common Law be
taken away by the Stat. of 25. E. 3. 1. H. 4. or 1. Q. M. or any of them.

My Lords, To say they be taken away by the Stat. of 25. E. 3. is to speak
against both the direct words and scope of that Statute.

In it there is this clause, That because many other like cases of treason might
fall out which are not there declared, therefore it is enacted, That if any
such case come before the Judges, they shall not proceed to judgment till the
case be declared in Parliament, whether it ought to be adjudged treason, or
not.

These words, and the whole scope of that Statute shows, That it was not the
meaning to take away any treasons that were so before; but only to regulate
the jurisdiction and manner of trial. Those that were single and certain Acts,
as Conspiring the Kings death, Levying war, Counterfeiting the money, or
great Seal, Killing a Judge, these are left to the ordidinary Courts of
Justice: The others not depending upon single Acts, but upon constructions and
necessary inferences, they thought it not fit to give the inferior Courts so
great a latitude here, as too dangerous to the subject, those they strained to
the Parliament.

This Statute was the great security of the subject, made with such wisdom as
all the succeeding ages have approved it: It has often passed through the
furnace but, like gold, has lost little or nothing.

The Statute of 1. H. 4. cap. 10. is in these words, Whereas in the Parliament
held the 21. year of Richard the second, diverse pains of treasons were
ordained insomuch, that no man did know how to behave himself, to do, say, or
speak, It is accorded, that in no time to come any treason be adjudged
otherwise then it was ordained by the Statute of 25. E. 3.

It has bin said, To what end is this Statute made, if it takes not away the
common Law treasons remaining after the Statute of 25. E. 3.

There be two maine things which this Statute does: First, it takes away for
the future all the Treasons made by any Statute since 25. Ed. 3. to 1. Hen. 4.
even to that time: For, in respect that by another Act in that Parliament, the
Statute of 21. E. 2. was repealed, it will not be denied, but that this
Statute repeales more treasons then these of 21. E. 2. it repeals all Statute
treasons but those in 25. E. 3.

Secondly, It not only takes away the Statute treasons, but likewise the
declared treasons in Parliament after 25. E. 3. as to the future. After
declaration in Parliament the inferior Courts might judge these treasons; for
the declaration of a treason in Parliament, after it was made, was sent to the
inferior Courts, that toties quoties the like case fell out, they might
proceed therein; the subject for the future was secured against these; so that
this Statute was of great use.

By the very words of it, it still referrs all treasons to the provision of 25.
E. 3. it leaves that entire and upon his old bottom.

The Statute of 1. Q. M. cap. 1. says That no offenses made treason by any Act
of Parliament, shall thenceforth be taken or adjudged to be treason, but only
such as be declared and expressed to be treason by the Statute of 25. E. 3.
concerning treason, or the declaration of treason and no others: And further
provides that no pains of death, penalty, or forfeiture, in any wise shall
ensue for committing any treason, other then such as be in the Statute of 25.
E. 3. ordained and provided any Acts of Parliament or any declaration, or
matter to the contrary, in any wise notwithstanding.

By the first part of this Statute, only offenses made Treason by Act of
Parliament are taken away, the Common Law Treasons are no way touched: The
words (and no others) refer still to offenses made treason by Act of
Parliament; they restrain not to the treasons only particularly mentioned in
the Statute of 25. E. 3. but leave that Statute entire as to the common Law
treason, as appears by the words immediately foregoing.

By the second part for the pains and forfeitures of treasons, if it intend
only the punishment of treason, or if it intend both treason and punishment,
yet all is referred to the provision and ordinance of 25. E. 3. any Act of
Parliament or other declaration or thing notwithstanding.

It says not, other then such penalties or treasons as are expressed and
declared in the Statute of 25. E. 3 that might perhaps have restrained it to
those that are particularly mentioned: No, it referrs all treasons to the
general ordination and provision of that Statute, wherein the
common-Law-treasons are expressly kept on foot.

If it be asked what good this Statute does if it take not away the
common-Law-treasons:

1. It takes away all the treasons made by Act of Parliament, not only since
the first of H. 4. which weremany, but all before 1. H. 4. even until 25. E.
3. by express words.

2. By express words, it takes away all declared treasons, if any such had
been made in Parliament: these for the future are likewise taken away; so that
whereas it might have been doubted, whether the Statute of 1. H. 4. took away
any treasons but those of 21. Richard 2. this clears it both for treasons made
by Parliament, or declared in Parliament, even to the time of making the
Statute.

This is of great use, of great security to the subject; so that as to what
shall be treason, and what not, the Statute of 25. E. 3. remains entire, and
so by consequence the treasons at the common Law.

Only, my Lords, it may be doubted whether the manner of the parliamentary
proceedings be not altered by the Statute of 1. H. 4. the 17. chapter, and
more fully in the Parliament roll, number 144. that is, whether since that
Statute the parliamentary power of declaration of treasons, whereby the
inferior Courts received jurisdiction, be not taken away and restrained only
to Bill, that so it might operate no further then to that particular contained
in the Bill; that so the parliamentary declarations for after times, should be
kept within the Parliament it self, and be extended no further. Since 1. H. 4.
we have not found any such declarations made, but all Attainders of treason
have bin by Bill.

If this be so, yet the common Law treasons still remaining, there is one and
the same ground of reason and equity since 1. H. 4. for passing of a Bill of
treason, as was before for declaring of it without Bill.

Herein the Legislative power is not used against my Lord of Strafford in the
Bill, its only the jurisdiction of the Parliament.

But, my Lords, because that either through my mistaking of the true grounds
and reasons of the Commons, or my not pressing of them with apt arguments and
presidents of former times, or that perchance your Lordships from some other
reasons and authorities, more swaying with your Lordships judgments, then
these from them, may possibly be of a contrary or dubious opinion concerning
these treasons, either upon the Statutes of 25. E. 3. and 18. H. 6. or at the
common Law:

If all these five should fail, they have therefore given me further in
command to declare to your Lordships some of their reasons, why they conceive
that in this case the mere Legislative power may be exercised.

Their reasons are taken from these three grounds: 1 From the nature and
quality of the offense. 2 From the frame and constitution of the Parliament
wherein this Law is made. 3 From practices and usages of former times.


The horridness of the offense in endeavoring the overthrowing the Laws and
present government, has been fully opened to your Lordships heretofore.

The Parliament is the representation of the whole Kingdom, wherein the King
as Head, your Lordships as the more noble, and the Commons the other members,
are knit together into one Body politic: This dissolves the arteries and
ligaments that hold the Body together, the Laws: He that takes away the Laws,
takes not away the allegiance of one subject alone, but of the whole Kingdom.

It was made treason by the Statute of 13. El. for her time, to affirm, That
the Laws of the Realm do not bind the descent of the Crown; no Law, no
descent at all.

No Laws, no Peerage, no ranks or degrees of men; the same condition to all.

It Is treason to kill a Judge upon the Bench; this kills not Iudicem, sed
Iudicium: He that borrowed Apelles, and gave bond to return again Apelles the
Painter, sent him home after he had cut off his right hand; his bond was
broken, Apelles was sent, but not the Painter. There be twelve men, but no
law; there is never a Judge amongst them.

Its felony to embezill any one of the judicial Records of the Kingdom; this
at once sweeps them all away, and from all.

Its treason to counterfeit a twenty shill-piece, here is a counterfeiting of
the Law, we can call neither the counterfeit nor true coin our own.

Its treason to counterfeit the great Seal for an acre of land; no property
hereby is left to any land at all. Nothing treason now, either against King or
Kingdom, no law to punish it.

My Lords, if the question were asked in Westminster Hall, whether this were a
crime punishable in Star Chamber, or in the Kings Bench, by fine or
imprisonment, they would say, It went higher: If whether felony, they would
say, That Is for an offense only against the life or goods of some one or few
persons: It would, I believe, be answered by the Judges, as it was by the
chief Justice Thirning, in 21. R. 2. That though he could not judge the case
treason there before him, yet if he were a Peer in Parliament, he would so
adjudge it.

My Lords, if it be too big for those Courts, we hope its in the right way
here.

2. The second consideration is from the frame and constitution of the
Parliament; the Parliament is the great body politic, it comprehends all from
the King to the Beggar: if so, my Lords, as the natural, so this body, it has
power over it self, and every one of the members for the preservation of the
whole: Its both the Physician and the patient: if the body be distempered, it
has power to open a vein to let out the corrupt blood for curing of it self;
if one member be poisoned or gangrened, it has power to cut it off for the
preservation of the rest.

But, my Lords, it has bin often inculcated, that Lawmakers should imitate
the supreme Lawgiver, who commonly warnes before he strikes; the Law was
promulged before the jugdement of death for gathering the sticks; no law, no
transgression.

My Lords, to this the rule of Law is, Frustra legis auxilium invocat, qui in
legem committit, from the lex Talionis, he that would not have had others to
have law, why should he have any himself? why should not that be done to him,
that himself would have done to others?

Its true, we give law to Hares and Deeres, because they be beasts of Chase; It
was never accounted either cruelty or foul play to knock Foxes and Wolves on
the head, as they can be found; because these be beasts of prey: The Warrener
sets traps for Powlcats and other Vermin, for preservation of the Warren.

Further, my Lords, most dangerous diseases, if not taken in time, they kill:
Errors in great things, as War and Marriage, they allow no time for
repentance; it would have been too late to make a law, when there had been no
law.

My Lords, for further answer to this objection, he has offended a law, a law
within, the endeavoring to subvert the laws and polity of the state wherein
he lived, which had so long, and with such faithfulness protected his
Ancestry, himself, and his whole family; it was not malum, quia prohibitum, it
was malum in se, against the dictates of the dullest conscience, against the
light of nature; they, not having the law, were a law to themselves.

Besides this, he knew a law without, That the Parliament in cases of this
nature had potestatem vitae and necis.

Nay, he well knew, that he offended the promulged and ordinary rules of law:
Crimes against law have been proved, have been confessed, so that the question
is not de culpa, sed de poena, what degree of punishment those faults deserve;
we must differ from him in opinion, that twenty felonies cannot make a treason,
if it be meant of equality in the use of the Legislative power: for, he that
deserves death for one of these felonies alone, deserves a death more painful
and more ignominious for all together.

Every felony is punished with loss of life, lands, and goods; a felony may
be aggravated with those circumstances, as that the Parliament with good
reason may add to the circumstances of punishment, as was done in the case of
John Hall, in the Parliament of 1. H. 4. who for a barbarous murder committed
upon the Duke of Gloucester, stifling him between two feather-beds at Calice,
was adjudged to be hanged, drawn, and quartered.

Batteries by Law are punishable only by fine and single damages to the party
wounded.

In the Parliament held in 1. H. 4. cap. 6. one Savadge committed a Battery
upon one Chedder fervant to Sir John Brook, a knight of the Parliament for
Sommersetshire; Its there enacted, that he shall pay double damages, and stand
convicted if he render not himself by such a time: The manner of proceedings
quickened, the penalty doubled, the circumstances were considered, it concerned
the Commonwealth, it was Battery with breach of privilege of Parliament.

This made a perpetual Act, no warning to the first offender; And in the Kings
Bench, as appears by the book case of 9. H. 4. the first leaf, double
damages were recovered.

My Lords, in this of the Bill the offense is high and general, against the
King and the Commonwealth; against all, and the best of all.

If every Felony be loss of life, lands and goods, what is misuser of the
Legislative power, by addition of Ignominy in the death and disposal of the
lands to the Crown, the public patrimony of the kingdom.

But it was hoped that your Lordships had no more skill in the Art of killing
of men, then your worthy Ancestors.

My Lords, this appeal from your selves to your Ancestors we admit of,
although we do not admit of that from your Lordships to the Peers of Ireland

He has appealed to them; your Lordships will be pleased to hear what
Judgment they have already given in the Case, that is the several attainders
of treason in Parliament, after the Statute of 25. E. 3. for treasons not
mentioned, nor within that Statute, and those upon the first offenders without
warning given.

By the Statute of 25. E. 3. its treason to levy war against the King: Gomines
and Weston afterward in Parliament in 1. R. 2. number. 38. 39. adjudged traitors
for surrendering two several Castles in France only out of fear, without any
compliance with the Enemy; this not within the Statute of 25. E. 3.

My Lords, in 3. R. 2. John Imperial that came into England upon letters of
safe conduct, as an Agent for the state of Genoah, sitting in the Evening
before his door in Breadstreete, (as the words of the Records are,) paulo ante
ignitegium; John Kirby and another Citizen coming that way, casually Kirby
trod upon his Toe: it being twilight, this grew to a quarrel, and the
Ambassador was slain; Kirby was indicted of high treason, the indictment
finds all this, and that it was only done se defendendo, and without malice.

The Judges, it being out of the Statute of 25. E. 3. could not proceed, the
Parliament declared it treason, and judgment afterward of high treason,
there is nothing can bring this within the Statute of 25. E. 3. but it concerns
the honor of the Nation, that the public faith should be strictly kept: It
might endanger the traffic of the Kingdom; they made not a Law first, they
made the first man an example. This is in the Parliament roll, 3. R. 2. number.
18. and Hilary Term, 3. R. 2. Rot. 31. in the Kings Bench, where judgment is
given against him.

In 11. R. 2. Tresilian, and some others attainted of treason for delivering
opinions in the subversion of the Law, and some others for plotting the like:
My Lords, the case has upon another occasion been opened to your Lordships;
only this is observable, That in the Parliament of the first year of Henry the
third, where all treasons are again reduced to the Statute of 25. E. 3. these
Attainders were by a particular Act confirmed and made good, that the memory
thereof might be transmitted to succeeding ages: They stand good unto this
day; the Offenses there, as here, were the endeavoring the subversion of the
laws

My Lords, after 1. H. 4. Sir John Mortimer being committed to the Tower upon
suspicion of treason, brake prison, and made an escape: This no way within any
Statute, or any former Judgment at common Law; for this, that is, for breaking
the prison only, and no other cause, in the Parliament held the second year of
Henry the sixth, he was attainted of high treason by Bill.

My Lords, Poisoning is only murder; yet one Richard Coke having put poison
into a pot of pottage in the kitchen of the Bish. of Rochester whereof two
persons died, he is attainted of treason, and it was enacted, that he should
be boiled to death by the Statute of 22. H. 8. cap. 9.

By the Statute of 25. H. 8. Elizabeth Barton, the holy maid of Kent, for
pretending revelations from God, that God was highly displeased with the King
for being divorced from the Lady Katherine, and that in case he persisted in
the separation, and should marry another, that he would not continue King above
one month after; because this tended to the depriving of the lawful
succession to the Crown, she is attainted of treason.

In the Parliament 2. and 3. H. 6. cap. 16. the Lord Admiral of England was
attainted of treason for procuring the Kings Letters to both Houses of
Parliament, to be good to the said Earl in such matters as he should declare
unto them, for saying that he would make the Parliament the blackest
Parliament that ever was in England, endeavoring to marry the Lady Elizabeth
the Kings sister, taking a bribe of Sherrington, accused of treason, and
thereupon consulting with Council for him, and some other crimes, none of them
treason, so clearly within the Statute of 25. E. 3. or any other Statute, as
is the case in question.

My Lords, All these Attainders, for ought I know, are in force at this day;
the Statutes of the first year of Henry the fourth, and the first of Qu. Mary,
although they were willing to make the Statute of the five and twentieth year
of Edward the third the rule to the inferior Courts, yet they left the
Attainders in Parliament precedent to themselves untoucht, wherein the
Legislative power had been exercised. There Is nothing in them whence it can be
gathered, but that they intended to leave it as free for the future.

My Lords, In all these Attainders, there were crimes and offenses against the
Law; they thought it not unjust, circumstances considered, to heighten and add
to the degrees of punishment, and that upon the first offender.

My Lords, We receive, as just, the other Laws and Statutes made by these our
Ancestors: they are the rules we go by in other cases; why should we differ
from them in this alone?

These (My Lords) are in part those things which have satisfied the Commons in
passing of the Bill; It is now left to the Judgment and Justice of your
Lordships.

FINIS.

