THE FIGURE OF Seven.

CONTAINING Diverse matters, Serious, Jocose, Pleasant and Profitable; fitted to
the Capacities both of the learned and ignorant.

WHEREIN, Is more treated of, then of any subject written before of this kind.

By POOR ROBIN, Knight of the Burnt-Island, a Well-wisher to the Math^maticks.

Printed with Allowance.

Printed for J. Conyers at the Black Rav^n a little above St. Andrews Church
Holb^rn

To the Ingenious READER.
THE Figure of Seven I here to you present
Hoping the same will give you rich Content,
^or here is nothing laid forth to your sight,
^ut may the Reader profit and delight.
^ere is variety for to content ye,
^he better so that may we complement ye:
^er's new and old, some jocose and some serious
^ome plainly understood, and some mysterious:
^s when men eats there is difference in their Palate,
^ome love strong meats, others content with Sallet;
^o some are for a high and lofty strain
and some for writing that is downright plain.
THE FIGURE OF Seven.
The seven Ages of the World.
1 FRom the Creation of Adam to the Flood of Noah, 2 From Noah to Abraham, 3
From Abraham's Birth, till the departing of Israel out of Egypt, 4 From the
departing of the Israel out of Egypt, till the Building of the Temple, 5 From
the building of the Temple, till the Captivity of Babylon, 6 From the Captivity
of Babylon till the Birth of our Savior, 7 From Christ's Birth, till this
present year, 1686.
The seven Ages of Man.
1 Infamy, 2 Childhood, 3 Youth, 4 Manhood, 5 Ripe Manhood, 6 Old Age* 7
Decriped-age.
The seven wonders of the World.
1 The Walls of Babylon, 2 The Pyramids of Egypt, 3 The Tomb of Mansoleus, 4
Diana's Temple at Ephesus, 5 The Image of Apollo at Rhodes, 6 Pharaoh's
Watchtower, 7 The Image of Jupiter at Achai^.
The seven fortunate Islands.
1 Canary, 2 Palusa, 3 Tenariffe, 4 Gomera, Hiero, 6 Lansavolle, 7 Fuerte
ventura.
The seven months of Nilus.
1 Heracleoticum, 2 Boluiticum, 3 Schamiticum, 4 Mendesium, 5 Canticum, 6
Pelusaicum, 7 Carionicum.
The seven Champions of Christendom.
1 St. George of England, 2 St. Dennis of France, 3 St. James of Spain, 4 St.
Anthony of Italy, 5 St. Andrew of Scotland, 6 St. Patrick of Ireland, 7 St.
David of Wales.
The seven Princes Electors of Germany.
1 The King of Bohemiah, 2 The Mar^^ess of Brandenburgh, 3 The Count Pala^^ne
of Rhine, 4 The Duke of Saxony, 5 The Archbishop of Mentz, 6 The Arch^^^hop of
Colon, 7 The Archbishop of Triers.
The seven Asian Churches.
1 Ephesus, 2 Smyrna, 3 Pergamos, 4 ^ira, 5 Sardis, 6 Philadelphia, 7 Lao^a.
The seven Wise Men of Greece*
1 Bias, 2 Solon, 3 Chilon, 4 Cleobulos, ^ Pittarus, 6 Thales, 7 Periander.
The seven Cities which strove for the Birth of Homer.
1 Smyrna, 2 Rhodes, 3 Colophon, 4 Sa^^mis, 5 Clios, 6 Argos, 7 Athens.
Seven Causes of the greatness of Cities.
1 A navigable River, 2 The Palace of the Prince, 3 The Residence of the
Nobility, 4 The Seat Justice, 5 Public Schools of Good Learning, 6 Immunities
from Taxes, 7 Opinion of Sanctity.
The seven deadly Sins.
1 Pride, 2 Gluttony, 3 Covetousness, 4 Leachery, 5 Envy, 6 Wrath, 7 Sloth.
Seven things of Note in the City of Avignion in France, and of each of these
seven.
1 Seven Palaces, 2 seven Parish Churches, 3 seven Monasteries, 4 seven
Nunneries, 5 seven Colleges, 6 seven Hospitals, and 7 seven Gates.
The seven Saxon Kingdoms that England was once divided into.
1 The Kingdom of Kent, 2 The Kingdom of the South Saxons, 3 The Kingdom of the
East Angles, 4 The Kingdom of the Northumbers, 5 The Kingdom of the
East Saxons, 6 The Kingdom of Mer^ia, 7 The Kingdom of the West Saxons.
The seven Penetential Psalms.
1 The sixth, 2 the thirty second, 3 the thirty eight, 4 the fifty one, 5 the
hundred and second, 6 the hundred and thirty, 7 the hundred forty and third.
The seven sleepers.
1 Maximilian, 2 Malchus, 3 Marcianus, ^ Denis, 5 John, 6 Serapion, 7
Constantius.
The seven Liberal Sciences.
1 Grammar, 2 Logic, 3 Rhetoric, 4 Astrology, 5 Geometry, 6 Arethmetick, 7
Poetry.
The seven mechanical Arts.
1 Husbandry, 2 Clothing, 3 Navigation, 4 Hunting, 5 Architecture, 6 Medicine,
7 Military Discipline.
The seven Stars.
1 Ambrasia, 2 Endor, 3 Pasthore, 4 Co^^nis, 5 Plexaura, 6 Pytho, 7 Tithe.
The seven Planets.
1 Saturn, 2 Jupiter, 3 Mars, 4 Sol, 5 Venus, 6 Mercury, 7 Luna.
The seven sorts of Drunkards.
1 The Ape Drunkard, 2 The Lion Drunkard, 3 The Swine Drunkard, 4 The Sheep
Drunkard, 5 The Maudlin Drunkard, 6 The Goat Drunkard, 7 The (...) Drunkard.
The seven sorts of Cuckolds.
1 The Patient Cuckold, 2 The Jealo^^ Cuckold, 3 The Frantic Cuckold, ^ The
Hen-peckt Cuckold, 5 The Pimp^ Cuckold, 6 The ignorant Cuckold, 7 The Loving
Cucko^d.
Seven marks to know a Man that is Hen-p^ct.
1 He that lets his wife keep his Mone^ and when he wants two pence to dri^^
with a Friend, is forced to sue to her (...) borrow it, 2 He that is followed
by ^^s wife to the Alehouse, and dares not sta^ no longer when she comes for
him, 3 He that warms the Child's Clou^s at the fire whilst his Maid is dressing
it, and his w^^^ (...) boozing it at the Alehouse with her Companions, 4 He
that goes to the Alehouse for a Pitcher of Bub. and leaves another man at home
with his wife, 5 He tha^ lets his wife run to Conventicles, while he stays at
home to skim the Pot, 6 He that gives account to his wife what money he takes,
what he spends at the Alehouse, and what he lays out for Goods, 7 He that
stays at home to rock the Cradle whilst his wife rides in a hackny Coach to see
a Play.
The seven Properties belonging to an Host
1 He must have the forehead of an Ox, 2 The Ears of an Ass, 3 The Back of a
Nag, 4 The Belly of a Swine, 5 The Subtilty of a Fox, 6 Skip up and down like a
Frog, 7 Fawn and lie like a Dog.
Seven sorts of people great in Title, but poor in Purse.
1 The Dons of Spain, 2 The Monsiers of France, 3 The Bishop of Italy, 4 The
Nobility of Hungary, 5 The Lairds of Scotland, 6 The Earls of Germany, 7 The
Knights of Naples.
Seven things which the chaste Romans did shun.
1 To talk much in Feasts and Assemblies, 2 To eat too much in Banquets, 3 To
drink wine being in health, 4 To speak aside with other men; 5 To stay long at
their windows, 6 To lift up their Eyes in the Temple, 7 To go out of their
Houses without their Husbands.
He that seeks after these seven things loses his Labor.
1 Fat Hog among the Jews, 2 Loyalty in a Flatterer, 3 Soberness in a Drunkard
4 Money in a prodigal man's Purse, 5 Wisdom in a Fool, 6 A fine wit in a fa^
Belly, 7 Virtue in evil Company
Seven things against Nature
1 A fair Maden without a Lover, 2 A merchant Town without Thieves, 3 An old
Usurer without money, 4 An old Barn without Mice, 5 A scald Head without Lice,
6 An old He-Goat without a Beard, 7 A sleeping man decked with Learning.
Seven things unprofitable unto Husbandry.
1 Hen without Eggs or Chickens, 2 A barren Sow, 3 An unfaithful servant, 4 A
sluggish Journey-man, 5 A sleeping Cat, 6 A whoring woman, 7 A fat maid
Servant.
Seven things not be trusted in.
1 A strong Dog, 2 An hired Horse, 3 A prattling woman, 4 A proud servant, 5 The
deepest place of a River, 6 The slattery of an Enemy, 7 The Report of a fat
Traveller.
Seven Creatures hard to find
1 A shopkeeper that never told lie, 2 A Drunkard that never swore an Oath, 3
A true Tailor, 4 An honest Lawyer, 5 A maid at 50 years of age, 6 A woman
without Pride, 7 A Liar without an Excuse.
Seven things invisible
1 Cuckolds Horns, 2 A Brokers Honesty, 3 A Catchpoles Mercy, 4 A Usurers
Charity, 5 A whores Constancy, 6 A Bawds Modesty, 7 A Traitors Loyalty.
Seven things make Life comfortable
1 A heavy Purse, 2 a light Heart, 3 an honest wife, 4 Obedient Children, 5 a
healthful Body, 6 a sure Friend, 7 a peaceable time to live in.
Seven Creatures better to hang than to keep.
1 A Padder or Highway-man, 2 a Prigger of Prancers. 3 a Lifter, 4 a Jilt, 5 a
Nip, 6 a Foist, 7 a Shark.
Seven things which suretyship may be compared unto.
1 Baits for tame Fouls, 2 Springes for Woodcocks, 3 Pursenets for Conies, 4
Toyls for mad Bucks, 5 Pens for Geese, 6 Hooks for Gudgeons, 7 Snares for
Buzzards.
Seven several sorts of Horses*
1 The Spanish Gennet, 2 the Naples Courser, 3 the German Steed, 4 the Galloway
Nag. 5 the Irish Hobby, 6 the French Cheuala, 7 the Welsh Palfrey.
Seven several Names for a Sir-reverence.
1 In Welsh it is called a Ban, 2 in French it is Maude, 3 it is called a Deers
Fewmets, 4 a Bore or Beaves Leasses, 5 a Hare or Coneys Crottoyes, 6 a Fox or
Badgers Feauce, 7 in English a T -- d.
The seven sorts of Geese.
1 The Wild Goose, 2 The Tame Goose 3 The Tailors Goose, 4 The Winchester
Goose, 5 The Clack Goose, 6 The Soland Goose, 7 The Hunniburn Goose.
The seven sorts of Transeendan: Ale.
1 Cock Ale, 2 China Ale, 3 Scurvy Grass Ale, 4 Lambeth Ale, 5 Hull Ale, 6
Darby Ale, 7 Elemozinary Ale.
Seven things a young Maid Loves.
1 Fine Clothes, 2 Walking abroad, 3 Choice of Suitors, 4 Lying a Bed, 5 Good
Victuals, 6 Strong drink, 7 Long sleeps and no work.
Seven sorts of People that live by the Element of Earth.
1 Griping Usurers, 2 Racking Landlord^* 3 Toyling Plowmen, 4 Moyling
Labourer^* 5 Painful Gardiners, 6 Grave Sextons, 7 Diggers of Mines.
Seven sorts of people that live by the Element of Air.
1 Poets, 2 Trumpeters* 3 Cornets, 4 Recorders, 5 Bag-pipers, 6 Tobacconists, ^
Pipers.
Seven sorts of People that live by the Element of Fire
1 Blacksmiths, 2 Fire-men, 3 Colliers, 4 Gunners, 5 Gunfounders, 6 Cooks, 7
Mettle-men.
Seven sorts of People that live by the Element of Water
1 Brewers, 2 Vintners, 3 Dyers, 4 Mariners, 5 Fishermen, 6 Scullers, 7
Tanners.
Nicknames given to seven several Counties.
1 Essex Calves, 2 Hartfordshire Hedgehogs, 3 Kentish Long-tails, 4
Cambridgeshire Cammels, 5 Leicestershire Bean-bellies, 6 Norfolk Dumplings, 7
Yorkshire Tikes.
The seven several sorts of Puddings.
1 The Bag-puddings of Glocestershire, 2 The Black Puddings of Worcestershire,
3 The Pan-puddings of Shropshire, 4 The White Puddings of Somersetshire, 5 The
Hasty puddings of Hampshire, 6 The Hogg's Puddings of Rutlandshire, 7 The
Pudding-pies of any shire.
Seven Dishes for a weak Stomach.
1 Custard, 2 Eg-pye, 3 Cheese-cake, ^ Flawne, 5 Fool, 6 Tanzy, 7 Flap-jack*
Seven other sorts of Dishes.
1 Froyze, 2 Fritter, 3 Posset, 4 Galeymawfrey, 5 Mackeroone, 6 Kicksshaw, 7
Tantablin.
Seven things greatly to be pitied.
1 An old man without grace, 2 a young maid without modesty, 3 a purse without
money, 4 a Cupboard without Victuals, 5 a shop without Customers, 6 an able
Preacher without hearers, 7 a hungry stomach and nothing to eat.
Seven sorts of men, love seven sorts of things.
1 A Dutchman loves Brandy, 2 an Irish^an Usquebath, 3 a Welsh-man toasted
cheese 4 an Englishman Canary, 5 a Scotch-man Oat-cakes, 6 a Frenchman
Mutton, 7 a German strong Beer.
Seven things some women provide for their Husbands.
1 A mess of maundring broth, 2 a dish of Powts, 3 a handful of Rue, 4 a
Worwood Posset, 5 a Pan full of Carp, 6 a Cuckolds Cap, and 7 an Horn Comb.
Seven several sorts of course music.
1 A Dog howling, 2 an Owl singing, 3 a Woman scolding, 4 a Pig crying, 5 an
Ass braying, 6 a Cat mewing, 7 and Trenchers scraping.
Seven Proverbs much in use.
1 A good Jack makes a good Jill, 2 a cunning Knave needs no broker, 3 Near is
my Petticote but nearer is my Smock, ^ Set a beggar on Horseback and he will
ride to the Devil, 5 Like to like, quoth the Devil to the Collier, 6 A bit in
the morning, better then nothing all day after, 7 Shitten-come-sh -- s is the
beginning of Love.
Seven ways to kill a Dog besides hanging him
1 To shoot a Cannon Bullet into his heart, 2 to dash out his brains against
the roots of a Tree, 3 to cut of his head with a sword, 4 to keep him without
victuals a month to gether, 5 to drown him in a deep River, 6 to flay of his
skin and turn him abroad in frosty morning, 7 to give him an ill name and that
according to the Proverb, is wor^^ then hanging.
Seven things which we should desire.
1 The grace of God, 2 a quiet Life, 3 contented mind, 4 An honest Wife, 5 good
report, 6 A Friend in store, 7 Mo^ at need, what need we more.
FINIS.

