A SERMON Preached at Christ-Church, DUBLIN, Before both Houses of PARLIAMENT,
May, the 29th. 1661.

Being the Anniversary of his Majesty King CHARLES the Second, his most
memorable and happy Restoration.

By the right Reverend Father in God, John Lord Bishop of ELPNIN.

DVBLIN, Printed by William Bladen, Anno Domini 1661.

Thursday, May 30. 1661:
By the House of Lords.
ORdered that the Bishop of Elphin shall have the thanks of this House for his
Sermon yesterday, and that the Speaker do give him the thanks of this House,
and that the Bishop of Elphin be desired to Print his Sermon.

Copia vera.

John Keating, Deput, Cler. Parl.

30. May 1661.
By the House of Commons.
ORdered that Cap. Trevor Lloyd, and Cap. Henry Nicholls, do from this House
return thanks unto the right Reverend Father in God, the Lord Bishop of Elphin,
for his Sermon Preached at Christ-Church the 29. instant, being the day of his
Majesty's birth, and return unto his Kingdom of England, and to desire his
Lordship, that the same may be Printed and Published.

Copia vera.

Exam. p^r Philip Fernely Cler. Parl.

Errat:
Page 28. l. 14. pro operation, l. apparition.

2. Sam. CHAP. 19. v. 14. And he bowed the heart of all the men of Judah, even
as the heart of one man, so that they sent this word unto the King, Return thou
and all thy servants.


THe People of Israel, even in the infancy of their Monarchy, and before the
Tribes had unhappily stoop't to a divided Scepter, had yet the hard fate, (like
these later Kingdoms) to be withdrawn from their due obedience to their natural
Prince into a most horrid and unnatural Rebellion, and under the splendid
notion of Reformation, to serve the basest ends of lust and ambition.

Absalom, whose aspiring thoughts had swelled his hopes to the expectation of a
Kingdom, begins to quarrel David's justice, and flatteringly bemoanes the people
in the want of the executive part of it, that although their matters were never
so importunate of justice, yet there was none deputed by the King to hear them.
2. Sam. 15.3.

The way to mount himself upon the svveling wave of popular affection, he
thought, was not directly, and at first, to tax the King of want of justice in
himself, but his Ministers, the want of able Ministers, to distribute that
justice which the King could not but necessarily bestow; of which having once
possessed the people, they think none fitter to remedy the evil, then he that
first found out the malady, and therefore are ready to join with Absalom, in
his ambitious option. O that He were made judge in the Land, that every man
that has any Suit, or Cause, might come unto him, and he would do him justice.
2. Sam. 15.4.

'Tas been the sly practice of aspiring spirits, secretly to bespatter his
integrity, whose office they cover, and to wound the Prince through the sides
of his Ministers, and it is the jealous madness of the people many times to
believe that justice will be done rather by any, than by him, whom God has
(next unto himself) principally entrusted with the distribution of it. David
(indeed) was a Prince, who had so large an interest in the affections of his
people, that had Absalom struck point blanck, either at the office, actions, or
person of the King, the people would have been startled, as having their ears
unaccustomed to any obloquies against the Lords Anointed; he finds fault
therefore first, with want only of persons deputed to hear them, and when
once their ears are bored open, though but to collatteral aspersions, they
will at length be made tame, and obedient to more virulent invectives.

Absalom having thus planted a jealousy in the people, of the want of
Ministers under the King to execute justice, does at length, (falling from his
first pretenses, though not first aim) labor to six them in this persvvasion,
that the King himself was no friend unto justice, and so consequently unfit to
rule them. To such a prodigious height of wickedness, do the small beginings
of Rebellious evils grow. The people could not want justice, as long as they
had Darvid to judge them: Sal. de Guber. Dei Lib. 7.
qui regit hocipso quod regit judicat, says Salvian, he that reigns, even in
that he reigns, judges: and indeed while David reigued in Jerusalem, we
hear of no clamours of the people ecchoed forth for want of justice, till
Absoloms flattery, avvakens their jealousies, and then like peccant persons
pursued only by their own guilt, they startle at each shadovv, and false
appearance. But as soon as David is driven from Jerusalem, the Metropolis of
the Kingdom, and dispovverd (as to the execution of his Regal authority there,)
they soon find the want of that justice which before was but absent in a
dream.

The actions and concerns of Princes should be tenderly dealt with, and it is
dangerous to afford an open ear to any lessenings, either of their Persons,
Actions, or Office; for by such vvayes disloyalty insensibly steals into the
heart, which does but too frequently break forth into open Rebellion in the
hand. For those, which at the first follovved Absalom, went out in their
simplicity says the text, 2. Sam. 15.11. simplicicorde, with a simple heart,
they were men of a good meaning, little dreaming then of engaging against the
person and life of their King: they marched forth (at most, as it is probable)
but as intentional Petitioners for a public distributive justice: I, but when
once the svvord is unsheathed, and that the people have in a personal (though
perhaps not cordial) compliance, bidden open defyance to that sacred power
which they should have religiously obeyed, they will rather by iterated acts of
Rebellion seem to justify their first defection, than by a timely repentance,
acknowledge their guilt; so procreative is sin, of sin, that to justily the
first, they necessarily involve themselves in more.

Absalom having thus by sly insinuations, and specious pretenses, stolen the
hearts of the People, and under the covert of Religion, 2. Sam. 15.7.8.
the pious payment of a vovv in Hebron, gained an opportunity to assemble his
confederates, (as the fovvlest actions are many times masked with the fairest
pretenses, and 'tas been the hard fate of Religion, to be but too common a
cloak for Rebellion,) he then begins to take off the vizzard, and plainly
discover, that it is not so much David's want of Justice, as Absolom's want of
the Kingship, is the religious cause now to be contended for, and therefore
Achitophel, who was his Mouth, as well as Oracle, delivers Absolom's old
sense, but in a new, and plainer dialect. I will smite the King only, and
bring back all the people unto thee. 2. Sam. 17.2.3. Had the ground of the
quarrel been only want of Justice in Darvid's Ministers, as was pretended,
the design (me thinks) should not have been laid so close to the person of the
King; But this was but pretended, the other (it seems) was originally
intended by the grand contrivers of the Plott: and yet we find none of the
people upon this early discovery, taking notice of the change, or returning
unto their former obedience, upon alteration of the first ground of their
engagement, but desperately, now prosecuting that interest, which at first
they abhorringly disovvned: so dangerous are the beginnings of sin, which being
once tacitly admitted, hurry men on into the perpetration of those crimes,
which at first their consciences would have trembled to have thought on. The
people thus engaged, run headlong on to the Battle, and as Solomon speaks of
the sinners, their feet run to evil, and they make have to shed blood, Prove. 1
16. Israel and Absalom pitch in the Land of 2 Samuel 17.26.27.
Gilead, and David and his men in Mahanaim, and both engage in the vvood of
Ephraim, where he, who is the great God of Battles and of recompenses, gives
a speedy issue to their undertakings, for the people of Israel were slain
before the Servants of David, 2. Sam. 18.7.

Success in a bad cause, is sometimes the worst of punishments: had Israel
prosper'd in that Rebellion, and had had the unhappy fate to have worsted their
King, that success (in their sense,) would have legitimated the cause, and
their prosperity (as judgeing by the event prosperum ac faelix scelus virtus
vocatur, Senec. Tragad.
) would have made them baptize that a righteous cause, which in it self was
horrid, damnable, abominable. And indeed had they prosper'd in that first
encounter, it is probable they had not so soon (if ever) repented of the sin:
but almighty God giving so sudden a check to their unjust proceedings, that
early rebuke awakened their consciences, and let them see the sin in the
punishment, which not only put a stop to the growth of so dangerous an evil,
but also moved them to return to their former obedience, which they manifested
in their resolution of bringing the King back to Jerusalem, from whence his
just fears, occasioned by so general a defection of his people, had most
unhappily driven him, and all the people were at strife throughout all the
Tribes of Israel, saying, the King saved us out of the hands of our enemies,
and he delivered us out of the hand of the Philistines, and now he is fled out
of the Land for Absalom. And Absalom whom we anointed over us, is dead in
battle: Now therefore why speak ye not a word of bringing the King back? Ver.
9.10. In this great revolution, and eminent return of Loyalty, Judah (it seems)
was backward, and therefore David kindly invites them to the exercise of that
obedience, which not only the ready example of the other Tribes, but also the
consciousness of their former guilt, might have prompted them to have
performed, Ye are my brethren, ye are my bones and my flesh, wherefore then are
ye the last to bring back the King? Ver. 12. which gracious message melts them
into this sweet and happy compliance, and he bowed the heart of all the men of
judah, even as the heart of one man, so that they sent this word unto the King,
return thou and all thy Servants.

Which words contain a Narration of the effect of King David's proffer of peace
to a revolted, but now returning People, namely, the invitation of their King
to the repossession of his Royal Crown and Dignity. In which likewise, these
particulars offer themselves to consideration. 1. The person working, He. 2.
The persons wrought upon, the men of Judah. 3. The operation or effect, he
bowed the heart of the men of Judah. 4. The extent, and generality of this
operation and effect, it did not only work upon some, and not work upon
others, but upon all, he bowed the heart of all the men of Judah. 5. You have
the consent, unity, and harmony, which appears in this generality of operation
and effect, as the heart of one man, not diversities of operations, making some
obedient, and others more stubborn and rebellious, like the Sun, which whilst
it softens the wax, yet hardens the clay, but as if the benign aspect had
created new hearts, new tempers and dispositions, He bowed the heart of all the
men of Judah, even as the heart of one man. And lastly, you have a farther
consequent, or effect of this bowing of their hearts, in that meslage of return
unto the King, so that they sent this word unto the King, Return. Now for as
much as causa causae, est causa causati, the cause of the cause, namely of the
inferior cause, is the cause of the effect, namely, of that which flows from
the inferior cause, David was the cause of their message of return, in that he
was the the cause by his first message of bowing of their hearts, for had he
not sent unto the Elders of Judah, saying, why are ye the last to bring the
King back to his house? Ver. 11. he had not bowed their hearts, and if he had
not bowed their hearts, they had not said, return: but being before them in the
proffers of Peace, it saddainly melts them into their wonted loyalty and
obedience, so that they sent this word unto the King, return thou. And that
they might fully manifest their love to their Fellow Subjects, as well as
loyalty to their Prince, they invite them too, to a participation of his joy,
who had formerly shared with him in suffering, return thou and all thy
servants, and he bowed the etc.

Of these in their several orders, and first of the first, the person bowing,
He, and he bowed; He, that is, Sadock, say some; or he, that is, Amasa, say
others; or he, that is, David; says a third; and so say most, and indeed so
(almost) say all, inclinavit ad se per suum benignum mandatum, says Lyra,
referring to David, and Hoc potest intelligi de David quod ipse per ea quae
misit dici viris Judae per Sadock and Abiathar sacerdotes inclinavit illos
totaliter, Tostat, in loc.
Tostatus to the same purpose that it is to be understood of David, bowing
their hearts by that message sent by the high Priests. But the Chalde
paraphrase, as leaving it indifferent, reads only, inclinatum est cor omnium
virorum, that the heart of all the men of Judah was inclined to their King, but
who inclined, who bowed them, says not, but sure, if we peruse seriously the
story, we shall find plainly and evidently, that 'twas David, though not
without the instrumentality of Sadock and Amasa. The person then working this
great change in the men of Judah (next under God) is David, and no marvail that
he should have so powerful an influence over their hearts to turn them, when he
had so just a tide and authority over their persons to rule them: being their
King, First, by God's particular designation, 1. Sam. 16. Secondly, by the
joint choice of the men of Judah, testified by their anointing him King in
Hebron, 2. Sam. 2. and then by all Israel, 2. Sam. 5. But neither the sense of
their still-due and oweing obedience, can so bind them, nor the remembrance of
past benefits, (for he saved them out of the hands of their enemies, 2. Sam.
19.9.) so engage them, but that they strengthened the hands of an usurper
against their lawful Prince, so that he was constrained to flee out of the Land
for Absalom, till the return of providence so improved his condition, that he
was solemnly invited to that place, from whence by their defection he was made
exile. And although God gave him an eminent and seasonable victory over his
enemies, so that he crushes that Cockatrice of Rebellion in the very shell, and
might by a vigorous prosecution of that victory, have made their future
obedience the fruit of his sword, and founded an afterloyalty in the price of
their blood, yet chooses rather sweetly to invite them to their duty, than
compel them, to draw them with Hos. 11.4.
bands of love, than with armies of violence, that so they may be said to be
active in their loyalty, not to soffer it.

Kings you know, are frequently dignisyed with the title of Exo. 22.26 Psalm.
82.1.6. Joh. 10.34.
Gods in Scripture, not only because they are unto their respective people, as
Moses was unto Aaron, * Exodus 4. lo^o Dei, instead of God, but also because they
ought to imitate that God whose Majesty in their office they so much personate
and represent. Now goodness, mercy and kindness, being properties wherein the
divine Majesty delights most to show it self; Kings the more they exercise of
these, the more clearly do they evidence their similitude, and likeness to
that God, whose place they bear, and whose greatness they represent. God you
may see in holy writ, frequently inviting his people upon their several
defections to return: so he does Israel, Isai. 31.6. Jeremiah 3. Ver. 12.13, 14.
Turn ye unto him from whom the children of Israel have deeply revolted, so he
does to Judah, Ierem. Hosea 12.6. Jo^lz. 12.13
18.11. Return ye now every one from his evil way: and though he be the party
wronged, and highly injured, yet first speaks of peace, and proffers
reconciliation, inviting them to turn to him by repentance and obedience, that
so he may return to them in the exercise of mercy and loving kindness. And thus
King David in this story, though the party wronged, highly injured, driven from
his Palace and Royal Throne, by a Rebellion of his own people, yet as
imitating that God, whose vicegerent he was, does himself make the first
overtures and proffers of peace, moving them to invite him to a return, that so
the reestablishment of him in his Throne might be an act of their own revived
loyalty, not the effect of the sword as the scourge of their former disloyalty
and disobedience.

Whatsoever things were written aforetime, Romans 15.4.
(says S. Paul.) were written for our learning: and surely then, if God being
loesa Majestas, the Majesty highly injured, and provoked yet first proffers
peace, and David though a King, and as grossly injured, as ungratefully
deserted by his Subjects, yet in imitation of that merciful God, first proffers
reconciliation, we ought to follow the great exemplar of God and the King, and
to be forward in our proffers of peace and love. The wisdom, says S. James,
which is from above is first pure, and then peaceable, Iam. 3.17. abhorring
contentions, and full of peace and love, so that there is not a greater sign
of pure and spiritual wisdom, than hearty defires, and earnest endeavors of
peace: and therefore the author of the Hebrews bids us follow peace with all
men, Heb. 12.14.
and S. Peter, to feek peace and ensue it, 1. Pet. 3.11.
and it is not ill writing after such copies, nor unsafe to tread in those
paths, which God himself has walked in before us: to be forward in proffers of
peace, to those that have wronged us and been our enemies causless, this is
Prince-like, this Saint-like, Nay, this is God-like too, for so the Allmighty
to his backsliding People, and so King David here to his revolted Subjects;
which is the next particular, the Persons wrought upon, the men of Judah.

David was of the Tribe of Judah, and therefore it is that he calls the men of
Judah, his brethren, his bones and his flesh, Ver. 12. and that they style
themselves near of kin unto the King, Ver. 42. but nearness of relation with
some sort of men, is no obligation to loyalty; for not only they, that had
eaten of his bread, but they also that were his near kindred, his brethren, his
bones, and his flesh, lift up their heels against him: and surely it must
needs wound the soul of a good Prince, and add much grief to the pressure of
his sorrows, when not only the remoter sort of his Subjects, but even those,
which either nature, or his own bounty had made nearer unto him, shall seek his
ruin, and attempt his life. This made Caesar yield himself a willing
Sacrifice, when he saw Brutus in the Conspiracy: and therefore David aggravates
his own misery, and the deplorableness of his condition, by the perfidiousness
of his friends, Psalm. 55.14. If it had been an enemy, then I could have borne
it: that is, with more ease, and less dolor, but it was my familiar friend;
this made it more insupportable; such calamities, as these, stick closest, and
wound deepest, and continue longest, and are most siguall: and therefore when
the Prophet is interrogated, what were those wounds his hands, Zech. 13.6. he
replies, Ver. 7. those wherewith I was wounded in the house of my friends: and
the Spouse in the Canticles seems to equal David's complaint, pugnaverunt
contra me filij Matris meae, my Mothers children fought against me. And indeed
when men for any secular, any by-ends or interest, act contrary to those near
ties of relation; as their actions degenerate into the greatest violences: so
their former love into the greatest hatred. For love, as it has a ready power
of doing good, so likewise of doing hurt; which (me thinks) the Gentiles seemed
well to represent, when they painted Apollo (by which they meant the Sun as
the Hieroglyphick of love and beneficence,) holding in one hand an Harp, and in
the other a quiver of arrows; ( ubi amor ibi dolor,) showing, that where
harmony and love have been, there may be the greatest hatred and confusion. The
other Tribes were (it seems) already become sensible of their sin, and had made
public manifestation of their forward inclinations to their Princes
Restoration; only Judah, which had the nearest relation, and strongest
obligation, is most backward; which backwardness meets with a just check, Ver.
11. why are ye the last to bring back the King unto his house?

Judah was the first that solemnly owned David for their King, and testified
that acknowledgement by anointing him in Hebron, 2. Sam. 2. But now they are
most backward in restoring him to those rights, to which they themselves were
primarily isntrumental to give him title. The reason of this backwardness in
the Tribe of Judah is variously conjectured: some think it was because
Absolom's men had still a guard in the Fort of Zion, and therefore they durst
not call the King back, least by an unseasonable discovery of their affections,
they might incense the rebellious party, and so, provoking their enemies rage,
might hasten their own ruin: others apprehend the cause of this backwardness
to be only the consciousness of their own guilt, and fear of the King's future
revenge: but for this, you may see David passing an Act of Oblivion in his
first overture of Peace, not calling them Rebels, or using any reproachful or
reviling speeches, but mildely, my brethren, my bones and my flesh. And truly I
am apt to believe, that the consciousness of their own guilt was the greatest
obstacle: they thought they had sinned beyond the King's mercy, and so durst
not trust him: and indeed when men once apprehend themselves past pardon, they
grow desperate, and labor to maintain and justify their former wickedness by
continued acts of violence.

Judah of all the Tribes had the nearest relation to the King, and the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem the greatest benefit by his presence, and personal
abode among them, and therefore to be the first countenancers of the Rebellion,
must needs be an aggravation of their sin above that of others: but as there is
no sin so great, but God's mercy can forgive, so there is no offense so
eminent, but the clemency of a good Prince can pass by, which is plainly
evidenced in David, for Judah's offense had aggravation from their nearness of
relation to the King, from their ingratitude for great benefits received by the
King, but none of these are mentioned, only proposalls of peace and love,
which makes that Tribe overlook all difficulties, and so mollifies their
obdurate hearts, that they are presently melted into an happy compliance with
their Prince, testified by the unanimous inclination of all their hearts unto
him, which is the next particular, the operation or effect, he bowed. Where
the word of a King is, there is power: says the Preacher, Eccl. 8.4. and surely
it is from that Majesty that God has stamped upon them, as the largest and
livelyest images and representations of himself, that their words are so
operative, so powerful: David, when he was but in election to be King, and
before the Crown of Judah, or Israel, had kissed his sacred temples, is yet
said to have stayed his Servants with his words when they would have cut off
Saul in the Cave, 1. Sam. 24.7. Confregit viros, so the vulgar Latin renders
the word, he brake them with his words, and the word in the original signifies
as much; to break, or to divide: and if his words were so powerful, when
only the private unction had marked him out to be God's, much more powerful
surely must they be when he was known by all Israel to be their King, and
actually instated in the Throne of Sovereignty, to which that Royal Character
and sacred signature had formerly given him title. The Latin translations
generally read, inclinavit, he inclined the heart of all the men of Judah, and
that inclination implies a bend of the mind, or heart, the people began to lean
to their King, and their bowels to yearne upon the sufferings of their Prince,
and indeed where God's power goes along, there can be no resistance, there
was an ero in ore tuo, to David here, as formerly to Moses, Exodus 4.12.
and so the voice of the King is the voice of God, and then, well may it bovv,
and incline, and subdue all before it, for the voice of the Lord is powerful,
says the Psalmist, Psalm 29.4.
or, mighty in operation, and so is the voice of the King too, for whatsoever
he commands them they do, said he who vvrote the King was strongest, 1.
Ezdr. 4.3. which is true here, for the King does no sooner intimate his
desire, but they yield a ready and vvilling obedience, verbum Regis ornatum est
potestate, and indeed, the power was such, that it was not to be resisted,
which is plain in the event, for they sent this word unto the King, return
thou etc and it will not be unvvorthy of our observation, as we pass along,
if we take notice of the part here specified, upon which this power had it is
principal operation and effect, the Text tells us it is the heart, he bowed the
heart of all the men of Judah. Kings may govern the bodies of their Subjects,
and by their proper power subdue them, nevertheless their hearts may be as
rebellious, as obstinate, as ever; but David's is a more Noble victory than so,
the Captives he takes are not the bodies, but the hearts of his People,
Tertullian said most true, inde potestas unde and spiritus, for such operations
as these flow from no less a fountain than that of the Deity, and so that of S.
Paul's, Romans 13. is true in this sense likewise, the powers that be, are
ordained of God, and it is plain this was of God, when God-like it bowed and
inclined the heart: so that David's Throne now finds a surer foundation than
ever, being (in some similitude and proportion) like that of David's Lord, and
God's own Christ, seated in the hearts of his people.

Many can bestow upon their Prince the outward formalities of the cap and the
knee, the voice and the tongue, bow before him, or say, God save the King, but
all this while there is a nolumus hune regnare, in their hearts, they would not
have the King Reign over them; perhaps worse; they would (had they power)
destroy him! whereas their Loyalty should be inward, as well as outvvard,
true and fincere, in the heart, and affections, as well as in the tongue, and
outvvard actions. For as we should give our hearts, first unto God, in entire
love and obedience: so next unto the King; the first is expressed, the second
often employed: my son, give me thine heart, Prove. 23.26. De Civitate Dei, Liber
15. Cap. 7.
This is in which S. * Augustine observes was vvanting in Cain's Sacrifice,
dans Deo aliquid suum, sibi au tem seipsum, giving to God somewhat that was
his, but giveing his heart, himself, unto himself: so do too many, give
something of theirs unto God, something perhaps unto the Ring, but give their
hearts to themselves, to their lusts and rebellious corruptions, nothing of it
either to God or the Ring: whereas, (I say) they should give their hearts to
God first, and next unto the King: mistake not the expression, I mean, in being
really within what they are seemingly without; curse not the King, no not in
thy thought, says the Preacher, Eccl. ^0.20. and the word in the original
signifies any disrespect, or disesteem, and where the vice is forbidden, the
contrary virtue is commanded, all blessing, respect, esteem, love, loyalty, in
our thoughts, in our hearts, unto the Ring; that is required of all, as here
done by all; which is the next particular, the generality of the operation,
and effect: All the men of Judah, and he bowed the heart of all the men of
Judah.

All the men of Judah. Judah of all the Tribes was the last that paid the
tender of their duty and obedience: but being wrought upon, by those kind
messages and endearing svveetnelfes of the Ring, their conversion becomes more
full, more universal, than the rest of the Tribes; it is of all the men of
Judah. Nullus mansit qui non inclinaretur, not one dissenting Brother among
them. Sheba the Son of Bichri may blovv a trumpet of sedition, and being angry
at the departure of the Scepter from the house of Saul and Tribe of Benjamin,
may, to gratify his own spleen, engage the People in a new Rebellion, though
it cost him his head, but the men of Judah cleave unto their King, 2. Sam.
20.2. So that (me thinks) this Tribe is like that Son in the Parable, Mat.
21.28.
who being commanded by his Father to go and work in the Vineyard, said he
would not, but afterward repented, and went. Those whom the spirit of God, and
the prudence and mildeness of reprovers have wrought to a true sight of their
sins, commonly prove most zealous, and constant in the exercise of the contrary
graces: a converted siner is usually most punctual, and intense in the acts of
devotion, and a reclaimed Subject in the acts of loyalty and obedience: and
good reason; for such must make amends (as I may say) for their former
deviations, and justify to the world the sincerity of their conversion by
future acts of severe obedience to those Laws, to which they had been formerly
rebellious. See what restitution is proffered by Zacheus? Luke 19.8.
(Behold Lord the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have taken any
thing from any man by false accusation, I restore him four fold.) What love
manifested by Mary Magdalen? Mark 16.1.
she who had sinned by unlawful embraces, you may find kissing the feet of our
Savior washing them with her tears, Luke 23.56.
and wiping them with the hairs of her head; her love is stronger than death,
and follows Christ to the grave with prepared spices and ointments; John 20.1.
her love prevents the day, and is more early than it at the Sepulcher: Oh, let
us not then despise those that have sinned, but if they repent, forgive them;
God does so, and the King does so; neither let us unworthily cast any man's
former sin in his teeth, or revile him for doing ill heretofore, when as he
does well now; but rather by all acts of kindeness, and sweetness, encourage
his present obedience, without any unhandsome reflections upon his former
disloyalty. To this purpose let us lay aside all marks, and names of
difference and distinction; this his sacred Majesty was pleased, as well to
desire as command, in his gracious Declaration, Dated from Breda, April 14.
1660.

Alas, we have enemies enough, both to our Religion and interest, at home, and
abroad; let us not then by weakening our selves, give the enemy an advantage
against us; which certainly we shall do, if we splitt again into factions, and
revive any thing of our old animosities: but let us all endeavor to walk by
one and the same Rule, to mind the same things: the glory of God, the peace
and settlement of the Church, the honor of his Majesty, the interest of the
true Protestant Religion, and the right of every honest, and innocent person in
the Land: and let us do this, not in word, and in tongue only, but in deed,
and in truth: in this, let us cry One and All; be as unanimous in this, as
Judah for David's return, let our hearts be as the heart of one man, which is
the next particular, the consent, unity, and harmony, which appears in this
generality of operation and effect, quasi viri unius, as the heart of one man.

When the spirit of God descended upon the Multitude of believers, Acts, 4.32.
it is said they were (...), of one heart and of one soul, (...) (as some Copies
add,) and there was no difference among them; the holy spirit of unity knit
their hearts in the unity of faith and affections: and when the pacifick
message of the King, as the spirit of an earthly and delegated Deity, was sent
to his rebellious Subjects; the sweet influence thereof, fell upon their
hearts, not only, as the small rain upon the tender herb, but as the showers
upon the grass; Deuteronomy. 32.2.
and not only softened the hard, and reduced the obstinate, but also joined
the heterogeneall, and united disunited hearts, in the one point of love and
obedience, and that tanquam viri unius, as the heart of one man.

Whilst the People continued in their Rebellion, they could not but suffer,
under many a sharp throw and pang of conscience, which oftentimes like that
hand writing upon the wall before Belshazzar, Dan. 5.5.
changed their very countenances, and loosened their joints, their
midnight-thoughts startling their black souls with the frightfull remembrance
of their guilt; and the operation of their sin, (like Hector unto Aeneas, In
somnis ecce ante oculos moestissimus Hector visus adesse mihi) -- left such a
damp and horror upon their spirits, as was equal to that of those visions of
the night, recorded, Job. 4.13.14. Stung with these sharp apprehensions, both
of sin, and punishment, they were many times ready to have cried out with that
Jailer, Acts, 16.30. What must we do to be saved? but those better motions
were suddenly expelled; in some, by desperate thoughts, (like those of Cain,)
that their sin was greater than could be forgiven: in others, by pleasing
reflections upon their new purchased wealth, they had bought much Land, (no
matter though it were with the price of blood,) and therefore they cannot,
they will not come: but when God interposes his power, and brings home the
Ring's gracious message, and proffer of peace, unto their hearts, they melt
like ice before the Noonday Sun, and smoothly glide into the ancient Channel
of their wonted Loyalty and obedience. And as the King invited them to the
performance of their duty, so they invite him to the repossession of his
Royal Crown and Dignity, they sent this word unto the King, which is the next
thing considerable, the happy consequent of this bowing of their hearts,
which is the calling of the King home to the exercise of his Regal power and
authority, which is the very sum of this Text, and the great business of
this day, return thou.

The People vvearyed with oppression and confusion, (which are the undoubted
consequents of Rebellion; and convinced of their sin, by their happy unhappy
success, and the no common death of the Usurper, call back their King: they
sent this word unto the King, return thou. And sure I am, this was an happy
message, both for King and People: by his return, both were freed from those
dangers, and hardships, which were, (and always are) the most certain
attendants of war. And indeed his long absence made his return more wellcom,
both to himself, and his Subjects* it made his Crown sit less weighty on his
own head, and his Government less burdensome on the shoulders of his People.
Some are taught to prize blessings best in the want often hem.

Would you understand the sweets of a soft bed and gentle repose? Prove. 7.16.17.
of a morsel of bread, and a draught of wine? ask not the effeminate person,
or rich glutton, such as deck their beds with coverings of tapestry, with
perfumes of Myrrh, Aloes, and Cinnamon, which Amos 6.4.
stretch themselves upon their Couches, and eat the Lambs out of the Flock, and
Calves out of the midst of the stall; that Luke 16.9.
fare sumptuously every day? but ask the laboring man, and weary travailer,
the hungry, and the thirsty soul, and they will tell you: for our joys are often
heightened by our sorrows; and we had not been many times so happy, had we not
been so miserable. The very afflictions of this life make Heaven it self more
Heavenly, and in this sense too, 2. Cor. 4.17.
work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory,. God is
therefore pleased many times to let us taste the sweetness of one condition, in
the bitterness of an other; and to change either when he thinks fit: for he
who can turn the heart, can at his pleasure, likewise alter the condition. Look
upon King David but four Chapters before this of my Text, and you shall see him
fleeing from Jerusalem for fear of the Conspirators, 2. Sam. 15.14.30.
weeping as he goes up the ascent of Mount Olivet, bare foot, and his head
uncovered. At Bahurim, Shimei curses, 2. Sam. 16.5.6.
and casts stones at him, and the heart of the men of Israel are generally
after the Usurper, as you may read, 2. Sam. 15.13.

Look upon him again, in this and the preceding Chapter, and you shall see his
enemies defeated, the pursuers pursued, the Usurper hanged, Shimei begging
pardon, and the hearts of the people after their King; inviteing him to that
place, and exercise of that authority from both which they had so lately driven
him. They sent this word unto the King, return thou, and as they manifested
their Loyalty in this to the Ring, so, their kindness in the next to their
Fellow Subjects. And all thy Servants, return thou and all thy Servants. Which
is the last thing in the Text, of which very briefly.

And truly this kindness is well measured out by the line of Justice; that they
that shared with him in the sorrows of his exile, should likewise taste of the
sweets of his return. This was according to S. Paul's pattern for better
things, a (...) for a (...), aconglorification for a copassion, if we suffer
with him, that we may be glorified together, Romans 8.17. And the same Apostle
tells the Philippians, Chap. 1.29. Unto you it is given in the behalf of
Christ, not only to believe, but also to suffer for his sake. And surely to
believe in Christ, is not only an honor, but also an advantage; but to
suffer for Christ, is a transcendent mark of favor. And truly (next to our
sufferings for Christ, and for Religion,) no suffering can be more honorable,
than for Subjects to suffer for, and with their King: Heaven it self looks upon
such with an auspicious eye, an eye of favor and regard. What wounds they
receive in such a cause, are not brands, but marks of honor; a lim thus lost,
is not a want, but an addition, and to be looked upon (...), Theophyl. in Gal.
6.17
as Theophylact in an other case, as some Trophe, or Regal Ensign. Well then
may they be invited to return with the King, who had thus hazarded their lives,
and left all to follow the King: who had made good in their practice, what that
Gittite professed unto David, 2. Sam. 15.21. In what place my Lord the King
shall be, whether in death or life, even there also will thy servant be, who
had a love to his Person, as well as a duty to his Office; it is fit that these,
all these, should return: return thou and all thy Servants. And it is much you will
say, that they did not except some; some, as evil Counselors, or unjust in
the late management of their respective offices, that so they might have put a
better color upon the face of their Rebellion; No, they are more ingenious in
their repentance than so; they do not by any means labor to extenuate their
sin, or to make loyalty a crime in others, when Rebellion is pardoned in
themselves; but without any exceptions, return all, return thou and all thy
Servants. And thus I have done with my Text, I shall beg your patience for a
word or two of application, and so dismiss you.

Origin, being to preach on that of the Psalmist's, unto the wicked says God,
what have thou to do to declare my Statutes? Psalm. 50.16. wept over his Text
instead of preaching: and truly I may well weep over this Text, instead of
applying; for that is many times a passionate expression of joy, as well as of
sorrow; and we may justly call up the most signal expressions, to evidence the
greatness of our joys, since this day my Lord the King came again in peace
unto his own house.

I shall not lead your attention into the parallel and application, as I did
into the story of the Text, through the many contrivances and managements of
the Rebellion, and show you how our Sovereign became an exile from these
Kingdoms, as David from Jerusalem; this were to rake in the dunghill, or to
open Pandoras's box, and so infection might fly abroad. His sacred Majesty
has graciously buried all these in the Act of Pardon and Oblivion, and I shall
not presume to unseal the Sepulcher: but shall begin my application of the
story, with the Text.

His Majesty having early notice of the summoning of a Parliament to convene in
Westminster, April, 25. 1660. and that the Lords were to be owned in that
jurisdiction and authority, which did always belong unto them by birthright,
and the fundamental Laws of the Land, he sent two letters by a person of
honor and integrity, together with a general Declaration to all his Subjects
of what degree or quality soever, to be first seasonably communicated to both
Houses, and afterward to the whole Kingdom: in which Letters and Declaration,
you may see such meekness, such mercy and forgiveness, as might easily convince
the world that he had a spirit suitable to that of David's: he sweetly minds
them of his own, and the Kingdoms sufferings, and then call's for their duty
and assistance.

In his Declaration, least fear of punishment, (to use his Majesty's own
words,) might engage any to a perseverance in guilt for the future, by opposing
the happiness and quiet of their Country, in the restoration of King, Peers,
and People, to their just, ancient, and fundamental right; He granted free and
general Pardon to all, of what quality, condition, or degree whatsoever, that
within forty days after publication thereof, should take hold of that his
grace and favor (except such as the Parliament should except.) Such, who
having washed their hands in the Sacred blood of his Royal Father, were not
capable of Pardon. Nor could those Nobles and worthy Patriots find out a
readyer way to expiate that horrid Crime, and avert those heavy judgments,
which then threatened the Nation, than by an exemplarly execution of those
unparalleled Regicides.

These Letters and Declaration, sent to both Houses, being publicly read,
produced the like effect, which that message of King David's did on the Tribe
of Judah, they bowed, they inclined the hearts of the People unto the King; and
were, indeed, the first appearance of our long expected happiness, and the very
foundation of all this our ensueing peace. For upon the reading of these
Letters and Declaration, both Houses of Parliament, (the great representative
of the Kingdom,) passed this Vote, (or to this effect, as near as I can
remember,) that his Majesty CHARLES the Second, immediately upon the death of
his Royal Father of blessed memory, as true and lawful Heir, was the
undoubted King of these Kingdoms.

See how God, who turns the heart, can change the condition. It Is not many
years since, when each new Parliament produced a new Vote against the King;
their chief work being, by all the Laws they could contrive, to disable him
from claiming, and frighten the people from promoteing him unto the Crown: to
this purpose the Usurper begot Parliaments, and upon them Ordinances, with
which they quickened so fast, (sometimes to a superfetation;) that a second was
hastily begotten, before the first was born. But now they freely, and without
danger, Vote, and publicly own him their lavvfull and undoubted King, whom
even now, had been Treason but to have named with honor.

The day, wherein these gracious Letters and Declaration, were read in
Parliament, was the first of this Month of May, in the year 1660. And truly
this Month, ought to be unto us as Abib unto the Israelites, Exodus 12. the
beginning of Months. Their deliverance from Egypt's bondage being not more
signal, than this of our's, from the bondage of those cruel, bloody, and
usurping Tyrants: Persons, of whom I may most truly say, as Gregory Nazianzen
said of Julian the Apostate, they had the defection of Jeroboam, the cruelty of
Ahab, the hardness of Pharaoh, and the sacrilege of Nebuchadnezzar, Orat^ adv.
Julian.
(...). Nay, a complication of all impieties in one.

The first day then of this Month was the birthday of our happiness; and each
succeeding day, was the happy Parent of new joys. Dies diei eructat verbum,
Psalm. 19.2. Day unto day uttered speech, and night unto night showed knowledge.
For not long after this public owning of the King, the Houses sent
Commissioners to invite him home; being much more impatient of his stay, than
others had been formerly fearful of his arrival; they sent, and they sent
again, this word unto the King, return thou etc. And here again, you may behold
a change indeed. Not many years since you might have seen your King, forced to
disguise himself in the poor habit of a mean Servant, to escape the fury, and
rage of his bloody, and rebellious Subjects; and in that disguise, to seek
relief and shelter in foreign Countries, where their kindeness was seldom
longer lived than their advantage; and, when he was not aptly serviceable to
their ends, they were no more charitable to his wants. They who were his own
allies, bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, unkindely deserted him; and
to comply with the Usurper, denied him the benefit of their air to breath in:
so that like Noah's Dove, Isai. 61.3.
he scarce found rest for the sole of his foot.

Yet in the Crovvd of all these temptations, nothing could stagger his faith,
or make him svverve from the true Protestant Religion: and therefore God has
now given him beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of
praise for the spirit of heaviness. Yea, Psalm. 21.2.
God has given him his hearts desire, and has not denied him the request of
his lips, and Psalm. 21.7.
why? because the King trusted in the Lord, and through the mercy of the most
highest, he did not miscarry, but upon the 25. or 26. day of this Month, his
Majesty landed at Dover, and the 29. (this day, which we now celebrate,) he
made his entrance into his renowned City of London, to the unexpressible joy,
and satisfaction of all his good People.

And surely, never was there a people so overwhelmed with joy, neither ever
was there a people more expressive of their joy and loyal affections:
conducting his Majesty, into that his Royal City in far greater splendor and
triumph, than any one of his most victorious Predecessors, Kings of England,
returned from their greatest Conquests. So that they that bragged of their
signal Conquests, might have here beheld a Conquest indeed, a victory Royal,
one like that of David's, fit for a King, so many thousand hearts taken captive
in one day. Exodus 7.12.
This victory, like Aaron's * rod, has swallowed up all their victories, and
like Pharaoh's Magicians they must now confess, digitus Dei est hic, Exodus
8.19.
this is the finger of God.

And truly, I esteem it the greatest temporal happiness I ever yet enjoyed,
that I was an eyewitness of that joy, though sometimes I could not well
distinguish, whether the tears trickled faster from the eyes, or the
acclamations ecchoed louder from the mouths of the People. Number. 23.21.
The Lord their God was with them, and the shout of a King was among them. All
former Crucifige's were now turned into the loudest Hosanna's: and though
tears trickled down, yet were they not lachrymae doloris, but lachrymae
amoris, not tears of sorrow, but tears of love, so that I could not but take
up that observation, which the Jews did of Jesus, when he wept over Lazarus:
Ecce quomodo amabant eum, John 11.36.
behold how they loved him. Sure I am, the spirit of God moved upon these
waters.

This day then (of us never to be forgotten) his Majesty entered upon the
actual possession of his Royal Crown and dignity: this day he 2 Samuel 19.30
came again in peace unto his own house; and and with him (as with David) all
his Servants; many worthy Gentlemen, and Nobles; Duke of ORMOND.
and among them, one, who (having some years under his Majesty governed this
Kingdom,) lost his estate, and often hazarded his life, for the preservation
of those whose falleness (to say no worse,) made him an exile, and themselves
(but justly) slaves to an usurping power: Persons, who could sign Letters of
renewing obedience to day, when as by excommunications denounced against him,
and all that should adhere to him, they had councermanded it the day before; as
if they intended to antedate their own apostasy, and let the world see,
(which is strange) that their relapse, was more ancient than their repentance:
of these things my eyes have been but too sad vvitnesses. As for those that
have constantly adhered to his Majesty, and his interest, as they have already
tasted of his Princely bounty and clemency, so I hope they shall of your just
care. Consumetur nequitia peccatorum, let the wickedness of the wicked come to
an end, but establish the just, Psalm. 7.9. I remember it was the saying of
that Noble person upon a public occasion (to which some here I believe can
bear vvi^ness with me) that it was more honorable to suffer with the best of
Princes, than to live gloriously with the worst of men. He verified this in his
practice and constant adherence to his Master, and that without any sinister
or by-ends, but merely conscience to God, and duty to his Prince And I bless
God he is now returned again, returned an example of Loyalty and constancy to
posterity. And (I hope I may speak as without suspicion of flattery, so
likewise of offense,) this whole Nation may bless God too, I am sure this
Church may, I am sure it does: and as we all bless God for, and joy in, his
Majesty's return; so is our praise heightened, and our joys enlarged by his
return with such Servants, return thou and all thy Servants.

There remains one thing more, and that is a pious, cordial, and thankful
remembrance of the most signal mercies of this day. A day, not to be passed
over in silence; but a day to be celebrated with the greatest expressions of
gratitude and joy we can imagine.

Herodotus tells us, Herodotus Lib. 9.
that the Persian Kings had always a standing officer with a memento for
them, (...). And indeed, our own gratitude should be that standing officer, to
put us frequently in mind of the great matters of this day; for the more ready
performance whereof, let me exhort every one of you in those words of the Lord
unto the Prophet. Ezekiel. 24.2. Son of man write thee the name of the day, even
of this same day. Our Sovereign Lord King CHARLES the Second, after twelve
years expulsion from his Kingdoms, returned to the possession of his Crown
and Royal dignity this same day* A day, fit to be written, not only with a
pen of Iron, or point of a Diamond, but with a Quill borrowed from the wing of
some glorious Cherubim: God himself has writ it with a beam of the Sun, in such
glorious and resplendent mercies, that he that runs may read it. Oh, let us
write it too, write it upon our hearts in the indeleble Characters of pious and
religious thankfullness. The Children that are yet unborn, and the generations
which are yet to come, shall bless God for this day; this day, which was the
restoration of our King, of our Church, of our Religion, of our Laws, of our
Liberties, of all that we can call venerable, good, honorable, or sacred.

This day has in it a double festival; it is the day of his Majesty's most
happy Birth and Nativity, and it is the day of his Majesty's most happy
restoration; very well expressed by the Act of Parliament for the perpetual
Anniversary Thanksgiving on the 19. of May: the most memorable Birthday, not
only of his Majesty, both as a Man and Prince, but also as an actual King, and
of this, and other his Majesty's Kingdoms. I may say then with David, Psalm.
116.12
this is the day which the Lord has made. Assuredly it was his doing, and it
is mavelous in all men's eves. Let every one then in a grateful
acknowledgement of the blessings and mercies of this day, say with David, quid
retribuam Domino? what shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits
toward me? Let us take the cup of Salvation, and call upon the name of the
Lord, let us pay our vows unto the Lord, now in the presence of all his
people: and let us all humbly implore the riches of God's mercy, who is the
fountain of all our joys, that he would graciously continue the joys of this
day unto us; that neither vvenor our Posterity may ever behold the like sad
confusions. To this end, let us pray, that God would continue his Majesty upon
his Throne, the Church in her possessions, Religion in it is purity, the People
in obedience, and these three Kingdoms in a firm and durable peace. For the
better effecting of all this, let us pray, pray, not from the lip only, but
from the heart and spirit: Vivat Rex, let the King live, let him live long, let
him live happy; and lastly, that the Soul of our Lord the King may be bound up
in the bundle of life with the Lord his God, let us pray fervently, pray
ardently, pray constantly, yea, pray as David danced before the 1. Sam. 6.14
Arc, even with all our might. Domine salvum fac Regem. GOD SAVE THE KING.
Amen.

FINIS.

