Mr. L'Estrange REFUTED With his own ARGUMENTS.

BEING A REPLY To his late IMPERTINENT PAMPHLET ENTITLED L'Estrange No Papist,
In farther Justification of the Informations sworn against him; before the
Lords of the Secret Committee.

By J. P. Gent.

Allatres licet usque nos and usque
Et gannitibus improbis lacessas,
Certum est hanc tibi famam negare.
Nam te cur aliquis sciat fuisse?
Ignotus pereas, miser, necesse est.
Matt. l. 5. Ep. 60. LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin, in the Old-Baly. 1681.

Mr. L'Estrange REFUTED With his own ARGUMENTS.
SUrely Mr. L'Estrange, you must either dote, or else your Parliament-scar'd
Senses are not yet returned to their Lodging. For certainly you seem to have
left them behind ye at the Hague, as if you had laid 'em in pawn for some odd
score. Here Is a Piece of Gallimawfrey indeed; a silly Oglio of
Fiddle-cum-faddle, and feeble threats, as void of Salt as a Witches Feast.
Lord! Mr. L'Estrange, that you should be no better a Marksman than so. You have
been aiming at five Affidavits, or rather Informations, this five Weeks, and
yet have not come near the Mark by the full length of your Bow. For
Heavens-sake, leave off your scribbling; wash that same demangeson of yours in
Spring Water, or Fasting Spittle every Morning, and kill that, which else will
kill you. Otherwise you will certainly expire with a Goose Quill in your hand,
and the last blasts of your Breath will be, L'Estrange No Pa -- for e're you
can say pist, you will dye with a twang of Conscience.

A man would wonder how such an Obsolete Quondam, as Mr. L'Estrange, should
pretend to be a Judge of Sense and Grammar. Let any man of Sense and Grammar
but look upon his last Right Worshipful Garden of Eloquence, his nonsensical
defense of himself, and see where he can find those Tulips and Gillow-flowers
of Sense and Grammar, which he believes himself so much the Master of. A man
may perceive him indeed to be nettled to the Quick; which causes him to flounce
and fling, and huff, and ding, and rant and swagger, evade and shift, and fence
and falsify, as if he were not only a Papist, but a Jesuit; but for any
Answer to the purpose, becoming a Person of Sense and Grammar, there is not the
least appearance of it. It Is to be feared that Mr. L'Estrange hides his Candle
under a Bushel, least others should be enlightened by his transcendent Gifts of
Sense and Grammar.

But hold a little; what is this we have got here?

L'ESTRANGE NO PAPIST, In Answer to a LIBEL Entitled, L'ESTRANGE A PAPIST.

And why a Libel? Oh! the reason is plain; because it is a Book that touches
the Copyhold of the most malcontent and right Worshipful Roger L'Estrange,
Esquire. Otherwise it seems very strange, that he who had been a Licenser for so
many years, and a Justice of the Peace too for some short time, should be so
ignorant what a Libel is. Had he read my Lord Cook, his Lordship would have
told his Worship at the latter end of his fifth Book, that A Scandalous Libel
in writing is, when an Epigram, Rhyme, or other writing is composed publicly to
the defamation and contumely of another, whereby his good Name and Reputation
may be prejudicsd. Which Definition includes both falsehood in the Matter, and
Malice in the Person. As to the Matter of the Book which he calls a Libel, it
is Matter sworn before some of the greatest persons in the Nation, a selected
Committee of the Nobility appointed to Examine that, and matters of the same
Nature. To which his Plea of Dismission at the Council Board is no Plea, as has
been already said, and as is apparent by the fresh President of the Lord Chief
Justice himself, a Person in a higher Station, then ever Mr. L'Estrange is like
to be. And for the malice of the Persons, there is no reason to imagine it, when
every one is bound to discharge his Conscience, when called to that end by a
lawful Authority. If Mr. L'Estrange will give the world the first occasion, by
villifying, traducing, and undermining the Evidence of so great Discoveries as
have been lately made, to think him a Papist, he is no Libeller that calls him
so, because there is a shroud probability, that the thing may be true; but more
especially when it is confirmed by the Oaths of credible Testimonies, and the
words of his own mouth. And therefore I must needs tell Mr. L'Estrange, that
his Title is a miserable piece of pedantic ignorance. And why in a Letter to a
Friend? He can as well be whipped as leave Dialoguing or Lettering it. As if his
sorrows wanted a Companion though in Nubibus. But it looks so like prating and
gossiping, that it is no wonder he uses it so much.

He begins, Sir,

So far am I from being troubled at the Box of Libels you sent me, that you
could hardly have made me a Present more to my honor and satisfaction. For
what greater honor to a man, that has any Sense either of virtue or common
Honesty than to be made the Mark of the Common Enemies of God, and of all good
men; the Common Enemies of the King and of the Church; and in one word, the
Enemies of Religon, Truth, Good-Manners, Order and Government, the Vomit, in
short, of all the Jayles about the Town, and the very Scandal of reasonable
Nature. This is the Just Character and the Quality of these People, according
to the very Letter.

But where is the satisfaction you will say of seeing men turned into Beasts; the
Spirit of Blasphemy enduing humane State, and managing the cause of Hell in
the Name of the Almighty, and in the style of the Gospel? Of seeing the Spirit
of Contumacy, Violence, and Slander not only flying in the face of Gods
Anointed, and insulting over Apostolical Institutions, with scorn and triumph,
but animated also to those outrages, by all the temptations and encouragement
of Popular applause, Impunity and Reward?

Non est hic Cynicus, cosme, quid ergo? Canis. The Squire is in one of his
Lunatic Paroxysms, and I cannot fancy otherwise, but that when he wrote these
two Paragraphs, he foamed at the Mouth, like a mad Dog; and that he thought a
Pinch of his Fangs at that time, would have proved as venomous, as the gripe of
an unworm'd Cur. Here Is such a Rhapsodie of Malice and imbitterment, as if he
durst not encounter his Foes till he had fixed the Bastions of his fury and
indignation to protect him from their great shot. You may wonder perhaps what
makes this vast distinction between this Altitonant Squire, and those Sons of
Earth, those miserable Titans which he so despicably contemns. But the reason
is plain. They never were acquainted with that Eminentissimo, Signior Rolando
di Pipino, alias, Rowland Pipin, the Trussmaker. Now it is a Maxim, that he who
was so dearly and intimately acquainted with Rowland Pipin, as Roger L'Estrange
Esquire, is above all the rest of Mankind. However to let him understand, that
he ought not to think himself so high, nor manage his Informatum fulmen with
that usurped authority as he does, I do positively aver, that there is more
learning, and truth of History in what Mr. Care has writ, then in all the
Quarto's of Mr. L'Estrange's Pamphlets; fitter for the Library of Pantagruel,
and to be placed in his Study, next the Famous Author of Poltronismus Rerum
Italicarum; the Squire's works being no more then Poltronismi Rerum Anglicarum;
besides that the disputes in Pantagruel, are carried on with equal heat, and
are all of equal importance. However by this Fluster-Bluster, you may taste the
savouriness of his wit, and the poinancie of his Expressions, tart, smart,
sharp, quick, biting, froppish, peevish, waspish, angry, touchy, and in short,
scelerata sinapis all over. Nevertheless he might have had more wit in his
anger, or in his brains, or somewhere, then to have thrust Mr. Prance among his
Blasphemers, and flyers in the face of Gods Anointed, against whom I Will hold him
an even wager he is not able to find the least syllable for such a Nonsensical
Accusation. For all false Accusations are but the nonsense of Envy, and
generally turn to the shame of the Accuser. But it is no difficult matter to
comment upon Mr. L'Estrange's Text. For by flying in the face of Gods Anointed,
he means the Discoveries of the Plot, and the Assertours of the Protestant
Religion; and by Blasphemers, those that, contradict the Follies and
Impertinencies of the Diana, and the Goliath of Sense and Grammar. His following
Excursions are nothing to our purpose, mere Persollae Nugae, trifles and
riffraffe, and a congeries of characteristical Raptures in defiance of the
Towzer-teazers; only he is very much troubled, that People should think he
withdrew either out of fear or guilt. For what was it then? Why, he is so kind
once as to tell ye, that being in a State of liberty, he thought it his safest
way, Achilles like, to retire among the Batavian Spinsters, for fear of being
shot in the heels. And that this is the sober-serious touch of the business the
very reason which he urges against his fear and guilt, confirm. For his
dismission at the Council, was no plenary bar for the Parliament not to call
over his Charge again. And for his withdrawing, before any thing was spoken
against him in the House of Lords, it was an act of his prudence, rather to
make use of Mercuries wings, than stay to run hazards. Then again, says he, I
declared at the latter end of my Appeal, that I would withdraw. But that most
People construed in another sense, that he intended to withdraw out of this
Impious and Trapanning World, upon the encouragement of Dr. Don's
self-Homicide, and not into Holland; however the hopes of a better
Secretary-ship then Mr. Prance's, made him alter his resolution. So unluckily
did his aged Ambition spoil a good Design.

As for his Answer to Mr. Prance's Information it is hardly worth taking notice
of. For the stress of Mr. Prance's Affidavit does not lie upon Mr. L'Estrange
being at Mass, but as he himself has stated his own Case, whether he were at
Mass in the Queens Chapel since the Kings Restoration. In the contrary
averments of which two different Assertions, either Mr. Prance or Mr.
L'Estrange must be forsworn. Now I am apt to think, that the greatest part of
the Readers of this hot contest, will take my part, and believe that Mr. Prance
has as much reason to be credited as Mr. L'Estrange. For most certain it is,
that his word has been taken already, more than once, for greatter Matters than
Mr. L'Estrange's being at the Queen's Chapel. In that he has answered nothing
to the point. For where he says, that had he been at Mass, the Papists would be
able to convict him. He knows well enough, and we know too, that it is no wonder
they should conceal his denyals, that are so good at 'em themselves, that they
will confess nothing by their good will.

And for his saying, that Mr. Prance's Secretary falls upon him most
outragiously, it is a Don-Quixotisme of his own, for there is all along that
Moderation and respect; which perhaps he calls Insipidness, observed toward
him; which he ought to have acknowledged rather than ingratefully and
disingenuously traduced: But when a thing pinches him, he, being old Dog at the
trade, finds it his best way to nip it again with his Barnacles of Outrageous
and Insipid, and so to shift it off. But let me tell you, Mr. L'Estrange, this
Plot of yours will take as little as young Mr. Tongues.

His answer to Mowbray's Affidavit, is nothing but a vain flourishing, upon the
accident of his being saluted at the Queens Chapel by the name of Mr.
L'Estrange, by an acquaintance of Mr. Andersons, who was Servant to Mr. Allaby
of Gray's Inn. Now because Mr. Mowbray, does not tell the Name of this Mr.
Andersons acquaintance, nor where he dwelt, therefore Mr. L'Estrange will have
this Person to be a Nullitie, or rather as I believe he meant, a non Entitie;
which is such an odd way of annihilating a Man, that only Mr. L'Estranges
Omnipotency could have found out. However, for his satisfaction, it had been
but his going with a little expense of Shoo-Leather to the Porter of
Gray's-Inn, and he would have directed him to Mr. Allaby; Mr. Allaby would have
directed him to his man Anderson, and Mr. Anderson would have directed him to
his acquaintance. Which he would certainly have done, rather then suffered his
friend to be thus unkindly annihilated. Truly Mr. L'Estrange would do well to
practice this art of Annihilation: I dare be bold to say, he might get vastly
by the wicked.

But Mr. Mowbray swears that he saw Mr. L'Estrange since that, at the Queens
Chapel, and knew him again to be the same Person he had seen there before,
that is the same Person that had been taken notice of by Mr. Anderson's
Nullitie in the same place.

So that if Mr. L'Estrange have nothing else but Conclusions upon surmizes,
(the five Jesuits way of Arguing themselves to the Gallows) and his own
Hectoring and Swaggering to defend his cause, it is positive, that his swearing
and protesting for himself is not to be believed against the Oath of two
credible Witnesses swearing for the King. Never believe it, Sir, these Hocus
pocus-tricks will not pass for the world is grown old and cunning, and is not
now to be cajoled with smooth Tales and Rhapsodies of hard words.

His Animadversions on the Depositions of Mrs. Jane Curtis, in the first place
are such as make against himself; Secondly disingenuously and Scandalously
untrue; and in the Third place, ridiculously evasive.

He confesses, he charged Mrs. Curtis and her Husband, for publishing Seditious
Books, and that being pinched upon curcumstances she confessed, The Appeal from
the Country to the City. So then it is plain, he looked upon the Appeal to be a
Seditious Book. And yet the Imposition of the fine upon Mr. Harris for printing
that very Book, was by the Commons of England, voted both Arbitrary and
Illegal. And it is vehemently to be suspected that their Judgment would have
been the same of Mr. L'Estrange's drawing dry-foot after it. And from hence the
world may give a shrewd guess at the reason of his withdrawing, as he terms
it, notwithstanding all his endeavors to palliate and sleek over the business.
It Is to be feared they would have given Mr. L'Estrange Esquire to understand that
neither his Sense nor his Grammar, no nor his Judgment neither, were so
superior to Parliaments and Bishops Chaplains, as he presumed within himself.

His saying that Mrs. Curtis denies her being concerned in publishing Books
upon her Oath, and yet that all the Town knows the contrary, is a conclusion
from such a piece of Cretan truth, as a man shall hardly meet with, and would
make a man suspect not so much Mr. L'Estrange's Sense and Grammar, as whether
he can read or no. For it is as plain as the Sun, that the words which he means,
were only the denial of a Woman scared with his Imperious frowns and menaces,
a Narrative leading only to what she was to swear, and no part of the Oath.
Nay Mr. L'Estrange, if ye once begin to put tricks upon the World, God-buy to
ye. But here is more of the same stamp; and so it is to be feared this is not the
first time.

The business about Oats and his gang, is most ridiculously false.

You are infinitely mistaken: For it is seriously true. And they that have sworn
it already will justify it again; and say besides, you were strangely overseen
to assert so confidently and publicly such an untruth. This is therefore
positively Jesuitical, and you have no way to deny it, but by invoaking your
Gentility to Witness.

But now your reason: Because it was not a likely thing that you should say to
her, you know what some of them are come to already, at a time when they were
in full prosperity. A miserable argument, when all men of Sense will understand
that their prosperity could never be so full, while your busy pomp, and vanity
strutted in the World. They being then in no such prosperity neither, their
exhibitions being either retrenched, or taken away by the industery of their
prevailing Enemies, almost to utter discouragement.

As to my refusal of Licensing some Books against Papists, which were Licensed
without scruple by the Bishops Chaplains, my answer is, That for or against
Papists, 'twas all one, for my Deputation was quallifi'd with an Exception to
all Theological Arguments

This is a mere pitiful shift: as if his deputation had forbid him to License
a jocose Sarcasme upon the Papists, occasioned by a Lay Proclamation for
expelling them out of the City. He might as well have refused to License the
relation of the public Executions, because they contained the repentant
Speeches and Admonitions of dying Men, and for that a Divine was always ordered
to attend them at the Gallows for their Souls health.

I would fain know of M. L. whether the Packet of Advice were not a
Theological argument, or at least an Ecclesiastical History, and yet it is well
known he Licensed that for five Months together, notwithstanding his Qualified
Deputation.

But I am informed that Curtis her self disowns several parts of her
Deposition, and says they are false printed, and imposed upon her.

This is one of Quevedo's Dreams, a falsehood, and mere Cony-catching Imposition
upon the World. They that know Mrs. Curtis, well know, she is a Woman that
considers better what she says, then to be persuaded out of her Reputation;
besides the affront which Mr. L'Estrange puts upon the Clerk of so Honorable a
Committee, as if he were one that gave out false Copies.

Mr. L'Estrange therefore was to blame, not to send a brisker Toper when he
employed his Emissary to pump Mrs. Curtise's Husband at the Three Tun Tavern
upon Ludgate Hill. But the Fellow it seems got Drunk unseasonably, and instead
of pumping others, wanted a Pump for himself; and so Mr. L'Estrange lost his
design, and was cheated in his Intelligence to boot.

But Mrs. Curtis is so far from Disowning what she has sworn, that she is ready
not only to repeat the same again, but to add more, when ever Mr. L'Estrange
shall have any occasion for such a kindness. She Will tell him a tale in his Ear,
that he swore Oats and Bedlow, etc. were a company of Rogues, and that the
Plot, was a Plot of their own making. But no more of this at present.

Now I Appeal to Mr. L'Estranges Wisdom, whether it be prudence in him, who
looks upon these People, as such a sort of contemptible Insects and Hornets, to
be thus continually disturbing their Nests, as if he had the curbing and
Licensing their stings, either to hurt, or not to hurt as he pleased himself.

To Mr. Fletchers Deposition he answers, That as to his asserting the Pope to
be the Head of the Church, himself a Member of that Church, or speaking of his
hopes to see others return to that Church, or any thing to that effect, by the
everlasting God, it is as false, as if he had sworn, I had come down the
Chimney upon a Broomstick. So there is my Oath against His.

Now Mr. L'Estrange thinks he has done a wonderful piece of business, in
swearing by the Everlasting God. Truly such a formidable Oath might have served
to have scared a young Lady out of a suspicion of his playing a foul Card at
Picquet: but here it does not signify one straw; and is therefore perfectly
taking the Name of God in Vain. For Mr. L'Estrange might have gained the
Experience, in that little time that he was a Justice of the Peace, how little
a man's swearing at Random for himself, will avail against a Testimony sworn
for the King upon the Evangelists. Could Mr. L'Estrange be so idle, as to
believe, that if he should be accused for Robbing upon the Highway upon the
Oaths of sufficient Witnesses legally taken, that his swearing and Hectoring by
the Everlasting God, would be a sufficient Argument for the Judges to acquit
him? So that his Ostentatious Expression of, Here Is my Oath against his, is a
mere Bubble. For his swearing by the Everlasting God, upon this occasion,
weighs no more in the Balance of Judgment against Mr. Fletchers Oath before a
Magistrate, then nothing against Ponderosity. Mr. L'Estrange therefore, in such
cases as these, would do better, to leave off his swearing by his Maker, and
the Everlasting God, and take Martial's advice, Ecce negas, jurasque mihi per
Templa Tonantis;
Non credo; jura, Verpe, per Anchialum.


For as he manages his affair of swearing, the same credit will be given to the
one as the other. But for all his swearing and vapouring, and holding up his
hands to Heaven, Mr. Fletcher is the same Person still, and avouches his
Deposition to be true, and what he is bound in Conscience, and shall be always
ready to justify. And more then that, he admires at Mr. L'Estranges Confidence
to call the Everlasting God to Witness the attest of his public Impositions
upon the World. But the slight Comparison of his coming down the Chimney upon a
Broomstick, shows the levity of his Invocation.

Now as to the probability of the Matter; First, says he, I had no discourse
with Fletcher, but in the hearing of the other two; and to those two I dare
appeal, if he dares but say who they were.

As to the first Assertion, Mr. Fletcher affirms it to be false; for that the
other two Gentlemen were at the one end of a long Table, and Mr. Fletcher and
Mr. L'Estrange at the other, at a competent distance, and consequently divided
into several places, and discoursing of distinct matter. As for his Appeal,
because he is in such a daring humor, we will ^ell him the Name of one of the
Gentlemen who was there, and perhaps took more notice of his Auricular
Confessions, then he was aware of; his Name with his addition, is Doctor Frye.
Now we must tell him where the Doctor lives too, or else Mr. L'Estrange will
make him a Nullitie, as he has done Mr. Anderson's Acquaintance; he lives
therefore in Black Friars, very near the Water-Stairs, where he is very well
known, and where Mr. L'Estrange may attend him for the Julip of his so
unquestioned acquittal.

Secondly, I must be two great Fools in one, to speak a thing so imprudent,
that had no relation either to the Company or the Occasion.

As for Mr. L'Estranges Folly, or whether he be one or two Fools, we shall not
trouble our selves with it, nor whether he borrowed this Argument from Gawen
the Jesuit at the Sessions House. But considering that it is the Custom of
most people now adays to preach over their Cups, and to slip out of all other
Discourses into that of Religion, at the Tavern, there might be occasion given
enough for the Discourse, and Discourse enough upon the Occasion,
notwithstanding all Mr. L'Estranges Improbabilities.

Thirdly, In case I had said it in so harmless a fashion, etc.

So then at length, here is a Confession of the whole matter wire-drawn out of
him. But what he means by confessing himself to be a Catholic of Rome in a
harmless fashion, by confessing himself to be of that Church in a harmless
fashion, and by hoping to see others return to that Church in a harmless
fashion; or how the saying of words in a harmless fashion, can make those words
void, is somewhat of a Riddle. But now you see what sort of Engine it is which
he makes use of, to shove off all Objections made against him, he swears and
stares and hectors in a harmless fashion, and then you are obliged to believe
what ever he says to be true in a harmless fashion.

But lastly, it is my comfort, that Mr. Fletcher of all the world is is the man
to make me a Papist, of whom no man living could ever make any thing.

The Assertion is very general and very positive; and properly enough becoming
Mr, L'Estranges impotent precipitancy; and shows how little heed there is to be
given to a rash and inconsiderate Censurer. But suppose him to be only a moral
honest Man (and that Mr. L'Estrange dares not deny) it is enough to do his
business. Nay, suppose him to be one of the midling sort, a man of no more then
a stripped Reputation; yet the Oaths of such a one is sufficient to serve Mr.
L'Estranges turn. Is this the Famous L'Estrange that ownes such Trifles as
these?

His Populus ridet, multumque torosa Jnventus
Ingeminat tremulos naso Crispante Cachinnos.
At these the common Vulgar laugh, the very Boys Sneer up their Noses, and
deride his Toys.

Mr. Prance 's Invention I find is quite jaded, so put to it to make a
Twelve-penny Book on it, that he is fain to Thunder a matter of twelve folio
Pages in Observations upon Philo-L'Estrange and Pragmaticus, and all the Edge
of his Indignation is as still turned upon me, that Heaven knows am innocent of
the thing as I was born. How innocent he was born it matters not. He should
have done well to have made the Earth as knowing as the Heavens in this
particular: Especially having so many good Friends, that for old acquaintance
sake, would have spared him room for such a short Advertisement in any of their
Weekly Intelligences. But be it whose it will, it runs in his Style, contains
his own Principles, pursues his wild and rambling Conceits, and smells of the
same Hemp with all the rest of his Pamphlets against the Plot and it is
Discoverers. His Name is to it, the known Name of Roger L'Estrange Esquire and it
is said to be printed for his Bookseller. And therefore since the Brat is laid
to his Charge, he is bound to keep and maintain it.

For otherwise, by his own Rule, unless he can produce the Author, and tell us
where he dwells, we must adjudge all other Authors Nullities, but himself.
However he says, there is in it one Terrible Pinch against him.

Mr. L'Estrange says, in his Discovery upon Discovery Now, Doctor, I do
positively averr that there was not one Church of England-Man in the Parliament
Army. To which it is answered, that a Metropolitan of England served in the
Parliament Army with a command of Horse, and thence inferred, now what becomes
of L'Estranges positive averr? To which Mr. L'Estrange replies, that the
Covenant was an Abjuration of the Church of England, and the opposing of
Bishops, and the Common Prayer was the Test of the Party, and that an Episcopal
man being once dipped, is no more a Church of England-Man, than a Renegade that
has renounced the Christian-Faith, is a Christian. --

Truly Mr. L'Estrange had better have let this Argument alone; for he only
speaks out of the abundance of his Heart, but not out of the Abundance of his
Logic. In the first place, he does not make it out that ever the Archbishop
took the Covenant; neither does it appear by any thing from Mr. L'Estrange but
that he might make use of the Liturgy of the Church of England at the same
time. So that it may be said indeed, that he assisted the Long Parliament as a
Rebel; but that did not make him cease to be a Church of England-Man. And thus
the Bishop of Munster, when he assisted the French King, was a Rebel, it is
true, to the Emperor, who was his lawful Prince; nevertheless, he was of the
Church of Rome, and Bishop of Munster still. So in the Archbishop the effect
must remain, because the cause was not taken away. The cause of his being made
Archbishop, was the Kings Favor, but the King had not un-Arch-Bishop'd him;
and therefore being still an Archbishop, he was still a Church of England-Man.

In the second place, He mistakes in Fundamentals. For Episcopacy is not the
Church of England, (...), de omni, but (...) per se, as being inseparable from
its Genus; which is Protestantism. Protestantism then is the grand Genus,
Episcopacy, Presbytery, and Independency are but the speces; dissentanea
diversa indeed, but not Opposita, as differing only in outward Ceremonies and
in things of indifferency, not in points of Faith. Neither can any of these
three be called Shisms from one another, neither erring in Fundamentis, as the
Arrians and Maronites, nor circa Fundamenta, like the Papists. The want of
which Knowledge has run Mr. L'strange into two gross Absurdities; that an
Episcopal Man Apostatized into Presbytery, or Independencie (for one of these
two, I know his Ignorance means by the word Schism) which is an impossibility
(Apostacy being a revolt from Truth) is no more a Church of England- Man then
a Renagado, that has renounced his Faith is a Christian. Which is a Nonsensical
conclusion. For to be a Christian and an Infidel are Opposita contraria. It Is
impossible for Christianity and Infidelity to be both in one Subject. But a
Bishop may be a Presbyterian, and a Presbyterian a Bishop without any offense
to God or Man. Nay if the Archbishop had taken the Covenant, it makes him
cease to be a Church of England-Man no more, then taking the Parliament Test,
made a Papist cease to be a Papist. But no more of this, as having said enough
to any Men of Sense and Grammar. And therefore Mr. L'strange must go to School
again; For I do positively aver, that his Positive aver to Dr. Oats, was a Peg
too high; the effect of his rashness or ignorance, or both together.

Having thus finished with Mr. Prance, he turns Jupiter Rampant, and falls a
Thundering upon his contemptible Enemies, as if he intended to Foot-ball'em to
the Devil immediately. To the end therefore that you may behold him in all his
Glory,

Enter the Exasperated Numen surrounded withal his Fury.

(...) --
ASsist me Goddess, Bloody Wars I Sing,
In which no Emperor is concerned, nor King,
But mortal Both in thought, whom Goddess fair,
You may to Man with Gnats disturbed compare.
Who Armed with Fly-flop, as in Bed he lies,
When Fly-flop does no good is forced to rise.
Then Jove L'Estrange the Sons of Earth bespoke,
How dare ye thus my Anger to provoke?
Since Peace ye have refused, I am for War;
Nor think your threats Norfolcian-Jove shall scare.
To him the Dreaded Curtis thus replied,
Thy Heaven and Thee the Sons of Earth deride;
These brawny Arms and Massy Limbs of ours
Shall pull thee soon from thy Olympic Towers.
Ton'd apomeibomenos prosephe nepheleghereta Zeus,
Your brawny Arms I vallue not a Louse.
With that the Sons of Earth for War prepare;
And straight, enraged, the Hundred-Headed Care,
Rheams upon Rheams of Pacquets of Advice,
To Pelion's height, advances to the Skies.
To him the Hugeous College lent his Aid,
And soon of Towzer's Quires an Ossa made;
Then in came dreadful Smith, like him was none,
And mounted Ossa upon Pelion.
Harris stood by, a vast Etnean-Pile,
Fire flaming from his Nostrils all the while.
What ails this Urchin of a god, quo He?
Must we be subject to his Raillerie?
We, though his low ingratitude forgets,
That lately gave him Milk for Licensed Sheets?
And for his sake, though favors now disowned,
The greedy Saturn-Poverty dethroned.
We to the Cretan Cliffs have equal right,
There He was Born, there we first saw the light;
Though Rhea were a Goddess, so was Tellus;
And therefore he must never think to quell us.
Courage, then, Sons of Tellus, bravely show
Your might, and let the proud Usurper know
The Sons of Earth are not so imbecil,
But they can reach Olympic Bloomsbury still.
Hos ipown, otryne menos, kai Thymon Hekastou,
For straight, in great contempt of Pope and Mass too,
No sooner had he ended, but the Rout
Of horrid Titan's made a dismal shout,
As with such force through Pelion's Bowels rung,
That Crack-fart-Jove could scarce forbear to dung.
And Snaky-Periwig'd Janaway swore by Styx,
He Would make Norfolcian-Jove to feel his kicks.
Then all together up the Cliffs they clamber,
Resolved to assail the Demy-gods own Chamber.
'Twas then no time for Jove L'Estrange to dally,
So, forth to meet his Foes he makes a sally.
Him first the Fifty-headed-Care received,
And at his Breast a Limb of Pope-Jone heaved.
Which he repaying with his Fell Appeal
Made one of Gyant's Fifty heads to reel.
Which the Grim Curtis seeing, straight stepped in,
And having under propt Cares Fiftieth Chin,
With Ox-hide Cestus, all with Libels stufft,
So ( Dares once and old Entellus cufft,)
Drives at the Thunderer's head with might and main,
And made a Window to display his Brain.
Out leapt Minerva then with Spear and Shield,
And holps him to maintain a second Field.
And well it hap't; for College, famed in Battle,
Choosing out Towzer from all other Cattle,
Takes Towzer by the tail, and with one swing
Lays at the Forhead of the Olympic King.
Then out flew Towzer's, out the Thunderer's brain,
And blended sense of Dog does Human stain.
But Jove himself was forced to stoop to Fate;
So with the blended Brains his empty Pate
He soon refurnish'd: which the Critic's say,
Makes the old Churl so Cynic to this day.
Breathing Revenge, with Mazard thus repaird,
He summoned to his aid his trusty Guard,
Zekiel, whose Fangs like Lions whelps hung out,
And Monstrous Ephrim with his Gorgons snout:
They fastened straight on hunderd-headed Care,
And thirty heads from threescore shoulders tear;
For what availed a hundred hands and more,
Against such as they, that could both tear and roar,
With Perseus Whale, or the Erymanthian Boar,
Like Diomeds Horses fed with Flesh and gore.
Thus Monstrous Care lay rolling in his blood,
Whom Jove reviled, and bid him swim that could.
This the Grim Curtiss with impatience see's,
And up he heaves ten Cartloads of Fuzee's,
The Composition all Combustible
Of new Sheeps Fat, and Oil of Knave and Fool,
Papist downright, and wilful breach of Oath;
A dreadful Mass to kindle human Wrath;
Which throw'n by Art, in showers of Fire returned;
That, Dejanira's smock-like all had burned
(So quickly did the eager Flames embrace him)
Had not brave Zekiel speeded to uncase him.
Nor were the Cinders useless, while the true
And trusty Zeck through Quill of Ostridg blew
The Perriwig Ashes in grim Curtis's Eyes.
The Advantage soon Norfolcian Jove espies:
And with his Gun, with Flowts and Scomma's crammed,
At Curtis envied Nose so truly aimed,
That Acre-covering-Curtis unbefriended,
On Ossa's Top lay all at length extended.
But him the Snakie-curled Janaway soon bestrode,
And gave him time to rear his Massy Load;
So then afresh the Thunderer they assail;
Blows fell like Hops, or if you please like Hail;
As when Joves Offspring, loath to be outdone,
In bloody Fight assaild Alcmena's Son.
Long was the Fray which cost Pails full of Blood,
While Victory still in a brown study stood.
While thus the Combat tottered,, Armed with fire
And Smoke in rushed Briarean Harris dire,
With Immense College close upon his heels;
Their very stamps astonished Ossa feels,
And shakes for fear. Their torvous Visages,
The chased Thunderer did no way please.
So he withdrew, and gaped, and breathed, and then
Why do I turn, quo he, from Mortal Men?
Then Citt and Bumkin, Zech. and Ephrim called,
And with fresh Succors Earth-born Sons assailed.
Then had you heard their bellowing without Truce,
You would have sworn that Hell had been broke loose.
But Oh! the Turns of Fate! the Victor Numen
Must now succumb to Earth-born Sons Bitumen;
There Zech. and Ephrim lie, there Citt and Bumkin,
All in mash, like Oven-Coddl'd Pumkin.
Jove thus alone, 'his Periwig tore in vain,
When Harris Grim, and College most humane
Embraced his Corpse, and with their potent hands,
Gave him a Cant down to the Netherlands:
Go there, said they, and in thy dark Repose,
Learn next time, not to scorn thy equal Foes.
This is the true Representation of Mr. L'Estranges ridiculous Passion, and his
pusillanimous vainglorie, which has caused such a Guelf and Ghibelline contest
in the City; a Crackfart Son of Rodomantado despising every one but R.
L'strange, and triumphing over as good Men as himself. If they are such
Pigmies, why does his Eagleship condescend to play the Crane? Such a
Ger-Faulcon as he, should scorn to stoop to such pitiful Game as Sparrows and
Titmouses. And yet as contemptible as they are, he can not but hug himself in
most of his Pamphlets for the little Victories which he thinks he has got; and
with which he flatters his own Fancy. Though for my part I see no such
inequality in the Match; but they return him as good as he brings, even to his
Vomits, and the Reversions of his Glysters. And therefore if he will voutsafe
to contend with 'em, he must allow 'em more desert, and higher Titles, for his
own honor. For all this while, as I said before, as insignificant as he makes
his Adversaries, they do but render him the subject of their own mirth, and the
sport of the Town. So that it is no wonder the Titan's should be two hard for
Jupiter, that is, that the contemptible should worst the Contemner, when he
himself by his own folly lays himself opon to their Lashes, and makes them the
Arbitrators of their own Revenge.

But now it seems he intends, after such ill success in his Wars, to take
another course with his Antagonists, and tell's 'em he intends to send his
Attorney among them. But then they laugh till they spill their Liquor. One
cries, Let him be a Norfolk one, I beseeeh your worship; for that is a famous
Country for Law. Another asks whither he were not in the Crown-Office himself,
when he vented that Rodemontado? Another asks, What he will take for the place,
and make a firm Deputation? Another bids him have a care that he be not picked
up for Hawks-meat, and presented to the Grand Jury the next Sessions. And then
what would become of all the hopes of Mr. L'Estranges Attorny-General.

Hear from him by his Attorney! A very charitable Gentleman to the Lawyers
indeed: What fine sport we should have? Norfolcian-Jove Plaintiff, Briarian
Care Defendant, in an Action of Scandalum Magnatum. Heavens forbid, that the
French King do not come in among us, and alter the Laws of the Land before Mr.
L'Estrange commences his Suits. However Gentlemen, it is fair play, fore-Arm'd,
fore-warned; think what ye have to do and what to say: for you will find no
mercy after a Verdict.

And thus as for the defenses of himself, they appear to be all frivilous and
impertinent, mere Shams, Delusions, Evasions Shifts and Falsehoods. So that he
need not make it such a wonderful thing, that one Man should call him This, and
another call him that, when he himself lays himself so open to such unhappy
Advantages. It Is very true, that it is hard case that any Man should be
wrongfully Arraigned, yet on the other side, we have no reason to believe, that
Mr. L'Estranges Merits were ever so advantageous to Human kind, as to give him
a general Pardon for all Offenses and miscarriages that should be laid to his
Charge in this World, or to oblige us to seal up our belief against all things
that can be said against him, or to enforce us to such an obstinate hatred of
all Charity for his sake, as to believe that any sober persons as to all other
things blameless in the eye of the World, would be so madly precipitate as to
damn themselves to injure Mr. L'Estrange. Besides that, such a thought would
not a little prejudice Mr. L'Estrange himself; for what could we imagine, but
highly to his disrepute, of such a behavior, that should provoke so dismal and
destructive a Revenge?

As for his Defense of the public Government, It Is the Opinion of more Doctors
then one, that he had better have let it all alone: as having done more harm
then good. He has only exasperated, exagitated and boutfeud, by accusing almost
a third part of the Protestants of the Kingdom of Plots and Contrivances,
vilifying and discountenancing the Kings Evidence and distracting the minds of
People in general; and still the Burden of his Song is, oh the Exorbitont
Liberty of the Press; as if he only wrote for his Licensers Place, and the
sweets of Domineering at Stationers' Hall. And indeed I must needs say, that I
could never find by any of Mr. L'Estranges Writings, that he has either
Learning or History enough, to interpose in any of the Contests now on Foot,
which is a work for more sober and judicious Pens then his. For weak Defenses,
such as his are, give the Adversary advantage, and are worse then none at all.

All the severity of Tiberius could not prevent the Inundations of Libels and
invectives against his Person, in an Empire much more enslaved at that time and
under the Government, by permission only, of the most obsequious and most
flattering Senate in the World. And what the Councils of Princes, nay the Pope
himself under his very Nose, in Rome, with his Inquisition cannot obviate, does
Mr. L'Estrange think to prevent with his Scribbling? Let him leave that to the
Govern-and Graver Writers, and whistle in his Whelps, his Citts and his
Bumkins, his Zekiels and his Ephraims which I dare be bold to say, will never
make him Immortal; fitter behalf to have the same Sentence passed upon them,
that Dr. Mayern passed upon the Queens Cowcumbers, or which the Barber and the
Curate gave upon Don Quixot's Library, which was to be thrown out at Window, to
illuminate the World more in a Bonefire, then by their Literature.

Thus Mr. L'Estrange, I have done. I have only said this, to tell you, that
your Answers to the Affidavits against you are frivolous and impertinent, and
that you must bring better proofs of your Innocence, or else you will never be
believed among Rational Men, and so farewell, and Write till Doomsday for me.

FINIS.

