A WARNING for all People.
ALl People Repent and turn to the Lord from the evil of your doings, for the
day of the Lord is at hand wherein the Lord will judge the world, and give to
every one according to their deeds, whether they be good or Jude (...) 1. 5
evil, yea he is coming with ten thousand of his Angels to be avenged of the
heathen, and them that know him not; now all that lives in sin and filthiness
it appears you know him not, for if you did, you durst not live in your Lusts,
heaping up wrath against the day of wrath, wherein the Lord will appear as a
consuming fire against all ungodliness, Romans 1. 18.

God is against you dissembling Professors, who adorn the outside, serve God in
notions, words and outside forms, but the heart is not upright with God, you
are in the earth, in your covetousness which is Idolatry, and the Lord abhors
the outside worship, when the heart is not answerable, and calls such whited
walls, and painted sepulchers, hypocrites, serpents, generation of vipers, and
the woe is to such, how can you escape the damnation of hell? Mat. 23.

God is against you proud lustful ones, who makes it your greatest care to deck
your selves in proud attire, inventing new ways and fashions to make your
selves glorious in the sight of men, that they may worship you and honor you,
but consider not that you are but dust, and God will lay your honor in the
dust, for he is Risen to whom all worship and honor is due, and he will bring
down your haughtiness and your pride, and Ezekiel 3(...) 16,
will exalt the humble and meek, and will seek that which was lost, but will
destroy the fat with judgment.

Repent ye lofty ones and turn to the Lord, and humble your selves before him,
that you may be hid in the day of his fierce wrath, least he take you away and
there be none to deliver, for the day of the Lord will burn as an oven, and
they that are proud and they that do wickedly will be as stubble, and it will
leave them neither root nor branch, Mal. 4. 1.

God is against you, drunkards, who make it your trade to pour in strong drink,
abusing the creature which God has given to be used moderately, for the health
and not for the Lust, therein you show your selves worse then beasts, you
should be reasonable Creatures, but your horses may teach you, who will not
drink but when they are dry, nor more then satisfies their thirst; woe unto
(...). 5. 22. (...). 5. 11.
you that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink;
woe unto you that rise up early that you may follow strong drink, and continue
until night till you be enflamed, the woe is upon you that puts the cup to your
neighbors mouth to make him drink, that his nakedness may appear, and
shameful spewing cover him, and this is your glory, which is your shame, and
you tell it to others, you show your selves to be of the generation of Ham, the
Father (...)n. 2. 23. (...).
of Canaan, who was accursed for such practices, and the curse is upon you
while you live here; Therefore Repent and live no longer in these abominations
and filthiness, your healths are abomination unto the Lord, you are ignorant
of his saving health, the wants of the poor cries out against your wilful
practices which is your condemnation.

God is against you swearers, who makes it your practice to take the Name of
God in vain, and lives in open breach of Gods commandments, who are not ashamed
to profane the Name of God in open streets and houses where you come, yea
because of Jer. 23. (...)0.
this the Land mourns; Repent, repent, the Curse is toward you profane ones,
you that regards not the Commands of Christ, who says swear not at all, but
let your yea be yea, and your nay be nay, for whatsoever is more comes of
evil, how will you stand Mat. 5. 34. (...) 37.
before him at the day of judgment whom you now so openly contemn; Oh Repent
betime, the day is at hand when it will be too late, wherein you will wish you
had never been born.

God is against you Liars, who makes a trade and gain of Lying and dissembling
for earthly profit to make your selves rich, and to cover over your deceit with
Lying and dissembling, and Jer. 5. 26, (...)7.
so your houses are full of deceit, and you sell your birthright for a mess
of pottage, as Esau did who was hated of God, and here you live in the fall,
Cursed from God in the first nature, in Lying, and cheating and dissembling,
striving to ensnare and oppress one another in bargaining by your lying and
dissembling, but the Invisible God who knows the secrets of your hearts, whom
you think not of is coming to reward every one of you according to his deeds,
every one shall be judged out of his Rev. 2. 1(...) Romans 2. (...)
own mouth, and God found a just God; Therefore Repent while it is called to
day, and to the Light of God in your Consciences turn your minds, by it to be
guided, and it will lead your hearts out of the earth and earthly things, from
coveting the earth, and will lead you to deal justly and honestly in
singleness of heart to speak the Truth one to another, and to let your yea be
yea, and your nay, nay, and to do as ye would be done by, and this is honest
and godly, according to the Light of God in every man's Conscience; now prize
your time while you have 1 These. 5. (...) J^h. 3. 19. 20. Pro. 21. 8.
it, for the day of the Lord is as a thief in the night to all the children of
darkness, to the Light of God in your Consciences I speak, which if you love
it will be your Teacher, but your condemnation it is if you act contrary to it;
for he that loves and makes a l ye is for the Lake that burns.

God is against you scorners who takes delight in scorning your brethren, you
show your folly to all men, you that sits in the seat of the scornful, you that
raises false reports against the simple, and tells them to make your selves and
your companions Luke 6. 2(...) Isa. ^8. 2(...) Pro. 1. 22.
to laugh, your laughter shall be turned into mourning, yea woe to them that
laugh now, for they shall mourn, ye forget your selves what you are, take heed,
be not mockers, least your bands be made strong, and when you cry there be none
to deliver; Repent, how long will ye scorners take delight in scorning, and
fools hate knowledge? Cease from sports and pastime ye wanton ones, making your
selves merry in your sin, your Idle talking and foolish jesting, your unclean
filthy words are abomination to the Lord; and every idle word must be accounted
for, your revelling, and Rioting, Carding and dicing, and all your invented
sports, 1 Cor. (...)
sitting down to eat and drink, and rising up to play, which Col. 3. 6. Pro. 16.
is Idolatry, and the wrath of God is against such practices, for man was not
made to fulfill his own lusts, but to serve the living God, who made all things
for himself, and the wicked for the day of judgment; Repent and take heed,
and search the Scriptures, Gal. 5. 2(...) Romans 8. Hab. 1. 1(...)
and see if the Saints used any such practices, or spent their time after that
manner, but had the flesh crucified with the affections and lusts thereof, for
he who lives after the flesh, cannot please God, for God is of purer eyes then
to behold iniquity, and nothing that defiles must enter into his Kingdom, Rev.
21. 27.

God is against you blind guides, you Priests of England, who are the Teachers
and leaders of this People, who live in this filthiness and ungodly practices,
without the fear of God, going on the way of the Heathen who know not God, and
yet you profess your selves the Ministers of Christ, and works no better
reformation in them, yet are maintained by them, and are their leaders and
examples in all this filthiness, flattering of them, and leading them in
blindness, crying peace to them, because they put into your mouths, and so
daubs them up with untempered mortar, telling them they are Christians, and of
the flock (...)h. 3. 5. Ezekiel. 22. (...). (...) Pet. 2. 3.
of Christ, and so through covetousness, with fained words makes merchandise of
them; but your judgment of a longtime lingereth not, nor your damnation
slumbereth not; all you blind guides who lead the People in blindness, in their
sins and corruptions, every one their hearts adulterated from God, committing
fornication with other lovers, and this you see and does not regard, but seeks
for the fleece, and feeds with the fat, and clothes with the wool, and maks a
prey on the sheep, and Ezekiel. 34. Jer. 23. 32 Jer. 6, 15.
causes them to err by your lies and lightness, and calls your selves the
Ministers of Christ, and are not ashamed, neither do you blush, Therefore you
shall fall amongst them that fall in the day that I visit you says the Lord.

James Parnell.

THE END.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the sign of the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate, 1660.


