THE PARLIAMENT MENDED, OR ENDED; OR, A Philter and halter for the two Houses.

PRESCRIBED By their Doctor Mercurius Elenticus.

The Doctors Profession.
Here Is a Drink, so Sovereign,
'Twill helps us to a King again:
Here Is a Cordial of such force,
It roots the Army, Foot and Horse.
And here is a Caudell, out of pity
For the famed Cuckolds of the City.
Here Is a Vomit, I pr^ferre
To the bloody crew at Westminster:
Take it, since J so freely give ye,
'Twill make you once more fill your Privy:
You are not squeamish I suppose
When I remember Atkins hose:
Be not angry at my tricks,
You know we are all Empericks.
WESTMINSTER, Printed at the sign of the Traitors head, and are to be sold
right over against the House of Commons. 1648.

THE PARLIAMENT MENDED, or Ended, etc.
Naught can let out your rancour-vile, but steel and Cupping glasses
Ye most degener^ted crew, made up of Knaves and Asses:
The Sword which you have tempered, to destroy
Our King and Church, will prove your own anoy:
And it is but Justice of high heaven,
You to your Foes, a prey are given:
You were our Fate,
But must not be our State.
Where the Word of a King is, there is Power, and, who shall say, What do
thou.
Now struggle Trayters, it is in vain, to hope to sway yet longer,
The Devil is ti'de up. GOD, will be stronger:
Your ruin, is inevitable yet
You dare not your own fear's before you set,
Then fall together; If you live we dye,
If you our States, then farewell Monarchy.
Yet seven Weeks, and we
Shall your Destruction see.
Where the Word of a King is, there is Power, and, who shall say, What do
thou.

HAving been a Practitioner in the Art of Physic these many years in the Lo^
Countri^s, where I have approved my skill, for the curing of Apoplexies,
Feav^rs, Aches, V^rdigo's, Gangrenas, Spleenitick people and Madness, with
very good approbation, and fortunate success, I resolved no longer to hide my
self from my native Country, but to return into England, that so my own
people might be the better for me the residue of my years; but now being
arived I cannot but stand amazed, and as if I had beheld another Gorgonhead me
thinks I am converted into stone, for the face of things here are so changed,
since the time I set forward for my travail, that me thinks, it is no more
like the Garden of the world (once worthily called so) then the Thessalian hills
are compared with Temp^; sure some Circe has taken up her abode here, and
practices her metamorphosing Charms, for I encounter with none but beasts,
men (I suppose when I left them) and now I cannot but curse my self that ever
I passed the Seas hither where I am like to starve for want of practice, since
the minds of the men of this Climate have need of cure and not their bodies,
Paracelsus, Dioscorides, Galen, yea or the Inventer of Physic Aesculapius,
might sit here and practice upon themselves; but since it is my ill hap to be
here now, and that I cannot evade it, I have be thought my self of a way, at
least to vanquish hunger, I perceive the vulgar, are generally Infected, and
desperately overrun with a Disease called Parliament,
dissease never heard of til the year 1641; and therefore I shall make semblance
to have skill both in the original of the cause and the taking away the
effects, Jack pudding.

Pudding. Here Sr, O master would I were amongst the butterboxes, again, the
fair haired Flemings, here you are like to get nothing by your skill, nor by
any tricks.


Dr. Never fear Jack I shall get wealth, and fame to boot and for that purpose
I will have a stage erected by Cha^ing Cross, on which I will divulge my skill
unto al passers by, get thou the copies of these bills speedily printed, that
performed, clap them up in every corner of the City, and in the most open
places of the suburbs, the first medecin I undertake to heal with, is called.

A Sovereign drink, which whosoever shall taste but six spoonefuls of it,
brings into a Loyal temper, and discovers unto him the goodness and
excellencies of his King.


The Receipt.
Let him take three Spoonefuls of the excellent juice, extracted from the
famous herb, so much lauded in scripture called Loyalty, with a good
quantity of the root of the herb Grace, and thereto an handful of obedience,
as much Christian pity, and true Faith, with a dose of humility; mix all
these together and boil them over the soft fire of Zeal according to
Knowledge, in an equivolent Number of tears taken from the clear fountain of
a repentant heart, and let all boil till they be coagulated and then take,
and keep.

A purge peculiarly to be administered to the members of the Iunto, and
prescribed only for them and their use.
For that the Junto, have this seven years confined, themselves to one place,
and have not taken their progress into the country thereby to refresh their
ever working and troubled spirits, with the odoriferous, and sweet smelling
air and withal have been so unprofident and careless of their own health, as
to suffer a large and noisome Privy to have it evacuation, nearly under their
nostrills: I have therefore being very Zealous of their preservation, and how
corrupt their bodies are even almost as foul as their Souls, have devised
them this through Purgation, which I am certain if timely taken, will be for
their exceeding profit.

The Receipt.
Let them take twelve ounces of Loyalty, a Vegitable to be found in each
corner of the pleasant Garden, called the word of God, with a good quantity of
Order and Discipline, with as much of Law and justice; a pound of Penitence,
with Competency, of the ancient Religious practices; mix all these together,
with a hand not spotted with Rebellion, murders, oppressions, cruelties, and
Impieties, and boil them in a Caldron filled with their own tears of
Contrition, and then it being gathered to a jelly, box it up, and preserve it
for your use; this receipt will without fail, restore you to your first and
pristine Purity; and you may yet be called a Parliament.

Another receipt in case the other fail.
Take each of you a good hempen halter strongly and surely twisted (and each of
you after you have well dined ( For it is not good to goo to hell with an
empty stomach) adorn each of your thick necks with the aforesaid Bracelets,
that done you that have a mind to step into Charons boat unseene, and have
studies replenished with books only for fashion sake, enter into them, and
there casting up your eyes search out the most conveniently exalted beam, to
which by the aid of a joint stool^, fasten your hempen jnstrument, and having
performed these necessary ceremonies without praying to God, who abhorres you,
or calling on the Devil, who longs to embrace you, put your selves to the
mercy of the throtle, and without fail it will prove your perfect cure,
Probatum est.

Another.
But if it shall so happen (as in all probability it may) that you shall be
out of conceit with such a speedy cure, alleging that because your charity
forbids you to take the Executioners trad e from him, who has these many years
so we I thriven under you, take another more-Gentleman like prescription.

Take each of you an ounce of white Mercury, as much Aqua fortis, half an
ounce of Stibium, boil all these together in an Asses hoof (for it is as
speedy and dangerous as ever was the Centaurs blood, the terror of the great
Alcides) till it shall be commixt into one jelly, then each of you share as
much of it as will cover a sixpence, and mingle it with your usual beveridge,
and take the opinion of the Horse Doctor it will cousen you of your leaprous
souls and in as small a time as you may be voting no further addresses to the
King, that a Declaration be drawn up against him, taxing him for murdering
his Father, or while you may vote a whole County out of their lives and
Estates, but if this fail or that you are yet resolved to hold up your house,
till your fingers are chopped of, hearken to your Doom.

The Doctors Doom, upon the Rebellious Iunt^.
Fatal Juno, is near unto you
The stars conspire, for to undo^ you:
Grim Saturn laughs, the other six
Have set a period to your tricks.
Mercury waits with his rod
To waft you to the Stygian God:
Jove whose great Acts, the Poets sing,
Has past his Vote, to have a King.
Tritonia waits to see you drop
Er' she ascend to Latin^s ^op.
Only the Cyprian Queen is sad
And is in sable vestments clad,
All sorrowful, for why by you
Whores thrived and Cockoldry was due.
Mars, is Armed cap-a-pe,
For to bring in your destiny.
Appollo gyrt with bea^^s about,
Has sent the fell Erinnis out.
The IUNTOS, Distraction.
See how their colors come and go^
Behold their tossing to and fro,
Their smotherd sighs* and large complaints,
Their Beastly Rage, and shameles^e (...)
How pale they look, and how forlorn
Their bodies, into shadows worn;
Their trepidations, and their tears,
To these add their infernal fears.
Ye The spain sisters, now rejoice
And lift up your exalted voice,
Clio, do thou in History
For aye, write down their infamy.
In such an high and haughty tone
All may abhor Rebellion.
Thus have I prescribed, two never failing Purgations; very meet to be used by
our Honorable Iunto, and which I am certain will endubitably, cure them of
their fears, and the kingdom of their Ague fits, and now because the whole
Nation are desperately sick of this cruel killing dissease* called Parliament,
I shall out of mere pity and compassion to my languishing Countrymen,
prescribe them this medicine then which none can afford them speedy and safe
cure.

The Receipt.
With speed draw your selves into one body of defense of your Rellgion, your
King, and your Laws, conjure all your fellow Commoners to rise as one man,
which done, and you in warlike equipage, let Surrey men be your president, and
Declare that you are lost, if there be not an OLD KING and a NEW PARLIAMENT;
draw up a Declaration, which may inform the world how your King has been
dethroned and Imprisoned, your Church Demolished and devasted, your Parson
Murdered and your Estates Sequestered* your Laws perverted, and vacated, by
these who at the first pretended to be Reformers, and Patriots, then
reinthrone your King stand by him till he call a Parliament, of knowing (but
unbiassed men) See the Fathers, I mean the Reverend Bishops of the Church
replaced in their former Sees and lay not down your swords till this late
cursed Rebellion, has been punished, and all things to their first purity
restored.

This is your cure, and only this,
Can bring you to your former bliss:
This if you neglect to do:
All good forever bid adu^:
Your baseness, over the world will Ring;
Without a God, without a King:

FINIS.

