The Parliaments Accounts cast up: for the satisfaction of all that desire to
be resolved therein.
SO much to him the Watermen
To drive away the King,
That they might sit and Lord it then,
And have men's plate brought in.
Is the account of the Parliament,
And the Parliaments account.
So much to Pryn, for to belie
The late Prelate of Canterbury,
So much for Hollis toward his wedding,
So much to Hotham toward his heading.
Is the account etc.
So much to those that caused dirisions,
And gathered hands, or forged them rarely,
So much to those devour precisians
That made the hubbub once at Farly.
Is the account etc.
So much to any man hates his Brother,
And will betray his Father and Mother,
So much to rejoice at the death of sinners,
City feasts, and thanksgiving dinners,
Is the account etc.
So much to Rowse for his new translation
Of David's Psalms in grievous rhyme,
So much for possets for edification,
So much for Peter's that buffe-coat Divine.
Is the account etc.
So much given about to toss
The stones of Cheapeside and Charing cross,
So much given for cunning spies,
So much given for jealousies,
Is the account etc.
So much to raise a tomb fot Pym,
So much for his Excellencies funeral,
That he died soon was not ill for him,
His arreares were paid at his burial.
Is the account etc.
So much to the Synod for conjobling,
And for full four years spent in squobling,
So much to the Scots for selling the King,
So much to Marshall sedition to sing,
Is the account etc.
So much to Clotworthy and Maynard,
So much to Poyniz and venerable Pryn,
So much to Glyn, the City Raynard
To maintain them abroad, till they come agin
Is the account etc.
So much to the Apprentices for their bravedoes,
So much for Massy and his Reformadoes,
So much sent after Dr. Sibalds now gone,
So much to cheer up poor Presbyter John,
Is the account etc.
So much to those that made a sure promise
To fight against the Army led by Sir Thomas,
So much for any will show them which way
They now may get safely beyond the sea,
Is the account etc.
So much for agitors in France,
Rebellion and Treason to advance,
So much to make the Dane untrue,
So much to the Devil, he must have his due,
Is the account etc.
So much to B^field for his fine story,
Correcting, augmenting the Directory,
So much to Burges and Calamy
To move further troubles extempore,
Is the account etc.
So much for Wenches got with Child
By Members when their blood grew to action,
So much for Citizens Wives defiled
By Commitee men of a sanguine complexion.
Is the account of the Parliament,
And the Parliaments account.
These things the Author never meant
Should be divulged to everyeare,
And now will wait till the Parliament
Will make their accounts, which woo'nt be this year.
FINIS.

