Christ Exalted INTO HIS THRONE, And the Scripture owned in its place.
THis then is the message that we have received of the Father, that God is
light, and in him is no darkness at all, if we walk in darkness and say we
have fellowship with him, we lie and do not the truth, but if we walk in the
light, as he is in the light, then have we fellowship one with another, and the
blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1. 5, 6, 7.
And this is the word which was in the beginning, by which all things was made,
and in him was life, and his life was the light of men, John 1. 1, 2, 3, 4. By
which light all the holy men of God in the days of old were inspired; By which
light Moses saw the things that were done in the beginning, and wrote of them;
Which word was a lamp unto David's feet and a light unto his paths, Psalm. 119.
105. Which light dwelt in the Prophets and holy men, by which they saw the day
of Christ, and wrote of him, Isa. 49. 6. and 60. 19. and spoke as they were
moved by it, and by it saw the deceit, iniquities, and transgressions of
Israel, and declared against it both in Priest people and Rulers, speaking the
word of the Lord faithfully, whether they would hear or forbear, Ezekiel ^. Micha
3. Isa. 56. And this word came unto the Prophets which was as a fire and a
hammer in their bones, Jer. 20. 9. and ^3. 29. Which word in due time became
flesh and dwelt among the Apostles, and they saw the glory thereof as of the
only begotten Son of the Father ful^ of grace and truth, John 1. 14. whom John
bears witness of to be the light of the world, who does enlighten every-one
that comes into the world, John 1. To which light Paul was sent to turn the
minds of the Heathen, Acts 26. 17, 18. Which light is the condemnation of the
world, who love darkness rather then light because their deeds are evil, and
he that hates it has it, though he will not bring (...) deeds to it, by it to
be proved, therefore his condemnation it is. John ^. 19. 20. 21. And there is a
time light shines in darkness and darkness comprehends it not, John 1. 5. And
this is the cause why many (...) it and are offended in it.

And the there is a time light shines out of darkness and darkness flees away,
and (...) witnessed the perfect day wherein the children of the day do (...)
42. 16. Mat. 4. 16. Ephesians. 5. 8. Which light is the true t^ye^ of (...), and
gives the discerning of spirits, and discovers the works of darkness, and
manifests the deeds of darkness, and by it the secrets of the heart are seen
and hidden things searched out, and by it all things are made manifest, and
whatsoever makes manifest is light, Heb. 4. 12. Ephesians. 5. 13. All which the
natural man knows not, and therefore cannot receive the things of God, but by
this light is seen and judged, for by this light the spiritual man is able to
discern and judge the natural man, but he himself is judged of no man, 1
Cor. 2. 14, 15. For this is the judge of the world, and by this the Prince of
the air is judged wheresoever he rules, John 16. 11. And therefore at it
rages, and stirs up his servants to persecnte it, where it is made manifest,
and so it is a stumbling stone and a rock of offense to the children of the
world in whom the Prince of this world lodges, Romans 9. 33, And of this word
the Apostle Paul bears witness to be quick and powerful and sharper then a
two edged sword to the dividing asunder betwixt the marrow and the bones, Heb.
4. 12. to which word the Apostle directed the minds of people within them from
looking without for to find it without, Romans 10. And from this same word the
Apostles spoke forth the Scripture, which word was their guide, and rule, and
teacher all along from the beginning, by which both the Apostles, and Prophets,
and the holy men was acted moved and carried forth in the power of it to
declare that which by it they were taught, 1 John 1. 2. Pet. 1. 21. And this is
the free grace of God which brings salvation and has appeared to all men,
Tit. 2. 11, 12. Which is their condemnation who do despite unto it, Heb. 10.
29. But this was the Saints teacher, by which they were taught to deny all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live godlily, righteously, and soberly
in this present evil world, and this is the anointing, which teaches all
things freely, which is truth and no lie, and leads into all truth, and he that
knows this need no man to teach him, but is come the end of man's teachitg, 1
John 2. 27. Unto which the Prophet was come, and therefore called freely, Come
buy wine and milk without money or price, why spend you your money for that
which is not bread, or your labor for that which profits not? Isa. 55. 1, 2,
3. And from this the Apostles spoke freely, not coveting any man's silver or
gold, but as they freely had received freely they gave, Acts 20. 33. And
whosoever speaks from this speaks freely, and its ministry leads to the end of
teaching, and here let all flesh keep silence before the Lord, Zech. 2. 13.

And let all Hirelings, and greedy Shepherds, stop their mouths who cry peace
peace to them that put into their mouths, but if not, they even prepare war
against them, and such like the Prophet in the light saw, and by it testified
against them, Mich. 3. 5. And all this the Scripture bears testimony of, which
was spoken from the light, but is not the light, nor the word, nor the life,
nor the Judge, nor the Rule, nor the guide nor the tryer of spirits, for all
this belongs to Christ, who is the discerner of the thoughts and intents of the
heart, Heb. 4. 1, 2. who is the light, John 8. 12. who is the word, John 1. 14.
who is the life, John 14 6. who blamed the Pharisees that thought in the
Scriptures to find eternal life, but would not come unto him that they might
have life, John 5. 39, 40. who is the anointing, who is the guide and teacher,
and the Rule, 1 John 2. 27. who when we are going to the right hand or to the
left, cries, this is the way walk in it, Isa 30. 21. Of which the Scripture is
a true Declaration spoken from this word of truth, of which light every one
has a measure, which unto them is the free gift of God to profit withal,
which light in the conscience reproves for sin and iniquity, and manifests the
deceit of the heart, and checks the creature when it swears, or lies, or does
amiss, telling it that it should not do so, and calls for repentance and
amendment of life, and leads unto the same as it is owned and followed, and as
many as receives it receives power to become the Sons of God, John 8. 12. and
1. 12. Romans 2. 4. But he that does evil hates the light and will not bring his
deeds to it by it to be proved and to him it is condemnation, but he that loves
the light brings his deeds to the light, that it may manifest them whether they
be wrought in God, John 3. 20, 21. But of this light you people and Teachers of
the world are ignorant, and so are doting upon the Scripture without with your
dark minds, therewith the blind Pharisees seeking for life where it is not to
be found, but will not come to Christ the light that you might have life, but
would cast him out of his throne, and exalts Scripture above him, calling
them the judge and the light, and the word, and the life, and the rule, and the
guide, and thus with your dark minds you would take the Authority from Christ,
and would give it unto the dead letter, which is but a declaration of these
things; And thus your leaders cause you to err, Isa. 3. 12. for their own
ends, because of the Scripture they make an Idol to get money by adding their
own meanings, interpretations, and constructions upon them, which is all the
conceivings and imaginations of their own hearts, by which they lead you in
blindness, ever learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth
in your hearts, but are looking without, doting without in the letter, acting
and imitating out of the light for life, and so in darkness doing your own
works, which 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7. Isa. 1. 12. Mat. 15. 9. John 4. 22.
are not required at your hands, but are for condemnation by the light, and so
in vain are you worshipping a God whom ye know not, crying up his Ordinances,
and crying up his Commands, and crying up the Scripture, exalting it in the
place of Christ, and thus coming near him with your lips and your hearts far
from him, still living in the corrupt sinful nature, ignorant of the free
grace of God which should lead you to repentance and amendment of life, Ephesians.
2. 5: 8. And because we do witness this mystery, which has been hid from
ages and generations, now made manifest in us, which is Christ within the hope
of glory, Col. 1. 26, 27. who is the light of the world, who does enlighten
every one that comes into the world, who is the true Shepherd, John 10. and
the true teacher no more to be removed into a corner, Isa. 30. 20. 1 John 2. 27.
who is the anointing, who teaches all things and is the end of man's teaching;
therefore your ministry of the letter, who make a trade and a gain of the
letter, by idolizing it, and setting it up in the room of Christ, by taking
the Authority from Christ and applying it to the letter, that your minds, who
are taught by them, may the more be drawn without to look at it and Idolize it,
expecting life and salvation by it, and no hope without it, that they may the
longer make merchandise of you, and still uphold their trade, and gain by it,
do now see that this our doctrine of Christ to be all in all, and that without
him we can do nothing, John 15. 5. but that by him we can do all things
without the help of Scripture or any thing else without, Phil. 4. 13. and that
there is no other name under heaven by which we can be saved, but that he is
able to save to the utmost all that shall come unto God by him, Heb. 7. 25. And
that he is the word, and the Scripture is not, and that he is the light, and
the Scripture is not, and that he is the rule and guide, and teacher and judge,
and the Scripture is not, but a declaration of him to be so, and that the
Scripture all along witnesses with our Doctrine to be one with it, and theirs
to be another Doctrine, which the Scripture will not maintain, but the
Scripture is against, and is only brought in for lucres sake to satisfy their
own carnal ends, that they may bear rule by their means, as the false Prophets
did before them, Jer. 5. 30, 31.

And this light all along makes them manifest in all their colors and false
covers, so that they cannot hide themselves from being Deceivers and also this
they do know, that if every one come to know and find a teacher within them,
which does teach them the will of God, and does enable them for to obey it, so
that they need no man to teach them, then indeed they will no longer spend
their monyes upon them for that which is not bread, nor their labor for that
which profits not, and will be a prey unto them no longer; so not only their
craft and trade, and Idol, will fail them, but also their great gain and
riches will be taken from them, and all their honor and same and dignity will
come to naught; therefore they in their hot rage, and fierceness, t and enmity
of their spirits, do set themselves to oppose this ligis wheresoever it is
made manifest, and persecuting the publishers of this Doctrine, railing against
them as deceivers, and seducers, and bringers in of false lights, and such as
deny the Scripture, and would rob it of it Authority and give it to a light
within them (which the Priests call a natural light) and insufficient to lead
to salvation without the help of Scripture and other outward helps, and so
would set the Scripture above the light of Christ, saying among themselves, if
we let go the Authority of Scripture then all is gone, (that is to say) take
away our Idol, then take away our maintenance, then down with out Ministry: So
here is clear the foundation they stand upon, and this is the cause why they
call the Scripture their foundation, and so all this Authority which they put
upon the Scripture they take from Christ, who alone is the foundation of the
faithful, of whom the Scripture is a declaration, and so we do own it by the
same which gave it forth, which unto us does open it and reveal it, and
manifests them to be out of the life of it, and so by the life thereof are
judged and condemned, as before is proved; And though they call it the word,
yet in the same it does witness against them, and witness Christ to be the
word before the Scripture was written, John 1. And though they call the
Scripture the light, yet in the same it does witness against them, and
witnesses Christ to be the light before the Scripture was written, and is able
to save to the uttermost all that shall come unto God by him, and they that
climb up any other way the same are thieves and robbers, John 10. 1. And
therefore is not a natural insufficient light, as they that know him not do
report of him, and therefore show themselves to be as ignorant as the Pharisees,
who only supposed him to be the Son of Joseph, yet wondered at his power, and
the works that were done by Mat. ^ 55, 56.
him, as these do now wonder at the prosperity of this ministration of light,
and to see how it prevails upon the hearts of the people, so that they know
not what to think of it, they are not able to encounter with it, but that they
see it strikes so much at their Diana, and lies so hard at their foundation, so
that it makes their building totter, therefore the Rulers Priests and Pharisees
takes counsel together, saying one to* another, if we let this people alone,
all men will go after them, and they will draw away whole Nations; therefore
they take the same course as ever the false Prophets did, joining together with
the earthly powers to make war with the Lamb, persecuting, stocking, whipping,
imprisoning and shamefully entreating his messengers, whom the Lamb sends forth
to bear testimony of this light in peoples consciences (where we have a
witness both in them that believe and in them that perish) and also striving
all the ways they can, by their evil incensing, lying, raylings, and false
accusings and reporting to defame this light, and leaven your minds against it
(that if it were possible) to put it out, that still they might uphold their
fathers kingdom of darkness, and bear rule by their means over the blind,
carrying captive the minds of people, but who is able to make war with the
Lamb, or who shall withstand the day of his coming? Saul, Saul, it is hard for
thee to kick against the pricks; And though they call the Scripture their Rule
and guide, yet in this it witnesses against them, to be in Caines way, and
Balaams way, and in the gain saying of Core, and so have not God, Jude 11. 2
John 9. but are found to be the generation who are borne after the flesh,
persecuting them that are borne after the Spirit, Gal. 4. 29. And though they
call the Scripture their Rule and guide, yet they receive not power from it to
enable them to walk according to it, but are altogether erring from it, in any
thing that crosses self, but as many as receive the light receives power to
follow it, and come out of the corrupt sinful nature, which they live in who
know not the light, John 1. 12. And here the light is above the Scripture; and
though they say the Scripture is the Judge and tryer of spirits, yet in the
same it witnesses against them to be liars, and bears witness of Christ to be
the Judge and tryer and searcher of the heart and discerner of the thoughts,
Heb. 4. 12. Romans 1. 16. 1 Pet. 4. 5. and that whatsoever makes manifestation is
light, Ephesians. 5. 13. therefore that which makes manifest false spirits is the
light, and not the letter, which light manifested and discovered false spirits
before the Scripture was written; and also though they say the Scripture is the
Judge and tryer of spirits, yet by the Scripture they cannot discern or Judge
of spirits, else what makes all this difference in judgment amongst them who
profess to try spirits by the Scripture, and profess it to be their Rule, and
ground their judgments upon it; yet are so confused in the same, and never a
one knows which is the truth, when as the way is but one; so that it follows
that they have nothing but the Scripture without, are still without in
darkness and confusion, as all those appears to be who call the Scripture
their Rule, and guide, and Judge, and tryer of spirits, and yet knows not the
truth, but are jangling and wrangling, and arguing, and disputing, and
contending about the Scripture, every one with a several judgment upon it,
surely this distraction is not in the Scripture, for it was spoken from one and
all agrees in one; therefore you that so profess the Scripture, see if you can
find it out by the Scripture, and see where you are, but they that are in the
light have fellowship one with another, 1 John, 1. 7. and are of one heart and
one soul, Acts 4. 32. and all agree in one, and are Epistles wrote one in
another heart, 2 Cor. 3. 2. and by the light they try and discern false
spirits, and in it are able to judge them, and open the Scriptures without
wresting adding or diminishing, and by it do know they are of God, because
they love one another with the same love with which Christ loved them, 1 John
4. it is not such love which is to day and tomorrow cross the will and it is
turned into wrath and anger, nay that love stands in the corrupt will, but this
love stands in the bond of peace which does endure; and here again the light
is above the Scripture, and though they say the light must be received from the
Scripture, yet in this the Scripture does witness against them, and bears
witness of Christ to be the light of the world, and does enlighten every one
that comes into the world; and they that could never read letter of the book
have this light, which is sufficient to teach them and lead them into all truth
after they come to the knowledge of it, and from this light the Scripture was
spoken, 2 Pet. 1. 21. and without this light none can read the Scripture with
understanding, and here the light is before the Scripture, and out of it all
the children of darkness are shut with their busy minds and vain contending
spirits; and though they say they must receive life and salvation from the
Scripture, yet in this the Scripture witnesses against them, and testifies of
Christ to be the alone fountain of life and salvation, and that there is no
other name under heaven by which we can be saved, Psalm. 30. 9 and 144. 10. And
that the Pharsees had the Scripture yet had not the light neither could see
that he was the Christ though the Scripture bare testimony of him, or either
would come unto him for life and salvation, but trusted in the scripture
thinking there to find eternal life and therein found it not. Ioh. 5. 39, 40.
As all you are now who are seeking the living among the dead, and here again
the light is above the Scripture, which light is within us the hope of glory.
Coll 1. 26, 27 and those that cannot witness this are in the reprobation,
though they* have the Scripture without, 1 Cor. 13. 5. and from it we receive
life and salvation, and from no other, and this alone is our guide, teacher,
Judge, and Law giver, if we never see letter, Luke 1. 79. John 6. 45. Isa. 33.
and this alone is the ground and foundation of our faith and hope, by which we
are made able to to cry Abba Father, 1 Cor. 3. 11. Romans 8. 15. And here it is
not self that judges or condemns, but Christ that lives in us, Gal. ^. 20.
and it is not self that justifies us, but Christ that lives in us; and here
Christ is exalted into his throne, and the Scripture owned in its place,
without contempt or undervaluing. And they found the Ministers of Antichrist,
who would cast Christ out of his throne, and take the Scripture out of its
place to exalt above him, applying to it that Authority which alone belongs
unto him for their own by secret self ends, so that in that they apply such
Authority to the Scripture, they in the same rob Christ of it, and undervalues
him, as the Pharisees did, who thought in the Scriptures to find eternal life,
but would not come to Christ that they might have life, in whose steps ye and
your teachers are now found professing Christ in words, but in life denying
him, and therefore must be judged and condemned by him, as they was. And if you
Priests do allege there is a false light, as well as a true light, I Answer,
that is it in you which blinds your minds so that you cannot receive this
Gospel, but from you it is hid, 2 Cor. 4. 3. 4. And therefore you bring another
Gospel, calling the four Books Matthew Mark Luke and John, the Gospel: in
which these four Books will witness against you, and bear witness of Christ
to be the Gospel which is the power of God unto salvation: who is the Lamb of
God slain from the foundation of the world who came to take away the sins of
the world; and blessed are they thar are not offended in him, John 1. 26. and
verse 13. Luke 7. 23 and also that is a false light in you which leads you into
the form or resemblance or outward show of holiness but denies the life and
power, 2 Timo. 3. 5. and to profess the Scripture no be your Rule but in life
and practice deny it, and to be short leads into a profession without
possession but that which leads into the life and power is no false light for
it leads into the possession before the profession, and so the profession is
from the possession, but your profession is from another possession, and so
boasts in another line by which you beguile both your selves and others; and
therefore in that you go about to arm your selves with the Scripture, to
oppose the light by exalting it above the light, thinking thereby to debase the
light and so to keep peoples minds from the light that they may still remain
in darkness and blindness under you. You do but in the same bring a weapon to
cut off your own heads, and raise a war to destroy your selves, and increase
more light to the people and manifest your selves odious, and to be the blind
guides of the Nation; who are to be denied and turned away from us, deceivers
to be held as accursed who 2 John 9. 10.
bring another Doctrine in opposition to the true Doctrine which is held forth
in the Scripture, for the Scripture and the light agrees in one, from both
which you are shut with jangling contentious spirits by which you would wrest
the Scripture out of its place, to clash against its Orignall; thereby to
uphold your father Antichrists Kingdom, and therein do the more manifest your
selves to be the ministers of Antichrist, who under profession of the true
Christ do oppose him and make war with him, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. but your
weapons are weak, as is daily made manifest.

James Parnell.

FINIS.

