AN ANSWER To the most material parts of Dr. HAMOND'S Book of Schism: Or a
defense of the Church OF ENGLAND, Against exceptions of the Romanists: Written
in A Letter from a Catholic Gent. to his friend in ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1654.

AN ANSWER To the most material parts of Doctor Hamonds Book of Schism, etc.
SIR,
YOu have been pleased to send me Doctor Hamonds Book of Schism, or a defense
of the Church of England, against the exceptions of the Romanists, as also your
letters, wherein you lay Commands on me to read it, and thereupon to give you
my opinion: truly Sir, both the one and the other could never have come to me
in better season, for having heard from some of my friends in England a good
while since of another book, written by one Doctor Fern to the same purpose,
as also one lately come out of the Bishop of Deries, and of this which you have
sent me, I was wondering what those who call themselves of the Church of
England could say to defend them from Schism, but now your favor in letting
me see this of Doctor Hammonds, I am freed from my bondage, and satisfied in
supposition that the most can add little to what has been upon that subject
of Schism said by him, whom you style wise and learned, and well may he be so,
but here he has failed, as all men must that take in hand to defend bad laws,
which I think to make appear to you or any indifferent Judge, and which I will
do rather upon some observations of several passages in his book then
consideration of the whole, which I will leave for some other who has more
leisure, in the mean time I must say with the Poet, speaking of some Lawyers
in his time, Fures, ^^t Pedio, Pedius quid? Crimina raris libratin Antithetis:
The Roman Catholic says to Doctor Hamond, You are an Heretic, you are a
Schismatic, and Doctor Hamond replies good English, some Criticismes, much
grief, with many citations out of antiquity indifferent to both parts of the
question: but to draw near your satisfaction: his first Chap. is for the body
of it common to both parts, Sect. 9.
yet I cannot omit one strange piece of logic at the end of it, where he
concludes, that the occasion or motive of Schism is not to be considered, but
only the fact of Schism, of which position I can see no connection to any
premises going before, and it self is a pure contradiction, for not a division
but a causeless division is a Schism and how a division can be showed to be
unreasonable, and causeless without examining the occasions, and motives, I do
not understand, nor (with his favor) as I think he himself.

Much of the second Chap. is likewise common to both, Sect. 3.
only he slightly passes over the distinction of Heresy and Schism, as if he
would not have it understood that all Heresy is Schism, though some Schism
be no Heresy, Sect. 6.
again treating of Excommunication he easily slideth over this part, that
wilful continuance in a just Excommunication makes Schism, what he calls Mr.
Knolls Concession, I take to be the public profession of the Roman, or
Catholic Church, and that nature it self teaches all rational men, that
any Congregation that can lie, and knows not whether it does lie or no, in
any proposition: cannot have power to bind any particular to believe what she
says, neither can any man of understanding have an obligation to believe what
she teaches farther then agrees with the rules of his own reason: Out of
which it follows, that the Roman Churches binding of men to a profession of
faith (which the Protestants and other Heretical multitudes have likewise
usurped) if she be infallible, is evidently gentle, charitable, right, and
necessary, as contrariwise in any other Church or Congregation, which pretends
not to infallibility, the same is unjust, tyrannical, and a selfe-condemnation
to the binders: so that the state of the question will be this, Whether the
Catholic or Roman Church, be infallible or no, for she pretends not to
bynd any man to tenets or beleefs upon any other ground or title. By this you
may perceive much of his discourse -- to be not only superfluous and
unnecessary, but contrary to himself, for he labors to persuade that the
Protestant may be certain of some truth, against which the Roman Catholic
Church binds to profession of error, which is as much to say as he who
pretends to have no infallible rule, by which to govern his Doctrine shall be
supposed to be fallible, and he that pretends to have an infallible rule
shall be supposed to be fallible: at most because fallible objections are
brought against him, now then consider what a meek and humble Son of the
Church ought to do, when of the one side is the authority of Antiquity, and
possession (such antiquity and possession without dispute or contradictions
from the adversary, as no King can show for his Crown, and much less any
other person or persons for any other thing) the persuasion of infallibility;
all the pledges that Christ has left to his Church for motives of Union: on
the other side uncertain reasons of a few men pretending to learning every day
contradicted by incomparable numbers of men wise and learned, and those few men
confessing those reasons, and themselves uncertain, fallible, and subject to
error, certainly without a bias of interest, or prejudice, it is impossible for
him to leave the Church if he be in it, or not return if he be out of it: for
if infallibility be the ground of the Churches power to command belief, as she
pretends no other, no time, no separation within memory of History, can
justify a continuance out of the Church: You may please to consider then, how
solid this Doctors discourse is, who tells us, for his great evidence that he
(says he) who do not acknowledge the Church of Rome to be infallible, may be
allowed to make certain suppositions (that follow there) The question is
whether a Protestant be a Schismatique, because a Protestant; and he will prove
he is not a Scismatique, because he goes consequently to Protestant, that is
Schismatic grounds: I pray you reflect, that not to acknowledge the Church
to be infallible is that for which we charge the Doctor with Schism, and
Haeresie in Capite, and more then for all the rest he holds distinct from us,
for this principle takes away all belief, and all ground of belief, and
turns it into uncertainty and Weathercock opinion, puts us iuto the
condition to be circumferri omni vento Doctrinae, fubmitteh us to Atheism and
all sort of miscreancie, Let him not then over leap the question, but either
prove this is not sufficient to make him a Schismatic (i) and an heritique
too, let him acknowledge he is both.

In his third Chap. what is cheefely to be noted to our purpose, is, that his
division is insufficient, for he makes Schism to be only against Monarchical
power or against fraternall charity, which is very much besides the principles
of those Protestants who pretend so much to the authority of Counsels, me
thinks he should have remembered there might be Schism against Consiliatory,
authority, whether this be called so when the Council actually sits, or in
the unanimity of belief in the dispersion of the Churches, so that the Doctor
(supposing he concluded against the Pope) has not concluded himself no
Schismatic, being separated from the Catholic world, in this Chap. he
tells us many things, some true, some not so, but all either Common to us
both, or not appertaining to the controversy, until he concludes that
certainly the Roman Patriarchie did not extend it self to all stately and this
he does out of a word in Rufinus, which he supposes to be taken in a special
propriety of Law, whereas indeed that Authors knowledge in Grammar was not such
as should necessarily exact any such belief, especially learned men saying the
contrary.

Than he tells you that the Office of Primats and Patriarchs was the same,
Sect: 22.
only authorizing that affirmation from an Epistle of Anacletus, He urges
Gratian too.
the which as soon as occasion serves, he will tell you is of no Authority,
but fictitious, then he says there was no power over the Patriarchs, his proof
is because the Emperor used his secular Authority in gathering of Councels,
concluding that because the Pope did not gather general Councels, therefore he
had no Authority over the Universal Church, which how unconsequent that is, I
leave to your judgment, but I must not forget here what I omitted to insert
before, that in his division of schism he omitteth the principal, if not
indeed, and in the use of the word by the Ancients, the only schism which is
when one breaks from the whole Church of God, for though a breach made from
the immediate superior, or a particular Church, may in some sort, and in our
ordinary manner of speaking be called a schism, yet that by which one breaks
away from the communion of the whole Church, is properly, and in a higher sense
called schism, and is that out of which the present question proceeds,
whereas other divisions, as long as both parts remain in communion with the
universal Church, are not properly schisms, but with a diminutive particle, so
that in this division he left out that part which appertained to the Question.

In the fourth Chapter he pretends to examine whether by Christ his donation
Saint Peter had a primacy over the Church, where not to reflect upon his
curious division, I cannot omit that he remembers not what matters he handles,
when he thinks the Catholic ought to prove, that his Church, or Pope has an
Universal Primacie, for it being granted that in England the Pope was in quiet
possession of such a Primacie, the proof that it was just, belongs not to us
more then to any K. who received his Kingdom from his Ancestors, a time out of
mind, to prove his pretension to the Crown just: for quiet possession of it
self is a proof, until the contrary be convinced: as who should Rebel against
such a King were a Rebel, until he showed sufficient cause for quitting
obedience; with this difference, that obedience to a King may by prescription
or bargain be made unnecessary, but if Christ has commanded obedience to his
Church, no length of years, nor change of humane affairs can ever quit us from
this duty of obedience, so that the charge of proving the Pope to have no such
Authority from Christ, lies upon the Protestants now as freshly, as the first
day of the breach, and will do so until the very last, as for his proofs which
he calls evidences, Sect: 5.
he tells us first that Saint Peter was the Apostle of the Circumcision
exclusively to the Uncircumcision, or Gentiles to prove this, he says the
Apostles distributed their great Universal Province into several (...) that is,
by his interpretation, lesser Provinces, and cites Act. 1. v. 25. where Saint
Peter with the other Apostles prays God to show which of the two proposed, he
was pleased to have promoted to the dignity of being an Apostle, this they call
(...) and this rigorous interpreter says, it signifies the special Province
Saint Matthias was to have, though the Scripture it self expresses the
contrary, saying the effect was that afterward, he was counted amongst the
Apostles, could any man not blinded with error make so wretched an
interpretation? but he goes on presently adding that Saint Peter in the same
place calls these particular provinces (...) and will you know what this
(...), or proper place is, read the Text, and you shall find that Saint Peter
speaks of Judas his going to Hell to receive his eternal damnation: Me thinks
you should wonder I can go on without astonishment at such blasphemous
explications, for sure it can be no less, so to abuse the Word of God, and
after this what do you expect? His position is as directly against Scripture,
as if he had done it on purpose, the Scripture telling us how by a special
Vision Saint Peter was commanded to preach to Cornelius a Gentile, first of all
the Apostles, and himself in the Council of Jerusalem protesting the same, and
yet this Doctor can teach he was made Apostle to the Jews; exclusively to the
Gentiles, though all story say the contrary; Again, if he were made the Apostle
of the Jews exclusively to the Gentiles, by the same reason St. Paul was made
Apostle of the Gentiles exclusively to the sense, for the words are like, and
yet the Scripture teaches us that where ever he came, Sect: 7.
he preached first to the sense; is not this to make Scripture ridiculous? but
he goes on telling us that the Gentiles exclusively to the Circumcision were
the lot of St. Paul by Saint Peter's own confession, his words are for the
uncircumcision, or Gentiles they were not Saint Peter's province, but peculiarly
Saint Paul's, etc. but look on the place, and you shall find no word of
exclusion as the word peculiarly is, and whereon lies the whole question, so
that the Doctors Evidence is his own word against the main torrent of Scripture
on either side. Again, see how he wrongs St. Peter, Sect: 8, 9.
and his Jewish profelites, where he says he withdrew from all communion with
the Gentile Christians. Whereas the Text expresses no more, then that he
withdrew from eating with them, that is, keeping the Gentile diet: upon this
wisely laid ground, he would persuade us followed the division of the
Bishoppricks both in Antioch, and Rome, but bringing not one word of antiquity
proving this to have been the cause, Sect: 18.
yet is he so certain of it, that he will find a collonie of Jews even in
England, for fear St. Peter should have touched a Gentile, and yet he cites
Saint Prosper, that both Saint Peter, and St: Paul founded the Church of
Gentiles in Rome.

A second Evidence he brings from the donation of the Keys, Sect: 20.
which he says were given equally to the Apostles, Matt: 28. yet confesses
the Keys were especially promised to Saint Peter, Matt: 16. but performed only
in common, Matt: the 28. which though they may be both true, yet is absurdly
said, for who acknowledges a special promise, should have found out a special
performance which is done, Joh: 21. Again, Sect: 21.
he would persuade the World that the Catholic Church holds, none had the
Keys but Saint Peter, calling it a peculiarity, and enclosure of Saint Peter,
as if the other Apostles had them not, which is calumny, I cannot pass without
noting another old interpretation of Scripture, in his 20 Sect: out of Matthew
the 19. speaking of the 12 Thrones at the day of Judgment, he explicates to
rule, or preside in the Church, his quibling about the Word is so light a
thing, as it is not worth consideration, the sense being plain that upon Peter
the Church was built specially, though not with exclusion of others.

In the fifth Chapter, Sect: 1.
first he lightly passes over the two most considerable Texts of Scripture fit
to be alleged for Saint Peter's supremacy, viz. Feed my Sheep, and thou art
Peter: because they have no appearance, and have been often answered, Why no
appearance? because he and his Fellows say so, and is if being as often
repeated, was not as likely to show the answer was naught, as the answering to
impeach the Objector: but who understands the principles of Catholic Faith,
knows that as well for other points of our Faith, as for this of Saint Peter's
supremacy, we rely not only upon such places of Scripture; next he urges that
if the succession to Saint Peter were the base of the Popes supremacy, Sect: 3.
Antioch should be the chief See, because St: Peter sat there, wherein to omit
his first and second question, whereof the first is untrue, I answer to the
third Negatively, that the coustituting a Church, and Bishop at Antioch before
at Rome, did confer no privilege extraordinary on that Church, and the reason
is clearly deduced out of his second Quaere, because it was before Rome, for he
could not give any such Authority, but by devesting himself, since there cannot
be two heads to one body, therefore this Authority and priuiledg of Saint Peter
can rest, Sect: 4.
and be no where but where he dyed. Then he tells you that the dignity, or
precedence of the Bishop of Rome is surely much more fitly deduced by the
Council of Calcedon from this, that Rome was then the Imperial City, or
ordinary Residence of the Emperor: a very wise Judgment, that the quality upon
which the unity, that is, the safety of the Church Universal relies, should be
planted upon a bottom fallible, and subject to fail, but the resolution was so
shameful that the very Patriarch was ashamed, and imputed it to his ambitious
Clergy, who how tumultuary, and untuly they were, is to be seen in the Acts of
the Council.

Seventhly, Sect: 5.
he cavilleth at the privilege of Supreme Magistracy, calling it a method of
security beyond all amulets: then he tells us of Antiochs being equal to Rome,
and that Constantinople desired but the same privileges against the very
nature of the story, for Constantinople being then a Patriarchy, if that made
it equal to Rome as this Doctor faineth, what did it pretend (...) for? seeing
the Dr. assumes before that all Patriarchs were equal, neither Rome it self,
and less Antioch had cause to complain.

As for the Canon of Ephesus, Sect. 6.
touching the Archbishop of Cyprus, it plainly shows that the Metropolitans
were subordinate to the Patriarchs, seeing this case of Cyprus was a peculiar
excepted case, the reason given does show that the superiority of Patriarchs
was by custom received from their Ancestors, contrary to that which the Dr:
before affirmed, however it is still nothing to the purpose, because the
Authority which we say belongs to the Pope is neither Patriarchall nor derived
from any institution, or custom of the Church, but from the institution of
Christ.

Then he goes on with two examples, Sect: 7.
in which he would persuade us that Justiniana prima, and Carthage were made
exempt Cities by the Emperor, and sees not that his own instance gives the
answer, for as in the temporal donation, he does not exempt them from his own
subjection, so neither from the Popes, in spiritual, nay nor as much as gives
them the style of Patriarchs; though the Bishop of Constantinople in his own
City ordinarily had it. Sect: 1.


In his 6. Chapter he examineth another title peculiar to England. viz: that
our Nation was converted by mission from Rome, Sect: 1.
and this is totally beside the question, for no man is so stupid as to pretend
Saint Peter, or the Church of Rome, to have power over the Universal Church,
because his successors converted England: But some pretend a special title of
gratitude; the violation of which aggravateth the sin of schismatizing from the
Church of Rome in our Nation, yet no man as far as I can understand thinks this
latter Obligation of so high a nature, as that for no occation or never so
great cause, it may not be dispensed with, but only press it, then when the
benefit is slighted, Sect: 2.
or by colorable arguments to the contrary unworthily avoided, and yet this
Doctor quite mistaking the question frames an Argument, as full of words as
empty of matter, affirming there cannot be two successive titles to possession
of the same thing, telling us, that he who claims a Reward as of his own
labor, and travel, must disclaim a donation, etc. if any passed before, and
that if a King have right by descent, he cannot claim any thing by conquest, by
which you may see his understanding the Law is not much more then his
understanding of our principles, but to come to some matter.

His first Argument is that this Island was converted before Saint Augustines
time, Sect: 4.
surely he means by the name of Isleland, the Land and Mountains, and Trees,
for it he speak of the Men what has the conversion of the former Islanders to
do with the subjection, and duty which the Saxons owe.

His next Argument demands whether all that Saint Paul converted, Sect: 8.
were obliged to be under him, truly if it were to purpose I believe there
might be proof that Saint Paul expected it, but he does not remember that he
could us Saint Paul was Bishop of Rome, and so it comes to the same question,
but indeed he quite misseth the matter, for no body stateth this for the Popes
title, but aggravation of the scism.

3ly: He said it was in the Emperors power to constitute Patriarchs: whether
that be so or not, Sect: 9.
it will not be much to our purpose to dispute here, only this I say, that he
seems neither to understand the question, nor proves what he would, he
understands nor the question, which has no dependancie on the nature of
Patriarchs, or rearms of gratitude, but on the donation of Christ, he proves
not what he would, for he produces only the act of an Emperor accounted
tyrannical toward the Church, without proof, or discussion whether it was well
or ill done, which was requisire to make good his proof, neither does he say
whether the thing were done or no by the consent of Bishops, especially since
the Pope was an actor in the business, he adds an Apocriphal Decree of
Valentinian the third, for giving of privileges purely Ecclesiastical to the
Bp: of Havenna, which out of his liberality he makes a Patriarch, but on the
whole matter this is to be observed, that generally the Bishops consents were
pre-demanded, or pre-ordered, as in the counsel of Calcedon, can 17. it is
ordered that the Church should translate their Bishoprics according to the
Emperors changing of his City, and when the Emperors did it, it is said they
did it according to the power given them, to wit, by the Church, so that a few
examples to the contrary produced in the Raigns of headstrong, and tyrannical
Princes, as the most of those were noted to be, under whom they are urged, and
as they did: The Conqueror was proved nothing, and if they did, yet cannot they
be taken as testimonies, when these matters of fact are only so attributed to
Princes, as no way to exclude the Church: but whatsoever it was, it does not at
all appertian to the question, since the Popes authority in the sense he calls
him Pope, is not properly patriarchal, nor has any dependencie upon, or from,
change of places made by the command of Printes.

In his 7th. Chap. he intends a justification of the breach, Begun in H. 8.
whereof as he does not teach the infamous occasion, and how to his dying day
the same King desired to be reconciled, as also that it was but the coming two
days short of a Post to Rome, which hindered that the reconcilement was not
actually made, as may be seen in my Lo: of Charberies book, fol. 368: and that
the moderate Protestants curse the day wherein it was made, so the very naming
of H: 8th. is enough to confute all his discourse, one of the darlings of his
Daughter having given him such a character as has stamped him for Englands
Nero to future posterity, Sir Walter Raughley in Preface to History of the
World.
and as it was said of Nero in respect of Christian Religion: so might it be of
him respecting the unity of the Church, viz: it must be a great good, which he
began to persecute and abolish: and as for the Acts passed in the Universities
Convocation or Parliament, let the blood shed by that Tyrant bear witness what
voluntary and free Acts they were, especially those two upon his Seneca and
Burbey, Bishop Fisher, and the Chancellor More, that he might want nothing of
being thoroughly paralleled to Nero.

But me thinks the Doctor differs not much in this, seeming tacitly to grant
the Bishops were forced, awed by that noted sword in a slender thread, the
praemunire, which did hang over their heads, though in the conclusion of that
Sect: he says we ought to judge charitably, viz. that they did not judge for
fear nor temporal Interests: yet after waves the advantage of that charitable
judgment, and says, That if what was determined were falsely determined by the
King and Bishops, then the voluntary and free doing it will not justify, and
if it were not, then was there truth in it antecedent to, and abstracted from
the determination, and it was their duty so to determine, and conclude that
they were unwilling: laying the whole weight of the Argument upon this, that
the pretentions for the Popes Supremacy in England must be founded either as
Successor to St. Peter in the Universal Pastorship of the Church, so including
England as a Member thereof, or upon paternal right respecting St. Augustines
conversion, or upon concession from some of our Kings, etc. To which I answer,
that we rely on the first as the foundation and corner stone of the whole
building. On the 3d. as an action worthy the Successor of St. Peter, which
requires a grateful consideration from us. And on the 3d. not as a concession,
but as a just acknowledgment of what was necessary to the good of Christian
Religion, taught our Kings by those who taught them Christian Religion; of
which belief, I mean that the Pope as successor to St. Peter is head and
governor of the universal Church, we have been in possession ever since the
conversion of our English Ancestors, then Saxons, to the Christian Religion
made by Austin the Monk sent hither by Pope Gregory for that purpose: until
that good King Henry the 8th, out of scrupulositie of conscience (no doubt) was
pleased to cut the guordian knot of those bonds within which all his Ancestors
limited themselves; neither shall all that the Doct. and his fellows have said,
or can say, justify themselves so, but that such a possession as I here speak
of will convince them of schism, though all those replies which by ours have
been 40 times made to every one of those Arguments the Doct, uses should bear
but equal weight in the scale, which we think hoyses it up into the air, for
the arguments must be demonstrative and clear to men of common sense, that must
overthrow such a possession; and therefore it is that the Puritans who are much
less friends to the Church of Rome then to the Church of England were all
disputing out of Antiquity, and confess, Napier on the Revelation.
that the Church of Rome has born a sway without any debatable contradiction
over the Christian world 1260 years, a time that no King in the world can
pretend to by succession from his Ancestors for possession of his Crown, and
yet I believe the Doctor would conclude those Subjects guilty of Rebellion,
which should go about to deprive such a King of his Crown, though he could not
show writings evidently concluding for him 13, 14, 15, or 1600 year ago, how
much more if he could show them demonstrating his right in the interpretation
of as wise and learned men as the world has, and 20 times the numbers of their
adversaries: Sect: 11.
Queen Mary's titular retaining of the Supremacy until she could dispose the
disordered hearts of her subjects to get it peaceably revoked, is no authority
for the Doctor, she never pretending it to be lawfully done, but that she could
not do otherwise, and by the refusing of a Legate which in all Catholic times
and Countries has been practiced and thought lawful, Sect: 13.
King Edward a child of nine years old fell into the hands of wicked ambitious
Traitors, who knowing the Kingdom affected for Religions sake to Queen Mary, to
cut off her succession and introduce their own, thought fit to strengthen their
faction, which besides what they might hope from abroad, consisted of many
Lutherans and Calvenists at home; those two Sects having by opportunity of that
rupture in H: the 8th. time, spread and nestled themselves in many parts of
England, Sect: 15.
Queen Elizabeth being by Act of Parliament recorded a bastard, and so
pronounced by two Popes, and therefore mistrusting all her Catholic Subjects
who she feared did adhere to the Queen of Scots title, in which she was then
likely to be supported by the King of France her Husband, was by the advice of
men partly infected with Calvinisme or Lutheranisme, partly ambitious of making
their fortunes cast upon that desperate Council of changing Religion,
desperate, I say, for see amongst what a number of Rocks she was, in
consequence of that Council forced to sail, witness her adhearing to the Rebels
of all her neighbor Kings, so provoking them thereby as if the French King had
not been taken out of this world, and wind and weather fought against the
Spanish Armado, in all likelihood she had been ruined, especially her Catholic
Subjects being so provoked as they were by most cruel and bloody Laws; but
this by the by: though from hence the Reader may judge of reason of changing
Religion in her time, and what a solid foundation the Church of England has,
how far Mr. Mason can justify the ordination of Queen Elizabeth's Bishops,
Sect: 16.
I will not now examine; but certain it is that the Record, (if there be such a
one) has a great prejudice of being forged, since it lay some fifty years
unknown amongst the Clamors against the flagrant fact, and no permission given
to Catholics to examine the ingenuitie of it, but howsoever it is nothing to
our purpose, for whatsoever material mission they had by an external
consecration, those Bishops who are said to have consecrated them are not as
much as pretended to have given them order to preach the Doctrine, or exercise
the Religion they after did, which is the true meaning and effect of mission. I
cannot end without nothing in his 20 Para: the foundation upon which he himself
says his whole defires relyes: which is that because the recession from the
Roman Church was done by those by whom, and to whom only the power of right
belonged legally, viz: the King and Bishops of this Nation, therefore it is no
schism, that is, whatsoever the reason of dividing has been even to turn
Turks, or for violating never so fundamental points of Religion, yet it had not
been schism.

In his 8th. Chapter as far as I understand, he divides schism into formal,
that is, breach of Unity; and material, that is, breach of Doctrine or
Customs, in which the Church was united: the former he brancheth into
subordination to the Pope, Sect: 4.
of which enough has been said; and breach of the way provided by Christ for
maintaining the unity of Faith, the which he puts in many subordinations
without any effect. For let us as he, Sect: 5.
if inferior Clergy men, dissent from their own Bishops, but not from their
Metrapolitan in matter of Faith is it schism? he will answer, No: if a Metrapo
itan dissent from his Primate, but agree with the rest of the Patriarchs, is it
schism? I think he must say, No: if a Patriarch dissent from the first, but
agree with the rest, is it schism? No: if a Nation, or a Bishop dissent from
the rest of the general Council, is it schism? still I believe he will
answer, No: where then is schism provided against? or where truly is there any
subordination in Faith? if none of these are subject, and bound to their
superiors or Universals in matters of Faith. But, says the Doctor, the
Apostles resolved upon some few heads of special force and efficacy to the
planting of Christian life, through the world, and preaching, and depositing
them in every Church of their plantation.

Truly I do not know what a Catholic professes more, so that by the word few
he means enough to form a Religion, and Christian life, and will show us a
Church which has not betrayed the trust deposited; for if there be none, what
avails this depositing? if there be any, clear it is that it preserved it by
tradition, if there be a question whether it has or no; again, I demand to
what purpose was the depositing, so that if the Doctor would speak aloud, I
doubt he would be subject to as much jealousy, as he says Grocius was, I
cannot but admire indeed the great temper he professes men of his Religion
have, in choosing of Doctrines, to wit, Sect: 7.
their submission to the three first Ages, and the four first Councels, but I
confess it is a humility, I understand not, first to profess, they know not
whether their teachers say true, or no, (that is, that they are fallible) and
then to hold under pain of damnation what they say. Another piece of their
Humility is in submitting to Ages, where very few Witnesses can be found, in
regard of the rarity of the Authors, and the little occasion they had to speak
of present controversies. A third note of Humility is, that whereas the fourth
Council was held about the midst of the fifth Age, these lovers of truth will
stand to it, but not to the fourth Age precedent, or that very Age in which it
was held, so humble they are to submit to any Authority that touches not the
questions in present controversy, but where do they find Christ's Church should
be Judge in three Ages, and fail in the fourth, or that the Councels in the
fifth Age should be sound, but not the Fathers.

In his 9th. Chapter he pretends the Roman Catholic Church, is cause of his
division, because they desire communion, and cannot be admitted, but under the
belief, and practice of things contrary to their consciences, of which two
propositions, Sect: 4 5.
if the second be not proved the first is vain, and is as if a subject should
plead he were unjustly outlawed, because he does not desire it, now to prove
the latter, he assumeth that the Protestant is ready to contest his Negatives,
by grounds that all good Christians ought to be concluded by, what he means by
that, I know not, for that they will convince their Negatives by any ground, a
good Christian ought to be concluded by, I see nothing less.

What then will they contest it by? all grounds a good Orthodox Christian ought
to be concluded by. If they answer in the Affirmative, we shall ask them
whether Si quis Ecclesiam non audierit, be one of their grounds, and if they
say no, we shall clearly disprove their major, but then their defense is, if
any ground, or Rule of it self firm, and good, speaks nothing clearly of a
poine in question, they will contest that point by those grounds, is not this a
goodly excuse?

In his 11 Chapter he says, we judge them, and despise them: as to the first I
have often wondered, and do now, that men pretending to learning, and reason,
should therein charge us with want of charity, for if our Judgment be false, it
is error, not malice, and whether true, or false, we press it upon them, out of
love and kindness, to keep them from the harm, that according to our belief may
come unto them: but since they deny they are scismaticks, and offer to prove
it, we must not say it: yet I think we ought until we have cause to believe
them, since our highest tribunal the Churches voice, from which we have no
appeal, has passed Judgment against them.

In the last Chapter he compiaineth of the Catholics for reproaching them with
the loss of their Church, and arguing with their Disciples in this sort,
communion in some Church even externally, is necessary, but you cannot now
communicate with your late Church for that has no subsistence, therefore you
ought to return to the Church from whence you went out, truly in this case I
think they ought to pardon the Catholic, who has, or undoubtedly is persuaded
he has a promise for eternity to his Church, and experience in the execution
of that promise for 16 Ages, in which none other can compare with him, and sees
another Church judged by one of the learned, Heoker Ecle: poll cha. 5.
and most prudent persons confessedly that ever was amongst them, to be a
building likely to last but 80 years, to be now torn up by the roots, and this
done by the same means by which it was settled, I say if this Catholic believe
his eyes, he is at least to be excused, and though I know the Doctor will reply
his Church is still in being, preserved in Bishops, and Presbyters rightly
ordained, yet let him remember how inconsequent this is, to what he has said
before, for ask him how does it remain in being, if there be no such Bishops,
or Presbyters amongst them, for his defense against the Church of Rome is, that
the secular authority has power to make, and change Bishops, and Presbyters;
from whence it will follow, that as they were set up by a secular authority, so
are they pulled down, and un-bishoped by another secular Authority, if it be
said the Parliament which pulled them down had not the 3. bodies requisite to
make a Parliament, no more had that which set them up, for the Lords Spirit was
wanting both in Parliament and Convocation, so that there was as much authority
to pull them down, as to set them up, but it will be replied that though they
are pulled down, yet are they still Bishops, viz: the character remains with
them.

Alas what is their characters if their mission of Preaching, and Teaching, be
extinguished, which follows their jurisdiction, which jurisdiction the Doct:
makes subject to the secular authority, so that whatsoever characters their
Bishops, and Presbyters pretend to have, they have according to his principles
no power over the layity, and so no character can be made of any Bishop as
head, and Pastor, and of the people as body, and flock, and consequently their
Church is gone; and this he does out of a word in Rufinus, which he supposes
to be taken in a special propriety of Law, whereas indeed that Authors knowledge
in Grammar was not such as should necessarily exact any such belief, especially
learned men saying the contrary.

But we account our selves Bishops, and Priests not from an authority,
dependant upon Princes, or inherited from Augustus, or new, but from Peter, and
Paul, and so shall stand, and continue whatsoever Princes, or secular powers
decree; when they according to their Doctrines, and Arguments are not to wonder
if they be thrown down by the same Authortly that set them up, and as the
Synagogue was a Church to have an end, so is this with theirs difference, that
the Synagogue was a true Church in reference to a better, but this a
counterfeit, and tyrannical one to punish a better, as concerning the Drs.
prayer for Peace, and communion, all good People will join with him if he
produce Fructus dignes penitentiae, especially if he acknowledge the
infallibility of the Church, and supremacy of the Pope, the former is
explicated sufficiently in diverse Books, the latter is expressed in the Council
of Florence, in these words, viz We desire that the Holy Apostolical See, and
the Bishop of Rome have the primacie over all the World, and that the Bishop of
Rome is successor to St. Peter, the Prince of the Apostles, and truly Christ's
Vicar, and head of the whole Church, and the Father, and Teacher of all
Christians, and that there was given him in St Peter from Christ a f^^ power to
feed, direct, and govern the Catholic Church: so far the Council: without
obeying this, the Dr: is a Scismatick; and without consing the other an
Heretic, but lee him join with us in these, all the rest will follow.

Thus Sir, you have my sense of Dr: Hammonds Book, in all the Particulars,
which I think to the purpose, my time, nor the brevity fit for a Letter not
permitting, I should be more methodical, and do rest,

Your Friend and humble Servant. B. P. Bruxels
the 30 March, 1654.
FINIS.

