A Shield of the Truth, OR The Truth of God cleared from SCANDALS AND
REPROACHES Cast upon it By scandalous and reproachful tongues, which the Devil
in all ages did make use of, whereby he blasphemed the truth of God, striving
to present it odious Heb. Io. 33. Psalm. 102. 6. 1. Cor. 3. 13. Rev. 9. Rev. 12.
in the eyes and ears of all people, that so he might uphold his own kingdom:
but the day has made him manifest, and the Lord is come, and is coming to make
war with him, and bind hm, and cast him into the bottomeless pit and all who
bears his Image, and under his dominion is.

Written from the Spirit of the Lord, by one who suffers amongst the Genesis ^1. ^
little flock of Christ who go under the name of Quakers, so called by the
stock of Ishmael, who is known to the world by the name of James Parnel.

It is written, they shall put you out of the Synagogues, yea the time comes
that whosoever kills you, shall think he does God service. Ioh. 16. 2.
And those things will they do, because they have not known the Father, nor me,
for if they had known him they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.

1 Cor. 2. 8. But fear not little flock, for it is your Fathers good pleasure
to give you the kingdom, and the time comes that all your enemies shall be
Luk 12. ^1 Isa. 51. 7. ^.
your footstool, the promise is to the faithful and obedient whose kingdom
is not of this world,

John 18. 36. London, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his shop
at the black Spread Eagle at the West end of Paul's, 1655.

To the READER.
REader, to thee whosoever thou art, I shall clear my conscience, and to all
people, to the light of God in all your consciences I speak, which is one in
all in the behalf of a depised Jer. 32. 37, 38, 39, 40. 1. Pet. 2. 25. Rev. 14.
4. 5. 1. Cor. 15. 49.
people with men, yet not with God, who are scattered abroad, in several
Countries, yet one in the Lord, whom the Lord has chosen out of the generation
of the Children of this world out of all sects, forms, and opinions, into the
light of life to bear his Image, and so to bear his Cross, and because they
have not the same Image, with the children of this world, but are chosen out
from amongst them, their fellowship, their kindred, 2 Cor. 6. 14. 1 Pet. 4. 8.
2 Cor. 4. 4. Bzek. 2. 2.
and acquaintance, and breeding, manners, customs, fashions, words, ways and
worship, for light can have no fellowship with darkness, and so the Devil who
goes about like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour, who is the god of
the World, who rules in the children of disobedience, has stirred up all who
bear his image. who under his dominion is, to persecute slander, revile, and
reproach all who bears the Image of Rev. 13. 14. 15.
God, who testifies against him and all who bears his image, so as he has done
in all ages, from the beginning, so it is now, that he may uphold his Image and
his kingdom, so the beast is making war with the lamb, and now is the war
begun, but the lamb shall get the victory, praises, praises to our God for
ever; and so for the truths sake, and the good of all tender Rev. 19.
consciences, I shall clear my conscience, in the clearing of the truth from
the scandalls, false accusations and reports, which is cast upon it by the
Priest and people who bear the image of the beast, least any who are unsettled,
and ungrounded in the 2 Pet. 2. 14.
truth, should by giving ear to those false reports, and scandals and
accusations, turn from the light, and so lose their convincement, and get up
into hardness of heart, and lose their part in the promised land; for there is
a company of Priests, in all parts of the Nation where the truth comes, who are
the Devils greatest agents, who are daily plotting and inventing, and seeking
every way, to blot the Image of God out of the Nation, by writings, by
prinlings, by petitioning to Rulers and Magistrates, with all the false
aspersions and scandals, they can get together to present the truth of God
odious to all people and likewise in their pulpits do the same, as it was in
the time of Christ Matthew. 16. 21. Chap. 29. Acts 4. Acts 5. Isa. 33. 22. Romans
8* 31. 32. to 37. Isa. 54. 18.*
and his Apostles, but we have but one Ruler and Governer to petition to, and
to rely upon, from whom we have our Image, even God over all, who knows the
hearts of all, who is our witness, and our justification, then who art thou
that condemnest or lays any thing to the charge of Gods Elect, but he has
promised, no weapon formed against him, shall prosper, for his work he will
carry on by his own unlimited power in despite of the beast and his image.

And so Reader I charge thee and all people in the presence of the Lord before
whom thou must come to judgment, to take heed of speaking avill of that you
know not, lest you speak evil of Gods Elect, for it is a fearful thing to
enter into the hands of the living God, for if those be cursed that does not
receive the ^eb. 10. 31. 32. Matthew. 25. 41. 42. 43.
Messengers of Jesus Christ, how much more them that reviles them, and
persecutes them, he that has an ear to hear let him hear, for in as much as
thou do it to one of his, thou do to him.

J. P.

A Shield of Truth, OR The Truth of God cleared from Roports and false
Accusations, etc.
1. COncerning the name Quakers, by which the world scornfully calls us.

As for the Quaking and Trembling caused by the unresistable power of the Lord,
I own, which the holy men of God witnessed before us in all ages, Isaac the
seed of the promise trembled, Moses the Servant of God quaked, and Genesis 27. 33.
Heb. 12. 21. Ier. 23. 9. Hab. 3. 16. Dan. 10. 7. Acts. 9. 6. Psalm. 22. 14. Job
4. 14. Ezekiel. 12. 18. Prove. 19. 29. Prove. 3. 33. 34.
trembled, Jeremias the Prophet of the Lord, his bones shook, Habakkuk, his
belly trembled, and lips quivered when Daniel heard the voice, he fell down and
trembled, and David the King were as if his bones were out of joint, and the
rest of the holy men of God quaked and trembled, and so it was no new thing but
that which was from the beginning, which all the holy men of God witnessed,
though new to the World, who live in darkness: and for this cause are we
scornfully called Quakers, but the scorners God will judge, and the righteous
God will bless, who work out their salvation with fear and trembling. Phil. 2.
12.


2. We are accused, to be the false Prophets, and false teachers, and deceivers
that are foretold of in the Scriptures, to come in the last times, but says
Jesus Christ, you may know them by their fruits, and so we desire to be judged
according to our fruits.

Jesus Christ said, beware of false prophets, that appear Matthew. 7, 15, 16. 17,
18.
to you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly ravening wolves, you shall know them
by their fruits, do men gather grapes of thorns, and figs of thistles, a
good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, nor a corrupt tree bring forth good
fruit, pride is a fruit of the corrupt tree, now see wheher we or your teachers
be guilty of this, who go in double cuffs and boot-hose tops, with great store
of points and ribands, which are of no use but for the satisfying of the proud
mind, and also following the new fashions and inventions of the world, they and
their wives and children, decking and adorning themselves according to their
proud minds, to make the creature seem something in its own eyes, and in the
eyes, 1 Pet. 3. 3.
of others, and those are the outward signs of pride, which lodges in their
hearts, and they are called of men Masters, and have the chiefest places in the
assembies, uppermost rooms at feasts, and love greetings in the markets, such
Mat. 23. 5. 67.
Christ declared against. See whether these be outward signs of pride, yea or
nay, but you will say that one may have as proud a heart in plain Apparel, I
Answer, but where pride is, it will vent forth its self, either less or more,
according to the outward ability of the creature, but it shows it self the
most in apparel; but the light of God makes manifest the heart where lies the
root.

Covetousness is a fruit of the corrupt tree, see whether your Teachers be
covetous yea or nay, who have some fifty, some sixty, some an hundred or two
hundred pounds in the year, more or less, as they can get it, and some have
money for smoke passing up the chimnies, and for piggs, geese, eggs and
chickens, and many other such like things, which are too tedious to reckon, but
your herelings will reckon them, when they come to take them, to seek for their
gain from their Quarter, and this gain they make of the letter which was spoken
forth freely by the true Isa. 56. 11.
Prophets and Apostles of God, where there is the greatest benifices there will
they be, so are like the false prophets which Ezekiel declared against who seek
for the fleece and regard not the flock, now see whether your teachers be
covetous or we, who have left our countries, our lands and livings, and
possessions, and have forsaken all and have not where to lay our heads, but as
the Lord provides for us, neither covets any man's silver nor gold, gifts, or
rewards, for freely we have received, freely we give, for we come not to seek
yours, but you, God is our witness, and our Acts 20. 33. 2 Cor. 12. 14*
justification, then who art thou that condemnest?

Drunkenesse is a fruit of the corrupt tree, now see whether we or your
teachers be guilty of this, he that has an eye to see let him see.

Envy is a fruit of the corrupt tree, now see whether your teachers be guilty
of this, who sue men at the law for their own estates, and earthly things and
trifles, though Matthew. 5. 4.
they be of their own flock, or we who sue no man at the Law, but are sued by
them, because we cannot maintain them, in their pride and idleness, by the
sweat of our brows, contrary to the Scripture, which says he that will not
work, let him not eat, and if they did administer to us 2 These. 3. 10.
spiritual things they would reap our carnal; now see if these be not the
ravening wolves in sheeps clothing, for so long as we put into their mouths
they cried peace, peace, Mich. 3. 5*
and told us we were Christians when we were heathens, and knew not God, so
sewed pillowes under out armeholes; and appeared to us in sheeps clothing, but
now that we are reduced into the flock of Christ, by Christ, our eyes are
opened, and now we see that we profited nothing by them, but were deceived by
them, so we cannot Ezekiel. 13. 18* 19.
put into their mouths nor maintain them any longer in their deceipts, but
testify against them, and so they sue us at the Law, and hale us before
Magistrates, and takes treble damage, and appears ravening wolves, and would
destroy us and our families, and would live upon our estates by compulsion, and
an outward Law, and some of us they cause to be put in prison, and call us
heretics, deluders, and deceivers, false prophets, and yet could live on our
estates, and covet our silver, and gold, and estates, and by law and Justices
Warrants strains upon them, and so seeks ours, and would destroy us, like the
false prophets which Hosea declared Hos. 6. 9.
against, who as a company of robbers wait for a man, so the company of Priests
murders in the way by consent, and also the false teachers which Peter foretold
of, 2. Pet. 23.
who through covetousness, with feigned words make merchandise of the people,
or we who are made merchandise of, though we take none of their stolen wares,
and make merchandise of none, God is our witness, and so if these be not the
false teachers which Paul foretold of to come in the last times, covetous,
*proud, boasters, blasphemers, disobedient, unthankful, unholy, without
natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce,
despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of
pleasures more then lovers of God, having a form of godliness, but denying the
power thereof, from such turn away, for of this sort are they that creep into
houses, who lead silly women captive, full of sin and corruption, and diverse
lusts, ever learning, and never come to the knowledge of the truth: now as
Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do they withstand the truth, men of
corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith, 2. Tim. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.
9.

Now see if your Teachers be not lovers of their own selves, who seek for the
fleece, and regard not the flock, but feed with the fat, and cloth with the
wool, and live by the sweat of others brows, living at ease, devouring the
creation, and spending it upon their lusts, they and their wives Ezekiel. 34.
and Children, nourishing their hearts as in a day of slaughter, and of
changeable minds, according to the government Jam. 5. 5.
of man, that they may save and shelter themselves under the power and will of
man, as the false prophets did, by which they stood and were upheld, and the
same that prayed for the King and Realm, and the same prays now for the Lord
Protector and the State of England. Now see whether these be false Prophets, or
we* who have forsaken our outward livings, and estates, and countries, and
acquaintance, and comes into strange countries, and light Mat. 10. 16. 17.
among dogs, and wolves, and heathens, as Christ says, he sends us forth as
sheep among wolves, which are of the Priests flock, and suffers our bodies to
be stocked and stoned, reproached, reviled, imprisoned, and shamefully
entreated, and loves not our lives unto death for Christ's sake, he is our
witness and only Protector, in whose power we stand and are upheld, contrary
to the will of man, and see whether we or your Teachers be covetous as it is
before proved, and proud as it is before proved, and see if they be not
boasters, who boast that they are the Ministers of Christ, and sent of God,
when as they are come but from Oxford and Cambridge, approved by the will of
man, and boasts of Acts 8. 20.
gifts, and sels them for money, when the Scripture says the gift of God is
not to be bought with money: And they boast they are the mediate means
ordained by God, when as they are ordained by their parents or some other, and
their means are imediate, and the Apostles imediate, Gal. 1. 16. John 14. 6.
and the way is but one says Christ; he that has an ear to hear let him hear:
and see if they be not Blasphemers, who say they are the Ministers of Christ,
and some of them drunkards, some proud, some covetous, and are evil examples to
all that follows them contraty to Christ, or his Apostles, Phil. 3. 17. 1 Timothy
2. 2.
who said walk as you have us for examples, and here they abide not in the
doctrine of Christ, and so has not God, as in 2 John 9. and this is blasphemy,
to say they are the mouth of the Lord, but are the mouth of the Devil, teaching
lies and blasphemies, telling the people that are of their flock, they are
Christians and of the flock of Christ, when as they are all manner of
unrighteous persons, who live without God in the World, and tells them their
children are the flock of Christ when they are sprinkled on the face with a
little water, when as they grow up in all manner of ungodliness, without the
fear of God, or the knowledge of God, and they are heathen that know not God;
and this is blasphemy to say Christ is the head of Jer. 10. 15. Col. 1. 11.
Ver. 24.
heathens, for he is the head of his flock, and they tell people that a house
of Lime and Stone is the Church, when as the Church is the body of Christ, and
this is blasphemy, now see whether we or your teachers be more like deceivers,
liars, and blasphemers, and let every ones life preach him forth, and judge
him, and see if they be not lovers of pleasures, more than lovers of God, who
delight in Music, in bowling, in carding, and diceing, and hawking, and
hunting, and all manner of pleasures and delights, now Phil. 1. 18. Romans 8. 5.
see whether they or we be like Apostles, who never used any such thing, but
all their delight was in the work of Christ, but they that are of the flesh
mind the things of the flesh, and they that are of the spirit the things of the
spirit: Now see if they have not a form of godliness, but deny the power and
life which the Apostles lived in, therefore from such turn away, and if you
find that our lives be contrary to what we profess, from us turn away also,
but of this sort are they who creep into houses, and leads silly people
captive; now see if they do not creep into steeple houses, and say that's the
place and no where else, and leads silly people captive, laden with sins, and
diverse lusts, ever learning, and never come to the knowledge of the truth: some
learns thirty, some sity, some sixty years, and above, and still full of sin,
and as dark and blind, and ignorant of the things of God as ever, and they will
teach you shall never be made free from sin, so long as ^^ are upon the
earth; and here they set up their rest in the Devils kingdom: And if you do
allege we creep into houses, I answer, the Apostle witnessed the same where he
said I Acts 20. 20.
have taught you publicly from house to house, and our meetings are public to
any who will come amongst us, Acts 16. 13. Mat. 18. 20.
sometimes in no house but in the fields or commons as the Apostles witnessed,
and we find the Lord amongst us being gathered in his Name according to his
promise, now see by their fruits if your teachers be not the deceivers which
are foretold of in the Scriptures, who as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses,
so do they withstand the truth by all the ways they can, as it is before
proved; for Jannes and Jambres were the Magitians of Egypt, that imitated Ex.
7. 11. 12
Moses, so those University men by their Magic Arts, inventions and
imaginations, and studying old Authors has gotten the form of the Prophets,
Christ, and his Apostles words to trade with, but denies the life and power,
and so are Traitors to Christ who are men of corrupt minds and reprobates
concerning the faith, but they shall proceed no further for their folly shall
be made manifest to all men; now he that desires to see may see, and let all
who are wise hearted judge.

But if you do allege they have been long, and have reigned long, and we are
now come up, and it is a new way, and we come to breed divisions and dis^ention?

I answer, the more is their shame, and by that the more they are seen to be
those that run, and the Lord never sent them, therefore they profit not the
people at all, who have Jer. 23. 31.
reigned so long, and wrought no better reformation in the land, but it flows
as much in iniquity and all manner of ungodliness as ever, and the people that
are taught by them as ignorant and as dark to the things of God as ever, and
here they would keep them by an outvvard power but the day has made them
manifest, and the Scripture fulfilled, 1 Cor. 3. 13. 1 John 2. 20.
which the Apostle spoke of, who said it was the last times then, and since
they have continued, you may know them by their frnits, they profess Christ in
words, but in life deny him, and the mystery of iniquity has reigned a long
time, and there has been a time of cruel darkness, and all Titus 1. 16. Rev.
13. 34 ver. 12.
the World has wondered after, and worshipped the beast and his Image and he
has reigned, and by him the false Prophet has reigned, which has deceived
the Nations, but now light is risen out of darkness and shines forth now in
these latter days in the sons and daughters of men, according Rev. 16. 30.
Joel 2. 28, 29
to the promise of God, whereby the wiles of Satan are made manifest to the
glory of God, and now is the separation, the Sheep from the Gorts, the Wheat
from the tares, and Christ is come to set at varience father against son, and
son against father, and wife against the man, and the man against the wife, and
to turn the world upside Mat. 10. 35.
down; and this is the cause why the world rages, and this is the condemnation
of the world, light is come into the Acts 17. 6.
world, and they love darkness rather than light, because their deeds are
evil, and so to those who are in darkness it is new, but we witness it is no
new way, but the same which J^hn 3. 19.
was* is, and is to be for ever, and the same signs follow, but the adulterous
generation cannot see it, but they that believe shall see and be healed, and
though the beast and false prophet, and those that bear the mark of the beast,
does now make war with the Lamb and the Saints for to uphold their kingdom;
yet the Lamb the King of the Saints shall overcome, and to him the Nations
shall bow, and the beast and false prophet, and all that bear the mark of the
beast into the lake for them prepared of old shall go; and for this Phil. 2.
10. Rev. 19. 20. Is. 30. 33.
end we are come out of our countries, and outward habitations and possessions
to preach to every conscience the eternal truth as it is in Jesus the
everlasting Gospel, as we have received it freely, freely we give, and as we
preach the Gospel we live of the Gospel, and this is our end and no other end,
God is our witness.

We are accused to deny the Scripture, which is false; for we witness the life
thereof and by the same do we witness the Scriptures to be truth and
serviceable in its place, and was written for our admonition upon whom the ends
of the world is come, and to us it is given to know, but to the world in
parables; and he that would go about to unfold 1 Cor. 10. 11. Luke 8. 10*
the parables to the dark minds, by the serpentine wit and imagination, he
must be kept out of the Scripture, and he who takes the Scriptures and makes a
trade of them, professing to interpret them, and so gets a living by them which
was spoken forth freely he is a deceiver and must be shut out of the Scripture;
and who reads or takes the Scripture to talk or discourse of, and is ignorant
of the life, must be kept out of the Scripture; for all those runs in with
their serpentine wit and imaginations, wresting them for their own ends, adding
and diminishing to their own destruction, and so he must be shut out of the
Scripture; for hence arises all these sects and opinions in the world, running
into the Scripture, with their wit, imaginations, and dark minds, one
imagining one way and another another way, and one of this opinion and another
of that opinion; but opinions is no assurance but are fallible, and every one
out of the way because they want the life which is the mystery; and this is the
difference between all sects and opinions and the infallible truth; and so they
come not in by the door, but are climbing up another way, and so are shut out
of the kingdom; but the same which gave them forth the same can open them, and
to it they are no mystery nor Joh. 10. 1.
parable, nor needs any meaning; for they are of no private interpretation, nor
came not in the old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they
were moved by the Holy Ghost, neither can the will of men open them, 2 Pet. 1.
20. 21.
but the same which spoke them forth, the same can open them, and spoke them
forth freely, so let him that has a dream tell a dream; and he that has my
word let him speak my word faithfully: What is the chafe to the wheat, says
the Lord? so he that has the letter let him speak the letter, and he that has
the life let him speak the life; what is the husk to kernel, and what should
swine do with Jer. 23. 28. Joh. 1. 1.
pearls, whose life is in husks and there they feed? he that can receive let
him; the same which gave it forth, the same can open it: and he who says the
Letter is the Word is a deceiver and erres, not knowing the Scripture; for the
Scripture says, that in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was God, and
the Word of the Lord came to the Jer. 1. 1. Jer. 2. 1. Jer. 1. 4. 8. Ezekiel. 1.
3. John 1. 14* Rev. 19. 13. Heb. 4. 12. 13
Prophets, and they spoke from the Word of the Lord, and the Word became flesh
and dwelt amongst the Apostles, and they saw the glory thereof as the glory of
the only begotten Son of the Father full of grace and truth, and the Word is
quick and powerful, sharper than a two-edged sword; and the Word is immortal,
and this the Apostles in whom the word dwelt bare witness of, and has left it
upon record, and we witness the same, the word is, the same which was, is, and
is to be for ever, and who puts the letter, for the word is blind, and
puts the shadow for the substance, and must be shut out of the Scripture,
and he who says the letter is the light is in darkness, and erres not knowing
the Scripture, which declares of the light which John came to bear witness of,
who was not the light, but testified of the light, which was the true light,
which inlightneth every one that comes into the world, he was in John. 1. 6.
7. 8 9. 10. 11. 12.
the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not, nor
knows him not, and he came unto his own, and his own received him not, but as
many as received him, to them he gives power to become the sons of God, and
this we witness, and by the same light do we discern and testify against him
to be in darkness and blindness, and is a deceiver, who puts the letter for
the light, and so draws peoples minds off from the light within them to the
letter without them seeking the living amongst the dead, Joh. 5. 39. 40.
thinking to find life in the letter without them, as the Pharisees did, and
will not come unto Christ, that they might have life, and also that must be
shut out of the Scripture, as the Pharisees were, and he also says the letter
is the rule and Luke 1. 73. 19. 15. Joh. 16. 13. Romans 8. 14.
guide of the people of God, is without, feeding upon the husk, and is ignorant
of the true light which was before the Letter was, which all the children of
God were and are guided by, and spoke and speaks the letter from which was
before the letter was, and with this the letter witnesses and who is guided by
this cannot walk contrary to the letter nor deny it, but they know how to use
it in its place, and Joh. 7. 15.
see in what condition it was spoken, and it witnesses with them both in words
and actions, and they that have this, have (...) the mystery within, though
they cannot read the letter without, nor ever learned, as it was with Christ,
which confounded the Scribes and Pharisees, and Mat 11. 25. Mat. 13. 11
they who are never so learned without, and can read and understand all tongues
and languages without, and does not read the Scripture within, only feed upon
the husk, and are ignorant of the life which is the mystery which is hid from
the wise and prudent, and revealed unto the ignorant, Job. 7. 48, 49
as it was from the Scribes and Pharisees, and high Priests, and was revealed
to those whom they counted ignorant and cursed, and knew not the Law, and they
who take the Letter to be their rule, cannot walk according to it, because they
are ignorant of the light, which opens and leads into the life which they who
spoke them forth lived in, but drunkards, and swearers, and proud and wanton,
(...) and covetous lustful envious ones, and all manner of unrighteous persons
will take the letter to talk of, and say it is their rule and guide, but are
out of the life thereof, and so by it are condemned, and those are the swine
that are feeding upon the husk without, and have gotten the form, Luke 15. 15.
16.
but are out of the life and power, and put the shadow for the substance, and
so lives in darkness, and knows not whither he goes, but they that read with
the single eye may understand, for the Scripture is within, and was read within
before it was read without. Now silence all the study and wisdom of man.

We are accused to deny the Baptism.
The Baptism we own which is the Baptism of Christ, with the Holy Ghost and
with fire, but we deny all other, for there is but one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, one God, and Father of all, and they who would have one Baptism Mat.
3. 11. Ephesians. 4. 5, 6.
outward, and another inward, would have two Baptisms, when the Scripture says
the Baptism is but one, and whosoever has the Baptism outward, are the same
they were before, but the Baptism of Christ makes a new creature, and this I
witness, for I received water upon my face, as my Parents told me, which they
called Baptism, but I grew up Romans 6. 3.
an heathen, as all other children* do, and no new creature, though my parents
were counted believers amongst the world and their Priests, but now I witness
the Baptism of 1 Cor. 12. 13 2 Cor. 5. 17.
Christ by one spirit into one body, and now I witness a new creature, old
things are past away and all things become new: And now I see the other to be
formal imitation, and the invention of man, and so a mere delusion, and Mat.
15. 4.
all are heathens and no Christians, who cannot witness this Baptism, who can
witness this denies all other; for the Scripture says, the Baptism is but
one, and who can witness this are believers, but who cannot witness this are
no belivers; and so it is that water or no water, avails nothing but a new
creature; for all by nature are the children of wrath, and except they be born
again they cannot enter; and as for the Baptism of Water which the Apostles
used, it being a command of Christ for its time, the power went along with it,
and the Disciples received the Holy Ghost when they were baptized, but none can
witness this, who sets their selves of acting or imitating the Apostles, and
so takes it up by imitation, and their ground is the letter, and are not guided
to it by the same spirit which guided the Apostles, and so they are the same
after water as before, and so now water or no water avails any thing, but a
new creature; for water was but for its time, though many in darkness have now
gotten the form, and are groping in it for life, but wants the life and power,
and so from such turn away.

We are accused to deny the Supper of the Lord.
The Supper of the Lord we own, which is the body and Joh. 6. 54. 55. 56. 57.
Acts 4. 32. 1 Cor. 10. 16.
blood of Christ, which the Saints feed upon, and this is eternal food and
life, and here they all feed upon one, and are of one heart and mind; and here
is pure and eternal union and communion, and this is not carnal but spiritual;
for Saints are spiritual, and their communion is spiritual and eternal; and
this we witness, who are of one heart and one mind, who are in the new
Covenant, and herein we discern the Lords body, and here all drunkards are
shut out, and all liars, adulterers, proud, covetous, lustful, and 1 Cor. 6. 9.
10
envious ones, and all backbiters, revilers, extortioners, and all deceitful
and unrighteous persons are shut out of the new Covenant, and are without
feeding upon the husk and shadow, which is carnal, for the bread which the
world breaks is carnal and natural, and only feeds the outward carnal body,
and goes into the belly, and so passes out into the dunghill, and so likewise
the cup which they drink, and so the communion and fellowship of the world
passes away, but this is no nourishment to the soul, but still the soul lies
in death, and here is no communion, but natural, outward and carnal, of
several minds and hearts, full of filthiness and uncleanness, which is the
table of Devils, eating and drinking their own damnation, not discerning the
Lords body, which is spiritual, which the natural 1. Cor. 10. 2^. 1. Cor. 11.
29. 1. Cor. ^. 14.
man discerns not: And here stands the worlds communion and fellowship, which
is carnal; and cross but their carnal wills, and it is turned into envy, and
for earthly trifles they will go to Law, and cozen and cheat, and defraud one
another for earthly trifles, and like people like Priest; but if they lie in
wait for revenge of one another, then they will not take their Sacrament, as
they call it: And here the Devil has as great hold, for he that envies is a
murderer; and 1. Ioh. ^. 15.
here is the difference betwixt the worlds communion* and the Saints communion;
life and death; for to be carnally minded is death, but to be spiritually
minded is life: and here they are without feeding upon the husk Romans 8. 6.
and shadow without, and would destroy the life and substance, where it
appears, both Priest, people and Rulers, and so have a form of godliness, and
denies the life and power, from such turn away; for it is a mere delusion 2.
Tim. 3. ^.
to take the shadow for the substance.

We are accused to deny all prayer.
The prayers of the wicked we deny, and God denies, for it is abominable, for
Cain the wicked Pro. 15. 8. Genesis 4. 34. 5*
one, who was out of the commands of God, who was the first birth, he offered
up a sacrifice of the earth, but GOD had no respect to it, but Abel the second
birth, who was the righteous, his sacrifice God had respect to, so the prayers
of the faithful and 1. Pet. 3. 12 Iam. 5. 16. Pro. ^58. 29
righteous, God does accept, and they avail and what comes from his own, which
is the second birth, his own Exo. 40. 12. 13. Luke 1. 3. Haba. 1. 13. Matthew.
12. 34. Job 14. 4. Genesis 3. 15. 2. Sam. 2. 22.
pure, and what comes from it is pure, and God who is pure, does receive that
which is pure, but he receivrs nothing which is polluted or unclean, for he is
of purer eyes then to behold iniquity; for his sacrifice must be without spot
or blemish, and that which comes from an unclean heaet is sported and defiled,
and unclean, for nothing that is pure can come forth of an unclean vessel;
but who can witness the second birth, and that the seed of the woman has
bruised the serpents head, which is the first promise, and faith which
purefieth the heart, then that which comes out is pure, proceeding from a pure
single heart, and this prayer God receives, and he has respect to it, and this
we own and witness, and this comes from the second birth, which is pure, for
the first birth is unclean and out of the command of God in the fall, in the
wrath, in the peevishness, and preversnesse, and frowardness, Cain like, and
the seed of the serpent is first in every one, and rules the head, but the
promise is the seed of the woman shull bruise the serpents head, so you who are
not come to this are still in the fall, and are not come to the first promise;
so all your self-acting and imitating, thinking to merit with your prayers and
praises, singings, and duties, and worships, and traditions, which are all in
vain, and you are sacrificing to an unknown God, a sacrifice of the earth Joh.
4. 22.
from the first nature, which God has no respect to* and the flaming sword is
set against that, to keep from the tree of life, for both drunkards, and
swearers, liers, proud, coveteous, and all manner of unrighteous 1. Sam. 15.
22. Isa. 1. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17
persons are offering up sacrifices, and are in their formal worships and
duties, thinking that is sufficient to pacify for our sins, and yet does not
repent* but says the Lord, bring no more vain oblations, away with your new
Moons and Sabbaths, they are abomination, Pro. 22. ^6. Jer. 2^. 12. 13. Matthew.
6. 21. Romans 8. 26.
and my soul loathes them, when you spread forth your hands I will hide mine
eyes from you, yea when you make many prayers, I will not harken, your hands
are full of blood, wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings
from before mine eyes, cease to evil, learn to do well, so it is the heart that
the Lord requires, and where your treasure is, there will your heart be also,
and says the Apostle, we know not how to pray as we ought, but as the spirit
makes intercession with sighs and groans, and this is more acceptable to God
from an honest single heart, then the long prayer of the Pharisees.

We are accused to be destructive to the Ministry.
The true Ministry of Christ we own and witness, and the Ministers and
Messengers of Christ, we own and witness, but those who have gotten the letter
and form to trade with which was spoken forth freely and denies the life and
power, those we deny, their Ministry, and all those who go to get humane
learning, and are certain years as it were serving a prentiship pretending to
study Divinity, and when their time is expired, they go amongst ignorant blind
people, and gets a certain place, and a certain wage, and so sells that which
they have studied and gotten into the brain, and those which receives it, gets
it into the brain, and so they live upon dust, which is the serpents meat,
feeding upon the tree of knowledge both Priest and people, Mich. 3. 10.
death feeding death, and with the notion begets into the notion, and feeding
the carnal mind with the carnal letter, and this is the cause why drunkards,
swearers, liers, proud, covetous, envious, wrathful and contentious ones, and
all unrighteous persons has gotten the letter to talk of, or discourse of,
though in the Alehouse or tippling house, but this Ministry works no
reformation, only has the form, and leads into the form, and denies the
life and power which is neither to be bought nor sold for money, so from such
we turn away who come by the will of man, and approved by the will of man, and
are upheld by the will of man, and not by the Will of God, and their call and
ministry we deny, which is mediate, and formal imitation and the invention of
man, and so a mere delusion, and this is the cause why the land so overflowes
with iniquity, and all manner of ungodliness and no Jer. 23. 29. 30. 31. 32.
better reformation wrought amongst them, their ministry is so dark, and dead
and cold, and yet the land full of teachers, and yet the people lost for want
of teaching, and so they spend their moneys for that which is not bread, and
their labor for that which profits Isa. 35. 2.
not.

But who can witness an immediate call by God, from their outward callings and
countries, lands, liveings and possessions, into several co^untreys, to preach
Mark 16. 25. Amos 3. 7. 8. Amos 7. 14. 15 Gal. 1. 11, 12. 1. Cor. 1. 17, 18.
19, etc. Cap. 2. ^. Pet. 1. 21. Acts 2. 4 etc.
the free Gospel as they have received it, by the immediate inspiration of the
spirit, and speaks it, and speaks it forth as they are moved by the Holy Ghost,
and as the spirit gives them utterance, freely as they have received it freely,
by which ministry many are convinced, and as they abide in it are converted, as
many in the Nation can witness to the honor and glory of God, who are now new
creatures, and this call we own and witness, and this ministry we own and
witness, which is immediate, and stands in the Will of God, and such covets no
man's silver nor gold, neither could be hired to a certain place, but travels
from place to place, and has no certain dwelling place, and such are the true
Acts 20. 3^. 1. These. 9. 6. as in Acts.
Ministers of Jesus Christ, who makes the Gospel free and without charge, and
this we own and witness, and for the testimony of this true ministry some of
us are imprisoned, some stoned, some stocked, whipped and shamefully entreated*
as vagabonds and deluders, and wanderers, and raisers of sedition, and
pestilent fellows, and esteemed not worthy to live in the Nation, both by
Priest and people, and rulers who are out of the commands of God, and are
vagabonds and fugitives from God, who go in the way of Cain to envy and murder
the innocent, and because we declare against Acts 24. 5. 6. Acts 22. 22.
Witness the town of Cambrige the well head,
all who comes not in by the door, but seeks to clime up another way by their
study, inventions, and serpentine wisdom, and knowledge, and so are theivs and
robbers, and those are they which are now so set up and extold in England, with
great augmentations* and benifices, by the arm and will of flesh, now heads of
England, and such Ministers, and their ministry we deny, for the hand of the
Lord is against them, but Ioh. 10. ^
this which we own is no new call, nor no new ministry, but the same which was
with the Prophets and Apostles and all who God sent witnessed, and here is the
difference of the Ministers of the world and the ministers of Christ the one
comes by the will of man, the other by the will of God* and the one is upheld
by the will of man, the other by the will of God contrary to the will of man,
and the one of the letter, and the other of the spirit, and the one has the
form and shadovv, and the other the life and substance, and the effects and
fruits of their ministry makes them manifest, but from 2. Tim. 3. 5*
such turn away, who have the form, but not the life and power, for they are
mere deceivers, and witches, bewitch people from the truth, holding forth the
shadow instead of substance, and what is the shadow to the substance, or what
is the chafe to the wheat, he that has an ear to hear, let him hear and
understand*

We are accused to deny all Magistracy and government.
I answer, this is false, for we own it in the place, 1. Ioh. 3. 4,
for whilst there is transgression, there must be a law, and while the Devil
has power over man, there will be transgression, so the law was added, because
of transgression, and the Divil was the Gal. 3. 29.
cause of it, so there must be a law without to keep those who are without the
fear of God in subjection* else they would destroy one another, and Cain would
destroy Abel, for this is the Devils work, and so for 1. Pet. 2. 14.
this end was the law given forth to curb evil doers, and to preserve and
encourage them that do well, and it was according to that in the conscience,
just, holy, and good, according to the will of God, and serviceable in its
place, and true Government, according to the law of God, is serviceable in its
place, Romans 7. 12.
and all Magistrates who fear God, and hate coveteousnesse, and are guided by
the light of God in the conscience, and executes the law in its place, without
partiality and respect of persons, and such are serviceable in their place, and
this we own, and honor and are subject to for conscience sake, but the Romans
4. 15 Romans 8. 1* Gal. 5. 23. Romans 8. 8. 2. Sam. 23. 3. Pro. 28. 15. 16. Pro.
25. 18. Pro. 29. 10 Isa. 14. 15. Iam. 2. 9.
righteous are from under the outward law, for they are a law unto themselves,
neither is there need of any law amongst them who walk not after the flesh, but
after the spirit, for against such there is no law, but he that walks after the
flesh cannot please God, neither know how to rule, nor govern, who cannot
witness his own will, subjected by the law of God in the heart, but is guided
by his own will, and stands in his own will, and such winks at deceit, and
rules with partiality and respect of persons, and so transgresses the law of
God, which respects no man's person, and also gives forth laws in his own
wills, which takes hold of the righteous, persecutes the righteous* and
countenances and encourages the heathen, who Hos. 4. 18.
know not God, so Cain slayes Abel within them, and they suffer Cain to slay
Abel without them, and the wicked and ungodly has more liberty in the Nation
then the righteous, and so the land abounds with iniquity, oppression and
treachery, because such corrupt Magistrates wink at deceits for carnal ends, and
upholds iniquity, and oppression; and treads truth under foot, and this is the
cause why the lands so abounds with all manner of ungodliness, and deceit,
falsehood, tyranny, oppression, and perscution, and yet full of Magistrates,
and officers, and corrupt Magistrates puts corrupt Magistrates in office, and
so they bear with, and winks at one another, and feeds and nourishes up deceit
amongst them, unless they cross one another will, and then they are as much
in deceit on the other side, seeking and preventing the law for revenge, and
such as these upholds these corrupt Ministers, and false prophets which the
Nation swarms of, and they can have a law to maintain their deceit, and uphold
them Est. 3. Dan. 1, 3. Isa. 23. Isa. 5. 27. 10. Psalm. 82. 1. 3.
in oppression, and so the beast upholds the false prophet, and they combine
together against the simple; and so the law is made a staulking horse to
deceive the simple, and they will pervert and wrest the law out of its place,
and act contrary to their own law against the righteous, and such Magistrates,
and such government, we honor, but denies, and testifies against it, as the
Prophets of God always did, for by such Magistrates and government did the
righteous ever suffer, and for the same testimony of a pure conscience, I have
and do suffer, by such corrupt Magistrates, and hundreds more in the nation who
are redeemed out of Zeph. 3. 3. Hof. 4. 18.
transgression, who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit, and Haman
who stood in his corrupt will would have destroyed Mordecai, because he crossed
his will, and could not bow to him, and also Pharaoh and Nebucadonezer, and
Herod who headed John who stood in their own wills, but the hands of the Lord
they did Mar. 6. 17, etc. E^t. 3. 8.
not escape, and so corrupt Magistrates say we deny all magistracy and
government, as Haman did, but Christ comes to fulfill and end all outward laws
and government of man, and he himself reigned, for as truth and righteousness
grows the law is fulfilled and passes away, and the lion and the lamb lie
down together, and this is the cause why corrupt Magistrates beat down the
truth as much as they can, and so to uphold themselves, but God will deliver
his own, and Pharaoh will he plague and confound, but such Magistrates as are
guided by the light of God in the conscience, and rules and governs by it,
without partiality, or respect of persons, in singleness of heart,
discharging their Romans 13. 3, 4.
consciences before the Lord, and executing the Law in its place, and such
Magistrates, and such government we own and honor in our hearts, for such
are a terror to evil doers, and for the praise and encouragement of those that
do well, and such bears not the svvord in vain, but stands in the Will of God,
which is a cross to their own wills and rules, for God and not for
themselves, and this government is of God, and not of man, nor after the will
of man, neither takes hold of any tender conscience, nor oppresses it, but
stands in the place where it is set; and some such Magistrates there has been
in the Northern parts of this Nation, who witness the Law of God set up in
their hearts, and feared God and hated covetousness, and testified against
those who did not; and so corrupt Magistrates sought to put them out, so let
all who are single hearted judge who are destructive to true Magistracy and
government.

We are accused to be destructive to all Superiority and Honor, Breeding and
Manners, because we cannot put off our hats, nor follow the fashions of the
world, nor respect any persons, but speaks the plain word thou to any one*
Rich or Poor.

In the beginning when God made Man, he made him to be Genesis 1. 26, 27 28.
Lord over all creatures, but not Man to be Lord over Man: Yet he was to be
servant to God, and when he had disobeyed the command of God, God spoke to
Adam, and Adam spoke to him, and God thoued Adam, and Adam thoued him, and here
was the plain language betwixt God and Adam. And when God appeared to Moses in
the Bush, God thoued Moses, and Moses thoued him; and this was the plain
language which ever passed betwixt God and his people in all Ex. 4. 10, 11, 12,
13. Acts 9. 5, 6.
Ages: and thou that disdains to be thoued, would exalt thy self above God, who
thou's God in thy formal prayers, and scorns to take it thy self; therefore
thou must come down as Lucifer did: but it is Lucifer in thee that is exalted,
who must not be honored, but must be cast down into the pit, and it is he who
is head in man who would be honored, and would be superior, and would be
above God, and calls this Manners 2 These. 2. 4.
and Breeding to bow to him and honor him, and he has vented ways whereby he
is honored and exalted and worshipped, and he calls this Manners and Breeding,
and who can honor him the most, and exalt him the highest, those he says is
the best bred, and of the best breeding, and those he calls Noblemen and
Gentlemen, and the other he calls Yeomen and Common people, and Inferiors,
though they all honor him, but they observe it not so much as the other; but
their minds is more set upon the earth and earthly things, to get wealth and
riches, and those he calls provident careful people; but he that seeks
preferment in the world, and would be exalted and set up* seeks to get his
breeding in as excellent manner as he can, that so he may get in favor with
Lucifer that sits in the Courts and high Palaces; and so long as he pleases
Lucifer he Obad. 3. 4.
will set him up, but both he and Lucifer must be cast down into the pit
together: and here is the ground of the worlds Superiority, Nobility,
Gentility, Honor, Breeding and Manners; and here they Lord over one another by
their corrupt wills, and here is the ground of all Tyranny and Oppression;
Rackings and Taxings, and Wars and Imprisonments, and Envy Jam. 4. 1. 2. 3.
and Murder, and the Persecutions of the Righteous* all arises from proud
Lucifer, the Lust in man, who would be honored; and all this is in the Fall
and under the Curse; but Mordechai could not bow to him in Hamon, and therefore
he sought to destroy him, and informed the King against him, and all the Jews
in the Nation, and said they were a scattered people, and their Laws were
diverse from all people, neither did they observe the Law of the King: Then he
set up a pair of Gallows for Mordechai, but Hamon was hanged on his own East.
6. 1. 2.
Gallows, and was cast down to nothing, and Mordechai is exalted in his stead:
So there is a time that Mordechai despised and Hamon exalted; and there is a
time that Hamon is cast down, and Mordechai exalted; and there is a time that
Esau Genesis 25. 3. Exodus 11. 9.
reigns over Jacob, and there is a time that the elder serves the younger; and
there is a time that Pharaoh rules and oppresses the Israelites, but there is a
time of Isreal's deliverance, and Pharaoh drowned in the sea: So there is a time
that Antichrist sits in the temple of God as God, and says he is God, and
Christ lies low in the Manger; but there is a time that 2 These. 2. 4. Rev. 19.
he must be cast down into the pit, and Christ alone exalted. He that can
receive it let him; but in all Ages the children of God could not bow to
Lucifer nor his Image; and this was Dan. 3.
the cause why Shadrach, Mesech, and Ahednego was cast into the fiery Furnace;
and this was the cause why Daniel was cast into the Lions den, but by the hand
of his God, whom he alone Dan. 16.
worshipped and honored, he was delivered and exalted, and his Adversaries
cast down in his place; and this was the cause why the Prophets were always
persecuted and imprisoned, and the Apostles, who came to turn the world upside
Acts 7. 6.
down; and this is the cause now why the Ministers and Messengers of Jesus
Christ are imprisoned, stoned, stocked, whipped, and shamefully entreated, whom
the Lord is pleased immediately to call from their outward callings, and
countries, and 2 Cor. 5. 16. 17.
sends them abroad into several Countries to preach his name, no more after the
Flesh but after the Spirit; and who* knows him, must know him no more after the
Flesh, but after the Spirit; and those come to turn the world upside down,
being crucified to the world, and the world to them; and these cannot Gal. 6.
14.
honor Lucifer, nor bow to Lucifer, nor worship his Image, though there was a
time when they did, but that which was done in Egypt, when they knew not God,
but now Lucifer and his Image is cast down, and Christ alone exalted, and the
pure and perfect Law is witnessed, which respects no man's person, but God alone
honored and exalted, and this we witness; for amongst us there are no
Superiors after the Flesh, but Christ is the head, and amongst those who was
redeemed Col. 1. 18.
out of the world, there were no Superiors but only Christ the Head, and all
the rest fellow servants; and he that would be the greatest should be the
least, and he that respects persons Mat. 20. 25. 26. 27.
commits sin, and the Angel would not suffer John to bow to him, but said he
was his fellow servant; and this we witness, who are redeemed out of the
kingdom of the Devil* from amongst the children of this world into the
kingdom of the Son, who are crucified to the world, and the world to us, by
the spiritual Cross of Christ, in which we joy and glory, amongst whom there
is no partiality, nor respect of persons, 1 Cor. 12. 12. 13. Acts 4. 32. Romans
6. 4. 5.
but all in union in one, though ten thousand; and here God alone is King, and
he alone is honored, exalted, and worshipped, no more after the flesh but after
the spirit; for we have no other God in whom our hearts delight; and here proud
Lucifer and his Image is cast out, and here all his honors is thrown down, and
his breeding and manners, and fashions and customs, and words and ways, and
worships which are after the Flesh and not after the Spirit, whereby he sets up
himself, and causes his Image to be worshipped; and this is the cause why
rages in his kingdom, wheresoever we come, and says we are destructive to all
Superiority and Magistracy, and Ministry, and Honor, Breeding, and Manners,
and turns the world upside down; for he knows where Christ comes he Rev. 19.
comes to take his kingdom from him, and cast him down into the pit, and there
he must be tormented quick, and all who bears his image or his mark; and these
are some of his marks, which he calls Nobility, Gentility, honor, breeding,
manners and civility.

But true Nobility we own, the seed of God is noble wheresoever it is born up,
and who can witness to the head of the Serpent bruised, and the seed of God
born up to reign and rule, there is true Nobility, there is true Gentility, no
more after the flesh but after the spirit: and this is to be honored: for
honor is due to this both in Magistrate or Minister, Fisherman or Ploughman,
Heardsman or Shepherd, wheresoever it rules without respect of person, and
here fear to whom Romans 13. 7.
sear, honor to whom honor; and this is no more after the Flesh but after the
Spirit: And here all the true Prophets of God were Noblemen and Gentlemen,
sprung of the noble seed, though of the Nobles and great ones of the earth they
were disdained and reproached, because according to the 1* Kings* 19. 19. Amos
7. 24, 15. Deuteronomy. 32. 3. Deuteronomy. 37. 5.
world they were of low degree, some of them Ploughmen, some Heardsmen, some
Shepherds, and therefore they persecuted them and destroyed them, yet they
were gentle and bore all. Christ was noble, sprung of the noble seed, though of
the Great ones and Nobles of the earth he was disdained, reproached and scorned
to be the King of the Jews, because according to the world he was of low
degree, and supposed to be a Carpenters son, so they spit upon him and
disdained him, and crucified him, yet he was gentle and bore all. The Apostles
were noble, sprung of the noble seed, though Mat. 13. 55, 56, 57.
of the Nobles and Great ones of the world they were despised, and disdained,
and reproached* because according to the world they were of low degree, some of
them Fishermen and the like, and came to turn the world upside down, so they
were dispersed, persecuted, and killed, yet they were gentle and bore all: But
those were all noble sprung of the noble seed, and so is all now who are of the
same seed: and those were all gentle, sprung of the gentle seed, and those have
the nature but not the name, and to those belong the true honor, not after the
Flesh but after the Spirit: for they denied the Acts 7. c.
honor of the world, and therefore Christ said, I receive not honor from men:
and said to his Apostles, Be ye not called Masters, Mat. 23. 8, 9, 10, 11.
wither call any Master upon earth: and though the Princes of this world
exercise dominion one over an there, yet it shall not be so amongst you, but be
that would be the greatest amongst you, let him be your servant: and said he,
How can ye believe which receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor
that comes from God only; and here the true honor is no more after the Joh.
5. 44.
Flesh but after the Spirit; and here you who are giving and receiving outside
earthly honor, you are in the unbelief, out of the doctrine of Christ,
cringing, and bowing, and honoring, and exalting the Devil, and worshipping
the Beast and his Image, which all the world wonders after and worships, Rev.
13.

And as for Manners and Breeding, Courtesy and Civility, Mat. 7. 12. Ezekiel 8. 16.
Learn to do as you would have all to do unto you, and speak every one truth
to his neighbor: And let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth*
but such as is good for the use of edifying; for evil communication corrupts
good manners; but let your yea be yea, and nay be nay; for whatsoever is more
is evil: and breed* your children so, and here is good Manners and Breeding,
Courtesy and Civility; and who are of the right Mat. 5. 37.
noble seed has this Manners and this Breeding, but the Nobles and Great ones
of the earth want this Manners and this Breeding, and both Priest and People of
all sorts, according to the world: And here is the ground of all true Nobility,
Gentility, Majesty* Honor, Breeding, Manners, Courtesy, and Civility, no more
after the Flesh but after the Spirit; for the natural man minds natural things,
and the spiritual man spiritual things, but the natural man receives not the
things of God: and this we own and witness, and the time is coming and now Romans
8. 5.
is, that before this seed every knee shall bow, and every tongue confess, and
the Kings and Nobles of the earth shall be bound Phil. 2. 9* 10 11. Psalm. 149.
8.
in Chains and Fetters of Iron: and here is also the ground of the Nobility,
Gentility, Superiority, Honor, Breeding, and Manners of the world, which is
after the Flesh but not after the Spirit, sprung from proud Lucifer, the Lust
that reigns in man, and are not yea and nay, but calls it manners to say nay,
and take it, or do it: and so they have the name, but not the nature, and so
are Bastards and no Sons, who are not sprung from the noble gentle seed: and to
those Honor is not due, neither can we bow unto them: for if we should, we
should set the Devil in the room of God, and give unto him that which is due to
God, which when we were blindness through Rev. 13. c. Rev. 149. 10.
ignorance we did, and so worship the Beast and his Image, which all the world
worships and wonders after; for they that are proud and lofty, which is the
Image of the Devil, for the Devil is the father of Pride, and in gay attire,
those the world worships and wonders after, and extols and exalts into high
places: but since the Lord has opened our eyes, this we cannot do, but
testifies against it wheresoever we come Rev. 18. 6.
both in words and actions, and so we are destructive to the worlds
Superiority, Nobility, Gentility, Honor, Breeding and Manners, which is after
the Flesh, and not after the Spirit, therefore the Devil hates us in the Nobles
and Great ones of the world, but we give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars,
and unto God that which is Gods, but we cannot give unto Mat. 22. 21.
Caesar that which is Gods, but fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor is due:
He that has an ear to hear let him hear, and understand: For, says the Lord,
if I be a Master where is my fear? If I be a Father where is my honor? Mal. 1.
6.

And now something concerning the partiality that is among the children of this
world in their Breeding and Manners.

First concerning the word thou or thee, which all those which are their
Priests and Teachers knows, that thou is the proper word to one particular
person, and is so all along the Scriptures throughout to any one, without
respect of persons; yea to God himself; and the word you is the proper word to
more than one, but not to one; and so it is all along the Scriptures
throughout. As for example, at all times when the Apostles spoke to Christ they
used the word thou or thee unto him, and when he spoke to more than one of
them, he used the word you or ye: but if he spoke but to one, he used the word
thou, or thee, as in Mat. 16. 14, 15, 16, 17. verses: And also Paul thoued King
Agrippa and King Agrippa thoued him, as in Act. 26. 27, 28 verses, and so all
along the Scripture; and so it is plain, that now it is an invention of proud
Lucifer in man to exalt himself, as it will plainly appear; for amongst the
Great and Rich ones of the earth, they will either thou or you one another if
they be equal in degree, as they call it; but if a man of low degree in the
earth come to speak to any of them, then he must you the Rich man, but the Rich
man will thou him: Nay you shall find it so betwixt Priest and People: If a
poor Laboring man come before one that you call a Minister, though he be one
of his hearers, and one who helps to maintain him according to his ability, yet
he must you the Priest, and the Priest thou him; and here the heathen Lord over
one another Math. 20. 25 Prove. 22. 7. 1 Cor. 9. 19.
by their corrupt wills; but this is contrary to the Apostles and Ministers of
Christ, who made themselves servants to all, and yet those will call themselves
the Ministers of Christ; and the word Minister signifies a servant, and they
are masters, and so they have gotten the Name but not the Nature, and so are
Bastards and no Heirs, who are not sprung from the gentle seed, and yet they
are hired as servants of men, and yet bears rule by their means as masters over
those that maintains them: Jer. 5. 30. 31.
so that he that has an eye to see let him see the deceits of the professed
Ministers of England.

And now as concerning the putting off of the hat, which is another invention
of proud Lucifer, whereby he is honored and worshipped, and exalted in man;
but the Scripture does not speak of any such fashion used in any Age, but Man
has found out many inventions since the Scripture was recorded; and now it is
so, that it is a fashion throughout the Land, whereby one man is exalted above
another; for if a poor man come before a rich man, it may be the rich man will
move his hat, that is called courtesy and humility; but the poor man must stand
with his hat off before him, and that is called honor and manners, and due
respect unto him; but if the rich man do bid him put it on, it is counted a
great courtesy, and Prove. 1. 23. Prove. 19. 4.
he gets honor to himself there to be counted a courteous man. But this
difference or respect of persons was never ordained by God but by the Devil,
whereby he exalts himself in man; but James the Apostle of Jesus Christ
witnessed against it, as in Jam. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and so on; and said, He that
respects persons commits sin; for there is no respect of persons Acts 10. 3. 4.
with God: and therefore says James, Howl ye rich men; and here your
professed Ministers abides not in the doctrine of 2 John 9.
Christ, and so has not God, but the Devil and his Ministers they are whom
they exalt. And now you shall see the partiality of the names in this your
breeding and manners: First, from a poor man to a rich man it is called honor
and due respect and manners; from a rich man to a poor man it is called
courtesy and humility, but amongst the Rich and Nobles of the earth it is
called courtlike breeding, but of those of lower degree it is called country
breeding, and amongst the lower sort of the world it is called neighborhood
and civil respect one to another; and so the Devil has covers for all his
deceit, and so he is honored and exalted both in Court and Country, but the
highest in the Court, and therefore they have the highest title: But woe unto
them that hides their sin, Isa. 30. 1.
and covers with a covering, and not of the spirit of the Lord: But this is the
riches of the world, and the devil that makes so many degrees, as between Dives
and Lazarus, and Hamon and Luke 16. 19, 20. Acts 17. 26.
Mordechai, for the Lord has made all the Nations of the earth of one mold and
one blood, but we who are redeemed out of his kingdom he calls us clowns and
fools, and says our Religion is built upon such small and frivolous things, and
stumbles at straws, and leaps over blocks, this says his wisdom, but it is
even death to him to bear these straws, especially where he is the highest
exalted; for it pulls down all his honor, and therefore do Rich men and Great
ones of the earth, and Rulers, and Priests, and Pharisees, persecute and
oppress us, and draw us before judgment seats, and would root us out of Iam.
2* 6. East. 3.
the Nation, as Hamon would have done by Mordechai and the scattered Jews,
because they cannot bear those straws; but I say whatsoever it is that comes to
be forbidden in the Conscience, it becomes a weight and a burden, though it be
never so small a thing in the eye of a Pharisee, so set none despise Ezekiel. 4.
10.
the day of small things, but some will call it stubbornness, obstinacy, pride,
and presumption, but the same nature would have called so in Mordechai, who
could not bow to Hamon as the rest did that sat by; and so let every one take
heed of speaking evil of that you know not, lest you call good evil and evil
good: for the woe is pronounced against such, but 2 Pet. 2. 12. Jude 10.
they that were after the Flesh, always, in all Ages persecuted them that were
after the Spirit; And so it is, not many mighty, nor many noble, nor many wise
after the flesh are called, but God has chosen the foolish things of this
world to confound the wise, and the weak to confound those that are mighty,
that no flesh should glory in his presence, 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27, 29.

We are accused that we say we are perfect without sin. I answer: Man was
perfect without sin before the Fall, or else he could not have been the Image
of God; for God is pure Genesis 1. 27. Genesis 3. 24.
and perfect, and he made man after his own Image, pure and perfect without
sin, but when he sinned he defaced his Image, and lost his pure estate, and was
drove out of Paradise, and became the Image of the Devil, for sin is the Image
of the Devil, and here all sin is in the Fall, and who are in the Fall are in
the Devils kingdom, which is impure, and imperfect, and unclean, but God
promised the seed of the woman shall Genesis 3. 15. Luke 4. 18. Mat. 10. 11.
bruise the Serpents head, and Christ the seed said he was come to preach
deliverance to the captive, and to heal the broken hearted, and to seek that
which was lost, and to bring again that which was driven away, and this was
his work, to redeem to man that which man had lost. Now consider what man has
lost, and I shall leave this as Querie with all both Priests and People, who
deny perfection from sin here, whether Christ is but a p^rt of Redeemer, or a
perfect and full Redeemer, and which is the place betwixt heaven and earth
where man shall be made free or cleansed from sin, if not upon the earth,
seeing that no unholy, nor unclean thing can enter the kingdom of God? But who
can witness this, has passed Rev. 21. 27. 1 Cor. 15. 5.
through death, and that has none who plead for sin, neither can they witness
Christ come, but for some simple ones sake I shall speak more clearly of this,
for it is a great delusion of the Devil, to keep people in sin, to tell them,
they shall never be made free from sin so long as they are upon the earth, and
brings this Scripture to maintain it, He that says he has no sin deceives
himself, and is a liar; but he tells them Christ dyed for all, and if they can
but lay hold on him by Faith, he will not impute their sins unto them, though
they sin daily; for the righteous man sins seven times a day, and all the holy
men of God sinned; and so he takes Scripture to maintain his kingdom, and
this he delivers by the mouth of his Ministers, which he sends abroad to
deceive the Nations, leading people in blindness, full of sin and corruption,
ever learning, and never comes to the knowledge of the Truth, nor never shall
do for them, and here he carries them to an easy delightsome way to the
Flesh, but the end is death, and so heals them up in their sin with a feigned
formed faith which perishes; John 8. 13.
and here they settle upon the Lees, and set up a rest in the Devils Kingdom,
which is sin; and here many are merely blinded and hardened, and all tenderness
of Conscience is done away: But you shall find that he that sooths you up in
this Faith is the greatest enemy of your souls, and whosoever witnesses
Christ their Redeemer, shall witness that he is come to destroy the works of the
Devil, which is sin, and to redeem out of the fall, out of sin, and out of the
Devils kingdom, which is sin, and all sin is in the Devils kingdom, which is
in the fall; but for this end Christ is manifested, to destroy the works of the
Devil, and to redeem out of the fall, out of the Devils kingdom into his own
kingdom, and no unclean thing Rev. 21. 27. Romans 6. 6.
can enter therein, but none can witness this Redemption but through the
death, and through the Cross which Paul rejoiced in, by which he was crucified
to the world, and the world to him, and had put off the body of sin, and was
made free from the Law of sin which once warred against his mind, which once he
complained of, which Scripture the unlearned, which are strangers from his
conditions, who reads them with the carnal eye, now perverts, and wrests to
their own destruction; 1 Cor. 4. 15.
and this we witness, who through the Lamb our Savior do reign above the
World, Death, Hell* and the Devil; but none can witness this whose eye is
outward, looking at a Redeemer a far off, and still live in sin; but who
cannot witness this Redemption here, must never witness it; for, as the tree
falls so it lies, and sin is the mark of the Beast, and who lives in sin has
the mark of the Beast, and bears his Image, and it is written that the Beast
and false Prophets, and all that 1 John. 1. 8. Romans 3. 23.
have his Mark or Image must be cast into the Lake that burns, and must drink
of the wine of the wrath of the Almighty powered out without mixture.

But as for that Scripture that says, If we say we have no sin we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us: All have sinned and fallen from the Lord,
and he that has sin, and says he has no sin, deceives himself and is a
liar; but if he confess and forsake his sin* God is faithful and just to
forgive him his sin, and to cleanse him from all unrighteousness; and this John
witnessed, 1 John 1. 9.
and he that can witness this, is no liar if he say he is cleansed from all
unrighteousness, but witness forth the truth and a perfect Redemption; and the
same John said, He that is born of God sins not, neither can he sin because his
seed remains 1 John 3. chap.
in him, and he that sins is of the Devil and never knew God: By this are the
children of God, and the children of the Devil made manifest; this John
witnessed, he was no liar, neither did deceive himself but spoke the truth; and
the same John said, God is light, and in him is no darkness at all: If we say
we have fellowship with God, and walk in darkness, we lie, and 1 John 1. 5. 6.
7
do not the truth; but if we walk in the light we have fellowship one with
another, and the blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin: this John
witnessed, he was no liar, neither did deceive himself; and this John said, He
that has hope in him purifieth himself 1 John 3. 3. Acts 15. 9.
even as he is pure, and faith in God purifieth the heart: Now try your Faith
and hope who plead for sin, for sin lodges in the heart, and while there is
sin the heart is unclean; now here you may see al your faith is vain, and your
hope which does not purify the heart; and so it is feigned hypocrites faith,
and not faith in God, and so perishes; and who can witness Christ died for
them, have passed through death; for none can live with him but those who dye
with him; and this is the true Baptism to be baptized into his death by one
spirit into one body; and how can they that are dead to sin live any longer
therein? and who can witness this has faith in him, which purifieth the
heart, and removes mountains, and the pure in heart sees God, and this the
Apostles witnessed, and that he was made free from sin, and more than
Conqueror, through Faith in Christ Jesus; he was no liar, and said that Christ
was come to redeem unto himself a pure Church, not having spot or wrinkle, and
though once they were sinners like the world, but they were washed and cleansed
by the blood of the Lord Jesus, and the spirit of 1 Cor. 6. 11. Ephesians. 4. 22. 23.
24. Col. 3. 9. 10.
our God, and had put off the Old man, and put on the New which after God is
created in righteousness and true holiness; but this you are strangers from who
plead for sin, and are such as call your selves a Church and are not, but the
synagogue of Satan, in whom the Prince of darkness reigns, which rules in
the children of disobedience; and as for that which blind Rev. 3. 9. Ephesians. 2. 2.
people calls Scripture, who says, The righteous man that is, sins seven times
a day, there is no such Scripture, for it is false; but though the righteous
fall he rises again by repentance; and this the holy men of God witnessed; and
though David through lust disobeyed the Lord, and forgot his God, yet he rose
again by repentance and after witnessed that he walked in the midst of his
house in the pureness of his spirit; and Psalm. 101.
though Peter sinned through weakness, yet he rose again by repentance, and
afterward exhorted the Church to be holy as God is holy; but this you cannot
witness who plead for sin, and are not yet come to repentance, but denies
Christ daily, and are convinced, but does not repent; but they who dwell 1 Pet.
1* 15, 16.
in the righteousness of Christ sin not; for they that are alive in
righteousness are dead to sin; and they that live in sin are dead to
righteousness; but how can they that are dead to sin Romans 6. 18. v. 20.
live any longer therein? and this is the Devil which pleads for sin the enemy
of the soul; for by sin did he obtain his kingdom, and so his kingdom stands
in sin; and your Teachers which tells you, you can never get out of sin, nor be
cleansed from sin here, erres, not knowing the Scripture nor the power Mat. 22.
29.
of God, but denies the end of Christ's coming, and brings another doctrine
which they have from their Father the Devil; and so are the deceivers which
Paul speaks of, who creep into Steeple Houses, and leads silly people captive,
full of sin and corruption, 2 Timothy 36. 7. 2 John 10. Ezekiel. 22. 28* Jer. 14. 13.
14. Ezekiel. 13. 18
ever learning and never come to the knowledge of truth, and so are not to be
received, but held as accursed; for they daub you up with untempered mortar,
seeing vanity, and divining lies; who says, the Lord says, when he never
spoke to them; they have healed the hurt of the people slightly, and have sowed
pillows under their armholes, crying peace when there is no peace, because they
put into their mouths, and they are not ashamed, neither do they blush,
therefore they shall fall amongst them that fall, in the day that I visit them
says the Lord: And these are your Teachers that makes you, Isa. 9. 16.
habitation in your sin while you are upon the earth, and so your Leaders cause
you to err, but when the day of account comes, wherein the books must be
opened, and every one judged out of the books according to their works, by him
who sits upon the white Throne, and all must be cast into the Lake that burns
but those whose names are written in the book of life, and then you will find
those the utter enemies of your souls, who persuades your hearts in sins, and
he that has no sin will be in the best condition, and here all your feigned,
formed faith is unbottomed, and all your Priests found liars, deceivers, and
Antichrists, in whom the false Prophet rules, which deceives the Nations, who
must be cast also into Rev. 19. 20,
the Lake that burns, and there tormented for ever, and all that uphold him.

We are accused to deny Christ come in the flesh.
We witness the same Christ which ever was, now manifested in the flesh, and is
appeared in the likeness of sinful flesh to Romans 8. 3. Joh. 1. 14. 2 Cor. 5.
16.
condemn sin in the flesh, which is the Word, which became flesh, and dwelt
amongst the Apostles, this Christ we witness, no more after the Flesh but after
the Spirit; and before we knew him after the Spirit we had no profit by him,
but was in 1 Cor. 2. 2. Romans 6. 6, 7. 1 Cor. 12. 13 Gal. 6. 14. Gal. 5. 24.
the state of Reprobation, and so is all now who profess him in words, and know
nothing of him but by the Letter without them, and such deny Christ come in the
flesh who plead for sin, who live in sin, and do not witness him come; but
those who are crucified with him do live with him, and he in them; and none
are Christians of the flock of Christ, but who are baptized into his death by
one spirit into one body; and he that can witness this is crucified to the
world, and the world to him; but who talks of Christ to be their Savior, and
are still alive in the worlds nature, must first witness him a condemner, for
his first appearance is with sword, and breaks the peace, and makes the war,
and ends the war, and makes the peace, and this peace endures for ever, and so
he is a Condemner Luke 11. 21.
before he is a Savior, and he is a peace-breaker, before he is a peacemaker;
but who are at peace in their sin, the Serpent is head, and the strong man
keeps the house, and Christ they do not witness come in the flesh, but who
endures the war shall enjoy this peace, and he that can witness Christ his
Savior can witness this: but silence all flesh before the Lord, and let him
that names the name of God depart from iniquity: for he that says he knows
God, and keeps not his 2 Timothy 2. 19. 1 John 2. 4.
Comandements is a liar: For, says Christ, why call ye me Lord, and do not
things which* I say? And none can call Jesus Lord but by the Holy Ghost, so it
is plain you know not God who cannot keep his Commands, then how can you
believe in him whom you do not know.

We are accused that we judge people.
It is written, the Saints shall judge the world: and for judgment 1 Cor. 6.
2. John 9. 39.
I am come into the world, says Christ, that those which see not might see,
and that they which see might be made blind: and where Christ rules in his
Saints he judges the world, as Paul witnessed, It is no more I but Christ in
me, and he is come to reprove the world of sin, of righteousness, and of
judgment: of judgment because the Prince of the air is judged, who rules in
(...) Joh. 16. 8. 11.
the children of this world, and they cannot bear the righteous judgment of
Christ, but kicks against it, and calls him Devil, and so they kick against the
prick, which will the more torment them: and this is the spirit of truth which
come into Acts 1. 5. John 14. 17. Joh. 7. 7. Joh. 3. 19. 20.
the world, which the world cannot receive because he testifies of it that the
deeds thereof are evil, and this is the condemnation of the world, light is
come into the world, and men love darkness rather than life because their deeds
are evil, and every one that does evil hates the light, and will not come into
the light lest it should reprove them: yet they will say, Christ is meek, love,
and lowly: It is so, but not to ungodliness: but he is meek to the meek, and
lowly to the lowly, and love to the Seed of God, and his Saints are meek and
lowly, and bears all, both scandals, reproaches, persecutions, and
imprisonments, but to the Seed of the Serpent Christ is judgment, and woe, and a
sword to that which is for the sword, and a condemner to the wicked, and our
God is a consuming fire, and terrible to the wicked to consume the proud and
haughty in their imaginations: and here Christ is a Lion, and he is a Lamb, he
is a Condemner, and he is a Savior: he that Rev. 19. 15. Rev. 5. 5. Hos. 5. 14.
can receive him let him: the hungry and thirsty he feeds with live food, but
the fat he feeds with judgment, and that which would not bear his judgment,
must never know his peace, but is for judgment, and cries out as the Devil
did, who said he was come to torment them before the time, but the Teachers
Mat. 8. 29. Jer. 6. 14.
of the world have deceived the people long, crying peace to them, because they
put into their mouths, and healing them up in their sin, with a feigned formed
faith which works no* reformation, so sewing pillows under their armholes; and
here the Devil has reigned in peace* and now Christ is come with Ezekiel. 13. 18.
Rev. 12.
the sword to break his peace, with plague and judgment, and now he rages, and
stands up for his life, in all both Priest and People, and now the Beast makes
war with the Lamb, but it is hard for him to kick against the prick, for he
must be bound and cast into the pit, and there be tormented quick, and the
false Prophet, and all who bears his Image.

We are accused to deny the Church.
I answer, the true Church which is in God we own, and witness 1 These. 1. 1.
through death, but the worlds Church we deny; for the true Church is the Body
of Christ, made of tried stones, elect and precious, washed and cleansed by his
blood and spirit, that he might present it a glorious Church, not having spot
or wrinkle; but this is not a house of Lime and dead stones, nor the people
that meets in it; for all manner of unrighteous persons meets there, which is
the synagogue of Satan, and a Cage of unclean Birds, and like people like
Priest; but who comes to be elected into the Church of Christ which is
spiritual, denies the worlds Church which is carnal, and the worlds Teacher who
is carnal, selling the carnal for carnal money and earth; for Christ himself is
the Teacher of his Church, who feeds it with living eternal food freely, and it
needs no other Isa. 54. 13. John 14. 26. Ephesians. 4. 4. 1 Cor. 8. 10. Acts 7.
Teacher; and this Church we own and witness, but all other Churches we deny;
for the Church is but one and the Temple of God we own, which is at new
Jerusalem, the City of the living God, but all other Idol-Temples we deny,
which is the inyention and imaginations of man, and though God commanded
Solomon to build him a Temple, nevertheless God that made the world dwells not
in Temples made with hands; and when Christ the substance came he prophesied
against it, and also Stephen was stoned to death when he prophesied against it,
and this we witness whose bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, who are
now stoned and persecuted by such as know not the living God, but worship Idols
because we speak against their Idols 1 Cor. 6. 19.
Temple, which God never commanded to be built, but was set up by the imagining
Idolizing Papists, and upheld by the blind Protestant so called, and so they
cast out the Papists, and uphold their Idols, and so the inchanters Diviners
and Sorcerers of England, leads silly people in blindness to worship Idols
telling them they are the houses and Temples of God, which is a mere delusion.

We are accused to deny the Sabbath.
The Sabbath of the Saints we own, which is not for a day but everlasting, and
who dwells in Christ witnesses this Sabbath, which is the substance, and the
shadow without is vanished; Heb. 14. 10
for says Paul let no man condemn you in respect of meats and drinks, or of an
holy day, or of New Moons, or of the Saboth days, which are but shadows of
things to come, and so the world has the shadow, and the Saints the substance,
Col. 2. 16.
and you who have the shadow, persecute them who have substance, as the Seribes
and Pharisees and high Priests did, who had and upheld the Types and figures of
Christ, and persecuted them who was the substance, so they that are after the
flesh, persecuted them that are after the spirit, but your Sabbath is a shadow
of nothing, for the Jews Sabbath in the time of the law, was upon the seventh
day, which was the last day of the week, but yours is the first day of the
week; for which you have no scripture, and they were not to do their own ways,
nor* their own pleasure, nor speak their own words upon the Sabbath day, and
here you transgress in the Gal. 4. 29. Gen 2. 3. Isa. 58. 13.
figure, and walkin your own ways, and speak your own words, and do your own
pleasures, both of that day, and every day.

We are accused that we justify our selves, and condemn all other.

I Answer, When we were our selves, without the Spirit of God, and had a form
and profession of the Saints condition, which we did not possess, we seeked to
justify our selves in our profession, and earthly wisdom, and to exhalt our
selves and be something in the eyes of others; and here we were Pharisees, and
yet feigned Publicans, saying we were sinful, but thought higher of our selves
than others, though we were in the same nature, and here our justification was
of our selves and not of Christ, and here are all you Pharisees and feigned
Publicans, both Priests and Professors, who are in your earthly Wisdom,
feeding upon the Letter: but as the Light of Christ arise in us, all our
earthly wisdom wherein we were exalted, became foolishness, and self was
judged and denied, 1 Cor. 1. 20. 1 Cor. 3. 18. 19. 20. 21.
and all that which was of self, both wisdom and righteousness, wherewith we
covered over our filthy, lustful, unclean hearts, and so were as painted
Sepulchers, and here are all Professors at this day, who are feeding upon the
Tree of Knowledge, and as from under the Cross of Christ, but all would not
hide from the Light of God, but as it arose it searched through all, and Mat*
23. 27.
laid open all, and all our covers became rotten, and fell from us, and so it
will be with all Professors: As the Light of Christ does arise, and the Book of
Conscience is laid open, for no flesh must glory in his presence: But now we
have nothing 1 Cor. 1. 29. 30. 31.
but what we have received of the Father through death, and Christ is made over
unto us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, and though we
glory, we glory in the Lord; for we have nothing in our selves to glory of, and
the Saints thought it no presumption to call themselves the Sons of God, and
said they were of God, and all the whole 1 John 3. 7. and 5. 19.
world lie in wickedness, and here the same spirit would have accused them:
yet they were no Pharisees, and Christ thought it no robbery to be equal with
God, yet he was no Pharisee, though of the Pharisees he was judged a
Blasphemer, and as he is, so are we, says the Saints, yet they were no
Pharisees, Romans 8. 16. 11. Phil. 26. John 10. 3* 1 John 4. 17. John 14. 6.
and so who are made the Sons of God, it is no self justification to witness it
forth, neither those who are made free from sin, to witness it forth as the
Apostles did, and to witness forth the life and power of truth, and deny them
that have gotten the form, notion, or profession, and here Christ is the
witness and the justification; for the way is but one, and the truth is but
one, and they who dwell in the truth witness one with another; for the Light of
God owns its own, wheresoever it is; for God cannot deny himself, but they that
are not with us, are against us, and out of the truth in the state of
condemnation; for all who are out of the truth, are under Mat. 12. 13. 1 John
5. 12.
the curse in the fall, and this truth we witness, by the Spirit of the living
God, through death, the same truth as ever was, and there is that in every
conscience, shall bear us witness; yea in the Heathen, and condemn them that
hate it, (...)

We are accused to be one with the Ranters.
I Answer, it is false; for we abhor their principles in our Gal. 5. 17. Jam.
1. ^7.
hearts, and deny any liberty to the flesh, or any light or loos or vain
conversation, which they live in, or any thing which is impure or unclean; for
our principles are pure and clean, and is at enmity with any thing that is
impure or unclean; for purity and impurity, cannot agree together, and it is
our desires to keep our selves unspotted of the world; for that which is
unclean, defiles, and from that we are separated, who are 2 Cor. 6. 17. 18.
the Sons and Daughters of the living God; but some of them have tasted of the
love of God, and grace of God, and have had appearances of God: but by harkning
to the voice of the Serpent, and giving way to the lust, have turned with the
dog to the vomit, and the grace of God into wantonness, 2 Pet. 2. 22. Heb. 6.
6. Romans 1. 26.
casting his pure Law behind their backs, and walking despitefully against the
spirit of grace, and have crucified a fresh, the Lord of Life, and put him to
open shame; therefore has the Lord given them up to their own hearts lusts,
and vile affections, and their consciences seared as with a hot Iron; for it is
written, It is impossiblo that those who were once enlightened, Heb. 6. 4. 5.
and have tasted of the Heavenly Gift, and were made partakers of the Holy
Ghost, and have tasted of the good word of God, and the Powers of the world to
come, if they shall fall away, to renew them again to Repentance; but they have
deceived many with their alluring speeches, and have caused the truth of God to
be evil spoken of, by their pernicious lacivious ways: But woe, woe, be to them,
for double shall be their reward* but Mat. 8. 7. Rom 8. 1.
God is our witness, we deny and abhor all things which is filthy or unclean,
and though all the world condemn, it is without: For there is no condemnation
to those who are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the
spirit: and it is my tender desire toward all tender consciences that they may
take heed of giving any liberty to the flesh, least they Gal. 5. 13. 15. 16.
Heb. 1. 13.
lose the tenderness of conscience, and harden it by lust and uncleanness, for
nothing but purity will the Lord receive; for he is of purer eye, then to
behold iniquity.

We are accused that the ground of our Religion is Popery.
The ground of the Religion made manifest to us, is God himself, for God is the
Fountain of all truth, and truth is Religion, and Religion is truth, and this
truth we witness, made manifest by God the life of truth, and here is the
Religion which we witness forth; and here is the ground witnessed Joh. 16. 13.
Jam. 1. 27.
forth from the ground: and this Religion is pure, unspotted and springs from
the light which is pure, wherein there is no deceit, neither can be; for it
discovers all deceit* and leads out of it, both within and without; but deceit
discovers not deceit, for Satan divided against himself cannot stand; but all
Mat. 12. 28.
sects and opinions arises out of darkness, and the end is confusion: and so
as darkness is opposite to light, and death to life; so is all sects and
opinions against the true Religion, and all will side together against the
truth, though they be opposite one to another in judgment. as Pilate and Herod
did against Christ, and the Scribes and Pharisees, and High Priests and
Saduces, and the rude multude: so it is now, both Papist and Protestant, as
they call them, and all other sects and opinions, Acts 4. 25, 26. 27.
which arises out of the fall; for though they differ in judgment, yet they
spring from one root* and no difference in life; but the light strikes at the
root, which is darkness, and lays open the hidden things done in darkness, so
darkness cannot endure the light, and this is the condemnation of the world,
who love darkness rather then light, because their deeds are evil: and this is
the cause why our Religion is spoken against, more then any profession besides;
all Drunkards, Swearers, Liars, Whoremongers, Adulterers, Joh. 3. 19.
Thieves, Murderers, proud, covetous, lustful ones, and all unrighteous
persons, will speak against it, and call it delusion and heresy, and witchery,
and all manner of evil, which the Devil can invent, and those stands up for the
Priests, and persecutes the truth as it was in the time of Christ, and his
Apostles times, and this will all Pharisees and Professors do, as they ever did:
for they can wink at one another, and bear with M^t. 26. Act. 17. 4.
one another in deceit, but truth cannot at all bear with deceit, because there
is perfect enmity, as there was ever in all Ages, and it is no new thing, and
here all your Sects and Opinions is shut out of the light and are in darkness,
and so is confusion, both Popery and all other, but the truth is but 1 These. 5.
5. Acts 4. 32. 2 Cor. 5. 2.
one, and who dwells in the truth, dwells in the light, and are the children of
the light, and there is no confusion, but all of one heart and one mind:
Epistles written in one another hearts, and there is that in every conscience
which shall witness it to be the everlasting truth which ever was, is, and is
to be for ever, both in them that believe, and in them that John 3. 20.
perish, though to the condemnation of them that hate it, and this I witness by
the infallible spirit of the Lord, which cannot lie.

And now I have discharged my conscience, before all people, in the behalf of
the truth of God, not that I would have any to speak well of it, but from the
ground of it, for the Galat. 1. 10.
love and the hatred of the unrighteous is all one to me; but for some simple
ones sake I have laid open my self, and freely discharged my conscience, and I
doubt not that my labor is in vain; but whosoever owns the truth of God, must
own it through good report and evil report, and must be content 2 Cor. 6. 8.
Luke 6. 22.
to lose their good name in the World, as both Christ and his Servants did, and
the Servant must not be greater than his Lord.

And now a few words to all you Heads and Rulers, and Magistrates, in what
degree soever, who have the Power in your own hands, who by your power
persecutes and imprisons the Servants and Messengers of Jesus Christ, as
deluders and deceivers, witches and vagabonds, and have no ground for it, but
only by heresay, and the evil thoughts and immaginations of your own hearts,
and because they cannot please nor satisfy your corrupt proud wills, which is
your Law by which you prosecute them, not weighing nor searching the ground of
things: You are they in whom the Beast reigns, and his Image you bear, which
upholds the false Prophet, and tyranizes over the Nations by his corrupt will,
and causes them to bow to, and worship his Image: and you oppress Rev. 13.
Rev. 14. 9. 10. Mat. 23. 30. 31, etc.
and persecute those who cannot. You must drink of the wine of the wrath of the
Almighty, powered out without mixture; for in the bloody generation, you are
found, filling up your measure of your Fathers wrath, upon whom must come all
the Righteous blood, shed from Righteous Abel, until now, and this I say in the
presence of the living God, by the Spirit of the living God, that all you who
have had a hand in persecuting of them, guilt shall follow you in the
conscience, until you come to judgment; and therefore I charge you all by the
Lord, to take heed of meddling about Religion, or to lay your Law upon any
tender conscience; but see that your Law be according to that in the
conscience, which is pure and perfect, and meddle with such affairs as you are
set about, and rather give Liberty to Religion than take it away, as you own
the grace of God you will, and see that you discharge* your consciences there,
lest that while you are persecuting the truth, you neglect that which you are
set about; for you will both persecute them your selves, and suffer the bruits
to stone them, John 7. 51.
and strike, and buffet them, which is all contrary to your own Law; neither
when they are brought before you can they have the liberty of the Law, to clear
such accusations as is laid against them; but you will hear the Accusers and
not the Accused, and this is contrary to the Heathenish Law, and you are more
unjust than the very Heathen, who said, does our Law judge any one before it
hear him: and so for shame profess no more love to Christ in his nature, who
executes your Law upon his servants, upon such a fallible ground which no Judge
ought to do, by the Law of God, especially about Religion, but to search out
the ground of the matter on both sides, before he judge, but this he cannot do
about Religion, except he have the Spirit of the Lord; therefore take heed of
meddling about spiritual matters, lest through ignorance you call Christ
Beelzebub, and persecute him as a Blasphemer, and Deceiver, as many of you have
done, which is written in the book of conscience, and there you shall read it to
your sorrow.

And all you blind people who persecute, rail, and revile and reproach the
truth of God, and have no ground for it but by here-say, and the evil thoughts
and imaginations of your own hearts, one imagining one thing and another,
thing, as the tumult which gathered together against Paul, one crying one
thing, and another, another thing, and the most part knew Acts 19. 32.
not wherefore they came together, and so it is the same amongst you; but it is
good for you to know certainly what you speak against* before you speak, lest
you speak evil of that you know not, calling good evil and evil good;
putting darkness for light, and light for darkness, against whom the woe from
the Lord is pronounced, and it is written in the book Jude 10. Isa. 5. 20. Isa.
4. 15. Romans 2. 5.
of Conscience, and there you shall read it with weeping tears, therefore take
heed of treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath, and remember you are
warned.

And now something to all you tender hearted ones, who are convinced by the
light of God in your consciences, which tenders you consciences, for whose
sakes I have laid open my self freely, and so I desire that you may mind that
Light of God, to which I speak, which is my witness, which has convinced you,
that it may be your guide, which will lead you to conversion into the Life to
witness with me, against the world, that my labor may not be in vain, and look
not out at scandals, false accusations or reports, for this is the reward that
the Heb. 12.
righteous ever received of the world; and Christ our Lord and Captain showed
the example; as it is written, They who will live godly in Christ Jesus must
suffer persecution, and they that depart from iniquity make themselves a prey,
but that which cannot bear those things is not of God, but turn your ear inward
to that measure of light in you, which is without guile, that is gentle, that
can bear all, as it did, both in the Prophets and Jam. 5. 10.
Apostles and all the holy men of God; This led them through good report, and
evil report, through persecution and through death, and this is the way to
life, and who enters must enter this way; and here is the trial of faith, and
the trial of faith is 1 Pet. 1.
more precious then gold: so fear not but be willing to give up, and to part
with all, though it be never so near and dear, yea though it be thy bosom
friend and darling; for he that loves any thing better then me, is not worthy
of me, says the precious pearl, and he that will not forsake all and follow me
is not worthy of me; Moses thought it greater riches to suffer affliction Mat.
10. 37 Heb. 11. 25. 26.
with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of Pharoahs Court for a
season: for the pleasures of this world, and the afflictions of this world
endures but a time and passes away, For all things visible passes away, but
the joy of the Righteous endures for ever, but if our hopes was only in this
world, we were of all men most miserable; but he that endures to the end shall
Romans 8. 10. 1 Cor. 4. 17. 1 Cor. 15. 11. 2 Vim. 4. 7, 8.
have a crown of glory, as Paul witnessed, so fear not little flock but be
faithful, valiant, and bold, for it is your fathers will to give you the
kingdom, and a hundred fold shall you receive, of what you lose, whether Lands
or Livings, Wife or children, or whatsoever it is, the promise is to the
faithful, and your joy and advancement shall be in the destruction of your
enemies, when the Lord does make your enemies your footstool, Rev. 2. 10. Luk
12. 32. Rev. 19. 1, 2. Mat. 24. 15
but this is witnessed through the War, and he that endures to the end of the
War shall witness this, and this in my measure I witness, and out of tender love
from my soul, to your souls do I declare it, and desire that you may all endure
to witness with me; for Love is Charity, and the Light leads through all, and
so I rest in my habitation, known to all who can Read me in Spirit.

J. P.
Farewell.

