THE PARLIAMENT Arraigned, Convicted; Wants nothing but EXECUTION.

Wherein you may evidently discern All the blessed Fruits of their Seven Years
Session, tending to the Dishonor of God, the Ruin of the Church of Christ in
this Kingdom, the Vnkinging of His Majesty, the Destruction of our Laws, the
Erection of Tyranny, and the perpetual Bondage of a Freeborn People.

Written in the Year of Wonders, being the Eighth Year of the Lords and Commons
dissembled at Westminster;

BY Tom TYRANNO - MASTIX; alias,

MERCVRIVS MELANCHOLIOVS, (Well-wisher to all such Parliaments) To their
Everlasting Glory, Amen.

Printed for the Public View of all His Majesty's faithful Subjects; and are
to be sold at the old Sign of You may go Look. Anno Dom. 1648.

TO THE READER.
TO all or none that style themselves with the Title of true English; yet you
will say, that is a Bull; Well, let it be so, the Kingdom shall have a Skin,
Head, and Horns, and the Parliament the Body. Here you may see, and not see;
hear, and not hear; judge, and not judge; what the Author here presents, is for
your own, not others Good; you are under a very strong Delusion; the God of
this World has settled such a Dimness on your Eyes, that the Catarrhs are
almost irrecoverable; only the Author, out of an affectionate Zeal to the
public Good, has compounded this Collyrium or Eye Salve, whereby, upon the
first Receipt, you may easily discern your pristine Freedom, your present
Thraldom, your Sovereign's Misery, and the Subject's Slavery, pencil'd in plain
English, by

Your well-wishing Friend Tom. TYRANNO-MASTIX, alias MERCVRIVS MELANCHOLICVS.

To the Work.
Go little Creature, in thy poor Attire,
And crave a Kiss at every Hand thou meets;
Although thou halt no Merit to admire,
Yet be the bolder though thou beggest in the Streets.
If th'ask, what art? bid them look in and see,
Then Ten to One but thou shall welcome be.
To all true Subjects.
As a Co-partner in your sad Complaints,
To hear the doleful Sighing of your Souls,
I truly sorrow, yea my Spirit saints,
To see you perish through the proud Controules
Of Faction; yet let this your Hopes maintain;
The Sun, though bid in Clouds, will shine again.
To the Parliament.
They stumble soon, that going, gaze on Stars;
Your lofty Flight does predicate a Fall:
The sweetest Sins, when strained to the highest Jars:
Hark, how swift, Vengeance croaks your Funeral.
Though Heaven has seemed to smile, and Time comply:
Your Doom is just, and you condemned to die.
Saepe sinistra cava praedixit ab ilice cornix.
THE Parliament Arraigned, etc.
THere stands an Island between the Atlantic and Ducalidon Seas, stored with
all the chiefest Treasures of Nature; for Martial Achievements honorable
through the World, famous in the Production and Government of many glorious
Kings and Princes, where Peace did spread her silver Wings; and Christian
Unity, from the root of unfeigned Love, did branch itself unto the farthest
Boundaries of the Land, that the neighboring Nations might participate and
taste the Fruit thereof.

But as nothing visible can challenge Permanency; so Fortune, ambitious to show
herself Omnipotent, took Spleen against this Isle, and thereupon, in a raging
Mood, shut in her Day of Beauty, Love, and Peace, with dismal Clouds of
Contention, blasts all her Roses and Lillies of Happiness, and long-enjoy'd
Amity, with the noisome and pestiferous Showers of a sanguinolent and bloody
War. Thus it began.

The King thereof being of a tractable Nature, and too Liberal, guilty in the
satisfying the ambitious Desires of his Servants, caused some particular
Murmurings among the People; which once kindled, could not be allayed without a
Parliament, (a Convention of Lords and Commons, a Custom in necessitous Times,
continually used in that Isle; that is to say, diverse of the chiefest of them
drawn into one unite Body; but no sooner were they, by Royal Authority,
convened, but every Frog began to swell into an Elephant, to lift up their
Heels against their Head, and kick at that Majesty who had given them Being (an
Act of greatest Inhumanity!) who then, too late, did see, Though Kings are Gods',
yet they live in Palaces of Flesh. But Treason never went without a just
Reward; and this Parliament shall be enrolled in the Monuments of Fame, for the
most traitorous that ever was; who, instead of curing the National Maladies,
added fresh Fuel to their increasing Flames; dethrones their Liege Lord and
Sovereign, raises a most dreadful and bloody War, lays heavier Burdens than
Pharaoh's Taskmasters on the People, and finally, brought a general Ruin and
Destruction on the Kingdom.

Whereupon, the abused People, finding (in these) the Stream of their
Affections in another Course, and altogether exhausted of all popular
Privilege, (besides having suffered such insupportable Tyrannies, contrary to
their intended Principles) repairs to common Justice for Redress, who freely
granted out this Hue and Cry.

To all Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, etc. (except those are
hereafter excepted, viz. Mr. Mayor of London, Mr. Mayor of Westchester, Mr.
Mayor of Newcastle, Mr. Mayor of Windsor, not forgetting Mr. Mayor of East-Looe
in Cornwall, and all other the Independent Tribe, the Family of public Faith,
and Fraternity of free Liberty) and to every of them.
THese are, in his Majesty's Name, strictly to charge and command you, and
every of you, that immediately, upon Sight hereof, you make Hue and Cry within
your several Precincts and Counties, after a loathed, traitorous, and
rebellious Parliament, that was begotten in an ill Hour; brought forth in
Division, and bred up in Faction and Oppression; of a bloody Countenance, hard
Heart, and seared Conscience; that has brought all the Plagues of God upon a
Nation, turned the Church out of Doors, the King out of his Throne, our Love
into Hatred, our Peace into War, our Plenty into Poverty; that has robbed the
whole Kingdom both of Estate and Happiness, changed Law into Liberty, Religion
into Heresy, our Freedom into Slavery; and brought upon an innocent People,
(instead of Blessing) Mourning, Woe, Lamentation, and Destruction; And upon
Sight of him, to apprehend him, and bring before us, his Majesty's Justices of
the Peace, to be dealt with, and proceeded against, according to the Laws of
this Land in such Cases made and provided. Hereof fail not, at your utmost
Peril.

Given under our Hands, the first Year of his Majesty's sad Imprisonment at
Carisbrook-Castle, in the Isle of Wight. Knights Justices of Peace and Quorum
Faithful Philolaus, Loyal Intention



No sooner was this Hue and Cry in several Copies dispersed to the Mercy of the
four Winds, but, as if Heaven and Earth had conspired together against Treason
and Rebellion, they unite their Forces; the Winds bellow, the Waves beat, the
Earth trembles at the Thought of such an hideous Malefactor: Officers of all
degrees, suspend the necessity of their own Affairs to prosecute the Command.
At last, one Mr. Diligent-Enquiry, Constable for the City of Westminster,
(according to his accustomed Vigilance) upon privy Search, found the Body of
this Traitor divided into Members; some of them in a Bawdy House, some in
Taverns, some in Tobacco-shops, some licking their Fingers at a Three-penny
Ordinary, some lapping Independent Plumb-broth in the Devil's Cook-room at Hell
in Westminster, some at Goldsmiths-Hall at Dinner, made of the Fat and Rapine
of the People; some making Compounds of many simple Delinquents, some he found
tormenting Souls in the Composition of Tophet, some casting strange Guns, and
Ordinances, to beat down Religion about the Kingdom's Ears, and to batter our
fundamental Laws to Atoms, and command the whole Estates of the Land under
their Lee; some, as busy as Bees, gathering the Cicropean Honey-money of this
Isle into their own Hives, etc. Which several Members, Mr. Diligent Enquiry
having gleaned into a Body, brought before Mr. Legal Authority, Justice of the
Peace and Quorum; who finding the Malefactor guilty of many bold Abuses,
bloody, rebellious, and incomparable Treasons, commit him to the common Gaol,
there to remain, without Bail or Mainprize, until the grand Assize, where, at
present, we leave him, desiring the Reader to peruse this ensuing Table.

Lord Righteous, Judge. Clerk of the Assize, Sir Faithful Philolaus. Justices
of the Peace and Quorum. Sir Loyal Philalethes, Mr. Legal Authority,
CRIER. Grand Inquest. Mr. Nobleman. Mr. Knight. Mr. Esquire. Mr. Gentleman.
Mr. Publick-Good. Mr. Common-Loss. Mr. Common-Interest. Mr. Allegiance. Mr.
Conformity. Mr. Orthodox. Mr. Unity. Mr. Charity. Jury of Life and Death
Freeman. Rich-Man. Poor-Man. Innocent-Man. Patient-Man. Loyal-Man. Honest-Man.
Quiet-Man. Well-meaning Man. Enslaving-Man. Lost-All. Undone.

Mr. Parliament, Malefactor. Mr. Necessity, Prosecutor. Witnesses. Jealousies
and Fears, Blood, Widows Sighs, Orphans Tears. Public Faith, Soldier
Conscience,
Attorney General, Equity. Counselor, No-Bribe. Plaintiffs for the Prisoner.
Synod, Scot, Independency,

Thus the Court being complete, I must press some necessary impositions upon
the Reader, essential to the prosecuting of our Work in hand: Therefore,
courteous Reader, understand that we shall proceed as near as we can in order
of a Sessions, where the Court being set, the Jury impanel'd, the Witnesses
sworn, the Prisoner is called to the Bar, his Indictment is read, and according
to the Evidence brought in against him, he is found guilty of High Treason,
against God, his King, and Country; arraigned, convicted and condemned.
Therefore, for Brevity sake, we shall pass by some things as unnecessary, and
proceed in order; Therefore, I desire thee to imagine the Court set, the Jury
sworn, etc. and the Jailer commanded to set the Prisoner to the Bar.

The Indictment read by the Clerk.

Clerk. Mr. Parliament, hold up thy Hand at the Bar. (look on the Prisoner,
Masters of the Jury) Thou art indicted in the Name of our Sovereign Lord King
Charles, by the Name of Parliament: That whereas against the Laws of God, and
the Laws of Nature, and the Laws of our Sovereign Lord the King; thou have
traitorously and feloniously raised War against thy King, that thou have made
thyself drunk with the Blood of his Loyal Subjects; and (pretending Liberty)
have persecuted even unto Death; not sparing the Prophets, but most barbarously
have murdered them, flung them into Prisons, starved them, etc. and exercised
all manner of Impiety against God, against the King, against the fundamental
Laws, and against the People. Against God by Blasphemy, Sacrilege, and Perjury,
and all Profaneness; against the King, by robbing him (not only of his People)
but of his Power, his Crown, his Revenue, Houses, Lands, Goods, etc. Against
the People by shedding their innocent Blood, leading them by the Noses, making
them fight with one another, kill one another, not knowing why, nor wherefore,
polling them by illegal Impositions, and pilling them by no better than
Monopolies, Taxes, Sequestrations, Plunders, and all manner of Rapine, to the
utter Undoing and Impoverishing of them, or the most part of them, amusing them
with Fears and Jealousies, and making them (like cunning Jugglers) believe any
thing, though never so false, by casting a Mist before their Eyes, till thou have
picked their Pockets; and this has been their chief Art these seven Years, as
by woeful Experience we see at this day without Spectacles, what innumerable
Tricks have been used to milk the Purses of the People, under Color to
maintain a War against the King and his evil Council, when it was to ruin the
People, to impoverish them, and bring them into irrecoverable Slavery and
Oppression under a tyrannical Parliament, and more than a tyrannical and
insulting Army; that have sought all Ways to murder your Prince; first, having
pulled out of the Church, Bishops, and cried down all Order and Discipline, to
place in their stead, Babes of Grace, pure Parricides, Independents and
apostated Levites, Sedgwick, Burgess, Martial, and the whole Tribe of
Many-Asses, and Owls of the Assembly, that you knew you could make preach, or
do what you could desire, though never so contrary to Truth, Religion, or Reason,
though to countenance bloody and abhorred Actions, murder Kings, and the like:
That, the better to enslave the People, you have entered into a devilish and
dangerous Combination to destroy Monarchy, to introduce Anarchy, to engross the
Militia and Power of the Sword to effect your cursed Designs: That you have set
up intolerable Taxes, instead of pulling down Monopolies: That you have used
Religion for a Cloak for your Knavery, giving Thanks for shedding of Blood,
tyrannizing over both the Persons and Purses of the People, with intent to
inslave and vassal both them and their Posterity: That you have most
traitorously gulled his Majesty into Prison, with intent to murder him, the
better to keep it from the Peoples Knowledge.

What say thou, Parliament? art thou guilty of this Treason, or not?


Parl. Not guilty, not guilty, my Lord.


Clerk. How will thou be tried?


Parl. By God and my Conscience.


Judge. Nay, for thy Conscience, that is as wide as Hell itself, as may appear
by thy Indictment. What can the Witnesses say concerning the Prisoner? Call
them in.


Crier. If any Man can give Evidence, or say any thing against the Prisoner,
let him come forth, for the Prisoner stands upon his Deliverance.


Clerk. Call in Jealousies and Fears, Blood, Widows Sighs, Orphans Tears,
Public Faith, Soldiers Conscience. Come forth and prosecute, or you forfeit
your Recognizance.


Crier. Every Man keep Silence, upon Pain of Imprisonment.

The Witnesses are sworn, every one according to his Knowledge, to give a true
Evidence for the King against the Prisoner at the Bar.


Clerk. Jealousies and Fears, Stand up. What can you say for the King, against
the Prisoner at the Bar?


Jeal. and Fears. O, my Lord, I have been made use of, upon all Occasions, to
delude the People, and to make them think of Danger where none was. My Lord, I
was merely drawn in by the Prisoner for his own Turn, since he sent me packing
when he had served his own End of me. Blood can give you a more clear Evidence.


Clerk. Blood, Stand up. What can thou say for the King, against the
Prisoner at the Bar?


Blood. My Lord, I shall cry continually against this cursed Horse-leech, that
has gorged himself with me so full, that he has spewed me up again, till the
Earth has been made as drunk with me as the Sword, from the Blood of Strafford
to the Blood of 100000 Innocents, Canterbury, Tomkins, Challenor, Burley the
King's Messenger, the Surrey-Men, and an infinite many more, that have been
barbarously and inhumanely slain for their Allegiance and Fidelity to their
Royal Sovereign; nay, my Lord, they are so Insatiate, that nothing can quench
their Thirsts, but Royal Blood, the Blood of the King, and all his Royal
Progeny, in which he would wash his Hands, if possibly he could attain to his
Ends; so that the whole Earth is filled with Blood and Violence, Father against
Son, Brother against Brother, and one Friend against another. Though Cursed is he
that shall slay an innocent Person, and all the People shall say, Amen, Deuteronomy.
xxix. 25. The Land that sheddeth innocent Blood, innocent Blood shall be upon
it, Deuteronomy. xix. 10. And, Innocent Blood the Lord will not pardon, 2 Kin. xxiv.
4. Yet, my Lord, this Traitor has made a Trade of shedding innocent Blood, and
does still to this Day.


Clerk. Wid. Sighs, Stand up. What can you say for the King, against the
Prisoner at the Bar?


Wid. Sighs. My Lord, my Heart and a Thousand more are so broke with weeping
for the Death of our Husbands and dear Children, whose Lives this Traitor has
taken away, that we cannot speak more for weeping, but still cry out for
Vengeance against this Parricide, this bloody Murderer.


Clerk. Orph. Tears, Stand up. What can thou say for the King, against the
Prisoner at the Bar?


Orp. Tears. My Lord, I lost my Father by this cruel Traitor, and so have many
Thousands of us, and have cried unto Heaven for Vengeance against him; that is
all I could do, or can say.


Clerk. Publ. Faith, Stand up. What can thou say for the King, against the
Prisoner at the Bar?


Publ. Faith. My Lord, he has been the Confusion of me; I could recount
innumerable Tricks to drain the People, and to milk their Purses of their
Money, as the free Loans and Contributions upon poor Public Faith, amounting
to vast and incredible Sums, Money, Plate, Horses and Arms, Bodkins, Thimbles,
Wedding-Rings, etc. and a thousand more that he has used to enslave the People.


Clerk. Soldiers Conscience, Stand up, and give Evidence for the King, against
the Prisoner at the Bar?


Crier. Call Soldiers Conscience.


Crier. Soldiers Conscience, Soldiers Conscience, Come into the Court, and give
Evidence for the King, against the Prisoner at the Bar, or else you forfeit
your Recognizance.


Clerk. My Lord, he is slipped away, being afraid to appear in the Face of the
Court; it is likely he is a party with the Prisoner.


Righ. Judge. There be Witnesses enough without him. Masters of the Jury, you
hear what is proved against him; how traitorous he has been against God, his
King and Country, against the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, in that he has
renounced his sworn Allegiance, when it is declared, 3 Jac. cap. 4. That if any
Person shall put in Practice, to absolve, persuade, or withdraw any of his
Majesty's Subjects from their Obedience to his Majesty, his Heirs or
Successors, or move them, or any of them, to promise Obedience to any other
Prince, State, or Potentate; that then every such Person, their Procurers,
Counselors, Aiders and Maintainers, shall be adjudged Traitors.

None can deny, but the Head is over the Members, and not the Members over the
Head: all Subjects being to perform both Active and Passive Obedience to their
lawful King, (as the Members to the Head) in all Causes, at all Times, and in
all Places: But this Prisoner, Mr. Parliament, is notorious Guilty; for the
King being Head, Beginning and End of a Parliament, and no Act can be made
without the King's Assent, therefore this Parliament stands guilty of
Perjury, by encroaching upon the Jurisdictions belonging to the King; and has
falsified their Faith, by voting, That no more Addresses should be made to him,
or Messages received from him. No Law can make a Servant to be above or greater
than his Master, nor a Subject greater than his King; for the King having an
undoubted Right to the Crown, and being his lawful Sovereign, and his
Allegiance being due unto his Natural Person, both by the Law of God, Nature,
and the Law of the Land, recognized and acknowledged by former Parliaments in
all Ages, confirmed by undeniable Authorities in Law, upon Record, that
evidently proves, that his Allegiance is due unto his Natural Person, by the
Law of God, Nature, and the Law of the Land, and can neither be abjured,
released, or renounced, being inseparable from the Person of the King, and
indispensably due from the Prisoner to his Majesty. Therefore, any reasonable
Man may conclude, that Mr. Parliament has perjured himself in withdrawing his
Allegiance from his Liege Lord the King, which is directly against the Law of
the Land; and has, moreover, falsified his Faith and Allegiance to his King,
God's Anointed, and crowned his natural Liege Lord, Sovereign and lawful King,
both by Descent, Coronation, Investure, and undoubted Right, which by the Law
of the Land is due unto him from all his Subjects, every one of them having
taken this following Oath.

To be true and faithful to their Sovereign Lord K. Charles, and his Heirs, and
Faith and Truth shall bear to him of Life and Member, and Honor. And you shall
neither know, nor hear of any Ill or Damage intended unto him, that you shall
not declare: So help you God.

Now (pray mark it Jury) you are to consider, Whether this Prisoner has any
Power against the King, or whether the King has not Power to hang him for his
most detestable Treachery against his Person, in betraying it to Prison,
against the Law of God, Nature, and the Law of the Land, the Closlier to murder
and make him away, as may more evidently appear by the Examinations, upon Oath,
of Mr. Osburn and Dowcet, against Rolf, that should have been the accursed
Instrument to make him away, either by Poison, or Pistolling, or otherwise: The
King has no Supreme but God alone, and it is sufficient Punishment for him,
because he must expect God to be the Revenger if he commits any Wrong; for
every Man is under the King, and the King under none but God alone; he is not
inferior to his Subjects; he has no Peer in his Realm; he has the sole
Government of his Subjects. Therefore, Mr. Parliament, thou hear what is
objected against thee; thou have now Liberty to answer for thy self, Guilty,
or, Not Guilty.


Parl. My Lord, I little weigh what any of these can say against me, and am so
far from acknowledging the least Circumstances objected against me, that I
utterly deny all, and claim my Privilege.


Judge. Thou art quite past Shame and Grace, and surely given thy self to the
Devil, else thou could'^t never have the Face to deny the least Tittle. Is this
all thou can say for thy self?


Parl. More than I need to say; yet I shall speak a Word or two to the People:
Did not you choose me; cry out for a Parliament, a Parliament? Nothing could
satisfy you but a Parliament; and now you have a Parliament, will you not be
ruled by a Parliament? Did not ye bring your Treasure, and fling it down at my
Feet whether I would or no; your Gold, your Silver, your Plate, your Horses,
your very Thimbles and Bodkins, etc. O then you would live and die with me, stand
up as one Man for me; venture all, Life, Estate, and all ye had with me: And
pray what have I made use of more than you promised me? Have not I eased you of
your Wealth, Religion, King, Laws, and brought you into the blessed Liberty of
the Saints, that any of you may preach what you will, and do what ye list, (so
it be not against me) made you all Kings and Beggars; and am I thus rewarded?
Well, London, London, 'twas thou --


Right Judge. We'll hear no more. Jury, you hear his Imperiousness, Ignorance,
and zealous Folly; that shows what Degrees he has taken, from a Cobbler to a
Preacher, from a Preacher to a Captain, from a Captain to a Committee-man, from
a Committee-man to a Colonel, and then he is a Companion for a Prince, nay a
King himself; rules, reigns, and rebels amongst his Fellow-Kings, whose Lives
and Professions, Natures and Arts, Inwards and Outward, agree in all, like
Canters and Gypsies: They are all Zeal, and no Knowledge; all Purity, and no
Humanity; all Simplicity, and no Honesty; and if you be sure never to trust
them, they will never deceive you: Their greatest Care is to contemn their
King; their least Care is to serve God; for they have no more Conscience to the
One, than Fear to the Other: They give Thanks for Victories when they be
routed, and relate Battles and Skirmishes as Eyewitnesses, when they winked
for Fear, turned back, and with their Eyes thievishly robbed a Pamphlet or
Ballad for the rest. Nor Pilate nor Prince can command him; nay, he will
command them, censure them at his Pleasure, and if they will not suffer their
Ears to be fettered with the long Chains of his redious Collations, their
Purses to be emptied with the Inundations of his unsatiate Humor, and their
Judgments to be blinded with the Mussler of his zealous Ignorance, then he is
one of the Wicked, a dead Dog, etc. In brief, he is nothing but varnished
Rottenness, full of seeming Sanctity, and mental Impiety, an outside Saint and
an inside Devil; to conclude, he is, etc.


Jury. His Cause is foul, my Lord, and we shall, no doubt, give in just
Evidence against him.


Judge. You of the Jury are sworn for the King, to give in your Evidence in his
Majesty's Behalf, against the Prisoner at the Bar; therefore you are now to
proceed in your Evidence.


The Jury go out. Crier. Make way for the Jury there.


Justice. I never heard (so long as I have been a Justice) of so notorious a
Malefactor, so bloody a Miscreant.


2. Justice. He has been as great a Robber, my Lord, as ever he was a
Blood-sucker; nothing comes amiss to him, and his Partner ^rmy; the poor
Kingston-Men dearly suffered for St. Livesey, a notorious Thief, who with the
rest of his Faction, stole from Kingston upon Thames, above 2000 Pounds worth
of Cloth: My Lord, here is a poor Clothier desires a Hu: and Cry after him.


Justice. Let the Clerk draw it speedily: If these Thieves be suffered long in
England, we shall not live to enjoy a Penny in Quiet; let there be all Care
taken to apprehend the Thieves.


Enter the Jury. Mr. Freeman. Gentl^men, you are all agreed that I should give
in the Verdict, you see the Case is plain and evident.


Mr. Richman. You shall have my Consent to hang him presently; I am sure my
Baggs have been emptied, and drained, for him; and yet the Thief called me
Traitor, laid me up in the Tower, and made a Show, as if he would have tried me
for my Life; but to tell you true, it was for my Means; it is High Treason for
any but an Independent to be rich in these Days.


Poor Man. Alas! I am undone by him, a Company of the Zaints, as they call
them, blundered me, took away my Bald Mare, to make a Dragon on her, and
pressed away my Zon Dick too, cham sure I could near zet Eye on um zince; a
wa^nion on him, he makes me feed upon Bullion, and glad che have it too; OF
have my Consent with all my Heart; wood che had been hanged Zeven Years ago,
then I had had my two Cowes, my Bald Mare, and my Zon Dick to dress um, and had
ought my Landlord, never a Penny a Rent: Hang um, hang um up, I zay, we shall
never zee happy Days else.


Innocent-Man. I have been forced out to fight for I know not what: I have lost
Three Sons in this unnatural War, and yet never could understand for what we
fight; they made us believe it was for the King, Religion, Laws, and I know not
what; but I am sure it was for our Money: I hope God will make them answer for
the Blood of my Children; I am sure the Scripture says. He that sheds Man's
Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed again; hang him for me, you shall have my
Consent.


Patient-Man. I am sure, Neighbors, I paid all Taxes, Impositions, and
Sessments, Subsidies, and found Free Quarter to the Soldier, besides
Pole Money, Free Loans, Contributions, Money, Plate, Men, Horse, Arms; paid to
the Weekly Meals, the Weekly Assesments for Essex and Fairfax's Army, and yet
all I can do is too little for them; I am sure I am quire undone, and the best
are no more; I will wait with Patience, till the Measure of their Iniquities
are full; the Time cannot be long, if it be not come already; Neighbors, my
Verdict is, That he is guilty of Treason, Rebellion, and Bloodshed, and Theft
too; that is my Verdict, I Will promise you.


Loyal Man. Because God's Word taught me, that I should be obedient to higher
Powers, for the Lord's sake, who himself paid Tribute, and was obedient to the
Death, suffering for the Maintenance of a good Conscience toward God and Man;
besides, I have bound my self by my Oath of Allegianc, and Supremacy, to be
true to my Sovereign, and know the Fifth Commandment; and have read that Place
in the Proverbs, My Son, fear thou God, and the King, and meddle not with them
that are given to Change. They have Voted me a Malignant, for loving my King;
but so long as God has commanded it, I think it better to obey God than Man;
what, though I am spoiled of Goods, locked in Prison; Obedience is beter than
Sacrifice, if I suffer for a good Conscience, I have a God able to deliver me;
yet my Verdict is, if the Law finds him guilty, (as I make no question but he
is) let him suffer.


Honest Man. Methinks a Man should do as he would be done unto; learn to eschew
Evil, and do Good: Yet it cannot sink into my Head, that this Parliament at the
Bar, has done one honest or just Action these Seven Years: Therefore they
cannot say when they die, Whose Ox, or whose Ass, have I taken?


Quiet-Man. The Scripture says, Love one another, not kill one another: And
again, He that says he loves God, and hates his Brother, is a Liar; for how
can he love God, whom he never saw, and hate his Brother, whom he sees every
Day: I hate none, nor will fight with none; for I have learned to know from
whence comes Wars, Strifes, and Dissentions, even from their own Lusts. I have
no Enemy worse than my self: Let me fight with my own evil Affections, and
conquer them; not for Religion, otherwise than the Three Children in the fiery
Furnace, We have a God able to deliver us. I hold it unlawful to take up Arms
against my King, nay, wicked and diabolical; and therefore take him Derick.


Wel-meaning-Man. I believed him at the first, and could not be persuaded that
his Words, and his Intentions, had been died of two several Colors; but now I
see he is a mere Jugler, an Impostor, and a Parricide, a Thief, and therefore
deserves to be tried by the known Laws, and to be hanged, drawn, and quartered,
that is my Verdict.


Enslaved-Man. Never were Men made such Slaves of, although the Law of the Land
says, that no Man shall be destroyed, dissiezed, or banished, but by the
Judgment of his Peers: Yet we are Bridled, Sadled, and rid Hackney at their
Pleasure; every lousy Rascal in the Army shall command our Persons, and Purses;
so the Devil rides the Army, the Army rides the Parliament, the Parliament
rides the People, and they, like patient Asses, must undergo all the Burden, or
else be Imprisoned, Sequestered, Plundered, Taxed, and Undone. I say he
deserves Death.


Lost-all. I am sure I am Plundered of all, they have not left me worth a
Groat; what with Free Quarter, Sesments, and the Devil and all; I have lost all
that I dearly earned, and labored for with the Sweat of my Brows, and now I
must Beg in my old Days; hang him, I say.


Undone-Man I am not alone undone, many a Thousand are undone as well as I; the
Undones are now the greatest Family in England, (thank this blessed Parliament)
I know no honest Man but is a Kin to the Undones; no Trade but is undone, no
City but is undone; none but knavish Committee Men, Parliament Men, Excise-Men,
and their Vermin, the Soldiers, thrive in these Days; they get, and grow rich,
whosoever looses: Well, I think this Parliament was begotten in an ill Hour,
for we never enjoyed happy Days since they first Sat; they have undone King,
Church, and People, and brought all in Bondage, from the highest to the lowest,
(themselves excepted) I say, he deserves to be hanged, drawn, and quartered.


Foreman of the Jury. You are all agreed then to give in your Verdict?


Omnes. We are all agreed; Guilty, guilty.


Gryer. Make way there for the Jury.


Righteous Judge. Parliament, hold up thy Hand: Masters of the Jury, look upon
the Prisoner; is he guilty of this Treason, Rebellion, Bloodshed, Felony, etc.
in Manner and Form, as he stands indicted, or not guilty?


Foreman. Guilty, guilty, my Lord.


Right-Judge. Parliament, thou have heard the heinous Accusation that has been
proved against thee; what can thou say for thy self to award the Sentence of
Death from passing on thee?


Parl. The jury have dealt falsely; I appeal to Synod, Scot, and Independency,
to plead my Cause.


Judge. There is no Appeal from this Court; besides, Synod, Scot, and
Independency, are Parties, and subborn'd, and as very Thieves as thy self; if
thou have any thing to say, speak, for now the Sentence of Death is passing
upon thee.


Parl. O hold, hold, good, my Lord, have Mercy upon me; I beseech your Honor
for bear Sentence, even for Reformation sake, the Directory, and New Catechism.

Good Lord deliver me.


Judge. Here is no Place of Mercy for thee: God's Vengeance cannot be dispensed
withal, no Privilege will-help thee here; this is a Court where Justice must
take Place.


Parl. I beseech your Lordship for the Mercy of this honorable Bench, let me
have the Benefit of the Clergy, A Psalm of Mercy, I beseech you; let it not be
said that a Parliament was hanged.


Judge. No, thou have robbed the Clergy, and had no Mercy on thy Brother,
neither must thou expect any Mercy from this Court; therefore hear thy
Sentence, thou have been Indicted* and Arraigned of Enmity against God, and the
King, of Treason, Rebellions, Bloodsheds, Thefts, etc. for thy Trial thou have
put thy self upon thy Country, which Country has found the guilty, thou have
had Liberty to plead for thy self, to award the Sentence of Death; but can
not; for thy Guilt is so palpably apparent and gross, that all the Subtilty,
Craft, and Policy, thou can devise, cannot obscure thee from the Eye of
Justice; for this Court, upon thy Trial, has found out thy Villainy, Treason,
Bloodshed, Sacrilege, Theft, and how thou art guilty of all that is laid to
thy Charge* therefore the Sentence of this Court is, That thou shall return to
the Place from whence thou came, and from thence be drawn on a Sledge to the
Place of Execution, there be hanged, drawn and quartered: Look to him Jailer.


Parl. Good, my Lord* the King's Pardon, I beseech you*


Judge. No, you must receive no Message from him* take him away Jailer.

All Rebels that make War against their King,
I hope to see them with this Traitor swing.

FINIS.

