A REVINDICATION Set forth by William Parker, In the behalf of Dr. Drayton
deceased, and himself: Of the Possibility of a Total mortification of Sin in
this life: And, Of the Saints perfect obedience to the Law of God: To be the
Orthodox Protestant Doctrine, and no Innovations (as they are falsely charged to
be) of Dr. DRAYTON and W. PARKER; In an ILLOGICALL VINDICATION, Wherein the
necessity of sins remaining in the best Saints as long as they live, and the
impossibility of perfect obedience to the Law of God, is ignorantly and
perversely avouched to to be the Orthodox Protestant Doctrine; by one who
subscribeth his name JOHN TENDERING.

The Anagram whereof is, 'GINNE TO HINDER.

What! 'Ginne to hinder doctrines so divine,
Which teach in heavenly purity the Trine?
Would have the man to live without the sin,
The blessed state he was created in;
Under pretense of innovations late
Taught by truths Lovers whom your soul does hate
Witness your tongue in flamed with hels fire,
Calling us Jesuits acting for Romes hire.
What! must Jehovah nil he will he dwell
With sin, while Saints retain their earthly cell?
What! did not Abraham drive the sowles away, Genesis 15.11.
Which came upon the Sacrifice to prey?
Was he compelled to let them there abide?
No, thence he forced them ere the evening-tide:
And must best Saints keep sin, (that soul disease,)
Without their will, till death bring their release?
Fie John! Tendering this Vindication
You settle sin (Gods abomination)
In The soul foretold of desolation; Matthew. 24.15.
Which we remove: but you cry out and say,
We teach to hell! The clean contrary way!
London, Printed by W.G. and are to be sold, with the Examen to the late Synods
Confession of Faith, by Nathaniel Brook at the sign of the Angel in Cornhill,
and John Orme in Pellican-Court in Little Britain, M.DC.LVIII.

The Vindicator (before he enters upon the prosecution of his sinful business
in plain terms) does present a Preface to his beloved friends, in
Scripture Phrase, like to a Pharisaical Saint, with a specious salutation in
the front of it.
A true Paraphrase of both which (as they must intend in reference to his
Position) we shall offer the impartial and intelligent Reader, in manner and
form following.
TO all Lovers of Gods truth, which I call Gods truth, namely, to live in sin
and disobedience as long as we precious Saints live in houses of clay: grace I
wish to you; yea, so much grace, as to be content to live in sin and
disobedience to Gods law, without hearkening to our enemies contrary doctrines:
and also peace I wish you, even as much peace, as you can expect by living all
your life long in sin; for there is no peace to the wicked, says my God,
Isa. 57.21. through Jesus Christ. Who is no minister, nor allower of sin, but a
faithful redeemer of his eminent Saints from all iniquity, Tit. 2.14.

The Vindicators first paragraph of his Preface begins thus: Beloved
friends, (for so I may call you who stick as close to my sinful cause as my
skin does to my sinful flesh;) These are the times foretold, wherein there
shall be a falling away from our sinful positions, and defection from the
faith, of our sinful doctrine hereafter to be named, as a forerunner of the
great and terrible day, to the man of sin, 2 These. 2.8. and of the loss of
our credit with all sober and wise people, for our maintaining that sin will
remain in the best of Saints as long as they live in houses of the clay that
Adam our first parent was made out of.

There are many false prophets (that is, to us and our sinful cause) whose
study and labor is to undeceive poor souls, (though I say to deceive them) if
it were possible the very elect and choice ones, who yet fight and contend for
sin to remain in the best Saints as long as they live, that so they may not be
esteemed for better Saints then our selves are who live (as it is well known to
our neighbors) we do.

I call them men confident in an arm of flesh ( Goliah-like) to terrify our
weak ones ( who know not the depths of Satan, Rev. 2.24.) from harkening to
them, because to say so it makes a great noise in the ears of our friends by
reason that Jeremiah says, cap. 17.5. Cursed be he that makes flesh his arm;
though the truth is, we our selves are the men confident in an arm of flesh;
because that sin is called flesh, Gal. 5.19, 20 21. and therefore to be
confident for sins remaining in the best of Saints until death, is to be
confident in the arm of flesh, Goliah-like, which signifies (as one says)
fleeting away, as indeed we are like to be, for they defy the whole Israel of
God, that is, all the prevailers of the God of this world, who blinds the
minds of unbelievers (2 Cor. 4.4.) to make them the more hardy in a sinful
cause, as who more bold then blind bayard? And Goliah-like we are like to be,
when little David (the lovely servant of God) with some pebble-stones (1 Samuel
17.4.) out of the stony law (Deuteronomy. 4.13.) does hit the champion in the fore
noddle, and throw him down to the earth from whence he came, Rev. 3.11.

But as long as I can stand to it, I shall not (as I tell you in my next
paragraph) be daunted by the foresaid Prophets, who oppose our falsehood,
however I am esteemed among them; so that you my friends hug me and love me for
engaging in this sinful quarrel, to maintain that sin will remain in the best
Saints as long as they live,

I tell them in the said paragraph, that applause (I mean from them) shall not
swell us; for we are not like to have much from them: and their dispraise shall
not deject us, so that you my beloved friends continue to applaud us; but if
you do not, we shall be dead in the nest.

I tell them their greatness shall not affright us, because they are but yet
few; for we are as yet the greatest in number, of what rank soever: and my
hopes are we shall continue so, if I can but cunningly abuse them with swelling
word of vanity, as you see I do my utmost in this my Preface, to keep them unto
us, which (I doubt) I shall not long do, but until they lay bare the
nakedness of my Vindication.

Yet (as I tell you in my next paragraph) I am resolved when the glory of the
God of this world lies at the stake, as it did when the Goddess Diana ( Act.
19.26, 27.) was preached against, and her crafts-men were like to lose all
their gain; because her magn ficence was near pulling down: And therefore
beloved friends (being such a people as we are) we must not (when such Prophets
do so openly endeavor to undeceive our choice ones, that they may live no
longer in a persuasion that they must sin while they live here) we must not
(I say) stand by with a guilty silence, as if we were ashamed (being past
shame) to maintain our sinful-positions: but as we are bound by many
obligations of credit, profit and pleasure, (as I may whisper to you in
private) to defend for truth our renents, and withstand the gainsayers of
them, or we are undone as a man should undo an oyster.

Yet (as I tell you in my next paragraph) I am neither worthy of note, since I
left my wife at Burston near Norwich above twelve years since, and became a
vgabond upon the face of our English earth; nor yet noted the unworthiest,
since I came among you at Wilton my beloved friends; no nor noted the
unworthiest among the thousands of Levi, because I preach and appear in Print
for the same-sinful doctrine which they own and maintain.

But though I be the meanest of Gods servants for so doing, yet my witness is
in Heaven that I have endeavored to do the worst service to Gods Church I can,
even to persuade men to a security in sin, and never to strive to mortify all
sin in them, because I tell them in Print (though I cannot prove it by
Scripture) that sin will remain in the choice Saints as long as they live.

And therefore this part of my simple and sinful stuff (as I tell you in my
next paragraph) I presume to present to those who fear the Lord (as they did, 2
Kings 17.41. which feared God and served their idols) not begging patronage
from such great ones as I know like not our sinful doctrines (though the world
do not like them for it) of a necessity of continuing in sin as long as we
live. But I hope I shall receive your patronage (my endeared friends) for the
same: And wherein I err in not doing my utmost to maintain that our sins
must remain with us while we live here, I desire your pardon, not defense, if I
do not as I say: though, when I have done my utmost, I can but persuade weak
capacities to believe, that the best Saints are (where it is without
controversy we are still) in sin.

The occasion (as I tell you in my next paragraph) of this published
Vindication (which will prove, I doubt, dismal to us in the end,) was, a
dispute, or a contest rather (as I call it) on our pars) betwixt Doctor Drayton
and Parker on the one party, and my self and many of my dear friends on the
other party, in Wilton Church, where they had preached for a possibility of a
total mortification of sin in this life; and in the said contest they did
openly deny for truth (as justly they may) the positions which we maintain, and
have placed in Capital letters with boldness at the beginning of our
senseless Vindication.

Now although (as I tell you in my next paragraph) our points in controversy
(concerning the remaining of sin in the best of Saints as long as they live)
have been so fully and plainly asserted in dark times, when men could not
(though they looked wistly) see wood for trees, yea swallowed down by the
credulous people, who have been over-perswaded to believe our foresaid
positions for Gospel, by reason we pretend the Worthies (ever since the
Apostles with their Apostolical doctrine fell asleep) of the dark times have
held out our positions; for which I call them men of blessed memory, to us for,
countenancing (as I endeavor to make the people believe) what I and the
reverend Clergy of our mind maintain; though the Prophets aforesaid are ready
to call them irreverend for so doing: But yet we say to these opposites unto
our tenants that they are men puffed up with pride in our sense, (though not in
their own) for correcting Magnificat, and going about to untrusse our points,
which have been so fully declared to be sound and orthodox; that if these fatal
Prophets did not contradict them, admission of addition to maintain our sinful
doctrine (worthy to be confuted) might seem superfluous and unnecessary for me,
unlessel could speak more sense them I do.

But although the proverb (as I tell you in my next paragraph) will be
fulfilled in me (undertaking this task) Nihil dictum quod non dictum prius, I
can speak nothing for our sinful cause (having only learned it from others, and
my own long practice) which has not been said already; yet in regard there are
many people well-willers to us, and our sinne-maintaining cause (which do
depend on me a sufficient bold follow to lead them wrong) who of late have been
disturbed and unsettled from our positions, by reason of the resolutions of our
gainsayers to oppose our ensuing falsehoods, (which we call truths;) and also
many of the said people are not able to buy great volumes (because they are not
to be had) of such nonsenfical and sinful stuff as we vent in our Vindication:

And likewise by reason (as I tell you in my next paragraph) of the weakness of
the capacity of our friends, who cannot easily apprehend (unless they open
their eyes) the perspicuity and plainness of their truths, of a possibility of
a total mortification of sin in this life, from our contrary falshead; nor
yet can distinguish (unless they be willing to hearken to our opponents)
betwixt their truth and our falsehood, by reason we have veiled our falsehood
under the feigned testimonies (as truths vizard) of Scriptures and Fathers,
which (I believe) they will at last charge me to have abused (both Scriptures
and Fathers) most notoriously:

Yet for the satisfaction of our well-willers, and confirmation of them in
falsehood, (instead of truth) I have (as I tell you in my next paragraph)
presented to the public (because I would have them the more taking with
shallow capacities, who are ready (out of their carnal and blind affections to
me for maintaining sin, as aforesaid) to believe what I say, right or wrong, (I
have presented a few collections pumpt out of our addle brain) which (not being
seriouslly digested nor weighed) will (I doubt not) disenable the meanest
capacities (being willing to be one still with us in our conclusions) to
discover the truth according to godliness, Tit. 1.1. from the deceitfulness of
sin, which we maintain will remain with us as long as we live.

That which others (as I tell you in my next paragraph) have done in
maintaining our tenants, namely, that sin will remain in us as aforesaid, etc.
I must bless the God of this world for; by reason the God of the true Israel
commands them who are desirous to show themselves his Saints, to hate the
garment spotted of the flesh, v. 23. of Judes Epistle.

And if that which I have now done shall be any way serviceable to weak
capacities (which is all we can expect) to keep them where they are, in a
sinful life, and to stir them up to do against our Autagonists, as they did,
Acts 17.5. and 19.20, 29, etc. it has obtained its ends (ex five rei) though I
do not blad abroad in plain terms my (finem intentionis) who am willing to be
spent in all impudency for the Israel of the God of this world, ( spoken of 2
Cor. 4.4.) to be prevailers in maintaining that sin and disobedience to: the
law of the righteous and just God will remain in the best Saints (if they be no
better then our selves are yet by confession and practice) as long as they live.

That being the end for which we are what we are, in all reviling and
slandering the said Doctor Drayton and Parker under the horrid names of
Jesults, and Factors for Rome, ( even for such Saints at Rome who were most
eminent above others in Neroe's house when Paul was there, Phil. 4.22.)

I say even for to make them more odious to our sin-maintaining party, I am not
unwilling to spend my lungs to reproach Jesuits, and Factors for Rome; as all
can witness that heard my scurrulous invective at Wisfoord near Wilton against
the said Parker, for preaching such poysonful doctrine at Wilton, of a
possibility of a total mortification of sin in this life; of which doctrine I
wished the people of Wilton who flocked to hear me, to take heed of and not
endure to hear the said Parker preach any such doctrine; for I told them,
spreading my paper on the Pulpit-cushion like Rabsicaes letter, that the said
doctrine will sink himself and his hearers to head, if our doctrine for sin
remaining in us as long as we live, do at any time advance and lift us up to
heaven. Your selves, my fellow Levites (like Simeon and Levi, brethren to
maintain iniquity) are now upon the stage (as I tell you in my next paragraph)
to act your parts: Therefore it does concern you to join hand in hand with me
in maintaining our positions, for they are begun (as I told you) to be spoken
against in publ que by our enemies, whom I could not dissuade nor terrify from
so doing, though I told them openly before a cloud of witnesses that if they
did publish such doctrines to the people against the necessity of sin remaining
in the best Saints as long as they live, they would pull all the Ministers of
my mind (which are too too many) in the country about their ears; His words
spoken in Wilton Church.
because if it should be so (as our enemies affirm) the people would soon
charge their Ministers with preaching (a long time) many lies to them, for
telling them so frequently that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as
they live; as an Alderman of Milton told my self (presently after Doctor
Drayton had preached the Sermon now in Print on 2 Cor. 7.1. for cleansing away
all fill hinesse of the flesh and spirit,) that if the said doctrine were true
which Doctor Drayton had delivered. I my self had taught (at Milton) many lies;
which wounded me to the heart (though it were so) to be told it to my face; and
the people in short time will say (my fellow- Levites) as much to your faces as
I was told if the doctrines of our enemies to sins continuance in best Saints
come to be received more generally among all sorts of people.

Therefore arm up you courage my indeared fellow-brethren for s^^^ cause, and
muster up the forsee you seem to have, and fight (as I bid you in the said
paragraph) (being likewise upon the stage while our enemies yet stand below)
this boon sight of our traditional faith, That sin will remain in us as long as
we live, by reason of the want of faith to believe the contrary, for it is said
Mat. 13.58. where it is said Christ could do no great works there because of
their unbelief.

Now if thus you do, my united brethren, I assure my self and you (as I tell
you in my last paragraph) that our victory (if we can overcome our enemies,
though it be but by Clublaw, as they did, Rev. 11.17.) will be glorious among
all lovers of sinful pleasures and profits more then lovers of God and his
holiness: for then we may as they did, (Rev. 11.10.) rejoice and be merry, if
we can still persuade weak capacities to be confident that sin will remain in
the best Saints as long as they live, because then we our selves shall still be
accounted for such Saints among the people; and also every man whose teeth
continual water after the apples of Sodom, will then think his own beloved sin
(how worthy soever it be to be hated) is the only innate corruption and
infirmity that will and must remain in him as long as he lives.

Thus you see friends how glorious our victory is like to be (if we can
prevail) in the eyes of all Epicures and lovers of sinful profits and
pleasures. But indeed we do but dissemble and lie when we say it will be
glorious through Jesus Christ: for Christ is not (says the Apostle Gal. 2.17.)
the Minister of sin; for he came to redeem all his Saints from all iniquity,
Tit, 2.14. and purify to himself a peculiar people zealous of good works;
therefore to him belongs better glory for ever and ever to be given to him
from such as those, Ephesians. 5.27, 28. who are sanctified and washed in water by
the word, then can accrue to him by our best Saints who plead to have sin
remain in them as long as they live; to which all truly enlightened Saints say
Amen, namely, that Christ may have more glory from his eminent Saints by their
being purged from all sin, then can redound to him from the constant cleaving
of sin to them as long as they live, which is contrary to God and Christ and
the holy Spirit, yea so contrary to the Saints pure happiness as nothing can be
more opposite thereunto.

This is the Paraphrase that Mr. John Tendering must have made himself of his
preface, if required to explain it, as consonant and in reference to his
positions, that sin and disobedience to Gods law will remain in the best of
Saints as long as they live; therefore we could give no other paraphrase upon
his preface (consideratis considerandis) then what we have (for substance)
delivered to Mr. John's friends; whereby they may see his naked mind under the
covert of Scripture-phrases by which he would deceive the hearts of simple and
well-meaning people: and therefore we hope his friends will not say that we
have abused him, and wrested his words in his preface from his own design.
Because we are persuaded his friends will not have him speak in his preface
heterogeneals to the positions in his Vindication; for then he does abuse them,
and make them believe that in his book to be one of his beloved truths which he
does contradict in his preface, if he mean not according to our paraphr^se, and
so with colored words deceives the hearts of his many allies which rely upon
his lying oracles.

Again, if men do not mean their prefaces to be respectively in reference to
their subsequent designs, then their preface and their book will not be
consentanies, but disparates, and the author of them a dissentany (altornis
vicibus) to them both: therefore Mr. John Tendrings friends must acknowledge
(if he be not always a jugler) that he meant this preface (though varnished
with Scripture-phrases) should relate (as consentanies) together; and also he
would be found a consentany to them both in reference to his ultimate end,
namely, (to maintain though he cannot do it) that sin will remain in the best
Saints as long as they live.

Hence (when he says in the front of his salutes, To all lovers of Gods truth)
we ask all unbiassed and understanding men, whether he can mean (if he intend
the maintaining his positions) any others but such that love his sinful
positions, and love that sin will remain in them (as Gods truth) as long as
they live.

When he wishes grace to them, what grace does he wish them, but grace to keep
themselves in a sinful life? for he says, it is the Orthodox Protestant
doctrine, that sin will remain in the best Saints at long as they live.

When he wishes them peace, what can he wish, but that they may be quiet and
not disturbed by endeavoring to mortify all their sins in this mortal life,
because he affirms to his friends that sin will remain in them as long as they
live?

When he says grace and peace through Jesus Christ, what can those words
(through Jesus Christ) intend, if considered in reference to his positions, but
that he would fain have Christ and sin dwell and be yoked together in him and
his friends, (though it be contrary to the Apostles dehortation, 2 Cor. 6.14,
15.) and so to have peace in a way quite contrary to that, Ephesians. 2.14, 15.
where is hinted that the partition wall of sin is to be broken down; what is it
but a plain mocking of Christ (absit blasphemia dicto) to call him the faithful
redeemer of all his Saints, and yet he does not (by the Vindicators doctrine)
redeem them from all sin in this life? as if Christ either cannot or will not
redeem them from all sins, that they may serve the Lord without blame, in
righteousness and holiness all the days of their lives, Luke 1.74 75. Ephesians.
1.4.

And whom can he call (in his first paragraph) his beloved friends (if he mind
his positions) but such as stick to him in maintaining that sin will remain in
the best Saints as long as they live? and also will be ready to do us all the
envious mischief they can for opposing them in teaching the contrary truths?
for none that read his book, and have heard his scandalizing of us, can believe
that he accounts us and them of our mind, beloved friends.

What times can he mean, when he says, these are the times foretold etc. must
not he mean (if he will have his sinful positions still maintained) the times
wherein there is a falling away from (this positions) and a defectio^ from
believing them?

Must not he mean (when he says, as a forerunner of the great and terrible
day) even the forerunner of the great and terrible day to the man of sin (2
These. 2.8.) by the the downfall of his positions? when Jannes (which
signifies, as an Onomastick says) one to be brought under, and Jambres (one
who has a sea in his head) (according to that Isa. 57.20.) shall proceed and
prevail no further, 2 Timothy 3.8, 9. so that our Vindicator is more then bodily
afraid he and his party shall be put out of credit if our doctrines of a
possibility of a total mortification of sin in this life be once resenned and
received.

Must not he mean (when he says, there are many false Prophets among us) such
as prophecy and evidence the Scripture against his tenants aforesaid?
wherefore they are to him and his friends like Michajah to Abah, who said that
Micha^ah never (in his sense of goodness) spoke good to him who sold himsellf
to do wickedness.

Must not he mean by such false Prophets, whose study is to deceive poor souls,
even the very elect, those whose study and labor is (if he mind his positions)
to undeceive poor souls, by persuading them that sin shall pot ( if they will
be baptized into Christ's death, Romans 6.2.4 5.) remain in them as long as they
live? and must not he mean by his elect (if he mind what he says of his
positions) such as are ordained and chosen (let himself name by whom) to remain
in sin? for his pos^^ion is, that sin will remain in the best Saints as long
as they live. When he calls them men confident in an arm of flesh: can any
wise man who minds and understands his position, think that those words can
reach us; who persuade all men to believe a possibility of mortifying all sin
in them through the grace and help of Christ; but that they reach only such
men, who like himself teach and maintain with bold confidence, that sin will
remain in the best Saints as long as they live, because that sin is called
flesh, as aforesaid? And therefore to maintain sin, as the Vindicator and his
friends do, is to be confident in an arm of flesh. And can a wise man believe
his words do reach us, where he says Goliath.-like (the great Giant against
little David) when as the Veterator does boast they are a hundred to one or two
of us, who said with him in his opinion, and also such as were ready to join
with him in petition to the higher powers against us, with confidence they
shall prevail, though we know it will not be with dint of arguments, but by
dint of sword, if they do prevail against us; and if so, surely the Veterator
and his accomplices are Goliah-like, men confident in an arm of flesh, when they
would be willing to take such con^ses against us. But let us have but our
liberty to preach in their Pulpits our doctrines of a possibility of a total
mortifica tion of sin in this life through the grace and help of Christ, then
(as the Prophet said 1 King. 18.24.) Let the God which answers by fire, to
purge away the filthiness of Jerusalem by the spirit of judgment and burning,
( Isai. 4.4.) be God: and therefore if the doctrine of a possibility of a total
mortification in this life be of God, it will stand, Act. 15.38, 39. if not,
let Baal plead for himself, Judge. 6.31, 32, 33.

But to proceed; what can the Vindicator mean in the next words of his preface,
of which number we have to deal with, but with them (as our selves do) who
plead against Baal, and against the necessity of sins remaining in the best
Saints as long as they live? for that is his assertion in his Vindication, that
sin will remain, as aforesaid, and therefore they are such as contradict his
positions that he will deal with: for he professes that he will maintain them
to the utmost of his little wit.

What can he mean where he says (in his next pargraph) he regards not how he
is esteemed of in this world for engaging in this quarrel, but that he
regards not what contrary-minded men to himself say? being resolved to
quarrel with all that do oppose him in his sinful position (a comfortable
business we wiss to quarrel for) that sin will remain in the best Saints as
long as they live: yea to maintain sins quarrel he tells us, no applause
from us, because we do not intend to give it him, but to blame him for his
impudency, shall swell him, nor dispraise (he means, from such great men as
he knows disown his positions) shall deject him; so far is he from leaving
his audaciousness to maintain sin will remain in the best Saints as long as
they live: especially when the interest of the God of this world, 2 Cor. 4.4.
lies at the stake, ever since that we persuade men that they may through the
help of Christ destroy all sin in them while they live in houses of clay.

What truth is opposed by us, but his sinful doctrine, which he calls truth,
though it come from the father of lies? for all sin is of the devil, 1 John
3.8. who is a liar from the beginning; for where is there one testimony in
Scripture which declares that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as
they live? or one testimony in Scripture which evidenceth that no Saint ever
died to all sin until he put off his mortal body? it is one thing what Saints
are in this life for the most part, and another what the doctrine of the
Sriptures does attest and teach what Saints ought to be in all holy and
spotless conversation.

What people can he mean in the said paragraph, which must not stand by with a
guilty silence, but such as are like himself, and are engaged by a confederacy
to defend (as long as they can) that sin will remain in the best Saints while
they live? which we hope will not be long, if we who are contrary-minded may
have liberty granted to teach Gods contrary and saving truths unto the people
of the nation, where ever we may have opportunity to come.

And what can the obligation be by which (he says) they are bound to maintain
that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as they live, but their sinful
profits and pleasures; which men must part with (as they did Act. 9.18, 19.) if
our doctrines be received? otherwise they must go no longer for any other
Saints in the world but such as are like Nebuchadnezzars image, Dan, 2.32, 33.

And what can he mean by those words in the said paragraph, and withstand
gainsayers, but that he and his friends will withstand us to the utmost, yea
with fire and faggot if they might obtain their vote (for we have heard of their
violence) to stir up the Magistrates against us, and it is sufficiently known
that some have lamented and condoled their want of power as yet not granted
them, to chastise Heretics and heresy (in their sense,) as the Jews would do
Paul for his heresy, Act. 24.14. though they confess that Synods and Councels
may err, and so do they in their late Confession of Faith.

What can the Vindicator mean by his words in his next paragraph, where he
acknowledges that he is not noted the unworthiest among the thousands of
Levites (as he styles them of his mind to maintain sin as aforesaid;) but that
he is of no small esteem (how notorious and vile soever his life and
conversation is known and proved to be for above twenty years) among the said
Levites, because he does maintain his positions with more audaciousness and
impudency then other Levites of his mind (though with as little sense) can do.

What can he mean when he says in his next paragraph, that he does presume to
present this part to those that desire to fear God, but that (in presumption)
he will present it to those, and such like as are spoken of, 2 Kings 17.41. who
feared the Lord, and served their Idols? for it is the thing he contendeth to
maintain, that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as they live: and
therefore he must needs mean by them whom he says fear the Lord, such as are
content that sin will remain in them as well as grace, and not resist unto
blood, striving against sin, ( Heb. 12.4.) that it may all be destroyed by the
grace and help of Christ; that so God may be all in all in them, according to
that, 1 Cor. 15.28.

Whom can he mean when he further says in that Paragraph, that he will beg no
patronage of great ones, but that he will not beg a patronage of such great
ones who dislike his sinful positions, because he knows full well they disown
him for them, and likewise for his impious and profligate life?

Besides, he thinks it so advantageous to plead for the continuance of sin,
that it will gain the acceptance of all that be of his mind, and have with
Ahab, sold themselves wickedly) without begging their patronage: and therefore
he adds further, if he err in the management of his sinful business, he
desires pardon, that he cannot maintain it better; for his will is (you may
see) to do his utmost to maintain his positions, though his will and abilities
are not sufficient to do Satan the service he desires to do, in maintaining
that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as they live; for if men be
persuaded to believe that position, then the least of Saints may well be quiet
in their sins without disturbing themselves for what they cannot (as this
Veterator says) hinder and remove by the grace and help of Christ to boot.

What can he mean when he says also, that he desires not defense, but that he
does not desire nor deserve to be defended himself, if he do not his utmost
endeavor to defend (if he mind his position) that sin will remain in the best
Saints so long as they live?

What can he mean by those words in his next paragraph, where he speaks of a
contest with Dr. Drayton and Parker, but that he is vexed at the heart, and did
contest with us, because we stand to beat down all sin? some (or the most part)
of which he would have remain (as his position does witness) in the best Saints
as long as they live; otherwise they are no company for him, because he neither
can, nor desires to come up to such Saints.

And whom can he call men of blessed memory, but such (if he mind his position)
who maintain (so desirable is a sinful life to him) that sin will remain in the
best Saints as long as they live?

And does not he intend them by his reverend Clergy (in the said paragraph) who
preach as he does, to maintain that sin will remain in the best Saints as long
as they live? otherwise he would have honored the late Dr. Drayton of the
reverend Clergy for his pious Sermons on 2 Cor. 7.1.

What volumes can he mean by his words in his next paragraph, which he says
many are not able to buy, but volumes of such abused and unwarrantable
testimonies as he produces to confirm his position with, that sin will remain
as aforesaid? and because they cannot be had, therefore he offers them his
pamplet of nonsense to delude them with who are hasty to believe him.

And whom can he mean by weak capacities, but such as he is afraid are not
stoutly resolved to stand to his positions, but that he doubts they will be
drawn off (if they search the Scriptures) from believing such pernicious
doctrine to their souls, as that sin will remain in the best Saints so long as
they live?

What can he mean (by those words in his next paragraph) where he says that he
does endeavor their satisfaction and confirmation; but that he desires to
confirm sin to remain in them as long as they live, that so they may be
satisfied with it? And therefore he says, he present; them with some few
collections (if he had presented none it would have been more for his credit
and comfort in the end) to persuade them that sin will remain in the best
Saints as long as they live; and that without dispute, if they will take his
word for it, who is most frequent in lying.

What can he mean by those words (his collections seriously to be weighed and
digested by them) but that he would have them so settled and rivetted in weak
capacities, as that they may never forget his tenants, that they, and the best
Saints, must live in sin while they live among men? and that upon all occasions
(when the enemies to his doctrine talk of mortifying all sin in this life)
they may reply, and say as the Lady Abbess did to her wanton daughter (both
justified by the Vindicators positions) By Saint Peter and Saint Paul,
Daughter, sinners are we all: for so this Veterator does impudently maintain,
that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as they l^ve; and therefore
needs must it remain in the Lady Abbess and her daughter, even to live a
wanton life, as their excusable infirmities; because the best Saints must have
their failings.

What can he mean when he says (in the same paragraph) these collections may
by the blessing of God enable the meanest capacities, etc. but that he desires
God may bless them so as to remain where they are, and to live in sin (if he
mind his position) while they live a mortal life*

What can he mean (in his next paragraph) where he says, I desire to bless
God for what others have done; but that it is his prayer and thanksgiving to
God, for such men who preach up sin (if he mind his position) and maintain
that it will remain in the best Saints as long as they live? else he resolves
to be none of the best, if any Saint at all.

What can he mean by his next words (in the same paragraph) if that which I
have now done be any thing serviceable, it has obtained its end; but that he
had no other end in his eye and thoughts in writing this pernicious
Vindication, and destructive to a good life, but to petswade men to live
quietly in sin, and not to trouble themselves, and grieve for that they
cannot help, because (as he says) sin will remain in the best Saints as long
as they live?

What can he mean when he further says, I am willing to spend and to be spent
for the Israel of God; but that they are the Israel of his God who prevail (if
he mind his position) against the grace of Christ, for to remain in sin as
long as they live? for Christ came to redeem his Saints from all iniquity, Ti.
2.14. and to purify to himself a peculiar people zealous of good works: and
for whom will he spend and be spent, but for such prevailers who can prevail
(if he mind his tenants) against all gainsayers, that sin will remain in the
best Saints as long they live? For these and with these he will spend his
patrimony, and all he can get besides by his practice as an Emperick at large.

What can he mean when he adds further, that he will be spent, but that he
expects at last to be spent in a sinful life himself? for he says in his
Vindication, that death only puts an end to a sinful life.

And what can be the sense of those words (in the same paragraph) that being
the end for which we are what we are; but that he looks on himself and those
of his mind and way to be appointed by some, let him name by whom (if he mind
his positions) to maintain that sin will remain in all Saints so long as they
live? and that is the end for which he is become what he is in shamlesness to
maintain that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as they live.

What can he mean by those words (in his next paragraph) where he says to his
allies and Levites, you are now upon the stage, fight the good fight of faith,
but that (if he mind his position) to remain in sin and disobedience is the
object of his faith, and that he does understand Saint Jude? when he bids
them to contend for the faith once delivered to the Saints, (v. 3. of that
Epistle) that he bids them contend (for so this Veterator does) that sin
will remain in the best Saints as long as thy live, as the faith which was once
delivered to the Saints, if any do deny it and contradict the same?

What can he mean by his words be courageous and fight etc. but he would have
them to fight for it, (if he do mind his position) that sin will remain in the
best Saints as long as they live? that so he and his friends may go for eminent
Saints as long as they are in this world, whatever they are accounted to be in
the world to come.

When he tells them they are upon the stage, what can he mean (in reference
to his position) but to put them in mind that they are above, and Doctor
Drayton must stand below to hear thi^ forsworn Veterator make oath to a
senseless article, namely, that Doctor Drayton should say, that when we have
fulfilled the Law then Christ would be as a bridge to carry us over to Heaven:
which is too senseless to come from Doctor Drayton, who knew (I say once
again) more divine truth then all the contrary-minded Divines in Wiltshire;
besides, I do attest it to to be falsely laid to Doctor Draytons charge, for I
was present at the same time when and where it is said the same or like words
were spoken by him.

What can he mean also by those words sight the good fight of faith, but that
it is good for them (if he mind his position) to fight against us who plead for
a possibility of a total mortification of sin in this life, and do deny their
rash assertion of sins necessary remaining in the best Saints as long as they
live?

Was there ever Veterator that abused Scripture Phrase more then this one does
in a Preface that must relate to his positions, or else he himself overthrows
his own positions by his Preface? I say was there ever varlet abused
Scripture Phrase as this Veterator does, when he bids his Lovites fight the
good fight of faith, in reference to his position, that sin will remain in the
best Saints as long as they live? for they are the words of St. Paul to
Timothy, 1 Timothy 6.12. and do you think that Paul bid Timothy to fight (as a
good fight of faith) against those who deny that sin will remain in the best
Saints as long as they live?

What did Paul intend by his words, when he said, I have fought the good fight
of faith, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, from honceforth is
laid up for me the crown of righteousness? 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. I say, did Paul mean
any of these words in reference to the Vindicators position, who bids his
Levites fight the good fight of faith? which must be in reference to, and for
his sinful position, else he says nothing to them that is to his purpose.

Now if St. Paul had been (which God forbid) of the Vindicators and his Levites
mind, then if any should have contradicted him, as we do the Veterator, what
stuff had Paul (absit blasphemia dicto) couched under the said words, if thus
or in a like manner, they had been explained in reference to the Vindicators
position; O you who deny that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as
they live, I have fought the good fight of faith, (as the Veterator exhorts
his Levites to do) against such as deny that sin will remain in me as long as I
live: I have finished my course in sin, to be in me as long as I live; I have
kept the faith or belief of the doctrine, that sin will remain in me (and in
all Saints) as long as I live; from hence (for so believing my continuing in
sin, and contending for it as truth, like as this Vindicator does) is laid up
for me the crown of righteousness, for contending for an unrighteous life? As
if it were a righteous work to contend for sin (if any deny it) to remain in
the best Saints as long as they live; which is the thing this Veterator aims
at.

What can the Vindicat or mean by these words (in his last paragraph) where he
says, I assure my self and you that our victory shall be glorious, but that he
does count it a glory (if he mind his position) that sin will remain in him and
his friends as long as they live? though the Apostle says Phil. 3.18, 19. of
such, their glory is their shame, that mind earthly things: and what more
earthly then sin? according to that Coloss. 3.4.

What can he mean when he says, it shall be glorious through Christ, but that
he would persuade them that Christ will (if he mind his position) countenance
and honor them for contending that sin will remain in the best Saints as
long as they live? Yea, when he says glorious through Christ, what can he mean
but that he would persuade them that Christ will plead also for sin to remain
in his best Saints as long as they live? by reason that to say their victory
shall be glorious through Jesus Christ, is to make them believe that Christ
will own sin to be there (according to his positions) by his concurrence and
assistance, befides allowance; for then its through Jesus Christ, when he is a
partial, chief, procreant and conservant cause of it: whereas indeed the
Apostle says the contrary, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. What fellowship is there betwixt
Christ and Belial, betwixt righteousness and unrightcousnesse? wherefore God
says to his Saints, come out from among them, and touch no unclean thing, and
then I will be your God, and you shall be my people.

What can he mean by those words (in his last paragraph) to whom be glory, but
that he and his friends (if his positions be minded) think they ought to give
glory to Christ for such doctrines, that sin will remain in the best Saints
as long as they live?

And his adding of Amen as in reference to Christ (in the close of all he
says) can argue no other thing, but that he hops, wishes, and prays, (if
he remember his position) that it may be so granted from Christ that sin may
remain in himself, and his friends and in as many as he can persuade to believe
him, as long as they live? for the word Amen signifies as much and more of that
kind then we have attested it to compreheud.

We say again, let the impartial Reader but mind his positions aforesaid, which
he contendeth for usque ad vires, and he will not deny but we have hinted the
true (though not the full) meaning of his preface in reference to his
positions, which are the terminus ad quem where all the expresses in the said
preface must center.

Besides, the substance of his preface is a condolement of sad times coming on,
and of false prophets risen up; and must not that relate to his positions? so
that he must count them the false prophets which he cries out against, for
teaching a possibility of a total mortification of sin (through the help of
Christ) in this life; otherwise himself and his specified Levites must be the
false prophets, for maintaining that sin will remain in the best Saints as long
as they live. And the sad times must be the times wherein there is a falling
away from his positions, and from them who stand and plead as he and his
fellow-Levites do, that sin will remain, etc. maugre the grace of Christ
inclining to the contrary. Secondly, his arguments laid down in his preface to
his friends and Levites, also his exhortations to them, and prayers for them,
do all show that the expresses in his preface must be so explained as we have
done in reference to his positions.

And therefore if he or his friends do understand that all things in a preface
and a book ought to look toward one another as face answers to face, for to
justify and maintain each other, then they will acknowledge that his preface
and book must in like manner reflect upon each other; and so be forced to yield
(upon this account) that our paraphrase has expressed (though not fully) the
genuine (though mischievous) intent of his preface respectively considered.

The Vindicator does subscribe himself an obedient Son of the Church; but he
does not tell us of what Charch: yet let any disingaged person to his
principles confider his positions fronted in his Vindication, and he must of
necessity bear testimony (if he be desired) that he is an obedient Son only of
the malignant Church of Satan; for he that commits sin is of the Devil,
John 3.8. and therefore he who pleads for the remaining of sin to be of
necessity (while Saints live, notwithstanding the promised help and grace of
Christ) does offer his devotions in Satan's congregation, for he is a
disobedient Son of the true Church of Christ, rending it with divisions and
contentions for the sins cause, to maintain that sin will remain in the best
Saints as long as they live: And thus rending the true Church by maintaining
such division, Joh. Tendering does verify another Anagram of his name

Hot in rending.
Some men are fervent that no sin remain;
Some are more hot its being to maintain:
Those with tongue John Tendring's hot in rending,
These for his Saints hotter in defending.
You see his name suites with his Anagram,
Hence sins abetter he may say I am;
Hence sinners Champion you may call his name
To plead for sin hence John does take no shame.
Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own eyes. Prove.
26.15. A Confutation of the two subsequent Positions.
1. That sin will remain in the best Saints as long as they live in houses of
clay. 2. That it is impossible for the best Saints to obey the Law of God
perfectly in this life.
HAving paraphrased the Vindicators preface, and demonstrated the same
paraphrase to be apt and genuine in a Relative sense to the Vindicators
positions; we come next to speak of the said positions laid down in the
Pamphlet it self; which is so full of digressions, and perverted Texts of
Scripture, of Tautologies, contradictions, nonsense, and other absurdities,
besides the error and impiety of his propositions, that we doubted not, but in
a short time quin mole sua rueret, but that it would ruinate it self: Yet lest
the Princock by our silence should grow proud of his borrowed feathers, and
others either be misled or confirmed in their error by what he has written, we
thought good to put forth this short answer, wherein we follow him (...), to
discover his errors; howbeit the Reader must not expect the formal word
Answer, in our replies to this vindication; for this we usually do, either by
the adversitive word (but,) or the interposition of a pasenthesis,) a
connter-question or limitation, in the close, or some such like opposition, and
qualification, to correct what he says; which when we have done in an
anasceuastical and confutatory way, we will cata^scustically establish what we
have undertaken to maintain.

But first, let us take a view of the positions themselves; the first of which
is this, as he has stared it, [That sin will have a being in the best of men,
so long as their souls have a being in the houses of clay.] Whence these
absurdities will follow; First, that sin comes originally from Jehovah, in that
it is said to have a being; for nothing is said to have a being of essence, or
existence but what first comes from the Being of beings, Jehovah himself.
Secondly, he here makes sin to be a supreme, if not an almighty commander, in
that he says sin will have such a being. Thirdly, herein he makes little
difference between grown men, and babes in Christ; for sin, says he, will have
a being in the best of them till death. Fourthly, he does not here exempt
Christ himself as he was man. Fifthly, he makes our bodies or houses of clay,
to be the proper domicil and seat of sin: and then neither Adam in his
innocence, nor Christ as man, were free from sin, for both dwelt originally in
houses of clay.

The second position is this; [That no man can by grace in this life perform
such perfect obedience to the Law of God, as not to offend against the same, or
to be thereby justified, otherwise then by Christ of Orace given.] From whence
you may observe these things likewise; First, that this man whose name John
imports the grace of God, is called so per Antiphrasin; for he is an enemy to,
and with Herod, an imprisoner of the grace of God. Secondly, he questions not
what men do de facto, but what men can do in this life with the utmost help of
grace. Thirdly, he makes the Law simply unlawful, because it is impossible, as
he says, to observe it, both to nature and grace. Fourthly, he does not here
reserve a place of possibility for Christ himself as man to fulfill it.
Fifthly, it appears here that the Vindex is a great lover of forbidden fruit;
for whereas Doctor Drayton told him at the first that he would not in this
controversy have any thing to do with the work of justification, this man
will needs bring in that by hook or by crook. Sixthly, that he is yet caught in
the same snare which he laid for another; for he tacitly says, that we cannot
be justified by such a perfect obedience to the Law of God, otherwise then by
Christ of grace given; and so say we: yea, if he grants us this, he yields the
other question also; for he that can be justified by such a fulfilling of the
Law through the grace of Christ, has no sin unsubdued left in him. And if he
runs into so many absurdities as he lancheth forth, what will he do when he
comes into the maine?

His first and grand impertinency is this, that he spends the first ten pages
in a Commonplace about sin, wherein he is so entangled that he can scarcely
find the way out again; of which take this short account:

Page 1. He tells us [that to the intent his ensuing discourse may be proper
and profitable for the informing of the weak, and establishing them in the
faith of the truth, which next after the glory of God (which is not much
glorified by our continuance in sin, which is that he pleads for;) and the
advancement of the truth, (which he directly here represseth,) is the only
thing here by him intended, he shall observe this method there following.] But
ere we come to that, what difference is there betwixt the establishment of men
in the faith of the truth, and the advancement of the truth; which he makes two
distinct things? But what is his intended method? First, says he, I shall
define what sin is in the general; which he may the better do because of his
long acquaintance with it, which by his calculation of his age was twenty four
years before his Mother bare him, and perhaps some years before her birth
also. Secondly, he will show what the first sin was. Thirdly, what were the
causes of it. Fourthly, the effects of it: (Thus he loves still to ramble about
from his right station.) And lastly, what original sin is. But what difference
is there between the first sin, and original sin, which here he makes two
things? He tells us here also, that the Hebrew word translated sin signifies
properly misdoing, or missing of the mark, as if the Hebrews had not many
words to denote sin, though he can name none of them. This learned Linguist
tells us page 26. that the Apostle does usually distinguish betwixt peccatum and
crimen, as if the Apostles writ unto the Churches in Latin. Page 66. he shows
also what a Logician he is, making the efficient and formal causes of
justification to be passive as well as active: And page 48 in his differencing
of gratia gratis data, and gratia gratum faciens, you will find him as
excellent a Schoolman, or schoolboy rather.

Page 2. he says, that in Religion the Law is our mark or way from which if
we swerve we sin. But is not the Gospel our way therein also? and that in a
special manner of our Christian Faith and Religion? That defect is the general
nature of sin; but is not excess, which is the other extreme sinful also? That
this defect is an inclination or action repugnant to the Law; But what thinks
he of evil words, as false accusation, lying, cursing, and swearing, (such as
he frequently uses,) are not they sinful also?

[That there is in sin a double formality, repugnancy to the Law, and guilt.
But guilt] is the effect, and not the form of sin.

[That the former of these two is a comparison with the Law,] but it is a
disparison or dissimilitude therewith [that the first fin of man was the
disobedience of our first Parents in eating the forbidden fruit.] But if he
understands it of their actual eating of that fruit, he is much mistaken; for
as the woman's actual eating thereof did go before the man's, so many gradual
evils did precede them both; as first, diffidence and incredulity to Gods
word, who had expressly said, in the day that thou shall eat thereof, dying thou
shall dye. Secondly, too much ear and credence given to the devils lying
promise, who said, ye shall not die, but be as gods, knowing good and evil.
Thirdly the too much liking and approbation of the forbidden fruit. Fourthly,
the hungring or thirsting after it. Fifthly, contempt of Gods justice. Sixthly,
ingratitude toward him for all his former goodness. And lastly, their
consenting to Satan, and resolution to eat of that fruit.

[That in the general, all our corruption and misery is sprung from that first
sin of the first Adam.] Contrary to what the Lord says, Hosea 13.9. O Israel,
thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thine help.

But here he says more particularly, that eternal death came upon all their
posterity by that first sin. Contrary to Gods express Law, Deuteronomy. 24.16. where
God will not have the son to suffer a temporal death, and much less an
eternal, for the fathers sin; and directly contrary to Gods oath, Ezekiel. 18.3,
4. As I live, says the Lord God, ye shall not have occasion any more to use
this proverb in Israel. Behold, all souls are mine, as the soul of the father,
so the soul of the son is mine: the soul that sins, it shall die. So ver.
20. The son shall not be are the iniquity of the father, neither shall the
father bear the iniquity of the son; the righteousness of the righteous shall
be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him. Number. 16.22.
Shall one man sin, and will thou be wroth with all the Congregation?

[That the corruption and averseness of our nature came from that fall
aforesaid, Page, 3. that all our actual sins do spring from thence.] See to
the contrary, Eccles. 7.29. [That the first sin of man is the cause of all
other sins and punishments; which is true of each man's personal fall and
disobedience, and not of the other.]

[That the Spirit by the Law entitles us to Adams sin. He means the first
Adams, as a derivation from the root to the branches; as poison is carried from
the fountain to the cistern; and as the children of traitors have their blood
tainted with the treason of their fathers; and as the children of bondslaves
are under their parents conditions. But all these similitudes are but shaws to
catch woodcocks; for neither was the first Adam either the root or fountain of
our souls, which are Gods immediate workmanship, Isai. 57.16. for the spirit
should fail before me, and the souls which I have made: nor are our bodies
unclean by birth, being created to be Temples for the Holy Ghost; nor are
traitors children usually tainted with their fathers treason, though by the
civil Law of some Countries, (in proditionis terrorem,) they are ignobled in
their blood and dignity: nor was Adam himself a bond-slave to sin, but by the
grace of regeneration Gods freeman, Romans 6.18. before he begat any children;
nor does the sinful corruption of our parents pass to us more then the graces
and virtues of those that are or were righteous; for both these are spiritual
things which nature cannot convey: but he seeks to prove what he says by some
Scriptures long since worn threadbare by allegation to that effect, Joh. 3.5.
Romans 5.12, 20, 21. 1 Cor. 15.47, 48, 49. Ephesians. 2.3. Job 4.4. Psalm. 51.5. Isai.
48.8. Genesis 8.21. To all which we will give answer in the order set down with
what brevity we can, having answered the same at large in our Examen. As for
that Ioh. 3.5. Whatsoever is born of the flesh is flesh; it is true of the
wisdom of the flesh, and of the righteousness of the flesh, as well as of
the open sin; but Christ speaks not here of the natural birth of men, but of a
spiritual, be it true or false. As for Romans 5.12, 13, 20. the Apostle speaks
there thus; Therefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin; so death went over all men, (...), so far as all have sinned; (for so
Chrysostom and Erasmus, and others, read those words:) for until the Law sin
was in the world, but where there is no Law sin is not imputed, or reputed for
sin: Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not
sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, who is the figure of him
that is to come. But not as the offense so is the free gift; for the judgment
was of one to condemnation, but the free gift is of many offenses unto
justification: for if by one man's offense death reigned by one, much more they
which receive an abundance of grace and of the gift of Righteousness, shall
reign in life by one, Jesus Christ. Therefore as by the offense of one
judgment came upon all to condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one
the free gift came upon all men to the justification of life: for as by one
man's disobedience many were made sinners; so by the obedience of one shall many
be made righteous. Unto which long Text we give this short answer; First, that
it is a parallel and opposition betwixt Adams mischief and Christ's remedy and
cure, but few in these days of supposed (rather then true) light, understand
either the one or the other aright; for besides the first Adam or man, whom the
Vindicator with many more, for want of a true Judicator, here understands,
there are four Adams mentioned both in the Scriptures and other writers. The
first is our natural or earthly man, which is the creature of this world; of
whom our Apostle says 1 Cor. 15, 41. The first man is of the earth earthly.
The second is an inward portraiture of righteousness, a glimpse of the
heavenly man, yet earthy, natural and mutable; which we all bear at the
first, and so are said to have born the image of the earthly, 1 Cor. 15.49.
This is opposed verse the 14 of this 5 chapter of the Romans to Moses, another
inward state or work of the Law, discovering the deadliness of sin unto us,
with lightnings, thunderings, and terrors, Heb. 12.18, 19. The third Adam is
the old man of sin. The fourth is the last Adam, the Lord from Heaven, who is
not as the first was, with his weak image of Righteousness a living soul, but
a quickening Spirit, 1 Cor. 15.45. It Is the first then of those sour, the Adam
of our earthly or natural man, who yet with the help of the second is the
image of him that is yet to come to the believers, to wit the Lord from heaven,
in whom we first sin and die by our personal fall, according to 1 Cor. 15.22.
As in Adam all die which do die, so in Christ shall all be made alive who are
quickened: for we proved before, that no man did or could dye by the first Adams
sin, both by the Law, and Gods oath thereagainst. As for the first, 1 Cor.
15.47, 48, 49. we have shown that it makes for us, and not against us. As for
Ephesians 2.3. Paul there confesses that since his fall he and the fallen Jews as
well as others were not children of God by love patience, and meekness, as in
their first creation, but children by the nature of the wrath, for so the words
run in the Greek, and consequently the children of the prince of the power of
the air as well as others, according to Romans 3.22, 23.

Unto the words of Job 14.4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? We
say, that since the man's personal fall and corruption, he can neither by his
own strength, cleanse himself, nor bring forth any righteousness or holiness
that is in it self clean or pure. Unto Psalm. 51.5. Behold, I was shapen in
iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me, or warm me: we answer, that
David speaks here of his own first personal fall and disobedience, or his first
conception and forming, not in his natural mothers belly, but in the womb of
sin; accordingly as it is said of Eve, who was at the first created after the
similitude of God, that when she fell (...), Tim. 2.14. But the woman being
deceived was begotten in the transgression. Thus the Jews speak to the blind
man, Joh. 9.3, 4. Thou wastaltogether born insin, and do thou teach us? And
David himself complains of some noted wicked ones, the wicked are strangers
from the womb, they go astray as soon as they be born, they speak lies, Psalm.
58.3, 4, 5. If he had spoken of their natural birth, he could not truly have
said that they had either gone astray, or spoken lies, as soon as they were
born: This mother that conceived David in sin, was his consent to the first
Temptation, Jam. 1.15. Lust when it has conceived, etc.

Unto Esaias 48.8. I knew that thou would deal very treacherously, and wast
called a transgressor from the womb: I say, that men could not from the natural
womb deal treacherously; and therefore it is a spiritual womb of which the Lord
speaks here. And Hosea 9.11. As for Ephrains, their glory shall flee away
like a bird, from the birth, and from the womb, and from the conception: to
wit, in the sin, or in the false righteousness.

Finally, unto Genesis 8.21. For the imaginations of man's heart are evil from his
youth: I say that is true; for before that time men usually lose their
innocence, and corrupt themselves. But what is that to innate corruption? And
whereas he brings in Augustine, saying, in uno vniversi; It is granted while we
were in Adams loins we were all one, and so we are still in the natural Adam,
at the first birth earthly; but innocent, and in the old Adam of sin all one
when we are fallen and depraved, that is, are corrupt and sinful; but are not
all such in the same measure and degree? But his following positions are these,
page 4.

That we were all in the first Adam legally; No, but seminally only.

That there was a stipulation and Covenant between God and Adam for all
mankind. That we were all parties with him to any such Covenant.

That we were liable to the curse that belongs to the breach of that
Covenant.] All which are the mere figments of man's brain.

That we had interest in the mercy promised in that pretended Covenant.] Of all
which there is no footstep to be found in the word.

That being in him naturally we were unavoidably subject to all the bondage and
burden which he or the humane nature then contracted.] Not so, unless it were
some temporal calamity, with which God might justly plague his posterity for
his fall and sins. Yet he goes on in page 4. to prove that we are guilty of the
first Adam's sin, but by false principles, or with true principles misapplied,
as follows.

That every thing which is born carries with it the nature of that which did
bear it, as touching the substance and accidents proper to the special kind.

This is a truth, and therefore the soul which is born and breathed from God
must needs be pure; and the natural earthly man must needs be good in his kind,
as all other natural living creatures are: that which is born of the Spirit in
a way of regeneration is Spirit, but what is born of the Flesh is still Flesh,
as this man's Wisdom and Doctrine is, of which birth Christ speaks, John 3.6.
as before.

That we being all born of corrupt and guilty parents, do in our birth by
nature draw their corruption and guilt.] Which is false, for guilt and
corruption are not natural, but spiritual and adventitious things as is
aforesaid.

That by the death of Christ who is the second Adam, (howbeit not as he was
man, but as he is a quickening Spirit, and the Lord from heaven,) 1 Cor. 15.45,
47. we receive a double grace, of Justification and Regeneration.] Wherein are
two false grounds laid down; First, that justification and regeneration are
two distinct things, which St. Paul makes but one and the self same thing,
Titus 3.4, 5, 6, 7. But after that the kindness and love of God our Savior
toward man appeared, not by works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the holy Ghost, which he shed abundantly on us through Jesus Christ
our Savior, that being justified by his grace we should be made heirs
according to the hope of eternal life. And 1 Cor. 6.11. And such were some of
you; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name
of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. The second false ground is,
that we receive those two gifts of justification and regeneration by the death
of Christ; for though remission of sins is purchased thereby for the true
believers, yet that is neither regeneration nor justification in the Apostles
sense, nor is justification purchased thereby; for he that made us had power to
regenerate without any such purchase: That therefore it follows, that out of
the first Adam (to wit our first parent) there issued a double evil unto and
upon us, to wit, guilt and corruption, we deny as false and inconsequent.

That in this derivative the sin which he speaks of is an universal corruption,
is false likewise, in which are two great evils, as he says: Sed sublato sub,
ecto tollitur ad unctum.

[Pag. 5. That in it first there is a general defect of all righteousness in
which we were at first created, to wit, in our first patents.] First, it is
manifestly false; as also that any such defect is derived unto us, who are
still created righteous and holy, and after the image of God, as these ensuing
Texts do clearly prove, besides many more that might be added, Genesis 9.6.
Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, for in the image of
God created he man, to wit, him that is so killed; or else the argument is of
no force, Jam. 3.9. Therewith, to wit, with the tongue, bless we God, and
therewith curse we man who is created after the similitude of God. Ecclesiast.
7.29. Lo, this have I found, that God made man righteous, but they have sought
out many inventions. Jer. 2.21. Yet I had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a
right seed, how then art thou turned into the degenerate plant of a wild vine
unto me?

[That this pretended derivative sin to be so conveyed from the first Adam to
us is an inherent deordination, evil disposition, disease, propension to all
mischief, and antipathy and aversation to all good, which the Scripture calls
the flesh, the wisdom of the flesh, the body of sin, earthly members, the
works of the Devil, the Hell that sets the whole course of nature on fire, Jam.
3.5, 6. Romans 8.6, 7. Jam. 3.15. Ephesians. 4.22. Col. 3.5. Romans 7.23. 1 John 3.8.]
Unto which I say, that although all those names are justly given to the body of
sin, especially when it is fully formed in men with all his members; yet first,
there is no such thing found in children, of whom our Savior says, that the
Kingdom of Heaven is of such; and that unless we be born again after our fall
and corruption, and become like them in humility, righteousness, love and
meekness, we cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, Matthew. 18.3. Mar. 10.14,
15. Does not Paul also give us this charge, 1 Cor. 14.20. Brethren, be ye not
children in understanding, howbeit in malice or naughtiness be children: where
he implies that children have no malice or naughtiness in them; and if sin be
the workmanship of the Devil, as he out of 1 John 3.8. confesses, I would
demand whether the Devil had an hand in the creation of children, which he
must, if this sin be his workmanship.

But that which follows there, that no man can be more sensible of the
through-malignity of this derivative corruption then Paul was when he cried
out, Oh wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? Is, first, the old mistake, and afterward backed with this error and
piece of nonsense, until his understanding was opened to conceive the
spiritualness, penetration and compass of the holy Law, which measures the very
bottom of every action: for Paul could not be so sensible of his sins
malignity till his understanding was so opened, nor till he had been scourged
also for it by the work of the Law, as all men are whom God brings to be, and
makes his sons, Psalm. 94.12. Heb. 12.

That the Law condemns as well the original as the Acts of sin, is true of
prohibition, but not of condemnation; for each sinful motion is by the Law
discovered and prohibited; but we are not condemned for the same till we
approve or like of the temptation in some measure.

Those ensuing positions are also false; First, that Paul Romans 5.14.
understands by Adam and Moses, our first parent, and him that was the Lawgiver;
but two distinct estates in men, as was said before: which may appear out of
the foregoing verse compared with this; For until the Law sin was in the
world, that is, before the inward Moses, Lawgiver or reprover comes unto men;
but where there is no Law sin is not reputed for sin, for so the word (...) is
to be rendered.

Secondly, because he says, that death reigned from Adum, which is the natural
man in his first defection, till Moses, or one that draws out of the water of
sin.

That the men who sinned between the first Adam's age and the time of Moses,
did not sin after the similitude of Adams transgression, against the clear
revelation of Gods holy will, as Adam did.] Yet they did, for the same God that
did forbid the eating of the forbidden fruit, does ever since prohibit and
forbid every sin in every man's soul that is against the moral Law, Romans 2.15.
Which shows the work of the Law written in their hearts, their consciences
bearing them witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing or else
excusing one another. Was not Enoch a Prophet in his time? see Jude 1.14. and
was not Noah the eight preacher of righteousness? as the Apostle calls him 2
Pet. 2.5. were not the men of the old World destroyed for their known
wickedness, and shut into the infernal prison for their apparent disobedience?
1 Pet. 3.19, 20. so that the Vindicators misapprehension of this place of men's
sinning for want of such light as Adam had, is full of darkness.

As for those over whom death reigned from Adam to Moses, and who had not
sinned after the similitude of Adam's transgression, we say, that as Adam and
Moses are two inward states, so may these be inward spiritual messengers of God
represented by Abel and others, as well as the inward Adam and Moses of which
he speaks; for such a generation of righteous ones which never sinned, we find
slain by the wicked and incorrigible generation of men; Mat. 23.35. That upon
you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of the
righteous Abel unto the blood of Zachariah the son of Barachiah: for though men
usually in reading this and other Scriptures look no further then the letter;
yet I demand of them, how in justice could all the righteous blood shed from
the beginning come upon that wicked and unbeleeving generation of the Jews, if
they had not inwardly slain a spiritual Abel and other messengers of God, even
to a spiritual Zachariah, that is, the Lord remembrancer; the son of Barachiah,
that is, of the Lords benediction, as all his inward messengers are? yea it is
true which Abraham answered to the rich man being in hell, I say it is true of
all men, that they have Moses and the Prophets inwardly, whom they ought to
hear, Luke 16.29, 30, 31. To which add that which is written Rev. 6.9, 10. And
when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of them that
were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they held; and they
cried with a loud voice, saying, how long, O Lord holy and true, do thou not
judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? And white robes were
given to every one of them, and it was said unto them, that they should rest
for a season, until their fellow servants also and their brethren that should
be killed as they were should be fulfilled. Concerning which we may observe
that they were no outward Prophets and Apostles, for such cry not for
vengeance, but pray for their persecutors, as Stephen did; and therefore they
must needs be inward and spiritual messengers of God who cry for vengeance
against the earthly sins and lusts of men by whose means they had been killed,
Qui capere possit capiat. Give me leave here to observe two things more upon
Romans 5.14. First, that those persons are said here not to sin in Adams fall,
but rather if they had sinned that it was after the similitude of Adams
transgression; where the Apostle had fair occasion to speak of our guilt and
fall through that sin, if he had known any such thing. Secondly, that Christ is
yet to come, even to the believers, namely Christ as he is the second Adam, and
the Lord from Heaven: so Heb. 10.36, 37. Jam. 4.21, 22. 1 Pet. 1.13. 1 John
3.1, 2, 3.

First, he says, but untruly, page 6. that the sin of Adam and the lust which
he contracted did reign over all men from the first Adam to that Moses the
Lawgiver; so he means.

Secondly, that not only all men, but every part of man is shut up under the
guilt of that first Adam's sin: (what infants? Christ and all?)

Thirdly, that the Apostle proves this at large, Romans 3.9, 19, 23. But what are
those words to this purpose which he produces there? to wit, what then? are we
better then they? no in no wise: for we have proved before that both Jews and
Gentiles are all under sin. But I say, first, that the Apostle here does not go
about to prove that the infants of either are so. Secondly, that this is not
corruption descended from our first parents fall, but contracted by our own
fall and disobedience. But he goes on with the Apostles words, ver. 19. Now we
know that what things soever the Law says it says it to them that are under
the Law, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty
before God. verse. 23. For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God:
and Romans 11.32. For God has concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have
mercy upon all. But does the Law speak any such thing to or of infants? No, we
have showed the contrary out of Genesis 9.6. Eccles. 7.29. Jer. 2.21. Mar.
10.14. 1 Cor. 14.20. Jam. 3.9. before quoted: to which add Matthew. 13.24, 25.
and the parable of the Talents, Matthew. 25. and that of the lost groat, or piece
of silver; and that of the prodigal Son, who had a portion to spend, which he
afterward wasted, as the said woman also had a piece of silver before she lost
it, Luke 15. All which prove that by creation still we have a talent, a
measure, and a portion of innocence and righteousness born with us.

After the universality of persons he goes about to prove that sin defiles
all the parts of man: which is true when men open a free passage and entrance
unto the Devil, which all men do not. But the Scriptures which he cites, as
Genesis 6.5. and 8.21. Romans 3.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. do not fully prove it as he
says they do: but none of those defects and defilements which he enumerates
there and in the seventh page, were drawn down from the first Adam to us.

[That the whole frame of a man's heart is evil continually: and page 7. he
says that our sin cleaves as close to our nature as blackness to the skin of
an Ethiopian, which cannot possibly be washed off.] Then Gods promises made
Ezekiel. 36.26. and elsewhere, that he will pour clean water upon us, and cleanse
us from all our filthiness and abominations, are to no purpose; and Christ's
design, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. is frustrated.

[That it is an evil ever present with us:] Indeed the Apostle says, Romans
7.21. of himself and others, that were then or had been babes in Christ, that,
when I would do good evil is present with me; that is too usually, but not
always; for at length he knew nothing by himself, 1 Cor. 4.4. and the Devil is
at length cast out quite by those that wanre aright, Rev. 12.10. yea he is
ofttime made to flee away: in the mean time, Jam. 4.7. resist the Devil, and he
will flee from you. But he goes on, and says [pag. 8. That it will be ever
present with us to derive a deadness, a damp, a dullness and an indisposedness
upon all our services.] How then is Gods oath made good? who swear unto
Abraham, that he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of the hands
of our enemies might serve him without fear, cheerfully, in holiness and
righteousness all the d^ yes of our lives. Luke 7.73, 74, 75. or that
fulfilled, Prove. 4.12. When thou go thy steps shall not be straightened, and
when thou runnest thou shall not stumble. See the contrary Psalm. 119.14, 16.24,
47. [That this sin casts such iniquity upon our holiest things or duties, that
we stand in need of a priest to bear, and expiate the same for us, because it
is said, Exodus 28.38. that Aaron should bear the iniquity of the holy things
which Israel should offer to the Lord.] Which Scripture is perverted by him and
others who understand it not; for the gifts of their hallowed things which
Israel offered unto the Lord were to be perfect and complete in themselves,
Lev. 22.21, 22, 23. if these were any way defective the priest was not to
receive them, nor offer them. But that Aaron might offer those in an holy
manner also after Gods prescript, he was to wear upon his Mitre a Golden plate,
with this Inscription for a remembrancer, Holiness to the Lord; or else if he
failed, not they, but he was to bear the iniquity of their holy or hallowed
things. How does this Text then serve his turn to that end for which he cites
it?

[That this Sin derives venom upon every action that comes from us.] Why does
the Apostle Paul then charge Timothy thus? 1 Timothy 6.13, 14. I give thee charge
in the sight of God, who quickneth all things, and before Christ Jesus, that
thou keep this commandment without spot, unrebukable, till the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ. So was also Peter's charge to all the Saints, 2 Pet. 3.14.
Wherefore beloved, seeing ye look for such things, be diligent that ye may be
found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless.

[That in our best works done by the contribution and concurrence of our own
faculties such a perverseness does adhere, and such stubborness of ours is
superinduced, that God may justly charge us for defiling his grace.] But this
is most absurdly spoken; for his grace cannot be defiled: and as for the evil
which we mix with them, if it may turn away his eyes from his own gifts in us,
why does the Lord say then, Psalm. 32.2. that there are some in whose spirit is
no guile: and Psalm. 119.1. Blessed are the undefiled in the way: and Mat. 5.8.
Blessed are the pure in the heart, if no such people can be found?

[That our lust is the father of sin, and the Adulterer: for temptation is the
father, and our desire, delight and consent is the mother.

That we may see this sin in our children, before they have hair or tooth
showing it self; to wit, vanity, pride, frowardness, self-love, and revenge,
and the like; for which he voucheth the words of Augustine, saying, [I have
seen a sucking infant that was not able to articulate a word, look with a
countenance pale with envy upon his fellow-suckling that shared with him in the
same milk.] But what will he say to those children that are born with hair and
teeth, as some have been in our age? or what vanity or pride has he seen in
children; where the child of a Prince will consort with the brat of a beggar of
his own age? or what frowardness (which sickness or pain has not caused) or
what self-love and anger but what is planted by God in every living animal?
Wherefore Augustine's reason is truly childish, and contrary to the Apostles
words, but in maliciousness or naughtiness be ye children, 1 Cor. 14.20. There
and page 9. he brings in Augustine crying out, Ubi Domine? quando Domine?
wherever was the place O Lord, when ever was the time O Lord that I have been
an innocent creature? To this I answer, when he was first created; Eccles.
7.29. Lo, this have I found, that God made man righteous: before he went to be
baptized; Quid festinat innocens aetas ad peccatorum remissionem? says
Tertullian lib. de bapt. and before the Devil even by the Law and word of God
abused him, and led him into error, and had made him wise in his own eyes, and
holy [or righteous] with his own chosen ways, as Paul speaks of himself in the
like case, Romans 7.9. For I was alive without the Law once, but when the
commandment came, sin lived and I dyed. How came that to pass? verse. 11. for
sin taking occasion by the commandment deceived me, that is, made me
self-wise, self-holy, self-righteous, and by it slew me. Does not Augustine
himself as well as others call those infants whom Herod slew about Bethlehem,
Innocents? lib. 3. de lib. arbit.

Further, he says page 19. [That this sin breaks forth unexpectedly; witness
Hazael, 2 Kin. 8.13. But what is thy servant a dog that he should do this great
thing:] But was this original sin that thus breaks out? surely then he might
have discovered in himself some inclinations thereunto long before, and then he
needed not so much to have wondered at it now. May not proud, and wicked, and
obstinate men be given up to heinous and inhumane sins brought upon them by
Satan's temptations, into whose hands they are delivered for their former
rebellions and incorrigibleness? See Romans 1.28, 29, 30. And even as they did
not like to retain God in their knowledge, so God gave them up to a reprobate
mind, to do those things which are not convenient, being filled with all
unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, full of
envy, murder, debate.

He says also, [Witness Peter, Matthew. 26.33, 35.] Why, what did Peter but
discover a great deal of good will to Christ, when he had as yet attained very
little power to withstand so great a temptation as did lie in the fear of
death, or some other great damage? yet both he and all his Fellow-Apostles were
then always ignorant and weak.

But he goes on and says, [Who would have expected or feared Adultery from
such a man as David, after so much communion with God? or impatience from
Jeremiah, after such revelations from God? or Idolatry from Solomon, after so
much wisdom from God? or fretfulness or frowardness of spirit from Jonah,
after such deliverance from God? or fearfulness in Abraham, after so much
protection from God? or cursing from Job, after so much patience and experience
from God?] yea, by the Vindicators doctrine we might have expected all these,
and all other sins from any of these, because he says that every man by
original sin derived from Adam, (and which is not wholly to be subdued in this
life) has the seeds of all sins in him. But what if they had been as innocent
as Adam before his fall? might they not have been tempted as he was, and
overcome likewise for want of close depending upon God? yet behold how this
Champion of corruption, to maintain his false doctrine, does falsely and
reproachfully charge some of the most eminent Saints with sin, where the Lord
himself does not; for Job and Jeremy might and did curse their nativity in sin,
and not their first birth, as some of the best Expositors speak, and that
without sin, yea with a great deal of piety toward God. Nor are the Prophets
charged with impatience by the Lord himself, but commended as a pattern of
patience to us, Jam. 5.10. and Abraham's concealing of his wife (if he failed
therein, which may justly be questioned) it is not so bad as to leave his wife
and child twelve or thirteen years together; nor did he use lying, or speaking
of falsehood to help himself, as this false son of Abraham does. Howbeit he
concludes with a good prayer, wishing [that we may all learn to know our
selves:] to which we say Amen. But whereas each of the eleven Apostles said,
Master is it I? this clearly proves, not that they suspected themselves, as he
would have it, but that they were not conscious to themselves of any such
wicked intention or inclination. Therefore his paraphrase here is rather
humanum commentum, then a comment upon that Text: nor do all these instances
prove any thing, but that men are liable, at leastwise for a time, to all
manner of temptations; and that some in their infancy of grace may through
humane infirmity be overcome by that temptation, which when they grow strong in
Christ, they can easily by his grace and help overcome afterward; as Peter did
his fear of death for Christ's cause, when he suffered martyrdom for him: but
this proves not that we must be always babes, and like reeds shaken with every
wind of temptation; yet should our former weakness and falings teach us to
commiserate others, who yet through ignorance or infirmity sometime stumble and
fall.

Therefore it is false which he there by way of conclusion speaks page 10.
That strive we what we can our infirmities will incompass us, and our
corruption will be about us so long as we carry flesh about us, as we may see
in the forenamed instances: [for Job and others saw God face to face
afterward, Job 42.2. as did Abraham, Joh. 8.5, 6. and Moses, Deuteronomy. 34.10.
[That this thorn of sin will be still in our flesh.] Did Paul's thorn continue
always?

That our Canaanites will be still in our side.] Did not David subdue all the
Canaanites in his time, by his sons confession, 1 King. 5.3, 4. so that there
was no adversary left?

That our twins will still be in our womb:] What did Rebecah go always big?

That our counterfightings and our counterwillings will still remain.] Then
Christ has taught us in vain to pray, Thy will be done in earth as it is in
heaven.

That though we be like unto Christ per primitias Spiritus, (is he himself so?)
yet we are unlike him per reliquias vetustatis.] but John says, 1 Epist. 3.1,
3. that every one that has a true hope to see Christ in his glory purifieth
himself as he is pure: and Paul, Ephesians. 6.13. and having done all stand fast.

That not to sin is here our Law:] Which Law he makes to be impossible, and so
void; but that in heaven it shall be our privilege; (which heaven by grace
some attain here at length) Psalm. 32.2. and in whose Spirit there is no guile.
And 119.23. Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and seek him with their
whole heart; they also do no iniquity, they walk in his ways.

That all our perfection here is imperfect.] True, in comparison of a greater,
yet it may be without sin, and adequate to the Law, Jam. 2.3, 8. If ye fulfill
the royal Law according to the Scriptures (thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self) ye do well. Chap. 3.2. If any man sin not in a word, the same is a
perfect man, and able to bridle the whole body. 1 John 2.5, 6. But whosoever
keeps his word, in him Verily is the love of God perfected; hereby know we
that we are in him. 1 John 4.17. Herein is our love made perfect, that we may
have boldness in the day of judgment, because as he is so are we in this
present world. Does this man read the Scriptures? yet says he further, [that
sin has its deaths blow given it, yet like a fierce and implacable beast, it
never lets its hold go till the last breath, animamque in vulnere ponit; it
never cease to infest us till it cease to be in us:] but that may fall out
long before we die the natural death, as Paul confesses, that old things were
past away, and all things become new with him, 2 Cor. 5.16. and that he was
crucified with Christ, Gal. 2.20. In the six next pages he has a new
digression about the fourfold state of man.

Page 19. by miscount be says, [that in the state of innocence the will was
free to good or evil:] And so it is still while we remain in innocence. [That
it might persist in good God preserving it.] So it may still.

First, that it might fall into ill, God forsaking it] So it does; but we
forsake him first. That God did not confirm the first man against the fall, yet
he did by his commandment, warning, and threatening:] And so he does still; but
he never did, nor ever will confirm any man by force against his will.

That he permits the first man to be seduced, and to fall into sin and
death, that as many as were saved out of the common ruin might be saved by
mercy alone.] But the common ruin is ours by personal fall, and not by our
first parents, as we have showed.

That if in the world there had been no misery there had been no mercy;] Yea
Gods mercy is over all his works, Psalm 115.9. yea his mercy is from
everlasting.] We answer it is true; for the object of mercy is a miserable
creature; and there had been goodness and bounty to man if he had not sinned.

That if there had been no misery there had been no need of Christ.] Yea, both
to create and to preserve that which is created, Heb. 10.1, 2, 3.

That if there been no sin, there had been no matter to show his justice:] Yes,
there is justice in rewarding the obedient, as well as in punishing the
disobedient; as we see in rewarding of the good and bad Angels.

Page 20. by miscount] That sin, or the fall, is necessary in regard of Gods
decree:] Why did that necessitate man to sin? then God must be the first author
of sin.

That the Creator was not bound to the creature to preserve him in his
goodness.

True, not by any outward Law, but by his own goodness he was: bonitatis enim
est and creare bonum and conservare.

That God willed the fall to be an occasion of bestowing his greater grace and
benefits.] Then that Grace must be at leastwise as universal as the fall was.

That mercy ought not to fight with justice.] Nor does it, if it be offered to
all that need it.

That it is most just that more regard should be had of the chief good then of
the creatures.] Then we must not make him unjust in damning those which never
offended him in their own persons, to uphold new blasphemous doctrines: yet the
chief good is most far from all selfenesse and injustice.

That man at his first creation had not power to will what he would do.] Yes,
he had that power so to will, but was not forced thereunto, nor, being created
a free agent, ought he to be forced to choose this or that.

That God ows no creature any thing:] Yes, that which he was pleased to promise.

Page 21. That man is fallen by being born of corrupt parents.] No, but by his
own personal disobedience, Eccles. 7.29. Psalm. 14.23. and 53.23. Hosea 13.9.
and 14.1. as before.

That man's will after the fall works freely, but is carried to evil only.] But
does not Paul allow a man both power to will and run after good, though not to
be saved thereby, when he says, So then it is not in him that wills or that
runs, but in God that shows mercy? Romans 9.16.

That in this fallen state man can do nothing but sin.] What will he say of
the Gentiles spoken of Romans 2.14. When the Gentiles which have not the Law, do
by nature the things contained in the Law, those (says he) having not the Law
are a Law unto themselves? and of Abimelesk? Genesis 20.6. who by Gods own
testimony did something in the integrity of his heart.

That after the fall of the first man ensued the privation of the knowledge of
God.] But neither all at once; nor upon his posterity by that fall, Romans 1.19,
20, 21. because that which may be known of God is manifest in them, for God
has showed unto them.

That there ensued likewise the want of inclination, yea and averseness to obey
God in us all.] Contrary to what was spoken now by Paul Romans 2.14. But he
brings diverse Scriptures to plead for him; as first, Genesis 6.5. All the thoughts
of man are evil; to wit, after his personal fall and own depravation, as the
men of the old world were depraved: but it is true which the Fathers have in
their writings, neme repent fit turpissimus: Then says he. [ can the
Ethiopian change his skin? Jerem. 13.23.] But this is spoken only of them who
by long continuance had both contracted an evil habit, and hardness; as it
follows there, then may ye also do good that are accustomed to do evil. It is
possible also that the Vindicator may sometimes speak the truth though he has
long used lying. [ Mat. 7.28. that a corrupt tree cannot bring forth good
fruit.] Yea, if it be corrupt but in part: as all men after the fall are but in
part, and by degrees corrupt at the first, and for some time afterward; nor in
all things at once, but specifically in one evil after another, and gradually
in each. As for Ephesians. 2.3. we showed before what that imports: and 2 Cor. 3.5.
We are not able of our selves to think, [imagine, or conceive] any thing as of
our selves, to wit, in spiritual and heavenly mysteries, which must only be
made known by revelation, as they were to him, 2 Cor. 12.7. Gal. 1.15, 16.
Ephesians. 3.3, 4 5.

That we have no liberty and pronenesse of will to do that which is good.] Is
there then no difference between willing and doing, liberty and pronenesse,
pronenesse and power?

That by nature we have no love of God, nor readiness to obey him.] But by
creation, and the word ingrafted, we have both before our fall; otherwise how
can we seek God, which is the great end of our creation? Act. 17.26, 27. That
they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after him. Or why does
the Lord expect any such thing from the sons of men, if they have no faculty or
ability to do it? Psalm. 14.2. The Lord looked down from heaven upon the
children of men, to see if there was any that did understand and seek after God.

[Pag. 22. by the first miscount, he denies that God does enable the will of
it self to do good works if it please.] But to will is one thing, and really
to do good is another thing, and requires a further power. Romans 7.18. To will
is present with me, but how to perform that which is good I know not.

He says also that Grace works in the will to please or choose;] Which is
false, for if it determine or force the will it were not a free agent: voluntas
trahitur, non cogitur, the will may be drawn, but not forced.

That God does not hang his work upon the suspended Ifs of our wills.] This is
altogether against the Scripture. Psalm 95.7, 8. If this day ye will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts as in the provocation: or Isai. 1.19, 20. If ye
be willing and obedient ye shall cat the good of the Land, but if ye refuse and
be rebellious ye shall be devoured with the sword: or Romans 11.22. Behold
therefore the severity and goodness of God; on them which fell severity, but
toward thee goodness, if thou continue in his goodness, otherwise thou shall
be cast off. But he cites Ezekiel. 36.17. to prove it, where the Lord says, I
will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye
shall keep my judgments and do them. To which we say, that this is a full
enablement to keep Gods Law, even in this life, contrary to his second
position: yet will the Lord be sought unto for this to do it for them. ver. 31
of that chap. He cites also the words of Augustine, but against his second
position likewise, saying, we will indeed, but God works in us to will; that
is, generally and habitually, but not in hypothesi, by a particular
determination to this or that act: and so are Paul's words to be understood, not
of our habitual doing, yet of our willing, Philip. 2.13. It is God that works
in you not only to will but do, of his good pleasure: for otherwise this verse
should contradict the former in some sort, where the Apostle charge us to
work out our own salvation with fear and trembling; if we must be merely
passive in this business, why does he lay such a charge of working or
co-working upon us, yea of working out our salvation to the end?

[That the will is effectually moved to do according to the new inclination
which God has put into the renewed will and affections.] True, but this is
done by motion, motive, or persuasion, not by determinating the will: For those
Scriptures which he cites page 23 by miscount, prove not any more then what we
grant: Deuteronomy. 10.6. The Lord will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy
seed: for that is only to remove the foreskin of the evil inclinations. Eze.
36.26. A new heart will I give: that is, new inclinations, with an habitual
power to choose, and an actual power (when it is sought) to do good. Act.
16.14. The Lord opened the heart of Lydia; that is, her understanding. 2 Cor.
2.7. Where the Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty; to wit, according to the
measure, and working of that Spirit, which first opens the understanding, then
puts inclination into the will and affections, and lastly, gives power.

Page 23. he says, that in this life the renewing of our nature is not
perfectly done here as concerning our knowledge of God, or our inclinations to
obey him.] But untruly; for relatively to what the Law requires of us here, we
know that it is only to love God above all, and our neighbor as our selves,
Mat. 23.37, 38, 39, 40. which we may both know and do also by grace in this
life, as there it is made known, and power is promised to act accordingly.
Deuteronomy. 26.18. And the Lord has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar
people, as he has promised thee, and that thou should keep all his
commandments: so also Deuteronomy. 30.6. which he lately cited; And the Lord thy God
will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God
with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may live: but
comparatively to the world to come; we grant it as we did before, that neither
our knowledge, nor our inclination, nor yet our power, shall be so intensively
full and great in this life as in the world to come.

That the regenerate are not always ruled by the holy Spirit, but are sometimes
forsaken of God, either to try them, that is, to make their own weakness
without God known unto them, as he did to Peter; or to chastise and humble
them.] This is true, if we understand it of the whole process of regeneration,
but not of their final estate, to which they do or may attain by grace in
this life; for Christ tells his Disciples, Joh. 16.16. that he will pray unto
the Father for them, and he shall send another comforter unto them, (which
certainly is the holy Ghost,) and he (says Christ) shall abide with you for
ever. And those Scriptures which he produces prove nothing to the contrary:
Psalm. 51.11. Take not thy holy Spirit from me; for that spirit was for a time
withdrawn from him, for his great fall into adultery and murder. Isai. 63.17.
Lord why have thou made us to err from thy way, and hardened our heart from thy
fear? return for thy servants sake, the tribe of thine inheritance: Where the
Prophet in the name of the young Saints, and not in his own bebalfe, complains
of an hardness contracted by their own sins; as see 1 Kings 8.57. The Lord
our God be with us as he was with our fathers, let him not leave us nor forsake
us: it seems to witness against him that God did not leave or forsake their
fathers.

His conclusion from hence [that the regenerate in this life do always go
forward or backward, and do not at any time stand still, or continue in the
same estate] is neither true, nor consequent from the premises. Hosea 13.13.
For he is an unwise son, otherwise he should not stay long in the place of the
breaking forth of children: did not the pillar of fire and the Arc often stand
still, at which time Jsrael was not to move?

Page 24 by the same miscount, That the righteousness of the regenerate in this
life is not such as may stand before God:] Contrary to many Scriptures; Prove.
28.1. The wicked flee when no man pursues, but the righteous is bold as a
Lion. 1 John 22. And now little children abide in him, that when he shall
appear we may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming. 1 John 3.7. Little children, let no man deceive you, for he that does
righteousness is righteous as he is righteous. 1 John 4.17. Herein is our love
made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment, because as he
is so are we in this present world.

That those who are converted can no further retain good inclinations,
thoughts, affections or purposes to persevere or go forward therein, then as
the Holy Ghost works and preserves these in them.] This is not true; for the
Holy Ghost does in time beget not only inclinations, but habits in the
understanding, memory, will and affections: sometimes they need (indeed) the
Spirits admonitory and excitant grace, especially in time of temptation, but
not always, either then or at other times. See Romans 15.14, 15. where the
Apostle says, That those Saints at Rome have no need of an outward admonisher
or remembrancer at all times: and the same may be concluded of an inward
commonefaction.

Does not Saint Paul charge Timothy to stir up the gift that was already in
him? 2 Timothy 1.6. And Christ himself gives the like charge, Rev. 2.25. that
which ye have already hold fast till I come.

Further he says, [that if the Spirit of God withdraw it self, the regenerate
are blind, and wander, and slip and fall, yet so as they perish not.] He speaks
very favorably of wanderers, if so be that they were ever truly converted: but
as the former part of his assertion is not true as to their blinding, unless
the Spirit of God wholly desert men; so the latter part is false, for some true
converts may by their own default fall totally and finally, and perish; Heb.
6.4, 5, 6. Heb. 10.5, 8. for the just shall live by faith; but if any man draw
back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. 1 Timothy 5.12. Having damnation
because they have cast off their first faith. Nor do the Scriptures to which he
refers us ratify what he says; 1 Cor. 4.7. What have thou that thou have not
received? I say unto him again, what have thou received, that thou do bring
this and all other Scriptures which are silent to the point in hand? But 1 Cor.
1.8. seems to plead for him, where the Apostle says, that God shall confirm
you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Christ: and
Phil. 1.6. Also being confident of this thing, that he which has begun a good
work in you will perform it till the day of Jesus Christ. But we answer, that
God indeed is constant on his part, and will carry on the work which he has
begun, if we prove not inconstant in our belief, love and obedience to him; as
the Apostle speaks, Romans 11.12. goodness toward thee if thou continue in his
goodness, otherwise thou shall be cut off: and Christ himself, Joh. 15.9, 10.
As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you, continue ye in my love: if ye
obey my commandment sye shall abide in my love, as I have kept my Fathers
commandments and abide in his love. So must Joh. 15.5. which he has cited, be
understood; He that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much
fruit: and Phil. 2.12, 13. Work out your falvation with fear and trembling, for
it is God that works in you to will and to do of his good pleasure: and 1
Cor. 10.13. Who will not suffer you to be tempted above what ye are able, but
will with the temptation make a way to escape, that you may be able to bear it:
and that of 1 Pet. 1.5. remains true notwithstanding, that ye are kept by the
power of God through faith unto salvation ready to be revealed in the last time.

Page 25. he says, (but he says without any ground of truth,) that the
fourfold liberty of the will, answerable to the fourfold estate of man before
and after the fall, in regeneration and glory, may serve for one ground to
confirm the point in hand.] That sin will have a being in the best of men
while they are here, is false also; and no less then these which follow.

That the regenerate estate of man is here but begun, and not to be perfected.]
Clean contrary to the Scriptures even now by him cited, 1 Cor. 1.8. Phil. 1.6.
1 Pet. 1.5.

That the estate of the regenerate here is but a growing in grace, and a
perfecting more and more, and a prevailing in mortifying their corruptions; but
not attaining in this mortal life to have grace consummate, nor corruption
abolished, but sin remains, and will remain, till they lay down the body, and
be completely sanctified in glory.] But is not this principium petere, to beg a
principle? or idem per idem probare?

But after a promise to confirm his position further by Scriptures, Fathers,
and reasons, he goes on and tells us out of Romans 8.1. That the Apostle there
does not say that there is no sin in them that are in Christ, but that there is
no condemnation; yet he tells us in the latter end of the same verse that such
as are in Christ, who are truly incorporated first into his death, and then
into the similitude of his resurrection, that they have no sin in them for they
walk not after the flesh but after the spirit; that Paul rejoices here that
sin was not able to condemn him, though it was in him, as he had confessed in
the former chapter, that the evil that he would not that he did, and that he
saw a Law in the members rebelling against the Law of his mind: But this sin
will condemn any man where it remains, as the Apostle says Romans 6.23. that
the wages of sin is death, and that of corruption. Ephesians. 4.22. that ye put off
the old man which is corrupting (or destroying) with its deceitful lusts: for
so the best Translators read the Greek word (...), it being the Apostles
argument why he would have the old man put off.

But he says, that here he expects Cajetan's or Aquinas his false exposition:
(and he shall have it, to do him a pleasure, out of his own book, page 23. by
the former account: Cajetan, one of their own fraternity says, damnatum est
peccatum, non extinctum.). Yet the worst of these two Epositors here are and
will be of better repute, even among the Protestants, then the Vindicators
glosses ever were or will be.

He says further, [that here he expects that of Mr. Parkers, that the Apostle
spoke this when he was a babe in grace.] But this is another of Mr. Tendring's
lies, for he says only the contrary, and proves it out of Romans 8.2. 1 Cor.
4.4. Phil. 4.13. that Paul was not now in that weak and corrupt estate
complained of Romans 7.14, 24. and that therefore he speaks it not of his own
condition (though figuratively in his own person) but in the behalf of such as
were babes in Christ.

Page 26. by the former account, he citing Paul's words 1 Timothy 1.15. that Christ
came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief; bids us mark it, that
Paul speaks it not in the preterperfect tense, of whom I have been chief; but
in the present tense, of whom I am chief; as if Paul at that time were the
chief of sinners.] But did ever any man besides himself (that was not besides
himself) think or say so? Is there not such a figure in the Scripture as
Enallage temporum, the putting of one tense for another? Does not Paul 1 Cor.
15.8, 9, 10. Ephos. 2.4, 5, 6. Titus 3.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and even at the 13 verse.
before set forth his corrupt estate of unbelief as a condition that was past?

But he goes on out of Paul his 2 Epist. to I know not whom or what Church (for
none is named) chap. 1. from verse. 6. to the 13. to prove that Paul was not now
a babe or child in Christ, but rather an old man; as he calls himself Paul the
aged, in his Epistle to Philemon. Truly as old as the Vindicator would make
himself, he shows himself very young and childish in that his reasoning: for we
know none that affirms the thing that he goes about to disprove, but he loves
to fight with his own shadow. In conclusion he says that these Jesuitical
cavils (which yet are his own) are too well known, and never did, nor shall
prevail against Gods truth. Then he goes on from Romans 8.1. to the second
verse, upon which he makes as learned observations as he did formerly upon the
first verse; for whereas the Apostle says that the Law of the Spirit of life
which is in Christ Jesus has made us free from the Law of sin and death; Here,
says he, [we may observe that the Apostle says not that we are fully freed
from sin in this life, but from the Law of sin.] But, first, it is evident that
Paul says that he was made free from that Law of sin of which he had so much
complained chap. 7.21, 22, 23. Secondly, that he calls it a Law of death; as he
does chap. 7.24. a body of death, because it has death and condemnation
appendant to it and involved in it. And thirdly, that he was now actually, even
in this life, and for the present, freed therefrom. And lastly, that it was not
the death of Christ that had thus freed him, to wit from guilt, leaving the
pollution behind, (as this Champion of corruption speaks hereafter;) but it was
the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus that had now freed him both from
that Law of sin, and of death its concomitant: so that he cannot possibly speak
of his present condition in chap. 7. from ver. 14. to the 24. And whereas he
adds in the close of that page, [that Christian experience shows that no sort
of men are more troubled with temptations then they whom God has begun to
deliver from the Law of sin.] Though this be true, yet what is this to his
purpose, or the proposition which he would now maintain? for we speak not what
befalls regenerate men at their first conversion, but of that which they do, or
may attain by grace in the end. Nor do all temptations arise from corruption,
they may proceed immediately from Satan, and assault such as have no sin or
corruption left in them; as they did our first parents in innocence, and Christ
himself as he was man, Heb. 4.15.

Page 19. by the latter account, he rols the old stone with Sysiphus, saying,
[that our deliverance from sin is but begun, not perfected here, but that God
is faithful by whom we are called] Then they are unfaithful that seek not to
have the work finished, Phil. 1.6. And there he breaks out into a great
rapture, saying, [blessed be the Lord, that whereas before we were captives to
sin, now the case of the battle is altered.] Why? what battle did we fight
against sin before grace did convert us unto God? [That sin is become our
captive through Christ.] Was it so with them in whose behalf Paul complains,
but I see another Law in my members warring against the Law of my mind, and
bringing me into captivity to the Law of sin that is in my members? we trow
not; sin was here too often the superior.

That it remains in us not as a commander, but as a captive of the Lord
Jesus.] But does it not till it be subdued often circumvent us and prevail
against us? and if so, then that of Peter is true, 2 Pet. 21.19. Of whom a man
is overcome of the same is he brought into bondage; at leastwise for a time. He
says further, [that the bolts of sin are yet upon our hands, and are left to
admonish us of our former miserable condition.] What are we under bolts and
Irons, and yet no prisoners or captives? But Christ is sent to preach
deliverance to the captives, and the opening of the prison to those that are
bound, and to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of
vengeance of our God, to wit, against his enemies, Esaias 61.1, 2, 3. Luke 4.18,
19, 20, yet contrary to this and other promises, he says, that we draw the
chains of our sins after us, which make us move the more slowly. But it is the
portion of the wicked to be in chains, 2 Pet. 2.4. Psalm. 107.10, 11. and to be
bound hand and foot, Matthew. 23.13. There are some that draw iniquity with cords
of vanity, Esaias 5.18. that is, with vain excuses and distinctions, or
ungrounded promises; woe to such, says the Prophet, Is. 5.18. woe, etc. [But
these chains, says he, are not able to draw us into the bondage that we were
in before.] Yes, they have done too many, 2 Pet. 2.19, 20.

That death which is the wages of sin is so changed, that it is not the death
of the man but the death of the sin in the man.] What does this babbler say? the
death that is the wages of sin is the second death in the lake that burns
with fire and brimstone, Rev. 14.9, 10. and chap. 20.10, 15. Sin is the first
death, and this is the second; how then can this be any thing else but the
death of a sinner? There is another death indeed, that is the death of sin, and
not of the man, which is a suffering out of all temptations, and a dying with
Christ unto all evil, Psalm. 116.15. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the
death of his Saints: of which see Romans 6.7, 8. Rev. 14.13. 2 Timothy 2.11, 12. Of
this death, and not of the corporal death, did Chrysostom and Ambrose, whom he
cites, speak, or else they were as much mistaken as the Vindicator is in this
matter, saying there [that the death which is brought out by sin (he should
have said, by Christ,) does at the last even destroy and consume it in the
children of God, and that sin will remain, though not reign.] Yes, if its will
may take place, it will reign also, and that for ever. But he goes on, and
comments thus upon Romans 8.13. If ye mortify the deeds of the body: hereby,
says he, the Apostle shows, that after regeneration by grace, and before
glorification, grace is not consummate, nor is corruption wholly abolished.]
But with what spectacles did he read this Text, when he found these things
couchant in it? for out of the whole verse he might have learned these saving
truths, for his better information, and reformation also; First, that God does
suspend his final purpose and promises of our salvation upon Ifs, or conditions
on our parts to be performed: For if ye live after the flesh, says Saint Paul,
ye shall dye; but if ye mortify the deeds of the body by the spirit ye shall
live. Secondly, that the remaining corruptions in the Saints such as these
Romans were, have death and condemnation attending upon them. Thirdly, that
therefore they are not to be wounded only, but mortified, that is, absolutely
killed. And lastly, that this is not to be done by the death of the body, but
by the power of the Spirit, which we are to seek by grace, and with which we
are to cooperate in this life till the work be done.

His conclusion then from hence page 19. and 20. by the new account is false:]
That as long as we live in the body there is some life of sin remaining, which
we had need to mortify and put off. [But not, as he does, to put it off til our
natural death.] But he adds Saint Augustine, saying, [that our life here is
bellum, not triumphus, a warfare, not a trophee of victory.] Yet may our
warfare have an end here, and so to have our triumph and victory follow. Esaias
40.1, 2. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says our God; speak ye comfortably
to Jerusalem, and cry unto her that her warfare is ended, that her iniquity is
pardoned. Ephesians. 6.13. Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye
may be able to stand in the evil day, and having done all to stand. 2 Timothy 4.6,
7. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith; henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness. But he
contradicts himself in his next speech page 20. by the new account, saying,
[that in this battle we must fight without intermission until we have gotten
the victory; for who can say that he has in such sort cut off his
superfluities, that he has no need of reforming?] Yes, Paul could say it 2
Cor. 5.17. and the holy Apostle John 1 Ep. 4.17. and 5.5. with many thousands
more; to whom Christ bears witness, Rev. 7.14, 15, 20. and 14.4, 5.

That when sins and superfluities are unregarded they kindle again.]

That it is true that the same spiritual temptations may return after the
former are quenched; but at length the Devil is by Christ to be cast out with
all his works. Rev. 12.10, 11. And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven, now
is come salvation and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of
his Christ; for the accuser of our brethren is cast down, who accused them
before God day and night. Yet he says further, [That whosoever he be, unless
he dissemble, he shall find within himself something that had need to be
subdued.] But such a Pigmee in grace as he is (if he be under grace) must not
measure the growth and mortification of Gods faithful and sanctified Saints by
his pitch. But he brings in some sentences which he fathers upon Ambrose, as
this, velis nolis infra sine; tuos habitabit (but he says habitavit;)
Jebusaeus sub^ugari potest, exterminare (he should have said exterminari) non
potest; that will thou nill thou the Jesubite will dwell wit hin thy coasts and
borders; he may be subdued, but not rooted out. This is true of temptations,
especially for a time after our first conversion; but this conslict, if we
bestir our selves aright, shall have an end here, as we have proved of late:
some Jesubites are our sins and corruptions, which must be rooted out; again,
some Jebusites are our native faculties as they are corrupted, disordered and
poisoned with rebellion; These also may be subdued and brought into obedience,
but neither can be cast out, nor ought to be: howbeit we have sure promises
that all our sins and corruptions shall be subdued, if we will sue out the
benefit of the same. Mich. 7.19. He will turn again, he will have compassion
upon us, he will subdue all our iniquities, and thou will cast their sins into
the depths of the sea. Insomuch as that there shall not be one Canaanite left
in our soul which is the house and the temple of the Lord; So Zech. 14.21. And
in that day there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of the Lord of
hosts. Yet he goes on saying, saying

That the great deceitfulness of man's heart, of which the Lord complains Jer.
17.9. saying, the heart of man is deceitful above all things, and desperately
wicked, who can know it? it is attributed to all men, good and bad
indifferently, Christ only excepted.] It is well he will except Christ himself
here, for he did not in his positions. But he might have excepted all who were
Christ's truly unto the end. Psalm. 32.2. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord
imputes not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile. Zephan. 3.13. The
remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor speak lies, nor shall a deceitful
tongue be found in their mouth. See Rev. 14.5, 6. And in their mouth was found
no guile, for they are without fault before the throne of God.

Therefore all his affirmations that follow in that page are false, at
leastwise in his sense and notion, as, [That all men's hearts are alike by
nature.] True they are alike molded at the first, but not corrupt, as he would
have it.

That corruption is not from the instrument, but from the Author. Then God must
be the Author of our corruption by his doctrine.

That men beget children as they are men, not as they are regenerate and holy
men.] Yet the Apostle gives the Saints some privilege above others, saying, 1
Cor. 7.14. Else were your children unclean, but now they are holy.

That nature with its corruption is derived, but not grace, for that is
supernatural.] And is not corruption a preternatural and an adventitious thing
also?

That grace makes no such change in this life, but the hearts of the best are
in some sort deceitful.] Which he presently contradicts, saying, though he
gave Nathaniel that praise, that there was no guile in his heart. Yea David,
says he, does the like to any justified man, Psa. 32.1, 2. howbeit, says he,
this is only true of the spirit or regenerate part, and not of the flesh of
the old man, who by reason of his age is often too hard for the young man;
where he contradicts himself in what he had said before, that sin is our
captive, and does not reign at any time, but only remains in the regenerate:
That it has its deaths blow page 21. by the former account; so that the best
Expositors, (he means for his tooth and palate,) read this Text thus; the
whole heart of the wicked is deceitful with a full, strong, and reigning
deceitfulness, and but part of the heart of the godly, namely the unregenerate
part, but in a weaker measure, as being discerned and stroven against.

That the heart of the wicked shows it self such in the whole course of their
lives. And yet by and by he contradicts himself, saying, that nevertheless the
heart of the wicked may be upright in some particular actions, as Abimelech was
in taking of Sarah, Genesis 20.6.

That the heart of the godly is only deceitful in some particular actions, as
David was upright in all things save in the matter of Uriah.] But I demand,
whether David might not have avoided even those sirs of bloodshed and murder
by watchfulness and prayer, as well as other Saints should have done? if so,
he might have overcome all sin, and no doubt he did so in the end.

He says further, that every regenerate man is partly flesh and partly spirit.
True, he is so at the first, but not always: Romans 8.2. For the Law of the
spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus has made me free from the Law of sin
and death, says Paul; where was then the flesh?

That hereupon arises the war in their hearts like the struggling in Rebecca's
womb] But did that struggling last all her life long?

That the regenerate here are but like the dawning of the day, wherein
darkness and light are mixed.] But Solomon says Pro. 4.18. The path of the
just is like the shining light that shines more and more unto the perfect day.

That the regenerate may be like a cup of wine mingled with water.] True both
at the beginning of their new birth, and for a good space after, yea all their
life long through their own default. [which vessel or cup, says he, is not
half water and half wine, but wholly wine and wholly water] Does the man
understand what he says? By this saying of his, and his similitude, the
regenerate should be wholly renewed and wholly corrupt; which he contradicts
with another comparison, saying [even as a vessel filled with equal
proportions of hot and cold water (it would make a dog spue to hear him) it is
not half cold and half hot (it is both) but wholly lukewarm, that is, partly
hot and partly cold in all the parts of it.] If this be not a clear
contradiction, or an absolute piece of nonsense, I know not what is such. And
whereas he says, [that a regenerate man is partly holy and partly unholy in
all the parts and powers of the body and soul (what is he so in the regenerate
part also, of which he spoke erewhile?) yet the denomination of a regenerate
man is always given him in Scripture a part praestantiore.] But he is
mistaken, where it has not the upper hand, it is otherwise: 1 Cor. 11.3, 13.
And I, Brethren, could not speak unto you as spiritual men, but as unto
carnal, even as unto babes in Christ; I sed you with milk, and not with strong
meat, for ye were not able to bear it, nor yet are ye able, for ye are yet
carnal; for whereas there are among you envying, strife and divisions, are ye
not carnal, and walk as men?

He says that the Lord who made the heart, Page 22 by the new account,
pronounces us all guilty of sin, Genesis 6.5.] Does he so to us? did we live in
that age? But yet it is true of every fallen man in the general; but that
guilt does not always lie upon the Saints for new sins: and there he heaps many
Texts of Scripture (which speak of the state of the unregenerate) to prove that
the regenerate are here always sinful; as Job 5.2. Psalm 14.2, 3, 4, 5. Isai.
54.2. and 64.6. Romans 3.3, 19. Gal. 2.16. yea though the godly have many
failings in their babeship, and some in their growing up, in which regard they
cannot justify themselves, but must take guilt and shame to themselves, as Job
does chap. 8.29, 30. and David, Psalm 130.3. and 43.2. and Solomon testifies
of all men till they be thoroughly purged, 1 Kings 8.46. That there is no man
that sins not, or may not sin: yet none of those places lays upon us a
necessity of continuing in sin all our days, nor makes sin impossible to be
subdued here by the grace and help of Christ; which is the point that he
should prove.

But he bids us mark what is written 2 Cor. 5.21. that Christ was made sin for
us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.
Which we admit, but not in his sense, saying, that the Apostle does not say
actively that we should make or work out our own righteousness, but positively
(he should have said passively) that we should be made the righteousness of
God; and that not by our selves, lest we should glory in our own salvation, but
by another even Jesus Christ the righteous, blessed for evermore.

But as the former part of his observation is false, that we should not
actually work out our own righteousness by Jesus Christ, so it is evident that
he understands not what he speaks in the latter words of his speech, about
being made righteous by another, even Jesus Christ: for there is no other
righteousness for men to seek after but that which is required in the moral
Law. Deuteronomy. 6.25. And it shall be our reghteousnesse if we observe to do all
these commandments before the Lord our God as he has commanded us: which yet
is of two sorts or degrees; the one is the righteousness of grace and
justification whereby sin is to be purged out; and the other is the
righteousness of glorification: of the former the Apostle speaks thus, Romans
5.17. Much more they which receive abundance of grace and of the gift of
righteousness shall reign by one Jesus Christ: and of the latter of these
David thus, Psalm 119. verse 142. Thy righteousness is an everlasting
righteousness, and thy Law is the truth: and verse. 144. The righteousness of
thy testimonies is everlasting. This is that David hoped for in the end; Psalm
17.15. I will behold thy face in righteousness, I shall be satisfied when I
awake with thy likeness. So Psalm 24.45. He shall receive the blessing from
the Lord, even righteousness from the God of his salvation: and 69.27. Add
iniquity to his iniquity, and let him not enter into thy righteousness: and
Paul Gal. 5.5. For we through the Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by
faith. 2 Timothy 4 8. Henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness. And
as both those are attained by faith, so they are called the righteousness of
faith, Romans 1.17. For therein, to wit in the Gospel, is the righteousness of
God revealed from faith to faith, verse 18. for the wrath of God is revealed
from Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. So
circumcision, the sign of sanctification, is called the seal of the
righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11. and the Apostle explaining himself, Phil.
3.9, 10. what that righteousness of God is which he would attain by the faith
of Christ, says that I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and
the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable to his death, if by
any means I might attain to the resurrection of the dead. And both these are to
be attained by Christ; in which regard he is called the end of the Law for
Righteousness sake to every one that believes, Romans 10.4. And as he is given
by the Father that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us who
walk not after the flesh but after the spirit, Romans 8.4. so he is called the
Lord our righteousness, Jer. 23.6. as is the holy Ghost, the heavenly
Jerusalem also in its descention unto us called likewise Jehovah sidkena, the
Lord our righteousness, Jerem. 34.16. which is that life the Saints hoped for
Gal. 5.5. as was said before. If any man find any other righteousness of God
unto salvation mentioned clearly in the Scriptures, let him takn it for his
labor; for that one man's obedience whereby many shall be made righteous, Romans
5.19. is the obedience of Christ within us to be attained by faith for the
fulfilling of the Law, and the former of those two righteousnesses, and not his
obedrence without us. Let every one take heed how he casts his own soul, or
make the souls of others depend upon any other righteousness of God which has
no footing for it in the holy Scriptures; but though there is no outward
obedience of Christ for us that is made our righteousness by the Lord, yet by
his passive obedience Saints that forsake sin, and subdue it by his grace, are
redeemed from the curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13. By which he also perfects or
completes for salvation those which are sanctified by faith in him, Acts 26.18.
Heb. 10.14. These things thus being opened and premised, we shall appeal unto
all that are godly-wise, whether those that are desirous to be saved are not to
work out their own righteousness and salvation by faith and obedience in Jesus
Christ. See Psalm 24.3, 4, 5, 6. Isai 51.1. Harken unto me ye that follow after
righteousness, ye that seek the Lord, chap. 56.1. Thus says the Lord, keep ye
judgment and do justice, (or righteousness) for my salvation is near, and
my righteousness ready to be revealed. Phil. 2.12, 13. Wherefore my beloved as
ye have always obeyed, not as in my presence only, but much more in my absence,
so work out your salvation with fear and trembling; for it is God that works
in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure. See 1 Timothy 6.11, 12. But
thou O man of God, flee those things, and follow after righteousness,
godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness; fight the good sight of faith, lay
hold of eternal life. David says, Psalm. 119.166. O Lord, I have hoped for thy
salvation, and kept (or done) thy commandments; and so must all do in Christ
that will be saved. Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they that keep his commandments,
that they may have right to the tree of life, and enter through the gate into
the city. But he goes on, and says out of Job, [Who can bring a clean thing
out of an unclean? Not one.] Nor can this man bring any clean doctrine, or pure
wisdom (unless by tradition from others) out of his impure vessel. Prove. 20.9.
Who can say I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? To which we
answered before, that this interrogation implies paucity, but not a nullity of
such men; witness that Text, Is. 55.3. Who has believed our report?

But he says page 23 by the new account, [That if my friends could produce but
one such man, and prove it, then I would yield the bucklers.] But if we cannot
produce any such man in our corrupt, blind, and unbelieving age, shall our
unbelief make the faith and promises of God of none effect? for though it is
true a posse ad esse non valet consequentia, so it is as true, that a non esse
ad non posse fieri non est concludendum, especially where we have Gods help
engaged by his promises, if we will seek it: But because we will now lay claim
to the bucklers, and that upon his clear and immediate promise, we will show
him John with many his fellow-Apostles, 1 John 4.17. as was showed before;
Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of
Judgment, because as he is so are we in this present world: we can also show
him many thousands (as we have done before) of such perfect ones even in this
life, Rev. 7.9, 17. and 14.4, 5, 6.

But here he produces by the help of some good neighbors the testimonies of
the Fathers, (for he never read them himself;) unto which when we have answered
we will pay him in his own coin: That it was the prerogative of Christ alone,
among all grown men, to know no sin, and to be found solus in hominibus qualis
quaerebatur in pecoribus, (not in peccoribus, as he has it) alone such among
men as was sought among the beasts, an unblamable lamb without spot. Here he
having cited Isaiah 53.6. saying, we like sheep have gone astray: and Gal.
3.23. that the Scripture has concluded all under sin, he might have spared
Augustine contra Pelag. lib. 2. cap. 13. and Gregory lib. 3. in Reg. cap. 6.
saying, There is no man that has not some corruption in him which he may and
should lament: For take all this as spoken of the unregenerate man, or the
regenerate that has not fulfilled his course with Paul, 2 Timothy 4.7. and we
have often affirmed the same.

But he brings Hieronymus contra Jovinian. lib. 2. saying, No man is clean from
sin, though he live but one day upon the long earth:] Which is true of the
sinful earth spoken of Collos. 3.5. mortify therefore your members upon earth;
although we know that in that saying Hierom and others suffered the Septuagints
ill translation of Job to impose upon them.

But we had almost lest out Lactantius whom contra Gentes lib. 6. cap. 13. he
alleges, saying, No man can be without sin so as he is burdened with the
garment of the flesh.] We say so likewise, if he understand it of that flesh
which Saint Jude speaks of verse. 23. hating even the garment spotted by the
flesh; if otherwise, he himself was Lactantick with Lactantius.

Further, he brings Bernard upon Cant. sermon. 2. saying, Non peccare Dei
justitia est, not to sin is the justice and property of God, but remission of
sin is the justice of man:] To which we say, that the former is but true in
part, for the elect Angels never sinned; and the latter scarcely true at all,
for remission of sins is one thing, and righteousness is another; And where the
remission of sin follows, the righteousness of sanctification to purge them
away must go before of necessity, Acts 26.18. Sed unus Bernardus non vidit
omnia. And his own conclusions there are as false; for, says he, [As the Ivy
will not die until the Oak be cut down; (but Experience shows that if you cut
the Ivy at the root it will forthwith die; so our sins will not die as long as
we live, (which is as false as the other;) neither will it ever be abolished
until death ends the conflict between the flesh and Spirit.] Then death, which
is but a privation, is stronger then the Spirit; And such Quacks as he is have
a good warrant and pretense to kill many, yea were it many thousands; for by
this means, according to his doctrine, they should put an end to this conflict
of sin, and send men presently to be perfected in glory: Here not only
soldiers, whose trade is to kill, but high-way-men, poysoners, and all
murderers, especially of the Saints, might find a strong plea for their
murders. But he brings us more of this Ambrosia out of Ambrose de Paenit. lib.
6. cap. 1. saying, [ It is not the voice of thy family, I am whole, and need
not a physician; but, heal me O Lord and I shall be healed.] But if it be the
voice of his family, of what family is the Vindicator, who says, that the Lord
cannot or will not heal us? is it death that must do that work for us? is it
not the voice of his family, first, to come to him for an absolute cure, and
then with the woman who was cured of her bloody issue, and the cleansed leper,
and many others, to come and give God thanks? But he goes on page 23, 24. with
Ambrose, speaking thus to the Novatian heretics of his time, [and says, it
may fitly be turned to the Jesuits of our time; Dare thou, O Jesuit, call thy
self clean and holy? albeit thou were clean in regard of thy works, this one
word were enough to make thee unclean.] To which I say, first, that the way
wherein Paul worshipped the God of his Fathers was called Heresy, Acts 24.14.
Secondly, we know no Jesuit that counts himself perfect, unless it be by his
profession: But we hope that he will not henceforth, when it comes to a trial
at Law, deny that be called us Jesuits; which is no less then to accuse us of a
capital crime, no better then treason; for which by Gods Law he ought to suffer
death himself, unless he can prove it, Deuteronomy. 19.17, 18, 19. or to incur a
great mulct for his slander, above that the Jury awarded at Sarum, March 15.
1657. But lastly, this pretender to no less degree then of a Doctor of Divinity
does not see that there is a gross absurdity, if not contradiction, in the
words which he fathers upon Ambrose, saying, albeit thou were clean in regard
of thy works, this one word, I am clean, (which in that case is but the truth)
were enough to make thee unclean. We hope the Vindicator hereafter will not be
too forward to speak the truth any more then he has done heretofore, lest, as
he says out of Ambrose, it make him unclean.

But he gives us presently some Nectar to his Ambrosia, saying, with him
agrees Augustine Sermon. 29. de verbis Apost. There are some like vessels that
are blown up with wind, filled with an haughty spirit of election, not sollidly
great but swelled with the humor of pride, who dare be bold to say that there
are men found upon earth without sin.] Why, are there no promises of such
persons? see Isai. 1.24.25. And I will turn mine hand upon thee, and purely
purge away thy dross, and take away all thy tin. See chap. 4.4. and 11, 19.
They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, for the earth shall be
filled with the knowledge of the Lord as the waters that cover the sea. Eze.
36.25. I will pour clean water upon them, and from all their filthiness and
from all their jdols will I cleanse them. Zeph. 3.13. The house of Jsrael shall
do no iniquity, nor speak lies. But we know what sort of Protestants at this
day are puffed up with the spirit of election: And it seems the Vindicator
being conscious to himself or his party, did not English those words of
Augustine, inflati viri, spiritu electionis pleni, men puffed up, filled with
the spirit of election, (though for him we do it.) But the Father demands of
such, How say thou that art just and holy this prayer, Forgive us our sins?
Yes, such may say with Saint Math. chap. 6.12. forgive us our debts, to wit of
love and thankfulness to God, yea and of love to men for his sake; which debt
is so great that it can never to all eternity be paid. Romans 13.6. Owe nothing
to any man but to love one another: and with Saint Luke chap. 11.9. they can
say also, Forgive us our sins, not only where they pray for and with others in
a mixed Congregation, but alone by themselves also, in regard of our innumerable
sins formerly committed. But we would ask Augustine again, does Christ
contradict himself in that prayer, when he teaches to pray, thy will be done
in earth as it is in heaven? But he interrogating says, is this prayer to be
said of Christ only, or of believers also? Yea, it is the prayer of the sons of
God also, for they call God father all which is true, but nothing to the
purpose. But he proceeds, saying, [what are ye that say ye have no sin? Liars,
says the Apostle, 1 John 1.] To which first we say, that men that say they
have sin may be liars, and nototious liars also; witness the Vindicator. And
secondly, that some men may say they know no sin by themselves for the present,
and yet speak the truth therein as Paul did 1 Cor. 4.4. but if any man says
he has not sinned at all he is a liar; and so Saint John explains that in the
first Epist. chap. 1. ver. 10. which he had spoken more darkely, and especially
to the babes in Christ, ver. 8. as may further appear chap. 2. ver. 1. where he
says, My little children, these things have I written unto you that ye sin
not:] What does he put them upon impossibilities then? No, he furnishes them
there and in the next verse with such a propitiator and healer of sin, as is
able to cure and take away the sins of the whole world if they would seek unto
him; for it is Jesus Christ the just or righteous. But whereas in the next
place he cites against us, Luk 17.10. When ye shall have done all these things
that are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable servants, we have done that
which is our duty to do. But he is here like the man possessed, who cut
himself with stones Mark 5.5. for this Text shows, that if we do all those
things that are commanded us, (which he implies that we may do) yet we do
but our duty therein, and add nothing to the Lord, and in that regard are but
unprofitable servants, and no dvantage to our Master. O how unprofitable are
they then who neither will do all those things that are commanded, nor suffer
other men to be at quiet who endeavor to do, and teach others their duty
therein.

But he says, that we have a silly subterfuge for concealing our perfection,
or rather for saying we are unprofitable servants, that were we never so
righteous, for humility sake we should say we are unprofitable servants. But he
answers with Saint Augustine, proper humilitatem ergo mentiris, Therefore for
humility sake thou lie; but it is certain that Christ never taught men for
humility to ly.] No, he did not, but Angustine and he are far from truth if
they say that Christ has not taught them who has fulfilled the Law and Gods
will to say that they are still unprofitable servants; for, can a man be
profitable to God as he that is wise is profitable to himself? Job 22.2.

But he urges us again with Bernards words, first, in Anunciatione Mariae, who
is better then the prophet David, of whom the Lord said, I have found a man
after mine own heart; and yet he need not to say, enter not into judgment with
thy servant.] True, so has every man, in regard of his manifold former sins,
but not always in regard of sins newly committed, when he is thoroughly
sanctified as they were, 1 Ioh. 4.17, 18. yet there is a time of greater grace
and growth in grace promised then that which David had attained. Zach. 12.18.
In that day shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and he that is
fallen, or a feeble one among them at that day shall be as David, and the house
of David (that^s of the beloved; or of the Princess) shall be as God, as the
Angel of the Lord before them.

Secondly, he alleges this saying out of Bernard 23. Sermon. 25. upon Cantic.
It suffices me for all righteousness to have him reconciled unto me whom I
have only offended.] True, but he is not fully reconciled unto any man, nor any
man fully reconciled unto him, until he be dead with Christ unto al known sin;
Romans 6.8. For if we be dead with Christ we believe that we shall also live with
him: and this cannot come to pass without receiving of abundance of grace and
of the gift of righteousness, as the Apostle speaks Romans 5.17. and being thus
justified by faith we have peace with God through Jesus Christ our Lord, and no
otherwise, Romans 5.1.

But he brings a third saying of his in Sermon. 10 contra vitium ingrati. To be
without sin is Gods righteousness, but man's righteousness is Gods grace
pardoning of sin] Which accords well with our doctrine if rightly understood:
for (...): signifies the putting away of sin, as well as the pardon of sin.
Luke 1.74. to give the knowledge of salvation unto his people for the remission
[or putting away] of their sin, to wit, by sanctification. Now this cannot be
done but by the contrary goodness and righteousness: Romans 12.21. Be not
overcome of the evil, but overcome the evil with the good.

But page 25 he says, Woe to the miserable generation, in whom their own
insufficiency seems sufficiency.] So say we, for our sufficiency is of God
alone, 2 Cor. 3.5. and we also bewail the miserable generation that shall die
in their sins, because they believe not a sufficiency in Christ alone, but in
and through weakness it self (a corporal death) to purge away the dross and
filthiness oi sin, John 8.21, 24. which also is his unbeleife. But here, which
is his third digression, without any (...) (unless it be (...)) he comes to
distinguish of perfection and perfect men; and first asks [how Paul Phil.
3.12, 13. denies that he was perfect; and verse 15. ranks himself among those
that are perfect. To which he answers out of Augustine Sermon 28, we suppose he
means de temp. That he was perfect according to his intention, not according to
prevention and attainment: and out of Bernard, saying, That great vessel Saint
Paul grants perfection, that is a going forward; as (...) (says he) is not
only one that is come to the end, but signifies him that moves toward it:
and out of Ambrose in Romans 8.9. (which yet is known to be none of his comment,)
That the Apostle speaks unto Christians sometimes as unto them that are
perfect, and other times as those who are to perfect that which is required of
them.

But this is one of his digressions and impertinences, for we plead not for
such an absolute degree of perfection as is expected in the world to come, but
a limited one, which is called perfection, viz. yet contains a love of God
above all, and of our neighbor as of our selves, which removes all contrary
lusts and sins. In pursuit of this said digression he brings two arguments out
of Augustine, to prove that Zachary, of whom he speaks chap. 1.6. did not
perfectly walk in all the commandments of God. The first is this [because he
was a Priest, and was bound as well to offer for his own sins as for the sins
of his people, Heb. 3.5.] Yet this he might do for his former sins, though he
were now perfect for the present: so that this argument holds nor. But the
second, which he has page 26. of the new account, is more childish then the
former; [That because he is said to walk in the commandments, he had not yet
attained to the mark; for they that are at their journies end sit still.] But
it is not so in the kingdom of God, for though they rest from their labors,
that is, from their conflict against sin and Satan, yet they walk in the
perfection of Gods commandments for ever: and if he fancied any other eternal
life to himself then the fullness of love and righteousness required by the Law,
he was mistaken in the mark at which all true Saints aim. Psalm. 133.3. For
there he commanded the blessing and life for evermore. Ephesians. 1.4. As he has
chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy,
and without blame before him in love. See Psalm. 24.4, 5. Gal. 15.5. 2 Timothy 4.8.
before cited: To which he adds a third argument of his own, [Because he was
smitten with dumbness for not believing the Angels promise.] But as there is no
moral precept for that, so it infringeth not what Luke has said of him chap.
1.6. where he tells us as before [that the Apostle does constantly distinguish
between peccatum and crimen, betwixt sin and crime, that is, says he, some
grievous offense which gives slander, and is worthy of crimination.] Is not
all sin then worthy of crimination? But he voucheth Augustine, saying, [ That
the life of holy men may be said to be without crime. (yet he thought otherwise
who said, nemo sine crimtne vivit;) but not without sin.] Which is true of a
man's whole race or course, that it is, and has been sinful; but not of the
Saints last and best seize, or possibilities through grace, as we shall
afterward show out of Augustines own confession, who is here again brought in
saying [Men live well if they live without crime.] But they live better when by
grace they live without sin. But that is egregiously false which follows [that
he who thinks he can (to wit by the help of Christ) live without sin, he does
not thereby make himself free from sin, (Yes, if he do not, he may do it in
time.) but debars himself of the pardon of his sins.] But Saint John speaks
otherwise, 1 John 1.7. But if we walk in the light as he is in the light, we
have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son
cleanses us from all sin. Is not the forsaking of sin for the present the high
way to pardon for our sins past? See Prove. 28.13. Ezekiel. 18.21, 22. But after
that former digression he returns again to his distinctions about perfection
and righteousness, wherein there is little of right, and less of perfection to
be found; for, first, he says out of his own cerebel, [that there is a
twofold perfection or righteousness, the first imputed, which is by way of
relation, and does perfectly justify us before God: (for which you must take
his word, for he brings no proof to make it good;) the second is infused by
way of inhesion subjectively in us; [and this (says he) is but inchoate and
imperfect, and cannot justify us before God.] But we have proved before out of
Titus 3.4, 5, 6, 7. 1 Cor. 6.11. that justification and sanctification are all
one thing, and therefore if the righteousness of sanctification be only
inchoated, and not perfected in this life, then we cannot be fully justified
before God; for there is no other righteousness to be attained for our
justification then that: hence it is Romans 8.30. nothing interveneth between our
calling and glorification but justification, by which sanctification (as being
all one thing) is to be understood: Moreover, those whom he foreknew those he
called, and whom he called those he justified, and those he justified them he
also glorified.

Then secondly, he brings [a distinction of extrinsecal and intrinsecal
righteousness out of Zanchie, of which the extrinsecal (says he) is the
adventitious (he might have said the fictitious) is the perfection of
condonation, where our imperfections are truly pardoned for the death and
passion of Jesus Christ, according to that of Augustine; All the commandments
are reputed as done when that is remitted which is left undone.] But where had
the Bishop of Hippo this Hippomanes? for the holy Ghost says transmutatis
terminis the clean contrary; that when the cammandements are kept and fulfilled
for the present, then all that was amiss before becomes pardoned. Ezekiel. 18.21,
22, 23. If the wicked will return from all his sins which he has committed,
and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall
surely live, and not die; all his transgressions which he has committed they
shall not be mentioned unto him, in the righteousness of that he has done he
shall live. Does not Christ require an actual keeping and performance of the
commandments of every one that will enter into life? Matthew. 7.21. Not every
one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven,
but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven. 1 Cor. 7.19.
Circumcision is nothing, nor uncircumcision, but the keeping of the
commandments of God. Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his commandments,
that they may have right to the tree of life, as before. [And this
righteousness, says he, rather consists in the pardon of sins then in the
perfection of virtue.] But where is the pardon of sins called righteousness?
for though the Apostle, Romans 4.6, 7, 8. speaks of a blessedness that lies not
in the imputing of sin, and the imputing of righteousness without works; yet
that not imputing of sin is the purging away sin by Gods Spirit; as is evident
out of Psalm. 32.2, 3. which place should be thus rendered; O the blessedness of
the man whose transgressions are taken away, and whose sins are covered! (to
wit, by mortification.) O the blessedness of the man to whom the Lord will not
impute iniquity, (by letting it remain unpurged away) and in whose Spirit there
is no guile! For the last words of the Text do evince that David speaks here of
sanctification, as knowing no other justification: and the imputing of
righteousness without works (that is, our own works) is the free bestowing of
the righteousness of sanctification, and the perfection of virtue, which the
virtuous Vindicator here sets aside. The intrinsecal perfection or
righteousness which he speaks of out of Zanchy, is, says he, the perfection of
inhesion, and this is said to be either absolute or comparative. It is said to
be absolute (says he) when our hearts are sincere, and simply free from
Hypocrisy and double-dealing with God. Thus Job was a perfect man, and David a
man after Gods own heart, because his heart was ever sincere toward him, and
seeking after God.] Pardon a moi: it was so habitually, but not ever so, for
then he had not fallen in the matter of Vriah. But where there is no guile at
all there is no sin left, as we said before; for all sin is full of guile and
deceitful lusts, Ephesians. 4.21, 22. Secondly, [it is comparative (says he) page
27. in respect of others, as Noah is said, Genesis 6.9. to be perfect in his
generation.] But by his leave, those words are to be understood absolutely as
well as comparatively; for his faith and obedience was so perfect that he not
only obtained to have himself and his family preserved, and to be made a seed
or remnant for the new or second world, but he became thereby an heir of the
righteousness which is by faith, Heb. 11.7. But it is the Vindicators practice
to detract from the chosen Saints of God, to patronize corruption, and reserve
it all his life long. [It is, says he, of this perfection which Paul writes,
saying, 1 Cor. 2.1. But we speak wisdom amongst those that are perfect.] And
why must it be so taken? for Paul spoke those mysteries of Christ, which might
and did pass for wisdom, not only among the other Apostles and most perfect
men, but among the Angels also, Ephesians. 3.11. 1 Pet. 1.12. But he goes on in the
27 page, saying,

As for any other absolute perfection, Paul is absolutely against it.] But that
is an absolute falsehood; for though he modestly says, Phil. 3.12, 13. Not as
though I had attained, or were already perfect; yet he is so far from being
against it, that he presently adds, but I follow after, if I may apprehend
that for which I am apprehended of Christ. And ver. 13, 14. But this one thing
I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth to those
things which are before, I press toward the mark of the price of the high
calling of God in Christ. We say he does not only strive for it himself, and
stirs up others thereunto, 2 Cor. 13.12. Colos. 3.14. but prays for the
Churches that they may attain it, 2 Cor. 13.9. Ephesians. 3.16. and 11.18, 19.
Phil. 1.10, 11. 1 These. 5.23. Heb. 13.19, 21.

That saying of Bernard, Sermon 50. super Cant. which he there subjoyneth, was
not advisedly uttered at the first, nor here recited by him, to wit, [Who dare
arrogate that to himself which Paul denies?] For, first, such as attain to
perfection do rather conceal it then boast of it. Secondly, Paul does not deny
all perfection, but in that very Epistle admits that which we contend for,
chap. 4.13. saying, I am able to do all things through Christ that strengthens
me. To say nothing of Romans 8.2. and verse. 37, 38, 39. where he says not only
that he was in Christ more then conqueror, but speaks of an immovable love
which God through Christ had planted in him, therewith he stood fast.

Then in conclusion he comes to his last distinction of intrinsecal
perfection, saying, it is either of parts, or degrees; saying, the former is
when a man has a respect, as David speaks, to all the commandments of God,
and allows not in his heart the breach of any. The second is, when a man
performs exactly all that the Law in its full rigor requires.] But mark how
he sets these two out by comparison: he that is perfect in the first sense
(says he) may fitly be resembled to a weak and feeble child who has all the
integral and perfect parts of a man, yet not integrally or perfectly; But he
that is perfect in the second sense is like a strong and full-grown man, that
has all his parts in their perfection: And we confess, says he, that the
Saints of God in this life may have the perfection of parts, because that in
some measure they may love every good, and hate every evil, though not
continually, as touching the exactness of performance, yet habitually as
touching a constant resolution. But that a man should have the perfection of
degrees we utterly deny, because we can neither love the good nor hate the evil
as we should do.] From all which we may observe, that though he affects the
highest degree in the Schools, to be called a Doctor of Divinity, yet he will
have the regenerate in this life, for all their striving against sin, and
laboring after perfection, which he often speaks of, to proceed no further,
nor to grow to any higher stature then to be always babes in this life:
Whereas John writes unto three forms, ages, or degrees of Saints; to babes, to
young men, and to old men, 1 John 2.12, 13, 14. and Saint Paul does tell us,
Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. that Christ gave gifts unto men, some to be Apostles, some
prophets, some Evangelists, some pastors and teachers, for the perfecting of
the Saints, or till we all come in the unity of the Spirit, and the
acknowledgement of the Son of God, to a perfect man, to the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ. And the Apostle does not only reprove those
that remained babes and sucklings, Heb. 5.12. but exhorts all the Saints to
become men perfect, or of a ripe age (as it is in the Greek) in understanding,
and all concomitant graces, 1 Cor. 14.20. Is not this doctrine like the
medicine which he gives to whelps to hinder their growth? Page 28. he first
tells us [that the Jesuits, Bellarmine, Becanus, and others, do wrest diverse
Scriptures to prove the perfection of the Saints in this life.] But happily they
may, and do strain some testimonies of Scripture too far, yet they need not
do it, for there are as many clear and full Scriptures to prove the
possibility of attaining such a perfection in this life as we contend for, as
there are to prove the Trinity in the Deity, or two natures united in Christ's
one person, or that there are ten commandments. Secondly, though he brings not
one of those testimonies forth, yet he will needs answer them by wholesale, or
in the Lump; some of which answers he fathers upon Augustine, as justly he may,
for by fits he is against perfection, yet sometimes for it.

The first whereof is this, that some of those testimonies are exhortations
showing us what we should do, not proving what we can do; for admonitions do
not show us, ut tantum praestari possit quantum suadetur, that so much can be
performed as is enjoined; but show us quousque conari oportet, how earnestly we
should strive to perform them, though we be not able perfectly to observe
them.] But this is false, and a mere subterfuge unworthy of a Doctor so cried
up as Augustine was, for although the Schools distinguished between counsels
and commands, and all exhortations spoken and pressed in the name of the Lord,
and those in special which tend to the purging out of all sin, and the
fulfilling of the Law in Christ; yet are not only precepts, but possible to the
Saints, as the said Augustine elsewhere confesses. The School also says, and
that truly, Ultra posse viri non vult Deus ulla requiri, God promises grace to
fulfill all that he requires. Secondly, he says [that many of those places of
Scripture do show us not what we are now in via, in the way, but what we shall
be hereafter in patria, at the end of our pilgrimage, when we shall be freed
from the imperfection of our flesh, and clothed with the garment of perfect
righteousness.] Yea they do in a special manner show us both what we are,
and what we should be now in via, or here now, yet it cannot fully be set forth
what we shall be hereafter; for as Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 2.9. But as it is
written, eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the
heart of man to conceive the things which God has prepared for them that love
him. Thirdly, he says, [that in many places the Scripture (but he cannot
produce one such) terms them perfect and immaculate which have defiled their
garments, and polluted their consciences; mark, says he, not with no sins,
which is impossible, but with no gross sins, or damnable enormities; which, as
is said before, is commendable.] But first, we think the Vindicator allows no
sin to be venial, but all mortal and damnable, though not equally such.
Secondly, we say that while any man pollutes his conscience he is neither
called or accounted either perfect or immaculate by the Lord, who is of purer
eyes then to behold iniquity, Haba. 1.13. And thirdly, what though all men have
so defiled their garments for a time? yet it is not impossible at length
through grace to keep our souls and consciences so unspotted; for so had Paul
done, 2 Cor. 1.12. and knowing that the like grace was attainable for others,
he prayed for it in their behalf, Phil. 1.10, 11. that ye may be sincere and
without offense till the day of Jesus Christ, being filled with the fruits of
righteousness. 1 These. 5.23. And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly,
that your whole spirit, soul and body, be preserved blameless until the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ. See also Heb. 13.19, 20. before cited. Fourthly, he
says [the Scripture pronounces men perfect blameless and blessed, not because
they have no sins, but because their sins are not imputed unto them, Psalm.
32.1, 2. But we have showed before that this not imputing is a purging them
away by sanctification as well as a remission. Further he says [and therefore
though the Saints are called righteous and perfect, not only in regard of the
imputative righteousness which is wrought in them by the Spirit of Christ: but
we must understand in what sense the Saints are inherently called righteous;
for we must not think them to be so perfectly righteous as to be void of sin,
or to be justified in the sight of God, because that together with the
sanctification of the Saints there is still in them a remainder of original
coruption, by the touch and stain of which their best works are corrupted and
defiled; and therefore we say, that though the Saints and holy men of God may
and have lived sine scandalo, without offense, and page 29. sine querela,
without reproof and complaint on man's part, by or in the observance of all
outward principles, yet it is impossible the best of them should live and die
sine peccato, without sin. So he] Unto all which we briefly answer, that his
distinction of imputative and inherent righteousness is vain; for they are all
one, as we have showed before. Secondly, the Saints are, or ought to be, so
perfectly righteous by inherent righteousness, as to be thereby justified in
the sight of God; whether the word be taken for a purging from sin, as it is
Acts 13.39. or for a positive righteousness, as Titus 3.4, 5, 6. for there is
no other way of justification in Christ unto eternal life spoken of in the
Scriptures. Thirdly, we have proved before that there is not, nor ought to be,
such a remainder of original corruption always found in the best Saints, as to
stain and corrupt their best works. Lastly, we have likewise asserted by clear
Scriptures, that the Saints through Christ not only may but should live here at
the length not alone sine scandalo and querela, but sine peccato, without sin
as well as without scandal or just reproof, for to that end Christ gave
himself, Ephesians. 5.24, 25, 26. But he tells us in that 29 page [that Romans 4.1,
2. is a remarkable place] So it is indeed, but not for his purpose, to prove
that Abraham lived and dyed an imperfect man, and with some remainders of
corruption in him: which words ought to be thus translated, as they lie in the
Greek Text, What shall we say then, that Abraham our father has found
according to the flesh? (or in his unregenerate estate) for if Abraham were
justified by works (to wit before, not after grace received) he has whereof to
glory, but not before God; as he proves in the following verse: but of this
more in another place. Then here he shows by a distinction that [the Saints
whom he holds to be always imperfect in this life may be in a fourfold sense
called perfect. First, in regard of their intention and aim at, and desire of
perfection; for resting in a good condition, says he, is contrary to grace:
grow in grace.] But may not the Saints rest when they are at the end of their
journey and race, which is the final mortification of sin through faith?
according to Heb. 4.3. For we which have believed do enter into rest. Let him
here who is tantus temporum observator, such an observer of tenses before, mark
the tenses here, for the work of believing is past, and the entering into rest
is present, The Saints in heaven are doubtless in a good condition, is it
against grace for them to rest in it? Secondly he says [that the Saints are
perfect inchoatively, and because they go on more and more; but inchoation and
consummation are two remote terms or stations, and progression may stand at a
great distance from perfection and the end of the race, at leastwise in the
beginning and the middle of it. Thirdly, he says [they may be termed so
comparatively, or in respect of other men's unrighteousnesse] And fourthly,
acceptatively, because God accepts them, though not absolutely just, by the
reason of manifold sins and defects, yet in Christ and for Christ his sake
(through whom all our imperfections are pardoned) as just and righteous men.]
But by his leave God accepts no man, no not in Christ, otherwise then as he is
according to his present inward state and growth: hence it is that the Churches
to whom the Apostle wrote, and those seven especially to whom Christ wrote,
Rev. 2, 3, chap. are either commended or rebuked, threatened, or encouraged
according to their obedience or disobedience, faith or unbelief, growth or
decay in godliness; and no man is taken for perfect but he that was truly so
in some kind or degree. Yet it is true that the Lord does for a time, and with
much long-sufferance, tenderness and compassion bear the failings of his
good-willing servants which proceed from ignorance and humane weakness, and
not from neglect, and much less from presumption; yea while men are truly
babes in Christ he accepts the will for the deed, and expects no more from any
men then what they can do by grace attained, or which they might have done by
grace at hand, if they had sought it: Howbeit nothing does more displease him
then wilful Apostasy after grace received, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6, 7. and 10.26, 27,
28. and unbelief in his grace and power for the subduing of our enemies, after
we had experience already of the same in some measure. Heb. 3.17, 18, 19. But
with whom was he grieved forty years? was it not with them that had sinned,
whose carcasses fell in the wilderness? and to whom swear he that they should
not enter into rest, but to them that believed not? so we see that they could
not enter in because of unbelief.

But he brings in Augustines saying [that the best perfection of man in this
life is to confess and acknowledge himself to be imperfect.] Which is a very
rash and inconsiderate affirmation, as many other of his dictates are: indeed
if he had said it had been the high way to perfection, first to know and
acknowledge our own imperfections, and then for cure to fly to Christ, this
saying had not been so imperfect or dangerous. But they that are under the work
of the Law, and not yet under the saving work of grace, do abundantly know and
feel their imperfections: how can this then be men's greatest perfection to find
and feel their imperfections? Such plausible sayings without truth are soft
pillows under secure men's arms, inviting them to sleep in slothfulness and
sin. But the Vindicator does now promise to lay down some reasons for the
confirmation of his first position; of which let us take a view. The first is
this, [That there is not any among the Saints of God mentioned in the Scripture
that the Spirit of grace does not charge with some sin; the most perfect in
their generations were not without their failings, and that after their long
walking with God; as Noah being drunk, Lot incestuous, Abraham diffident, when
he consented to unlawful means in going in to Hagar, for bringing about Gods
purpose; Sarah lied and distrusted when she laughed at the promise of God;
Moses and Aaron were barred out of Canaan for dishonouring God by diffidence
and passion; Hezechiah was lifted up with pride; Job impatient, and humbled for
it; David had foul and secret sins which he repented of and prayed against;
Jehosaphat and Asa were reproved; Uzziah and Zachariah punished, one by
untimely death, the other by dumbness; and yet these are reported in the
Scripture to have served God with all their heart. To which we say, that this
argument and reason has little of reason in it; for, first, it is false that
the Spirit of grace has charged with some particular sin or other the most
perfect men in their generation; for neither Abel nor any of the Patriarchs
before the flood, nor after the flood to Abraham, are so charged, unless Noah
for one act of drunkenness, wherein also he was surprised by the unknown
strength and operation of the new wine. The like we may say of Eleazar,
Ithamar, Joshuah, Caleb, Othniel, Ehud, Jephthah, Samuel, Nathan, Gad, and
almost all the prophets; of John the Baptist and his mother, of the Virgin Mary
and Joseph her husband, of Nathaniel, and almost all the Apostles, and
thousands of other Saints mentioned in general and particular in the
Scriptures. Secondly, that there neither wants ignorance nor impudence in this
his charge: For Abraham took Hagar by instinct of the Spirit, as is partly
hinted in Mala. 2.13. which verse, as Castellio has formerly observed, should
be thus rendered. If so be one did it who had abundance of the Spirit; (yet
wherefore is that one alleged? to wit for the justification of Polygamie) who
sought a godly seed; therefore take heed to your spirit, and let none of you
deal treacherously against the wife of his youth. Does not Saint Paul also tell
us that Sarah and Hagar were also an Allegory or mystery of the two Covenants
and Testaments? Gall. 4.24. But it was once the practice of the false Apostles
to speak evil of those things which they understood not, Jude v. 10. yet this
champion of corruption contents not himself to accuse the most absolute pattern
of faith and obedience that was to be found among mere men, who is the father
of all the faithful, and the friend of God, whom he first singled out to make
him in a special manner the man of his covenant, and to charge him with
unbelief and disobedience, and that here the second time, in this his
slanderous pamphlet: but he likewise challenges and impeacheth Job of
impatience, who is commended unto us, Jam. 5.11. for a rare pattern of
patience, as indeed he was: It were well for him if he had the fourth part of
Abraham's obedient faith, or Jobs patience. But let it be granted that not
only David, but others also had foul sins and secret sins for a time, had they
such unto their dying days? we trow not; being he confesses that he both
bewailed them, prayed to have them discovered and removed: witness the
Psalmist, Psalm. 139.23, 24. saying, Search me O God, and know my heart, try me
and know my thoughts, and see if there be any sinful or wicked way in me, and
lead me in the way everlasting. And therefore to little purpose he cites [page
30 that passage of Augustine, who bids the Pelagians in a rhetorical flourish,
ask all the Saints, and they will confess (is he sure of it?) that while they
lived here they were not without sin.] But theirs is but one opinion; we shall
anon show him the contrary sense of some not inferior to him, as we did of
late out of 1 John 4.17, 18. The confession of John who was ten times more
infallible then Augustine and all his African Bishops assembled together. But
he goes on, and says [if any Saint on earth had to glory, it was with men,
and not with God.] So say we also, yet had all the faithful Saints cause to
glory in the Lord for their victory in Christ, 1 Cor. 15.57. And further he
says for his second argument [that we do not read of any Saints that did so
stand, but that they fell into some sins.] Which is not true of their final
estate; and they also that had; as he says, defects in their best
performances; yes, the Lord testifies of Joshuah and Caleb, that they had
fully followed him, Numb. 14.24. Josh. 14.6. and we have proved the contrary
out of many places; and therefore in his second reason he wrongeth Nehemiah and
the Text it self when he says [that Nehemiah, chap. 13.22. prayed that his
good services might be remembered with Gods reward, and also with his pardon or
forgiveness;] for that implies a contradiction, for the original fignifieth to
spare as well as to forgive; and so have our Translators rendered it in that
place, and that very genuinely, Remember me O Lord concerning this, and spare
me according to the greatness [or multitude] of thy mercies; That is, preserve
me from mine enemies to do thee further service. But to retain corruption to
the last breath, the said Champion lays aspersion upon the very grace of God,
saying there that good works do not come from such a pure principle of grace as
does exactly fill the soul.] But the Lord says, Psalm. 81.10. Open thy mouth
wide, and I will fill it. And Christ also Mat. 5.8. Blessed are they that
hunger and thirst after righteousness for they shall be satisfied. And again he
says expressly [that in the principle of grace there are some defects, and
therefore the works flowing from thence are imperfect. Page 31 he says in the
same lying dialect, [that God reserves the consummation of grace, to wit, that
whereby sin should be purged out, and the Law fulfilled by us, unto the state
of glory.] True it is in the general which he speaks there, that grace is glory
begun and glory is grace consummate; but not that grace which is called the
laver of regeneration, and the renewing of the holy Ghost; for that must go
before life and glory, Titus 3.4 5, 6, 7. And though the spirits of just men
made perfect are in heaven, to wit, in the heaven of Gods holiness, of which
the Prophet speaks Deuteronomy. 26.15. Is. 6.17. yet there is a first, a second, and a
third heaven here besides the outward heaven, 2 Cor. 12.23. And that heaven is
threefold as well as the outward heaven, one of calling and conversion,
another of justification or regeneration, and a third of glorification; and the
Saints may be made perfect in the second heaven, as to the final purging out of
sins, and the renewing of Gods image, though in the third heaven we expect the
perfection and transcendency of glory: Paul was caught up into the third
heaven, but lived constantly in the second, Phil. 3.20. Yea he tells all the
believing Saints that were come to have that fellowship in some measure and
degree with the general assembly and Church of the firstborn written in that
heaven, and with the souls of the just men made perfect, to wit, some in grace,
and some in glory; with the former they were upon the way in tendency unto the
latter. His third argument is, [that all our graces here are imperfect in this
life.] But does not Saint James tell us, that there are perfect gifts that come
down from the father of lights? chap. 1.17. and Paul tells us, that God will
perfect his own work in us, 1 Cor. 1.8. Phil. 1.6. And whereas he says [that
these three divine graces, faith, hope, and charity, are so all our life long:]
It is evident, that not only his charity, but his faith and hope are truly
such; for the Apostle says, Jam. 2.22. that by works Abraham's faith was made
(or declared) to be perfect; and if true see John 1 Epist. 4.17. Herein is our
love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment: and for
hope, see Heb. 6.11. And we desire that every one of you do show forth the same
diligence to the full assurance of hope unto the end. The like we might show of
patience, Rev. 3.10. Because thou have kept the word of my patience, I will
also keep thee (preserve thee) in this life. But let us hear how he proves
these three graces to remain always imperfect in us. [For faith (he says) and
that truly, must be grounded upon knowledge.] And we wish his had been so, we
mean aright understanding. [But the Apostle tells us (says he) that we know but
in part, 1 Cor. 13.12. so that our Savior may well say to the best of us as he
did to his Disciples, O ye of little faith, Matthew. 8.26. and the best of us may
say with him, Mark 9.24. Lord I believe, help my unbelief.] But we have proved
before that Abraham's faith, (whose steps we should follow, Romans 4.12.) was
perfect; and that the Apostle had kept (or fulfilled) the faith, 2 Timothy 4.7.
yea that the faith was an estate which they had passed through and left behind;
Heb. 4.3. For we (says he) who have believed do enter into rest. Nor is the
knowledge of true believers concerning things to be sought for by faith
imperfect, or in part only; although the things that God had prepared for
those that love him, and which are to be enjoyed in the third heaven, or
paradise, are here but known in part; for that which Christ spoke to his
disciples is made good to all true believers that seek it, John 14.4. Whither I
go ye know, and the way ye know: How can faith be the ground of things hoped
for, and the evidence of things not yet seen, and not yet attained, if it have
not a knowledge of them? See Heb. 11.1, 2.

Secondly he says, that which is perfect admits no increase.] No more did the
faith of Abraham, and of the Apostles, and of many Saints more, Acts 11.24.

Thirdly he says, that our faith shall be perfected in heaven.] But both it
and patience must be finished ere we can arrive at the third heaven, Heb. 6.12.
and 10.36. and 12.1, 2, 3.

Fourthly he says, that [fides est tam apparentium quam non apparentium.] But
Paul says, Romans 8.24, 25. For we are saved by hope; but hope that is seen is
not hope, for what a man sees why does he yet hope for it?

Lastly, he says, we must believe in heaven the continuance of our happiness,
and therefore there is a perfect faith in heaven, because it is grounded upon
knowledge.] But as this man understands not what faith is, so that faith is
rather experimental knowledge and assurance then faith properly so called. The
faith of Gods elect purifieth our hearts here, Acts 15.9. and through it we
must be thoroughly sanctified ere we can obtain final remission of sins, or that
promised inheritance, Acts 26.18. Unto whom I now send thee to open their eyes,
that they may turn from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God,
to the intent they may receive remission ofi sins, and an inheritance among
them that are sanctified by faith that is in me, says Christ. Where you may
take notice also of the power of the will in turning to God after illuminating
and preventing grace: yea after men have been soundly chastised for sin by a
work of the Law, and afterward comforted from heaven with a hope of mercy to
salvation witnessed in their consciences by the holy Ghost: But the words of
the Greek Text are commonly mistranslated. Concerning the imperfection of hope
he says little to the purpose, but what he says implies a contradiction in
it self, and to what he would assert also; for he says that the Apostle
compares hope to an anchor for the soul which is both sure and steadfast, as
the Apostle does, Heb. 6.19. and yet this, says he, does no ways prove our
hope to be perfect; for what greater perfection can there be in an anchor then
to have it sure and steadfast, and to stay and preserve us against all winds and
storms of Satan? which he confesses that our hope does: Nor is it the anchor
that reels to and fro, as he absurdly speaks, but that which lies at anchor,
or the Ship it self, but at the distance and the whole length of a cable;
whence its mobility by the winds and storms does arise, and not from the anchor
it self. And as for charity, he goes about page 32 to prove that it must be
imperfect all this life long: [First, because our knowledge here is imperfect
and but in part. It is, says he, a Maxim among Divines, tantum scimus quantum
diligimus, which he, or some others for him, does English thus; imperfect
knowledge cannot produce perfect charity.] But though the English saying is
true, yet it is not the sense of the Maxim, but rather this; that we have so
much divine experimental and saving knowledge as there is love found in us;
that knowledge being always accompanied with a proportionable love: 1 John 2.3.
Hereby we know that we love God, if we keep his commandments: and verse 4. he
that says I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the
truth is not in him. True it is also which the Poet speaks, quod latet ignotum
est, ignoti (but not ignotae, as he has it) nulla cupido, things simply
unknown cannot be loved: yet is not our affection always toward men according
to our knowledge or acquaintance with them, as he affirms; for knowledge and
acquaintance may be without love. But yet it is true also which he out of
Bernard says, we can neither desire what we know not, nor enjoy what we love
not; and that we shall love God with an absolute perfection in heaven, because
that we shall so know him, and that with an experimental knowledge of his
goodness.] But this hinders us not from so knowing him here as to love him
above all, which is the perfection of love here required of us. Secondly, he
says, [that perfect charity expels fear; but there is no Saint here without
feare] Yet we have often showed the contrary out of Luke 1.74, 75. and 1 John
4.17, 18. Thirdly, he says, [that perfect charity expels sin, which he denis
to be exterminable here, because Saint James says, in many things we all
offend, chap. 3.1, 2.] Which is truly spoken of James of the whole race of our
life, not of our final and best seize; for in the same verse Saint James
describes such a perfect man qualis invenire posset aut debet, saying, If any
man sin not in a word the same is a perfect man, and able to bridle the whole
body. But to fortify his own cause, he goes about to disable the word of
Christ, saying, [ Joh. 15.13. Greater love has no man then this, that he lay
down his life for his friend; which he says is not yet perfect; for men may
do this out of ambition, and for vainglorious ends: and therefore, says he,
our Savior does not bring this to prove the perfection of our love, but of his
own toward us, so far as might be understood by outward apprehension.] But
there is a life which if he and others would lay down in love to the Father,
Son, and the Holy Ghost, and their friends whom they should perfectly love, it
would be an undeniable argument of the greatest and most perfect love toward
God, and that is not to offer our only son with Abraham, or our own natural
life, but the life of sin; and and that is the life which he would have us hate
and lay down for his sake, Matthew. 10.39. Luke 14.26. Joh. 12.25. Rev. 12.11.
nor is there any other life that men can properly call theirs but the life of
sin, for the natural life and the spiritual life are Gods workmanship and gift,
but so is not sin. And having thus to his power mutilated the words of Christ,
Joh. 15.13. he goes about likewise to do Christ the like service, where our
Savior says, Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you: of which
this John of Burson, as if he affected to be herein an Antichrist, says [This
is an hypothetical proposition, which can never prove his perfection of
charity, because we can never be able to perform the condition] Does Christ
then give us false marks and mock-tokens to try our selves by whether we be his
friends or no? was not Abraham called the friend of God? 2 Chronicles. 20.7. Isai.
41.8. Iam. 2.23. and was it not upon this very score, Genesis 26.5. because, says
the Lord, that Abraham obeyed my voice and kept my commandments, statutes, and
my charge? This brought all blessings upon Abraham and his seed after him. But
he goes on, saying:

For although Bellarmine [saith Gods word may be kept, that is, fulfilled; yet
he proves it not.] If he did not, he might easily have done it; and for to say
that Gods commandments are grievous, and to say that we can keep them not, is
not the same, says he: yes, in the Apostles sense they are, Joh. 5.3, 4. For
this is the love of God that we keep his commandments, and his commandments
are not grievous: and he shows the reason of it in the two next verses, to the
confounding of both the Vindicators positions; for whatsoever is born of God
overcomes the world, to wit, that world of sin opposite to the world of the
Father; of which sinful world he had spoken, 1 John 2.15, 16. And this is the
victory that overcomes the world, even our faith. [For a thing, says the
Vindicator, may be very light, yet heavier then I can bear.] Surely he is
either a very weak man, or this is a strong mistake; but how does he prove it?
[ The commandments, says he, are just and holy and good, Romans 7.12. and the
yoke of obedience is easy and light, Matthew. 11.30.] Both these are true; but
the former of these does not speak any thing of the lightness or heaviness of
Gods Law, nor yet the latter, unless it be to those that are weary of the yoke
of sin, and come to Christ, and learn of him the lowliness and meekness, and
all other Christian virtues which are contrary to sin, and which enable men to
obey that Law. Now whereas he would prove that these commandments of the moral
Law are heavyer then we can bear; he brings out a testimony that speaks of the
ceremonial Law especially, which no man could bear, or fulfill of himself,
though it was far lighter then the moral Law, Act. 15.10. Now therefore why
tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples, which neither we
nor our fathers were able to bear?

It is not, says he, the privilege of the Church militant to have no defect
or imperfection remaining:] It is true of the Church collectively taken; but we
have proved before that some have ended their warfare here before they go
hence, Isai. 40.1, 2. 2 Timothy 4.7. Ephe. 6.13. [Here, says he, we pray, enter
not into judgment with thy servants O Lord. O that my ways were so directed
that I might learn thy statutes. Make me a clean heart O God.] But do the
Saints pray so always to the end of their life? They that are Christ's have
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof, Gal. 5.24. and
Christ only lives in them, Gal. 2.20.

[Here, says he, we still find need of Christ who is our advocate with God the
Father, 1 Ioh. 2.12.] But who are they that need him still as a propitiator or
purger out of sin? for Ioh. speaks there to the babes, My little children; and
yet he speaks to them not to sin, that is, not to continue in sin; and for that
end he sets forth a helper of them there against sin: as for the young men, he
says, that they had overcome the wicked one, Ioh. 2.13, 14. how much more had
the old men so done?

Page 34. He tells us [that what he has before written may suffice to satisfy
them whose eyes the God of this world has not blinded; That sin will have a
being in the best of men so long as our souls have a being in these houses of
clay:] But we dare conclude, that if any man rest satisfied therewith in that
point that his eyes were never yet truly opened to behold the light of the
Gospel of the glory of Christ who is the image of God, 2 Cor. 4.4.

But he prays all the faithful to join with him in supplications to God for his
adversaries, that they may see their own sins.] And so do we also for our
selves, and reciprocally for him and them: yet will not that follow that we
shall be ashamed of our doctrine, as he hopes we shall; For we have not drawn
the same from any such puddles as he is pleased to call them, to wit, Pelagius,
Bellarmine, Baily, Becanns, the Jesuits, or from the Adamites, who conceived
that they were renewed to Adams first purity: unless he will have the second
Adam, as he calls Christ, the Prophets and Apostles, to be such Adamites: Nor
have we learned them from Romes fraternity now crept in amongst us, who are, as
he says, well versed in the old trade of Arch-hereticks (what is that? even
his own handicraft;) in falsifying of truth or Text; rather (for the truth may
be denied or abused, but not falsified) whatsoever he says to the contrary, to
maintain lies. But he does hope, and so do we also, that God will discover
such in due time (by us or some other of his servants) and in the interim keep
his (who are no patrons for sin, nor latrons from the due observance of Gods
Law) by the help of Christ, from being subverted by them. But he goes on, [what
men without sin?] says he. Yes, the Angel showed John many thousands that had
been such upon the earth, as we proved before out of Rev. 7.14. and 14.4, 5, 6.
Yea John did demonstrate some such unto us before of his own society, 1 John
4.17, 18. and 5.18. But he scoffingly says [it was happy for the woman that
was taken in adultery that her accusers were not such as these preachers.] Why?
do we profess our selves to be without sin? But it will be found our fault,
and his also, if we live and dye in our sins, now that there is such a fountain
opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and
for uncleanness, Zach. 13.1. And yet it will not follow that if there had been
one, yea many such impeccant persons there (of which none are to be found among
the proud and censorious Pharisees) that the said delinquent should have had a
volly of stones about her ears; for who are more sensible of humane frailty
then such as have passed through the same? or who are more merciful then such
as have obtained mercy to put away all cruelty, pride, and wickedness through
the help of Christ? yet must Christ's express commandments be observed. But he
comes upon us with the Apostles Creed, saying, [What need is there to believe
the Article of the forgiveness of sin, if men may live without sin?] True, if
they could come into this world, live here many years, and go out again
without commiting of sin. But if sin that is once in cannot be purged out
again, nor the image of God renewed, nor the Law fulfilled, what need is there
to believe in God the Father Almighty maker of Heaven and earth, and in Jesus
Christ his only son our Lord? who is called Jesus, because he came to save his
people from their sins, Mat. 1.21. and called Christ, because he is anointed
for that very work, Isai. 61.1, 2, 3, 4. yea why do we believe that he is
risen again for our justification, or regeneration, Romans 4.25. or in the Holy
Ghost, that there is an Holy catholic Church whom Christ came to sanctify by
the washing of water through the word that he might present it to himself a
glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing? Epes. 5.25, 26,
27.

Page 34, 35. he gives us this advice as a point of good religion; To turn the
Lords precepts into prayers, and to say with holy David, who a little before
had his secret sins and his foul sins, but now is called holy David, Psalm
43.3. Send out O Lord thy light and thy truth, and let them lead me into the
holy mountain, and unto thy Tabernacle: and as is Psalm 143.10. Let thy good
Spirit lead me into the land of righteousness.] To which we say, it is a point
of good religion indeed, for as the whole duty of man, by the testimony of
Solomon, consists herein, to wit, in fearing God and keeping his commandments,
Eccles. 12.13. So his father David made the 119 Psalm, which is the longest
meditation extant in the whole book of Psalms, a devout prayer for grace to
understand and fulfill Gods Commandments; and left it to the Church as an holy
Alphabet to know their duty both of prayer and obedience thereby.

But would the Vindicator have men pray in faith or unbelief? for if the thing
be not possible to be had in this life, they cannot pray for it in faith; and
if it is attainable, his second position falls to the ground: And if Gods light
and truth must lead us into the mountain or tabernacle of his righteousness,
then all sin must be left behind, and so his first position is overthrown
likewise. And here is another of his contradictions, yea a twin, or a double
one.

But to this his advice he joins his new Letany (to which we fay Amen;) And
from blind Jesuiticall guides with their false pretended new lights in a dark
Lanthorn, their feignedlies, pretended revelations, but delusions, Good Lord
deliver us.] But who pretends to new lights, or insists upon extraordinary
revelations? or who has a darker lanthorn then himself? or what Jesuit uses
the trade of lying so often as he does? in which conflict its now known he
himself would carry away the whetstone: So that if Diogenes came at noonday
again with his lanthorn, either to find truth in his assertions, or common
honesty in the author of them, he would operam and oleum perdere. Note also
that here again he calls us Jesuits.

But he is pleased to salute us at the table, saying [much good may their
perfection on earth do them, sure we are that if we can attain it, it will do
us no harm] But by way of return we say, well may he fare with his much
affected imperfections and corruption; similis lactuca labris: but Christ also,
Rev. 22.11. says, he that is unjust let him be unjust still, and he that is
filthy let him be filthy still; but he that is justified let him be justified
still, and he that is sanctified let him be sanctified still: for what a man
most affects in these things, that shall be his portion in the end. Howbeit
with his lips or pen he begs to have his imperfections discovered, and to be
humbled in the sense of them so long as he lives (as if the Lord delighted
more in our dejectment for them, then ejectment of them;) that he may cry
always with the poor Publican; but does he beg healing and cleansing mercies,
that he might offend no more, or only pardon for his offense toties quoties
committed, and so to end his days? Surely he should then have been but a poor
Publican in the end, though he had a rich office. But he will also (at
leastwise in words) make an emulator of Saint Paul, who forgot what was behind
and pressed forward toward the mark, and put forth, (we wish he means not
quite out of doors,) all the strength that the Lord shall please to send him,
and improving all opportunities to the best advantage for the mortifying of all
sinful corruptions in him, and for the growing in grace, until he attaines
unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. But lest all this
should be had too soon in the world (but here by the ministry of the word the
work is to be carried on even to perfection, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.) he
contradictingly says, [which shall be after grace consummate hereafter in
heaven,] and so desperately concludes, [As for him that can find perfection
here on earth, let him never look for it in heaven.] As if it could not be had
in both places or estates in several degrees; contrary to Paul's hope, 2 Timothy
4.7, 8. I have fought the good fight, I have kept the faith, I have finished my
course; henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness. Does not
the holy Ghost say, Rev. 14.13. that those that die (here to sin) in the Lord,
that they may rest from their own works and labors, (as the fourth
commandment requires) that their works shall follow them?

But in the last place he tells us, that he will lay down some of our arguments,
and some Scriptures which we wrest to maintain them.] Wherein he shows himself
a better diviner then a divine; for he had none of them as yet from us, unless
those which he finds in the argument of Doctor Draytons sermons, of which he
mentions very few. First he says [that we deny original sin.] Which thing in
his sense is true: But we say every man's first fall is his original sin.
Secondly, we say (as he tells you) that original sin is taken away from the
Saints on earth;] we say that it either is, or ought to be, there being
sufficient grace and help offered and afforded in Christ to us for that end:
[and therefore that such mortified Saints cannot derive it to their posterity.]
What is this to the question in hand? yet we confess more, that neither the
first Adam, nor any parent descended from him, can convey any such stain of
sinful corruption by generation to their children; because a most holy God
creates both soul and body innocent and without sin. But as this argument of
his is none of ours, so his solution or answer is a mere figment of man's brain;
for he says [there are three things in sin, the offense, the guilt, and the
pollution, or stain, being an inclination to fall into the like sins: Of which
(says he) the two first are taken away; but the last, which is the worst, is
left behind during this life.] Where ye may take notice of these absurdities or
contradictions: First, that Gods hates the offense, as he says, in his dearest
Saints; and, as he says, it is abolished and blotted out by the blood of Jesus
Christ: If it be abolished (as he says it is) how can it remain in them still?
and if it remain still, how can it be but hateful to God? For the second, the
guilt or obligation to punishment he says that is pardoned; but, as we have
often showed, no sin is pardoned till its left and forsaken, Prove. 28.13. As
for the third, the pollution, which he calls the pure essence of sin. (a very
pure essence indeed if one look well upon it) [that (says he) does not reign
in a regenerate man; yet the life and being of sin is not taken away, page 36.
But he cites a Text there, wherewith he cuts his own throat, if rightly
rendered, Psalm. 103.3. Who is propitious to all thine iniquities, and heals
all thine infirmities, or diseases.] The latter words explaining the former;
and certainly where diseases are healed they are wholly removed or taken away,
they leave no life nor being behind them; and then follows verse. 4. who
redeemeth thy life from destruction, and crowns thee with loving kindness and
mercy: for where any life or being of sin is left there is so much destruction
or condemnation left also, as we showed out of Romans 8.2. True it is that the
Lord does heal our souls gradually, as this puny Emperick speaks; but he leaves
not (we say) the full perfecting of the cure to the life of glory, or yet to
the hour of death. But page 36. he feigneth a second objection of ours, and
then forgeth an answer for it, as he did before: [Regenerate parents cannot
convey the guilt of original sin to their children, because to themselves it is
pardoned.] Which objection is a strong bar against him, though not made by
us: And upon this score the guilt of the first Adam's sin after his personal
repentance could not be charged upon his posterity. But he says by way of
answer, [that they are freed from the guilt of sin, and have righteousness
imputed unto them by grace, and not by nature; but by nature they have in them
original corruption, and therefore they can leave the latter, though not the
former:] But we have showed before that corruption and guilt as well as grace
are all spiritual and preternatural things, and pass not to the posterity by
procreation. In the same page he says, [that grace and justification are not
tied to carnal propagation:] no more are original sin and condemnation, but to
the most sure election of God, as Romans 9. in Esau and Jacob.) But as he
understands not what the election of grace is on which justification depends,
so has he no discerning of that Esau and Jacob to which Paul relates Romans 9.
yet are they both clearly set forth in the Scriptures; the former 2 Pet. 1.10.
Mal. 1.1, 2, 3. He has also a third argument to prove that infants have sin,
[because they are liable to death, and stipendium peccati mors, Romans 6.33.] But
it were well for sinners if there were not another, and that an everlasting
death, that is the just recompense of sin, as we showed before: as for corporal
death, it being but a temporal punishment at the most, it might be by the first
Adam's sin brought upon all his posterity, yet without any infection of sin
derived unto them.

Fourthly, he says there, and page 37. [That infants want not the faculty of
will by which they are inclined to sin, though they do not sin in act.] Which
evil inclination we have denied and disproved before, with the affirmation
fathered upon Irenaeus and Chrysostom by him, that Adam's sin was not one
personal sin, In uno universi; but this one is our personal Adam. And therefore
it is a false charge to say that the first Adams sin was his handwriting that
made al his posterity debtors unto God, unless in some temporal evils inflicted
on them for his sake, as we showed before.

He tells you likewise, but with his wonted lying and impudency, [that we say
concupiscence without consent unto it is no sin.] But we say the first motion
to adultery, or any other sin arising from men's or Satan's immediate temptation,
is no sin till some titillation or liking of the same follows. And though
Aquinas and Coster seem to speak so of original concupiscence it self; we deny
it, nor do we approve that saying of that Council of Trent (who as he says,
have as many curses as Canons) that the Catholic Church never counted
concupiscence truly so called sin in the regenerate; for we do count it no
better till it be mortified: And they in effect grant so much, saying, it comes
from sin, and tends to sin. And Paul calls it expressly sin, Romans 7. where the
Vindicator confesses that he was sometimes captivated by it against his will.
And did it not then reign as a tyrant over him? And is tyranny devoid of
dominion and power where it bears sway, and takes men captive? True it is also
that the Vindicator says in the general, [that the law condemns sin (to wit,
in a prohibiting way, as we said before) as well in the branch as the root:]
But that prohibition, there shall not be in thine heart an evil thought against
the Lord thy God, does only restrain us from allowance of such, for we cannot
hinder Satan from suggesting such unto us; nor was Christ upon earth wholly
free from such injectments. And that which the Vindicator page 30 says of the
motions of concupiscence, is true; but both he and Augustine himself are foully
mistaken if they think that all sinful motions come from concupiscence: yet it
is true in some sense which Augustine there says, It were better to have none
then to overcome them. True, it were better for the man's ease and safety to
have no temptations; but it is better for his exercise, and more for his glory
(if the Lord will have it so) to have such, and overcome them, then not to be
exercised at all therewith.

As for Bernard's saying, take it single without the Vindicators double dealing
in the end or conclusion, and it makes against his position and scope; which
saying is this: [That kind of sin which so often troubles us, I mean
concupiscence and evil desires, may and should be suppressed by the grace of
God, so that it reign not in us, and that we give not our members weapons of
unrighteousness unto sin; and that way there is no condemnation to those that
are in Christ.] For this is the sum of what we say, and therein he directly
contradicts himself; and this the Vindicator observing, adds this clause [yet
it is not cast out but in death.]

Having in the two last pages made an impertinent digression to prove against
the Papists that concupiscence is sin, and page 39 and the two following, he,
comes in his erratick and wandering way to visit the Pelagians, who, as he tells
us page 39. were condemned in many Councels summoned and gathered together for
the confutation (he should have rather said for the censuring) of Pelagius and
Caelestius their heresies, about the year 420, and some years after; as in the
Milevitan Council, the Council of Carthage, and the Council of Palestine in the
East: some of whose objections (with which we have nothing to do) he, to fill
up his empty book like an empty shop with rols of painted wares, produces and
answers them with other men's solutions, so solutive is he at this present: As
first, [that concupiscence because it is a natural propension to things
forbidden by the Law, is no sin. To which he answers, that our natural
concupiscence and desires are now inordinate and sinful, which they were not
before the fall: the like he answers to our affections and appetites to
desire good, and eschew evil things, which as long as they are not carried to
forbidden objects, or immoderately, are not exorbitant or sinful.] And so say
we; sed quid hoc ad Rhombum? But page 40 he brings a second objection of
theirs, and a third, and fourth; the second is this, [That which is not in our
power to cause it to be, or not to be, is no sin: but concupiscence is not in
our power to shake off, therefore it is no sin. Unto which he answers
something that is true, and something that is false. As first, that sin is to
be esteemed by the will and Law of God thereagainst.] Which is true; But this
is not so, where he says that God requiring of us impossible things does not
injure us, because he commanded them when they were possible.] But this is not
only injurious to us without grace offered, but inconsistent with Gods justice
and goodness also. The third objection is this, [Sin makes men obnoxious to the
wrath of God: but concupiscence in the regenerate does not; for there is no
condemnation (say they) to them that are in Christ Jesus, though they have
concupiscence left in them.] Wherein take notice that the Vindicator that calls
us Pelagians is herein a Pelagian himself, as all his fellows are. Secondly,
that whereas he should deny the Minor, that concupiscence does not make the
regenerate obnoxious to Gods wrath, he admits it, and takes it for granted,
that neither that nor any other sin does condemn the regenerate, or make them
obnoxious to Gods wrath: and yet he confesses them to be sins; but says, that
by accident it comes to pass that they are not reputed for such, but are
pardoned by grace.] Which is true when they are repented of and left, and so
cease to be sins; but not otherwise.

The fourth objection which he brings is this, [In baptism original sin is
taken away; therefore concupiscence is no sin in those that are baptized. Uunto
which he answers by distinction, yet without the least instinct of truth, that
by baptism the guilt of sin is taken away.] Which we deny against some of the
Fathers and the Schoolmen, as having no warrant from the Scriptures. But he
confesses [that the worst part of sin, and that which is most offensive to
God, remains, even corruption, and an inclination to sin.] But here we first
say, that the guilt is not taken away before or without the corruption.
Secondly, that children when they are baptized have neither guilt nor
corruption to be taken away for the present, yet may lawfully be baptized in
innocence, as Christ himself was, for a future document and sign. And thirdly,
that in the baptism of men grown, and newly converted, neither the acts and
corruptions, nor the guilt are taken away by outward baptism; only there is
their duty in following of Christ in his death and resurrection, under the hope
of his grace and help for the present, and of a full remission and eternal life
in the end declared unto them therein; by which also they observe and fulfill
an outward ordinance, oblige themselves to the said duty, stand under that
grace hoped for, and are distinguished by an holy ordinance and Christian
profession from other men. Page 41. he first concludes [that original
concupiscence is sin.] Which we never denied: and then he is so impudent as to
say of us, [that were not these men past shame, they would never go about to
revive such heresies as we hoped had been long since buried among us] But who
revived them, he, or we? But mark his (...) there. [But so long as there is a
Devil in hell, or a Pope at Rome, we must never expect to be freed from such
disturbers of our peace.] But what disturbance have we made, or what peace have
we broken? Thus he that has played the boutefeu himself, and has without
cause incensed all the neighboring Ministers and people against us where he
could get access and audience, charge us with his own wicked practice of
disturbance, who live quietly, and cause no commotion amongst men, but only
seek to awaken them out of security and sloth, to watch, and war aright against
their sins and Ghostly enemies, and that out of love to God and their souls,
and in order to their everlasting peace as well as their present welfare, in
the unity of the Spirit and the bond of perfection, which is love to God and
men, the conquering of sin, and the fulfilling of the Law. But we must bear his
false charge and challenge in this kind with the more meekness, because the
holy Prophets and Apostles have undergone the like accusation at the hands of
injurious, slanderous, and outrageous men, and that upon the self-same account,
Acts 16.21. and 18.13. and 24.5. and as long as there is a Devil in hell, and
his hellish kingdom has room in men's hearts, and sets their tongues on fire,
as Saint James speaks chap. 3.6. we must expect no better usage at their hands,
till the old accuser of our brethren be cast ou^ of them, Rev. 12.10. See Mat.
10.25. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, much more will
they do it to them of his household.

But in the end of page the 41 to the end of page the 48. he comes with his
solutive medicines to answer some Scriptures, which he says we allege and
wrest to maintain our errors.] But this he speaks by way of divination; for
diverse of them we have not yet produced; nor have we need to wrest those that
we allege, for they speak that clearly which we would prove. [The first, says
he, is that Romans 6.6. where Paul says of the Christians who are baptized into
the faith of Christ, knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that
the body of sin may be destroyed; from thence (says he) they conclude that the
corruption of old Adam is quite abolished, that they are perfectly quitted from
sin, and perfectly renewed in grace.] But this is one of his forged lies; for
we neither cite that Scripture, nor infer any such thing from it: but since he
by preoccupation has quoted it for us, we shall without wresting it conclude
that those which truly confess the Christian faith and baptism, both may and
ought to be crucified with Christ, and through his grace and help to destroy
the whole body of sin; and so we have promised by our sureties to do, when we
were baptized, unless we will be renegadoes with him: Unto this Scripture he
answers page 42 as he had done before, without fear or wit, truth, or modesty,
[that the guilt of sin which the Schools term the formal of sin (but indeed is
the fruit and effect of sin) is taken away in baptism.] The falsehood of which
we have showed before; the baptism which he means neither takes away the
guilt nor corruption of sin; for Simon Magus was baptized among the other
Samaritans, and yet was still in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity,
Acts 8.20. Secondly, as to the corruption, he says, [that the dominion of it
is taken away, but not the being of sin, from Gods Saints, because Paul says
Gal. 5.17. the flesh lusts against the spirit; and the same Apostle speaks of
himself, I see another Law in my members warring against the Law of my mind,
and carrying me captive unto the Law of sin which is in my members.] But we
showed before that the infant-state of the Galatians, being newborn babes in
Christ, is not the full strength and stature of young men in Christ, and much
less the dayednesse of old men, or elders, and experienced soldiers or Saints
in Christ. Secondly, that Paul speaks not there of his own present condition.
And thirdly, that this Text flies in his and their faces who affirm that all
dominion of sin is taken away from such babes; for this sin is a prince and a
Tyrant, it is not our slave, but makes us its slave. But he adds this, [that
the Apostle says not, let not sin be in your mortal bodies, but let it not
reign.] Which is true in regard of Satan's sinful motions, as we said before;
but not of the old leaven of corruption which must be purged out, 1 Cor. 5.7.
And therefore that saying of Augustine (though it pleases his tooth well) for
which he commends it, is false, that sin and concupiscence is taken away by
baptism, non ut non sit, sed ut non obsit, not that it should cease to be, but
that it should not hurt us, nor hinder our attainment of everlasting
happiness:] For as long as sin remains in us, bringing forth the works of
the flesh, spoken of Gal. 5.20, 21. it will bar us from entering into Gods
kingdom. See there and 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. yea, for such does the wrath of God fall
upon the children of disobedience, Ephe. 5.6. Col. 3.5, 6. Here he brings in
the saying of Anselme also to second Augustine; Not that our inbred corruption
should of a sudden be consumed in our flesh (who said that it could be so
consumed?) that lives, but that it should not be imputed when we are dead.] To
which we say, that if we be dead unto it in conformity with Christ it shall not
be imputed unto us, but if we live and die in it, it shall be charged upon us.
Romans 8.13. If ye live after the flesh ye shall die.

In the next place, instead of citing the second place of Scripture, which he
fathers upon our quotation, he heaps up three, some whereof have small affinity
with each other. Romans 6.2. How shall we who are dead to sin live any longer
therein? Romans 7.14. Wherefore my brethren ye are become dead to the Law. Romans
8.9. The Law of the spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus has freed me from
the Law of sin and death. 2 Cor. 5.17. Unto which last place he rather alludes
then expressly refers us, saying, [that a regenerate man is renewed in all
things throughout in every part and power, both of body and soul; and therefore
the regenerate are quite freed from all corruption of sin, and endued with all
perfection of grace. But in these allegations he abuses us; for first, we have
not alleged any of them heretofore to maintain our positions.

Secondly, that of Romans 7.4. speaks of a freedom or deadness to the Law in
its compulsive work, and not of being dead to sin; and though we might and
shall conclude from Romans 6.2. and 8.2. and 2 Cor. 5.15, 17. that the regenerate
may and ought to be so dead to sin, freed from the law of sin and death, and so
renewed, yet we do not say that they all are so perfected, or can be so on the
sudden; but in due time they may and shall be so, even in this life, if they
quit themselves aright. Howbeit page 43. he comes to answer these and the like
places which speak of a total death unto sin, and a renewing of Gods image,
with his old distinction [that it may be done inchoatively (which is effected
in the least infant or babe in Christ, I speak of regenerate ones) but not
pefectively or fully. [Surely he is wont to cure his patients but inchoative at
the most, or else, if he do it perfective, he will in his way put down Christ,
according to his doctrine. But says he, [the Spirit of God by these forms or
phrases would teach us two special things, (what be those?) First, that sin is
now like a serpent crushed in the head, Genesis 3.15. which, says he, can never
recover his former strength, nor any ways hurt the regenerate man, but only to
bruise his heel, that is, by the wrigling of her tail to bring some temporary
affliction upon him. But when was sin so crushed? by baptism? was it so
crushed in Simon Magus? but Paul tells the Romans that Satan the worker in and
with them was yet to be bruised for the present, Romans 16.20. and the God of
peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly, and was afraid that he might
through his subtilty deceive and seduce the Corinthians from the simplicity
that is in Christ, 2 Cor. 11.3. Secondly, that it should be the main scope of
the Saints to strive continually to mortify the deeds of the flesh, and to do
their best endeavors to be clean rid of them, and to perfect holiness in the
fear of God: and this, says he, is plainly intimated unto us in all the
exhortations of the Scriptures; as where it is said, Abstain from fleshly
lusts; and mortify the deeds of the body, and the like.] But first, those
places, or some of them, as Romans 8.2. 2 Cor. 5.16, 17. do show us that the
work was done already; and both those and others incite as to set upon the work
vigorously and under hope, to effect it with hope: which he denies. And
thirdly, we are by those exhortations, which are indeed express commands from
the Lord, (whatsoever he or Augustine says to the contrary) enjoined to labor
after such a riddance from sin, and perfection in holiness, not by our own
endeavors alone, but by invocating the help of Christ, or else we shall effect
little in in the business; which makes many unfruitful. And in conclusion he
adds very impertinently, though pertinaciously enough; [If there were no lusts
nor deeds of the flesh in us (yes, there are too many till they be subdued) to
what end are we bid to mortify them?] To which we will superad this, that if
they cannot be killed and slain, why are we commanded to mortify or kill them,
as we are often enjoined to do? Then he comes to a third Scripture of ours (as
he calls it) which he says he had quoted before, to wit, that in the second
place, but we reserve it for this; where he takes upon him to answer it after
his wonted manner: the place is 1 John 3.9. Whosoever is born of God does not
commit sin, because his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin because he is
born of God. Unto which he answers two ways, first more largely, and then more
briefly, but neither way to the purpose; for he understands not of what sort of
regenerate men Saint John speaks, not of babes, or young men, but of such old
men in Christ as with himself and his fellow-Apostles had the love of God
perfected in them, 1 John 4.17, 18. But let us hear what those his answers are:
[First, he says that they, to wit, the regenerate, do not sin unto death, for
they do not wholly forsake God; howbeit they may sin against their consciences
(and such, says Paul, condemn themselves, Romans 14.20, 21.) but they retain
some beginnings (he should say seeds) of true godliness, by which as by spatks
they are stirred again to repentance.] But here first he seems to contradict
what he had said page 24. by the first account, that the Holy Ghost withdraws
as he is grieved, driven away and quenched by such sins, Ephe. 4.30. 1 These.
5.19. then men are blind and wander, as some such regenerate ones may wholly
forsake God, as we showed out of 1 Timothy 5.11, 12. Heb. 10.28, 29, 30. 2 Pet.
2.11. Secondly he answers [that he sins not as he is regenerate, but in
his unregenerate part, or as he is unregenerate.] But so do even the
unregenerate sin in that part and manner, and yet they sin to death, or else
they could not perish. But he confesses against himself [that sin sometimes
reigns in the regenerate, which thing he had denied before: And then he
brings in John, as he has done often, to prove that all have sin in them, 1 John 1.8. which is his mistake of the place that he understands not; for John
does not only explain his meaning better ver. 10. but at the first of the next
chapter writes even to the babes not to sin, as we have showed. But he will
give us his sense, 1 John 1.9. whose words are these; If we acknowledge our
sins he is faithful to forgive us: This therefore, says he page 44. is the
meaning of Saint John, that the regenerate do sin, but make not much of their
sin; or they do not set open the door, or yield to evil desires so as to cast
off all love to godliness, and not to repent. But we have showed the contrary
even now, and might do further out of Ezekiel. 18.23. Mat. 12.43, 44, 45. Heb.
10.27, 28. or more briefly, because, as he tells us (yet with more words, but to
as little purpose) that he which is born of God makes not a trade of sinning,
he lives not in his sin, he fancies not his sin, he delights not in his sin, he
sins not with purpose, with pleasure, with malice, with perseverance; sin
reigns not, but (as the Apostle speaks) the evil that I do I would not
do.] And cannot some of them that are yet unregenerate, or but under the work
of the Law at the furthest, say so likewise? we know who said, Video meliora
proboque, Deteriora sequor. But here he brings the latter part of that verse 1
Ioh. 3.9. by way of objection, His seed remains in him, neither can he sin
because he is born of God. To which he gives his former answer, that he sins
nor unto death.] But is not this to add to the word that is written our own
words, and so to come under that curse? Rev. 22.18. Then he brings in a fourth
Scripture of our alleging, as he pretends, to wit, 1 Pet. 1.21. being born
anew not of mortal, but of immortal seed, by the word of God who lives for
ever. From whence he says, that we conclude, that since this immortal seed
never dies in them that are born of it, they ever remain regenerate, retain
grace, and never fall into sin.] But as this objection is here (...),
impertinent, and upon a new head or point of doctrine, so his answer is
suitable, and false also into the bargain, to wit, that the regenerate may and
do lose grace and the holy Spirit of God in regard of some gifts, and those
sometimes more and fewer; but not in respect of all the gifts, for still there
remains in them some print of faith and conversion, which yet by yielding to
evil inclinations and desires is ofttimes so oppressed and darkened, that it can
neither be known to others, nor confirm themselves of the grace of God and
their own salvation for the present; howbeit, says he, it suffers them not
wholly to forsake God and the known truth, or the embracements of Christ's
merits by faith: so David prays, Psalm. 51.10, 11. Create in me a clean heart
O God, and renew a right spirit within me, and restore to me the joy of thy
salvation.] But was this by virtue of the old seed of grace, when David had
been long in his sins of Adultery and murder without any true repentance for
them, or by Nathan's coming unto him to call him to repentance? Therefore his
conclusion from thence page 45 is not consequent, to wit, [that David had not
wholly left cleanness of heart, righteousness of Spirit, nor the way of
salvation, because then he would not have asked them afresh of God, as he
does.] For though some cleanness of heart and rectitude of spirit might remain
in him, yet he had wholly forfeited and lost the joy of Gods salvation.
Secondly, he further answers, that the seed of God, which is his word working
true faith and conversion, abides and dies not.] Concerning their conversion,
he means a new and final perseverance, however they may fall often grievously
and foully before the end, because John says, 1 John 2.19. If they had been of
us they would have continued with us.] But we have proved the contrary before
out of 1 Timothy 5.11, 12. unto which add 1 Timothy 1.19. holding faith and a good
conscience, which some having put away, concerning the faith have made
shipwreck: and 2 Timothy 1.15. and 2.17, 18. and 4.14, 15.

In the 45 page he brings out other Scriptures as produced against him by us;
and in the fifth place that of our Savior, Matthew. 7.18. A good tree cannot
bring forth evil fruit. To which he answers [that it cannot as it is a good
tree (which shall so come to pass in the life to come,) but as it is partly
good and partly evil it may bring forth evil fruit; whereof (says he) we have
sufficient trial and experience in this life.] Must we then bring forth no good
fruit here? But Solomon says, Whether the tree fall to the north, or to the
south, in the place where it falls there it shall lie, Eccles. 11.3. and
David, Psalm. 91.12, 13, 14, 15. The righteous shall flourish as the palm tree,
he shall grow as the Caedar in Lebanon; those that be planted in the house of
the Lord shall flourish in the Courts of our God, they shall bring forth much
fruit in old age, they shall be fat and flourishing; to show that the Lord is
upright, he is my rock, and there is no unrighteousness in him.

A sixth Scripture he undertakes to answer, which we shall truly own as
alleged by Doctor Drayton in his sermon, is this, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. but it
seems the Vindicator was afraid to recite the words, as being too full and
evident against his position and purpose, which are these; Hu bands love your
wives as Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might
sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, and might
present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any
such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish. Concerning which he
says [This Text shows us how Christ in this life, by the word and Sacrament,
and by the operation of grace does cleanse us, that in the state of glory we
may be perfectly holy without spot or wrinkle.] But how proves he that this
must be then done, and not before? This, says he, I shall prove by these
ensuing reasons; [First, because here we know but in part, and consequently can
love but in part:] But we have proved that by and in the new covenant it is
promised that such a measure of knowledge is to had (if sought for) that men
shall not need to say, know the Lord, for they shall all know me from the least
to the greatest, Jer. 31.32, 33. and that the knowledge of the Lord shall
abound like as the waters cover the sea, Esaias 11.9. His second reason is, [that
if grace were consummate in this life there should be no difference between the
state of grace and of glory.] Yea, grace may here be consummate in his degree,
and that in a very high one, and yet fall short of that transcendent measure
which shall be attained in the life to come, What says Paul? Phil. 1.21. for
me to live is Christ, and to die is gain. His third reason is petitio
principii, [all the Saints on earth have sin remaining in them; and they that
deny it are liars, and have no truth in them.] Yet we do deny that all Saints
must (while they are upon earth,) have sin remaining in them; and have a
greater Divine then Mr. John Tendering to warrant us, even the holy Apostle
John, upon whose testimony (which he understands not) he ignorantly and
confidently relieth: See 1 John 4.17. and 5.4, 5. Rev. 7.14, 15, 17. and 14.3,
4, 5. before often cited. Yet we are not such liars as he is notoriously known
to be, and we hope have more truth in us then he and his book set forth.] But
he adds, [that all the Fathers against the Novatians and Donatists understand
this place.] Which if it were true (as it is not) the Novatians may convince
them to be Novices, not Fathers; and the Donatists evict them to be Dotists or
Dotards: for the Scriptures show clearly that we must or ought to be such
before, and for the obtaining of the kingdom of glory. 1 Cor. 1.8. Who shall
also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Phil. 10.11. That ye may be pure, and without offense in the day
of Jesus Christ, being filled with the fruits of righteousness. 1 These. 5.23.
And I pray God that your spirit, soul, and body, may be preserved blameless
until the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. 3.14. Wherefore beloved
seeing ye look for such things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in
peace, without spot, and blameless. But he says [it is the Church triumphant,
and not the Church militant, that must be found without spot or wrinkle.] Yet
the Church of Smyrna, Rev. 2. and much more the Church of Philadelphia, Rev. 3.
do appear to be such here, because Christ himself who searches the hearts and
reins, Rev. 2.23. and who finds fault with five of the aforesaid Churches of
Asia, and upon occasion rebukes them sharply, finds not the least fault with
these, but commends them highly; and that may also be in some sense a
triumphant Church who has upon earth gotten victory over all her enemies, and
in that behalf triumphs with Paul, Romans 8.33, 39.

In the seventh place, he brings 2 Timothy 4.7. to be answered by himself, where
Paul says, I have fought a good fight, and finished my course: which he
fortifieth against himself, as if it were not of sufficient strength by it self
for him to oppose: which Text the Vindicator will not observe, nor the other
place, 1 Cor. 9.27. where Paul says, but I keep under my body, and bring it
into subjection, lest when I have preached unto others I my self should be a
castaway.] To both which he answers page 46 as he was wont to do, without
truth or judgment; [First, that Paul fought a good fight, being now ready to be
offered up; but that conflict was yet to come says he, not so as to obtain
exact perfection of grace, and to be without all inherent sin, of which he
complains Romans 7.] Yes, he was even at that time of his complaint freed from
the Law of sin and death, as we have often showed out of Romans 8.2. and that
long before he was to be so offered up. He tells us also, (but we know not to
what purpose) [that Peter was led where he would not.] But surely it was not
into sin, John 21.18. Thirdly, he says [ Paul kept the faith, and he who said
unto him, my grace is sufficient for thee, and my power is perfected in
weakness, enabled him to overcome, though he had corruptions remaining in him,
and the buffetings of Satan.] But does the man understand what he says? It is
the office of faith to purify the heart from sin, Acts 15.9.1 John 3.2, 3.
which faith Paul did not only keep and retain, but fought the good fight of
faith till the battle was ended, and so finished his race and course in that
kind in dying to sin; yet he justly expected that promised reward of which he
speaks Romans 6.8. 2 Timothy 2.11, 12. As to the second Text, 1 Cor. 9.27. he says
[that Paul kept down his body by fasting and prayer, to bring it into
subjection.] But was this the body of flesh and blood, or the inordinate
desires of the sinful flesh? He tells us also [that Augustine did use fasting,
prayers and tears to the same end.] But he did it not in the faith of Christ's
assistance, and the hope of final victory, of which it seems he despaired here:
and James shows that if we would obtain, Jam. 1.6. we must him ask in faith,
nothing wavering, for he that wavereth is like the waves of the sea, etc.

In the eighth place, he brings a second Scripture, of which Doctor Drayton had
made use in his sermon, and these two are all that he can call his; it is taken
out of Ephesians. 4. from verse 10 to 15. And he gave some to be Apostles, some
prophets, some Evangelists, some pastors and teachers, for the perfecting of
the work of the ministry, and for the edifying the body of Christ, till we all
come in the unity of faith and the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfest
man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. Unto this he
answers after the old mode ignorantly and intricately [First, that the
ministry of the word is given not only to convert men from sin, but to perfect
men in holiness,] Then it must either effect that for which God has designed
it, or else the Lord was mistaken in choosing and using too weak instruments.
But he adds, yet so as the same Paul speaks, Acts 20.32. [ Which is able to
build you up, that is, to edify and build the Saints more and more.] Where
first he understands not that word of Gods grace which Paul speaks of there;
for it is the essential word which is almighty, not only able to build us up
to perfection, but afterward to give us an inheritance among them that are
sanctified. Secondly, he contradicts himself, because this is able to build us
up to the uttermost in the way of sanctification, that we may be fittted for
that inheritance. Thirdly, that fitting must also go before in this life,
therefore the two things following are false, and his, are his old picklocks:
for first he says, [though the Saints do grow up under the word and
Sacraments, yet it is not to the attainment of an exact obedience in this life,
to be without sin in this life, and to have grace consummate; but they grow and
edify one another in love.] But we speak not here what the Saints do actually,
but what they may and ought to do; nor of their mutual edification of each
other, but of the words design and ability to build them up to the top, or the
finishing of the edifice; for a skilful and a faithful builder gives not over
till the structure is finished. Secondly he says [that the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ is attained only in glory.] Which in his
sense is false; for here we may have a perfection of degrees as well as of
parts, to wit the perfection of sanctification or grace, which we call the
perfection of the way, as we have often proved before, whatsoever he says to
the contrary.

In the ninth place he brings in two or three Scriptures together out of Doctor
Draytons sermon upon one and the same head, as he might have found more of the
same kind there: They are these; [that the Apostle prays for the perfecting of
the Saints, Heb. 13.20. 2 Cor. 13.9. 1 Pet. 5.10. and surely they prayed for
things feasible and attainable; nor can the prayer of Christ for the same be in
vain, John 17.25. I in them, and they in me, that they might be made perfect in
one. Unto which page 47 he gives in the old lying and sinful distinction for an
answer; namely, That the Apostles prayed for the perfecting of the Saints, and
so did our blessed Savior, and they obtained what they prayed for, that is to
say, to have them sincere in this life, and to have grace consummate in the
state of glory.] But we have proved that the sincerity which Paul prayed for in
the behalf of the Saints was a state devoid of sin, and to be had before, and
in order unto the kingdom of glory; Phil. 1.10, 11. That ye may approve the
things that are excellent, and that ye may be sincere, and without offense till
the day of Christ, and that ye may be filled with the fruits of righteousness.
1 These. 5.23. Now the very God of peace sanctify you wholly, and I pray God
that your whole spirit, soul and body, be reserved blameless unto the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ. But he brings in two replies of ours, by way of
Anticipation likewise; the first of which is this, is sin pardoned and
mortified and does it yet remain. [Which he answers with his old crambe centies
posita, It is so pardoned as not to be imputed; its so mortified that the power
and dominion of it is taken away, yet it remains to be more and more
mortified and wholly cast out at the death of the body; and death shall be
destroyed at the general resurrection, and so it is the last enemy that shall
be destroyed.] But though he and others have often and confidently affirmed
that sin shall be cast out at the death of the body, they could never bring one
Text of Scripture for this article of their belief, nor should they be able to
do it though they live to the age of Methushelah, whose name and life is a dart
of death against sin and their position. Then he brings in our second reply,
which, as he says, is this; When must sin be purged out if not in this life?
must we carry the remainders of sin into the kingdom of heaven, whereinto no
unclean thing shall enter? Rev. 21.27. To which he gives us his old thredbare
and beggarly (we had almost said) and lousy answer, that men shall not carry
the remainder of sin into Gods kingdom with them, but they shall lay it down
at the death of the body.] Then there is hope that none shall go to hell for
corruption, or thereby be debarred from heaven; there is hope also that the
Vindicator may then lay down his lying and his other lewd prrctises against God
and man at that day. [The thief (says he) only converted shall be that day in
paradise.] Therefore he may safely continue in his sin till the hour of death.]
But what if that thief had repented long before, even from his first
apprehension, or perhaps from the committing of the fact? for this is possible,
and the Scripture has nothing to the contrary. Yea, what if he belived on
Christ before, having heard of or seen his miracles, though he had not the
opportunity to confess him till now, nor to pray unto him face to face: nor
does he understand what paradise this was into which Christ and he entered; for
the first paradise is a submission unto Gods will even under the punishing hand
of God; and the last is the third heaven unto which Paul was caught by way of
vision, 2 Cor. 12.2, 3, 4. [And as for Rev. 21.27. he says it is confessed by
our own fraternity to be the state of the Saints in patria.] Its true, all the
reformed Churches, and that of England, (whose first reformation might have
been a pattern to all the rest,) do almost generally conceive that the new
Jerusalem, or heavenly City of God spoken of Rev. 21, 22. chap. is the state of
the Saints in patria; and so do the Papists also for the greatest part: which
of those then must be our fraternity? But there are some of both Religions that
hold the new Jerusalem to be an estate attainable in this life; because John
saw it descending down from heaven unto men as a tabernacle of God wherein they
were to worship him; and he heard a loud voice following, and saying, behold,
the tabernacle of God is with men, and he shall dwell with them, and they shall
be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God, Rev.
21.1, 2, 3. But herein all do agree that men must cease to be of Mr. Tondrings
fraternity before they can enter into this state, for there shall in no wise
enter into it any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination,
or makes a lie, Rev. 21.27.

Then he concludes with the like confidence as he begun; [And thus have I
briefly proved unto you the truth of the point (which yet has not one point of
truth in it) That sin will have a being in the best of men while their souls
have a being in these houses of clay: And this I hope, says he, may be
sufficient to satisfy the people.] Yea, and perhaps some of the Priests also,
who are very easily persuaded to sleep still in sin, and loath to be put upon an
hard encounter against the Canaanites; for such are apt to believe the
unbelieving spies, and much more the Scout-master-generall, who like his Master
does go to and fro compassing the earth, and walking up and down in it. [And
if, says he, I shall meet with any new arguments from my friends against the
truth of the point I shall endeavor to answer them by way of replication for
their full satisfaction.] We are beholden to him for his promised endeavors,
and shall honor him when he has set all the world on fire in the love of sin,
with this epitaph, Quae si non tenuit, magnis tamen excidit ausis. [As for
their old arguments, says he, they stink before God and good men, Romes good
creatures excepted.] But our hope is that when the true Sabbath comes our
doctrine shall no more stink then the Mannaa which was kept from the sixth to
the Sabbathday, Exodus 16.24.] But his and their doctrine who take his part
therein shall be like the river in Egypt, turned into blood; for it is but the
fading notion of flesh and blood, whose fish shall die, and the river it self
shall send forth a stink, where the light of Gods truth and wisdom is and does
appear, Exodus 7.18. Yet he proceeds and says [that our arguments have been so
fully answered and confuted (but we know not by whom) that were not men past
shame (as himself is in denying his own Mother, sister, and wife, when they
write unto him) set on work of hell (to wit, to stir up men to purge away all
sin by seeking and setting up thereagainst the kingdom of Christ,) and engaged
for wages to Rome, (but does the Pope then hire men to cry down sin, and preach
up Christ's kingdom?) they would forbear to disturb the peace of Gods Church.]
But who are Gods Church? are they not such as are sanctified in Christ Jesus,
called to be Saints? 1 Cor. 1.2, 3. and what is the peace of his Church? is it
not to have the enmity slain and the partition wall of sin between us and God,
and between each other, broken down by Christ? Ephe. 2.13, 14, 15. Do we then
disturb or interrupt this peace by our doctrine? yea we further it all that we
can; it is he and those which hold forth his doctrine who with the false
Prophets make the breach between God and man wider, instead of hedging up the
gap, Eze. 13.4, 5. if we disturb the peace of any Church it must be that which
calls her self Christ's Church, but in this and the like doctrine differs not
far from the Synagogue of Satan, as will be more evident hereafter. But page
48. he tells us for a farewell to this point or position [That he and his party
doubt not but maugre the malice of men and devils (whom he has often in his
mouth) truth shall hereby be made more manifest, and shall prevail, and that
the folly of those that resist the truth shall be made manifest to all men. The
Lord grant that we may obey the Apostles commands, from such turn away; and the
Lord in mercy strengthen our faith in the belief of that promise, 2 Timothy 3.9.
They shall proceed no further] Unto all which in Paul's sense we say Amen,
knowing him to come as nigh to those deceivers of whom Paul speaks as Joannes
does to Jannes. And then he passes on to his second position, which he hopes
to clear as the former; and so he may quickly do, even as smoke clears the
eyesight. The second position is, [That no man can by grace in this life
perform such perfect obedience to the Law of God as not to offend against the
same; or to be thereby justified otherwise then in and by Christ of grace
given. Which mixed position he resolves into three branches, or single
positions, as we told you at the beginning: First, that no man can perform such
perfect obedience to the Law of God as not to offend against the same: which
was our entire second position agreed upon at the first. Secondly, that no man
can be justified by the works of the Law, or by his obedience thereunto. And
thirdly, that we are only justified by the righteousness of Christ. And for
the better understanding of the point, says he, which points, by his own
distribution, are three, we must know that grace (he means the word Grace) is
an equivocal word, and that it is taken two ways in the Scripture, (he might
have said ten ways at the least) first, pro gratia gratis data, the free gift
of God infused into our hearts by the Holy Ghost.] But so are not only the
common gifts which the Schoolmen call gratia gratis data, but the grace of
sanctification, which they call gratia gratum faciens: which of those then does
he mean here? doubtless that grace of regeneration, contrary to the sense and
distinction of the Schools. Then secondly, says he, [grace is taken pro gratia
gratum faciente, for the free favor of God whereby he makes us acceptable to
himself; and in this last sense, says he, we say that we are justified by
grace, that is, by the free favor of God whereby he imputes not our sins, but
he accounts us just by imputing Christ's justice to us] By which you may take a
view what a learned Schoolman he is for his age, who says, that he is sixty
five years old, or somewhat ancienter than his own Mother, if we mistake not
the year of her age. Now as grace is taken by him in the first sense, for we
say not that the Law can be perfectly fulfilled but by the grace of
sanctification, I say, says he, that no man by grace in this life can perform
such perfect obedience to the Law of God as not to offend against the same.
Page 48. and 49. he says [that God never gave (what not to Christ himself?)
nor ever will give such grace to any, (what not in the world to come?) to
fulfill the righteousness of the Law in their own persons, and so thereby to
be found justified or righteous by the same.] You see how far the Vindicator
interests himself in the Counsel of God, as to know that he will never so
justify any man; and this knowledge he must have by private revelation, for it
is contrary to Gods revealed will and practice, Tit. 1.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 1 Cor.
6.11. 1 Pet. 1.1, 2, 3. for, says he, [it stands not with the glory of Christ
that any such grace should be given from above (behold a bold piece of
blasphemy) and the reason, says he, may be this, if by our infirmities the
strength of Christ be made perfect (as doubtless it is in the renewing of men's
souls, and the fulfilling of the Law thereby) it must needs follow that by our
strength the virtue of Christ's cross is abated, 2 Cor. 12.9. Thus he.] But we
say, he which has learned his Christ-cross may easily perceive that he
understands not his A. B. C. in Divinity; for the strength whereby the Saints
do or may fulfill the Law of God is not their own humane strength, but the power
and virtue of Christ, which derogates nothing from his cross or sufferings. But
he backs his former saying with another Scripture which he understands as
little, to wit, 2 Cor. 5.21. whereas the Apostle says that God has made
Christ to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him: where, says he, the Apostle does not say
actively, that we should make or work out our own righteousness, but
passively, that we should be made so ex indebita misericordia, of Gods free
mercy, the righteousness of God, and that not by our selves, but by another,
Jesus Christ blessed for evermore.] But what if he and all his adherents be
herein grossly mistaken, and shamefully deluded by Satan's imposing a false gloss
and understanding upon them? if the main foundation upon which they build the
hope of their salvation be sandy or rotten, what will become of the whole
building erected and settled upon such a basis? Take notice then that the
Apostles words which he here takes passively must be actively understood also,
and that we must get our selves to be made the righteousness of God in Christ
by deriving and putting on his righteousness in the way of regeneration and
renewing, and strengthening grace to fulfill every commandment of God by his
help and Spirit; to this effect the Apostle John speaks John 1.17. For the Law
came by Moses, but grace and truth (to fufill it) came by Jesus Christ. John
15.5. I am the vine, and ye are the branches, he that abides in me and I in
him the same brings forth much fruit, but without me ye can do nothing. Romans
5.17. How much more they which receive abundance of grace and of the gift of
righteousness shall reign in life by one man Jesus Christ? verse. 19. so by the
obedience (Christ's obedience in us) of one shall many be made righteous. Romans
8.3, 4. But what the Law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh,
God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned
sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us
(not outwardly for us) who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit; for
Christ is the end of the Law to every one that believes. Romans 10.4. Romans 14.7,
8, 9. For none of us lives unto himself, and no man dies unto himself; for
whether we live we live unto the Lord, or whether we die we die unto the Lord;
whether we live therefore or die we are the Lords: for to this end Christ both
died, and rose again and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and of
the living. 1 Cor. 15.10. But by the grace of God I am what I am, and his grace
which was in me was not in vain, but I labored more then they all, yet not I
but the grace of God in me. 1 Cor. 1.31. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who
is made unto us of God wisdom, (that is, in the understanding) righteousness,
(in the will) not only sanctification, (in both) but redemption, (or
glorification) also, 2 Cor. 5.15. And that he therefore died for all, that they
which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died
for them, and rose again. Gal. 3.24. For the Law was our schoolmaster to bring
us unto Christ, that we might be justified (or made righteous) by faith. But of
this more anon, in answer to the Vindicators next words: [And thus, says the
Vindicator, does the Apostle speak, Phil. 3.9. That he might be found in
Christ.] But let us call in that whole Text to give in evidence for us against
him, Phil. 3.5, 6. Paul tells, that concerning zeal he was zealous, as the
Vindicator is, unto persecution, persecuting the Church, touching the
righteousness of the Law (taught and required by the Jews, not only in
observance of their traditions and the ceremonial Law only, but of the moral
Law, so far as an unregenerate man could compass the same by his own strength)
he was blameless: then in the seventh, eighth, and ninth verses he tells us upon
what score he gave over that righteousness, and all his native privileges as
he was an outward Hebrew or Jew; But what things were gain to me those I
counted loss for Christ; yea doubtless I count all things but loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered
the loss of all things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ, and
be found in him, not having my own righteousness which is of the Law, but that
which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of (or from)
God by faith. Thirdly, at the tenth and eleventh verses by way of exegesis he
declares what that righteousness of Christ is which he so much longs for,
namely, first, the righteousness of grace, that I may know him and the power of
his reusurrection (but wherein or whereunto?) and the fellowship of his
sufferings (to suffer out all temptations, or to die unto sin in a suffering
way is the only way of overcoming all sin, which because the world knows not
they deny the possibility of the work) being made conformable to his death,
verse. 10. and then the righteousness of glory in the 11 verse, if by any means
I might attain unto the resurrection of the dead, both partly here in this life
in the similitude of Christ's resurrection, wherein Christ rises in them in
great power and glory, and hereafter in a more transcendent estate when they
obtain a glorified body, which the Apostle looked for Phil. 3.21. Therefore the
Vindicators conclusion hence is a non sequitur, to wit, that no man can by
grace in this life perform such perfect obedience to the Law of God as not to
offend against the same. But in page 49 and page 50 he comes with great variety
of words, and little truth, to show how the Law may be said to be possible or
impossible unto us; and as to the first he says [it is possible in a twofold
sense; first, in regard of outward order and discipline.] But this is rather
one use and effect of the Law to set up and keep such order, then properly its
possibility. Secondly he says [it is so by the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, by the benefits of justification and regeneration; which
benefits, he says, be obtained by faith.] But we have showed already that
justification and sanctification are not two, but one benefit, wherein the
righteousness of Christ, that is of grace, is freely imputed and given to the
believer that seeks it aright: [For such, says he, God looks upon in the face
of his Son (to wit, if the Son be present there with his righteousness) in whom
alone he is well pleased, Matthew. 3.17. And his fulfilling of the Law is their
fulfilling of it (to wit, if it came to pass within them, but not without them,
as he means) though not in the same manner, yet to the same and as good
effect as it had been done by themselves alone; which, says he, is thus done:
He for them (yea and both with them and in them; they by him, (to wit in a
cooperative way only;) he actually performed (so did they also) and they by
imputation; (yes, if you take that for his free gift and contribution of his
help) he by virtue and merit internal, they by gift and grace.] Thus all his
words are in some sort true, but not in his sense. And thirdly, says he [as
touching the beginning of inward and outward obedience in this life, for this
is the love of God that we keep his commandments, 1 John 5.3.] But here he is
twice mistaken; for first, that obedience is the same thing which we speak of,
and he should have done if he had understood himself in the foregoing member:
and secondly, that Text of St. John does not in that Scripture speak of an
inchoative obedience only, but of a complete observance of the Law, the which
he and his fellow-Apostles, with diverse other other brethren, had already
attained. [But the Law is impossible (says he) to the regenerate in respect of
God, that is, says he, as he is the perfect outward and inward obedience of
the Law.] Which is false: but how proves he it? Page 50. he first cites that of
Psalm. 143.2. which we have had so often before: Enter not into judgment with
thy servant O Lord: and there he alleges some of his former reasons; First,
they fulfill not perfectly, because they do many things against the Law.] But
are the Saints necessitated to do so unto the end of their lives? for in many
things we offend all, says James, c. 3.2. and I am sure he has oftener then
once offended, in wresting this Scripture against the Apostles and perfect
Saints, which James speaks to the younger believers. Then he adds out of Psalm.
19. [who knows the errors of his life?] Surely not till God reveals them,
which he does to his servants who desire to be humbled for them, and healed of
them, Phil. 3.15. And if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal
it unto you. Is. 30.21. And thine ear shall hear a voice behind thee, saying,
this is the way, walk in it, when ye turn to the right hand, or to the left.
[Secondly, those things which the regenerate do according to the Law are
imperfect (what in their youth and old age in Christ also?) for there are in
the regenerate, says he, as I have showed in my former position (but with much
ignorance and error) many sins remaining, as original sin, ignorances and
impurities (he measures all men by his own last) which they acknowledge and
bewail, Is. 64.41.] But that is the Prophets confession in the behalf of the
unregenerate; We have been as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness is as
filthy rags: which words (we fear) the Vindicator may use concerning his
present estate, for all his pretense to the work of regeneration; for his life
and doctrine bear witness unto it. Then he comes to a second distinction or
thesis, [the perfect obedience to Gods Law is fulfilled in us two ways; first,
by application of Christ's righteousness unto us (to wit, like one of his
outward emplasters;) he is our head, says he, (what of the evil doers?) and
we his members (what when we give our members as weapons of unrighteousness to
sin and corruption?) and are so rivited with him that we are not to be taken
asunder, but as one body with him.] Which is true only of those which are first
implanted into him by the similitude of his death, and after by the likeness
of his resurrection, as we said before: but the Vindicator and his party hold
neither of those estates attainable in this life. [By virtue of which
communion, says he, it comes to pass that that which is ours is his, (yes,
when we yield the whole desire and delight of our hearts over to him and his
service in all righteousness) and that which is his, is ours; (then we can
neither want understanding to know, nor power to keep his Law, for he has
both; so that in our head (that is, in our conceit and imagination) we have
fulfilled the Law, and satisfied Gods justice for our sins, says he, as I have
showed before.] But to satisfy Gods justice for our sins, is one thing, which
Christ alone has done for them that leave their sins; and to fulfill Gods Law
is another, which we also must do by and through Christ working in us and with
us, Romans 8.4. otherwise all these are mere dreams, and delusions of Satan to
make men secure, if not presumptions, under the relics, if not the whole body,
of sin. [Secondly, it will be fulfilled within us (whether we sleep or wake, as
he supposes) by and in our perfect sanctification, to wit, in another world,
though now our obedience is but in part: The Lord Jesus (says he) at the last
day when the last enemy, which is death, shall be destroyed, shall bring it in
us unto perfection] But what shall those that dye before want their
consummation in grace and obedience till the general resurrection? and how is
death the last enemy, when our sins by perfect sanctification shall not
be-destroyed and purged out till after death? How does this man contradict
himself, who said that in our personal death sin shall be perfectly purged
away, and grace consummate unto glory? [This is the end, says he, which Christ
has proposed unto himself, and whereof he cannot be frustrate: Ephesians. 5.26.
As he has begun it, so he shall finish it.] But what think you is that to us?
and how shall this be sought and attained? by faith, obedience, and prayer, as
our full renovation must be. [He shall then conform us to the Law, the
righteousness thereof shall then be fulfilled in us, says he.] But Paul
commands us, Romans 12.2. in the mean time not to conform our selves to this
world, but to be transformed by the renewing of our minds, that we may prove
what is that good, and perfect, and acceptable will of God. Then the Vindicator
goes on with his swelling words of vanity, promising liberty unto others, when
himself is the servant of corruption, as the false teachers were always wont to
do, 2 Pet. 2.18, 19. and says, that there shall not be left in our nature so
much as a sinful motion or desire, but he shall at the last present us pure and
without blame unto his Father, he shall make us perfectly answerable to the
holiness which the Law requires, and shall bring it to pass in his own good
time, which is in this life time say we, for the other life is a time of
harvest, and of reaping those things which we have done in the body, 2 Cor.
5.10. For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every
one may receive the things done in his body according to what he has done,
whether it be good or evil; and unto this Judgment we must go as soon as we
give up the Ghost; for it is appointed for all men once to die, and after
follows the judgment, Heb. 9.27. and therefore all these are vain words and
lying promises wherewith he would comfort himself and others without any
ground of truth and Text of Scripture. But he says pa. 51. [that the Law
should be fulfilled in this life is denied by some of our own fraternity; sin
is condemned (says Cajetan) but not extinguished] But if he abuse him not let
him henceforth own him for one of his fraternity; as he may Bellarmine about
original sin and many more Papists, both of the Jansenians and Anti Jansenians,
in other points which he holds forth with Romea good creatures, as he calls
them; yet we will not so impudently say that he has wages from the Pope,
unless we knew it. But here he falls upon the second proposition or member of
his second position telling us that the Apostle says positively that no man
shall be justified by the works of the Law, Gal. 2.26. and yet the same Apostle
says, Romans 2.13. for not the hearers of the Law are just before God, but the
doers of the Law shall be justified: and St. James backs him, saying, chap.
1.22. Be ye doers of the Law, and not hearers only, deceiving your own souls;
for none else shall be found righteous before God, as we have proved before:
And therefore he and we had need to have recourse to Christ for grace to
fulfill it in us, Romans 8.7. for which purpose that Text which he next
alleges, but in a false sense, and to a deceitful purpose, must be both a
direction and support unto us in this case, Romans 10.4. Christ is the end of the
Law for righteousness to all that believe: nor does that of Galat. 2.21.
dissent therefrom, or any way thwart the same: we do not frustrate the grace of
God, for if righteousness be by the Law, and our own weak and humane obedience
performed thereunto without the assisting and renewing grace of Christ, then
Christ died in vain both as to meriting the pardon of our guilt, as also to
example, and motive also: but we say there is no way for the fallen and corrupt
man to enter into life but through conformity to Christ's death in the burial of
all known iniquity (which yet the Vindicator holds to be for attainment
impossible.) Romans 6.8. 2 Timothy 2.11, 12. 1 Pet. 4.1, 2, 3. and yet it remains
inviolate which he cites out of Gal. 3.11. That no man is justified by the Law
(or our own unregenerate works) before God: but the just shall live by faith,
to wit, first, the life of grace, and then the life of glory; also that 18
verse stands entire; If the inheritance by the Law (and our own obedience
thereunto without the assistance of grace) it is no more of promise; but God
gave it to Abraham by promise. But it is false which the Vindicator subjoyns;
[It is faith that answers the promise (to wit, by closing with it, and deriving
from Christ by way of regeneration the things promised;) but obedience (says
he) holds no proportion with it.] Yes, the obedience of faith must do it, or
else actum est de animabus in some measure, Matthew. 7.21. Rev. 22.14, 18, 19.
But here he first cites [ Romans 8.3. But that which was impossible to the Law
insomuch as it was made weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the
similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh: and
afterward he gives his connection and false gloss upon the Text, saying, the
Apostle having in the first verse set down a proposition of comfort to those
that are in Christ, he confirmed it in the second, where also he shows us in
his own person who they are to whom there is no condemnation in Christ, namely
to such whom the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has freed from the
Law of sin and death; and no other are absolutely and actually freed from that
condemnation but they: though others that are still in the work have a
conditional promise of that freedom. Verse. 13. but if ye mortify the deeds of
the body by the Spirit ye shall live. But the Vindicator says [that the
Apostle here shows us how Christ has freed us from the condemning power of
sin.] How is that? not by his death alone, as he would have it, but by the Law
of the Spirit of life, in the first place, subduing (unto those that are dying
with him) the Law of sin and death. [But how is that done? says the
Vindicator, that is, says he, Christ taking upon him our nature, and therewith
the burden of our sins, has condemned sin in his blessed body, and so
disanulled it that it has no power to condemn.] This is false as he
understands it, for sin has a condemning power so long as it remains
unmortified in us, as the Apostle witnesses Romans 6.23. and 7.24. and chap.
8.13. as we proved before: Christ has purchased the pardon of sin by his
death, and has it in his own hand to dispose of, but bestows it upon none save
so far as sin is bewailed and left. There is then another body of Christ
which must take away the condemning power of sin, and that is the body and
flesh of his like sufferance and grace; and that in order to that purchased
pardon of which the bread broken in the supper of the Lord is a type as well as
of the flesh of Christ's word, Jer. 15.16. [And this benefit, says the
Vindicator, does the Apostle amplify, showing that by no other means we could
obtain it.] Yet we have showed you but even now another means which must go
before the pardon of sin: [for as, says he, there is but one way without
Christ for men to come to life, namely the observance of the Law (which way is
still retained also in Christ, Matthew. 19.17. Rev. 22.14. he lets us see, says
the Vindicator, that it was impossible for the Law, (to wit now that we are
fallen) to save us; and this impossibility proceeds not from any impotency in
the Law, but from our selves, as the Vindicator truly sets it forth, and that
in a threefold respect: for first, it craves of us that which we cannot
perform, even an absolute obedience unto all the commandments, and that under
pain of death.] But whereas the Vindicator says page 53. [that that obedience
may most justly now be required of us, because that by creation (he means in
our first parents) we received an holy nature, and ability from God to keep
this Law.] This is a false ground, as we have proved before: yet here in words
he expressly contradicts his former doctrine, saying, [that by reason of the
depravation of our nature drawn on by our selves (which is as much as we affirm
in that kind) it is impossible that we of our selves can keep or perform the
Law. Secondly, because the Law could not give us that whereof we stood in need,
to wit, a full discharge for our infinite debt of guilt contracted by
transgression; for says he, it promises no pardon, but binds us fast to the
curse: and secondly, supernatural grace to reform deformed nature: and thirdly,
says he, (but this last coincident with the former) though it shows us the way
of life, yet it ministers no grace to walk therein; nor does his Gospel
minister sufficient grace for that purpose. But to make us some amends he
comforts us with lies, saying, [but all that which the Law, could not do, Jesus
Christ by whom comes grace and life, has done unto us.] But has Christ
already performed for us and in us perfect obedience to the Law, and to that
end fully reformed and renewed our deformed natures? [These two, says he,
cannot be done till we be perfected in glory.] Then he concludes for his second
position, or the first part of it rather, but out of his false premises,
[therefore there is no life to be found in the observance of the Law.] Unto
which we have often replied upon undeniable grounds, that there is no life to
be found but in the observation or Gods Law through Christ Jesus. Again, he
ress us [that the Apostle in another place calls the Law the ministry of death
and condemnation, because it instantly binds men under death for every
transgression of her commandments.] It is true, the work of the Law by the
help of the word does give such a condemnatory sentence: but elsewhere the Law
is called the perfect Law of liberty, as James 1.25. yea and our life also,
Deuteronomy. 32.46, 47. ye shall command your children to o^serve to do all the words
of this Law, for it is not a vain thing for you, for it is your life, to wit,
when performed by the grace of Christ: But mark his inference from hence; [so
that he which has eyes to see what an universal rebellion of nature there is
in man to Gods holy Law, yea what imperfections and discordance with the Law
are still remaining in them who are renewed by grace (to wit, after John
Tendring's model) may easily see the blind presumption of those who seek life
in the ministry of death.] But we know none that do so more frequently then
such loose Gospellers as he, who turn the grace of God into lasciviousness: And
sure we are that the Jews, who seek life in the observation of Gods Law, for
the most part are more obedient to God, and consequently nearer to Gods
kingdom, though yet they own not Jesus of Nazareth to be the promised Christ,
then any such libertines as he is, who own Christ in words, but in life and
deeds deny him; whose sentence he may find recorded before hand by way of
premonition, Matthew. 7.21, 22, 23. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my Father
which is in heaven: Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy name? and then will I profess unto them, I never knew them,
depart from me ye workers of iniquity. The Jews are called natural branches,
because they avoid known sins to the uttermost of their power, and follow after
righteousness with all their strength: but such as take liberty to the
contrary, are still branches of the wild olive, Romans 11. yea these last, though
they have Christ often in their mouths, are further from the love of Christ,
who has no communion with Belial, 2 Cor. 6.15. then the former; and it is the
wicked lives of those that call themselves the Disciples and followers of Jesus
that has kept both Jews and Turks, and many others, from embracing the holy
way of true Christianity. [Yet, says he, so universal is this error of
seeking life and salvation by their own deeds, that it has overrun the whole
posterity of Adam, nature teaching all men who are not illuminated by Christ to
stand to the covenant of works.] But those who are rightly illuminated by
Christ, Grace teaches to seek salvation in the works and observation of the
Law, yet not out of their own strength and endeavors alone, but by the grace
and help of Christ;] which grace John Tendrings vindication curtaileth. [But
the supernatural doctrine, says he, of the Evangelist, page 53. teaches us to
transcend nature, to go out of our selves, and to seek salvation in the Lord
Jesus:] All this is true if rightly understood; but so is not that which
follows; and so to use the Law not that we seek life by fulfilling it (which
here is impossible) but as a Schoolmaster to lead us unto Christ, in whom we
have remission of our sins (so that which is to be had in the last place he
puts it in the first) sanctification of our nature, acceptance of our imperfect
obedience (what always, when it should for times and means afforded be made
perfect?) benefits which the Law could never afford us. Thus, says he, ye see
it is impossible in our own persons (but what if Christ be brought in hither to
purge us and renew us fully?) to fulfill the Law of God, no such grace, says
he, being given from above.] Oh the bold blasphemy of man against the renor of
the old and new Testament! Deuteronomy. 26.18, 19. and 30.6. Jerem. 31.32, 33. Romans
8.4. and 10.4. [Or if we could (says he) yet it is not possible for the Law to
save us: [but he confesses that it is not through any defect or imperfection
in the Law, for the Law is just, and holy, and good, Romans 7.12. but in regard
of the corruption of nature, which Christ came purposely to abolish, 1 John 3.8.
yea I say, quoth he, that although the Law be good, yet it is not good to that
end, neither is it ordained of God for that end. (Yes at first it was, and
still is in force) yet he confesses that the Law was given for a double end;
first in common to all men, namely to discover sin, Romans 3.10. and the wrath of
God due to us for sin, and to restrain all men by its rule and discipline from
sin, and to retain them in a civil course of morality for the good of humane
society. And secondly, in special; first, to the reprobate, to make them
without excuse, because it teaches them what shall be done, or left undone.]
But all have not the outward Law, it is therefore the inward Law that does
this, and especially because there is grace also afforded likewise to help us
in the doing of the good required, and the resisting of the evil forbidden.
Secondly he says page 54. [in respect of the elect, to incite us by the sight
of our sins to seek out a Savior; as he that informs us of some dangerous
disease does tacitly advise us to seek out some expert physician, (which is not
John Tendering;) but the Law was never intended that it should justify us, or
of it self bring us to eternal life.] Yes, it was so at the first. But he
brings diverse arguments to prove that which we deny not (as he is very profuse
and prodigal in his proof of such things;) For he first says [that eternal
life had been promised to the keepers of the Law: then the promise had been
vain.] So it had without grace in Christ. Secondly, if righteousness were by
the Law then Christ had dyed in vain, because it were superfluous for him to
dye for us, if we could attain it by the works of the Law; and therefore it is
apparent that by the works of the Law no flesh living can be justified.
Thirdly, for hypocritical Gospellers, such as seem Saints in ostentation, that
they may play the devil without suspicion (as John Tendering did till he went
away) who say they have faith, but show forth no works which are not veiled
with hypocrisy, and which are not done or intended to wrong ends; for such,
says he, let Isaiah tell you how acceptable their works be to God, and whether
they be like to justify them, Isai. 1.16, 17. For the Lord complains that he
is weary of them, and that his soul hates them, and bids them, bring no more
such sacrifices to him.] But we demand of him whether those men were
Gospellers, or pretended Professors? whether the works which the Lord there
forbids were Ceremonial or Morals: For, he forbids not the works of the Moral
Law. Fourthly, he says, [that for true Christians that are born not of blood,
nor of the will of the flesh, but of God, if any works could justify, it must
needs be their works which are wrought in and through them by the spirit of
God; and yet we say (quoth he) that the best works of the best regenerate men
cannot justify them before God: And thus we prove it; (how does he that?)
First, because all the graces that we receive in this life are given to us but
in part, page 55. (sure they are wholly and freely given,) as we showed in the
proof of the other positions, and so they are imperfect grace.] But see how he
contradicts himself, and lies against the Holy Ghost in his next words, which
are these, [not that the Spirit of Gods works imperfectly, but that he means
not to enrich us with any grace here while we are conversant with sinful men in
this vale of misery, but only so far forth as he sees it fit to bring us unto
the kingdom of perfection, where that which is in part shall be done away. 1
Cor. 13.10.] But what if Paul looked for that here, saying, when that which is
perfect is come then that which is in part (or but a piece-work) shall be
abolished and swallowed up, verse 11. yea, what if Paul all that time enjoyed
that which is so perfect? for he says verse the 11. When I was a child I spoke
as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child; but when I became a
man I put away childish things. And if so, then the Vindicators conclusion will
stand against us like the walls of Jericho, which fell flat to the ground,
which follows in these words; And therefore our inherent justice being but as
our knowledge is, imperfect, and therefore it is impossible that it should
perfectly justify us before God.] But we have overthrown that supposition of
his before. Secondly he says [that though our good works are perfect in
respect of the Spirit of God which effects them, yet they are tainted when
they pass through us, who are so subject to sin as waters running through a
dirty channel; and therefore cannot justify us before God, in whose presence
every polluted thing stands condemned: whence the Prophet says, Is. 64.6. All
our righteousness is as a menstruous cloth.] But neither are all Saints subject
to sin all their life long, nor can that which proceeds from Gods Spirit be
tainted by us, nor is that the righteousness of Saints, but of sinners and
unregenerate men which is so menstruous, as is said before. Howbeit he brings
in Gregorie's saying, Moral. lib. 21. cap. 15. and lib. 3. cap. 7. All man's
righteousness should be unrighteousness if God should strictly judge it: and
then Augustine's saying, Woe to the most laudable and best life of men.] Unto
which we first oppose these sayings of the Apostle, 1 John 2.29. If ye know
that he is righteous, ye know that every one that does righteousness is born of
him. chap. 3.7. Little children, let no man deceive you, he that does
righteousness is righteous even as he is righteous. chap. 4.17. Herein is our
love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment: and then
those of the Psalmist, Psalm. 11.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and 119.1, 2. and 128.1, 2. unto
which we could add many more. Howbeit he goes on in the same lying strain,
saying, [if God laying aside his mercy should discuss our lives, or
righteousness, in the strictness of his justice, it would be so, for God is a
God of purer eyes, who charged his angels with folly.] Indeed Eliphaz, one of
Jobs backfriends, and of John Tendring's gainsaying spirit, says so, but
falsely, Job 4.17, 18. for the Lord never charged any but the fallen Angels with
folly so. But he tells us further, if you will believe him, [that the best of
men when he lives on earth is both a Saint and sinner; a Saint by reason of
grace wrought in him, and a sinner by his own natural corruption, which in some
measure tainteth every grace of God; and therefore the best of these who being
compared with their fellows might seem just indeed, yet looking to the
strictness of Gods justice they disclaimed all their own righteousness.] What
that of grace and regeneration also? But who are those Saints? St. Eliphaz, a
lying and contentious zelot, with whom God is highly displeased, Job 42.7. But
he brings in Job himself saying [ chap. 9.2, 3. But how should man be just with
God? if he will contend with him he cannot answer him to one of a thousand: and
David, Psalm. 130. and 143. 2. of which we said before that all this is true of
man in his corrupt estate, and for a time afterward, but not of the Saints
best estate and growth upon earth. For whereas he says page 56. that [ Paul
affirms, 1 Cor. 4.4. that he knew nothing by himself:] it is true. But
whereas the Apostle adds, that he was not thereby justified, he renders a
false reason of that saying of the Apostle, and contradicts himself also,
saying [though he served God most faithfully in the inner man, yet he saw
another law in his members warring against the law of his mind; and hence he
cried out, O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of
death?] What did he feel? surely a law of sin; and felt such a body of death
continually, and yet knew nothing by himself? Good Hyperbolick bring your ends
nearer together, as the servant said to his lying mother. Thirdly, says he,
[that although it were granted that some works of the Saints were perfectly
good, yet any one sin blotteth out the remembrance of our former righteousness,
Ezekiel. 18.24.] But that Text speaks of a final Apostasy from righteousness, not
of one actual slip, or fall, as all men confess; otherwise David, Peter, and
all the Saints of God during their time of actual falls had lost all their
righteousness which they had wrought before by every such by-step or slip. Unto
which he adds two sayings of the Apostle James, which he understands as little
as the former: The first is chap. 2.10. [For whosoever shall keep the whole
law, and yet shall offend in one point, is guilty of all.] That is, of
violating the equity of the law, and contemning the Authority of the lawgiver,
which binds to the obedience of all the commands as well as to any one; yet is
not this guilt to be understood of every breach of the law through ignorance or
weakness, but of witting and presumptuous sins. The other place, chap. 3.2. in
many things we offend all, of which we have spoken before; and therefore (says
he) are we taught every day to beg the forgiveness of our trespasses.] Unto
which we have said likewise, that although we sin not daily, we may daily pray
so for our selves and others, to have our sins pardoned, which have been many
and great. His fourth argument against justification by works (which in the
Apostles sense we renounce) is that, [ Romans 3.28. We conclude that a man is
justified by faith without the works of the law: unto which he adds Gal. 5.3,
4. That if ye seek to be saved (or justified) by the works of the law, then are
ye debtors to fulfill the whole law, and so Christ should profit us nothing,
who is given for that end. But he goes about to prove that here Paul excludes
not only ceremonial works, and works before grace, but all works whatsoever:
(how does he that?) for, says he, Paul writes not these things to unbelieving
Jews, but to the Galatians, who were believing Christians.] But by his leave
those of the Jewish faith, who looked to be saved by their own works without
the grace of Christ, were crept in among them, and had almost withdrawn them
from the faith in Christ, as appears chap. 1.6. I marvel that ye are so soon
turned from him that called you to the grace of God unto another Gospel: See
chap. 3.12. and 4.19, 20. and 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. so this argument is false.
Fifthly he says, [that no work of man can be good before his person be
justified before God; for without faith it is impossible to please God; But a
man may have faith to please God before a justifying faith; the first is in God
the Father, the second is in God the Son: see Heb. 11.6. But without faith it
is impossible to please God, for he that comes to God must believe that God is,
and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Abel, (says he,)
was first accepted, and then his offering.] But that divinity of his agrees
not with Gods sermon to Cain, if thou do well shall thou not be accepted? and
if thou do evil sin lies at the door, Genesis 4.7. Nor with that which Solomon
speaks, Prove. 18.16. A man's gift makes room for him; which is true of gifts
brought unto God as well as unto men, especially if it proceed out of a good
willing spirit. But page 57. he comes to answer some objections, which we
present not, because we oppose not his doctrine in this parergical discourse.
The first is that, to what purpose are good works, if we can neither be
justified, nor merit by them? he answers [That as gold is good, yet not to
assuage hunger, (yet his confiding friends gold and silver made him good
cheer.) and the same has admirable effects, yet not to make the blind man see;
so good works have many uses both necessary and profitable, yet not to justify
us before God, or to merit by them; for when we have done all we can, yea all
that is commanded, we are unprofitable servants, Luke 17.10. (to which
Scripture we have spoken before.) But here he brings in some objections
against his own doctrine of the impossibility of keeping the law; as first, [If
God gives us commandments which we cannot perform, it is in vain to exhort
thereunto, viz. to obey the same. Secondly, his promises of happiness, and
means for keeping them, were but mockeries; as if I should promise a child a
thousand pounds to carry away a Millstone, which he is not able to wag. Thirdly,
his punishments for the neglect and transgression of them should be unjust; for
if laws be not made and proportioned to our power of performance, the lawgiver
may as well be termed a tyrant, as the laws themselves unjust. But none of this
can stand with the wisdom and justice of God, viz. to command beyond our
power or possibility.] Unto which objections he makes answer after his wonted
manner with words of ignorance, error and falsehood: [first, says he, God does
require of us to keep and fulfill his law, to teach us what we could have done
in Adam, and what we owe to God.] But in the first Adam or Protoplast we could
do just nothing, for we had no being then, nor are we debtors to God upon that
score, though perhaps upon another score we are. Secondly, says he there and
page 58. [to show us that it is our own fault that we cannot now keep the Law.]
Which perhaps may be truly spoken, but not in his sense and way [because man
abusing his power and free liberty to do what he would, did lose both, and now
he must do what he would not, because Adam received that strength both for
himself and us.] He often says it, but he never yet proved it. [Thirdly, God
teaches us, says he, what we should ask, and of whom; for God does therefore
command us to do what we cannot perform, that seeing our own infirmities, and
being wearied under the Law of equity, we might sue unto the throne of grace
for pardoning mercy, and the gracious assistance of the holy Spirit, to enable
us in some measure (says he) (yea to the uttermost say we) to perform what he
so justly requires.] To which third reason of his we subscribe, as also to
that which he cites out of Augustine, saying, in the commandments we must know
what we ought to have, and in our punishments we must learn that we our selves
are the c^uses of our own wants: yea add hereunto, and of our own failings
likewise: and in prayer we must learn from whence we must fetch the supply of
our defects, (or rather before we go to prayer:) or, says he again, to answer
methodically (for all this while he has been no very orderly man) God was upon
Mount Sinai to deliver a Law (what de novo?) that was never given before, but
such as was formerly engraven on man's heart.] Thus far he speaks truly; but
what follows is not so true: [that the Law was now defaced and obliterated
through sin;] for we have proved already that though the righteousness of the
Law was obliterated, yet the knowledge of it was written in every man's heart
with indelible characters: [it was not now for God, says he, (no nor ever will
be) to bend the rule of righteousness to the crookedness of our affections,
that so he might make it answerable to our abilities (yes, through his promised
and premised covenant of grace in Christ) but rather to set down a straight
rule, not in favor of our sinful nature (which he hates) but to express our
whole duty, though it be impossible for us after we have lost our ability to
perform it] What is it so now impossible after that a new supply of grace and
assistance is vouchsafed if we seek it? [For, says he, he that has lent a
thousand pounds may without injury demand it of them, and when he knows that
thou have carelessly spent it, and as a Bankrupt art not able to pay a penny
(which no merciful man will rigorously do, unless it be to evidence his
prodigality and folly;) so God having given us power to obey his precepts, may
at any time justly call for the performance of the same, though he know that we
by our sins have disabled our selves so much as to think a good thought.] But
his thoughts herein are very evil; for we have proved before that God cannot in
justice, and much less in mercy, require of us that obedience for which we in
our persons never received, or could receive sufficient power to perform the
same: Ultra posse viri non vult Deus ulla requiri. Page 59. he propounds
another objection of his adversaries, to wit, that the regenerate have
sufficientia principia operationis, that is, sufficient means and causes of
well doing, his soul being enlightened, sanctified, and assisted by Gods spirit;
and therefore he may perform what God requires. And then he goes about to
answer it with mincing the truth, and extenuating Gods grace, saying [a
regenerate man is enabled to do good, but not perfectly, his undestanding
being still obscured, his will distempered, and his power of doing good hindered
by many lustful temptations: and therefore these principles of operation being
imperfect, our actions which proceed from thence must needs be imperfect
likewise: which he proves with his old mistaken Scriptures, [ Who can tell,
says David, how often he offends? cleanse thou me from all my secret sins:
ye see (says he) Saints have their secret sins (and he himself wants not his
open and manifest enormities;) I may, quoth he, have many sins, and fail in
many things which no man knows of (we doubt it not) nor yet my self, which yet
are known to God; we cannot judge men's hearts: (Why then does he judge ours for
hypocrisy, and carrying on new pretended lights in a dark lanthorn?) for we
know not our own, it is Gods prerogative to search and try men's reins, Jerem.
17.9. 1 John 3.20. and it is our duty with Nehemiah to pray, chap. 13.12.
accept mine obedience, but pardon mine iniquity.] But the man of God does not
pray so there, as we have showed before, though he had his former sins also. A
chosen vessel was compelled to say he knew nothing by himself, yet was he not
thereby justified; of which before. Thus ye see that his book is stuffed full
of tautologies. [And this, says [he, may suffice for the clearing of the first
branch of the second position.] Indeed it is pretty well cleared from
probability of truth or piety. But for further confirmation [he dares appeal to
any man's conscience (that is no more careful then he is to keep it without
offense to God and men) how upon the consideration of Gods strict judgment,
and his own manifold infirmities, he dare justify himself in any one act, not
against God, but before God] But Abimeleck could do it, as himself confessed
before: and Paul could do it for his habitual acts, as we showed before, 2 Cor.
1.12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience that in
simplicity and godly sincerity, not in fleshly wisdom, (and much less
fleshly lusts) but by the grace of God we have had our conversation in the
world. [And I doubt not, says he, page 60. but the proudest heart would soon
tremble, and the boldest face (save his own) would blush and be ashamed, to
have his best works, yea his prayer, scanned by the strictness of Gods Law and
justice.] But Job could say chap. 6.17. My face is foul with weeping, and on my
eyelids is the shadow of death, not for any injustice in mine hands; also my
prayer is pure. Has not the Lord promised, Zephan. 3.9. Then will I turn to
the people a pure language, that they may call upon the Lord, to fear him with
one shoulder or consent: and Malach. 1.11. For from the rising of the Sun unto
the going down of the same my name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in
every place incense shall be offered up unto me with a pure offering. But he
goes on yet more confidently, saying,] And of the adversaries to this truth I
require (qua demum authoritate?) this one thing, that they will either produce
a man, and prove it, that has ever (what does he mean from his youth up,
without any corruption?) performed in his own person such perfect obedience to
the Law of God as not to offend against the same.] Unto which we have answered,
that if ever we knew any such we should not be very forward to show them to
such unbelieving and envious spirits as he is of: and we have produced many
such already; as Caleb, Numb. 4.24. Josh. 14.6. John and his fellow-Apostles, 1 John 17.7. with many thousands more. [Or else, says he, let them acknowledge
their error with shame, and forbear opposing the truth (as Jannes and Jambres
did Moses) and disturbing the peace of Gods Church. [He might have said the
Devils chapel, if all the Ministers of Gods Church were like himself: But as
he is no living member of a true Church, which is a congregation of Saints, so
neither does our doctrine disturb, but further the peace of the true Church of
God: Act. 9.32. Then had the Churches rest throughout all Judea and Galatia,
and were edified, and walking in the fear of God, and in the comfort of the
Holy Ghost, were multiplied. To such Jorams, or high-flown spirits as he is,
Iehu may answer, what peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Jezebel
and her witchcrafts are so many? 2 Kings 9.21. for there is no peace to the
wicked, says my God, Isai. 5.21. [But he fears first by our malicious
wickedness (in decrying sin, and opposing Satan's kingdom, to set up Christ's)
our sin may become unpardonable: yet he says that he shall pray for us, as he
does for himself (while he continues in wickedness) not that God would be
pleased to convince us of our errors, and humble us in the sense of our sins
and be merciful to our poor souls: (because we oppose his sinful positions) But
we pray that the Lord would vouchsafe him mercy in reality and truth so far as
to turn him from his enterprise, and then we are sure we shall be no longer
accounted innovators by him, nor his opposite doctrine be esteemed orthodox.

But now at length he comes to the second branch of his second position, which,
as he says, has these two parts to be considered [First, that no man can be
justified by the works of the Law. Secondly that we are only justified by the
righteousness of Christ.] Both which are true, and suit well with what we
speak, if rightly understood. And concerning the first, he says he has
cleared it before; (but he has obscured it rather by bringing the works of the
Spirit under the works of the law, as he will do it again by and by.) And here
he tells us [that the Apostle Paul reasons admirably and plainly to this point,
Romans 11.5, 6. saying, If salvation be of grace it is no more of works, for else
grace were no more grace; and if it be of works it is no more of grace, for
else works were no more works.] So that it is evident (say we) that the works
that are here recited are not works of grace, but works before, without, and
against grace: But salvation, says he, is by grace, for by grace are we saved
though faith, and that not of our selves, it is the gift of God; not of works,
lest any man should boast. Ephesians. 2. And our Savior tells us plainly, that when
we have done our best we are unprofitable servants.] And such a servant will he
be for the Church, and his doctrine also unto which he pretends. [And reason it
self, says he, drawn from the Scripture does sufficiently prove that we cannot
be justified by our works; for if any works justify us, (says he) they must
be done either before or after justification: but no works before our
justification can justify us, says he, page 61. because an evil tree cannot
bring forth good fruit; and these works not being done in faith must needs be
sin, for whatsoever is not of faith is sin; and without faith it is impossible
to please God, Heb. 11.5, 6.] Thus he goes about to maintain that which is true
in it self with false grounds, as we have showed before: [whereupon St. Paul
says (quoth he) that all men before they be engrafted into Christ (which as
yet he is not) are servants of sin, far from righteousness, and bring forth
no other fruits but such as deserve shame and death.] Which is all as false as
the other; for Cornelius was not as yet grafted into Christ when the Angel
commanded him to send for Peter, and yet he brought forth many good fruits,
Acts 10.1, 2. as we showed before. Secondly, says he [Reason it self tells us
that our works done after grace cannot be the cause of grace.] Yes, they may be
some cause or means to procure a subsequent grace, for how can that which
comes after be the cause of that which went before? for the cause must precede
the effect: and so Augustine tells us, that good works do not go before him that
is to be justified (which is not true in every behalf, (as we have showed) but
they do follow him that is already justified; and therefore they can be no more
the cause of justification, then good fruits are the cause of the goodness of a
tree: and that place of the Apostle (says he) which I cited before proves it,
Romans 3.20. by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified. But there are
good works which follow converting and sanctifying grace, which yet may precede
the great work of justification, and nevertheless are no works of the law,
against which Paul disputes in this controversy. For first (says he) Paul
tells us verse 9. that all, both Jews and Gentiles, are under sin, because all
are transgressors of the law (true;) and therefore all the world must be guilty
before God, and can no way be justified by pretending innocence and
righteousness in keeping the law: (true likewise.) Secondly, he shows the
reason why no flesh can be justified by the law, [because the law convinces of
sin; for by the law comes knowledge of sin.] But what he adds in the next
place is partly false, and wholly impertinent: [but the law, says he,
convinces them that are under grace (some of them it does, who therefore had
need to seek the justification which yet they want) of sin, and who have the
greatest measure of grace (this is ungraciously spoken) to be sinners, Phil.
3.9.] But that Text speaks of Paul's first conversion to Christ, not of his
last and best estate. [Therefore, says he, but by a non sequitur, they that do
the works of the law by the help of grace cannot be justified by the Law, (yes
in one sense they may because the law is with them, and not against them) Gal.
5.23. because the law shows them likewise to be sinners, (by which words he
contradicts himself) as well, though not as great as those are who endeavor to
keep the law without the help of grace (with which he is better acquainted then
with the other way of keeping it;) and therefore, says he, the Apostle
concludes thus, that we are justified by the righteousness of God without the
law, as ye may (in his sense) see Romans 3. from verse 20. But whereas he adds
his own subinference thereunto, saying, [therefore we are not justified by any
righteousness of the law, done either by the help of grace, or without the help
of grace] that is neither the Apostles doctrine, nor true in it self: and the
reason which he yields for his said assertion is devoid of reason, saying, [for
he that, obeys the law, howsoever he does it, by the help of grace, or by his
own strength, yet he has the same righteousness.] Which we say is false,
because those two differ as much as weakness and strength, as flesh and spirit,
and as that which is natural from that which is spiritual, yea as heaven and
earth from each other. Yet says he fondly [the righteousness of the Law,
because of the different manner of obtaining it, alters not the thing: But
the Apostle (says he) shows a great deal of difference between the
righteousness of the law and the righteousness of faith, (so he might as to
matter, manner, and measure) for Moses described (says he) the righteousness
of the Law, that the man which does those things (however he does them, by his
own strength, or some other help, if he does them) shall live by them.] But
this is a false gloss of his upon Moses; for so there shall be no difference
between the righteousness of the law required by Moses, and the deeds of the
foregoing Testament, and the righteousness of faith in the new Testament. Romans
10.5. But the righteousness of faith speaks in this wise, If thou shall
confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart that
God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved, verse. 6, 9. [And
therefore, says he, because the Apostle opposes doing of the law, and
believing in Christ, and not the doing of the law by our own strength, and the
doing of it by the help of grace, it is apparent that we can never be justified
by the works of the law, by what means soever we do them, whether by the
strength of nature, or by the law of grace.] But he neither understands this
Scripture, wherein the Apostle is the obscurer because he is concise; nor fits
or states the opposition here aright: For, first, no man can be saved or
justified by believing alone that God raised Christ from the dead, that is not
the Apostles doctrine or meaning; but he that will be saved must believe that
Christ likewise rose again for our justification, that is, for to cleanse us
from sin, and make us just. Romans 4.23, 24. Now it is not written, for his
(Abraham's) sake alone that it was imputed to him, but also us, to whom it
shall be imputed if we believe in him who raised Jesus our Lord from the dead,
who was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our justification by
faith to sanctification: and the opposition is clearly made by the Apostle
between the fulfilling of the Law by our own strength, and between the doing of
that work by the help of grace in Christ, or by faith in him, Romans 3.21, 22.
were it rightly understood; Romans 8.3, 4. and chap. 10.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. for as
Moses says, Deuteronomy. 30.14. concerning the knowledge of the law, that the word is
very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou may do it: so
speaks Paul here concerning Christ's spiritual word whereby we must be
sanctified to fulfill the Law, verse. 6, 7, 8. But the righteousness which is of
faith speaks on this wise; Say not in thine heart, who shall ascend into
heaven, that is, to ^ring down Christ from above? or who shall descend into the
deep, that is, to bring up Christ from the dead? But what says it? the word is
nigh thee, even in thy mouth and in thy heart: it is the word of faith which we
preach, to wit, an inward living word, Christ, to quicken us in all
righteousness, for the purging out of sin, and the fulfilling of the law: and
then it follows verse 9.11. that if thou shall confess with thy mouth (in way
of earnest prayer) the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart that God
has (for this end, even thy justification) raised him from the dead, thou
shall be saved, to wit, from all sins, spiritual enemies, and the wrath to
come. And this is the Apostles doctrine every where, Gal. 1.2, 3, 4, 5.
chapters Ephesians. 2.1, 10. so it is most evident out of Phil. 3.8, 9, 10. where
the Apostle having said, verse. 9. that I may be found in Christ, not having
mine own righteousness which is of the law, but the righteousness which is by
the faith of Christ, even the righteousness that is of God by faith; which he
at the tenth verse by way of explication sets forth what that is, thus, that I
may know him and the power of his resurrection (and for the overcoming of sin)
the fellowship of his suffering (to suffer our every temptation with patience
to the end) and so may be made conformable unto his death (the only way in
Christ unto life) if by any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the
dead, first, in the power of Christ's resurrection here, Romans 6.5. and then at
the last day. Thus both the Vindicators suppositions and conclusions do fall to
the ground or earth, and place from whence they came.

But Bellarmine (says he) in his first book de justificatione cap. 19. labors
to prove by three special arguments, that all works of the law are not excluded
from our justification.] (Which thing he might justly do, say we, if he had
understood the works of justification aright) [First, because faith is a work,
and that there is a law of faith as well as of works; and therefore if all
works were excluded from our justification, then faith it self must be
excluded, and so to be justified by faith were to be justified without faith.
Secondly, because the Apostles intent is Romans 3. that neither the Jews by the
observation of Moses his law, nor the Gentiles by their moral works, and so
neither Jews nor Gentiles, could be justified by any works that they could do
before they believed in Jesus Christ. Thirdly, because the Apostle shows Romans
4.4. that the works which he excludes from justification are those works to
which wages are due by debt, and not by grace; and those, says Bellarmine, are
all such works as are done by our own natural abilities without the assistance
of any supernatural grace. Unto which he or some other answers page 63. thus;
But unto all those I say, we confess faith to be a work, and it is the
commandment of God that we believe in Jesus Christ; but we deny that faith
justifies us as it a work is performed in obedience unto this command, but as
it is an instrument embracing (yea seeking) Jesus Christ aforesaid; it is not
the act of believing, but the thing holden (he should have said, first sought
and gotten, and possessed by believing) that is our righteousness.] True, if he
understood rightly what that is or should be. Secondly he says [that
Bellarmine is mistaken in the whole scope of the Apostle, and St. Paul does not
give us the least intimation of what he means, that we are not justified by
any works done by our natural strength: (The which is false, as we have fully
and truly proved as well as formerly;) but rather shows, that inasmuch as we
are all sinners against the Law, therefore by our obedience done to the Law,
however done by grace, or without grace, no man can be justified in Gods
sight.] But this, as we showed before, is contrary to many express Scriptures;
see Psalm 15.1. and 112. Isai. 33.13, 17. Ezekiel. 18.5, 9. he is just, he shall
surely live, says the Lord God. Mat. 12.37. For by thy words thou shall be
justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned. Romans 2.13. For not the
hearers of the Law are just, but the doers of the Law are justified. See Jam.
1.22. 1 John 3.7. Little children, let no man deceive you, he that does
righteousness is righteous as he is righteous, 1 John 4.17, 18. as before.
Thirdly he says to Romans 4.4. cited by Bellarmine [the Apostle intends no
such distinction of works as Bellarmine alleges, but he excludes all works,
as well those that are done by the help of grace, as those that are done
without grace, from the justification of Abraham; for those works of Abraham
are excluded wherein Abraham might glory before men, (true;) but these are the
works, says he, which he did by the help of grace.] Oh absurd! for who made
him to differ from other men? or what had he in that behalf which he had not
received? and why should he or any other boast before men as if he had not
received that grace? 1 Cor. 4.7.] for otherwise (says the Vindicator or his
friend for him,) if he (Abraham) were justified by the works done without the
help of grace, he might as well glory before God as men; which is not true in
every behalf, for he received his internal helps from God, and not from
himself, Psalm 100. It is he that made us, and not we our selves: But the
Apostle tells us, says he, that although by those works done by the help of
grace he might glory before men (where does he tell us so?) yet not before God,
and therefore he was not justified by those works in the sight of God] But as
the premises were false, so is the conclusion which he draws from thence;
for by every grace of God he was justified in some kind of actual
righteousness, and purged from the contrary sin, which is the only
justification which Paul pleads for in Jesus Christ necessary to life. Nor is
his next reason less absurd, where he says, [for if we could be justified
by any works howsoever done, by grace, or without grace, then the wages,
that is, eternal life is not counted of favor, but of debt] Is it not so when
without the rich grace of God the duties required unto eternal life cannot be
performed? [But (says he) when we cannot be justified by our own works
(nor are we so justified) but by believing in him that justifies the ungodly
(so that he makes them godly that were before ungodly) who is in Jesus Christ
(what are any ungodly that are in Christ? see 1 Cor. 6.11.) that we are then
justified by his righteousness, and saved by his merits; like the hungry
dreamer, Isai. 29.8. who dreameth that he eats, but when he awaketh his soul
is empty: Then faith, says the Apostle, and not any kind of works is imputed
to him for righteousness, Romans 4.5.] But here the new false Apostle John of
Burstou, corrupts and falsifieth the Text, for these words (and not any kind
of works) are not found there. See Rev. 22.18. what his reward is like to be;
for if any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him all the
plagues that are written in this book.] But Page 64. he says, I shall here
close this point with these conclusions: First, that no man that is a sinner
can be justified by his own obedience to the moral Law. Secondly, that no man
that has offended the Law can be justified by his own satisfaction for his
transgression] But who denies either of those? or to what purpose is all this,
unless, as we said before, to entertain his Reader with kickshaws? But
wanderers love extravagancies. As to the first of these, he says, [that by the
Law comes the knowledge of sin, Romans 3.20. that is, the Law accounts all
such to be sinners, and accounts them as transgressors, and therefore they
can never be pronounced guiltless by that Law which proves them guilty: but
every man is a transgressor of the Law (to wit before grace, and for some time
after) Romans 3.9. Gal. 2.1. Joh. 1.8, 11. and our consciences testify it to our
faces: Therefore can no man be justified by his own obedience to the Law.] But
what is this to the obedience of Christ in the Saints? by which alone, as we
have often said, they may be justified freely, and ought so to be. Secondly, he
says [that a sinner which has once offended can never by any action or
passion of his own make satisfaction to the justice of God for his
transgression] Yet can God freely remit thousands and millions of such
transgressions to the converting sinner: [and the Law, says he, being broken,
there is no way to be justified by the Law, but by making a plenary
satisfaction for the transgression: which no sinners satisfaction can do,
because a finite act can never be a sufficient value to satisfy the offense
that is done against an infinite goodness; as also, because all that we can do
(yea much more) is required of us now that assisting grace is tendered, as our
duty to the Law (or Lawgiver) and therefore it cannot be rendered as any
payment for the breach of the Law: Therefore, says he, to conclude this point,
or truth, we are not under the Law for the justification of our persons as Adam
was, nor for satisfaction of divine justice, as those that perish: but we are
under it as a document of obedience (what perfect or imperfect?) and a rule of
living] But not as we ought to do, by his doctrine.] It Is not, says he,
published from Sinai, but from Sion, (but to whom is it so?) as a Law of
liberty (what to take our sleep and swing in sin?) and as a new Law, not as a
Law of condemnation and bondage.] Yes, it is so published still to impenitent
and unbelieving men, 1 Timothy 1.9. knowing, this that the Law is not made for a
righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient. And yet he says Page 65.
[that the obedience is not removed (yes, by his doctrine a great part of it is)
but the disobedience thereof is both pardoned and cured.] But how? perfectly
pardoned, but inchoatively cured by his doctrine; for, says he, [the
observance thereof is necessary as a fruit of faith, (but mark how enormously
he speaks in the next words) but not, (says he) as a condition of life and
righteousness, yet necessary necessitate pracepti, as a thing commanded, the
transgression whereof is the incurring of sin; not necessitate medii, as a
strict undispensible means of salvation, the transgression whereof (yes, if it
be habitual or final) is a peremptory obligation to death.] But we have proved
before out of Mat. 5.18, 19. and Rev. 14.22. that this is required by Christ as
the way to life by the necessity of a medium, or means, as well as of a
precept, especially of those that have both space and means to attain unto it
in Christ [And thus (says he) of the former of the two last branches of the
second position, wherein I have clearly showed (as one would show a small and
remote object in a dark night) that as no man can be justified by obedience to
the Law, nor the works of the best Christians cannot justify them (what not in
Christ?) And now he comes to the last branch, that we are only justified by the
righteousness of Christ; (which being rightly understood we also maintain) [We
believe and maintain, says he, as the Scripture teaches us, (what is that?)
That we are acquitted and absolved from our sins, and so justified in the sight
of God, by and for (he should have said through) the righteousness of Jesus
Christ.] And so do we, but not in his way and sense: And though we have said
heretofore that justification and remission of sins are two different things,
yet we would be thus understood, that the pardon of sins in his sense, which is
to take away the guilt or obligation unto punishment, and leave the corruption
behind; and justification, that is, to make us just, holy and good, or
liberative justification whereby sin is purged out, upon which the pardon and
removing of the guilt follows through the mercy of God and the merits of
Christ's death: we say that these are diverse and dissentaneous things: But
otherwise, as (...) is in the new Testament frequently to be understood of the
dimission and purging out of sin by the Spirit, so both in the old and new
Testament, by prayer, remission, and forgiveness of sins, both these are
connectively and collectively to be understood; because where the Lord is
pleased to purge out sin; and heal men of it, he always pardons it, or takes
away the guilt; and never takes away the guilt but where the corruption and
fault are first put away. Hence it is that not to impute sin, as we said
before, is, first, to purge it by sanctification, and then to pardon i^; as
Psalm. 32.1, 2, 3. and Romans 4.6, 7. and where sin is so purged, and not imputed,
there the righteousness of grace for the renewing of the same is freely imputed
or given to the believing and obedient soul. But this premised, we return now
to consider what he says; who first brings that place Romans 5.18. As by one
offense (or of one the sin) guilt or judgment came upon all men to
condemnation, (to wit, all that offended or sinned in that one personal Adam of
theirs, as he said before) so by one righteousness, or the justification of
one, the free gift came upon all unto the justification of life, that is, of
glory; for there is a twofold justification, the one of grace, or the
foregoing righteousness, and the other of glory, or the evelasting
righteousness.] But wherein does this Text speak for him, or against us and our
doctrine? The second Scripture which he brings is 2 Cor. 5.21. For he has made
him to be sin for us (to wit, a sacrifice for sin, and a pattern, and motive
unto us, teaching us how we should in him root it out) that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him; first in grace, and then in glory, as we said
before.] Where the Apostles words make far more for us, and our sense and
doctrine, then they do for him; for there is not the least mention made in all
the Context, or any where else in all the Scriptures, that Christ's personal
obedience unto the law without us and for us should become or be made our
righteousness. The third Text of Scripture produced by him is that, Acts 13.38,
39. Be it therefore known unto you men and brethren, that through this man (or
Messiah) is published unto you dimission or remission of sins, and in him he
that believes that he is (or may be) justified (that is purged) from all
things from which ye could not be justified (or purged) by the law of Moses.]
Which Text makes so clearly for us, that by way of warning we will add Paul's
next words, Look to it, or take heed lest that come upon you which is spoken in
the Prophets, Behold ye despisers and wonder, and vanish (or come to nothing)
for behold I work a work (in the days of perfect sanctification) a work to
which ye will in no wise give credit, though one tell or show it unto you, Acts
13.40, 41. The words are cited out of Hab. 1.5, 6. and imply also an heavy
judgment to come by the Chaldeans, or the enemies figured thereby, which are
the Devils. His fourth Scripture by him quoted is 1 Cor. 6.11. And such were
some of you; but ye are washed, but now ye are sanctified, but now ye are
justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.] And as
other Scriptures made not at all for him, but much more for us; so this is
clearly also against him, showing that washing from the act and habit of former
sins, sanctification by Gods Spirit, and justification in in the name of
Christ, are one and the self-same thing, as we further proved out of Titus 3.4,
5, 6, 7. Rev. 22.11. and other clear places. But here he says [that some may
object and say, this righteousness is Christ's, and how can a man be justified
by the justice of another? Unto the which he answers with some truth and some
falsehood; that as sin is ours by propagation (which we have often showed to be
false) so righteousness is ours (if we attain unto it truly by Christ) by
imputation.] But his righteousness which he here intends is only such by
putation and imagination. [And as Adam, says he, derived sin to our
condemnation (which is one of his old Chimaera's) so Christ brought life by his
obedience to our justification: Thus if many be made sinners by the
disobedience of one man (which if rightly understood is undoubtedly true) then
how much more shall many be made righteous by the obedience of man, Jesus
Christ? Romans 5.19. especially since the nature of Christ, as he says, page 66.
is far more divine then the nature of Adam, and therefore is more powerful in
ability to work this effect to justify us, then Adams sin was to condemn us.
But as Adams sin without us, and our conformity thereunto, condemns us not, so
neither does Christ's obedience, which is ab extra, justify us; we speak of his
active obedience: and by his passive we have another benefit, the pardon of
sins upon our leaving of them: and 1 John 5.11, 12. says he, this is the
record that God has given us, to wit, eternal life; to whom was it given? to
John, and those in whom Christ was risen in the power of the eternal life, and
this life is in his Son, so that he which has the Son (in that manner) has
life, and he that has not the Son of God has not life as yet, that is, says
the Vindicator, he has the righteousness whereby he brings us to eternal
life.] But this is his gloss upon the Text, and a mere dream and delusion; and
this, says he, does the Apostle most excellently show unto us, when he says,
[ that God made Christ to be sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.20. which we even now cited.]
But he speaks no such thing as he aims at, or dreams of; for, says he, as our
sins were made the sins of Christ, not by altering or transplanting them
inhesively into his own person, but by assumption of them imputatively to make
satisfaction for them, as fully and truly as if they had been his own inherent
sins; even so the righteousness of Christ (but not his external obedience) is
as truly made ours by imputation (his inherent righteousness whereby he and we
obey God is so) as if we had perfectly fulfilled the law by our own personal
and actual operation.] Prove this by Scripture (Vindicator,) and you shall be
made a Doctor in Divinity, which you never was, nor will be. [And therefore
(says he) justification is a gracious and judicial act whereby he judges (he
should have said a judicious and moral, a physical or metaphysical act of God
whereby he judges) (first, makes righteous, and then judges them so) the
elect being in themselves liable to the accusation and condemnation of the law,
to be just and righteous by faith in Jesus Christ through the imputation of his
own justice, to the praise of his power, and the eternal salvation of their
souls.] Which description of justification is utterly false, and shows how
far he and those from whom he borrowed it are out of the way, and how
ignorant they are in fundamentals, even one of the main grounds of their
salvation; which description he notwithstanding goes about to explicate by the
causes, as follows; saying, [Now for the causes of justification, first, they
are especially the efficient; secondly, material; thirdly, the formal;
fourthly, final.] Why would he have any more then four causes of an effect? I
fear in this business he must content himself with fewer for the effecting and
producing of the justification at which he aims. [But each of these aforesaid,
says he, must be considered two ways; first actively, in respect of him that
justifies us: and secondly, passively, in respect of the man who is justified:
first, the principal cause of our justification actively considered, is God
freely purposing to send his Son to be made man, to work righteousness for
men.] But God justified men in the Old Testament by the Spirit of his Son, Isa.
50.8. and 5.3, 11. where he cites 1 Pet. 1.10. Gal. 4.4. Then, to wit, in the
fullness of time, God sending his Son made of a woman, made under the law; then
revealing his Son unto us by the preaching of the Gospel, and persuading us to
believe the same, and lay hold on the Son of God by the operation of the
blessed Spirit, and then accounting unto us the obedience of his Son for our
righteousness.] In all which he is gone out of Gods road, or way of
justification, and from the truth of the Gospel; for though God so sent his Son
made of a woman, and made under the law, yet it was not to justify us by
active obedience unto the law, as we have said: [And this he did, says he, to
show that he is the beginning, the middle, and the end of our justification:
and to prove this, the Lord himself says, Isa. 43.25. I, even I am he that
blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy
sins: and the Apostle plainly says Romans 8.33. (as he has it page 77.) It is
God that justifies: and the very Pharisees (that rejected Christ most
impiously) professed this most truly that none can forgive sins but God only:
And so says Gregory, It is meet that he should be the giver of grace that was
the author of nature. Greg. in Psalm. paeniten. pithily says, It is his office
to absolve the guilty by whose justice he is made guilty.] But who questions
any of all this? [Again, the impulsive cause that moved God to do all this for
man, we find (says he) to be twofold; first, internal; secondly, external:
the first is the mere grace and free mercy of God toward men, and this because
he would be merciful to man: Because we can ascribe no other cause of Gods
will, which is the cause of all things, to wit, in their first creation, but
only this, quia voluit, because he would; But in acts of providence,
especially in the punishment of sin, there may be an external cause found in
the creature; And therefore Saint Paul says he attributes our redemption to
the riches of his grace, Ephesians. 6.7. Romans 3.24. Titus 3.4, 5. where he says,
that after the kindness and love of God our Savior toward men appeared, not
by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he
saved us by the washing of regeneration and renewing of the holy Ghost, which
he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior. Whereby you see the
Apostle makes the kindness, love and mercy of God to be the efficient,
principal cause or motive that moved God to send Christ to be the means of our
salvation.] Nor is this denied at any hand; but if the Vindicator had taken in
one verse more of Titus 3. he might have easily seen that regeneration before
described, and justification, is all one work and thing; for it follows there,
that being justified by his grace (in the work aforesaid) we might be made
heirs according so the hope of eternal life. But he goes on thus; [And
Augustine Homil. de Not. and Gratia says, that it is the ineffable grace of
God that a man guilty of sin (yea, and say we, polluted with sin) should be
justified from fin: And especially against the Pelagian heresy, who magnified
nature, to villifie and almost nullify grace, he says, that the grace of God
whereby infants and men of years are saved is not procured by deserts, but
tendered freely without merits: and so Anselm in Romans 11. that because all men
are shut up under sin, the salvation of men comes not in or by the merits of
men, but in the morcy of God. The second impulsive cause is Christ (says he)
God and man, who purchased by his merits that we should be justified in the
sight of God.] Which thing has been justly questioned; for God might out of
his free mercy and grace justisie us without any such merits; and though the
death of Christ wants not its inestimable price and merits, yet we are not
justified in Paul's sense thereby, (and much less by his active obedience) but
only by his Spirit. But he gives us a reason for what he had said out of Isai.
53.5. [because the chastisement of our offenses was laid upon him, and that by
his stripes we might be healed.] But here we would ask the Vindicator and his
friends these questions; first, whether Isaiah speaks of a chastisement that
was past, or yet to come; for certain it is that Christ was a Lamb slain from
the beginning of the world Rev. 17.8. Secondly, if it was a preterit suffering,
whether it was not Christ's inward and voluntary death for us, and in us, when
we first became actual sinners? according to Romans 5.6. For when we were yet
without strength (according to the time) Christ died for the ungodly: and Gal.
3.1. Oh foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you that you should not obey the
truth, before whose eyes Christ has been evidently set forth crucified in you?
Jam. 5.6. Ye have condemned and killed the just one, and he does not resist
you. See Rev. 1.7. and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him;
even so, Amen. And if so, what peace was that which was procured for us by that
his suffering and death? was it not a time and space of repentance? for
otherwise we, as also our first parents had immediately been sent to hell.
Fourthly, what those stripes of Christ are by which we are healed? are they his
personal sufferings alone, inward, or outward upon the cross; or are they his
like sufferings when we suffer with him or for him, dying unto all sin? See
Romans 6.8. For if we be dead with him we believe that we shall live with him:
and chap. 8.13. and if children then heirs, heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with
Christ: if so be that we suffer with him that we may be also glorified with
him. See 2 Cor. 1.4, 5, 6. 2 Timothy 2.11, 12. 1 Pet. 4.1, 2, 3. This condition of
conformity to Christ's sufferings, whether inward, (of which the Vindicator and
his party say nothing) or outward upon the cross, is not once thought of,
though there is no other way left us in Christ to obtain salvation, Mat. 16.24,
25.

Page 68. he tells us (but falsely) that [the material cause of our justification
actually considered is Jesus Christ.] No, it is the person to be justified.
[and the benefits which we have by Christ, says he, are two especially; First,
redemption; Secondly, propitiation. [But those two, say we, will prove but one
in the end. [First, for redemption, says he, it is a word borrowed from the
use of war (and why not from other civil and judicial acts?) and it signifies
freedom from captivity; And thus Christ is our deliverance, (but how?) First
from the wrath of God (see his method,) he sets that in the first place which
should come last) because, says he, he is our reconciliation] And is not that
a propitiation through faith in his blood? Romans 3.25. which blood, say we, is
the promised spirit for, and signified by blood in the old Testament, and not
the blood of his cross, as he and others dream: see Heb. 9.14. and 10.39. and
13.20, 21. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. 1 John 1.7, 9. Rev. 7.14. and 12.11. [Secondly,
says he, we are freed from the tyranny and dominion of sin, because that
obeying from the heart the form of doctrine unto which we are delivered, that
is, the Gospel of Christ, we are made free from sin, and are become the
servants of Christ, which is our righteousness. Romans 6.18.] Is this obedience
then our righteousness? sure he means nothing less, though he speaks truer
herein then he is aware of: But he will have Christ's external obedience to be
our righteousness, and none other,. [Thirdly, we are freed, says he, from the
punishment of our sins; because its against justice the punishment should be
inflicted when the sin is pardoned; for, sin being the cause of punishment, it
must needs follow that sublata causa (which he elsewhere says cannot be taken
away in this life) the cause being defaced (or rather removed) the effect
should be absolved.

But against this he says it may be objected, [That the sins of the elect are
pardoned, and yet they are afflicted continually, and, as the Prophet says,
Psalm 73.13. they are chastised every morning; and therefore how can it be that
he should for give the guilt of their sins, and yet, as the Prophet speaks
Psalm 99.8. he should punish their inventions? (But there are no sins pardoned,
say we, till they be wholly left.) Unto which said objection he answers [That
the miseries of men before the pardon of sin are the punishments of sin; but
the affliction of the Saints after the remission of their sin are not to be
reputed penalties of Gods anger, but exercises of his servants, and arguments
of his love; for, as many as I love I rebuke and chasten, says Christ, Rev.
3.19. so also Heb. 12.5. and that for a double end; First, for our salvation,
that we should not be condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11.30. Secondly and
subordinately, for our sanctification, that we may be made partakers of his
holiness.] But what difference is there between Gods holiness and our
positive salvation? is not eternal life a participation in full of Gods
holiness? Psalm 17, 13. I shall be satisfied when I shall awake with thy
likeness. But God punishes those sins with temporal plagues in his servants,
for their humiliation and amendment, and for a warning unto others, which he
pardons as to the world to come, 2 Samuel 12.13, 14. and before the pardon of
sin men are chastised in love to their souls, as well as afterward, Psalm
94.12. Pro. 3.11, 12. and Heb. 12.6, 7. As for Propitiation, he tells us page
68, 69. [that it is a reconciling us to God through the blood (to wit, the
blood of his Spirit) and it is, says he, the accomplishment of that which was
signified by the Mercy-seat, Exodus 30.] But the Mercy-seat, or Propitiatory,
did represent Christ in the Spirit; and in his second, or spiritual coming in
the power of his resurrection, when the two tables of the Law are written upon
our hearts, and the face and aspect of God and the soul looks toward each
other, like the two Cherubims, through Christ the everlasting propitiation and
Priest. And that which the Vindicator speaks there confirms it: for first, as
God gave his oracles unto the Prophets, (he should have said unto the Priests
also) out of the Mercy-seat; so he did, yea does, reveal his will unto us (his
Priests and Ministers) by Jesus Christ, not without us only, but especially
within us, 1 John 2.27. Joh. 1.17. Secondly, as God was said to dwell between
the Cherubims, which covered the Mercy-seat; so in Christ the fullness of the
Godhead dwells bodily, or really, Coloss. 2.9. And thereby as God was made
propitious and favorable unto his people to assist and bless them, by the
blood which the High Priest sprinkled before the Mercy-seat; so, says he, he
is pacified and reconciled unto us, and procured to enrich us with spiritual
blessings through the blood of Jesus Christ, Coloss. 1.18.] Which is true of
both bloods, that of his Spirit, and that of his cross; yea of the blood of sin
also, which we must shed in conformity to the death and bloodshed of Christ:
But this last parallel is not apt but forced. Again he says [the grounds of
those benefits, or the meritorious cause thereof is the most absolute and
perfect obedience which our Savior Christ performed unto his Father for our
sakes, and is to be considered, first actively, then passively: first the
active obedience of Christ is a most perfect performance of Gods Law, even to
the utmost tittle thereof; touching which we must consider-first, that although
Christ as man fulfilled the Law for himself, that in both natures he might be
an holy High Priest to offer sacrifice unto God; yet as mediator, as God and
man, he became subject to the Law, and did fully and perfectly execute the same
for us.] But how does he prove that? for Christ, says he, is not only our
redemption by that ransom which he paid for our sins, but he is also the
perfection of the Law unto salvation (most true, but not in his sense) unto
every one that believes. And there he three things, says he, that prove the
necessity thereof to be performed for us: (what are they?) first, the justice
of God that will not justify the wicked (to wit, while they remain such in
deed and will, Prove. 17.15.) but such as are just and righteous, either by a
proper, or imputed righteousness; (yet he justifies the ungodly that turn
from their ungodliness, and that both by a proper and an imputed
righteousness (as we have showed:) Secondly, by the office of a mediator that
was to undergo for us (or rather to do for us) whatsoever was required of us to
be done] But may not this be done as well within us by Christ's grace and
cooperation for us? yea with much more piety and justice; every man being
created to a personal obedience toward God and his Law. [Thirdly, (...) a
recuperation or recovery of happiness, which could not be attained without
perfect righteousness; because the death of Christ (as he says) freeth us
from erernal death (to wit, when we are dead with him unto sin) and the
obedience of Christ (that within us only) brings us to eternal or everlasting
life.] All which you must take upon his word and credit, for he knows not how
to prove it. [And therefore we say, (quoth he) that Christ was born for us, not
only auferre peccata, to take away the sins of the world (to wit by
sanctification) by his voluntary suffering of the most bitter death of the
cross, (but that only takes away the guilt, and shows us how in order thereunto
we should sacrifice, flay, and consume all our sins,) but adferre justitiam, to
bring righteousness unto us (but how?) by his plenary obedience (within us,
not without us) to the most holy Law of God.] Which is yet unproved [And
therefore those Scriptures (says he) that do ascribe our falvation unto
Christ's death (which none do) are not to be taken exclusively, or as denying
the active obedience of Christ to be imputed unto us, but Synecdochically, for
the accomplishment of the whole obedience of Christ that was to be performed
for us:] But none such was to be performed for us, or upon our score, as we
have often affirmed; nor can the contrary be proved out of the holy Scriptures.
[And with this affirmation of his (says he) agree the main and major part,
(for his tooth and diet, as aforesaid) of all orthodox (he should have said
heterodox) Divines, and most of the Fathers] To wit, since Calvin's days.
[Secondly, says he, the passive obedience of Christ is all the sufferings of
Christ both in life and death for our sins.] (Yes, and much more also in our
inward man for us, while we went on in our rebellion against God (of which he
never thinks) because the justice of God required that we should never be freed
from death without a just punishment (in Christ like death also) laid upon our
selves, or on some other for us: (both which we grant.) And therefore, says
he, the prophet Isaiah prophesied that the Messiah should be wounded, (yea had
been so, as we said before) for your trausgressions, and bruised for our
iniquities, chap. 53.5. And Daniel says, that he should be cut off, but not
for himself Daniel 9.26. and St. Peter says, should hear our sins in his our
body on the cross (but for what end?) that we being dead unto sin should live
unto righteousness: and then it follows, by whose stripes (or
fellow-sufferings) ye are healed, 1 Pet. 2.14. and St. John says, Rev. 1.15.
that he washed us (him and his fellow-Apostles and Saints who were thoroughly
cleansed from sin) in his own blood, or Spirit, Rev. 1.5. And here we must
observe (says he) that this obedience of Christ is of sufficient merit to
satisfy for all sins (and for those that were repented of and left more
especially,) by reason of the dignity of the person that did obey (or suffer,)
for the hypostatical union of the Manhood of Christ with the Godhead makes the
obedience of Christ to be of inestimable value or price, Act. 20.18.] True; but
that Te^ speaks of the blood of Christ's Spirit; for with that also is the
Church of God purchased or redeemed from among men, Rev. 14.3, 4.

Thirdly, the formal cause (says he) of our justification actively considered
is a free imputation of Christ's actual righteousness (we say the inhesive)
whereby the merit of Christ's obedience is applied unto all believers, that is,
the accounting of us just and righteous for the merits of that obedience which
Christ effected for us, says he, page 71.] But this is more formally then
truly spoken; [for as we, says he, apply unto our selves the righteousness of
Christ, and make the same our own by faith and acceptance (he should have said
by mere imagination) so God himself (says he) applies it unto us by
imputation (according to his putation) and accepts us for righreous for the
righteousness of Christ; (which we have not:) and this imputation of
righteousness (says he) is a work of grace [which God never spoke or thought
of] not of nature; a communicating of another righteousness; and not a
conferring of any real (therein says he truly) or habitual righteousness upon
us.] But without such a real or habitual one righteousness shall no man that
has polluted himself be justified, or saved:] And this is a sweet exchange
(says Justine Martyr) (if he belie him not, or mistake not his sense) in
Epist. ad Diog. that one should be sin for many, and that the iniquity of many
should be covered] yea, blotted out, say we, with the righteousness of one, to
wit his internal righteousness] or that the justice (or kindness of one) should
make many that are and were injust to be reputed, yea to be, just: to omit,
that most of the Fathers (which he had read) speak to this purpose, Friar
Tarrus says in sermon. de Dom. Advent. Christ has made all partakers of his
justice and merits, (so say we) that they might be able to stand in his sight,
and sustain the judoment of God: see 1 John 4.17, 18. often before alleged by
us. [Because, says he, there is no mortal man living whose righteousness, (to
wit his own) can be sufficient to obtain eternal salvation.] But if the Friar
meant it as the Vindicator does, we hope the Vindicator will turn Friar also.
[But (says the Vindicator) Christ's righteousness is made ours, not because it
is infused or translated into us,] Oh take heed of that, for it would drive out
sin too soon, to abide habitually in us; [but because it is imputed and reputed
unto us] rather by him and his party, then God [as if it were theirs (when it
is not) whom God does acquit from sin, and actually count just for the justice
of Jesus Christ. And therefore the force of our justification (however I easily
believe it) is not any habitual sanctity subjectively remaining in us, but the
righteousness of Christ (of which in his sense there is no mention in the
Scriptures) freely imputed unto us, and so though it be without us, (and they
without it) yet it is made ours by right of giving. (if he knew by whose gift.)
The Apostle (says he) remarkably in Romans 4.6, 7. joyneth both the imputation
of righteousness and the remission of sins together, as the two special means
to make us happy;] And so do we, but not in his way, which will never make any
happy. [ Blessed is the man to whom God imputes righteousness without works,
(to wit, his own works, before, and without grace.) And blessed is the man to
whom the Lord will not impute sin, (but purge it away by his grace and Spirit.)
[But this righteousness of Christ thus imputed to us, says he page 72 must be
considered in a threefold respect: first in respect of the truth of our
imputed righteousness,] which is wholly a fancy:) and so we say, that we are as
truly righteous before God as Christ himself. [Beware of blasphemy whoreson
Phanatick;] because we are righteous with the same righteousness with which he
is righteous. (The clean contrary way.) Secondly, in respect of the quantity:
But so we deny that it is in the same measure (he might truly have said, in any
measure) for in him it is in its fullness, and in its largest measure; but in us
it is only received so far forth as it serves to justify any particular
believer (he should have said dreamer, that is not at all.) Thirdly, in respect
of the quality: And so we say that this is not in the same manner in us as it
is in him, (which is true enough) for he is righteous actually, we imputatively
(or passively rather;) he subjectively, we relatively in him, and by him,] that
is, not at all but by mere relation, or tradition, and our fond credulity. [And
so, says he, in these two last respects we cannot be said to be equally
righteous with Christ (no nor with the least real Christian who seeks the true
righteousness by Christ) though we be righteous with the very righteousness of
Christ, (to wit, as Laodicea was, Rev. 3.17, 18.) he perfectly righteous, we
righteous by reason of our imputation, and inchoative righteousness.] Which
last, if he have any, is the best string for his bow, by reason the other is a
broken one. [Again, says he, Christ is called holy, and sin, and yet is said
to know no sin, and to be made sin: so likewise are we said to be just, and
sinful; just in him (or rather just out) by the imputation and application of
his justice (without any conversion from sin;) and sinful in our selves by the
inbred corruptions of our own flesh, which is brought in by our personal fall,
as we said before.

Lastly, the final cause of our justification actively considered is the glory
of God, which he acquired unto himself by the wonderful mixture of his justice
and mercy toward men; justice, and mercy also, that he would have his own Son
die to make satisfaction for our sins (yea suffered to procure us some respite
of repentance and returning, as said before) rather then our sins should esape
unpunished, or we forthwith perish eternally, and mercy, that he would have the
righteousness of his Son be imputed (no, derived) unto his servants, rather
then we poor sinners should perish for or in our sins.] But if he have no
better skill in compounding his own medicines then he has made here in this
jumble of justice and mercy, he is a Physician of no value. [And thus much,
says he page 73. of the causes of justification actively considered in respect
of God: now in the second place we must consider the causes of our
justification passively, in respect of man; and first, the efficient cause
passively considered is wholly instrumental; and it is twofold; external,
which is the preaching of the word, and the administration of the Sacraments;
these are the chief outward instruments which God uses for the application of
Chrsts (supposed) righteousness for the (imagined) justification of his
servants; and therefore the Gospel is called the word of life, Acts 5.15, 16.
and the ministry of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.18. and the Sacraments are called
the seal of the righteousness of faith; and our Savior says of the preachers
of the Gospel, whose sins ye remit (or put away) they are remitted.] But are
the word and Sacraments passive or active instruments? does not the Apostle say
that the Gospel is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes?
Romans 1.16. Is the man infatuated?

Secondly, the internal instrument whereby we apprehend (he should say seek)
the grace of justification is only faith in Jesus Christ.] But that is false;
for by prayer also we both seek and comprehend the same: [But Christ is set
forth, says he, to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood, Romans 3.15.
John 1.12. (which place he wrests from its native sense) Gal. 3.24. and
therefore the righteousness of Christ (but not in his sense) is called the
righteousness of faith; and we are said to receive Christ by faith, and to
receive the promise of the Spirit (which is the purging blood of Christ) by
faith. [Secondly, says he, faith is the only instrument] he should have said
the main, yet no passive instrument, as he would have it [whereby we are
justified before God. The Scriptures, says he, are plain and plentiful in this
point; Is. 45.21, 25. Ezekiel. 20.44. Hab. 2.4. Romans 3.24, 26. Gal. 1.8. Acts
13.39.] But the first of these, if rightly looked into, cuts the throat of
justification; for righteousness and strength are joined together, which must
intimate the inward and powerful righteousness of God, and this it justifies
the man; Is. 45.24, 25. where the words run thus; Surely, shall one say, in
the Lord have I righteousness and strength, even unto him shall men come; and
all that are incensed against him shall be ashamed; in the Lord shall all the
seed of Israel be justified, (or made just,) and shall glory. Yea, that place
in Hab. 2.4. shows, that he whose soul is lifted up (with any knowledge, or
hope of a false righteousness) is not upright in him; but the just (who is such
by any measure of inherent righteousness) shall live (the full life of
righteousness) by faith. As for Acts 13.39, 40. we have spoken of that already.
[And so, says he, does the Apostle in many other places inculcate the same
truth, as Gal. 4.5, 24. and our Savior says, Joh. 3.14, 15.] What does he say
there? (for the Vindicator cites no words) namely thus much; [ that as Moses
lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, that Israel reflecting upon their
serpentine sins and rebellion, might repent and not die; even so must the son
of man (as crucified both in us, and for us, Gal. 3.1.) be lifted up (and set
forth before us) that whosoever believes on him (as a pattern herein as well
as a reconciler, and through faith follows him unto the like death) should not
perish, but have eternal life, that is, says he, (by his false gloss,) be
justified, and so be saved only by believing in him.] A short and easy way to
be saved, if it were true; as those Israelites that were bitten by the fiery
serpents, Number. 21.9. were healed and saved alone by looking up to the brazen
serpent. [The Fathers also, says he, are plain and pregnant herein (of whom
more anon) Chrysostom. in Romans cap. 3. idem Sermon. de fide and lum. not. God has
justified us, using thereto no works of ours, (such as we work of our selves)
but only requiring faith in Christ: (so say we also) and without faith no man
obtains life: But I am able to show, says he, page 74. that a faithful man
has lived and obtained the kingdom of heaven without works.] Do it then, and
give Saint James the lie, who says chap. 2.14. What does it profit, my
brethren, though a man says that he has faith, and have no works, can that
faith save him? [So the thief, says he, did only believe, and was justified.]
But was not his reproving of his fellow-thief the condemnation of himself and
his partner in those evils, and the accepting of his punishment, the justifying
of Gods justice, and the clearing of Christ as innocent, the owning of him for
his Lord, and his prayer for mercy, besides all his former repentance? which,
as we have showed, was both possible and probable; was all this we say as no
works and fruits of his faith? we may justly question whether the Vindicator
has ever showed such fruits of his repentance, and evidences of a true faith:
howbeit you see he makes much of this thief, alleging him again and again, as
if he would fulfill the proverb, Similis simili, etc. And- Basil, quoth he, de
humilitate says; This is to glory in the Lord, when a man does not boast of
his own righteousness; but acknowledges himself destitute of righteousness,
and justified only by the faith of Jesus Christ.] Who does not so? yet do we
not rely upon a false and mere imagined righteousness in Christ, as the
Vindicator does. [Thirdly, the material cause of our justification passively
considered, says he, or the persons to whom justification belongs (these are
rather subjects and objects, then a material cause) are those sheep of Christ
that are known of him (of whom no doubt a great part are fully justified
already) and he known to them; that hear his voice, and follow him, whom he
predestined to life, and elected before the foundation of the world, Romans
8.30. Moreover, whom he did prodestinate, them he also called, and whom he
called those he justified (in a sanctifying way) and whom he justified he
glorified. And Rodolph, says he, in Levit lib. 17. cap. 2. That the blood of
the High Priest (was the High. priest wont to be slain then?) was the expiation
of the sin of all believers; and so Christ has taken away not only the
original sin, but also all actual sins, in respect of the guilt, punishment,
and dominion of sin; but not in respect of the corruption and pollution of sin,
which still remains in the best Saints.] But this Rodolphus is not a good
Agricola; for so Christ, who came to perfect or present his Church holy and
without blemish before God, should have the worst thing and that which of all
other is most hateful to God, namely the pollution of sin to be left behind;
which to say is blasphemy against him. [And besides this, says he out of Haymo
in Romans 5. He has given unto them everlasting life, (and to none other does
justification belong, says he) and the reasons may be these; All those that be
justified (in full) shall be glorified; for whom he justified them he
glorified, Romans 8.30. But all men shall not be glorified, because the kingdom
of heaven shall be given but only unto them for whom it is prepared, Matthew.
20.23. Secondly, (but that Text speaks of sitting at Christ's right hand or
left) Christ is called Jesus, for that he should save his people from their
sins (that is, none at all fully, according to his doctrine) Matthew. 1.21. But
though all men are his people jure creationis, says he, that is, by right of
creation, yet all men are not his people jure donationis, given him to be
redeemed (from their sins and corruptions) for of them thou gave me I have
lost none, (yes, the Son of perdition, John 17.12.) And ye believe not, faith
Christ, because ye are not of my sheep, Joh. 10.26. therefore he shall not
justify all men thereby to save them from their sins.] But whose fault is
that? Christ's or theirs? for he invites all that are weary and heavy laden to
come unto him, Matthew. 11.28, 29. and Rev. 22.17. The Spirit and the bride say
Come, and let him that hears say Come; and whosoever will let him take of the
waters of life freely. Yea, though no man can come unto Christ unless the
Father which sent me draw him, and those he will raise up at the last day, John
6.44. yet who is it that the Father does not draw; first to himself if he will
come, and after to his Son, to be justified and saved by him? Hosea 11.3, 4. I
taught Ephraim also to go, taking them by their arms, but they knew not that I
healed them; I drew them with the cords of a man, even with the bonds of love,
and I was to them as they that took off the yoke, and I laid meat before them.
See Job 33.29, 30. so all these things works God oftentimes with man, to
bring back his soul from the pit, to be enlightened with the light of the
living: and chap. 36.10, 11. He opens also their ear to discipline, and
commands that they return from iniquity; if they obey and serve him they
shall spend their days in prosperity, and their years in pleasure: but if they
obey not, they shall perish by the sword, and they shall die without knowledge.
And Christ, who tasted death for every man, Heb. 2.9. says of the Jews (and
might do it of others also whom he and his Father draws) John 9.40. and ye
will not come unto me that ye may have life: but men are in a special manner
given unto Christ by the Father, when they are first converted by him, and
after brought to believe on the Son for salvation from all their spiritual
enemies, John 6.37, 46.

Thirdly, the formal cause of our justification passively considered, says he
page 75. is the particular application of the righteousness of Christ (which in
his sense is monstrum inform) unto every saithful soul.] But is this
application an act or passion? [wherein two things are to be considered, says
he; first, that faith must apply unto us all the benefits that Christ has
effected for us.] Is the work done to our hands? is he to effect nothing in us
for our justification? [Secondly, that every man in particular must apply these
things unto himself; (if he desires to be deluded as he is:) for the first,
says he, this is one of the manifest differences betwixt the faith of Gods
elect (of which he knows little or nothing) and the faith of Devils and wicked
men; that the godly do apply unto themselves all the benefits of Christ,] Or
rather do apply themselves to the seeking of the same according to the
promises. [and the other know them, but have not true grace to apply them.] But
what are they, wise men or fools, that believe every vain word and doctrine of
men which has no ground in the Scripture? Prove. 14.15. The simple believes
every word, but the prudent take heed to their going; [for so says Augustine,
says he, and Peter Lumbard lib. 3. Senten. distnct. 23. That there is a great
difference between him that does believe Christ, and him that does believe in
Christ; for the Devils believe Jesus to be Christ, but they believe not in
Christ.] And may not some believe amils in Christ, as he does? [Because, says
he, it is one thing to believe God, another thing to believe there is a God,
and another thing to believe in God.] (yea, and another thing to believe lies.)
To believe God, as he says, is to believe that he speaks the truth in the
Scriptures; and to believe God is to believe a God is: But to believe in God is
to believe with love, and loving him to go unto him, and to cleave unto him, to
be made one with him, to dwell in him, and have him dwell in us.] Whence it will
follow that the Vindicator never yet believed rightly in God. [And this is that
faith by which a sinful man is instrumentally justified (in Gods way, and not
his) and is both found and accounted righteous in Gods sight.] And has not the
faith of the Devil, the father of lies, the contrary effect hereunto. [For the
second, says he, we must understand that this applicaof faith, or of Christ
through faith, must be particularly applied (what must the application be
applied?) by every man unto himself (if he desires to be led hood-winked by the
nose) and that in a most special manner (even he) Because a general faith (no
nor a phanatick faith, such as his is) is not thought justifying faith; for
Paul testifies that Agrippa did believe the Prophets, Acts 26.17, 18. and yet
Agrippa confesses he was no Christian] And herein he was the honester man,
then in words to confess him, and inworks to deny him as some Vindicators do.
[And a natural man, says he, by the force of Reason may be reduced to believe
and acknowledge a God, and that this God is powerful, just, and true; and
therefore brought to a general persuasion of the truth of things to be
believed, and yet all this faith (no nor his own to boot) is not sufficient to
justify us, because true justifying faith is no natural quality (nor
phanatical notion) but a supernatural gift of God, as the Apostle teaches,
Ephesians. 2.8. Phil. 1.29. howbeit it were no hard thing to prove that some of the
heathen understood Gods work of justification better then the Vindicator;
witness that of Catullus the poet: Omnia fanda, nefanda, malo permista furore,
Justificam nobis mentem avertere Deorum.
Things good and bad, mixed with a fury blind,
Have turned away Gods just just making-mind. [or justifying mind.]


And therefore the general faith of the Scriptures, says the Vindicator, is
not sufficient to make us Christians; but as we read, the Saints of God do
apply the promises of salvation unto themselves (or rather themselves unto the
promises) to seek them in a right way, as David says, to wit, among
experimental deliverances, God is my rock and my redeemer: and Job 19.25. I
know that my redeemer lives: and Mary (after that Christ was formed in her) my
soul rejoices in God my Savior, Luke 1.47. and Thomas says, my Lord and my
God, Joh. 21. and Paul, Gal. 2.20. who loved me, and gave himself for me.] But
what promises be or are contained in these Texts? [so must, says he, every
Christian that looks for salvation apply (we say lay hold of in particular) the
grace and favor of God unto himself; and his faith instrumentally justifies
(or may be a help unto him) the sinner.] what without seeking of justifying and
cleansing grace? [Lastly, the final cause of our justification passively
considered (or the effect of it rather) is peace of conscience in this life,
and the atonement (a new expression, but let it pass) of eternal happiness in
the life to come: the first whereof, says he, is attained by two special
things; first, by an assured persuasion that all our sins are forgiven:] (But
may not some have a false persuasion in this kind?) [so being justified by
faith (that is, in a sanctifying and a purgative way) from all our sins which
we have committed, we have peace toward God through Jesus Christ] for
ootherwise, namely in his Son, our justification is but a dream. [Secondly,
says he, by an unwearied study to strive against the stream (which in his
sense of impossibility is truly and properly spoken) of our own natural
corruption,] and why not against all temptations also? [and to keep a constant
course (which he denied heretofore to be possible) in the ways of godliness;
for Christ, says he, gave himself for us to die for us, (and not by his Spirit
to redeem us from all iniquity) and did bear our sins on his body upon the
tree;] But for what end? [ that we being dead unto sin should live unto
righteousness, 1 Pet. 2.24. or as Zachary says, Luke 1.74, 75. And so St.
Augustine says that Christ died for the wicked, not that they should remain
wicked, but that they being justified through faith should be converted from
their wickedness, and bring forth the fruits of holiness; because (as St.
Augustine says also) grace justifies that we should live justly.] But here
the Vindicator is so blind that he brings Augustine against himself; for he
takes the word justification, as we do, for purging away of sin, and making of
man just, holy, and good, by way of sanctification, which is an usual acception
of the word among the Fathers. [The second end of our justification, says he,
is the eternal blessedness which shall be attained hereafter when Christ shall
say unto all his justified Saints (made just and merciful by his sanctifying
spirit) Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. Mat. 25.34. And so much, says he,
for all the causes of our, justification actively and passively considered.]
Wherein he has given us non causas and mutilas pro veris, false causes for
true, especially instead of the formal and material causes, not much
unsuitable to his deceitful justification; but the efficient and final causes
are for the most part applicable to the true work of justication. [And this,
says he, I hope may suffice] but it must be among such as are blind, or are
willing to be deluded [for the proof of the truth of this last branch of the
second position, that we are only justified by the righteousness of Jesus
Christ. Which point being rightly understood has been and shall be better
confirmed by us. I shall end, says he, with that of our Savior, Joh. 12.48.
The word which I have spoken shall judge you in the last day.] Yea, and judges
and convinces the Vindicator already to be a blind guide, a stranger to the
faith of Gods elect, and no other Apostle then a veterator, or impostor, as we
shall in our catasceuastical or affirmative part of our discourse more fully
manifest. [But he concludes with his form of prayer, I pray God to enable us
all to hold the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, and that we may
renounce all those doctrines that set up any thing of man] And much more, say
we, do tend to the setting up of Satan or his kingdom [to the abasing of Christ
[and that we embrace those doctrines which abase man,] and much more whatsoever
is of the devil [and which exalt the Lord, according to that of the Psalmist,
Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us] and much less unto the Devil [ but unto thy
name, and unto that only give the glory, Psalm 15.] Unto all which we say (and
that not formally, but cordially) Amen.

You see the Vindicator has closed (like a Saint of the Pharisaicall sect)
with a prayer even as specious in words of Scripture Phrase, as his Preface was
to his beloved friends placed in the front of his Vindication; but when his
prayer is explained to you in reference to his position, That sin will remain
in the best of Saints as long as they live, then it will appear to have the
same scope and end to his said position as we have declared his Preface had.

For whom can he mean and include in the relative word us, when he says, I
pray God enable us, but the Levites his friends, and other his allies with
himself? For be it known to all men by these presents, that we disown his
Tenants, and resolve to speak against them, dum maneat Lachesi quod torqueat,
to speak until we lack breath, if we have opportunity.

Secondly, if to hold the unity of the Spirit be intended in reference to his
position, then these words must signify to hold the oneness of the wicked
spirit; for all sin is of the Devil, 1 John 3.9. therefore to pray (in
reference aforesaid) to hold the unity of the Spirit, is to pray to hold the
oneness of the wicked spirit in upholding and maintaining with one affection,
that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as they live.

Thirdly, to hold it in the bond of peace is to pray (in reference to the
foresaid position) that in the oneness of affection to the wicked spirit, that
he and his friends may in all ties, bonds, obligations of a quiet and peaceable
agreement be bound together to maintain, that sin will remain in the best of
Saints as long as they live; and not to disturb one another, as those foresaid
false Prophets do disturb them who deny their position.

Yea, the Vindicator prays (as ignorantly as he can, if he maintain his
position) that he and his friends may renounce all the doctrine that sets up
any thing of man, to the abasing of Christ; for if he intend that clause of his
petitionary note in reference to our doctrine of a possibility of a total
mortification of sin in this life, then his prayer is, that nothing of man,
that is of us, (in contradistinction to himself and his friends) may be set up
to the mortifying of all sin, and so to abase Christ by a total mortification
of sin, (if he mean to prefer his own petition before our doctrine) tends
(absit blasphemia dicto) to the abasing of Christ. But if he iutend to maintain
to the end (as he begun) that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as
they live, then the said clause of his vote and prayer is a contradiction to
himself and his position; for does any doctrine set up any thing of man, but
that Doctrine which maintains the necessary continuance of sin in this life?
for only sin, and allsin, is of the Devil and man, Joh. 3.9. Romans 5.12. by
one man sin came into the world: and 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. the devil or wicked one
(what ever men dream to the contrary) is called the man of sin: therefore for
the Vindicator to pray that no doctrine be owned, but renounced, that sets up
any thing of man, is to pray against his own position, that sin will remain in
the best Saints as long as they live; because only sin, and all sin, is
from man, as aforesaid. And is there any thing which abaseth Christ but sins
continuance? when as the Lord complains, thou have made me to serve with thy
sins, and wearied me with thine iniquities, Isai. 43.24.

Hence also upon the same account that the doctrine of sins remaining, is the
setting up of man, and abasing of Christ, we say: here also the clause of his
prayer, which is expressed in these words, And that we embrace those doctrines
that abase man, and exalt the Lord, is a prayer for the embracing our doctrines
because a total mortification of sin in this life is it which exalts Christ
in his holiness, will, and power, to destroy all sin, according to that, James
4.5, 6. for the Lord offers more grace, that is, to overcome it: See Phil.
4.13. Joh. 1.16. who came to redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. Titus 2.14. that the Lord may
be exalted alone in that day, Isai. 2.17.

Not unto us, Lord, Psalm. 115.19. (in a better sense then the Vindicator does
apply those words in reference to his prayer relating to his position;) but
unto thy name be the glory, who have in some measure made known to us, and made
us to believe the true doctrine which abases man, and exalts Christ; which
doctrine is a possibility of a total mortification of sin in this world.

Thus we have traced the Vindicator (...) from the first to the last of his
Vindication; wherein the unbiassed Reader may easily comprehend what nonsense,
tacit contradictions (besides open ones) this Vindicator is guilty of in this
his Vindication; so that he has first and last verified therein another apt
Anagram of his name, In no end right.

Our Gusmond has spit folly with despite;
But marvel not, for He Is in no end right,
The finis rei (by his confession,)
Of his positions is transgression.
Will you his friends elect this sinful wight
To be your Pilot, who is in no end right?
Can he direct your souls unto heavens bliss,
Who at both ends does steer amiss?
You Levites in his Preface called to fight
With us forbear, for he is in no end right.
His Jus and Saints mentioned in his letters,
Are mongrels compared with their betters:
For he cannot on best Saints temper light,
It to define, who is in no end right.
Disown him then who has no morning light;
Detest this vagrant, who is in no end right.
Having demonstrated the Anasceuastick or confutative part of our
revindication, and observed the Vindicators ends what they are: we proceed to
the Catasceuastick or confirmative part thereof, in two axioms or assertions
contrary to the Vindicators positions.

First, we affirm that there is a possibility (through the grace and help of
Christ) of a total mortification of sin in this life.

Secondly, that there is a possibility of perfect obedience (through the grace
and help of Christ) to the Law of God in this life.

It is true, that if these two assertions be not coincident, yet they
consequently follow each other, so that to prove one of them is to confirm the
other; for if sin by the grace of Christ be rooted out in this life, what
hinders but the Law of God may be here (by the same grace) fulfilled? yea to be
so fulfilled; as to be justified thereby, and that through Christ of grace
given? and if the Law of God may be so far fulfilled here through the grace of
Christ, as not tooffend against the same, then doubtless all sins may be
rooted out here by the same grace: yet we shall confirm each of them apart with
their respective branches, both by divine and humane authority, so fully and
clearly, that scarce any Article of the Christian faith shall have more
evidence of truth and piety to plead for it, then our positions shall produce
for themselves. And first, for the former of them, That all sin and corruption
may be and ought to be in this life by the grace and help of Christ purged and
rooted out of the Saints; which we shall evince by many Topic places: And
first, from Gods express commandments, which if they were not possible by
grace to be performed were not only unjust and unlawful, but would be
frustrated of their end, which is observance, and accomplishment; and the
Author of them would be argued of the want of wisdom or equity, and of
tyranny and cruelty. Of which sort are these among many other.

Job. 11.14, 15. If iniquity be in thine hand, put it far away, and let not
wickedness dwell in thy Tabernacle; for then shall thou lift up thy face
without spot, yea thou shall be steadfast and not fear, Psalm. 4.4. Stand in aw
and sin not.

Isal. 1.16. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from
before me, cease to do evil: and 55.11. Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from
thence, touch no unclean thing, go ye out of the midst of her, be ye elean that
bear the vessels of the Lord.

Jeremiah 4.14. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may
be saved, how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee?

Acts 22.16. And now why tarriest thou? arise and be baptized, and wash away
thy sins by calling upon the name of the Lord,

1 Cor. 5.7. Purge out therefore the old leaven that ye may be a new Lamp.

Ephesians. 4.20, 21, 22. But ye have not so learned Christ, if so be ye have heard
him, and been taught by him as the truth is in Jesus Christ, that ye put off as
concerning the former conversation the old man which is corrupting through the
lusts of error (or deceit.)

Coloss. 3.5. Mortify therefore your members which are upon earth,
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and
covetousness which is idolatry; for which things sake the wrath of God comes
upon the children of disobedience.

1 Thessalonians. 5.22. Abstain from all appearance of evil.

Heb. 10.21, 22. Having a High Priest over the house of God, let us draw near
with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from
an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with clean water.

Jam. 1.21. Wherefore lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of
naughtiness: and 4.8. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you; cleanse
your hands ye sinners, and purify your hearts ye double-minded.

1 Pet. 2.1. Wherefore laying aside all malice, and guile, and hypocrisy, and
envyings, and evil speakings, as new born babes desire the sincere milk of the
word that ye may grow thereby. verse. 11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as
strangers and pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul:
and 4.1, 2. Forasmuch then as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, so arm
your selves with the same mind, for he that has suffered in the flesh has
ceased from sin.

The second Topic is from the promises, wherein sufficient grace is promised
for the effecting that which is so often, so clearly and fully required. Isai.
1.25. And I will turn mine hand upon thee, and purely take away thy dross, and
purge away all thy tin: and 11.14. But with righteousness shall he judge the
poor, and with equity shall he reprove for the meek of the earth, and he shall
smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breach of his lips
shall he slay the wicked: and 25.7. And he will destroy in this mountain the
face of the covering cast over all people, and the vail that is spread over all
nations: and 43.25. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for
mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins: and 61.1, 2, 3. The spirit of
the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to preach good
tidings to the meek, he has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim
liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bonnd.
Jere. 33.8. And I will cleanse them from all their iniquities whereby they have
sinned against me: and 50.20. In those days, and at that time, says the Lord,
the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none. Ezekiel.
36.25. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and from all your filthiness
and from all your abominations will I cleanse you.

Amos 9.8. Behold, the eyes of the Lord are upon the kingdom of sin, (for so
it is in the Hebrew) and I will destroy it from the face of the earth.

Micah 7.14. He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us who will
subdue our iniquities: And thou will cast all their sins into the depth of the
sea; the Lord will subdue them as he did the Canaanites, and all other the
enemies of David in his days; so that there was neither adversary nor evil
occurrent left in his son Solomon's entrance upon the kingdom, 1 Kings 5.4.
And will drown them as he did Pharaoh and his host, of which not one escaped.

Zephan. 3.13. The remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor speak lies.

Zacha. 13.1, 2. In that day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of
David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and for uncleanness.

Malachi 3.2, 3. But who may abide in the day of his coming? (to wit in the
Spirit:) and who shall stand when he appears? for he is as the refiners fire,
and as the fullers soap: And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver,
and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that
they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness: and chap. 4.2, 3.
But unto you that fear my name shall the sun of righteousness arise with
healing under his wings, and ye shall go up and grow as calves of the stall:
And ye shall tread down the wicked, for they shall be ashes under the soles of
your feet in the day that I shall do this for you says the Lord.

Matthew. 1.21. And thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people
from their sins: and 3.11, 12. I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance,
but he that comes after me is mightier then I, whose shoes I am not worthy to
bear; he shall baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire: Whose fan is in
his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and gather his wheat into his
garner, but he will burn up the chafe with unquenchable fire.

Luke 1.70, 71, 74. As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets which have
been since the world began; That we should be saved from all our enemies, and
from the hand of all that hate us.

Romans 6.14. For sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not under the
law, but under grace: and 11.26. There shall come out of Sion the deliverer,
and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob.

1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful to forgive us, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness: and chap. 2.1, 2. My little children,
these things I write unto you, that ye sin not; but if any man sin we have a
comforter with the father, Jesus Christ the righteous; and he is the
propitiation for our sins (by way of propitiation and purgation of them) and
not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole world.

A third Tropic is this, That our subduing, overcoming, and rooting out of sin
is made the condition of manifold spiritual and heavenly promises, which would
be frustraneous and void, if the condition were not feasible by grace: And such
conditional but performable promises are these.

Psalm. 24.3, 4, 5. Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? and who shall
stand in his holy place? he that has clean hands and a pure heart; who has
not lift his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully, he shall receive the
blessing from the Lord, even righteousness from the God of his salvation. Prove.
28.13. He that confesses and forsakes his sins shall obtain mercy.

Isaiah 1.16, 17, 18. Wash ye, make ye clean, take away the evil of your
doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, etc. Come now
and let us reason together, says the Lord, though your sins be as scarlet they
shall be white as snow, though they be red as crimson they shall be as wool.

Jer. 4.14. Wash thine heart O Jerusalem, that thou may be saved. And Matthew.
5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Matthew. 16.24, 25.
If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross and
follow me: for whosoever will save his life (of sin) shall lose it, and
whosoever shall lose his life for my sake shall find it. Chap. 24.13. But
whosoever shall endure to the end (of his race and mortification) the same
shall be saved. Romans 6.5. For if we be planted in him into the likeness of his
death, we shall be also into the likeness of his resurrection. verse. 8. For if
we be dead with him (unto the sin) we believe that we shall also live with him.
Romans 8.13. If ye live after the flesh ye shall die, but if ye shall mortify
the deeds of the body by the Spirit ye shall live. 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. Wherefore,
come out from among them, and be ye separate, and touch not the unclean thing,
and I will receive you, and I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons
and my daughters, says the Lord Almighty. 2 Cor. 7.1. Wherefore, dearly
beloved, having these promises let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of
the flesh and Spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

Hebr. 3.6. But Christ as a Son over his own house, whose house are we if we
hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end, (to
wit, the end of sin, as before) verse. 14. for we are made pertakers of Christ
in the Spirit after the likeness of his resurrection. Romans 6.5. If we hold the
beginning of our confidence steadfast unto the end.

Rev. 2.7. To him that overcomes (all sins, temptations, and spiritual
enemies) will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the
paradise of God. verse. 11. He that overcomes (sin, which is the first
spiritual death, Romans 7.24.) he shall not be hurt of the second death, which
lay lurking and hid therein. verse. 17. To him that overcomes will I give to
eat of the hidden manna; and I will give him a white stone, and in the stone a
new name written, which no man knows saving he which receives it: verse. 26,
27, 28. And he that overcomes and keeps my words unto the end (aforesaid) to
him will I give power over the nations (to wit, all the powers and faculties of
the outward man, or the natural being) and he shall rule them with a rod of
iron, as the vessel of a potter they shall be broken in shivers (if through any
new temptation they shall offer to rebel Rev. 9.27.) even as I received of my
Father; and I will give him the morning-starre: and Rev. 3.5. He that
overcomes shall be clothed in white raiment, and I will not blot out his name
out of the book of life, but I will confess his name before my Father and
before his Angels: verse. 12. him that overcomes will I make a pillar in the
house of my God, and he shall go no more out: And I will write upon him the
name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, which is new Jerusalem that
comes down out of heaven from my God, and I will write upon him my new name:
verse. 21, 22. to him that overcomes will I give to set with me upon my throne,
even as I overcame and am set down with my Father upon his throne. Let him that
has an ear hear what the Spirit says unto the Church (which condition we had
six times before in the former and this present chapter.)

The fourth Topic shall be the end for which Christ was given by the Father,
and for which he gave himself for us, which on his part cannot be disappointed,
cannot be frustrate, if we be not wanting to our selves. Isa. 42.6, 7. I the
Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep
thee, and will give thee for a covenant to the people, for a light of the
Gentiles, to open the blind eyes, to bring the prisoners out of prison, and
them that sit in darkness out of the prisonhouse. So again, Isaiah 49.8, 9.

Isai. 61.1, 2, 3. as before; The spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because
the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings to the meek, he has sent me
to bind up the brokenhearted (who are troubled about the remaining and
prevalence of their sins and spiritual enemies) to proclaim liberty to the
captives, and the opening of the prison to those that are bound, to proclaim
the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God, (against
his and our spiritual enemies) to comfort all that mourn, to appoint unto them
that mourn in Sion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning, the garments of praise for the spirit of heaviness, that they may be
called trees of righteousness, the plantings of the Lord, that he may be
glorified. See Luke 4.18, 19, 20, 21.

Luk 1.74. That we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies might serve
him without fear.

Tit. 3.14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity
(in a purifying way) and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of
good works.

1 John 3.8. He that commits sin is of the Devil, for the Devil sins from
the beginning: for this purpose was the Son of God manifested that he might
destroy the works of the Devil, to wit, by his spirit and power. Romans 16.20.
And the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly.

Ephesians. 5.24, 25, 27. Husbands love your wives even as Christ also loved the
Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the
washing of water by the word, that he might present it to himself a glorious
Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be
holy and without blemish.

The fifth Topic, shall be the prayer that Christ, his servants and his
Apostles have made, and thereby taught us to pray for this grace of a through
purging from sin, and victory over it and all temptations in this life; who so
prayed in faith that the things which they so prayed for might be obtained, 1 Chronicles. 4.10. And Jabez called on the God of Israel, saying, Oh that thou
would bless me indeed, and would enlarge my coast, and that thy hand
might be with me, and that thou would keep me (or redeem me) from evil, that
it might not grieve me: and God, says the Text, 'granted him that which he
requested; as he will do unto us.

Psalm. 55.10. Create in me a clean heart O God, and renew a right Spirit within
me.

Hos. 14.1, 2. O Israel return unto the Lord thy God, for thou have fallen by
thine iniquity: take with you words, and turn unto the Lord, saying, take away
all iniquity, and give good, or receive us graciously, so will we render the
calves of our lips.

Mat. 6.13. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. See.
Luke 11.14.

Joh. 17.15. I pray not, says Christ, that thou should take them out of the
world, but that thou should keep them from the evil.

2 Cor. 13.7. Now I pray to God that ye do none evil.

Phil. 1.10. That ye may approve things that are excellent, that ye may be
sincere and without offense till the day of Christ.

1 Thessalonians. 5.23. Now the God of peace sanctify you wholly; And I pray God that
your whole Spirit, soul and body, may be kept (or preserved) blameless unto
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The sixth Topic, shall be the faith of the Apostles, and of the elect in the
Primitive Church, which now and for many hundred years has been almost quite
lost in two grand benefits and works which they believed and hoped for.

This faith expected Christ's spiritual coming and return with his Father and
the Holy Ghost, to set up his kingdom, not only of grace, but of power and
glory in them here and for ever; and in order thereunto they were to purge
themselves by faith, through his grace and help, from all iniquity in the mean
time; as these following places do clearly witness and prove without all
contradiction, if duly looked into.

Joh. 14.18. I will not leave you comfortless, I will come unto you; yet a
little while and the world sees me no more, but ye shall see me because I live
ye shall live also: At that day ye shall know that I am in the Father, and ye
in me, and I in you. He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is
that loves me, and he shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and
manifest my self unto him. Judas says unto him (not Jscariot) how is it that
thou will manifest thy self unto us, and not unto the world? Jesus answered and
said, if any man love me he will keep my words, and my Father will love him,
and we will come and make our abode with him. and chap. 16.22. And ye now
therefore have sorrow, but I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice,
and your joy shall no man take away from you. See Romans 6.5. as before. 1 Cor.
1.7, 8. So that yecome behind in no gift, waiting for the revelation of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be
blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Phil. 1.6. Being confident of this very thing, that he which has begun a good
work in you will finish (or perform) it till the day of Jesus Christ: verse 10.
that ye may be sincere and without offense till the day of Jesus Christ. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. be preserved unto the coming of our Lord Christ; as before.

1 Timothy 6.14. That thou keep this commandment without spot, unrebukable,
until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. Heb. 9.20. So Christ was once
offered to bear the sins of many; and unto them that look for him shall he
appear the second time without sin unto salvation. chap. 10.25. Not forsaking
the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is, but exhorting
one another so much the rather as you see the day approaching verse 37. For yet a
little while and he that shall come will come, and he will not tarry.

Jam. 5.7. Be patient therefore brethren. verse 8. be patient and stablish your
heart, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh.

1 Pet. 1.13. Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind be sober and hope to the
end for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus
Christ. All which places, and many more to the like effect, have absurdly been
understood of Christ's external, last, and dreadful coming to judgment, which
in so many ages since is not come to pass, nor peradventure may arrive in many
ages more: whereas the former Texts speak of a day and an appearing, or coming
of Christ which the Saints were to expect and prepare themselves for in their
days; it being the kingdom of heaven which first John the Baptist, and then
Christ and his Apostles, published to be at hand, Mat. 3.21. and 4.17. which
accordingly came to the Saints which waited for it in a right way.

Revela. 12.10. And I heard a loud voice in heaven (the Church of God, wherein
he dwells) saying, Now is come salvation and strength, the kingdom of our God,
and the power of his Christ; for the accuser of our brethren is cast out who
accused them before God day and night.

In hope of this kingdom, and in order thereunto, the Saints to whom it was
published purified their hearts by faith in Gods sanctifying grace to be had in
Jesus Christ, 1 John 3.2, 3, Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it does
not appear what we shall be, but we know that when he shall appear we shall be
like him, or we shall see him as he is: and every man that has this hope in
him purifieth himself even as he is pure. Act. 15, 7, 8, 9. Men and brethren,
ye know that a good while ago God made choice among us that the Gentiles by my
mouth should hear the word of the Gospel, and believe; and God which knows
the hearts bare them witness, giving the Holy Ghost unto them even as he did
unto us, and put no difference between them and us, purifying their hearts by
faith. Out of this faith and hope the souls of Gods elect do cry unto God night
and day for vengeance against Gods spiritual enemies and theirs, who first had
crucified Christ in them, and by them, and afterward did cruciate and vex them
with continual temptations and assaults. Luke 18.1. And he spoke a parable unto
them, to this end, that men always ought to pray and not to faint, saying,
There was in a City a Judge that feared not God, neither regarded man, and
there was a widow in that City; and she came unto him, saying, avenge me of
mine adversary; and he would not for a while but afterward he said within
himself, though I fear not God, nor regard man, yet because this widow
troubles me I will avenge her, lest by her continual coming she weary me. And
the Lord said, hear what the unjust Judge says and hall not God avenge his own
elect which cry day and hight, though he bear long with them,? I tell you that
he will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless when the Son of man comes shall he
find faith upon earth? Where now is this faith of Gods elect to be found? yea
where is the faith of the Apostles and their Churches to be heard or read of,
who looked for no life and glory by Christ, unless they died with Christ unto
all known sin? Romans 6.8. For if we be dead with him then we believe that we
shall live with him: and the doctrine which held forth that and no other way
for the fallen man to enter into life, the Apostle commends as a faithful and
undeceivable word; implying that the contrary doctrine and persuasions deceive
men's souls in the end. 2 Timothy 11.12. This is a faithful saying, if we be dead
with Christ we shall live with him, if we suffer with him (dying to sin) we
shall also reign with him. If we deny him in this way he will also deny us.

The seventh Topic is the inequality between sin and Gods grace now to be had
of Christ Jesus thereagainst. Is. 5.4.11. No weapon that is formed against the
Lord shall prosper, and every tongue that raises up against thee in judgment
thou shall condemn; This is the heritage, and so forth. Romans 5.17. For if by
one (or one man's offense) death reigned by one, how much more they which
receive abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness shall reign in life
by one, Jesus Christ? verse. 20, 21. Moreover, the law entered that the offense
might abound, but where sin abounded grace did superabound; that as sin had
reigned unto death, even so grace might reign through righteousness unto
eternal life by Jesus Christ.

The eighth Topic is the professed resolution of the Christians in the
Apostles time to die unto all sin.

Romans 6.1. What shall we say then? shall we continue in sin that grace may
abound? God forbid. How shall we that are dead to sin (namely by Christian
profession and resolution) live any longer therein?

Colos. 3.3. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.

The ninth Topic is from the true end and use of baptism, to teach us this
death and burial of sin in conformity to Christ's death and resurrection.

Romans 6.3, 4. Know ye not that so many of us as are baptized into Jesus Christ
were baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into
death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the
Father, even so we also should walk (after we are dead and risen again with
him) in newness of life; for if we have been planted into the likeness of his
death we shall also be planted into the likeness of his resurrection: knowing
this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be
destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin.

1 Cor. 15.29. Else what shall they do who are baptized for the dead, if the
dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead?

Colos. 2.12. Buried with him in baptism, wherein ye are also risen through the
faith of the operation of God, who has raised him from the dead.

The tenth Topic is from the admission and assertion of this mortified and
purged estate every where.

Romans 8.2. For the law of the spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus has
freed me from the law of sin and death.

Romans 6.7. For he that is dead is (justified, or) freed from sin.

2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ (according to the Spirit) he is a new
creature; old things are past away, and all things are become new.

Gal. 2.20. I am crucified with Christ; nevertheless I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me.

Chap. 5.24. And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts.

The eleventh Topic is from the omnipotency of true faith in Christ.

Marth 15.18. Then said Jesus unto her, O woman, great is thy faith; be it unto
thee even as thou will.

Chap. 21.21. Jesus answered and said unto them, Verily I say unto you, if ye
have faith and doubt not, ye shall not only do this which is done to the
fig tree, but also if you shall say unto this mountain, (of sin) be thou
removed, and be thou cast into the sea, it shall be done.

Mark 9.23. Jesus said unto him, if thou can believe all things are possible
unto him that believes.

John 14.12. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that believes on me the works
that I do shall he do also, and greater works then these shall he do, because I
go to the Father. Unto which join that of our Savior, John 16.33. In the world
ye shall have tribulation; but be of good cheer, I have overcome the world,
even Satan's world, which ye through faith shall be by me enabled to overcome. 1
John. 5.4, 5. For whatsoever is born of God overcomes the world; and this is
the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith; for who is he that
overcomes the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?

The last Topic shall be the sum of all practical truth in Christ, which
Paul reduces to two heads.

Ephesians. 4.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. as was said before; But ye have not so learned
Christ, if so be ye have heard him, and have been taught by him as the truth is
in Jesus, that ye put off concerning the former convers^tion the old man which
is corrupting according to the deceitful lust, and be ye renewed in the Spirit
of your mind, and that ye put on the new man, which is created after God in
righteousness and holiness of truth. Then who holds out the truth of Christ, we
or the Vindicator, let all wise men judge impartially between us. Thus much for
divine authority; now for humane: we shall first produce diverse of the Fathers,
and some of those which the Vindicator or his friends for him have alleged
against us to out-ballance him; and then the authority of our own Church (the
best reformed of all the Protestant Churches) in her established doctrine, and
late Liturgy. For the first of these; Justin Martyr in quaest. and respon. ad
Orthodoxos; All men do sin, not because we cannot do otherwise: which appears
from hence, because all men are not entangled with all sorts of sins, but some
fall into these offenses, some into others; and some men are involved with many
sins, some with fewer, and some with none at all; those of whom I spoke before,
to wit Zachary and Elizabeth.

Origin super Genesis homilia 11. But let us see how a man may be made the good
savor of Christ, sin is a filthy stinking thing. In a word, sinners are
compared to swine wallowing, who wallow in the filthy dung. If there be any of
you in whom there is no savor of sin, but the savor of righteousness, and the
sweetness of mercifulness, he is the sweet savor of Christ.

Cyprian. sermon. de Baptism. Christi. The Law teach us to avoid sin, it reproves
transgressors; and to the intent we should walk with washed and clean feet, it
foreshews all things that may offend, and makes known unto us all diverticles
whereby dangerous out-turnings and passages may be avoided: it commands nothing
that is impossible, nothing that is austere or difficult.

Chrysos. in 2 Cor. 11. homil. 3. speaking of Abraham's prayer made to God in
the behalf of the inhabitants of Sodom and the neighboring cities which were
to be destroyed, Genesis 18. says he, that Abraham speaking there verse. 27. by
way of self-abasment before the Lord, said, Behold, now I have taken upon me to
speak unto the Lord which am but dust and ashes; and thus he did, Because,
says Chrysostom, Abraham at this time had no sin left, therefore he flies unto
nature it self; and because the name of earth contains in it something that is
honest and decorous in its kind, he adds the word ashes thereunto.

Hieron. in Epist. He which desires to reign with Christ must of necessity be
pure or clean from all naughtiness and guile: if thou will have thy part or
portion with Christ, thou must live after Christ's pattern; if thou desire the
society of the Saints, keep thy heart clean from the very thought of
naughtiness and sin, because the celestial Court receives none but those that
are holy, chaste, simple, innocent, and pure.

Augustine. de vera and falsa poenitentia: For he is first to be purged with the
fire of purgation who deferreth the fruit of his conversion unto another world:
and albeit (says he) this fire be not everlasting, yet it is grievous after a
wonderful manner; for it exceedes all the pain that ever any man suffered in
this life. Therefore let every one so endeavor to amend his faults here, that
he may not have cause to endure such pain hereafter. Here his exhortation and
counsel is good, though his ground concerning purgation wants an Index
expurgatorius.

Idem in lib. de baptism. par. If it be demanded whether a man be without sin
in this life, I confess he may by grace of Christ and the right use of his
free will.

Greg. lib. 2. mara. cap. 8. If we say that Job offended in his speech or words
(which were wickedness in us to think) we should confess that God had lost the
victory in his challenge or offer made to Satan concerning Jobs exposal to his
sifting and trial.

Prosper in his book of senten. ex Augustino. As some parents do aggravate
original sin; so some do lighten or abate it, but none does take it away, save
he only of whom it is said, Behold the lamb of God which takes away the sin
of the world; to whom no good of man is impossible to work, no evil is
uncurable. Unto which add that saying of Bernards, by the Vindicator quoted,
yet without his additional, That kind of sin which so often troubles us, I mean
concupiscence, and evil desires, may and should be repressed by the grace of
God, so that they reign not in us, and that we give not our members as weapons
of unrighteousness unto sin; and then there is no condemnation to them that are
in Christ.

Thus for the Testmony of the Fathers; of which sort we shall allege more in
the confirmation of the second position. Now for the doctrine of our English
reformed Church heretofore established by law; First, in the Catechism is thus
demanded and answered:

Q. What did your Godfathers and Godmothers then for you?

A. They did promise and vow three things in my name; first, that I should
forsake the Devil and all his works, the pomps and vanity of this wicked world,
and all the sinful lusts of the flesh. Secondly, that I should believe all the
Articles of the Christian faith. And thirdly, that I should keep Gods holy will
and commandments, and walk in the same all the days of my life.

Q. Do thou not believe that thou art bound to believe and to do all as they
have promised for thee?

A. Yes verily, and by Gods help so I will, and I heartily thank our heavenly
Father that he has called me unto this state of salvation through Jesus Christ
our Savior: and I pray God to give me his grace that I may continue in the
same unto my livesend. And afterward reciting the Lords prayer:

Q. What desire thou in this prayer?

A. I desire my Lord God, who is the giver of all goodness, to send his grace
unto me and unto all people, that we may worship him, serve him, and obey him
as we ought to do, etc. And that it would please him to save and defend us in
all dangers Ghostly and bodily: and that he will keep us from all sin and
wickedness, and from our Ghostly enemy, and from everlasting death, And this I
trust he will do of his mercy and goodness through our Lord Jesus Christ: and
therefore I say Amen. And afterward concerning Baptism.

Q. What is the inward and spiritual grace signified therein?

A. A death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness.

Hence it is that our Church prayed thus at the baptism of infants; And humbly
we beseech thee to grant that to (the person baptized) he being dead unto sin,
and living unto righteousness, and being buried with Christ in his death, may
crucify the old man, and utterly abolish the whole body of sin. And now we
hope that the Vindicator had not renounced his baptism by sinful positions and
his own wicked course of life.

Secondly, in our late Liturgy we are taught thus to pray in the Collect on
Easter-Tuesday, and to like effect in many other places:

Almighty God, which have given thine only Son to die for our sins, and to
rise again for our justification; grant us so to put away the leaven of malice
and wickedness, that we may always serve thee in pureness of living and truth,
through Jesus Christ.

Unto which we might add that out of the Letanie:

From all evil and mischief, and sin, from the crafts and assaults of the
Devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation, Good Lord deliver us.
From all blindness of heart, from guile, vainglory and hypocrisy, from envy,
hatred, and strife, from all uncharitableness, Good Lord deliver us.

From fornication and all other deadly sin, and from all deceits of the world,
the flesh, and the Devil, Good Lord deliver us.

And thus much for the confirmation of the first position. Come we now to the
establishment of the second; That the law of God may by the grace and help of
Christ be so perfectly kept and fulfilled in this life, as not to offend
against the same, yea as to be justified, and that only by Christ of grace
given: whch we will divide into two branches; and first prove the possibility
of such a fulfilling by the like Topics and authorities as we did the former;
and then briefly ratify that which will follow by consequence, namely that by
such a fulfilling of the Law by the grace of Christ we may be justified before
God and men, according to the truth of the Gospel.

As for the first of these, we take it for granted that the Law of God
requires no more of us then what is contained in those two commandments, Mat.
22.36, 37, 38, 39. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind; this is the first and the great
commandment: and the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self. Because our Savior says verse. 40. On these two commandments hang
all the Law and the Prophets.

Our first Topic to prove all this attainable by grace is taken from Gods
predestination and election. See Joh. 15, 16. I have chosen and ordained you
that you should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain.
Romans 8.29, 30. For whom he did foreknow them he did predestinate to be made
conformable to the image of his Son, that he might be the first born among many
brethren: moreover, whom he did predestinate those he also called, and whom he
called those he also justified, and whom he justified those he also glorified.

Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the
world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love: and chap.
2.10. For we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which
God had before ordained that we shall walk in them.

1 Pet. 1.2. Elect according to the foreknowledge of God in holiness unto
obedience (and in order thereunto) unto the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus
Christ, that is, his sanctifying Spirit, as shall be proved hereafter.

The second Topic is from Gods express commands, which cannot be impossible,
for they should be frustraneous, tyrannical, or unjust, as aforesaid.

Genesis 17.1. I am the almighty God, walk thou before me and be perfect. Deuteronomy.
4.21. Ye shall not add to the words which I command you, neither shall ye
diminish ought from it, that ye may keep the commandments of the Lord your God
which I commanded you. chap. 5.32. Ye shall observe to do therefore as the Lord
your God has commanded you, ye shall not turn aside to the right hand or to
the left. chap. 6.5. And thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy might: and those words which I command
thee this day shall be in thine heart, and thou shall teach them dilligently
unto thy children. Levit. 19.18. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self,
fear the Lord.

Deuteronomy. 6.24, 25. And the Lord commanded us to do all those statutes, to fear
the Lord our God for our good always, that he may preserve us alive, as it is
at this day. And it shall be our righteousness if we observe to do all these
commandments before the Lord our God, as he has commanded us. chap. 10.12.
And now, Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the
Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord
thy God with all thine heart and with all thy soul? chap. 18.13. Thou shall be
perfect with the Lord thy God.

Josh. 22.5. But take diligent heed to do the commandment and the Law which
Moses the servant of the Lord charged you, to love the Lord your God, and to
walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandments, and to cleave unto him,
and to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul.

Jerem. 7.25. But this thing commanded I them saying, obey my voice, and I will
be your God, and ye shall be my people, and walk in all the ways that I have
commanded you, that it may be well unto you.

Mala. 4.4. Remember ye the Law of my servant Moses which I commanded in Horeb
for all Israel, with the statutes and judgments.

The third Topic is Gods promises to enable us to fulfill these by grace in
Christ.

Deuteronomy. 26.18, 19. And the Lord has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar
people, as he has promised thee, and that thou' should keep all his
commandments, and to make thee high above all nations which he has made in
praise and in honor, that thou may be an holy people unto the Lord thy God,
as he has spoken. Deuteronomy. 30.6, 7, 8. And therefore thy God will circumcise
thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may live, and the Lord thy God will
put all these curses upon thine enemies, and on them that hate thee, and which
persecuted thee, and thou shall return and obey the voice of the Lord thy God,
and do all these commandments which I commanded thee this day.

Isai. 46.29, 30, 31. He gives power to the faint, and to them that have no
strength he increases might: even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the
young men shall utterly fail, but those that wait upon the Lord shall renew
their strength; they shall mount with wings as Eagles, they shall run and not
be weary, they shall walk and not faint. chap. 42.21. The Lord is well pleased
for his righteousness sake, he will magnify the Law and make it honorable.
Which it would not be if it were impossible. chap. 48.17, 18. Thus faith the
Lord thy redeemer, the holy one of Israel, I am the Lord thy God which teaches
thee to profit, which leads thee by the way which thou shall go: O that thou
had harkened to my commandments! then had thy peace been as a river, and thy
righteousness as the waves of the sea. chap. 51.4, 5. Harken unto me my
people, and give ear O Nation, for a Law shall proceed from me, and I will
make my judgment to rest for a light to the Gentiles, my righteousness is
near my salvation is gone forth. verse. 7, 8. Harken unto me ye that know
righteousness, the people in whose heart is my Law, fear ye not the reproach of
men, neither be ye afraid of their revisings, for the moth shall eat them up
like a garment, and the worm shall eat them up like wool: but my righteousness
shall be sure, and my salvation from generation to generation.

Jerem. 31.32, 33, 34. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will make
a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah, says the
Lord, not according to the covenant which I made with their Fathers, in the day
that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the Land of Egypt, which my
covenant they broke, although I was an Husband unto them, (or therefore I must
overule them) says the Lord; but this shall be the covenant which I will make
with the house of Israel; After those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law
in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and
they shall be my people: And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor,
and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord; for they shall all know me
from the least of them to the greatest of them, says the Lord, for I will
forgive their iniquities, and remember their sins no more.

Where take notice of these things; that the first covenant is a covenant of
works, and the effect a compulsive obedience out of fear of vengeance.

Secondly, that the second covenant is made to those that now love God and
righteousness, and obey it out of good will, after the days of compulsion are
ended, which must have their foregoing work to break man's strong lusts and
inclinations to sin; after which comes the revelation of free mercy and
salvation out of grace, unexpectedly witnessed from Heaven, to the lost, yet
humbled penitent, and praying or deprecating soul, which melts his heart with
godly sorrow, and inflames his heart with love to God, and righteousness, and
with an hatred of all known sin.

Thirdly, that this second covenant is of sanctification, and then of some
degree of glory. As to the former, the Lord promises to put his Law into our
inward parts, and to work the same in our hearts; which is done no other way
but by regeneration, and by the promised Spirit of Christ, which is called the
blood of the new covenant, and the blood of the everlasting covenant for the
purging, or the dimission away of our sins; whereof both the expiative and
consecrating blood of the old Testament was a figure, Exodus 24.8. and 14.14,
10. and chap. 8.23, 24. and whereof the wine in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper in the New Testament is a sign and representation, as the bread broken
is a representation both of his word to be broken, received and eaten, Jer.
15.16. and of his suffering patience and weakness, which is a body of his to be
broken unto us by degrees, and received by faith and obedience, where through
we may remember Christ's death, and follow him therein, crucifying sin till he
come unto us in the Spirit and power of his resurrection. Thus the Apostle
says, ' Heb. 9.14. How much more shall the blood of Christ (this Spirit, and
spiritual blood of Christ) who through the eternal Spirit offered himself (as
man) without spot to God, purge the consciences (or souls) from dead works, to
serve the living God? And Heb. 10.29. He that falls from grace counts the blood
of this covenant wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing (or a thing of
small price) and so does despite to the Spirit of grace: and hence it is that
the Apostle prays, Heb. 13.20. that God who brought again from the dead the
Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, would through the blood of the
everlasting covenant make the believing Hebrews perfect in every good work to
do the will of the Lord; as Peter also tells the Saints 1 Pet. 1.18. that they
were through the same redeemed or delivered from their vain conversation in a
Jewish righteousness received by tradition from their Fathers. This blood is
promised unto them that walk in the light with God and his Saints, 1 John 1.7.
But if we walk in the light as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with
another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all our sin.
With this blood the Saints washed their robes (or imperfect righteousness) and
made them white, Rev. 7.14. with this Christ washed the Apostles, and made them
Kings and priests unto God, Rev. 1.5, 6. for which they give him praise and
glory; and with this is the Devil overcome and cast out, Rev. 12.11.

A third thing observable in this covenant, is, that there is a clear, full,
and glorious wisdom promised to each Saint in due time, so that they shall not
need to say to each other, know the Lord, for they shall know him from the
least of them to the greatest; for that perfect knowledge and love is then come
which makes the imperfect knowledge and prophesying to cease, 1 Cor. 13.8, 9.
Lastly, the time of that perfect wisdom, power, and love, is also limited,
namely verse. 34. in those words, for I will forgive their iniquities, and
remember their sins no more: it is then when God has purged and taken away all
their sins by the same blood: where forgiving of sins (as in many other places)
is to be understood of the purging them away by Gods grace, which we call
dimission, and that is the principal taking away of sin, upon which the pardon,
or taking away of the guilt follows of course, and is cast in over and above,
out of Gods abundant mercy for the death and sufferings of Christ.

But to proceed; Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27. we have another of these promises of
enabling grace; Then will I pour clean water upon you, and from all your sins
and from all your idols will I cleanse you; a new heart also will I give you,
and a new Spirit will I put within you, and I will take the stony heart out of
you, and I will give you an heart of flesh, (that flesh of Christ of which we
spoke before) and will put my Spirit within you, and I will cause you to walk
in my statutes, and ye shall keep my commandments and do them.

Luke 1.72, 73, 74, 75. To perform the mercy promised to our Fathers, and to
remember his holy covenant, the oath which he swore to our Father Abraham that
we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies might serve him without
fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life. With
which agrees that which follows, 2 Pet. 11.4. whereby exceeding great and
precious promises are given unto us, that by them we should be partakers of the
divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust.
In both which places we may take notice that there are but two grand benefits
promised in Christ, the first in order of time and nature, is deliverance from
our spiritual enemies, or our escaping out of corruption; and the second is a
partaking of the divine nature; whereby we may serve God cheerfully and without
fear, in holiness and righteousness all our days. Here is no mention made in
these promises of the remission of sins, either because it is an appendant to
the first benefit, God taking away the guilt with the corruption and fault, or
because the Lord counts it so inconsiderable a benefit in comparison of the
other two that he makes no mention of it, but casts it in over and above, as
Christ speaks, Matthew. 6.33. Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his
righteousness, and all other things shall be added unto you.

The fourth Topic shall be, That this full obedience through the grace and
help of God is made the condition to the greatest part of Gods promises, and
his spiritual blessings in special.

Exodus 19.5, 6. Now therefore if you will obey my voice indeed and keep my
covenant, ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people, for all the
earth is mine, etc. And Exodus 23.20, 21, 22. Behold I send an Angel before thee
(the Angel of the covenant) to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee to the
place which I have prepared. Beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him
not, for he will not pardon your transgressions, for my name (or being) is in
him. But if thou shall indeed obey his voice, and do all that I speak, then I
will be an enemy to thine enemy, and an adversary to thine adversaries. See
Levit. 26.13. all manner of blessings are promised upon this score. Deuteronomy.
11.8.9. Therefore shall ye keep all the commandments that I command you this
day, that ye may be strong, and go in and possess the land whether ye go in to
possess it, and that ye may prolong your days in the land which the Lord
swear unto your Fathers to give unto them, a land flowing with milk and honey.
(which land is a type of the heavenly Canaan) Deuteronomy. 28.1, 15. And it shall come
to pass, if thou shall hearken diligently unto the voice of the Lord thy God,
to serve him and to do all his commandments which I command thee this day,
that the Lord thy God will set thee on high above all nations of the earth, and
all these blessings shall come upon thee and overtake thee, if thou shall
hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God: blessed shall thou be in the city,
etc. Joshua 1.7, 8. Only be thou strong and very courageous, that thou may
observe to do according to all the law which Moses my servant commanded thee;
turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou may prosper
whithersoever thou go.

Isaiah 1.19. If ye be willing and obedient ye shall eat the good of the land.

Ezekiel. 33.15. If the wicked restore the pledge, give again that which he robbed,
walk in the statutes of life, he shall surely live, he shall not die.

Matthew. 5.19. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments,
and shall teach men so, he shall be called least in the kingdom of heaven: but
whosoever shall do, and teach them the same, shall be called great in the
kingdom of heaven. Chap. 7.21. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my Father
which is in heaven. Chap. 28.20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever
I have commanded you; and lo I am with you to the end of the world.

Luke 10.25, 26, 27. And behold, a certain Lawyer stood up and tempted him,
saying, Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life? he said unto him, what
is written in the law? how read thou? and he answered and said, thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all
thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbor as thy self: And he said
unto him, thou have answered right, this do and thou shall live. See John
15.10. If ye keep my commandments ye shall abide in my love, even as I, etc.

2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse
our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and of the Spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God.

Heb. 10.36. For ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of
God ye may receive the promise.

Rev. 21.14. Blessed are they that do his commandment, that they may have
right to the tree of life, and may enter through the gates into the city.

The fifth Topic shall be, The end of Christ's coming to fulfill the law in us,
according to Gods covenant aforesaid.

Psalm. 22.30, 31. A seed shall serve him, it shall be accounted to the Lord for
a generation; he shall come, and shall declare his righteousness unto a people
that shall be born, that he has done this (to wit, wrought that righteousness
in them.)

Isaiah 53.10. He shall sow his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. See chap. 61.1, 2, 3. before
cited.

Jer. 23.5 6. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will raise unto
David a righteous branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute
judgment and justice upon the earth, (in men) in his days Judah shall be saved
from their enemies, and Israel shall dwell safely: And this is his name whereby
he shall be called, The Lord our righteousness; to wit, that righteousness
which he executes and works in his Saints.

Dan. 9.24. Seventy weeks are determined upon the people and upon the holy
city, to finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to
seal up the vision and prophecy, and to anoint the most holy: by bringing in
the everlasting righteousness aforesaid.

Matthew. 5.17, 18. Think not that I am come to destroy the law and the Prophets,
I came not to destroy, but to fulfill; (to wit, in us, as for us) for verily I
say unto you, that till heaven and earth pass away not one jot or one tittle
shall pass from the law till all be fulfilled, (and that in us,) as the next
words there prove. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these commandments,
and teach men so, he shall be counted least in the kingdom of heaven etc.

Romans 8.3, 4. For what the law could not do in that it was weak through the
flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin
condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the law might be
fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit. Romans 10.4.
For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that believes.

1 Cor. ^.30. Who is made of God unto us wisdom (in the understanding)
righteousness (in the will) and not only sanctification in both, but
redemption in fullness also.

Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. As Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that
he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, that
he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle,
or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish.

Titus 2.14. Who loved us, and gave himself for us, that he might redeem us
from all iniquity, and purify us unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of
good works.

The sixth Topic shall be from the end of the law and the written word of God.

Psalm 111.4, 5, 6. Thou have commanded to keep thy precepts diligently. O that
my ways were directed to keep thy statutes! Then shall I not be ashamed when I
have respect unto all thy commandments. verse. 89. For ever O Lord thy word is
settled in heaven. And verse. 105, 106. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet and a
light unto my path: I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy
righteous judgments.

Romans 15.4. For whatsoever things were written aforetimes were written for our
learning, that through patience and the comfort of the Scriptures we should
have hope. 1 Timothy 1.5. Now the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure
heart and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned.

2 Timothy 3.16, 17. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, and for instruction in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to
every good work. See 2 Pet. 1.19. 'We have also a sure word of prophecy, unto
which ye do well to give heed as unto a light shining, until the day dawn, and
the day star arise in your hearts.

The seventh Topic shall be from the end of the ministry of the word set up in
the Church by the Lord himself.

Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. And he gave some Apostles, some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, and for the edifying of the body of Christ, till
we all come in the unity of the faith, and the knowledge of the Son of God unto
a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. For
which end see the Apostles suitable practice: Coloss. 1.28. Whom we preach,
warning every man, and teaching every man, that we may present every man
perfect in Jesus Christ.

As for the Topic of the end of the two Sacraments, we have spoken before.

The eighth Topic then shall be the prayer which Christ has taught us to
pray, (and which his Apostles, yea Christ himself has prayed) for this
perfection; Matthew. 6.10. Thy kingdom come, thy will be done in earth as it is
in heaven.

2 Cor. 13.9. And this also we wish, even your perfection.

Ephesians. 3 19. That ye might be filled with all the fullness of God.

Phil. 1.10, 11. That ye might be sincere and without offense till the day of
Christ, being filled with the fruits of righteousness, etc.

Coloss. 1.9, 10. For this cause we also, since the day we heard it, do not
cease to pray for you, and to desire that ye might be filled with the knowledge
of his will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding; that ye might walk
worthy of the Lord to all well pleasing, being fruitful in every good work.
chap. 4.10. laboring fervently for you in prayer, that ye may stand perfect
and complete in all the will of God.

1 Thessalonians. 3.12. And the Lord make you to increase and abound in love toward
each other and toward all men, as we do toward you, to the end that he may
establish your hearts unblameable in holiness. chap. 5.23. Now the God of
peace sanctify you wholly, etc.

Did those Ministers of God pray against perfection in this life, as the
Vindicator and a certain Minister in Salisbury, who came out of New England
rather then out of new Jerusalem, are said to to have done?

Heb. 13.20, 21. Now the God of peace which brought again from the dead our
Lord Jesus Christ, that great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the
everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do his will.

1 Pet. 5.10. Now the God of all grace who has called us unto his eternal
glory by Jesus Christ, after ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, etc.

Joh. 17.23. I in them and they in me, that ye may be made perfect in one,
says Christ.

The ninth Topic shall be the admission of this work as possible every where
in Scripture.

Psalm. 112. Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, that delights greatly
in his commandments. and 119.1^2. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who
walk in the Law of the Lord. Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and
seek him with the whole heart; they also do no iniquity they walk in his ways.

Ezekiel. 18.21. But if the wicked will turn away from all his sins that he has
committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he
shall surely live, he shall not die.

Luke 17.10. So likewise ye when ye shall have done all these things which are
commanded you, say ye are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was
our duty to do. Romans 2.13. For not the hearers of the Law are just before God,
but the doers of the Law are justified.

Jam. 2.8. If ye fulfill the royal Law, according to the Scripture, Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self, ye do dwell. chap. 3.2. If any man offend not
in word the same is a perfect man.

1 John 5.3, 4. For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments,
and his commandments are not grievous; for whatsoever is born of God
overcommeth the world, and this is the victory that overcomes the world, even
our faith. 1 Ioh. 3.22. And whatsoever we ask we receive of him, because we
keep his commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight.

Rev. 12.17. And the Dragon was wroth with the woman, and went to make war with
the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandment of God, and have the
testimony of Jesus Christ. chap. 14.12. Here is the patience of the Saints,
here are they that keep the commandments of God and the faith of Jesus.

The tenth Topic shall be examples of men who by Gods testimony have fully
followed him and obeyed him at length.

Such an one was Abel, Heb. 11.4. By says Abel offered to God a more excellent
sacrifice then Cain, by which he obtained witness that he was righteous, God
testifying of his gifts; and by it he being dead yet speaks.

Enoch, Genesis 5.22. And Enoch walked with God after he begat Methuselah, three
hundred years. Heb. 11.5. By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see
death, and was not found, because God had translated him; for before his
translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God.

Noah, Genesis 6.9. Noah was a perfect and a just man in his generation, and Noah
walked with God. Heb. 11. By faith Noah being warned of God concerning things
as yet not seen, moved with fear he prepared an ark to the saving of his house,
whereby he became heir of the righteousness of faith. And though aftewards he
was overcome by wine, that was but a single act and surprise, he not knowing
the strength of that wine till he had tried it.

Abraham, Heb. 11.8, 9. By faith Abraham when he was called out to go into a
place which he should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed, and he went
out, not knowing whither he went, by faith he sojourned in the Land of Promise
as in a strange country, dwelling in Tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, heirs
with him of the same promise; for he looked for a City which had foundations,
whose author and builder is God. verse. 17, 18, 19. By faith Abraham when he was
tried offered up his Son Isaac, and he that had received the promise offered
his only begotten Son, of whom it was said, that in Isaac thy seed shall be
called; accounting that God was able to raise him up from the dead. James 2.23.
And the Scripture was fulfilled, which said, Abraham believed, and it was
accounted to him for righteousness, and he was called the friend of God.
Isaac, Heb. 11, 20. Jacob, Genesis 25.27. And Jacob was a perfect man, dwelling in
Tents. Lot, 2 Pet. 2.7. and delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy
conversation of the unrighteous: for that which his daughters did unto him was
by way of intoxication, without his knowledge or will.

Caleb, Numb. 14.24. But my servant Caleb, because he had another Spirit with
him, and has followed me fully, him will I bring into the Land whereunto he
went.

Ioshuah, Numb. 32.11, 12. Surely none of the men that came u^ out of Egypt
from twenty years old and upward shall see the land which I swear unto Abraham,
unto Isaao, and unto Jacob, because they have not wholly followed me, save
Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite, and Joshuah the son of Nun, for they
have wholly followed the Lord. Joseph in Egypt a lively type of Christ.

Phineas, Psalm. 106.30, 31. Then stood up Phineas, and excuted judgment, and
the plague was stayed; and that was counted to him for righteousness unto all
generations for evermore.

Many (if not the whole family) of Levi in Moses his days; Mal. 2.5, 6. My
covenant was with him of life and peace, and I gave them unto him for the fear
wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before my name: the law of truth was in
his mouth, and iniquity was not found in his lips; he walked with me in peace
and equity, and did turn many away from iniquity. See Deuteronomy. 33.9. Who said unto
his father and his mother, I have not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his
brethren, nor know his own children, for they have observed thy word and kept
thy law.

Job 1.8. And the Lord said unto Satan, have thou considered my servant Job,
that there is none like unto him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man,
one that fears God and escheweth evil p. chap. 2.3. And the Lord said unto
Satan, have thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the
earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that fears God and escheweth evil?
and still he holds fast his integrity, although thou movedst me against him to
destroy him without a cause: and chap. 42.7, 8. And it was so that after the
Lord had spoken these words unto Job, the Lord said unto Eliphaz the Temenite,
my wrath is kindled against thee and thy two friends; therefore take unto you
seven bullocks and seven ramms, and go ye to my servant Job, and offer up for
your selves a burnt offering, (for him will I accept) lest I should deal with
you after your folly, in that ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right,
as my servant Job has done. And though Job had seen God then face to face,
verse. 5. yet he lived an hundred and forty years afterward, wherein he had
time to be further perfected, if need did so require.

Samuel was not only a just man, by the confession of all Israel, but declared
so by a token which God at his request sent from heaven, 1 Samuel 12.17, 18.

Daniel was also such an one, concerning whom, Noah and Job, the Lord speaks
as of three great favorites of his, and men full of righteousness. Ezekiel.
14.14. Though these three men, Noah, Daniel and Job were in it, they shall but
deliver their own souls by their righteousness.

We say nothing here of Rahab the hostess (rather then an harlot) who is so
highly commended, Heb. 11.13. James 2. of Deborah, of Naomi, of Ruth, of Hannah
the mother of Samuel, of Rebeccah, of the Virgin Mary, of Elizabeth, and
Zachary her husband, and of John their son: It is said of Stephen, that he was
full of faith and power, Act. 6.8. yea full of the holy Ghost, Act. 7.55. and
that he saw the heavens opened: and of Barnabas, Act. 11.24. that he was a good
man, and full of the holy Ghost and of faith: yea the Apostles imply that many
such might be found in the Church. Act. 6.3. Wherefore brethren look out from
among you seven men of honest report, full of the holy Ghost and of wisdom,
etc. But as the Apostle concludes his catalogue of Saints and believers in the
old Testament, saying, Heb. 11.31, 33. And what shall I more say? for the time
would fail me for to tell of Gideon, and of Barack, and of Sampson, of Jephtah,
of David also, and of Samuel, and of the Prophets; who through faith subdued
kingdoms, (the power of sin and Satan) wrought righteousness, obtained
promises. Also John does not only own such a perfection as we stand for to be
attained by himself and many others in this life, saying 1 John 4.17. Herein is
our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment: But
saw first many thousand servants of God of every tribe sealed; And after I
beheld a great multitude which no man could number, of all nations and
kindreds, and people and tongues, standing before the throne, and before the
lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands, who came out of great
tribulation here, and had washed their robes, and had made them white in the
blood (or spirit) of the lamb. Rev. 3.14. And the like spectacle he saw, chap.
14.4, 5. of men that follow the lamb wheresoever he goes, being redeemed from
among men, and made the first fruits unto God and the lamb; and in their mouth
was found no guile, for they are without fault before the throne of God.

The eleventh Topic shall be the two parts of all practical truth in Christ;
of which before out of Ephesians. 4.20, 24.

But ye have not so learned Christ if so be ye have heard him, and have been
taught by him as the truth is in Jesus; That ye put off concerning the former
conversation the old man which is corrupting through the deceitful lusts, and
be ye renewed in the spirit of your minds, and put you on the new man which is
created after God in righteousness and holiness of truth.

The last Topic shall be the new Jerusalem that comes down from heaven, which
in its coming is called the Lord our righteousness, from the presence of the
holy Ghost, or rather of the whole Trinity.

Jer. 33.15, 16. At that day and at that time will I cause the branch of
righteousness to grow up unto David, and he shall execute judgment and
righteousness in the land; in those days Judah shall be saved, and Jerusalem
shall dwell safely; and this is the name wherewith he shall be called; The Lord
our righteousness. Which Jerusalem is promised to every overcomer of sin and
Satan, Rev. 3.12. as before; and it is an estate to be had in this life, as Mr.
Brightman, and most of the best interpreters among the the Protestants, and
Arrias Montanus among other Papists, does confess out of the clearness and
evidence of the Text, Rev. 21.23. And I John saw the holy city, new Ierusasalem
coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her
husband; and I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying, behold, the
tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be
his people, and he shall be with them and be their God: And at verse. 9. God
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, (
viz. spiritual death, which is either sin, or the wages of sin) neither sorrow
nor crying, neither shall there be any more (spiritual) pain (which being
effects of sin, are with their causes taken away before;) for the former things
are passed away. So our obedience to the law must go before as a preparative
and a qualification hereunto; Lev. 26.3. and 11.12. If you walk in my statutes,
and keep my commandments and do them, then will I give you rain in due season,
etc. and I will set my tabernacle among you, and my soul shall not abhor you,
and I will walk among you, and I will be your God, and you shall be my people.
See Ezekiel. 37.27. My tabernacle also shall be with them, yea, I will be their
God, and they shall be my people: and Psalm. 128.1, 5. Blessed is every one that
fears the Lord, and walks in his ways; and verse. 5. The Lord shall bless
thee out of Sion, and thou shall see the good of Jerusalem (to wit the
spiritual Jerusalem aforesaid) all thy days.

Thus much of divine authority; now for humane.

Justine Martyr in Resp. ad Orthodoxos, says, That which is possible to one
man is possible to any, as to sail by sea; for even as the Scripture says,
that certain of them who live under the law were unblamable in righteousness,
so it was possible unto all those who lived under the law to have been alike
unblamable: for Saint Luke the Evangelist says of Zachary and Elizabeth,
chap. 1.6. that they were both righteous before God, walking in all the
commandments, justification (or righteousness) of the law blameless. But what
is the total righteousness of the law? even to love God above thy self, and thy
neighbor as thy self; which is not impossible unto those men which apply their
will and desire thereunto. Wherefore that saying, By the works of the law shall
no flesh be justified, was not spoken or used by the Apostle because we cannot
perform impossibilities, but because we will not frame our selves to do things
possible.

Origin in his ninth homil. upon Joshuah says, Does not that man seem unto the
Worthies to be reckoned among women, who says, I cannot observe or do that
which is written? And again in the same place; he that says, I cannot fulfill
them, does he not manifest himself worthy to be ranked among the feminine sort,
who can do nothing that is virile, or like a man, or worthy of that sex?

Cyprian sermon. de Baptis. Christi. Neither does this written law in any thing
differ from the natural; but the rejection or refusal of evil, and the election
of good are so infixed into the rational soul from above, that no man has just
cause in this behalf to complain, because there is neither knowledge nor power
wanting unto any man for the prosecution and performance of the same, because
we know what ought to be done, and have power to effect what we know; whereas
if the precepts were impossible, or environed with so great difficulties, or
thy will therein so abstruse and hidden that the thing could not be understood
which thy Highness (or Majesty) requires of us, albeit no man sins against his
will, yet he might many ways excuse his offense (or sin) unless the equity and
moderation of that which is commanded, and the clear knowledge of the truth,
and the distinction of things to be done, or not done, had been sufficiently
provided for us by an intelligible authority, and therewith the possibility,
facility and power had therein embraced each other.

Basil. Magnus homil. 3. It is impious to say that the precepts of Gods Spirit
are impossible. And in Psalm. 119.155. he says, I knowing that thou beholdest
me, have not only fulfilled thy commandments, but I have done it also with a
fervent mind.

Chrysostom. homil. 19. in Heb. Christ commands nothing that is impossible, in
so much that many go beyond the commandments: and homil. 18. de poeniton. And
if it be demanded who ever did this; he presently answers, Saint Paul, Saint
Peter, and even the whole chorus (or quire) of Saints: and homil. de poenitent.
8. Do not in any wise accuse the Lord, for he does not command things that are
impossible.

Hieron. Symbol. Apost. Epist. 17. We detest their blasphemy who affirms that
God commanded any thing impossible to man; and that Gods commandments cannot
be kept of any man in particular, but of men taken together.

August. de Not. and Great. cap. 4.3. God by giving his law unto us admonished
us to do what we can, and admonished us to ask what we cannot do.

Idem de tempor. sermon. 61. Neither could God command any thing that is
impossible, because he is just; nor will condemn any man for that which be
could not do, because he is pious, or good.

Idem in Psalm. 56. God would never command us to do that thing, if he judged
it impossible to be done of man; if thou therefore considering thine infirmity
faintest under the precept, be comforted by example; for he that gave us his
example is at hand, that he may also afford us his aid.

Idem in Heb. Epist. 89. The love of God is diffused into our hearts, from
whence proceeds the fulfilling of the law, not by the power of the will which
is in us, but by the holy Ghost which is given unto us.

Idem de verbis Apost. sermon. 15. He that believes in him shall not have his
own righteousness which is out of the law, though the law is good; but he shall
fulfill the law, not by his own righteousness, but that love which is given him
of God, for love is the fulfilling of the law; and from whence is that love
diffused into our hearts? not from our selves, but from the holy Ghost which is
given unto us.

Idem lib. 2. in Julian. cap. 1. Neither is the perfection of virtue to be
despaired of by his grace who can change and heal that nature which was
vitiated originally (or from the beginning.)

Prosp. lib. Senten. ex August. The law is given that grace may be sought,
grace is given that the law may be fulfilled.

Idem ibidem. The end of the law is Christ, in whom the law of righteousness is
not confirmed, but fulfilled; for all perfection is to be found in him, beyond
whom here is no place or thing whither the hope of faith and truth should
extend it self.

Idem ibid. Every precept is light for him that loves; nor is it so to be
understood as spoken upon any other occasion, where it is said, my burden is
light, but because he gives the holy Ghost, by which love is diffused into our
hearts: we should do that freely and liberally which fear made us do servilely.

Greg. in homil. 38. upon the Gospel, called charity the wedding garment, which
he that has not before he comes to the great marriage, is excluded.

To say nothing of Alippius, Evodius, Aurelius, Possidius, and many more of the
ancients, who with Aug. did hold, That the law of God by grace was possible to
be kept and fulfilled in this life; we will add a testimony or two of Leo and
the Schoolmen, and then come to our own English reformed doctrine: he says,
sermon. 12. de passione. Where sin abounded there grace has superabounded, that
those who were born with the guilt or prejudice of sin, have power to be reborn
unto righteousness; for the gift of freedom is stronger (or more forcible)
then was the debt of bondage and slavery.

Idem sermon. 9. de Jesun. and alibi. He may justly press us with his precept who
goes before with his help and grace; and again sermon. 9. de Jejun. sept. men. We
cannot attain to that which is promised unless we observe that which is
commanded, but because we commonly do this without the grace of God. Also he
adds further upon those words of our Savior, be ye holy as I am holy; seeing
it seems difficult which I command, run to the command, that from whence the
precept is enjoined, help may be afforded for performance. As for the
Schoolmen, we have their judgment briefly comprehended in that verse, Ultra
posse vini non vult Deus ulla requiri.
Beyond man's possibility by grace
The just God naught requires of mortal race.


As for our reformed doctrine and Liturgy, those places which we alleged
before upon the former position will speak to this also; That as our Godfathers
and Godmothers did promise and vow in our names, that we should keep Gods holy
will and commandments, and walk in the same all the days of our life; so we
should by Gods help resolve so to do, and to that end seek his grace, that we
may continue the same unto our lives end. And afterward, when the catechist
had set forth the duties of the whole law in the first and second table, he
says, My 'good child, know this, that thou art not able to do this of thy
self, (nor to walk in the commandments of God and to serve him) without his
special grace which thou must learn to call for at all times by diligent
prayer, etc.

As for the Liturgy, in the Collect upon the first Sunday after the Epiphanie,
the Church was wont to pray thus:

Grant that these thy people may both perceive and know what things they ought
to do, and also have grace and power faithfully to fulfill the same, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

And besides a prayer said after every one of the commandments, in the close
of all the Church prayed thus; Lord have mercy upon us, and write all these thy
laws in our hearts we beseech thee.

To say nothing of the most learned Bishops that were in their ages, Bishop
Andrews, Bishop Overal, and Bishop White, with other Grandees and Fathers of
our Church, King James upon the Lords prayer affirms, that it is blasphemy to
say that any of Christ's precepts are impossible; for that were to give him the
lie, who told us out of his own mouth, that his yoke is easy, and his burden
light: And Christ's intimate disciple says, 1 John 5.3. that his commandments
are not grievous.

Thus much for the first branch of the second position: now for the second
which follows thereupon; That by this righteousness or obedience unto the law
wrought by the grace of Christ we may be justified. Take these twelve things
into consideration; First, that justification is one and the same thing with
sanctification in Jesus Christ, as we have showed out of many places of the
Scriptures; as 1 Cor. 6.11. But now ye are washed, now ye are sanctified, now
ye are justified in the name of our Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.
Tit. 3.4, 5, 6, 7. He saved us by the washing of regeneration, and by the
renewing of the holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ
our Savior; that being justified by his grace we should be made heirs
according to the hope of eternal life. Rev. 21.11. where read the Text thus, as
it signifies in the Greek; Let him that is unjust be unjust still, and he that
is filthy be filthy still; but he that is justified be justified still, and he
that is sanctified be sanctified still.

Secondly, that as we are sanctified by faith in Christ ( Acts 26.18. among
those that are sanctified by faith in me) so we are justified by faith in
Christ; Gal. 2.16. knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law,
but by the faith of Christ.

Thirdly, as we are sanctified by the Spirit of Christ, so we are justified by
that Spirit 1 Cor. 6.11. But now ye are washed, but now ye are sanctified, but
now ye are justified in the name of our Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our
God.

Fourthly, as sanctification is taken for a washing away of sin, so is
justification also. Ibid. 1 Cor. 6.11. And such were some of you, but now ye
are washed, but now ye are sanctified, but now ye are justified. Acts 13.39.
And by him all that believe are justified from all things from which they could
not be justified by the law of Moses.

Fifthly, sanctification is taken for a positive or infused holiness or
righteousness, whereby the contrary unrighteousness is purged out: 1 These. 4.3.
For this is the will of God, even your sanctification: and chap. 5.23. Now the
very God of peace sanctify you wholly. So is justification used for an
inherent holiness and righteousness; Isaiah 45.24, 25. Surely shall one say, in
the Lord have I righteousness and strength; even unto him shall men come, and
all that be in censed against him shall be ashamed; for in the Lord shall all
the seed of Israel be justified (in way of inherent righteousness and strength
communicated unto them, as was said in the former verse) and shall glory.

Sixthly, as this sanctification is gradually attained, so is justification
also. Rev. 22.11. He that is unjust let him be unjust still, but he that is
justified let him be justified still, and he that is sanctified let him be
sanctified still, that is, more and more; where justification and
sanctification are used for an inhesive holiness, or righteousness, as was said
before.

Seventhly, as sanctification is communicated and given to make us obedient
unto the law, that it may be fulfilled by us, so is justification also; Romans
8.4. That the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not
after the flesh but after the Spirit. 1 Pet. 1.2. Elect according to the
foreknowledg of God, or through the sanctification of the Spirit unto
obedience, and the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ.

Eighthly, as forgiveness of sins follows sanctification, as an individual
companion of those sins that are purged away by it, Acts 26.18. that they may
receive remission of sins, and an inheritance among them that are sanctified by
faith that is in me: so that remission of sins is not justification, but an
effect or concomitant of the same. Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods elect? it is God that justifies; who shall condemn?

So did our Church believe, and did pray for children and persons to be
baptized, saying, Almighty and immortal God, the aid of all that need, etc. We
call upon thee for these infants, that they coming to thy holy baptism may
receive remission of their sins by spiritual regeneration.

Ninthly, whereas our Savior makes the new birth absolutely necessary to
salvation John 3.3. Verily I say unto you, that unless ye be born again ye
cannot see the kingdom of God: so Saint Paul leaves out sanctification in
order of causes, unless sanctification and justification be all one: Romans 8.30.
Moreover, whom he did predestinate them he also called, and whom he called
those he justified, and whom he justified them he also glorified. And so does
our Church in the 39. Article speak of sanctification under justification, or
else leaves it out as needless; which were impiety in us to think: which is yet
more clear out of the thirteenth Article, thus entitled. 'Of works before
justification: The words of the article are these; Works done before the grace
of Christ, and the inspiration of his Spirit, are not pleasant to God,
forasmuch as they spring not of faith in Jesus Christ, neither do they make us
meet to receive grace.

Tenthly, every grace and virtue of God whereby we perform obedience to Gods
law is called a justification; and all the graces of the Saints are named as so
many particular justifications: Rev. 19.8. And to her was granted that she
should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white, for the white linen is the
(...), or justifications of Saints. Hence it is that Basil Psalm. 118. according
to his account 119. upon verse. 2. he calls the commandments justification, as
those which are to justify or make just those that observe them rightly: so
before Psalm. 119.7. the law, etc.

Eleventhly, by doing and fulfilling of the law, which we do accomplish by the
grace and Spirit of Christ, Romans 8.4. we become fully justified before God.
Romans 2.13. For not the hearers of the law are just before God, but the doers of
the law shall be justified.

Lastly, as we are sanctified by the blood (that is, the Spirit of Christ:)
Heb. 10.29. Of how much forer punishment shall he be thought worthy who has
trodden under foot the Son of God, and counted the blood of the covenant by
which he was sanctified an unholy thing, and done despite to the Spirit of
grace? So we are justified by the same blood. Romans 5.9. How much more being
justified by his blood shall we be saved from wrath through him? Hence it is
also that the Apostle speaking of the love of Christ to him and his
fellow-Apostles and Saints, says, who has loved us, and washed us in his own
blood, and made us Kings and Priests unto God, Rev. 1.5, 6. where Saint John
speaks of the work of justification. See 1 Pet. 2.9, 10. compared with Exodus
19.5, 6. Concerning which work of justification by Christ's internal
righteousness, take these few testimonies of the Fathers following instead of
many more which might be alleged.

Justin. Martyr. in quaest. ad Orthodoxos, before cited; But what is the
universal righteousness of the law? To love God above himself, and his
neighbor as himself, which is not impossible to those men that apply
themselves thereunto. Wherefore the Apostle did not therefore say, that no
flesh should be justified by the works of the law, because we cannot perform
impossible things, but because we will not do possible things.

Cyprian. sermon. 6. de oratione Domini, speaking of the Publican, that went away
rather justified then the Pharisee, says, he by his humiliation deserved to be
sanctified, etc. Where he makes sanctification and justification to be one and
the same thing.

Hieron. in lib. 1. dialog. advers. Pelag. That a man is not condemned for that
which he has not, but is justified for what he has.

Ambrose lib. 6. exam. cap. etc. I pray thee answer, whether justification seem
to conferred upon thee according to the mind: But thou can not doubt, seeing
justice or righteousness from whence justification has its derivation, but
that it belongs unto the mind, and not unto the body.

Epiphanius does not only make righteousness and goodness to be the same in
the end of the second Tome of his first book; but in the first Tome of his
third book, having spoken of a threefold sanctification or justification, one
of the body under Moses, and another of the soul under the Prophets, and a
third of the Spirit in the new Testament, he compares them to the three parts
of the Temple; the first to the outward court ot space; the second to the holy;
and the third to the Propitiatory. And says, God counts him only just that
has his habitation in the said last steps or degrees of his inward Temple of
holiness. The like saying he has again in lib. anathematum.

Augustine sermon. 5. de Trin. cap. 8. which nature when it is justified it is
transformed from deformity unto a beautiful form. Idem lib. ad Sympliciam
quaest. 2. Because the purpose of God to justify some believers remains,
therefore does he find out these good works which he may choose into the
kingdom of Heaver. And there afterward, unless the mercy of God in calling
men precede, neither can any man believe that he may thereby begin to be
justified, and receive the power and faculty of operating good. Et lib. de
peccati meritis and remissione cap. 10. we read that they which believe in
Christ are justified by (or for) the occult communication and inspiration of
his spiritual grace: and in Psalm. 119. concio. 26. Who whath wrought
righteousness in man, but he that justifies the ungodly? that is, by his
grace of ungodly makes him righteous: and in Psalm. 98. Who has righteousness
in is but he that has justified us? Therefore we are wicked and he is our
justifier, because he works the righteousness in us whereby we please him: and
sermon. 15. de verbis Apostolicis, He that believes him shall not have his own
righteousness which is out of the Law (although the Law is good) but he shall
fulfill the Law it self, not with his own righteousness, but with that which
is given from God himself; for love is the fulfilling of the Law: and from
whence is that love diffused into our hearts? certainly not from our selves,
but by the Spirit of God which is given unto us.

Cyril. Alexandrinus lib. 6. de Trin. It is the heat of the Spirit, who when he
has diffused love into us, and inflamed our mind with the love of the same,
then we have obtained righteousness.

Greg. lib. 18. Mor. cap. 23. All the chosen ones of the imperial country are
holy and just by participation of wisdom, not in comparison of it: they are
righteousness and wisdom, and the servants of righteousness and wisdom,
but that wisdom (to wit Gods) is the justifying righteousness, and they are
the justified righteousness. Prosper. lib. sent. ex Augustino; As there are
two offices of Physic, or of medicine, one whereby the infirmity or disease is
healed, and the other whereby health is preserved; so there are two gifts or
effects of grace, one which takes away the concupiscence of the flesh, and the
other which makes the virtue of the mind to abide or continue with us, and in
respons. ad cap. 6. Gallorum; A justified man, that is, he which of ungodly is
now made godly, where no good, merit, or desert did go before, has received
the gift, (by which means he may attain merit or work) that what was begun by
the grace of Christ may also be augmented by the industry of free will; the
help of God being never set aside or neglected, without which no man can either
be a proficient or perseverer in any good.

Bernard. lib. Sent. For so is justification fulfilled when we abstain from the
vices for bidden, and exercise the virtue or good things commanded.

By this time it is evident (we hope) that we are no innovators, unless the
Fathers of the Church, the Prophets, Apostles, and Christ himself, who have set
forth our doctrine, shall be counted such. And it is no less apparent that the
Vindicator is a veterator, and one of those false prophets of which he speaks
in his Preface, whose study and labor it is to deceive poor souls, yea if it
were possible, the very elect; in which place he tells us more truly then he was
aware, [that these are the times foretold, wherein there shall be a falling
away and a defection from the faith, a forerunner of the great and terrible
day.] For the doctrine maintained in his two positions (by whomsoever first
broached) clearly decyphers a manifest defection from the faith which was first
given to the Saints, who looked for these two things only or mainly by Christ;
first, deliverance out of the hands of their spiritual enemies, and then to be
so renewed that they might serve God without fear in holiness before him all
the days of their life, Luk 1.68. and to escape the corruption of the world
(which came in by lust,) and to be made partakers of the divine nature, 2 Pet.
1.4. To be by regeneration justified, in hope to be made heirs of eternal life,
Tit. 3.4, 5, 6, 7. who expecting eternal life have placed their Religion and
Christianity in putting off the old man, and putting on the new, Ephesians. 4.20,
24. In which Preface also he gives us a warrant for what we preach and write,
saying, [the glory of God lies at the stake (as it does here) and truth is
opposed, he tells us that Gods people must not stand by with a guilty silence;]
nor will we be silent God assisting. But whereas he says, [that he is neither
of note, nor noted by the unworthiest among the thousands of Levite,] we shall
easily grant him the former; but for the latter, as he was never any of the
tribe of Lovi, but by intrusion, and first in a mendicant and abusive way: so
if he had been one of that Tribe, he might have past for one of the unworthiest
of them, by reason of his lewd life; as no small part of his doctrine here is
the scumm of ignorance and infidelity. What he says further, [that we in the
public congregation (to wit, at our second meeting) did beat down the truth of
his positions, and seek to maintain the contrary,] he is mistaken, it was to
decry and overthrow the falsehood of the same, for we can truly say with the
Apostle in our measure and degree, 2 Cor. 13.8. We can do nothing against the
truth but for the truth: where notwithstanding he tells us that the points in
controversy have been so fully and clearly vindicated by the Worthies of our
Church, (of which himself, nor we, ever saw any yet) and by our yet living
Clergy (why did he then produce none of them?) that to any not puffed up with
spiritual pride admission of addition may seem superfluous and unnecessary;
then by his own words he must be convicted as one puffed up with spiritual pride,
whatsoever his coadjutors are; for he and they have made a large addition, if
any thing in this kind was extant before. But whereas he tells us [that many
people have been disturbed and disquieted (in their former opinions and purity)
by reason of the audaciousnesse and impudency of the opposers of his tenants:
we say it that we were, are, and we hope shall be, bold in the cause of God
against sin, and Satan, and the upholders of his kingdom; but we were never so
audacious and impudent as himself, who in Suffolk changed his name, and called
himself Doctor Kendall of Pembrook-Hall.

How beit we will use his pretended motives for our real incentives, who
says, and that truly therein, that because many of the people are not able to
buy volumes, nor by reason of the weakness of their capacities (and small
growth in grace) are able so readily to apprehend the clearness and
perspicuity of the truth upon the hearing of them, nor yet clearly to
distinguish betwixt them and falsehood veiled under truths svizard, we have
therefore for their satisfaction (and the edification of all men) as also for
the confirmation of the truth, presented unto public view some few
collections, which being seriously weighed, considered, and digested, may by
the blessing of God enable the weakest, if willing, to discover truth from
falsehood, Amen.

Now whereas he adds, he is willing both to spend (which is true of his own
money, and other men's also) and to be spent for the Israel of God: It is a
gross piece of hypocrisy; for it is their way that he opposes, Psalm. 73.1.
Surely God is good to Israel, even to them that are of a clean heart. And yet
he says, it being the end for which we are what we are (that is, if he speaks
of himself, his way and practice, a very Gusmond.) Finally he tells his Readers
that they are upon the Stage. Which is true of the Theater of this world (where
we hope they will act Isreal's part better then he has hitherto done) and we
will with him wish them to fight the good fight of faith, (which is not for sin
or Satan, as his Vindication tells us, but for Christ against both) and then we
may as truly, as he does deceitfully, assure them, you, and all the Israel of
God, that the victory shall be glorious, (more glorious then his has been
hitherto, or is likely to be hereafter, without a sudden and earnest
repentance) through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom be glory for ever, Amen.

And now we crave leave to speak a word or two to those that have abetted the
Vindicator, or do any way favor his doctrine; and therein to advertise them of
these things in the name and bowels of Christ.

First, that this doctrine is not the Protestants doctrine, though it may be
called a Protestant doctrine; for there are many distinct Churches, all whose
faith and doctrine are called Protestant, because in many things they protest
against the Church of Rome; of which the Calvinistical is the worst, and most
erroneous; the Lutherans is the next, and in some things more orthodox then the
former: And the third is the ancient English reformed Protestant, which is far
the best of all the three; for our Reformers desired to tread in the footsteps
of Antiquity, according to their best sight and comprehension, which the other,
and (especially the Calvinists) were careless to do, and in many things
refractory thereagainst: and though we in the point of original sin may seem to
differ from our English Church (which received that by tradition from many of
the Fathers) yet when occasion shall serve, we shall make it manifest, that we
have not only divine authority for that and other things also wherein we seem
to some to be out of the common road, but we have the first Fathers of the
Church, and the first reformers, as well as many of the latter, on our side:
and what dishonor will it bring to God, or disconsolation to parents whose
children die in infancy, that we affirm that all children are now born without
original taint or guilt, or why should an allegorical speech, Romans 5. of our
natural and personal Adam, or an hyperbolical speech of David, Psalm. 51. so
far impose upon us (though not rightly looked into by some others in many ages)
as openly to contradict many other Scriptures vindicating Gods mercy and
justice?

Secondly, that this doctrine of the Vindicators which we oppose is
bottomless, like the place from whence it came, that is, it has no foundation
in the Scripture: whereas we have brought some hundreds of Texts, and might
have brought more, to clear up the truth and piety of our tenants; for we dare
challenge all the Calvinists in the world to prove any of these assertions,
(upon which the contrary doctrine is built) by clear Texts of Scripture: First,
that we shall not be perfected in grace till the day of Judgment, so as to be
presented without spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing, whereas we have
remonstrated two things to the contrary, first, that many places which our
adversaries understand of that day, speak clearly of Christ's second coming to
us in the Spirit and inner-man: and secondly, that we must be made holy and
without blemish, not in that day, but before it, and in order unto it, Phil.
1.6, 10, 11. 1 Thessalonians. 5.32. 1 Timothy 6.12, 13, 14, 15. 2 Pet. 3.14. and secondly,
that we shall not be perfected in grace, or the righteousness of
sanctification, until we come into Heaven, or the full kingdom of God; for we
have showed that justification, which is all one with sanctification, must of
necessity go before glorification, Romans 8.30. Tit. 3.4, 5, 6, 7. and so must
full obedience and doing of Gods will, if the Lord affords time and means be
fore the enjoyment of the promises, 2 Cor. 5.10. 'then we must receive the
things done in our bodies; that is a time not of sowing, but of reaping reward,
Gal. 6.9. to wit, of life and glory, Heb. 10.36. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. Thirdly, they
say that sin shall be mortified and abolished by corporal death, and not by the
spirit of grace only, contrary to Romans 8.13. but if ye mortify the deeds of
the body by the Spirit, ye shall live: and Romans 12.21. be not overcome of the
evil, but overcome the evil with the good. See 1 John 1.7, 9. and chap. 14. and
5.3.4. Rev. 7.14. and 12.10, 11. Fourthly, they say that the Spirit of God will
abolish the remainders of sin in the hour of the corporal death, and not
before; contrary to the import of innumerable Scriptures; Psalm. 31.15. My times
are in thine hand, deliver me from the hands of mine enemies: and 39.13. 'O
spare me, that I may recover strength, before I go hence, and be no more seen:
and 41.5. Mine enemies speak evil of me, when shall he die, and his name
perish? and verse. 10, 11. But thou O Lord be merciful unto me, raise me up that
I may requite them; by this I know thou favourest me, because mine enemies do
not triumph over me: and 54.4, 5. Behold God is my helper, the Lord is with
them that uphold my soul, he shall reward evil to mine enemies, cut them off
in thy truth: and 59.13. Consume them in thy wrath, consume them, that they may
not be; and let them know that God rules in Jacob to the ends of the earth:
and 71.24. My tongue shall talkof thy righteousness all the day long, for they
are confounded, for they are brought to shame that seek my hurt: and 101.8. I
will early destroy all the wicked of the Land, that I may cut off all wicked
doers from the City of the Lord; which is every Saint. Jerem. 4.14. Wash thine
heart O Jerusalem, that thou may be saved; how long shall thy wicked thoughts
lodge in thee? Psalm. 112.8. His heart is established, he shall not be afraid
until he see his desire upon his enemies: and 139.23, 24. Search me O my God,
and know my heart, try me and know my thoughts, and see if there be any wicked
way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting: and 143.9, 10. Deliver me O Lord
from mine enemies, for I fly to thee, to hide me with thee; teach me to do thy
will, for thou art my God: thy Spirit it is good, lead me unto the Land of
uprightness, and of thy mercy cut off all mine enemies, and destroy all them
that afflict my soul. Eccles. 9.10. Whatsoever thine hand finds to do, do it
with all thy might; for there is no work, knowledge, wisdom, or device in the
grave, whether thou go: and Luk 1.74, 75. That we being delivered out of the
hands of our enemies might serve him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of our life. Tit. 2.12. Teaching us,
that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world. 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self
bare our sins in his body upon the tree, that we being dead to sin might live
unto righteousness: and 4.1, 2. Forasmuch then as Christ has suffered for us
in the flesh, arm your selves likewise with the same mind, that he which is
dead has ceased from sin, that he should no longer live the rest of his time
in the flesh, after the lusts of men, but after the will of God. Fifthly, that
when we were first converted sin had his death-wound* contrary to Romans 7.14,
24. and 8.13. Gal. 5.17. Heb. 3.13, 14. Take heed brethren lest there be in any
of you an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God; but exhort
one another daily, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of
sin: and 6.4, 5, 6. and 10.26, 27, 28, 29, 30. and 12.15. Looking diligently
lest any fall from the grace of God, lest any root of bitterness springing up
trouble you, and thereby many be defiled. 2 Pet. 2.1.20, 21. Jude 4. etc. for
no sin has its deadly wound till it be by the patience and Spirit of Christ
wholly overcome and lest, Rev. 2.16. and 3.10. Sixthly, That all the guilt of
sin and punishment is taken away, though the pollution and corruption remains;
contrary to Prove. 28.13. Jer. 33.8. Acts. 26.18. this is to take away the
effect, and leave the cause in force and being: hence it is that Hieronymus
says on 1 Cor. 6. Be not deceived, thinking that faith alone suffices, for
every sin that remains excludes men from the kingdom of Heaven, as the
Apostle speaks, Gal. 5. how the works of the flesh are hurtful, which are
these, adultery, fornication, uncleanness etc. of which I tell you before, as
I have told you in times past, that they which do such things shall not inherit
the kingdom of Heaven. But also, says he, they pray sinfully who persevere in
sin, and desire that those sins of theirs should be pardoned or put away by the
Lord, which they themselves have not put away from them. Seventhly, they say
that there is not any other active obedience or righteousness of Christ to be
attained by faith then that which Christ works in his Saints: for its contrary
to Isai. 45.24, 25. and 48.18. and 53.11. and 59.17. and 61.3, 10, 11. and
62.1, 2. Jerem. 23.5, 6. and 31.31, 32, 33. and Romans 4.11. and 5.7, 18, 19. and
8.4. Phil. 3.9, 10. Eighthly, that we are perfect in this life, and complete by
justification, though not by sanctification; where is they are both one thing, as
has been proved at large: and while the one is imperfect the other is also.
Ninthly, that justification lies in remission of sins, or taking away the guilt
of the same, yet leaving the sin or pollution behind: whereas justification,
taken in a liberative way, is a purging and washing away of the fault and
corruption in the first place; as has been proved out of Acts 13.20. and 1
Cor. 6.11. Tit. 3.4 5, 6, 7.

Thirdly, consider that the kingdom of God which Christ and his Apostles
preached is not only an inward kingdom, Luke 17.21. as it is a kingdom both
of grace, Romans 14.17. and of glory also, Romans 8.19. Ephesians. 1.18. but
consequently that there is an internal heaven of holiness and glory to be had
and obtained by the Saints in this life, Heb. 10.34. knowing that ye have in
your selves a better and more enduring substance in the heavens; for so the
words are in the Greek Text. As Paul also speaks of himself and
fellow-Apostles, whom God has raised up and set together in heavenly places in
Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.5, 6. this is that kingdom which Christ taught his
Disciple to pray for, saying, 'thy kingdom come; and which he and John Baptist
published 'to be at hand, Matthew. 3.2. and 4.17. and which ' John saw coming
down from God out of heaven, Rev. 21.23. before whose coming all sin must be
purged away, for 'no unclean thing can enter into it, Rev. 21.27. yea all the
spiriteal effects of sin, as the second day, sorrow, crying and tears shall be
removed, Rev. 21.4.

Fourthly, that they which know not, own not, nor witness this kingdom of God,
with the way and means thereunto, were never sent of God to preach the true
Gospel of the kingdom, but do publish their own imaginations and traditions of
men, as the Vindicator, and many of far greater note then he, both living and
dead, both do and have done.

Fithly, that they who do not believe that he (God) will avenge his elect who
cry unto him night and day for vengeance against their spiritual enemies for
the rooting of all out, Luke 18.1, 7. have not the faith of Gods elect; as has
been said before.

Sixthly, we shall leave it to your serious consideration whether it be not the
voice of the unbelievers, and not of the Saints, of whom it is said, concerning
the beast of sin which came out of the sea with seven heads and ten horns,
saying, Rev. 13.4. and they worshipped the dragon, who gave power unto the
beast, and they worshipped the beast, saying, who is like unto the beast, who
is able to make war with him? Which interpretation concerning the beast of sin
is not ours, but Arrias Montanus has it, and that from a special Author also.

Seventhly, we would not have it slightly passed over which is written, Numb.
13.14. concerning the ten unbelieving spies, who would neither encourage
themselves nor others to go and fight against the Canaanites, that so they
might have inherited the promised land, but disheartened themselves and others
with the apprehension of impossibilities, till they were excluded therefrom in
the end; 'for whatsoever was written in time past was written for our
instruction, Romans 15.14. 1 Cor. 10.6. Heb. 4.1. and so was the story of
Bar-Jesus, Elymas the Sorcerer, Act. 13.6. who called himself Bar-Jesus, that
is, the Son of Jesus, and pretended to become a prophet, but he opposed the
true faith in Christ, as the Vindicator and some others do, seeking to turn
away the Deputy Sergius Paulus from it, and so perverted the right way of the
Lord, being an enemy to the true righteousness; in which regard, he is not
only called a false prophet, and a sorcerer, as his name imports, but
smitten with blindness: from which sin and all other, as well as from the
horrid effects thereof, the Lord in his mercy preserve us all; and let those in
special find mercy at his hands, who opposing the truth have done it
ignorantly in unbelief, 1 Timothy 1.13.

Eighthly, that a great part of the Clergy in this nation, and no small part of
them in authority, begin to decline from the Orthodox faith of our English
reformed Church, and to urge the rigid and turbulent opinions of Mr. John Knox,
the father of the Gomarists in Scotland, whose doctrine and discipline in an
hundred years space has not brought forth so much reformation of life in that
nation, as our late erected Government has done there, though for the most
part by awe and constaint.

Lastly, that as this doctrine deviates from the Apostles faith, Romans 6.8. for
if we be dead with him, we believe that we shall live with him; so it swerves
from the right end of both the Sacraments; for by baptism we are buried into
the death of Christ, that like as Christ was raised up by the glory of the
Father, even so we should walk in newness of life: for if we have been planted
together into the similitude of his death, so then shall we be into the
likeness of his resurrection, Romans 6.5, 6. and in the Lords supper we are to
show forth the Lords death (in dying with him unto all iniquity) until his
coming again unto us in the power of his resurrection, 1 Cor. 11.26. Which two
estates are by the Vindicators doctrine opposed as things of impossible
attainment in this life; and so the sum of the Gospel, the right belief and
true Christian race, hereby denied, decried, and openly opposed in this
Vindication, by which the Vindicator has verified (as if his name were ominous
in reference to his design) another anagram of his Name, O hindering net.

God has his net, and so has the Devil,
Both nets are daily used about the evil:
Gods net draws fish out of the sea of sin,
The Mare clausum Satan casts them in;
Where Satan's drudger-man is still impli'd
To watch, and draw Gods fish on his shore side;
This work to do, (John Tendering) he is set
To plead for sin, hence called O hindering net.
True Doctrine is Gods net; his fisher men
Are ministers of righteousness, and then
False doctrine must be Satan's net to draw
Men from their due observance of Gods law;
By which they love to God and man forget:
And such thy book does prove, O hindering net.
Having finished also the catasceuastical part of our Revindication, in the
next pirce we shall presume to offer some Queries (because we desire to lay
open our hearts and minds for the trueths cause) to such as are held to censure
and rashly to judge of those whom they believe are contrary-minded unto
themselves.

1. Querie Whether do you or any of you pretend to an infallible Spirit,
whereby you do not (nor can err) in what you affirm or deny to be divine truth
according to the Records, commonly called the Scriptures. The reason is,
because the late Synod confessed, cap. 31. of their Confession, that Councels
and Synods have erred, as themselves have done: else why do they not answer the
Examen against it in the materal points, out of pity to the examiners, (who
pitied them) to undeceive them and the well-meaning people.

Secondly, because if it be true, as aforesaid, then why do the Committees for
trying in one place, and ejection in every County, though some are more
moderate then others, put the Article at the foot of other Articles, That he is
ignorantand insufficient for the work of the Ministry; when sometimes the
person the said article is put upon, is a grave Doctor of Divinity, and may be
their catechisers Father for age in years and learning.

Thirdly, because many are put out, (and others kept out) of a livelihood in
the way themselves live and grow, with other additionals rich by, because they
cannot ex consciencia subscribe and own their masters opinions, Et jurare in
verba magistri; and yet these masters by their own confession may err as their
masters did whose servants were the miser men, John 7.45, 46, 47, 48, 49.

2. Querie: What do you aim at in your preaching with such bitterness
(especially in Wilts) against us? whether to maintain a combination and faction
of self interest or that the people you preach unto may live a peacable and
most holy life, and their souls saved in the day of the Lord. The reason of
this Querie is, because the Apostle says, James 1.14. If you have bitter
envying and strife in your hearts glory not, also you lie against the truth:
and verse. 16. where envying and strife is there is confusion and every evil
work: verse. 17. and that the fruit of righteousness sown in peace of them that
make peace. Therefore Heb. 11.14. the Apostle says, follow peace with all men,
without which none shall see God.

3. Querie. Whether such doctrines as hold out a possibility of a total
mortification of sin (through the grace and help of Christ) and a perfect
obedience to the Law of God, are not the Doctrines which do persuade people to
live that most holy life, but lead men, as some have said, from Heaven to Hell,
if Hell be where no sin nor unclean thing can come, and Heaven be where much
sin will remain (it is confessed) according to the Vindicators attestation
and position.

The reason of this Querie is offered, by reason we have heard from an
intelligent and present hearer thereof, that a Minister in Salisbury, (but it
is said he was late a New England man) did pray to God in his ignorant real
(before many people) that he might never believe such a doctrine as a
possibilty of a total mortification of sin in this life. And we pray God of his
mercy not to say Amen to his prayer, but pray unto the Lord Jesus for him or
suchlike, that he would intercede to his Father, saying, Father forgive them,
for they know not what they say.

4. Querie. Whether it be not interest, and self-love in any, to malign others
for what they hold out to the world for doctrines according to godliness,
before the said maligning persons do confute by plain Scriptures the said
doctrines held out to be contrary to godliness; and likewise give the said
maligned persons freedom and time to make reply and answer for themselves: for
you may see what Festus said, Act. 25.27.

5. Querie. Whether they do well, and do as they would be dealt with, who
charge men for preaching poysonfull doctrine, before they themselves have heard
such kind of doctrine from them whom they charge with it; or have received some
information from others, either viva voce, or under their hands, that the
persons charged have preached such kind of doctrine.

6. Querie. Whether the holy Scriptures, commonly called the word of God, be
not the rule, and the only extornal rule, to confute all error, and confirm all
truth by; because it is said, Isai. 8.20. to the Law and to the testimony.

7. Querie. Whether an error in Divinity be not a Scripture-axiome commonly
mistaken, and not understood. As an Anabaptist (for so some are called by
others of divided judgments) mistook that Scripture-axiome, Matthew. 20.25, 26.
where it is said, The Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and
they who are great exercise authority over them; but it shall not be so among
you. From which exceptive particle (but) in the last clause, the said person
denied magistracy to be exercised over Christians; for which cause he was (some
years since, as its said) imprisoned in Lincoln-Castle, and indicted upon the
next opportunity before the Judge of Assise for that County: Upon which
Indictment he produced his Bible, and desired the Judge that the place might be
read, where it is said, but it shall not be so among you.

But who was most in fault for his said opinion? the poor misunderstanding man,
who out of conscience did adhere to the translated Scripture, or they who did
translate the said two verses amiss, and so led him from the mind of Christ to
the said misunderstanding? for the words are, (...).

Now the preposition (...), which signifies ofttimes contrarium and adversus,
being added to the verbs (...) and (...), must make the said verbes to signify
to abuse and pervert their rule and authority; which was no doubt our Saviors
meaning, when he said to his disciples, but it shall not be so among you,
namely, not to abuse any authority committed unto them; which is a good caveat
to all Christian magistrates to use their authority rightly and Christian-like:
according to which if the foresaid words had been translated, (as they ought to
have been) the foresaid conscientious man had (no question) submitted to
Christian magistrates, and so have been kept out of prison; for who will not
submit to magistrates out of obediential love, while they exercise their ruling
power and authority according to rules of justice prescribed by God, without
respect of persons, because then there would be no complaining in our streets?
But says Christ, woe be to them by whom offenses come, Matthew. 18.7.

7. Querie. Whether it be not the most compendious way of right judging every
pretended divine controversy, to put the said controversy into a
Scripture-axiom or axioms; and consider whether both parts (which are commonly
called the subject and predicate) of the said axiom be expressly or equivalently
contained in the Scripture: as for instance; It is said by the Romanists, that
Papa Romanus est caput Ecclesiae, that the Pope of Rome is head of the Church:
and, that, Maria est mediatrix gratiae, that Mary, Christ's Mother, is the
intercessor to her Son for grace and help for us in time of need.

Now its confessed that caput Ecclesiae, which is the prodicate, or last part
of the foresaid axiom, is in the Scripture; but we cannot find the subject, or
first part of the aforesaid axiom (Papa Romanus) in the Scripture, which surely
must be therein contained if ever we think to prove by Scripture that the Pope,
of Rome is head of the Church. So must we find mediatrix gratiae in Scripture,
the predicate or latter part of the second axiom, before we do with confidence
affirm that Maria est mediatrix gratiae, that Mary is the intercessor to her
Son for grace to be given to us in our time of need: therefore why should we
believe the said assertions for divine truths, when we cannot find those axioms
to be expressly or equivalently laid down in Scripture?

8. Querie. Whether the sense we put upon an axiom (expressly laid down in
Scripture) ought not to be proved to be expressly or equivalently in some one
Scripture or other of Gods word, that so we may justify our said sense of the
axiom to be the very mind of Christ according to the Scriptures. As for
instance; Saint John says of himself, Rev. 1.10. I was in the Spirit on the
Lords day: In which words are these two divine axioms:

First, That there is a Lords day.

Secondly, that Saint John says, I was in the Spirit on the Lords day.

Now he that will presume to fix his proper sense upon the first axiom,
affirming what is meant by the Lords day; or upon the second axiom, what is
meant to be in the Spirit on the Lords day; must not he first prove that his
said sense is plainly declared in some Scripture or other to be a
Scripture-sense, and so the mind of God? otherwise he may justly be questioned
why he puts such a sense upon the said axiom, which the holy Scriptures do
not expressly hold out in some place or other of the said Scriptures.

And in case some other place of Scripture do fully declare his sense of the
axiom to be divine, (according to his assertion) yet he must prove by the
context (if not by the text) of Scripture, that his sense imposed is the sense
and meaning of the axiom he has laid down in the said place; otherwise it had
been much better for his advantage to have chosen the axiom in Scripture which
expressly holds out his said sense, then to put a sense upon an axiom which he
cannot prove by the text, or context, to be the genuine sense of the said axiom.

The sense which too many Divines put upon Saint John's words, is, that Saint
John means by the Lords day the first day of the week, which they call our
Christian Sabbath (in contradistinction to the Jews Sabbath) to be set apart as
the Lords day, which we must solemnize and keep sacred as a day to the Lord,
(commanded by him) to be solemnized by all good Christians in holy duties, as
preaching the word, hearing the same, administering the Sacraments publicly
with prayer and thanksgiving; and also spend the remainder of the day (vacant
from public duties) in private reading, prayer, and repetition of Sermons, etc.

It is true (and we confess it) that the foresaid duties are most needful to be
practiced by us; and that a day to do them in is most needful to be appointed
and assigned: and as for our selves we do profess to all whom it may concern,
that we are most ready to perform the same duties enjoined on the said day in
every capacity we stand related unto; yea we acknowledge our selves bound in
obligation of Scripture and Conscience to observe the said day (now set a part
to be observed by this nation) from outward and bodily labors so far as we
can do it without transgressing some other command of God incumbent at that
time upon us: and thus we acknowledge we cease from our said works, as a
figurative Sabbath, which imports a cessation to rest; and as an instruction to
put our selves and others in mind to cease from thinking of our own thoughts,
words, and actions, Is. 58.13. which are our sinful thoughts, words, and
actions, as being most properly ours, because Saint James says, every man is
drawn away of his concupiscence, James 1.13, 14. which we must cease from, that
so at length we may come into the true rest which is prepared for the people of
God, Heb. 4.9.

This is our confession of faith in this particular aforesaid; and if the
Christian magistrates we are to live under, do appoint two such Sabbaths
aforesaid in a week to be observed by the nation, we are ready to do what is
required of us accordingly in every capacity we stand in.

But we still querie the said Divines, whether they can prove by text, or
context, that Saint John in the foresaid place ( Rev. 1.10.) did mean by the
Lords day the first day of the week; or whether the first day of the week is
specified in any place of Scripture in plain terms to be our Christian Sabbath,
and so to be used and set apart (as aforesaid) for the Lords day.

Thirdly, what place is there in the New Testament which calls the first day
of the week the Lords day, for Christians to observe, as the Lords day, in
cessation from all bodily labors which are appointed for the benefit of the
natural life? because if there be no such day specified in the Scriptures, as
aforesaid, it is lest to Christian magistrates to order and appoint a day of
cessation from bodily employments in reference to the performance of such pious
and needful duties aforesaid, to the glory of God, and good of our souls; which
must be cared for in special manner, for Christ says, What will it profit a
man to gain the whole world and lose his soul? Matthew. 16.26.

Secondly, because if the said day be set apart by God to the ends and purposes
aforesaid, and in such a manner as is pretended, then we must be bold to tell
the Christian magistrate, that he has no more liberty and authority to
dispense with any civil affairs to be done on that day, then any private man
has; unless there fall out some present and unavoidable necessity to transact
some performances for the preventing or suppressing of some imminent and
destructive mischief. In other cases we say (if it be as aforesaid) the
Christian magistrates must not allow and tolerate such civil affairs to be done
on the Christian Sabbath, as are ordinarily and frequently allowed to be done;
for Christ who said, Give unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, said also,
Give unto God the things which are Gods, Matthew. 22.21.

And likewise Christ-saith, Math. 15.19. Let none teach for doctrines the
traditions of men: hence all (especially in authority) must be wary how they
publish any thing to be Gods mind, for to bind others to its observance, as the
positive command of Jesus Christ, unless it be plainly expressed according to
their sense in some Scripture-axiom or other; for as an axiom is only true or
false, so a divine axiom is always true.

9. Querie. In case it be a plain Scripture-axiom which is affirmed or denied,
whether then to find out the true meaning and scope of the said Scripture-axiom
as its translated, whether (we say) it be not requisite, first, to consider if
the words of that axiom be rightly translated out of the original tongue or
language in which the axiom was first written, that is, whether the words of
the axiom in the translation do bear the same and as full a sense as the words
in the original do evidently import.

Secondly, whether the verbs (if there be any in the said axiom) be translated
in the same mood and tense which the original language will bear, and are
usually put into; when there is great reason (for to make good sense) so to do.

As for instance; Solomon says, 2 Chronicles. 6.36. If they sin against thee, (
for there is no man, says our Translation in the said place, that sins not)
and thou be angry with them, etc.

Those words in the parenthesis, (for there is no man which sins not) are
offered and premised as the reason of the hypotheticall axiom, if they sin
against thee.

Now its as true as an usual saying, that hypothesis nihil point in esse, a
supposition does not put the thing absolutely, but in possibility only: as 1 Samuel 12.25. But if ye shall still do wickedly ye shall be consumed both ye and
your King: now none can conclude from thence that they must needs continue to
do wickedly, or that there is not a possibility to abstain from doing wickedly;
but the hypothesis or supposition in that place does only declare that there
was a possibility for them still to do wickedly, or not to do so any more.
Hence also the hypothesis, 2 Chronicles. 6.36. does only declare a possibility to
sin, or not to sin against God, (if they sin against thee.) Now Solomon's
words which are by him brought as the reason why he said to God, if they sin
against thee (which are those in the parenthesis aforesaid) are so translated
that they make the hypotheticall axiom (if they sin against thee) ridiculous
and nonsense; because if it be true, that there is no man that sins not,
then its ridiculous and nonsense to say to God, or any other, if they do sin,
when it is prejudged and declared that there is no man which sins not: but
it is most apt sense to say, if they sin against thee, for there is no man
which may not sin, or that is not in a possibility to sin, by reason of the
man's weakness for a long time, and the manifold temptations he is liable unto.

Hence the Translators ought to have translated the said verse (to make it good
sense) if they sin against thee, for there is no man which may not sin;
which is the Potential mood of the verb, and present tense of the same mood,
which the Translators ought to have rendered the verb In (to sin or
transgress) though it is true that the said verb in the said place (in the
Hebrew text) is in the future tense: but who is there (that knows any thing of
that language) who knows not that the Hebrews have no potential mood of a verb;
and that when they have occasion to make use of the same mood to declare the
sense of Scripture, according as it is intended, they then render the future
tense of the Indicative mood in the Potential mood, as aforesaid? which the
English Translators should have done, to have made the hypothetical axiom good
sense in reference to the reason given immediately in the Parenthesis, to
illustrate the hypothetical axiom by.

Again, its requisite to find out the sense and scope of a Scripture-axiom, to
observe whether the said axiom be laid down absolutely, without any dependence
on the context; or whether it be laid down with some relative particle (to be
taken notice of) evidencing its dependence upon the context, antecedent or
consequent.

As for instance; it is thus translated, Eccles. 7.20. for there is no man
which sins not; hence it is more confidently affirmed, then truly by most,
that Solomon does acknowledge that there is no man upon earth which does good
and sins not.

But the mistake of these men (who affirm as aforesaid) is from the
mistranslating of the Hebrew particle (...); which indeed is a relative
particle, and does intimate that this verse does relate unto the 19 verse,
which is the antecedent context thereunto; where it is said, that wisdom does
strengthen the wise more then ten mighty men which are in the city: The meaning
is, that wisdom will fence and secure a wise man more from dangerous assaults
and violence, then ten mighty men which are in the city. For the illustration
of which, and to show the excellency of wisdom, and the use thereof in a
superlative degree, Solomon does subjoyn the 20 verse, so as to make it with
the 19 verse a discrete axiom, by putting a discrete particle (if rightly
translated) to the 20 verse: but our Translators express that particle (...)
by a a causal particle, for, which indeed being so expressed makes those said
19, 20 verses (relating together) to contain in their relative respect little
or no sense at all, as will appear to every truth-searching man, thus: Wisdom
does strengthen the wise man more then ton mighty men which are in the City,
for (or because) there is not a just man upon earth which does good and sins
not. Now is that a good reason or cause why wisdom does strengthen a wise man
more then ten mighty men, even because there is not a just man upon earth who
does good and sins not? surely its not a better reason then his was who gave
out of his shallow judgment that Tenderden steeple was the cause of
Goodwin-Sandes, because- Goodwin Sands was after Tenderden steeple. That story
Bishop Latimer made use of upon an occasion (in a Sermon before King Edward)
concerning such who ignorantly put non causam pro causa, that which is no cause
for the cause.

So do the Translators by their translation put non causam pro causa; for sin
is no cause why wisdom has any excellent effect, but the contrary rather, if
we believe what Solomon says, Eccles. 10.1. Dead flies make the ointment of
the Apothecarie to smell; so does a little folly him that is in reputation for
wisdom. But if the Translators had translated the particle (...) discretely,
though: although: notwithstanding: and rendered the verb (which is in the future
tense of the Indicative mood) in the present tense of the Potential mood then
had they given a good and profitable sense of the words thus; Wisdom
strengthens a wise man more then ten mighty men which are in a City; although
there be no man upon earth which does good and sins not: as it did
strengthen Christ, Luke 20.20, 21. and Stephen also, Act. 6.10.

By translating the said words in the manner aforesaid (as they should have
done) they had not been guilty of seducing the people to believe, by their
translation, that Solomon does affirm (contrary to Scriptures) that there is no
man upon earth which does good and sins not. If those (who are Judges, and
assume power to scan and judge men's words) do conclude the axiom or axioms to
be positively and absolutely affirmed or denied, which are only intended
relatively to the antecedent or consequent axioms; we say, if they do so, quis
pene innocens sit? who can free himself from treason or blasphemy, as often as
their tryers and Judges please to declare their words absolutely and abstractly
spoken, when the author of them intended them (as Solomon did in the place
aforesaid) only to be relatively spoken? By which kind of dividing axioms he
did more wickedly then wittily, who said, Hang all the Law and the Prophets,
concealing and not mentioning Christ's antecedent words, Math. 22.40. On these
commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets.

10. Que. Whether if we doubt of the meaning of an axiom which is a divine
testimony, we are not to consider (to the end we may see the meaning of it) the
artificial arguments contained in the said axiom: for though testimonium be
argumentum inartificiale, yet the axiom consists of artificial arguments, and
these testata must be proved by artificial arguments, or something equivalent
or tantamount unto them; which are qualifications requisite to be in every
witness, as scientia, virtus, prudentia: First, Knowledge in the testis, else
he will speak he knows not what, like them, 1 Timothy 1.7. Secondly, Virtue, or
else talk they care not what, as they did, Math. 28.15. upon a sad account.
Thirdly, Constancy, else the testes will seem to contradict themselves as they
did that cried before Christ, Hosanna to the highest, and the next day cried,
Crucify him, crucify him.

Therefore to find out the true meaning of the res testata, the thing affirmed
or denied, we must see what arguments (relating one to another) are contained
in the axiom which is a Scripture-testimony.

As for instance; Christ says to Nicodemus, Joh. 3.5. Except a man be born
again of water and of the Spirit, etc. Now what water Christ means is the
thing to be inquired into. We instance in the said place, because there was a
learned respondent who did of late in a public disputation affirm (and the
opponent did not deny it, though he might) that elementary baptismal water was
meant by Christ in the said place. His only reason was (without any further
demonstration) because so many Fathers had for so many ages downward attested
it (without any artificial arguments, but only their bare words) to be so:
which is the reason (we profess to all men) why we doubt that sense to be the
meaning of water in that place, unless the said respondent can assure us that
those Fathers, (or some of them) were by inspirement infallible in giving of
the said sense; if he can, then we will believe their Ipsi dixerunt, without
any artificial arguments to prove what they say; because we then know what they
affirm is true by reason they have (then) received the unction, (1 John 2.26.)
which is truth, and is no lie: But in the mean time he must pardon us that we
dissent from him and his catalogue of Fathers (on which he builds his faith,
for ought we see) in that point; and desire him to give us leave, or rectify
our weakness by some stronger reasons then we heard from him at that time, to
declare to him first negatively, that the words of Christ could signify no
such thing.

Our reason is from the artificial arguments contained in that axiom, Joh. 3.5.
Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God. The axiom is a compound axiom, (as all exceptive and exclusive
axioms are,) wherein are two axioms, one affirmative, the other negative.

Now as affirmation is before negation, so in the said exceptive compound
axiom, the affirmative axiom is first to be considered.

1. That a man is to be born again of water and of the Spirit, to enter into
the kingdom of God.

2. Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God.

In the first axiom is laid down the effect, to be born again, and its causes,
water and the Spirit.

In the second axiom is intimated the necessity of those causes to the said
effect, that without those two said canses none can be born again to the
kingdom of God. And so much for the general consideration of the two axioms.
Our first reason (we say) why baptismal elementary water is not meant there,
is, because the effect and its causes are of the same nature or quality,
according to the old and true maxim, Qualis effectus talis causa, and contra,
Such as the effect is such are the causes, by reason that Causa est cujus vi
res est, A cause is by whose force and virtue a thing is. Hence the birth
(specified Joh. 3.5.) being (as none, we believe, will deny) spiritual, the
causes must be spiritual also, which Christ names to be water and the Spirit
in a copulate respect to the effect; also Christ puts water as the first
cause in order to the effect aforesaid: hence we affirm both causes, water and
the Spirit, concur as partial requisite causes to the effect. Secondly, that
both causes therefore must be spiritual because the effect is spiritual: but
baptismal elementary water is a gross, material, and no spiritual water; and
therefore the said water cannot be the water Christ means as a partial
concurrent cause to the new spiritual birth. If it be said, that baptismal
elementary water is figurative, and representative of the new birth: That will
not serve the turn; because Christ does not speak of a new birthin respect of a
partial representative cause, but he speaks of water as the true and real,
partial, coworking cause out of which a man must be born again, therefore the
said elementary water is not meant.

Neither can what is said be evaded by affirming that instrumental causes may
be of another nature to the principal efficient causes; as the Apostles were,
when it is said by St. Paul, 1 Cor. 3.9. we are laborers together with God:
for though that be true in some respect, when they are used as preparatory
causes, or instruments to the preparing of the said effect, yet it is not true
that heterogeneal causes can communicate immediately their virtue in common to
the said effect, and yet the effect be wholly of the nature of one of them, and
not of the other; as we say in this place, that the effect is wholly spiritual,
and Christ names water the preceding concurring cause in common with the
Spirit, from which this spiritual effect does proceed.

Again, though Paul do call himself a fellow laborer, as aforesaid, 1 Cor.
3.9. yet the same effect of which he was a preparatory instrument, and but a
preparatory instrument, might have been produced without him; and no man, we
think, dare affirm, that except Paul or his fellow-Apostles had concurred, that
the Corinthians and others could not have been begotten again in Christ.

Again, Christ specifieth the water in the said place to be so necessary, that
except a man be born of it and the Spirit he cannot enter into the kingdom of
God: which, if it be elementary baptismal water which is there meant, then no
man nor child can be saved, or enter into the kingdom of God without it, no
not Seth, Enoch, nor Abraham, nor any of the Patriarchs, unless they and every
one of them were baptized with elementary water: but it is not likely, though
the Jews had ceremonial washings, and though their washings were called
baptism, that any of them used to baptize with water as Christ has left the
institution and direction of it to be, In the name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost (as is expressed Matthew. 28.19.) which yet they must use in like manner,
or none of them were or could be born again to the kingdom of God without it;
because Christ says, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit he cannot
enter, etc. Again, if it be such water aforesaid which Christ makes so
necessary, as aforesaid, then those do very ill who are of that opinion, if
they do not urge all parents to baptize their children so soon as they peep
into the world (especially if they maintain the old tradition, of original
sin) because they are liable to sudden death (Quod cuivis potest accidere
cuiquam potest) and not defer the baptizing their children unto some more
convenient time (as many do) for a more pompous and magnificent administration
thereof.

In the next place, we do affirm with confidence, that the water Christ meant
in the said place is the divine and spiritual word, according to that, John
15.3. Now you are clean through the word I have spoken unto you, which is
Christ's living and powerful word, which is called spirit and life, John 6.63.
which also is aptly called water by Christ, because it has the same parallel
effect to the defiled and unregen erate soul, that water has to the defiled
body; for as water cleanses the defiled body, so the said word makes clean
the defiled soul, according to that Ephesians. 5.26, 27. where it is said, Christ
gave himself for his Church, that he might sanctify and cleanse it by the
washing of water, in or through the word, as the Greek expresses it, making
the word the exegesis of the water; and the vulgar Latin turns it, the word
of life: hence Christ did say to Nicodemus, Except a man be born again of
water, that is, the word, called water as aforesaid, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God.

Secondly, this word is meant by the water aforesaid, because none can enter
into the kingdom of God without a washing with that word called, also Tit.
3.5. the Laver of regeneration, etc. for no unclean thing can enter, Rev.
21.27. and Christ said, John 15.3. Now you are clean through the word I have
spoken to you: and James 1.18. it is said, Of his own will begat he us by the
word of truth.

But we presume to add yet a little further, to show how needful it is to
prove from the text, or context, that the sense we fix upon a Scripture-axiom
is the proper sense which the Holy Ghost intends in the said place; Because
one Mr. Stevens of Fenny Drayton in Leicestershire has set forth a book which
he intitles A three fold defense of original sin in reference to the old
common notion thereof; in which book he says, (p. 94.) that the Examiners of
the late Synods Confession of faith deal sophistically with him and his party
in leaving out their chief argument, which lies (hid we confess to us) in 3
John 6.

But if it do appear that we have sophisticated with them, we acknowledge that
they may justly (according to their large power of admitting or hindering)
interdicere nobis aqua and igne; sed qui non est sponte nocens we desire him to
pardon; for we do profess to him that we did not dream of such a best in the
said place among all their weak arguments for their tradition of original
sin, as aforesaid.

The sense Mr. Stevens sixeth upon those words ( John 6.3. That which is born
of the flesh is flesh,) is, that original sin and the impurity of the natural
birth is meant by the same words; and therefore there is a necessity of a new
birth (spoken of v. 5.) from original sin. Which we grant if it be in all
men; but that is petitio principii; its the thing to be proved, though yet
there is a necessity of a new birth according to v. 5. and for the reason added
v. 6. but we challenge Mr. Stevens, (who boasts of this place to contain
(being as little to the purpose as the rest) their chief argument) to prove
(for as yet he has not done it) that Christ meant by flesh (from which that
which is flesh is born) is original sin and impurity by nature; which we
openly deny (as it were at the market-crosse.)

1. Because flesh in Scripture is taken in more senses then Mr. Steven's his
distinction of flesh in the said place (p. 94.) does comprehend.

Secondly, because flesh is more largely taken in Scripture then he can yet
fathom within his apprehension; and opposite also to the sanctifying work of
the Spirit: therefore we say Mr. Stevens distinction and his explication of it
does not prove what he with rash confidence affirms.

Now that flesh is taken in Scripture in other respects then Mr. Stevens
mentions, as aforesaid, these following Scriptures do evidence: 2 Cor. 5.16.
Wherefore henceforth know we no man after the flesh; yea, though we have known
Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth we know him so no more. Let Mr.
Stevens apply the said place to his sense of flesh, John 3.6. and make good and
Christian-like sense of the said words if he can; for there is spoken of a
knowing Christ no more after the flesh, although they had known him so before:
now to know them after the flesh must intend not to own them after the flesh
any more, because Paul could not but know them after the humane flesh by reason
all are in that condition to be outwardly conversed with.

Secondly, He did never know (that is, own) Christ at any time after the flesh,
as it is meant by Mr. Stevens in the second member of his distinction; for
Christ was not born in original sin, nor yet lived at any time in the
corruption of nature. Hence flesh in this place does not come under any member
of Mr. Stevens destinction. Again, flesh in this place is the same in sense, as
appears by Paul's expression, in reference to men, and the reason of the
Apostles disowning any man henceforth after the flesh is grounded upon his
disowning Christ after the flesh any more: for so the arguing lies clear, by
the emphatical expression or revocation; yea though we have known Christ after
the flesh, yet now henceforth we know him so no more: therefore the flesh is to
be taken in that place in the same sense as it relates to men and Christ; and
Paul would henceforth know neither men, nor Christ after the flesh: hence its
plain that the flesh there was a state in contradistinction to the Spirit, or
his other sanctifying work of the Spirit, in which Paul would not henceforth
know them in. Again, in John 6.63. flesh is taken in another sense then Mr.
Stevens does apprehend.

But to come nearer to the sense of flesh, as it may suit with John 3.6. flesh
is taken Gal. 3.3. not for corruption of nature in any kind, (because none can
think the Galatians ever did expect to be perfected by sinful nature, after
they had begun in the Spirit; much less did Paul drive at it, so as to upbraid
them for attempting to be perfected by the flesh in that sense;) but for the
fleshly ordinances they were turning back unto after they had begun in the
Spirit; as does plainly appear in chap. 4.21, 22, etc. chap. 5.1, 2, 3. So Heb.
7.16. the Ceremonial services (in which the Sribes and Pharisees rested in and
were captived to, are called the carnal comman dement: So Heb. 9.11, 12. Hence
the observances of them were but carnal, because the ordinances were but
fleshly. Hence that which is born of the flesh is still flesh, according to
Christ's words, John 3.6.

Now with Mr. Stevens his favor, in this sense of flesh, and not in his, of
original sin, and impurity of the birth, did Christ teach Nicodemus, first,
the necessity of a new birth; Secondly, the necessity of it by the water and
Spirit, which are the two copulate causes of it named by Christ; and that upon
the reason Christ gives, from the nature of the cause to the like nature of
the effect, in two instances, v. 6. that which is born of the flesh is flesh;
and that which is born of the spirit is spirit: for it was in that flesh, that
is, in fleshly ordinances that he and others were captived in, therefore not in
Mr. Steven's sense of flesh did Christ intend that instruction to Nicodemus,
because Christ had no occasion given him from Nicodemus to fall upon the
doctrine of original sin; this appears from Nicodemus discourse with him,
owning him (upon his working such works) to be a teacher come from God: our
Savior knowing Nicodemus was a master in Israel, v. 10. and likewise well
knowing wherein all the present masters of Israel stuck, and what they gloried
in, being puffed up (though captived) with fleshly ordinances ( Col. 2.17, 18,
etc.) he taught Nicodemus a new lesson, of the necessity of his and their new
birth, from better principles then fleshly rules and services, which only
served, Heb. 9.13. but to the purifying of the flesh, because that which is
born of the fiesh is flesh still, v. 6.

Secondly, their necessity of being born again appears from that, Romans 10.3.
where it is said, they went about to establish their own righteousness (we hope
none will say it was original sin and corruption) and neglected the
righteousness of God: and Matthew. 5.20. Christ tells his Disciples, that
except their righteousness exceeded the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, they shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven; therefore it was
necessary for them to be born again, and also all of their way and mind: hence
Christ uses an indefinite pronoun, applicable to all such men, Except any be
born again, etc.

Secondly, because its not likely Nicodemus should be more ignorant of the
doctrine of original sin then Mr. Stevens, if there were such an universal
continued pollution of it (as the world has been made to believe, without any
Scripture-arguments, unless only seeming arguments) by the pretended masters
and doctors of the Christian Israel, it is not likely (we say) that Nicodemus
should be ignorant, as aforesaid, by reason he was a teacher and master in
Israel, v. 10. and John 7.50, 51, etc. especially, because the Psalms of David
were extant long before Nicodemus time; therefore he could not be ignorant of
the 51 Psalm, from whence is the chief argument the Zelots for original sin
have: but yet nothing convictive to any rational man, notwithstanding the
answers given to our interpretation of the 5. verse; which also are not worth
the replying unto, unless it be to satisfy weaker capacities, who believe
every thing the Originalists say concerning the same.

3. Reason. Because Christ knowing Nicodemus his good will unto him, v. 1. John
7.50, 51. would never (upon Nicodemus his wondering at the strangness of Christ's
speech) have omitted to explain himself to Nicodemus in the matter of original
sin, and in such a manner, as Nicodemus should have been convinced to say as
they did, John 16.29. Now thou speak plainly, by reason it was Christ's great
business to seek and save that which was lost, Matthew. 18.11. but Christ
speaks not a word of that, for Nicodemus goes on still, wondering how these
things could be, v. 9. and Christ reproves him, v. 20. saying, Art thou a
master in Israel, and know not these things? and so our Savior proceeds
to declare to him what he knew and had seen, and admireth that Nicodemus should
be so ignorant not to understand earthly things, which are below the heavenly,
1 Cor. 15.48, 49. and so Christ proceeds to show these masters of Israel the
mystery of the belief (besides the necessity of it) in many particulars; and
first, in that of Moses lifting up the serpent in the wilderness, v. 14. surely
if the state of original sin and natural impurity by birth had been Nicodemus
(as Mr. Stevens and others say it is all men's) his state and condition, Christ
would (no doubt) upon the account aforesaid have taught Nicodemus (upon this
occasion of his coming to him) to bewail and deplore first and mostly his
original birth in sin; as that notorious murderer executed in Cheapside, An.
1657. was taught and pressed in his confessions (as its printed, and its
reported by whom it was) to bewail his original sin and impure natural birth
before and above all his debauched life, adulteries, and horrid murders for
which he was executed: but Christ speaks not one plain word of any such thing
to Nicodemus of his and others impure natural birth, therefore we cannot pin
our belief upon Mr. Stevens bare opinion of the sense of the said place.

But we say again with more evidence then Mr. Stevens can for all his
confidence in his conceit, from the text and context, that Christ spoke to
Nicodemus of the necessity of his (and all his fellow-doctors) being born again
from their fleshly state, in and from the fleshly ordinances of the Law, that
they were puffed up with and rested in.

1. Reas. Because the said rights and services signify flesh, and are declared
to be carnal, as aforesaid.

2. Reas. Because they made nothing persect; but the bringing in a better hope
did, Heb. 7.9.

3. Reas. Because to treat of this state and new birth from them was more
pertinent to the occasional discourse of Christ to Nicodemus, then any thing
that Mr. Stevens has said or can say to the contrary.

Hence we declare to the impartial Reader, that Mr. Stevens has wronged us,
and born false witness against us, (peradventure it is for want of reading the
ten Commandments to his people, that he forgot the ninth Commandment) in
saying, before he had proved it, we have sophistically dealt with him and his
party in leaving out their chief argument for orignal sin from John 3.5, 6.
for they have no color but a fading fleshly color for what they say, John
3.5, 6. Now for his abuse of us in this particular we ask no more satisfaction
from him at present, but that he will be pleased to declare that he is more
then confident we can answer his weaker arguments, and also that we can make
more then sufficient replies to his weak answers to our arguments against
original sin; because we have worsted him (we appeal to the impartial stander
by) in his strongest argument (as he rashly calls it) for original sin out of
the place aforesaid.

Therefore (upon the account aforesaid) we hope he will make it known, that we
may spare our needless pains to make further reply unto that part of his weak
defense of original sin, which concerns the Examiners to take notice of;
and as for that part of the said book which concerns Doctor Tailor, we doubt
not but he will let Mr. Stevens know in due time, qui vir siet against his
defense for original sin.

We must yet take a little further liberty to declare the necessity of looking
upon what grounds we fix our sense upon any Scripture-axiom in any particular
place of Scripture, because there is a grave Doctor, and some others in Wilts,
who fix this sense on Christ's words, Matthew. 19.21. namely, that Christ advises
the rich man to go sell all his temporal possessions and give them to the poor:
this is their sense, and the sense of many more without demonstrative argument
from text or context; and therefore we deny to take their words for it without
reasons given with them.

First, because we can find no command in general through out the Scripture to
command a rich man to sell all his temporal estate and give it to the poor: if
there be, let these abounders in their own sense show it us; for if there
should be any such place of Scripture, it would cross other Scriptures; as
first that 1 Timothy 5.8. where it is said, he that provides not for his family is
worse then an infidel; and this man for ought we know might have a family.

Secondly, it would cross that Scripture where it is declared, that one should
not be eased, and another burdened, but that there should be equality, 2 Cor.
8.13. Now if the young man had then gone and sold all he had (as Christ did bid
him) and given it to the poor, he had indeed eased them, but burdened himself,
in leaving himself nothing of his vast estate; for it is said, he had great
possessions; and so he had made himself a burden to others.

Again, it is not certain there were so many poor at that time among the Jews;
and they meddled with the Gentiles in that case (its probable) no more then the
Samaritans did with the Jews in diverse cases, John 4.9.

Thirdly, Christ does not bid him sell it and have it in common, to communicate
it, as they did, Acts 4.32. with others; if it had been so there might have
been some argument from it to incline him to obey Chrsts advise, because then
he might have had as good share (being before his own) as others had in like
need: but Christ bids him go and sell all he had, and so fulfill the Proverb,
make himself as poor as Job, without giving him any comfort in reference to his
estate, by telling him that he might have part of it himself with the poor;
but, go sell all and give to the poor, says Christ unto him.

Fourthly, Paul tells Ananias, Acts 5.1, 2, 3. that his estate was his own,
and that he was left free to do as he pleased, he was not bound by any
requiring to sell all his estate, and bring it to be distributed; but Peter
reproves him for his hypocritical dissimulation only in keeping back part of
his estate under hand, contrary to his outward pretense hence: a pari, it is
not likely or probable from what Christ said to him, that Christ required him
to go and sell all his temporal estate and give it to the poor: for Ananias is
not by Peter told that he was required to sell all that he had and to give it
to the poor; but Peter says to him, whiles it remained was it not thine own?
and after when it was sold, was it not in thy own power? etc.

5. Reas. Because Christ tells him that he should be perfect ipso facto,
(upon the supposition of his foregoing universal obedience which he professed
he had performed) yet Paul says, 1 Cor. 13.12. If Ishould give my body to be
burned, and my good to the poor, I should profit my felf nothing if I have not
love: therefore Christ could not intend to bid the man sell his temporal estate
that ipso facto he might be perfect, because that fact in it self would not
have made him perfect, according to Paul's restimony aforesaid.

6. Reas. Because Christ had no occasion given him to discourse of temporal
estates; therefore Christ did not bid him fell all his temporal estate and
riches, but his own false spiritual riches, which was his high conceit of
himself; for after Christ had declared the happy estate of Children, Mat.
19.13, 14. then comes this Querent (St. Luk styleth him a ruler cap. 18.18.)
to know what he must do, and tells Christ what he had done in order to
Christ's directions, verse. 28. and would know what he had more to do; Christ
tells him, to sell all that he had and give it to the poor; the words are
(...), sell all thy own which remains, or sell all things remaining that are
thine: now the self-chosen righteousness, and such like stuff are the man's
own, for the earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof, 1 Cor. 10.26.
therefore that is not the man's, but Gods, that he may command when he pleases,
and may be no impediment to eternal life unto them that do enjoy a great
measure of it. Hence you see the occasion given to Christ from the Querie of
the man, and his reply, from whence (no doubt) our Savior took opportunity to
give him the advice aforesaid. Read also the other Evangelists, Mar. 10.17. to
ver. 23. Luke 18.18, 19, 20, to 23. ver. 10, 25, 26. Mat. 22.34, 35. and it may
easily be perceived how apt these sort of men are to justify themselves, when
that which is high in men is often abomination to God: so we may see how Laodicea
was lifted up with this sort of spiritual false riches, Revel. 3.10. as is
apparent by the Lords counsel to that Church what to do in that case. And Paul
upbraideth the Corinthians, that they were rich, and full, and wanted nothing,
and reigned as Kings, etc. 1 Cor. 4.8, 9. yet not in truth, as those Kings
spoken of, Revel. 1.11. but only in their own high conceivings, because the
said Church of Corinth was not so rich in temporals at that time. Secondly, it
appears that they looked on themselves as rich in high conceivings, by Paul's
expressions in reference to them, ver. 6, 7. Thirdly, because he wishes they
did reign, that the Apostles might reign with them. Hence, it is easy, by
comparing the foresaid testimonies with the words and deportment of this man,
to understand that it was spiritual false riches of selfe-chosen righteousness
that were his great possessions which our Savior bids him to sell and part
with, that he might be perfect and complete (having done what he said) and so
by his righteousness which Christ would have him, show forth, he might have
treasure in Heaven; for Prove. 22.4. it said, By humility, and the fear of the
Lord are riches, and honor, and life: and Math. 18.4. Christ says, Whoever
shall humble himself as a little child, the same is great in the kingdom of
God.

We sum up all in this Syllogisticall demonstration:

Those riches which Christ had only an occasion to take notice of to be the
man's possessions, the same in reason we ought to believe Christ did intend when
he bid the man s^ll all he had etc. But they were his spiritual false riches of
his chosen holiness andhigh-conceitednesse that Christ had occasion given him
from the man, and others of his like mind, to take notice of. Therefore those
riches were the riches which he counsels him to sell. The major cannot be
denied; and we hope the Assumption is proved by former instances.

If it be said, it was his temporal estate, because hewent away sorrowful: We
answer, that it will not follow necessarily thereupon: because those who are
rich in false spiritual wisdom and holiness, ( Luk 18.11.) are as unwilling,
yea more, to part with their possessions, as theformer; and therefore our
Savior tells them, that Publicans and adulterers should enter into Heaven
before them, Mat. 21.31. And the reason is, because it is easier to convince
the Publicans and Harlots (having no excuse) then to convince these, as
appears Job. 9.34, 40. and 7.48, 49.

If it be yet further urged, that Christ meant as aforesaid, because he bid him
give them to the poor: We answer, though Christ did bid him do so, yet its
Ignoratio elenchi to conclude thence that Christ meant the man's temporal
possessions, because there are other poor besides these poor; as Christ tells
the Church of Laodicea, that she was poor: therefore none can affirm that
Christ meant only the former poor, because, Where there are many specials under
a general that is only named, we must give some undeniable reason why that
special we nominate is meant rather then another special by reason all the
specials are not alike, but differ specifically, and by their next forms, from
each other, even as a man and a brute do, and yet are both animals, living
sensible creatures, but yet not both rational creatures: so do many poor in
temporals, and false righteousness, differ specifically; and this last sort of
poors is meant by Christ, who could not boast of their righteousness, and did
not boast of it, as this sort of people did, Luke 18.11. and these are the poor
devils who are poorest of all in this kind, because they have not so much as
that chosen false righteousness to boast of as this ruler had (as he is called
Luke 18.18.) and as Laodicea did boast of, Revel. 3.17. who yet was truly poor
in the midst of her riches; therefore Christ bids him sell them, (in that they
kept him from being perfect to the kingdom of Heaven) and give them to those
poor devils, for then they might boast as well as himself, and be rich like
himself. If this seems strange arguing to any, let them consider how the
Apostle ( James. 2.29.) does argue the Solifidians, who boast of their vain
faith without works, even by a parallel of faith in the devils; thou beleevest
there is one God, thou do well; the devils believe and tremble. Hence upon
the same account, may we think Christ argued the man's necessity to sell all in
reference to the poor devils, and give them to those, because they would do
good to no man, but hinder him of Heaven.

Secondly, because riches are for some poor which stand in some relative
respect to them, therefore Christ bids him give them to the poor devils. ver.
21. if he parted with these because they were acquired from the devils
persuasion and delusion, and therefore to give them to the devils, who were the
instigators to him to seek them and boast in them, was most proper counsel
from our Savior to him.

But it is said further, Christ bids him sell them and give them: therefore it
was his temporal riches, because the other cannot properly be sold. I answer
yea, in the sense that the Scripture often times sutteth out selling and buying
by: as Prove. 22.23. Buy the truth and sell it not, also wisdom and
instruction, and understanding: this is spoken to the obedient Son, ver. 22.
See the phrase is used Isai. 55.1, 2, 3. and Christ wishes Laodicea 'to buy of
him change of raiment, etc. Hence that expression does not conclude that it was
the man's temporal estate that Christ would have him sell.

But we desire leave to offer (in reference to our sense of the man's great
possessions which he was advised to part with) the place, Luke 13.33. So
likewise whoever he be of you who forsakes not all he has he cannot be my
disciple: whether no man can be Christ's disciple unless he sell all his
temporal estate, and give it to the poor; for it would then follow that none of
themselves, because they have a great share of temporal estates, are Christ's
Disciples, nor ever must expect to be until they have sold all their temporal
estates, (sive male, sive just^ parta) and give them to the poor, which are
innumerous since our plundring and sequestring times: hence Christ did not mean
in the said place, Luke 14.33. when he declared a necessity of forsaking, or a
putting away all, that every one who would be Christ's disciple must part with
all his just-gotten riches (as for goods ill gotten let them look to that who
have them) if ever he will be Christ's disciple, we hope, our enemies being
Judges; for the sense of the place, Luke 14.33. will give sentence that we give
a right sense thereof negatively, lest they should be forced to part with their
wealth before they expect to leave sin, which they usually affirm must be in
them while they live: and why upon the same reason shall we conclude that
Christ did not mean, the rich man, Math. 19.21. should sell those, and no other
possessions then are included in that place? Luke 14.33. for (...) is the same
expressed in both places to be parted with.

But its urged yet further, that the disciples did so understand our Savior by
his general speech, because Peter said, ver. 27. to Christ, we have forsaken
all and followed thee, and ver. 29. Christ says, Every one that has forsaken
houses, brethren, lands, for my sake, shall receive a hundredfold, and shall
inherit eternal life.

If these words of Christ were intended literally of houses and Lands a
hundredfold to be received for what they forsook, it is not to be questioned,
but many who have got houses and Lands (how unduely soever got and possessed)
but they would forsake them all upon this pretended account, and let them take
them whose they were, if they might have a hundredfold more for them they
left, and Heaven to boot at last when they can enjoy these no longer. Therefore
surely our Savior did not intend his reply to Peter literally.

Again, Christ does not begin with that comforting speech to Peter, after he
had told Christ what they had done, but says to him, first, you that have
followed me in the regeneration you shall (in due time) sit upon twelve
thrones; intimating plainly that it was for their following Christ in the
regeneration, not for their forsaking all they had, which was not much, ( Math.
4.19.) of temporals) to follow him, that Christ spoke such good words and
comfortable unto them: yet then he adds further, that in case any do forsake
freely of themselves all they have, (but Christ advises the man to sell all he
had) for his names sake, to honor and serve him, they shall have such a
multiplied reward as is after specified, ver. 29. yea with persecutions, Mark.
10.30. But let it be granted that Peter and the rest thought that Christ bid
him sell all his temporal estate and give it to the poor, who had need; yet it
does not therefore follow that Christ meant his words in that sense because
Peter and the rest thought so; for the Disciples themselves (as well as others,
Joh. 2.19.) mistook in their nonage their Masters sense and meaning of his
words, as appears by their mistake, Joh. 21.23. Hence it is no argument for
our censurers to build upon, that they mistake not also Christ's sense and
meaning, by concluding it to be his temporal estate, because the Apostles at
that time did think so: but as the Apostles did mistake their Master sometimes,
so do they our Saviors meaning in the said place.

We shall presume to trouble their patience a little further, by adding the
interpretation of two other Scriptures, namely Isai. 64.6. Phil. 3.10. which
are much abused and profaned too frequently, and of late by Mr. Ditton and Mr.
Phelps, Grandees in the Committee of Wilts for ejection, etc. and have been
fierce men against us for that purpose, in a letter to a person of Honor, and
of better divine principles then themselves: for in the said letter they
declare that the true Church of God does account all her righteousness to be
as filthy rags, and do specify Isai. 64.6. for their warrant: but with their
good Worships favor we confidently deny it, yet not without reasons, but first
from the relative respect wherein the 6 ver. stands unto the 5. ver. which
said two verses are disposed together in a compound discrete axiom thus; Thou
meetest him who rejoices and works righteousness, those that remember thee
in thy ways: behold, thou art wroth, for we have sinned, in those is
continuance, and we shall be saved, ver. 5. But we are all as an unclean thing,
and all our righteousness is as filthy rags, and we do fade like a leaf, our
iniquities like the wind have taken us away, ver. 6. Here we may evidently
perceive the righteousness in the 5 ver. is set in a dissentany respect with
the righteousness in the 6. ver. and is so to be disposed by the particle
(but) in the 5 ver. as both of them are to be considered and judged together in
the form of a discrete axiom, of which that particle But is the sign.

Now in a discrete axiom the parts are dissentanies or disagreers.

Hence the righteousness in the 6. ver. is not the same with that in the 5.
ver. because disagreers are not the same.

Secondly, in a discrete axiom the disagreeing parts (which are here
disagreeing adjuncts to their subject) do but disagree in some Logical or
accidental respect unto their subjects: which argues that (though their
natures in abstracto are opposites) yet they do but so disagree in reference to
each others subject, as they can likewise agree to be (upon occasion) in
eithers subjects.

For instance; they which had the righteousness as filthy rags, ver. 6. might
have had that righteousness, ver. 5. which God (who rejoices not in
filthiness) does rejoice in, and meets them who work it, ver. 5. yet still
those two righteousnesses are not the same in those two said verses, because
they are disposed in a discrete axiom, which does comprehend disagreeing parts;
otherwise the axiom in a discrete form is ridiculous: as for instance,
rationality and risibility are agreeing respects or arguments to man, because
he is a risible as well as rational, though not by the same way, or from the
same principle.

Now to dispose them in a compound discrete axiom, saying, a man is a rational,
but a risible creature, it were but ridiculous to wise men to say so.

Hence we conclude that the righteousness in the 5. ver. is not the same with
that in the 6. ver. because they are discretely or diversely disposed in a
discrete axiom as aforesaid. And therefore it cannot be that the Churches best
righteousness is as filthy rags.

Secondly, it cannot be so, because it is said God meets them who work that
righteousness, v. 5. for God loves not wickedness, neither can evil dwell with
him, Psalm. 4.4.

But we shall presume to mind them of diverse Scriptures which will demonstrate
the said opinion of the true Churches best righteousness to be most impious.

It is said Ephesians. 5.27, 28. that Christ sanctifies and cleanses his Church
with the washing of water by the word, that it may be without spot or wrinkle,
or any such thing, holy and without blemish; and is the righteousness of this
Church as filthy rags?

It is said, Is. 4.3, 4. That it shall come to pass, that he who is left in
Sion, and he that remains in Jerusalem, shall be called holy; and when?
namely ( v. 4.) When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughter
of Sion, etc. by the spirit of judgment, and spirit of burning: and what will
the righteousness of these holy ones be still as filthy rags?

It is said 2 Cor. 3.18. of the true Church, that they are changed into the
image of Christ, from glory to glory as by the Spirit; and is their best
righteousness as filthy rags?

It is Christ's testimony to his Church (his Spouse) Cant. 1.8, 10, 11. and 4.1.
Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee (Christ does not say in
himself, but in thee,) and is her righteousness yet as filthy rags? what cannot
the Lord discern? or is he so partial that he will not see it, or say it is so
(if it be as filthy rags) but say to his Church or Spouse, thou art all fair,
there is no spot nor wrinkle in thee? Can. 4.4.

It is said, 1 Cor. 6.11. of those that they were washed sanctified justified,
in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of my God? and was all their
righteousness but as filthy rags?

It is said, Rev. 19.8. The fine linen with which the Saints are clothed is
the righteousness of the Saints; and is that fine linen filthy rags? see what
is said, Rev. 2.5. And what is the new man created after God in righteousness
and true holiness, which the Ephesians were exhorted to put on Ephesians. 4.23. was
it but as filthy rags?

If the late Doctor Drayton had spoken as blasphemous doctrines as his Judges
and Examiners have done, he had been deservedly accounted ignorant and
insufficient for the work of the Ministry: but sic fata volunt, that the
ignorant ofttimes sit in the chair, and the intelligent stand at Bar.

But they say further that our great Apostle did 'count all his own
righteousness as loss and dung, Phil. 3.9, 10. He did indeed account all his
Pharisaical righteousness (in which he had boasted himself with a Pharisaical
devotion and zeal) but loss and dung, Phil. 3.3.45. which he calls 'the
righteousness of the law without the faith of Christ, v. 4, 5, 6. but did he
acknowledge the righteousness he had attained unto by an operative faith (which
gives victory over the world, 1 John 5.4.) as filthy rags? What was the
righteousness to which the crown was promised him, and all who loved the
appearing of Christ? was that righteousness (we ask again) but loss and dung?
Paul fought a good fight indeed! he finished a fair course in such a
righteousness, and he kept a fruitful faith indeed which brought him to no more
righteousness but that which is but dung and loss! O, but it is said he called
it so in comparison of Christ's righteousness, or that which he had by faith in
Christ. It is true, he says that 'he desires to be found in Christ, not having
his own righteousness which is of the law, but that which is through the faith
of Christ, even the righteousness of God by faith, v. 9.

Its worth observing what expressions Paul uses in that verse, for he does not
hence, nor Romans 4. intend to condemn all righteousness of the law, but only
the righteousness of the law exclusively considered without the faith of
Christ; but not that righteousness of the law which is through the faith of
Christ: and therefore he says according to the Greek reading, Phil. 3.9 10.
that I may be found not having my 'own righteousness of the law; (...), 'but
that righteousness which is through the faith of Christ.

Whence he shows evidently that he received the righteousness of the law,
which was that he attained not unto when he was a Pharisee, v. 5, 6. through
the faith of Christ, for the law is the rule of all righteousness, and
requires all righteousness, Matthew. 19.14, 15, etc. but it must be attained
through faith in Christ, because that faith deduceth it from Christ, and makes
it to be what it is, 'even the righteousness of or from God by faith, v. 9.

The Translators by their translation turn the words, as if Paul set the
righteousness out of the law in contradistinction to another righteousness to
be attained unto through the faith of Christ; when as its the same
righteousness for nature with that Paul had before, but it was now qualified
and altered through the faith of Christ; Paul's righteousness out of the law was
not so qualified, before he believed in the Lord Jesus, according to his
requiring, Joh. 14.1.

Hence we say that Paul did not account his best righteousness loss and dung,
nor yet his righteousness out of the law loss and dung through the faith of
Jesus absolutely in it self, but as it was unqualified with his faith in Christ.

And surely he did not advise Timothy to follow after the righteousness which
is loss and dung, when he bids him 'follow after righteousness and holiness,
patience, meekness, 1 Timothy 6.11, 12.

They call St. Paul in their letters our great Apostle; but very
inconsiderately, if his best righteousness he had was but loss and dung, for
then he was not very great in his seize, to attain to no other
righteousness but that which is but loss and dung: Saint Paul uses but a
comparison to set out the difference of his righteousness of the law; but
comparisons do not determine things in their absolute nature, but in their
comparate affection, as wisdom is better then rubies, Prove. 8.11. There is a
comparison of better and worse, yet it will not follow that rubies are worth
nothing at all; yet are they worth nothing in comparison of wisdom, when they
come in competition, and one of them is to be removed, then rubies are to be
cast away rather then wisdom, because wisdom is better then rubies.

There are many comparisons in Scripture of things and persons compared, which
are neither of them in their positive degree such as they seem to import in
their comparative degree; as Luke 18.14. it is said, the Publican went away
rather justified then the Pharisee: and yet it will not follow that either of
them (for the present) were justified, that is, made righteous. See in Ezekiel.
16.51, 52, etc. It is said of Judah, thou have justified thy Sisters Sodon and
Gomorrah, they are more righteous then thou, etc. yet none will say, if they
consider v 49. that Sodom was righteous. Therefore its needful to ponder what
is declared by comparate affections, lest we judge of things amiss, by putting
our sense upon things from the comparative affection between them, which we
mistake often, and so put our conceited sense to be that wherein things are
compared, when indeed they are not so to be compared, without perverting the
sense of the holy Ghost. As once an highly esteemed preacher did pervert the
sense of the Text, Ephesians. 2.1. you has he quickened who are dead in trespasses
and sins; from whence he gathered this Doctrine (never intended by that text)
that an unregenerate man can no more stir, or contribute any thing to prepare
his conversion, then a logge or a stone, or a dead body can move; and he gave
for his (...) or (...), this reason, because he is compared to a dead man; to
which indeed he is compared in respect of spiritual life, which is no more in
him then life in a dead carcass; but yet the said unregenerate living man is
not dead in his natural life also, which yet quickneth and acts all his
organs and faculties, whereby he may hear, read, and pray to God to make what
he hears and reads powerful and effectual to the ends and purposes
appointed, that so faith 'at last may come by hearing, Romans 10. and through
prayer for strength to avoid temptations he may through watchfulness abstain
'from fleshly lusts which war against the soul, 1 Pet. 2.11.

Thus it is easy to abuse comparisons to the bearing of false testimony
against the mind of Christ.

They ingenuously confess in their foresaid letters, that they dare not accept
of Dr. Draytons Sermon on 2 Cor. 7.1. (which was sent unto them as a love-token
to their souls by the said person of Honor) because it does direct them to
place their perfection in inherent righteousness, which they say they do obtain
by faith alone in a mediator (without them, not within them;) no marvel that
Dr. Drayton found so little respect from them, and the Vindicator (though a
vagrant, and not long known to them) so much favor with them, because he was
for no inherent righteousness, but imputative (if he can get it) to be his
perfect righteousness, with his imperfect and debauched life; for then sin
may remain in him, according to his positions, and he may well confess all his
righteousness to be as filthy rags, without any trouble to him, because the
hypocritical Church confesses hers to be so, Isai. 64.6.

And that they may justify their not daring to own any inherent righteousness
( but such as is as filthy rags aforesaid) in themselves, they produce for
their warrant Paul's testimony of the Coloss. 2.10. saying to them, 'you are
complete in him, that is, as they dream, without inherent righteousness, but
that which is aforesaid; though Paul tells them how its to be complete in
Christ, ver. 11. even by being circumcised with Christ's circumcision made
without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh: not keeping
it still to 'humble them with a voluntary humility, ver. 18. but that they
might be eased of so great a burden, and so complete in Christ, being partakers
of so great a benefit by Christ's circumcision aforesaid.

But we wish them to go (but not too late) with the foolish Virgins, Mat. 2.25.
and buy some of the salve Christ mentions, and anoint their eyes, Revel. 3.18.
that they may see whether they had no inherent righteousness, in whom Christ
was formed again, Gal. 4.19. and whether they had no inherent righteousness
who were changed into the image of Christ from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3.18.
whether Peter did not think they had inherent righteousness who were partakers
of the divine nature, or that the said divine nature in them was as filthy rags
as aforesaid.

This very antipathy in them against inherent righteousness moved (it seems)
Mr. Ditton to come in open court of Ass^ize at New-Sarum, March 16. 1657. and
stand behind their Comittee-servant Cox his back, to clap him on the back, as
an encouragement of his zeal against a possibility of a total mortification of
sin in this life; for the said Cox did then and there acquaint Judge Windam
(before whom I was necessitated to have a trial with the Vindicator, who was
run away a little before) that he had some thing to inform his Lordship with
concerning my self and Dr. Drayton, namely, that we had infected the whole
County of Wilts (Vtinam id verum fuisset) with the doctrine of perfection or a
perfect life; the causa (...), the ininward impulsive cause of his so doing,
could be no other but an ignorant zeal and detestation of a perfect life, and
the doctrine of it: and the causa (...), the outward provoking cause could be
no other without doubt but a desire in the said Cox to blast me and Dr. Drayton
by informing the Judge what manner of Preachers we were to divert some (if he
could) from considering too strictly upon the merits of my cause: and whether
it had any such influence or no I cannot say; but I had ten pound damage
awarded me for a slander, which did so nearly concern my life and estate to
what I had: for a Jesuit (which was the slander) is to be hanged (as my Counsel
opened before the Judge) his bowels ripped out, and his carcass to be
quartered, by the Law of this Nation, if it be proved against him; for which
mischievous revenge done me I had ten pound damage as aforesaid awarded me
(which I had almost said I scorn upon such terms;) Gods Law has appointed a
retaliation to be done unto a false witness, (so righteous are Gods judicial
Laws, though they are little thought of to be put in practice; as if we could
conform to better Laws then they which come from Heaven.) that where Draeo's
Laws are made against real offenders, there ought to be some severe Law made
against him who should be a false accuser of men in such cases, that so men
might be terrified from attempting to accuse falsely, lest they came to fall in
the pit which they dig for another.

There was a severe Law made of late (and not unjustly) against such as should
be taken (...), as the woman was, ( Joh. 4.4.) but there was no Law made at the
same time against trapanners, according to that Scripture, Deuteronomy. 19.16, 17.
etc. hence some (as its notoriously known) have been trapanned by wretches who
looked for gain from their own quarter, because they knew the urmost of their
peril, if their plot did not succeed as they intended, by reason there was no
parallel Law made against the false accusers. But we return to Cox aforesaid,
and do salute him for his zeal against a perfect life, with the ensuing
express: Cox, come, give evidence again at Size
Against perfect life, at which your stomachs rise;
Come often, and unto Judges make address,
Tell them we have with such strange wickedness
As is a perfect life infected round
Wilts County, to restore it holy ground;
Which Cox and's Master sorry are to see,
That Wiltshire people should so poisoned be
With doctrines of a perfect life, lest they
Should be at last infected with that way,
And so stand forth, as once Zacheus did,
To restitute again what may lie hid.
But Cox, though at your back your Master stand,
I fear you not, but I will lend a hand
To pull poor wretches out of all their sin,
Which Tendarings Levits have them settled in.
I care not whom before you make complaint,
So I can save a soul and set a Saint
Free by our doctrine, and at liberty, Joh. 8.32, 36.
From sin in the Land of his nativity,
That Christ may have a people him to serve
Who will not from him and his just Laws swerve,
Which is the thing he calls for it our hands.
Saying in that our due obedience stands;
Because that he is holy so must we 1 Pet. 1.16.
Be in our lives, and thus his Temple be, 1 Cor. 6.16.
Where he will dwell, but not with sin he says* ( Psalm. 5.4.
For it is against the doctrine of the says
Which he did teach when as he said Come out, 2 Cor. 6.17.
Touch no uncleanness, of the sinful rout:
Then will I be your God and you my flock, 2 Cor. 6.18.
And you again graft into Abraham's stock. Romans 11.23.


11. Querie. Whether it be be not needful for the discovery of divine truth
contained in the Scriptures, and for satisfying all men's scruples, to the end
we may all at last come to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace,
Ephesians. 4.3.

We say, whether it be not needful to call and admit of all divided judgments
in a Nation to meet together, and choose out some from among themselves to
declare and debate in some public assembly their respective assertions of
divine truths, that so all parties may come to see wherein the strength and
weakness of their own arguments lies, when they shall hear the answers of
others to their own arguments, and likewise hear objections against what they
hold; they having also permitted unto them time and freedom to make answer, and
subscribe it under their hands to all the debates agitated, declaring what they
assent or dissent unto, and their reasons wherefore they do so.

It has been the cause (we believe) of great misery and mischief in reference
to such divisions about what is truth (as Pilate said,) that the powers of
Christian Nations (like the Popes) who pretended to justify their policy and
Divinity to be according to godliness laid down or held out in the
Scriptures, have (to that end) convened assemblies usually, and for the major
part, of such men of esteemed learning, as they have been more then confident
would contend, tanquam pro aris and focis, for them and their interests to be
most religious; likewise would have them an admiration because of advantage,
Jude, epist. v. 16. Romans 16.17, 18. but so long as Synods and Conventions of
men are designed from interest, and do consist of such who are flexible jurare
in verba magistri, and only study how to please their present powers and
Masters; as they did to please the late King James, and others of his design,
in the Synod of Dort, (if we believe the acta Synodalia of the Remonstrants)
for Vorstius must not be admitted to that said Synod, whose name was Worst, as
Bishop Andrews (its said) told King James, when he asked him what that Vorstius
was; he answered the King, that his name was Worst. So some of our Divines (as
its reported) told the said Synod that they were not sent to debate that rigid
and horrid question of absolute reprobation, but that well-pleasing question of
absolute love and election of God to some who be from all eternity; elected
though from the demonstration of this, any of ordinary capacity might easily
conclude what they must needs think concerning reprobates and their reprobation.

We say again, if Synods are called and convened as aforesaid, we cannot expect
Gods blessing upon their endeavors, how specious soever their meeting seems
to be: For all such as God will bless to such a work, must be unbiassed, and
holy men of God, besides their acquired learning; for only such will say (if
allured, or threatened by higher powers) as the Apostles did to the rulers, Act.
4.19. whether we should obey God or you judge ye.

12. Querie. Whether it be a sin to pray for grace and help from Christ to
live here without sin, and in perfect obedience to all and every one of Gods
commandments, which consist in our operative love to God and man, Matthew.
22.37. to 41. The reason, because the doctrine of perfection is deemed an
innovation and heresy, and to pray therefore for such a thing must be evil.

13. Qu. Whether (if we ought to pray as aforesaid) it be a sin in any of the
Saints to believe and expect that God will give grace and help by Christ unto
such praying Saints to live without sin and transgression to his laws in this
life as aforesaid.

14. Qu. Whether it can be demonstrated clearly out of Scriptures (for its
often affirmed to be so) that what Adam received of God for himself, he
received: (as a common root, and by virtue of a covenant of God with Adam
relating thereunto) for all mankind; and what he lost in himself by his
personal sin, he lost likewise for all his posterity, and they must for ever
lose the same without they repent of Adam's sin, and saved by an absolute
decree of election. Our reasons of this Querie are these;

First, because it will then follow that if Adam had stood in his integrity (as
he might have done) until he had had a child of thirty years of age, which
might have lived a most holy life as Enoch did on earth, yet upon Adam's fall
or transgression afterward, his said child or children must have lost all, and
been inwardly defiled with Adam's sin, and under the condemnation for it,
though until that very time they had lived most innocently in personal
obedience to all Gods laws; for many say (without book) because God did (as
they say) so covenant with Adam, that what he lost by transgression he and his
posterity should lose (ipso facto) the same, and his posterity be as truly
defiled with his sin as himself.

Secondly, because if it be so as aforesaid, then in case Adam had stood and
persevered in obedience to his lives end, as he might have done, (for it is
said, James 1.13, 14. God tempts no man to sin, but that every man is drawn
aside of his own concupiscence,) then though his posterity yea hitherto had
broken Gods righteous laws, yet the just God must not have been angry with
them, nor punished them as sinners, because Adam himself did not sin, in whom
the Lord (as they say) made such a covenant as aforesaid; and therefore what he
received and did not forfeit by his own transgression, they must likewise
receive, and must not lose (by virtue of the said covenant with Adam)
notwithstanding their personal frequent rebellious and disobedience.

Orighteous God, cause us to see and consider what dangerous sequels may be
inferred, directly opposite to thy justice and mercy, from such a fictitious
covenant (as is pretended by many Divines) that God made with Adam for himself
and all his posterity.

15. Querie. What dishonor and wrong is offered to Gods justice and mercy, or
to any attribute of God, by unbelieving and disowning the old tradition of
original sin from the first personal Adam. Let the more zealous then
considerate defenders of it produce the clear Scriptures to prove that our
denial of it does wrong Gods justice and mercy, that so he may be justified in
his saying, and pure when he judges, according to the said tradition.

16. Querie. What cause have parents to quarrel or grieve that they hear their
children be born innocent, and fit members for the kingdom of heaven, Matthew.
19.14, 15. Matthew. 18.3. let them produce Scripture plainly to prove that its
more for Gods honor to ordain them to come into the world as firebrands of
hell; the reason is, because St. James tells us, 'mercy rejoices over
judgment; and the Psalmist says, Psalm. 14.59. that 'Gods tender mercies are
over all his works; which in the foresaid case of being under wrath for Adam's
sin cannot be rightly attested and declared: and Is. 57.16. 'the Lord makes
the souls, and also the Lord restored Adam into his favor from his guilt, etc.
before he had any children; therefore if Adam's posterity were under the
condemnation for his sin, the mercies of God are much obscured toward the
posterity of Adam.

17. Querie. What honor and excellency is taken from Christ's merits and saving
grace by declaring that our justification or making righteous is from Christ
within us, Col. 1.27. not without us, and from his saving grace communicated to
us in our obedience to his laws? The reason of this Qu. is, because there is so
much pleading that our justification is by Christ's imputative righteousness
residing in himself, and not communicated to us, but putatively only, and so
our pollution may remain still, if we be justified in Christ by the said
external imputation of his righteousness only; for there is no inward
cleansing by that means communicated unto us. And peradventure the observing of
the common transgressions committed by most men (yea professors of religion,
like those Tit. 1.16.) very frequently, first brought in the imbelief (because
men 'resist not, striving unto blood against sin, Heb. 12.4.) that all our
sins cannot be purged away in this life: we say the observing and believing
as aforesaid, brought in (without doubt) the persuasion of a justification by
Christ's righteousness imputed only to us, and not by inherent righteousness
within us, that we might have quiet consciences (notwithstanding our iniquities
(...) us in our faces) by dreaming we are justified by (...) imputative
righteousness without us, and not wrought in us through our obedience by the
help of his grace and holy Spirit.

18. Qu. Whether these who cry out against others for heresies and blasphemous
opinions, ought not to be sure before that they are so, lest it be retorted on
them (as Paul did against his contenders, Act. 24.14.) by the way that 'you
call heresy, so worship we the Lord our God; and especially to be careful they
are sree themselves from all heresy; for Turpe est doctori cum culpa redarguit
ipsum.

19. Qu. Whether the Lord did intend to alter and abate those qualifications
(enumerated Ps. 15. and Ps. 24. v. 3, 4.) of them that should inhabit his
tabernacle through Christ after he came in the outward flesh; because if he did
not intend so to do, then these are still the qualifications to be showed forth
by every one that is to dwell in Gods holy hill; even to walk uprightly, to
work righteousness, and speak the truth from his heart, not to do evil to his
neighbor, to perform his oath though it be to his own hinderance, etc. and not
to swear deceitfully.

19. Quer. Whether religion stands in assuming or practicing of any outward
forms and services, so as the practitioners of them are to be accounted the
religious men above others who assume them not, yet practice more mercy and
justice in their actions then the aforesaid do, and also live as unblameable
lives. The reason of this Querie is, because the Lord by the Prophet Micah
tells them that to do justly, love mercy, and walk humbly with God, is the
good which he has showed them to do, and that he cares not for their
offerings, nor for their rivers of oil, nor yet for the fruit of their bodies
for the sin of their souls, Micah 6.6, 7, 8.

Secondly, because in Is. 58.2, 3, 4. its said, They seek me daily, and delight
to know my ways as a Nation that did righteously, they ask of me the
ordinances of justice, they take delight in approaching to God; yet for all
this, and their fasting to (...), the Lord declares his dislike of them, v. 3,
4 5, 6, 7, (...)

3. Because it is said, James 1.27. Pure Religion and undefiled before God the
Father, is to visit the fatherless and widows, and keep himself unspotted of
the world.

We desire to know of any inquisitive man, or professor of Religion, whether
there be any place of holy Writ which speaks like to this of the pure
Religion. So that it appears that the mercy and unspotted life is the pure
Religion and undefiled before God the Father; and therefore they are the most
religious men who practice most of the mercy and unspotted life, though they be
of no divided opinion amongst us at this day, yet practice all outward services
with others for peace sake. Hence it is to be considered, whether many in
America who have not the written Scriptures, be not better Christians then many
in England; for I have heard a woman commonly called a Moore) then of Mr. Jesse
his Congregation, who rel^aed thus much in reference to St. James, his Religion
of their Countrey-natives practiced, that they used when any of them were sick
to go to them, and one to do this office about the patient, a second to do
another, a third to do another office of help about them, and not to leave them
until they saw them dead or recovered: This was her testimony unto a person of
Honor in my hearing, she also saying of themselves, we do not as is usually
done in England, to send to see (peradventure) how they do, but afford them
little help of their own, but God help them; according to that, James 2.16.
'Depart in peace, be ye warmed; but give them nothing.

20. Querie. Whether to be often distempered with passions of pride, wrath,
maliciousness, envy, and to be of an unreconcileable spirit, be not worse then
to be often distempered with wine and strong drink.

The reason of this Querie is, because the latter sort of distempered ones are
looked upon as irreligious men (as indeed they are) and are shamed and spoken
against for such distempers by the former sort of distempered men, who are yet
more frequently distempered (and longer) with malice, wrath,
irreconcileablenesse, and envy, then the others are with wine. Now as every
effect is to be argued from its causes, by reason it is from them, so must men
judge of the said effects more or less evil, from their causes and principles
from whence they come; and hence it will appear, that those who are often
distempered with wrath, anger, malice, are worse then the other; because envy,
wrath, and malice, etc. are from the devils nature more immediately and
properly, (according unto that, Ja. 3.14 15, 16.) where its said, 'that this
wisdom is devilish: the other distemper is more indeed of the brutish and
sensual nature, according to that, Phil. 3.18, 19. Whose God is their belly,
whose glory is their shame, who mind earthly things. Hence it will follow, that
the wrathful and malicious man because he shows more of that id Diaboli to be
in him, (though the other more of the id ruti to be in him) is the worse of the
two; though he that is the best of the two will be shut out of Heaven, 1 Cor.
6.11. if he repent not here; but whether it be not inconsiderateness or
partiality, (let them judge whom it concerns) to count the distempered with
wine for irreligious persons, and yet to account the other sort, who are
distempered with wrath and envy, for religious persons, and their wrathful
envious passions but the infirmities of Saints, especially if they walk in some
outward form of a religious esteem: do not the Apostles words, Jam. 2.4. reach
these, Are you not partial in your selves, and Judges of evil thoughts? because
that which is high in most men is abomination to God, and because the malicious
distemper is more of the devils nature as aforesaid.

We shall offer further some Texts of Scripture to be enquired into, as how far
their scope and aim does concern us, because of what is said, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.

1 Querie. What is St. Paul's intent when he says, Romans 2.3. And think thou
O man that judge them which do such things, and do the same, that thou
shall escape the judgment of God? The reason is, because God is no respecter of
persons, v. 12. v. 6.

2. Querie. What did our Savior mean, Math. 7.12. where he says, All things
that you would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them, for this is
the Law and the Prophets. The reason of this Querie is because of what Job
said, Job 16.4. and many care not who sink so they swim.

3. Querie. What did St. Paul mean, Phil. 2.21. where he says, All seek their
own, and not the things which are Jesus Christ's.

4. Querie. What did the Lord mean, Jer. 45.5. where it is said, Seek thou
great things for thy self? seek them not.

5. Querie. What did Christ mean. Math. 16.26. where he says, What is a man
profited? if he shall gain the world and lose his soul?

6. Querie. What is the scope of that, Psalm. 50.20. Thou sit and speak
against thy brother, and slanderest thy own Mothers son.

7. Querie. What is meant, Isai. 63.8. where it is said, My children will not
lie.

8. Qu. What does Christ intend, Luk, 17.1, 2. when 'he said, Woe be to them by
whom offenses come; it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about
his neck, and he cast into the Sea, then that he should offend a little one.

9. Qu. What is meant by that, Math. 7.2. where 'it is said, With what measure
thou metest it shall be meted unto thee again.

10. Qu. What is meant by the false balance, Prove. 11.1 'where it is said, A
false balance is an abomination to God, but a just weight is his delight. See
Prove. 16.16. and 20.10. Levit. 19.35, 36. The reason of this Querie is, because
'it is said, Dan. 5.27. that the King was weighed in the balance, and found
too light: therefore other things are weighed besides natural or artificial
things.

11. Qu. What does the Psalmist mean by those words, ' Psalm. 119.126. It is
time for thee Lord to work, for they have made void thy Law.

12. Qu. What is the scope and intent of the Lord in those words, Mal. 2.8, 9.
Ye are departed out of the way, ye have caused many to stumble at the Law, ye
have corrupted the covenant of Levi, says the Lord of Hosts. v. 9. Therefore
have I made you contemptible and base before all according as you have not kept
my ways, but the people, have been partial in my Law?

13. Qu. What did David mean by that, 1 Samuel 26.19. For they have driven me out
this day from abiding in the inheritance of the Lord, saying, go serve other
Gods.

14. Qu. What is meant, Heb. 8.10, 11. After those days, says the Lord, I will
put my Laws into their minds, and write them in their hearts, and I will be to
them a God, and they shall be to me a people. v. 11. And they shall not teach
every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord, for
all shall know me from the least unto the greatest.

15. Qu. What is the meaning of those words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 119.98, 99,
100. Thou through thy commandments have made me wiser then my enemies, for
they are ever with me. v. 99. I have more understanding then all my teachers,
for thy testimonies are my meditations. v. 100. I understand more then the
ancients, because I keep thy precepts.

16. Qu. What is the meaning of that, 2 Cor. 8.13. Not that one should be eased
and another burdened, but that there may be equality.

17. Qu. What is the meaning of that, Ezekiel. 17.18, 19. The reason is, because
of the sore threatening declared by the Prophet for breaking oath with the King
of Babel; and we see that the Lord calls it the despising of his oath, and
the breaking of covenant with him. What will the Lords displeasure be less
against such who have lifted their hands to him to reform in doctrine and
discipline according to the word of God? Exitus actu probabit; what will you do
in the latter end thereof? Jer. 30.23, 24.

18. Qu. What is the meaning of that, Revel. 2.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. The reason is,
because the Lord threatens to remove the Candlestick unless they repented, for
that they had left their first love.

19. Qu. What is the meaning of that, Jam. 1.20. where it is said, The wrath of
man does not accomplish the righteousness of God.

20. Qu. What does the Apostle mean, v. 26. where he says, If any seem to be
religious, and refrain not his tongue, that man's religion is in vain.

21. Qu. What is meant by that, Math. 23.25. where it is said, These things
thou ought to have done, and not to have left the other undone.

22. Qu. What is the meaning of that, Jam. 2.7. where it is said, 'Faith
without works is a dead faith. The reason is, because we are said (by many) to
be justified by faith alone without works; which if so, then we are justified
by a dead faith, according to St. James, and its contrary to the justification
of Abraham, v. 21, 22.

21. Qu. What is the meaning of that, Gal. 6.1. Brethren, if a man fall by an
occasion, you who are spiritual restore such a one with the spirit of meekness,
considering thou thy self may be tempted one way or another. The reason of
this Querie is, because of that mentioned, v. 1. Bear ye one another burdens,
and so fulfill the law of Christ. Romans 15.1. You that are strong ought to bear
the infirmities of the weak, which are but such for a time, 1 John 2.12, 13, 14.

22. Qu. What is the meaning of that, 1 Cor. 15.26. where it is said, 'The last
enemy which shall be destroyed is death. The reason is, first, because its
said, v. 25. 'Christ must reign until he has put all his enemies under his
feet, and death is said there to be the last: therefore what death is meant
there is worthy of Divines enquiry. Secondly, if it be so that death is the
last enemy, then all sin must be destroyed before death come, and so sin
shall not remain in all Saints as long as they live.

23. Qu. What is the meaning of that, 1 Cor. 11. v. 26. where it is said, So
ost as you eat, etc. you show forth the Lords death until he come. The reason
of this Querie is, because it is spoken to every one who rightly receives the
Lords Supper; and if so, it cannot be meant of his last coming, which is so
much spoken of among Divines.

24. Qu. What is the meaning of that, Luke 18.8. where it is said, 'When the
Son of man comes, shall he find faith on the earth? The reason of this Querie
is, because we believe that it is not likely to be meant of the rarity of the
faith to be-lieve that Christ came to save sinners, or that he was made man to
suffer for our sins.

25. Qu. What is the meaning of that, Romans 8.4. where it is said, That the
righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the
flesh, but after the spirit. The reason of this Querie is, because it is
usually affirmed that Christ has fulfilled all righteousness of the law for
us; and the Apostle says, that it might be fulfilled in us.

26. Qu. What is the meaning of that, Mark 16.17, 18. And these signs shall
follow them that believe; In my name shall they cast out devils, they shall
speak with new tongues, they shall take up serpents, and if they drink any
deadly poison, it shall not hurt them; and they shall lay their hands on the
sick, and they shall recover. The reason of this Querie is, because these signs
are declared to follow (not the Apostles who were to preach the belief) in
their order every believer, as to know ^hether they believe a right or not,
which is set down, ver. 16. to be of that 'necessity, that he who believes not
shall be damned; therefore it concerns us much to know whether we believe
aright yea or not: hence these signs shall follow them which believe, and the
believers shall do these ensuing things in their order; It does therefore
concern us to find out what is contained under those stupendous expressions,
that every believer must do as aforesaid.

27. Qu. What is the meaning of that, Matthew. 28.20. 'And lo I am with you to
the end of the world. The reason of this Querie is, because that is the divine
record from which a succession of ministration is proved to continue downward
from the Apostles to the end of the world; from whence the ministers of the
word and Sacrament do claim their own office to be Jure divino, and that they
are the Apostles successors descended lineally from them by virtue of Christ's
words and promise to the Apostles, Lo I am with you to the end of the word.

But how they will prove what they say from the said words of Christ by
rational arguments, is the thing for the present we doubt of.

First, because the words are spoken not to the Apostles successors, 'Lo I will
be with you to the end of the world; but it is personally spoken to the
Apostles, 'Lo I am with you to the end of the world. But to this it is said,
that Christ did intend their successors to be included under those words,
because the words are not literally true of the Apostles, by reason they are
fallen asleep with their Apostolical doctrine, and are no more personally in
this world; therefore the words must include (say they) their successors, 'I am
with you, namely, my Apostles in your successors, to the end of the world. But
this is an addition to Christ's words, for Christ says no more, but, Lo I am
with you to the end of the world: and by what authority they make that addition
aforesaid, it concerns them to consider, because the curse is heavy whic his
charged on them who add or take from Christ's words, Rev. 22.18, 19. But if
they say Christ did intend to continue successors of the Apostles for the good
of his Church, to put them in remembrance, and teach them how to walk in all
the commandments of God without offense: we then ask (if it be so) whether
Christ has appointed themselves to be the true successors unto the Apostles by
virtue of the said words; for to argue merely from the said words, there must
be successors of the Apostles, for diverse good ends; ergo we ministers
aforesaid, and them of our mind, order, and practice, are the men; is no better
arguing to persuade the doubtful of what they say, then he that would persuade
himself that his son must be the next Bishop of C. because it is appointed by
order and authority, besides custom, that he must be a Cambridge-man or an
Oxford-man; and if an Oxford-man, then of this College, or another College;
if of this College, then why not my son as well as another? especially since I
persuade my self he is the man intended for the Bishop. Just so is the former
argument; Christ did intend to have successors in the Apostles ministration,
because he said, 'Lo I am with you (though the Greek text will not justify
that translation) to the end of the world; and therefore we are the ministers
who are their successors.

Truly the Pope and Popelings argue just so for him to be Peter's successor;
Peter, say they, was at Rome, and governed there, and Peter was the prime and
chief Apostle; for Christ said to Peter, 'Feed my lambs, feed my sheep, Joh.
21.15. and thou art Peter, upon this rock I will build my Church, Math. 16.18.
Now the Pope is a Minister also, if you will take his word for it, of Jesus
Christ, by virtue of the words of Christ aforesaid; and he sits and rules at
Rome where Peter governed Christ's Church (as they say) therefore the Pope is
Peter's successor, and head of the Christian world upon the foresaid account.

Do not the Protestant Ministers smile at such argumentations for the Popes
supremacy? and do the Ministers who are in contradistinction to the Pope argue
any better for their succession and authority, to be the Apostles successors,
and their Ministers and Bishops to be jure divino, because Christ said to his
Apostles, 'Lo I am with you to the end of the world? for suppose that Christ
had said in plain terms, 'Lo I will be with you and your successors to the end
of the world, will it be rational to say, quia antecedens, ideo hoc consequens,
therefore we are specifically the said successors? must there not be something
else looked into, and to be proved, before they conclude, ergo we are
successors of the Apostles, by reason Christ said, 'Lo I am with you and your
successors to the end of the world? What are there no more maids then Maukin?
may there not be another sort of successors besides these claimers unto it?
which if there may be, then its but like the arguing of the man aforesaid for
his son to be the Bishop of C. Surely Haman had a little better ground of
argumentation for his persuading himself that he was only the man (from former
received and peculiar favors fom the King, Est. 3.1, 2. and 5.11.) that the
King would delight still to honor him above all others, chap. 6. v. 7. and
therefore upon surmise v. 7. he says to the King, (upon the Kings asking what
should be done to the man the King delighted to honor, v. 6.) Let the royal
apparel be brought forth which the King uses to wear, and the horse the King
rides upon, and the crown royal which is upon his head, and let this apparel
and the horse be delivered to one of the Kings most noble Princes, that they
may array the man whom the King delights to honor, and bring him on
horseback through the streets of the City, and proclaim before him, 'thus shall
it be done to the man whom the King delights to honor; and what was Haman
therefore the man? truly he thought he should be the man upon the said same
antecedent probability for it: but yet he was deceived, for it was another whom
Haman never dreamed of. Hence we say, is it good arguing that the Apostles must
have successors by virtue of Christ's speech, (which we have not yet well
considered of) Math. 28.20.) therefore we are their successors, and so
Ministers of Jesus Christ who can there be none but Haman (which notes
troubling,) that the King does delight to honor? is there not a Mordecai (the
hidden contrite teacher) that he at last may have the honor conferred upon
him, that Haman was more then confident was intended for him? Therefore he who
argues from the general to the special, as belonging to it, must argue from the
general to the special, secundum id generis quod est in specie, according to
that of the general that is in the special; which is to be applied thus to
our purpose: The Ministers aforesaid do claim their ministration from the
Apostles, because they doubt not (though the words they bring will not remove
their doubt) but the Apostles were to have successors; and if successors, then
they themselves are the successors; but how do they prove it? for none can
argue themselves successors, but secundumid generis, that of the general
requisite to be in them that was in their predecessors.

Now the Apostles, to whom Christ spoke the words, had with their office
suitable gifts thereunto, conferred upon them, to teach the people inf^libly to
observe whatever Christ commanded them. Hence we ask the foresaid claim-layers
to be the Apostles successors, how they can lay claim (on their gloss
aforesaid upon the words of Christ); whether they lay claim to the office of
the Apostles, for teaching, and other services of their ministration, without
the like gifts; or with the like gifts. Now if to the office without the like
gifts, then they do not lay their claim (with their favors) rationally, from
our reason given before, how we must argue from the general to the special, but
according to that of the general which is in the special: therefore if they
have not the like gifts in teaching, which is to teach infallibly by
inspiration from Jesus Christ, even as witnesses are taught, when called to
make oath in point of testimony, to speak the truth, and the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth, so help us God; We say, if they have not the like gifts
aforesaid in teaching, (which they deny they have) saying, revelations and
infallibility are ceased now, and Synods may err, (as they confess in their
late Confession of faith, which they there make good) then they are not the
Apostles successors (notwithstanding their claim) because we cannot believe
that Christ meant a successor of an identicall office of teaching, without the
gifts that then were concomitant to the office, and were inherent to the
officers, the said Apostles.

We wish them to consult again, and lay down the claim of their office from the
Apostles: unless they will also lay claim to the like gifts in teaching with
the Apostles, because they were so nearly and necesarily joined toget her in
there, Ephesians. 4.9, 10, ends 11, 12. to enable them to perform their office to
the ends and purposes expressed, Ephesians. 4.13. Therefore what Jesus Christ has
joined together let none dare to put asunder; as to pretend to their
predecessors office, and not to their gifts.

Again, they call themselves Pastors and Teachers; now their ministration is
not the same in office with the Apostles, to whom Christ spoke the foresaid
words.

If they say all of them are included in these words, Lo I am with you: because
it is said ' Ephesians. 4.11. that he gave some Apostles, some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors, some Teachers: we answer, that it is true, that
Ephesians. 4.11. there is an enumeration of several persons concrete with their
several offices: yet it will not follow on that account, though they be like
Pastors or Teachers, that therefore those officers are so included in the
words, Math. 28.20. Lo I am with you to the end of the world; and that they are
the Apostles successors, and that they justly can derive their claim from the
said place, Math. 28.20. for though omne majus ejusdem generis continet minus
in some respect; yet its not (...), that every minus contin^t majus, that the
less contains the greater, that is, because the Apostles had vertually what
the Pastors and Teachers had, and that they could upon any occasion perform
their office, yet is not the Apostles office their office; nor yet could the
Pastors and Teachers perform the Apostles office, because it is a lowre office;
and if so, they cannot call themselves the Apostles successors by virtue of
these words, Mat. 28.20. by reason of what Christ did, Ephesians. 4.11. Hence it is
we say, these words, Math. 28.20. will not afford them warrant to call
themselves what they do; but it had been much better for them to have laid hold
on Ephesians. 4.11. and argued thus for their claim of Pastors, etc. There are
Pastors and Teachers mentioned in the said place, and though they themselves
are not Apostles, or Prophets, or Evangelists, yet they are Pastors and
Teachers, and in these employments Ministers of Jesus Christ: we say it had
been much better for them to have laid hold on that place for the end
aforesaid, because they had held forth some more color to justify their
office they pretend unto; but yet little more of rational evidence for what
they say, save only still an argumentation like that of the man for his Son to
be the Bishop aforesaid. For though there be mention made of Pastors and
Teachers, and they are to be continued to the worlds end; will it follow
therefore upon any other certainty then the argumentation aforesaid, that they
are their successors as Pastors and Teachers in their generation, unless they
can prove that id generis, that of the general requisite of gifts to be in them
with their office, which were in the appointed Pastors and Teachers mentioned
Ephesians. 4^.11? for the gifts (as aforesaid are still to be concomitant with
their office: therefore it is said, Ephesians. 4.8. Christ gave gifts, and so among
the rest made some Pastors and Teachers; and it is undoubtedly intended to be
conveyed by the imposition of hands, 2 Timothy 1, 6. where Paul says to Timothy,
I put thee in remembrance to stir up the gift of God which is in thee by the
putting on of my hands. Therefore that ceremony was a document to figure out
the manner or reality of conveying the gift with the office by the Donor
himself; but there is no mention made of it, Ephesians. 4.11. because Christ made
Pastors and Teachers as he himself was made a High Priest, Heb. 7.6. 'after the
power of endless life; so they were made Pastors by the power of endless
life. And therefore it is is said, v. 8. When he ascended he gave gifts unto
men, and so made some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors
and Teachers: Hence therefore not one, but all were endued with gifts
immediately by him who did appoint them their office. Now whether they had
less gifts then to be infallible in their teaching and instruction, is the
business to be inquired into; which we say they had not, from that which is
expressed, Act. 6.3. where when there was a want found of supplying a defect,
v. 1. then the twelve Disciples, commonly called the Apostles; (and were those
sent out Math. 28.18, 19, 20.) wished them to look out among themselves: (it
seems it was not so rare, nor were they ignorant in those times of such endowed
men, nor did they deny such men extant who were full of eminent gifts men of
honest report, and full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom, which they found out;
and the Apostles authorized and confirmed them, v. 5.6. in their office, and
left not that unto the people to do: henc therefore these Pastors and Teachers
Christ intended, Ephesians. 4.11. were such, and so qualified, (we believe) for the
office of Pastors, etc. Hence also we say, if the several and respective
Ministers (claiming their ministration as aforesaid) will prove themselves
their successors, (whether included or not included in the words, Math. 28.20.)
who are mentioned Ephesians. 4.11. and so the Ministers of Jesus Christ, then they
must demonstrate themselves to be men of honest report amongst. Apostolick-men
(if there be any) and full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom, even that wisdom
specified Jan. 3.17. and not be pufed up with pride, and showing bitterness
and wrath; and carry themselves Diotrephes-like, loving so far to have the
preeminence, as to have power to receive whom they think fit into the
Ministerial office, and to reject whom they affect not, because they are not of
their mind, though peradventure better qualified with saving truths then
themselves; yea do not only so, but forbid or hinder them that would receive
them, or cast them out of their livelihood.

Hence we sayagain, that if they derive their claim; as aforesaid, to be their
successors, they must be qualified like those Pastors, which we have proved to
be qualified as aforesaid by reason it is said, Ephos. 4.11. they were of
Christ's own making and gifted with his immediate gifts, v. 8. which cannot be
less or fewer then fit for the ends they were appointed unto, v. 12, 13. the
ultimate whereof is to become a perfect man, (which most of our Ministers deny
to be in this life,) unto the measure of the stature (or age) of the fullness
of Christ.

Therefore, the Ministers of England, if they lay claim to be the successors of
the foresaid Pastors and Teachers, and so the Ministers of Jesus Christ, they
must be such Pastors, so made by Jesus Christ inwardly; for their outward
ordination is but a ceremony, which they most frequently apply where there is
not the thing signified, namely such gifts in those ordained men; which if
there be, then they must first understand those gifts to be, and own them, yea,
employ them for those ends expressed, Ephesians. 4.12.13. which ultimate end is
denied by many to be attained in this life; and their great contest and zeal is
to lay claim to the said succession, for to justify their office, and not to
have the office of Presbyter, Ministers and Bishops to be extinct out of their
Church, but we hear no disputes nor can we see such zeal and animosities put
forth to defend their claim to their predecessors gifts: but they can be
content to say, yea to excuse themselves, to be like other men (save only in
the Grecians wisdom and literature, 1. Cor. 1.22.) in passions and
conversations, if not below other men, (as too often its to be feared;) but
their office forsooth they would have looked upon as to be the Ministers and
Bishops of Jesus Christ; when the gifs aforesaid of such Pastors Ehes. 4.11.
and of such Bishops and Deacons which are specified, 1 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5. etc.
are not to be found, yea not be believed can they be in these days; so that if
the Son of man come again (as he will come) will he find faith? as its said
Luke 18.8. on the earth, (amongst these sorts of men,) to believe that there is
any who can come while he lives to a perfect state in holiness? though its
declared to be the end that all these officers are appointed, Ephesians. 4.12, 13.

The foresaid men are so sollicitous and careful to prove their office of
ministration to be from the Apostles downward, that when they are reproched as
to have their office from the Pope and Popish Bishops, (because those did once
rule in England,) that they presently deny it, and say (having brushed their
vesti tures and picked out the Cross) that they have cast off the relics of
Rome, and only retain (they said) the office, which indeed the Popes had from
their immediate predecessors; and so they run to the top of the scale or ladder
to see the Apostles descending (like the Angel on Jacobs ladder, Genesis 28.12.)
to justify them to be their successors for matter of office without their
gifts, as aforesaid. But we believe that Christ meant by that place of
Scripture otherwise then such a continued future succession to follow to the
end of the world: for the words are, (...). I am with you all the days to the
end of that age. Hence why may not we think Christ meant the like days, of
which he bids them rell Herod that fox, Luke 13.23, 24. Behold, I do cures
to day and to morrow, and the third day I shall be perfected: so all the days
of their age or dispensation he would be with them to assist them in the
accomplishment of their cures or work; which like days are intimated, Hosea,
6.2. After two days he will revive us, and in the third we shall live in his
sight; which Christ (we believe) calls the last day, (and not the end of the
world) when he says, and I will raise him up at the last day, Joh. 6.39, 40,
41. in a parallel respect to the Lord Jesus day, who was raised up at the last
day; for it is said, he was dead and buried, and the third day he rose again:
so it is said Romans 6.4, 5, 6. etc. We are buried with Christ by baptism into
death, etc. for if we have been planted together into the similitude of his
death, even so shall we be into the similitude of his resurrection: which work
of mortification to a new life the Apostles were appointed to preach, v. 19,
20. until the accomplishment 'of the age of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13.

In this foresaid sense the words may be justified to be truly spoken to the
Apostles in their own persons, but not in the sense the words are translated
into, Lo I am with you to the end of the world: for so they cannot be literally
true; therefore such as desired to hear of such a succession aforesaid, and
finding no fitter place in their apprehensions, they presently fancied Christ's
meaning to be in their successors, by saying 'Lo I am with you to the end of
the world, that is, with you in your successors: and then the next inserence
is, themselves are the Presbyters and Ministers of Jesus Christ, because Christ
meant (as aforesaid) I will be 'with you in your successors to the end of the
world; which yet he may be with the Apostles successors, and yet none of the
public ministration of England may be the said Ministers of Jesus Christ,
that is, according to his constitution and order; though many of them, we deny
not (but acknowledge them) to be God-fearing men and well meaning servants for
Jesus Christ; but yet we cannot believe them to be Ministers of Jesus Christ,
that is, by his order and appointment, by reason that we are more then
confident that Christ would not have the office of the Apostles in their
ministration separated from the gifts concomitant and needful thereunto; which
we cannot yet find to be in them, yea they disown them to be unattainable, and
therefore not to be in these after days expected, though it be said, Wisdom
7.27. Wisdom enters into holy souls, and makes them friends of God and
Prophets: and Rev. 18.20. Rejoice over her thou Heaven, and the holy Apostles
and Prophets; and such also we look for, when the new heavens and the new earth
comes wherein dwells righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.13. And when the everlasting
Gospel comes to be better known, and preached anew to them that dwell on the
earth, etc. also then will Pastors be given by Christ according to his own
heart, Jer. 3.15. with such gifts as those had, Ephesians. 4.11. who shall
officiate in teaching his Church according to his own order and discipline: in
the mean time we cannot tell how to persuade our selves that our Presbyterrian
public Ministers or Bishops, nor any other divided opinions among us who call
themselves Ministers of Jesus Christ, are more then Ministers for Jesus Christ
in a prudential way; which yet we do not despise, but honor them, if sober,
and peaceable in their ministration; for we believe the said ministration to be
very serviceable to righteous and just ends, even to have its service until the
time of a better reformation then we have yet seen: for we see former (if not
worse) deformities acted under other names and employments of Ministers; utinam
id verum non esset! But we say no more at present, save only wish all whom it
may concern to mind the words of St. James 2.12, 13. So speak and so do, as
they that are to be judged by the Law of liberty or freedom; for there shall be
judgment (says the Apostle v. 13.) without mercy to him that shows no
mercy: (which Christ does not relate to friends only, but to reputed enemies,
Math. 5.44. etc.) and mercy rejoices over judgment, Jam. 2.13. that is from
the Father of mercies, whose mercy is over all his works, Psalm. 45.9. and if
they do so speak and do, etc. then we doubt not, (according to that 2 Cor.
10.6.) but the messenger of the Lord of Hosts will suddenly return again to his
Temple, Mal. 3.1. and build up once again the Tabernacle of David which is
fallen down, etc. Act. 15.16, 17. but in the mean time their service (whose
souls are not lifted up, Hab. 2.4.) in a prudential way of ministrarion will be
acceptable to the Lord in their measure, according to that Mal. 3.16. etc. Then
they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another, and the Lord hearkened
and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before him for them that
feared the Lord and that thought upon his name; and they shall be mine, says
the Lord of Hosts, in the day when I shall make up my jewels or special
treasure; and I will spare them as a man spares his own son that serves
him: then shall ye discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him
that serves God and him that serves him not, Mal. 3.16, 17, 18.

FINIS.
The Contents of the Integral (or of this whole Book) is distributed into a
Tricotomie, and offered to the Readers view, that he may (primo intuitu)
perceive what he shall (if he please) find despersed and argued (a capite ad
calcem) throughout the same.
THE first part of it, is a genuine and fit Paraphrase on the Vindicators
Hypocritical (Saint like) Preface.

And first, a Paraphrase upon the salutation (in the Preface) To all the Lovers
(in his sense) of Gods truth, etc. Secondly, a Paraphrase on the Preface it
felf, consisting of many Paragraphs in colored words of Scripture Phrase to
deceive the hearts of the simple.

The Revindication it self comprehends two parts, First, the Anasceuastick
confutative part, i. e. to confute by answering the Vindicators pretended
Scriptures and Fathers, which he does rashly and ignorantly produce to justify
his pernicious positions, placed in the front of his Vindication, wherein we
trace him from page 2. to p. 146.

The second part of the aforesaid Tricotomie is Catasceuastick, the
confirmative part of our contrary assertions, by several Topic heads of
Scripture testimonies. Secondly, by humane testimonies; first, of the Fathers
commonly so called.) Secondly, our English reformed Church, in our first
reformation, from page 146. to p. 200.

The last part of the foresaid Tricotomie consists of two sorts of Queries,
occasioned from our overforward contenders and Censurers, and offered to them
(or whomsoever they may concern) to pensitate with serious thoughts.

The first sort of them, are to such as fix (two magisterially) their own
sense, (before they have deliberately considered it) upon some particular
Scriptures, as if their sense were (before they are sure of it) the very mind
of the Lord in the said places; some Scripture instances we have set down,
mistaken (we appeal to all impartial Readers) by several persons, as that of
John 3.5, 6. by one Mr. Stevens, who does weakly call the said place, their
strong reason to maintain his old tradition of original sin, in his shallow
Book called, A threefold defense of original sin.

Other instances of Scriptures in a mistaken sense, are those Isaiah 64.6.
Phil. 3.8, 9. mistaken by two grave Committee men (who have been our back
friends) in the County of Wilts.

Thus we have delivered the sum of the Tricotomy of our Book entitled A
Revindication.

Its true we have inserted some personal reflections which do not concern every
Reader, and therefore it may be said, they might have been left out, as if they
savoured of a like Spirit; we answer, we must commit that to him, who knows
all things; we have much more to say a-against some, and to vindicate the
deceased, whose death we wish them to consider of, that were so violent against
him, who was more knowing (I am sure) and more meek (I am afraid) then
themselves, and we thought it not amiss to name some passages, and persons;
having been so publicly wronged by the same, that the world may see what
unruly spirits there are in these days of reformation against the Doctrine of
a possibility of a total mortification of sin in this life; because it has
been for the said Doctrine, we have been traduced in the Vindicators senseless
Vindication, and also through many counties, it has been sounded and ecchoed
out that we are Jesuits, and Factors for Rome; so strangely and unexpectedly is
Rome (it seems by the foresaid callumny) reduced, as to hire us to publish and
convince a possibility of a total mortification of sin in this life, and to
cry up a possibility of a perfect obedience to the law of God in this life.

If this be to be vile, we are content to be more vile, 2 Samuel 6.22. If I have
spoken evil, bear witness of the evil, John 18.23.
Here are some Errata referring to the book aforesaid, which we desire the
Reader to take notice of, for the better understanding what we mean in the
respective places: we confess they might (by the mutual and diligent care of
all parties of us concerned) have been prevented; therefore we do not excuse
our selves, that it could not be helped, saying, in many things we offend all;
for our endeavor here has been to prove a possibility to live in this life
through the grace and help of Christ without offense: and therefore these
Errata we acknowledge did happen by our neglect and oversight who were mutually
concerned to have looked better about us: Sed nihil factum infectum fires
potest; its too late now to mend them otherwise then by their subscription;
therefore we desire the Reader, when he perceives in any page of the book a
Crupsis, either of inversion, redundancy, or defect of, words to make
grammatical construction, then to reflect upon these nominated Errata, to
rectify the sense of the said place, and as for the objectum occupans, and
adjunctum occupat about the same, we leave them to the Readers censure as he
pleases.

PAraph. p. 2. l 34. r. service. l. 36. d. fore. l. 37. r. 13.11. p. 7. l. 2.
r. to reproach them for. l. 29. r. Wilton. p. 9. l. 39. after preface. r. and
positions. p. 12. l. 2. for said. r. side. p. 13. l. 29. r. Act. 19. p. 15. l.
1. r. to do wickedly. Book. p. 2. l. 6. r. catasceuastically. p. 25. l. 18. r.
Mat. 22. p. 26. l. 28. r. 1 John 2.22. p. 37. l. 6. r. 1 Cor. 3.1, 2, 3. p. 39.
l. 10. r. Sidkenu. p. 35. l. 12. d. not. p. 82. l. ult. add be. p 100. l. 37.
add is. p. 106. l. 21. f. servant. r. Son. p. 112. l. 23. del. not. p. 117. l.
30. r. as it is. p. 127. l. 19. r. because of him. p. 136. l. 1 2. d. it. p.
139. l. 15. r. Joh. 5.40. p. 144. l. 17. f. note. r. vote. l. 30. r. commander.
l. 31. f. whence. r. whom. p. 188. l. 25. add be. p. 200. l. 4. f. held. r.
bold. p. 210. l. 20. r. the res testata. l. 23. f. prudentia. r. constantia. p.
217. l. 17. f. rules. r. rites. p. 228. l. 7. del. a. p. 229. l. 22. r. Phil.
3.6, 7, 8. p. 230. l. 29. d. through the faith of Jesus. p. 233. l. 10. after
nature r. 2 Pet. 1.4. p. 241. l. 2. r. related. p. 16. l. ult. r. id bruti. p.
243. l. 28. r. before all the people. l. 29. d. the people. p. 245. l. 10. f.
who. r. what. p. 254. l. 10. r. yea not to be believed they can be, etc. p.
256. l. 8. after earth. r. Rev, 14.6.


