A TREATISE OF Three Conversions of England FROM PAGANISM TO Christian
Religion. I. Under the Apostles, in the First Age after CHRIST. II. Under Pope
Eleutherius and King Lucius, in the Second Age. III. Under Pope Gregory the
Great and King Ethelbert, in the Sixth Age; with diverse other Matters thereunto
appertaining.


The First Two PARTS.

Dedicated to the Catholics of England; with a new Addition to the said
Catholics, upon the News of the late Queens Death, and the Succession of His
Majesty of Scotland to the Crown of ENGLAND.

By N. D. Author of the Ward-Word.

Enquire of ancient times before you; remember the old days of your
Forefathers; consider of every Age as they have passed; ask your Father, and he
will tell you; demand of your Ancestors, and they will declare unto you.

Deuteronomy. iv. 32. LONDON, Reprinted by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most
Excellent Majesty for His Household and Chapel. MDCLXXXVIII.

THE Epistle Dedicatory TO THE CATHOLICS of ENGLAND.
Though when I wrote the Preface that does ensue, I had no purpose to add any
Epistle Dedicatory (most dearly-beloved and worthy Catholics) yet afterward
thinking of some other circumstances both of Matter and Time, I deemed it not
amiss to say somewhat also in this kind of Dedication, both for presenting this
Work to whom principally it is due, as also for Advertisement in some few
Points which the present State of your Affairs does seem to require.

2. And for the first, Cause of Dedication.
Who does not see and consider that this Treatise of the first Planting of
Christian Catholic Faith in England, with the Continuance and Preservation
thereof from Age to Age unto our Times, does chiefly and principally belong to
You that are Catholics at this day, most worthy Children of so renowned
Parents, most honorable Offspring of so excellent Ancestors, most glorious
Posterity of so famous Antiquity, whom future Ages will both esteem and extol
above many of your Predecessors, for retaining That in times of War, which they
left unto you in possession of Peace, and for defending that by so singular
Constancy of Sufferings, which they both received and bequeathed unto you by
quiet Tradition?

3. Which Tradition being set down, proved, and declared most clearly in this
ensuing Work, I do by offering the same unto you, but present you with your
own, to wit, the History of your own House, the Records and Chronicles of your
own Family, the Pedigree and Genealogy of your own Forefathers, the Antiquity
and Nobility of your own Progenitors, together with your just Title and Claim
to their Inheritance, producing jointly for the same your undoubted Charters,
Enrollments, Evidences, Writings and Witnesses, which no man with reason can
deny or call in doubt.

4. And furthermore I do add in the end, The substance of the Book.
for more full Complement of this whole Cause, all such former false and wrong
Suits, Pretenses, Pleas, Intrusions, Surreptions, or other like Shifts or
Wranglings, which any Heretics to this day (but especially these of our times)
have made hitherto about the same, for show of some Title or Right on their
part to this Inheritance and Succession of yours. And lastly, I do produce also
the Judgments, Censures, Sentences and Arrests of all Christian Parliaments of
the World, to wit, the Determination of all the highest Ecclesiastical
Tribunals in your favor. By all which I doubt not but that your Right and Title
remains most evident and clear to all Men of Judgment, even to the Enemies or
Adversaries themselves. Wherefore most justly I do Dedicate this Treatise unto
you, which so many ways, and for so many reasons, is your own. And so much for
the first Point.

5. The second also, about the Circumstances of the present Time, is already
somewhat touched in that we have said: How by God's holy Providence you are
born in this time of War, Tribulation and Contradiction, instead of that large
and long Peace and Tranquillity which your Ancestors enjoyed in the use of that
Catholic Religion for which you strive and suffer now; which thing, though for
the present it seem unpleasant and distastful to Flesh and Blood, yet will the
hour come when it shall prove a most singular Benefit and Privilege to such as
have received Grace to manifest themselves by this occasion, Time of Trial.
seeing that, according to the Apostle, this is one principal End, in God's
Everlasting Wisdom, for permission of Heresies, ut qui probati sunt manifesti
fiant, that those that be of proof be made manifest by this occasion. 1 Cor. 11.


6. Wherefore seeing, as the same Apostle says in another place, it is given
to you (dear Catholics, that live in England at this day) not only to believe
in him, Philip. 1.
but also to suffer for him, (a singular privilege by his account;) yea, and
that we may say of You, as he said and gloried of Himself and his Fellows,
Vincula vestra manifesta fiunt in Christo in omni praetorio; Ibidem.
Your Bonds for Christ are made notorious throughout all the Tribunals and
Judgment-seats of our Country. And yet further, as he wrote to his dear
Thessalonians in their highest praise and commendation, You are become such
Followers of Christ and his Apostles, 1 These. 1.
as receiving the Word of God with Joy of the Holy Ghost in great Tribulation,
you are made an Example or Spectacle to all other faithful people in Macedonia
and Achaia, for that from you is divulged the Word of God not only in Macedonia
and Achaia, but also in all other places, by reason of your Faith, which is
published everywhere throughout the World.

7. Seeing, I say, all this may be truly written of you, and that our Country
has gotten more honorable Renown in Foreign Catholic Nations, and the Church
of God more Glory and Comfort, by this your Patience and Sufferings in these
few latter years, than by the peaceable Calm of many former Ages of your
Ancestors; I know no true Servant of God, that, together with the commiseration
of your present hard afflicted state, receives not also particular Consolation
by your Integrity and Constancy, praying for your perseverance in that most
honorable Course which hitherto you have held of true Obedience to Almighty God
in matters of your Soul, The honorable course of English Catholics.
and Loyal Behavior of Duty toward your Temporal Prince in all worldly
Affairs; which course, though it have not escaped the calumnious Tongues and Pens
of some carping Adversaries, yet is it justifiable and glorious, both before
God and Man, where Reason rules, and not Passion: And I doubt not but that the
Wisdom and Moderation both of her Majesty and her sage Council, will rather in
this Point ponder your own facts, than your Adversaries words; as also consider
how rare such Examples of Patience are in these our days, where so great a
multitude for so many years has passed under the Rod of so sharp Afflictions,
which is your singular commendation with all wise and godly men, let Cavillers
and Calumniators say what they will to the contrary.

8. But God's holy hand has not stayed here in proving you by these external
conflictions only, but has passed to the internal also, Internal Tribulations.

Esai. 1.


that he might say of you as he did of his dearest people when he meant to do
them most good: Convertam manum meam ad te, and excoquam ad purum scoriam tuam;
and auferam omne stannum tuum; I will turn my hand upon thee, and will boil out
by fire all thy rust even to the quick, and will take from thee all thy Pewter,
thereby to leave thee pure Silver; he would equal you in this Point with the
Privilege of his Apostles, that you might say with them truly, 1 Cor. 7.
Foris pugnae, intus timores; We have fights abroad, and frights at home. You
know what I mean, and others will easily guess, that have heard of the late
storms past: Only I will say, to your high commendation, that your moderate and
sage deportment has been such also in this Point of not admitting the scandal
offered, as all men have been edified by your Wisdom and Piety therein; seeing
fulfilled, on your behalf, that which the Holy Ghost prophesied of holy wise,
and peaceable men, truly fearing God: Psalm. 118.
Pax multa diligentibus Legem tuam, and non est illis scandalum; Those that
love thy Law (O Lord) do enjoy their inward Peace, and are not scandalized with
what external tempests soever do arise.

9. In respect of which Piety of yours, it is to be presumed that Christ our
Savior has wrought again by his Substitute (and this upon the sudden) that
famous Miracle recorded by St. Matthew, St Mark, and St. Luke, of calming the
Tempest that put his Disciples in fear and jeopardy: Exurgens, Matthew. 8. Marc.
4. Luc. 8.
imperavit ventis and mari, and facta est tranquilitas magna; He rising up,
commanded the Winds and Seas to cease, and thereupon ensued a great calm and
tranquillity; which kind of Miracle is not lightly made among Protestants, for
that they want the means thereof. And therefore, as a thing peculiar to the
Subordination of Christ's orderly Church, and wrought by his Divine Power and
Virtue, I do the more admire and reverence the same; assuring my self, that no
good Catholic will ever hereafter so much as move his finger against it, but
cooperate rather to the firm establishment and continuance thereof, as is most
behoveful, to the end that as we are all one in Faith and Belief, so we be also
in Life, Speech, and Actions, especially in this time of trial. Which God of
his infinite Goodness grant: To whose holy Protection I commend heartily both
You and my self, this first of March, 1603.

An Addition of the Author to the foresaid Catholics, upon the News of the
Queens Death, and Succession of the King of Scotland to the Crown of England.
SInce the writing of the precedent Epistle, Advertisement is come, that
Almighty God of his infinite Mercy has delivered you at length (dear
Catholics) from your old Persecutor, and, as we hope, will also shortly from
your Persecution; His Divine Majesty be thanked everlastingly for the same.
Here generally the applause is no otherwise, than it was in old time among the
Christians, upon the entrance of Constantine into the Empire after Dioclesian,
or of Jovinian after Julian. But the former Example seems more like, for that
good Constantine was of a different Religion when he entered, yet of singular
hope to become such as afterward he did, both in respect of his excellent
Parts, S. Paulin. ep. 11. ad Severum.
and of his pious Mother St. Helena. The difference of the two Mothers is, That
the Empress Helena did assist her Son here upon Earth, as St. Paulinus writes,
toward the Truth and Piety of Religion; but Queen Mary of Scotland and France,
being violently deprived of this Life, will do it (we trust) by her Prayers in
Heaven. The Comparison also is not improper in this, for that perhaps this our
new King is the first that has been absolutely Lord of the whole Island of
Britanny (with the Parts annexed thereunto) since Constantine.

Gallican. orat. in Panaegyric. 1. Constantini.
2. We know what Commendation a Heathen Author gave to Constantine while he was
yet no Christian; and this in public Audience, at the day of Marriage with the
Daughter of Maximianus Herculeus, both the Emperors being present, and hearing
him: The moral virtues of Constantine before he was a Christian.
Neque enim (says he) Forma tantum in te Patris; sed etiam Continentia,
Fortitudo, Justitia, Prudentia, sese votis gentium praesentant; Not only the
Form and Beauty of your Father (Constantius) does appear in you; but also his
Continency, his Fortitude, his Justice, his Wisdom, do represent themselves in
you, according to the full desire and wish of all Nations. Eusebius. l. 8. hist.
c. 26.
Thus said he of that Constantine: Whereupon Eusebius shows, That the
Christians of that time conceived so great Love toward him, (though he were not
yet a Christian) as his Adversary Maxentius hearing of his coming toward Rome,
was glad to feign that himself would be a Christian also, to retain somewhat
thereby of their affections from Constantine.

3. We read of diverse excellent Men in Christian Religion, who were presumed
and foretold that they would be such, before they were Christians indeed; and
this only upon the foresight of their good Natures and virtuous Inclinations;
as, St. Martyn, afterward Bishop of Tours; St. Nectarius, Archbishop of
Constantinople; St. Ambrose, Bishop of Millain, and St. Augustine Bishop of
Hyppo: albeit of St. Augustin's Conversion from the Heresy of the Manichees to
Catholic Religion, St. Ambrose added another Conjecture also, or rather
Prophecy; to wit, that the Prayers and Tears of his good Mother St. Monica,
could not suffer such a Son to perish. All which you see how far it makes for
Us, and for our Hope, of this second Constantine, who wanted not also a holy
Mother to Pray and shed Tears abundantly for him whilst she lived, that he
might be such as we most desire now; whereof my self amongst others can be a
true Witness, and this from her own testimony.

4. And for that I cannot persuade my self that so holy Endeavors of such a
Mother in such a Cause, can be frustrate with Almighty God, I do not only hope
well, but do attribute hereunto in great part the many Blessings that have
fallen upon this King ever since; but principally His Majesty's Preservation
and strange Delivery from infinite Dangers, The strange deliverances of His
Majesty from many perils.
and most imminent Perils, as all men know; so as neither Cyrus, nor Romulus,
nor Moses himself, was more strangely preserved than this King has been since
his Infancy. And for that God does never commonly work those great Effects but
to great Ends, you Catholics of England may with reason hope well thereof,
especially if any thing came by his said good Mothers Intercession, who loved
you all so dearly, as whatsoever she asked at God's hands for the Life and
Prosperity of her dear Son in this World, a great part thereof was meant (no
doubt) for You, and your Good, if ever you came to be under his Government, as
now God has brought you.

5. Another effect of this holy Queens Prayers for her only Son, I hold to be
that other Blessing beforementioned of so many rare Parts discovered in His
Majesty's Person; which truly, though I have had ever in great esteem upon the
reports of other men, yet has the same been exceedingly increased upon the
late reading of a Book, written (I suppose) some years agon by His Highness,
but printed in London this very year, 1603. The King's excellent Book entitled
Basilicon Doron.
This Book is entitled in the Greek Tongue, Basilicon Doron; to wit, A Kingly
Gift sent by His Majesty unto the Prince, his eldest Son, (now also our Lord)
being in truth a Golden Gift in respect of the excellent matter contained
therein; and it discovers so many rare Parts in the Writer, as may justly
give all Catholics good hope to see one day that fulfilled in His Majesty which
most they desire. And would to God this singular Treatise had appeared earlier
to the World.

6. For setting aside one Point only therein handled, which is Religion,
(wherein His Majesty must needs speak according to his Persuasion and Education
in that behalf;) all other matters are such, and so set down, as you will
exceedingly delight therein, and profit also thereby, if you read with
attention, and ponder all well; but especially Three Points above other I
noted, with no small admiration to my self, which I speak in all sincerity of
truth, as in the sight of Almighty God. The first is, Three rare Points of His
Majesty's Book.
the great variety of select Learning, in such a Person, and so occupied
otherwise, as His Majesty is. Secondly, the great maturity of Judgment, in
applying the same so fitly to the peculiar Affairs of Scotland. The third is,
the fervent and extraordinary affection of Piety toward God and Godliness,
uttered in so effectual words, and upon so good occasions throughout the whole
Book, as a man may easily see it comes from the heart. And how highly this one
Point of Piety is to be esteemed in so High and Mighty a Prince, especially in
these our days, when Contentions in Religion have wrought so great coldness of
Religious Piety in many Great Men's Hearts, every Wife and Pious Man will easily
consider.

7. But I will go no further in this matter, lest I may seem to flatter, which
I hate with my heart, and His Majesty detesteth the Vice most prudently and
Christianly in this his Book: Only I will add for our common comfort, That it
seems impossible unto me, that such a Wit, and so godly-affected a Mind, as
God has bestowed upon His Majesty, can be long detained with the vanity and
inanity of Sects and Heresies, where no Ground, no Head, no certain Principle,
no sure Rule or Method to try the Truth, No reason to be yielded why a man
should be rather of one Sect than another.
no one Reason at all can be found, why a man should rather be of one Sect than
another; but only every ones own Will, and particular Judgment, grounded (as
each one will pretend) upon the Scriptures, whereof yet himself only will be
the Judge and Interpreter. Which things being of themselves most absurd, in so
weighty a Cause as Religion is, that concerns the Eternal Salvation of our
Souls, it is to be hoped that His Majesty, having the former two parts of
Judgment and pious Affection in that Excellency as has been said, will easily
come in time to discover the same, and therewithal the contrary substantial
Grounds and clear Demonstrations for the Catholic Religion, whereunto this
Treatise also of the first planting of Christian Religion in our Country, may
(in my Opinion) give no small help and light, if it might please His Majesty to
bestow the casting of his eye upon the same.

8. Wherefore, to conclude this Addition to my former Letter, God having
wrought so strangely this Change, as here is reported, with so general Peace
and Applause of the whole Realm, you are to expect at His Divine Majesty's
hands the Effects that are conform to his Fatherly Love and Care, ever hitherto
showed toward you. And as for the Person now advanced, I know most certainly,
that there was never any doubt or difference among you, but that ever you
desired his Advancement above all others, as the only Heir of that Renowned
Mother, for whom your fervent Zeal is known to the World, and how much you have
suffered by her Adversaries for the same. Yet do I confess, that touching the
disposition of the Person for the Place, and manner of his Advancement, all
zealous Catholics have both wished and prayed, that he might first be a
Catholic, and then our King; this being our bounden Duty to wish, and his
greatest Good to be obtained for him. And to this end, and no other, I assure
my self, has been directed whatsoever may have been said, written, or done by
any Catholic, which with some others might breed disgust.

9. Now, it has not pleased Almighty God to give us our desires in the order
of our wishes, but first to make him our King, 1 Reg. 3.
and then to leave us in hope of the other at his due time. What shall we say
in this and all the rest, but, as Heli did, Dominus est, quod bonum est in
oculis suis, faciat: He is Lord, let him do as he thinks best? And with
Patience, Humility, Longanimity, and Obedience, seek by continual Prayer to
hasten that time of our full Joy by His Majesty's Conversion, which we trust in
his everlasting Wisdom and infallible Providence is already determined to be
suo tempore. And in the mean space, seeing it is here reported, that Catholics,
according to their Abilities, have showed themselves in every Country both
ready and forward to advance His Majesty's present Admission to the Crown, I do
not doubt but they shall find the Effects of his Clemency for their delivery
out of such Afflictions, Calamities and Oppressions, as lately they have
suffered by the instigation principally of such people, whose Manners are most
excellently and prudently described by His Majesty in the second Book of his
worthy Treatise, as to himself well experienced.

10. And it is no small comfort in this behalf to have a King of whom we may
truly use the words of St. Paul, Hab. 5.
which he spoke of Christ, Didicit ex eis quae passus est, etc. He has learned
by that himself has suffered by the same kind of Men. And truly, though in his
own Person he cannot be said (nor would perhaps) to have suffered properly for
Catholic Religion, as You have done; yet if we respect his nearest, either in
Nature, Blood, or Affection, and their Number, Rank, and Quality, that among
them have suffered for the same Cause, He may be said to have suffered
perchance far more than You; for that more of his Princely Blood has been shed
in England, France, and Scotland, about the quarrel of Catholic Religion, than
of all other Christian Princes joined together.

11. And forasmuch as His Majesty does vouchsafe of his Princely Gratitude to
profess in one part of his Instructions to his Son the Prince, That in all his
Troubles, Streights, and Dangers, he has found none so sure and confident unto
him, as those that remained Loyal and Faithful to his good Mother the Queen,
(who all for the most part were known to have been good Catholics) it is to be
hoped that he will make the same Account also of You, that remained Constant
and Dutiful, not only to Her Majesty while she lived, but to God's Divine
Majesty also, in standing and suffering for your Conscience in Religion; which
was the Mark and Badge (if you remember) whereby the foresaid famous Governor
Constantius, Father to our Constantine, did try his Christian Courtiers, though
he were a Pagan himself; rejecting those who upon his Commandment and
Invitation had yielded, Eusebius. l. 1. de vit. Constant. c. 11.
and done against their own Religion; and retaining and honoring others, that
had been Constant even against himself: Which fact Eusebius recounteth, with
exceeding praise of the Man's Judgment, Justice, and Piety therein; whose
Example I hope our now King will imitate, and you follow the Example of the
better sort of those Christians, whom Constantius for their Constancy so much
esteemed and advanced.

THE PREFACE TO THE CHRISTIAN STUDIOUS READER, CONCERNING THE Edition and
Argument of this Treatise, and of the Method held therein, and principal Points
to be Treated.
MAN, to be mutable, or (as the Scripture speaks) uncertain in his foresight
and Providence, Sap. 9.
if no other Arguments were to prove it (as there be infinite) yet my own
Experience (gentle Reader) of the success of this Treatise were sufficient,
having altered so often my first intention about the same, as it being now
ready to come forth, it seems nothing less than that which at the beginning I
had purposed.

2. My first design was to have written only some few Leaves or Sheets of Paper
in answer to Sir Francis Hastings, Sir F. Hastings in his Reply, page 192.
who in his Reply to the Seventh Encounter of the Warder (which Encounter
concerns principally the Bishop and See of Rome) would seem to diminish that
obligation of gratitude, which the Warder said that England had above many
other Nations to that See, for Two Conversions of our People to Christian
Religion received from thence. The Knight (I say) endeavored to strike out or
diminish that Obligation, by calling in doubt the said Conversions, or
cavilling at least at some particulars thereof: Whereupon I thought it needful
not only to confirm that which had been written before of the Two foresaid
Conversions under Pope Eleutherius and Pope Gregory I. but also to add a Third,
more ancient than these Two, to wit under S. Peter himself, and some other
Apostles. And albeit all this was meant so briefly (as I have said) in the
first designment; yet when I came to the Work it self, it grew more long, and
could hardly be dispatched in so many Chapters, as I had purposed Leaves or
Sheets at the beginning.

3. The reason of this increase was, for that coming to the examination of the
matter, I found Sir Francis to have taken all that he had said concerning that
Point, out of John Fox, though he cited him not; and Fox again the most part of
his Cavils out of the Magdeburgians: So as of necessity I was forced to
encounter all these Three Adversaries together, to examine their Arguments,
discover their Frauds, and refel their Follies. Which to do with any
sufficiency, How the first Part of this Treatise was increased.
(as also with the clearness and perspicuity which I desired) drew the matter
on to a bigger Bulk than well could be set forth as a Part only of that
Encounter whereunto it belonged: Whereupon, at the persuasion of some Friends,
resolution was taken to have it divulged in a several Treatise, as before has
been showed in the end of the Second Encounter already printed.

4. But now, when it was taken in hand to be reviewed for the Edition* diverse
things occurred to be added for the more fullness of the Treatise; and namely,
that not only the Planting of Christian Faith in England should be averred by
these Three several Conversions, but that the Continuation also thereof (I mean
of One self-same Faith and Belief) should be showed and demonstrated from the
First to the Second Conversion, and from the Second to the Third, unto our
days. And with this came the Discourse to occupy a dozen whole Chapters; which
was more than twice as much as in the first design was purposed.

5. But being arrived hither, there offered it self a new cogitation of adding
a Second Part, no less important than the First, for searching out our
Adversaries Religion in all this time; Arist. in topicis. Cicer. 1. ad Heren.
and de Orator.
according to the Advertisement both of the Philosopher and Orator, That it is
not sufficient only to confirm our own Cause, except we infringe and refute the
contrary. Whereupon it seemed necessary not only to show the first, second and
third Planting of our Religion in England, together with the manifest and
visible Continuance thereof unto our Age; but also to demonstrate the contrary
in the Religion of the Protestants; Why the second part of the search of John
Fox's Church was added.
to wit, That it was never planted in England, (I mean in such Points of
Doctrine wherein they differ from the Catholic) nor ever was received, nor had
essence or being under the name of Christian Religion, from Christ's time to
ours. And for that John Fox above all other English Protestant-Writers takes
upon him of purpose and by promise to prove the contrary in his huge Volume of
Acts and Monuments, Fox in the title of his Acts and Monuments, and in his
Protestation to the English Church.
to wit, to show the course and race of his Church (for so are his words) from
the beginning of these latter Ages, I was forced to join Issue with him in
particular upon both these parts: I mean, in showing the beginning and
continuance of our Church and Religion, and the not being or continuance of
his; for performance whereof I have had occasion (as you see) to peruse over
the first Part of the said Volume, from the beginning of Christian Religion to
King Henry VIII. containing above 500 Leaves.

6. But for that the second Part of that Volume, from K. Henry downward (being
of no less bulk than the former) treats of the principal Pillars of his
Religion since that time, Why the third part of this Treatise was added about
the examination of Fox's Calendar.
whereof some he makes Confessors and other Martyrs, and distributeth them
into a certain Ecclesiastical Calendar according to the days of every Month
wherein their Festival memories are to be kept, and places the said Calendar
in the front of his Acts and Monuments; it seemed convenient also, to the end
that nothing should remain wholly unsearch'd or unexamin'd in that Work of his,
to add a third Part to the former two, for the discussion of this Calendar, and
some other necessary Points belonging thereunto.

7. Lo here, good Christian Reader, a brief sum of all my cogitations about
that matter; which, if they may serve thee for thy spiritual utility, either
for confirming or establishing thee in Catholic Religion (if thou have it
already) or for thy reducing unto it, if hitherto thou be not partaker of so
high and heavenly a Blessing; I shall be glad, and think my Labor happily
bestowed therein, well knowing of what importance this matter is for thy
Eternal Salvation.

The diligence which men ought to use for informing themselves of the truth of
Catholic Religion in time of Heresies. Possidon. in vit. Aug. and Aug. l. 4,
and 5. confess. Athan. in Symbol. verse. 2. Mat. 13. Aug. l. de morib. Eccl. c.
17. Chry. hom. 14. in c. 24. Mat.
8. In respect whereof thou ought also, if thou be in any doubt, not only to
take upon thee the labor of reading this, or any such Treatise, that may help
thee therein; but also to travel both by Sea and Land, Countries and Kingdoms
(if we believe S. Austin, that both said and practiced the same) to seek out
the Truth and Certainty of Catholic Religion; whereby only, and by no other
ways and means under Heaven may a man be saved, or escape Everlasting
Damnation, as holy Athanasius protests in his Creed. Wherefore this ought to
be unto us (as the same Father says) that rich Jewel found in the Field, for
buying whereof we should not stick to sell or lose all other temporal Goods or
Riches that we have, seeing Christ our Savior does so much commend them that
did so, and thereby inciteth us also to do the like.

9. And the same Doctor S. Austin, together with S. Chrysostom and other
Fathers, do reprehend greatly the sluggishness of diverse men in their days,
that seeing Sects and Heresies to arise, and diversities of Religion in almost
every Country, did not bestir themselves to try out the Truth, but were content
either to accept of every Novelty thrust upon them, or to remain doubtful or
indifferent, which in some sort is a worse state than the other: For as the
Prophecy and Prediction of our Savior is clear, that such times of Heresy and
Contradiction should come, when one Sect would say, here is Christ; and
another, there is Christ: One Heretic would cry, Matthew. 24. Marc. 13. Joann. 7.
here is the Church, here is the true Doctrine, here is Reformation; and another
deny it: So the Apostle expounds the hidden Providence of Almighty God in
this permission of his; to wit, ut qui probati sunt, manifesti fiant; 1 Cor. 11.
that those who are men of proof should be made manifest among us. And how then
in a time of proof, and of so special trial, when so great a Crown is to be
gained, are men so negligent, slothful, and fearful in showing and declaring
themselves? S. Chrysostom yields this reason, which is severe: Chrysostom. opere
imperfect. in Matt. cap. 23. page 962. Chrysostom. ibid.
Quia neque promissio beatitudinis ejus (says he) desideratur, neque judicium
comminationis timetur, etc. It is, for that neither God's promise of Eternal
Felicity in the next Life is desired by these slothful people, nor his threat
of Judgment feared. And yet, says the same Father, si Vestimenta empturus
gyras unum negotiatorem and alterum, etc. if you were to buy a Garment, you go
about from one Seller or Merchant to another, to see and examine where the best
is to be found: And how much more ought this to be done to try out true
Religion?

10. If a pretension were made (says one) to take away your Temporal Lands and
Livings, or that any new doubts should be put in the Title of your Inheritance,
A representation of such as are negligent in examining the truth of Catholic
Religion.
or that it should be called in question by any Promoters, or busy people,
whether you were true Owners of such and such Lands and Livings or no; you
would quickly start and bestir your selves, looking out Records and Writings
for confirmation of your Right and Title, and would seek Lawyers to plead and
defend the same, and you would make account of ancient Witnesses for proof
thereof. All which you neglecting in this case of trial about Catholic Religion
against Heretics, (which is more clear in it self, if men would attend unto it,
than any other proof of Possession, Right, Interest, Title, or Inheritance
whatsoever) this negligence (I say) does clearly declare, that men have more
care and cogitation of Temporalities, than of Eternity; of Earth, than of
Heaven; and of this miserable, short, and vanishing Life, than of God's
Everlasting Kingdom, and their Immortal reigning with him.

11. And thus much be spoken by the way concerning the judgment, sense, and
feeling of ancient holy Fathers about the care and solicitude that every true
Christian ought to have for informing himself soundly and substantially, (but
especially in time of Heresies) what the truth and certainty of Cath. Religion
is; lest being negligent therein, and yielding overmuch to the cogitation of
worldly affairs, he be deceived before he be aware, and carried away to
Perdition by the present surge and sway of Innovations, under the color and
name of New Reformations; persuading himself that he goes right, and has no
need of further advice or information therein.

12. For preventing of which most perilous course, held, (alas!) by too many of
our Country at this day, (who persuade themselves, Dangerous cogitations.
that either matters of Religion appertain not greatly unto them, or that they
go well as they are, or that they may remain indifferent, or attend to worldly
affairs, and let the other alone, or at leastwise do imagine by the multitude of
contradictions which they see and hear every where, that it is a hard matter to
discern which Party has the Truth, or where that Certainty lies:) For help (I
say) in all these Points, (but especially the last) I have thought best to
publish this Treatise, which I trust shall be a sufficient Light for discerning
Truth to them that will vouchsafe to peruse the same; for that it does briefly,
clearly, and in whole sum or view, lay before them the Verity of Catholic
Religion, the Offspring, Increase, and Continuance thereof, together with the
Fraud and Falsehood of all Sects whatsoever, but especially those of our time.

13. And it is here to be noted, that, as in Suits and Controversies about
Temporal Lands and Livings belonging to any Estate or Lordship, a man may take
two ways of proof and trial against Quarrellers, that craftily and falsely would
intrude or make pretension thereunto: The first, by alleging particular
Evidences for every part and parcel thereof severally, as for this Close, this
Meadow, this Park, that Pasture, those Woods, that Glebe-land, and the like;
which way (as you see) is more prolix and troublesome: There is therefore a
second more short and general, whereby a man proving One point, proves All; as
if we would take upon us to show, that the chief Mansion House of the said
Lordship in Controversy (whereunto all the rest belong) is Ours, and has been
ever held by our Ancestors, and that we are true Successors, Heirs and
Inheritors to them. This Issue (I say) were more short and sure; and this is
that in which I do now join plea with our Adversaries, especially with J. Fox,
in name of all his Brother-Protestants; to wit, that whereas other men hitherto
have taken upon them to defend and prove particular Points of Controversies
severally: As for example, the Real Presence, Purgatory, Prayer to Saints,
Seven Sacraments, and the like, which are but Branches of our whole Cause; my
purpose is to prove all together, by joining the foresaid Issue about the chief
Mansion House, and true Owners thereof; that is to say, the true Catholic
Church, and lawful Family thereunto belonging, descending from Christ himself;
for that we proving this only, we prove the whole; no man being able to deny
but that where this House and Family is found, there is all the Right and
Interest that may be pretended to the State and Dignity aforesaid.

The contention about the House and Manor place.
14. But now again, for proving of this Point diverse ways are or may be held by
different Men; mine shall be at this time after the fashion of Two that strive
and contend about the Mansion House before mentioned, and thereby pretend to
the true Title, and lawful Inheritance of the foresaid State and Lordship: the
one part pretending only in general terms, That there is such a Noble House,
well and strongly built, with great and excellent Qualities and Commodities,
and richly furnished, whereunto belongs the said State and Lordship; and that
the Owners and Inhabitants thereof have great Privileges and Preferments before
all other People; and that there are certain ancient Records extant also of
this matter, out of which Records, according to their own exposition, they
gather these Properties of the said House and Family, and apply both the one
and the other to themselves.

15. But the other party denying their pretense and exposition of old Records,
says, That all this is false; The Catholic Parties Plea for the House.
and that according to the true exposition of the said Writings, and the marks
and tokens thereby given, the said House and Mannor-place appertains to them
only, and therewith consequently the whole State and Lordship without
controversy; which they offer to try by coming to particulars, showing when
and where, and by what occasion, the said House was first built, what were the
Stones and Timber that went thereunto, how the Title of the whole State and
Lordship was tied or annexed to this House, together with the Dignities and
Privileges thereof; and then to what Family this House was assigned at the
beginning, who were the first Inhabitants, Dwellers, Guiders and Governors
thereof, and how it has continued ever since from hand to hand, and from time
to time, always under the same Family by lawful Succession, and has defended
it self from all sorts of assaults made against it, as well of secret
domestical Thieves, as open Enemies; and that at this day the same Family is in
possession thereof, etc.

16. And as for the other Pretenders, these men offer to show further against
them, that they have been always contemptible and vagrant persons, dispersed
here and there in several Cottages of their own building or patching, nor ever
dwelt in any House, worth the naming, much less in so excellent a House as
this; and that if any of them have at any time heretofore been of this House or
Family, they were either dismissed and cast out for their disorders, or have run
away as Fugitives for guiltiness of their own Consciences.

17. Now then this being so, who does not see to which party the said House and
Mansion-place is like to be judged? And this is the true figure or
representation (good Christian Reader) of our present Controversy with J. Fox
and his Fellows throughout all this Treatise, for that he and his pretend a
certain title to the true Church and Religion of Christ from all Antiquity, but
produce no better proofs to challenge the same, than the Pretenders before
mentioned for the said House and Mannor-place, if not somewhat worse, as shall
be declared.

18. But we on the contrary side do follow the course of the other party in
coming to particulars, setting down first how Christ's Church and Religion
began, by whom, The application of the two former Examples.
and under whom; who were the first beginners, promoters and professors
thereof, what they taught, what they did, whom they left their successors, with
what promise and assurance of continuation, and finally how they endured unto
this day. And all this is handled in the first part of this Treatise. And then
in the second is declared the other point before mentioned; to wit, that the
adverse heretical part, had never any house at all, and much less any such as
has been spoken of; that is to say, they had never any Church or certain
Family agreeing with it self, nor ever any certain Profession of any one Faith
or Religion like in all points to it self, or to that of any others, were it
good or bad, false or true, Heretical or Catholic. And this is observed from
the beginning of the world to our time, as you shall see manifestly proved
afterward in the prosecution of this work; desiring thee (gentle Reader) to
take the pains to read it over with some attention for thine own utility; though
I presume that thy contentment also in reading thereof will easily equal thy
pains, the argument being historical, and not devoid of grateful variety both
of times, men and affairs.

19. But now, for that my end and scope in writing this Treatise, Four points
of consideration about matters of Faith.
and in handling this important Argument of discerning between Religion and
Religion, is not indeed so much (if I shall confess the truth) to delight, as
to move and profit thee (good Reader,) I have thought convenient for the second
part of this my Preface, to adjoyn 3 or 4 points of principal consideration
about this Subject of Faith and Belief, and thereof deduce as many inferences
of no less importance, for thy good disposition in this behalf, and therewith
leave thee for the rest to thine own judgment, and more mature deliberation.

20. The first of which points is, The first point how our articles of Faith
are above man's Reason.
That Almighty God for man's greater humility and merit in believing, has
placed the greater part of the object of our faith and belief (that is to say,
the things which are to be believed) above the ordinary reach of man's reason,
and environed them with such difficulty and obscurity, in respect of our
frailty, as without the light of his grace, and the concurse and free motion of
our own will and good endeavor, they are not to be attained unto. And this (as
I said) as well for man's humiliation, in respect of the height of God's
mysteries revealed by faith; as also that man may merit by his free and willing
concurse to belief; which he would not do if the articles or object of our
faith were so clear as there were no obscurity or darkness in them: for then,
according to the grounds of philosophy, man's understanding perforce must yield
thereunto, and consequently our will also; whereof would ensue the loss of all
merit and reward, according to that Saying of S. Greg. Non habet fides meritum,
Greg. hom. 36. in Evang.
ubi humana ratio praebet experimentum; Faith has no merit where man's reason
does make the thing evident. And long before him S. Athan. Fides de re evidenti
concepta, Athan. tract. de advent 1. cont. Apollin.

Aug. trast. 79. in Joan. and ser. 1. de festo S. Trin.


Fides dici non potest; Faith conceived of an evident matter, cannot be called
Faith. And briefly, but pithily S. Aug. Laus fidei est; si, quod creditur, non
videtur; The praise or merit of Faith stands in this, that the thing be not
seen which is believed. And in another place, Credo, quod nescio: and propterea
scio, quia scio, me nescire quod nescio; I do believe that which I know not:
and thereby I come to know, for that I know my self to have been ignorant in
that which indeed I knew not. And finally S. Paul to the Hebrews makes this
plain, when giving a definition of Faith, he writes thus: Hebr. 11.
Est autem fides substantia sperandarum rerum, argumentum non apparentium;
Faith is the substance or ground of things hoped for (in the next life) and an
argument of such things as be not apparent or manifest to humane sense or
reason. Thus teach they. And the matter is clear in it self, and confounds
the politic vain heads of our days, who will believe no more than they see or
feel, or can comprehend by their own understanding.

21. But now concerning the causes of this difficulty or obscurity in matters
of belief, First cause of obscurity in Faith.
the same Fathers do assign 2 or 3 for principal. The first is the height and
sublimity of the the articles and mysteries themselves that are to be believed,
which being of God's Secrets, do surpass the base capacity and reason of man.
As are (for example) the creation of the world of nothing, the trinity of
persons in one nature of divinity, the incarnation of the Son of God, and his
birth without violating his mothers virginity, the resurrection of our bodies,
the being of Christ in the Sacrament, and the like; which human reason cannot
reach unto, Second cause.
though they be not contrary to it, but above it. Another cause is (as S. Ambrose
notes) the Majesty of Almighty God, who will be believed at his word, Ambr. l.
1. de Abraham c. 3.
without being asked for proof or reason for the same. For if (says he) a
grave honorable personage in this life, (especially if he be of high authority,
and our superior) will take it in disdain to be asked a proof for that he
affirms; how much more ought God to be credited without proof of human
reason, when he proposes unto us a matter above our reach or capacity?

Third cause.
22. The third cause is that which before I touched, that Man might merit more
by believing that which he sees not evident, according to the Saying of Christ
to S. Thomas, Joan. 2.
Quia vidisti (Thoma) credidisti, beati qui non viderunt and crediderunt;
Because thou have seen, Thomas, thou have believed; but happy are they that
have not seen, How God proceeds in revealing his Mysteries.
and yet have believed. And for all these causes, if we consider the matter
well, we shall find that God has proceeded strangely to man's eye from the
beginning of the world, in revealing the mysteries of our Faith unto us;
discovering his will on the one side, with infinite testification of his love
and desire that we should know them; and yet on the other side, with such
reservation in those revelations, as the matter might still be difficult, hard,
or obscure, in some respect; and this for the greater merit (as has been said)
of the believer. Genesis 2.6.7.8.
As for example, before the flood he appeared to diverse Patriarchs from time to
time, causing them to preach and open to others his will, and the truth of that
Faith which they were bound to believe; but yet he appeared not to all in those
days, which he might have done if he would, and thereby have made the matter
more clear and out of doubt: but he would have them believe others by words and
tradition. And the like manner of proceeding he used after the flood with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob for instruction of their posterity. Genesis 20.22.23.
Exodus 1.2.3. Deuteronomy. 33. Act. 7. Jos. 15.
And then again four or five hundred years after that, when he determined to
bring the Hebrew people out of Egypt, and to give them a written Law, he
appeared not evidently to all the people, but chose Moses to send unto them in
his name, and spoke to him out of a fiery bush at the beginning, and at other
times out of a cloud on the top of a hill. All which things had still their
doubts and difficulties for him that would wrangle, or had not good will to
believe and credit them.

How Christ our Savior proceeded in revealing his Mysteries, and why he
appeared not to all.
23. And finally, when the Son of God came himself in flesh to preach, though he
used many and sufficient Arguments to draw men unto him, and believe the
Mysteries revealed by him, as in the next Point shall be showed; yet used he
the same course notwithstanding, that had been used before: for neither
appeared he to the whole world (as he might have done by his Divinity and
Omnipotency) but to those of Jewry only, nor there to all; nor did he work
Miracles in every place, but where he thought expedient. Nor when he rose again
from death (which is a Point principally in this matter to be considered) did
he appear to all men, or publicly in the Streets of Jerusalem, as he might
have done, and thereby have made his Resurrection clear and out of
controversy; but he appeared only to his Apostles and Disciples: which he
expresses in these words: Act. 10.
Hunc Deus suscitavit tertia die, and dedit eum manifestum fieri, non omni
populo, sed testibus praeordinatis a Deo: nobis, qui manducavimus and bibimus
cum ilio, postquam resurrexit a mortuis. Et praecepit nobis praedicare populo
and testificari, etc. God has raised up this his Son from death the third day,
and gave him to be made manifest, not to all the people, but unto such as were
pre-ordained beforehand by him to be witnesses thereof; that is to say, us that
did eat and drink with him after his Resurrection; and to us he gave
commandment to preach and testify to the people, etc.

24. Behold here the reason why Christ after his Resurrection did not appear to
the whole people in Jewry, but to his Apostles and Disciples only, who were his
appointed witnesses, to testify and preach the same to others, to the end
their Faith might be of more merit, Joan. 20.
according to his former speech to S. Thomas, Happy are they who have not seen,
and yet do believe. And for the self same causes we may not doubt, Christ's
Resurrection, how, and to whom it was made manifest.
but that these his apparitions and manifestations, which are recounted in
Scriptures to have been made by him at diverse times, in sundry places, and upon
different occasions, during his abode on earth, for the space of forty days
after his Resurrection, (which apparitions arrive to the number of 13 or 14)
were made in such particular manner by him, as the Scripture recounteth them:
First to those godly women, Matthew. 28. John 20. Act. 2.10.13.17. Romans 4.8.14. 1
Cor. 15. 2 Cor. 5. 2 Timothy 2. Luc. 24. Marc. 16.
then to the Apostles, then to the disciples going to Emaus, and after that to
others: All, I say, were so made, as still remained place for our free will to
merit in believing them, and diverse did doubt at the beginning, as the
Scripture says; and Christ was often forced to reprehend their coldness and
backwardness in belief, as when he said, O stulti and tardi cord ad credendum!
O you foolish and slow of heart to believe! And at his last departure from
them, Exprobravit illis (says S. Mark) incredulitatem eorum and duritiem
cordis; quia iis, qui viderant eum resurrexisse, non crediderunt; He did
exprobrate unto them their incredulity and hardness of heart, for that they had
not believed those who had seen him risen from death again. Which doubt and
hardness of heart in believing, he cured wholly afterward by sending the Holy
Ghost.

25. But yet hereby we may evidently see, that Christ required humility and
obedience of belief, even in things where our reason or sense resisted, 1 Cor.
10.
requiring us to captivate our understanding (to use S. Paul's own word) unto
his obedience in matters of faith; and not only to himself immediately, but to
those also that teach and preach unto us by lawful ordination and authority
from him, albeit they deliver us matters above our capacity, reach and
understanding; and this under pain of eternal damnation: for that our Savior
himself having given the Commission of preaching in S. Mark's Gospel aforesaid,
Ite and praedicate, Go and preach, he adds presently, Marc. 16.
Qui non crediderit, condemnabitur; He that will not believe, shall be damned.
And this is sufficient for the first Point, about the obscurity of the Object
of Faith, and Causes thereof.

22. The second Point of this consideration is, The second Point of this
consideration, that notwithstanding the Articles of our Faith cannot be
demonstrated by Reason, yet have they sufficient Arguments of credibility. Romans
12.
That albeit Almighty God will have us to yield obedience of faith unto him, as
well for his due honor, as for our own utility; yet does he not leave us
without sufficient testimony of the truth, nor requires at our hands this
obedience, but as rationabile obsequium, (to use S. Paul's words) a reasonable
obedience, or an obedience founded in all reason of probability inducement and
credibility. For proof whereof we must understand, that albeit the most parts
of Christian Belief do so surmount (as in the former Point has been showed)
the reach and capacity of human reason, as they cannot be comprehended thereby
(though of some other there may be also demonstration made, as shall be showed in
the fourth Point of this consideration;) yet for satisfaction of our
understandings, his divine Piety and Providence has left unto us so many other
proofs and arguments of persuasion and inducement, called by Schoolmen
Argumenta credibilitatis, Arguments of credibility, which being laid together
and well pondered, may justly move any indifferent, prudent, and discreet man,
to yield his assent thereunto, and to rest fully satisfied of the truth, as
learnedly you have seen proved these days past, by a Treatise set forth in
English, for answer of the new challenges of the Minister O. E. this matter is
handled more largely. But for my present purpose it is sufficient to record
unto you, that of these arguments of credibility are full fraught all the books
and volumes of the ancient Fathers, thereby to prove the credibility,
probability, and convenience of Christian Religion, and of every part and
article thereof, thereby to leave them inexcusable that will not believe the
same: whereof it shall be sufficient, that I allege only the example of S.
Peter, who going about to persuade his audience, uses these words, 2 Pet. 1.
Non indoctas fabulas sequuti, etc. Not induced by vain fables (as the Gentiles
were) have we believed and made known to you the power and presence of our Lord
Jesus Christ, but for that we have been made eyewitnesses of his greatness,
etc.

27. Thus began S. Peter to persuade his Hearers, Arguments of credibility used
by S. Peter.
alleging 2 or 3 strong Inducements of credibility for the same. First, that he
and the rest of his Apostles had conversed with Christ himself upon earth, and
had been eyewitnesses of all his doings. And secondly, he allegeth that famous
Miracle upon the Mount Thabor, when he with S. James and S. John were present
at his transfiguration, Matthew. 17.
and heard the voice from heaven. This is my beloved Son, hear him. And
thirdly, he allegeth the Predictions of the old Prophets concerning Christ's
coming, life, actions, death and resurrection; which S. Peter does prefer
before his sight, knowledge and experience had with Christ, and worthily; for
that the Predictions of the Scriptures and Prophets being written by God's
Spirit so many Ages before Christ was born, and now fufilled so evidently in
his Person, the Apostles sight and experience thereof, was but a testimony to
the others verity and nothing so certain as the foretellings of the said
Prophets so evidently verified in their sights.

Arguments of credibility are not so evident as are philosophical
Demonstrations.
28. And yet were all these things but inducements and arguments of credibility
(as I have said) and not demonstrations. For albeit the truth of Scriptures be
most certain and infallible in it self, yet to me, who must take them upon
credit of others, either concernings the books themselves, traductions or
interpretations, or some other such circumstances, they cannot have the
clearness and evidence to convince our Understandings, which philosophical
Demonstrations have; albeit the assent of our Faith induced by these Arguments
of credibility (together with the help of our pious affection, and assistance
of God's grace) be much more sure, firm and immovable, than that which is
gotten by human knowledge; which is partly seen, in that a stronger reason
coming against my knowledge, I do change my judgment; but not in Faith, if it
be sound. The cause whereof is, for that Faith is grounded upon a more certain
foundation than is human science, to wit, upon the credit and authority of God
himself: wherein also is to be noted, that these Inductions and Arguments of
credibility, may be much more evident to some than to others. As for example,
the Miracles done by God in bringing home of the Jews from Egypt, were much
more evident to those Jews that then lived, and were present and saw them, than
to others that came afterward. Albeit the Faith and Belief of some of the
later, might be as firm and constant as the former. And so the Miracles of
Christ and his Apostles were more evident to those that saw them, than unto us
that hear them only by relation; though yet our Faith may be as good and firm,
yea more commendable and meritorious than theirs, in that we believe them
without seeing, according to the aforesaid Saying of our Savior to S. Thomas.
And this is the great Piety and Mercy of Almighty God, that we that come after
in the end of the World shall lose nothing (if we will) by our so late coming,
but may be equal in merit to the first.

Arguments for proof of Christian Religion.
29. Well then, this is the second Point, what Arguments of credibility Christ
has left unto us for proof of Christian Faith, whereof (as I said) all the
ancient Fathers Books are full; and you may see many in Eusebius's Learned
Books De praeparatione, and demonstratione evangelica; but especially in those
that before him wrote Apologies for Christians in times of Persecution, as
Justin Martyr, Tertullian, and others, S. Austin also in 22 excellent Books
that he wrote De Civitate Dei, gathered many. And you may see good store laid
up in our English Tongue, in the first Book of Resolution, c. 4. entitled,
Proofs of Christianity. Which Arguments being indifferently weighed together,
with the absurdities of all other Religions besides the Christian, do make our
Faith most credible, and sufficient to move any wise considerate man to believe
the same, though they do not enforce him.

Arguments of credibility for Catholic Religion against all sorts of Heretics.
30. And the like may be said and showed concerning the Arguments for Catholic
Religion against all Sects and Heresies whatsoever; which are so many and
pregnant in themselves to him that will consider them duly, as there can be no
probable doubt in the world, which is the truth, and which is falsehood; though
oftentimes for want either of diligence to know them, or pious affection to
consider indifferently of them, (which is the third Point here to be mentioned)
many Men's Judgments are so obscured or perverted, that they cannot, or will not
see the truth. Of these Arguments of credibility for proof of Catholic Faith in
general against Heresies, you may see many put together by Tertullian in his
excellent Book De praescriptionibus adversus Haereses; and in S. Augustin's
Books De utilitate credendi, and de moribus Ecclesiae, and other such
Treatises; and in all his other Books against the Donatists, Manichees, and
Pelagians. And in that Golden Treatise of Vincentius Lirinensis contra
prophanas haeresum omnium novitates, who wrote soon after S. Austin; and in our
times Bosius de signis Ecclesiae, and diverse others, have handled the same
Argument. And more than this, there want not also store in our English Tongue
of like matter, as Dr. Bristow's Motives and others; and you shall find no
small number of these Arguments in this Treatise, if you read it over. So as
this Point makes any man inexcusable that will pretend ignorance herein.

31. But now there rests the third Point, which (as I said) is the Key of all
the rest, to open the Gate to true Faith and Belief; which is, The third Point
of consideration about pious affection. Marc. 6. Act. 24.
a pious and purged Affection, without which all the Arguments of Credibility
in the World will do no good to move a man to true Religion, no more than the
persuasion of S. John Baptist did with Herod, nor the often speeches and
Conferences of S. Paul prevailed with the Proconsul Foelix: the reason whereof
is, that albeit naturally our Judgment and Understanding should yield to that
which appears truest, and that our Will and Affection by the same natural
course ought to follow our said Judgment and Understanding; yet through the
corruption of mankind we find daily by experience that our Will draws after
it our Judgment, and as she is affected or disaffected, so goes our Judgment
and Understanding also.

32. This Point touched Christ our Savior, Evil affection perverteth the
understanding. Joann. 5.
when he said in S. John's Gospel to certain ambitious Jews: Quomodo vos
potestis credere, qui Gloriam ab invicem accipitis, and Gloriam quae a solo Deo
est, non queritis? How can you believe in me, which do take and seek Glory one
of another, and do not seek that true Glory which is only to be had from God?
Here you see that an ambitious affection did impossibilitate their
Understanding to believe; notwithstanding what Arguments, Reasons, or Motives
soever to the contrary. S. Paul also giving the reason why certain Infidels did
not believe the Gospel preached by him with many Signs, Miracles, and other
Arguments to move them, he notes the whole impediment to be in their
affections, saying, In quibus Deus hujus saeculi excaecavit mentes, 2 Cor. 4.
ut non fulgeat illuminatio Evangelii gloriae Christi, qui est Imago Dei: In
whom the God of this world has blinded their Minds and Understanding, so that
the light or illumination of the glory of Christ's Gospel cannot shine in them,
who is notwithstanding the very Image of God, etc.

33. Here you see that there wanted not external Light on the behalf of Christ
and his Gospel, (whose Glory shined by so many Miracles) in those days of S.
Paul; but that the love of this World, and disorderly affection to Honor,
Ambition, Riches, and other Sensualities thereof, (which here by the Apostle
are called, the God of this World, for that worldly men do adore them:) This
God, I say, (or Devil rather) of corrupt affections had so blinded their
Judgments and Understanding inwardly, as they could not see this shining Light
of Truth. How necessary pious affection is.
So that where this pious affection is not, or at leastwise where it is not so
purged from sinister humors, as it remains with some indifferency of desire
to know and follow the Truth if it be discovered, no good can be hoped for:
Luc. 23. Matthew. 13.
In regard whereof Christ refused to do Miracles before Herod, or in his own
Country, for that he knew them so obstinately averse in mind, as they would not
profit by them; And for the same cause he refused to reason or argue with Pilat
about his own Cause, when he gave him occasion, Joan. 24. Joan. 18.
for that he knew his affections to be so tied to the World, and himself so
addicted to please the People, and to gain the good will of Tiberius the
Emperor, as his labor would be but lost in seeking to persuade him, being so
obstinately disposed otherwise. And thus much of this third Point of pious
affection, and the necessity thereof to a Man's Salvation.

34. The fourth and last Point of this Consideration is, The fourth Point of
this consideration, whether some Articles of our Faith may be demonstrated, and
how.
That though it be true (as is said in the first Point) that ordinarily and for
the most part the Object or Articles of our Faith are above the reach of man's
Reason, and were first revealed to man from God himself, yet are there some
Points thereof which by force of human Reason may be known and demonstrated. As
for example, that there is a God, and that he is but One, and cannot be Many,
and that the World was made by Him, and that he has Providence over the same,
and other suchlike Points. Which Points and Articles notwithstanding, for that
on the other side they are proposed also in the Scriptures, and in the Nicene
Creed, Exodus 20. Heb. 11. Symb. Nicaen.
as Articles of our Faith, that must be believed by Christians as revealed from
God: hence arises no small question among School-Divines, whether these Points
here set down may be known by two distinct ways or no; to wit, evidently, by
force of human Reason or Demonstration; and inevidently, by Light of Faith, and
Revelation from God? Alex. Halens. 3. par. q. 79. Alb. Mag. in 3. p. d. 24.
art. 9. Alrisidior. 3. p. tract. 3. c. 1. Bonav. in 3. p. d. 24. art. 2.
Durand. in nu. 39. and alii.
And the more common and probable Opinion of Schoolmen, and more conformable
to the Scriptures and ancient Fathers, is, That they may; for that our
Understanding may have two Lights to know one and the self-same thing: the
first by Revelation from God, which always is with some darkness and obscurity
to our Reason, (as before has been declared,) and consequently our Judgment
being not forced to yield thereunto by the clearness of evidence, it follows
that our assent by Faith is more free, and greater place is given to pious
affection of our will, and thereby also more merit to assent, as before has
been showed.

How Science may stand with Faith.
35. The second Light may be by force of Man's Reason and evidence of
Demonstration, which sometimes is so clear in it self, as it admits no doubt
at all; as when we show this Principle, That every Whole is greater than its
Part or that man is a reasonable Creature, or like evident things; and then is
our Understanding forced to yield thereunto, and consequently has the less
Merit, by how much less freedom it leaves to our will and affection to give
our assent, or no. But yet this knowledge gotten by human Reason does not so
take away the merit of the other, that proceeded of free assent of Faith, but
that both may stand together in one and the self-same man about one and the
self-same thing, (to wit, Faith and Demonstration) as distinct lights gotten by
different and distinct means, the one by Revelation from God, the other by
Demonstration of Reason; A great inconvenience.
for that otherwise this great inconvenience (say the Authors that hold this
Opinion) would follow, that learned men should be in far worse case for their
merits in Faith, than the ignorant; for that whenever the said learned men do
come by means of their study to see clearly by Reason the truth of any
Conclusion of Divinity, or Article of Belief, which simply before they did
believe only as revealed from God; (which thing may very well happen, and often
does to learned men,) that then they should lose their former Faith, or at
leastwise the Merit thereof, if it be granted that Faith and Science may in no
case stand together.

36. But, to leave this to be disputed in Schools and to return to our purpose:
There is no doubt, but that some Points belonging to Christian Faith may
plainly and absolutely be demonstrated and proved by human Reason and Science,
as those which I have here touched of One God, his Omnipotency, Providence, and
the like. Some other there be, Demonstration by supposition.
which though they cannot be altogether so absolutely convinced by
Demonstrations, yet may they in part, by way of supposition; that is to say, by
supposing some one or two Points belonging thereunto, which the Adversary will
either grant, or cannot deny. As for example, Supposing there is a God, and
that he has appointed any Religion to mankind, and that the Prophets and
Prophesies of the Old Testament are to be believed; it is not hard to prove and
demonstrate the Verity of Christian Religion against either Jew or Gentile. And
the like is it in this matter here treated by me in this Book, against J. Fox
and his Fellows, about the Beginning, Planting, Growing, and Continuance of
Catholic Religion: For if you suppose only that Christ is God, and that he has
appointed any Religion at all, and that the first Religion and Church
instituted by him was true, and truly meant by him, and that he was able to
perform his promises made to the first Christians for the Preservation and
Perpetuity thereof: This (I say) being granted, what I infer in this Treatise
follows by necessary consequence of moral Demonstration, as you will find in
the perusal.

The inference of the first Point.
37. These four Points then I thought good (gentle Reader) to touch briefly in
this Preface, meaning to make four several Inferences out of the same, not
unprofitable (in mine opinion) to the purpose we have in hand: For out of the
First Point, concerning the height and sublimity of matters of our Faith, above
the capacity of Man's Reason, I make this inference, That every one ought to
come to treat and talk of such things as belong to Faith and Belief, with great
reverence, respect, modesty, and submission of mind, not condemning that which
his sense or reason reaches not unto, nor making the Depth of his own Capacity
the Rule and Measure of his Belief. A thing noted in the Sect of Manichees by
S. Austin, who writes, Aug. l. de util. cred. c. 1.
That for this cause principally he was nine years of their Company, for that
they told him still (he being a young man desirous of Knowledge) that Catholics
did superstitiously require Faith before Reason, and that They (the Manichees
forsooth) did teach nothing but that which should clearly be discussed by force
of good Argument and Reason before it was believed, etc. Upon which occasion
also the said Father wrote that excellent Book beforementioned, de Utilitate
Credendi, S. Austins book de utilitate credendi, what it treats, and why it
was written.
of the great utility and infinite commodities which Catholic Christian People
have, in believing simply, by Tradition of their Ancestors, that Faith which is
established in the Universal Church of Christ, though their own Reason arrive not
to penetrate the same; for whosoever opens once his Ears, (especially the
Unlearned sort) to hearken to Human Reasons against the Mysteries of their
Faith, he is in danger presently either to lose his Faith, or at leastwise the
Merit thereof, together with the peace, comfort, and tranquillity of his mind,
and thereby opens a wide gap to the Devil and all his Instruments, as well
Infidels as Heretics, to enter in, and trouble the House of his Conscience.

38. And as for Heretics, it has been an old practice to trouble or draw men
from Catholic Religion, or make them stagger, by this means of pretending human
Reason against Belief; as we have showed by example of the Manichees, who took
this trick from the old Heathen Philosophers, whom S. Hierom for this cause
principally calls, Hier. l. 2. con. Ruffinum.
the Patriarchs of Heretics. The Arians also deceived many by the tricks of
human Reason, drawing out their Napkins (as Theodoretus says) and asking the
common people whether Three corners thereof could be One, or no; and then
inferring deceitfully thereupon, said, No more could Three Persons be One God.
The Sadducees founded their Heresy against the Resurrection of the Flesh, upon
the contrariety it seemed to have with human Reason; which prevailed afterward
with diverse sorts of Heretics, Many Heresies founded in reason against Faith.
that had infinite Followers, as, Simon Magus, Basilides, Hymenaeus, Philetus,
Valentinus, Marcion, Appelles, the Ophites, Cerdonists, Cainites, Albigenses,
and others. And now in our days with Zuinglians, Calvinists, Anabaptists,
Trinitarians, Family of Love, Brownists, and diverse other Sects, who do nothing
but rave and blaspheme against the Real Presence of Christ in the Blessed
Sacrament, upon the same ground, that it seems contrary to Sense and human
Reason. And finally, this is a way to all Misbelief, Atheism, and Infidelity,
etc.

39. Out of the Second Point, concerning Arguments of Credibility for our
Belief, I infer, The inference upon the second Point about Arguments of
credibility. Intolerable sloth and negligence in not viewing our Evidences for
Catholic Religion.
That (seeing God has left us such store and variety of Arguments for our
comfort and consolation in that we believe) every man ought to be diligent and
careful to seek out and use them, and not suffer himself to be overborn by
deceitful quarrelling people in a suit of so great importance, without looking
upon his Writings and Evidences that he has for the same. For how greatly
would we condemn the sloth and negligence of a Man, who descending for many
Ages as lawful Heir from a most Ancient and Noble House, of great Riches and
Possessions, and seeing false Pretenders to make claim thereunto, and by slight
and intrusion to put both Him and his Posterity from the same: How much (I say)
should we condemn him, if (having whole Chests full of Writings for his
Defense) he should never so much as look them over, or take a view of them, but
should suffer himself to be cast and overthrown in the whole Suit, without
pleading at all for Himself or his Interest? Which is the very case of many
negligent Christians in our days, who seeing so many assaults to be made by
different Sectaries against the old possession of Cath. Religion (which was
their Ancestors Inheritance to Salvation, and must be theirs if ever they be
saved, do yield so dastardly in this conflict and injury offered them, as they
never so much as examine what Proofs or Evidences they have, or may have, for
their Defense. A negligence no doubt inexcusable, and worthy of infinite rebuke
and confusion.

The inference upon the third Point about pious affection.
40. Out of the Third Point, concerning the necessity of pious Affection in him
that must profit by these Arguments of Credibility, I do infer, how highly it
does import every man that means seriously to treat of his Salvation in this
behalf, to dispossess himself of his Passions and sinister Affections against
the Truth, (at leastwise while he treats this Great Affair) and that he place
himself in such an indifferency, equanimity, and serenity of mind, as he may be
able to discern and look upon the Truth with an unpassionate Eye, if she chance
to appear unto him.

A dreadful threat of our Savior.
41. The saying of our Savior in the place before-alleged of S. John's Gospel,
to such as were ambitious, and intangl'd with the Wealth and Honor of this
World, and thereby let to believe the Truth, is terrible and dreadful: For
having demanded, How it was possible for them to believe, and thereby come to
Salvation, that were so intangl'd and evil-affected in mind; Joan. 5.
he adds presently, Nolite putare, quia ego accusaturus sim vos apud Patrem;
est qui accusat vos: Do not you think that I shall have need to accuse you to
my Father, (for these corrupt affections of yours rising of Ambition,) for
there wants not one to accuse you. Whereby Christ insinuates, amonst other
things, that Himself, at the Day of Judgment, was not to be Accuser, but Judge;
and that the Condemnation of these men was to be most grievous, who for
Ambition, Honor, Wealth, Dignities, and Promotions, had neither Time nor Will
to attend to matters of Faith and true Religion, whereby only Eternal Salvation
may be achieved; which is a Point greatly to be considered and born in mind;
especially by such who are in the same or like Case with those Men of Jewry, to
whom Christ our Savior used that dreadful speech.

The inference upon the fourth Point about demonstration by Reason.
42. Out of the Fourth and Last Point is inferred, That considering all the
premises, and that this matter of true Religion is of so great Moment, as has
been showed, and that in this Treatise so short and clear a way is taken for
discussion thereof, as by only joining Issue about the Planting Continuance,
Succession, and Descent of Christian Religion in England, from the Apostles
Time unto Ours, the whole Controversy between Us and the Protestants may fully
be cleared; and that with such evidence of Reason and necessary Consequence,
as, supposing only that Ghrist was Christ, and his Promises true, all the rest
does follow by most certain sequel of Argument, and moral Demonstration. All
this (I say) being so, it may encourage and animate the studious Reader to run
over this short Treatise. Which if he do with that indifferency and attention
which in the Second and Third Point of this Discourse have been touched, I do
not doubt but that he shall not need to read many other Books for resolving
himself either about the grounded certain Truth of Catholic Religion, or the
Vanity, Inanity, Inconstancy, Lightness and Folly of all Sect and Heresies that
ever have or shall arise up against the same. And with this (good Reader) I
leave thee to the holy Protection and Benediction of Almighty God, and to his
merciful direction of thee in so weighty an Affair. This Vigil of the Nativity
of our Savior, 1602.

The First PART of this Present TREATISE CONCERNING Three Conversions OF
ENGLAND TO THE Christian, Catholic, Roman Religion.
The ARGUMENT.
THe purpose of this first Part (gentle Reader) is, to declare by evident
demonstration, both of Histories, Reasons, Antiquities, and Succession of
Times, and by confession and other testimonies of the Adversaries themselves,
That this our Isle of England, and People thereof, the Britans, Saxons, and
English, have at three several times received Christian Faith from Rome, and by
Romish Preachers. First, under the Apostles, in the first Age after Christ; And
then under Pope Eleutherius, in the second Age; And thirdly, under Pope
Gregory, in the beginning of the sixth Age: And that this Faith and Religion
was no other than the Roman Catholic Faith, generally received over all
Christendom in those days; And that it was One, and the Self-same Faith, at all
these three times; and that the same was continued and professed afterward in
England publicly for almost 1400 years together, to wit, from the Apostles
days, unto the Reign of King Henry VIII. under diverse Nations, States,
Governments, and variety of Times, by Britans, Saxons, Danes, Normans, and
English; and that the self-same Faith continues at this day in the Church of
Rome, and Christian Catholic World abroad, without change or alteration of any
one substantial Article, or Point of Belief; and that all Cavils and
Calumniations of Heretics and Sectaries in this behalf are vain and foolish,
and most manifestly here confuted. And finally, a most clear; easy, evident,
and infallible deduction, visible to the Eye and Understanding of every mean
intelligent Reader, is set down, and brought from hand to hand, without
interruption, from the first Conversions of our Realm unto this day; and this
so perspicuously, as no man, that will not wilfully shut his eyes, but can see
and behold the same, as by the Chapters following (God willing) more
particularly shall appear.

CHAP. I.
Whether England and Englishmen have particular Obligations to the Sea of
Rome, above other Nations? And of the first Conversion of Britans to Christian
Religion in the time of the Apostles.

AFTER a certain Narration made by me in my Answer to Sir Francis Hastings,
Taken out of the fourth chapter of the seventh Encounter.
about the seventh Encounter between him and N. D. wherein I declared what
Reverend Respect other Nations and Kingdoms of the Christian World have ever
born to the Sea Apostolic, and Bishop thereof, until this miserable Age of
Heretical Spirits, who ridiculously do hold the same to be Antichrist: I do
infer the conclusion and comparison following, about the particular Obligation
of Englishmen toward the same See and Bishop, above many other Kingdoms,
saying in my Ward-word thus:

Ward. pa. 103.
2. And if all Christian Nations have, and ought to bear, such Reverence and
Respect to the Sea of Rome; The particular obligation of Englishmen toward
the Bish. of Rome.
then much more out little Island of England, (as this man calls it) for that
it has received more singular benefits from thence, than any one Nation in the
World besides, having been twice converted from Paganism to Christian Religion,
by the especial Diligence, Labor, and Industry of the same See. Once, in the
time of the Britans, about 180 years after Christ, at what time Eleutherius,
that holy Pope and Martyr, converted King Lucius and his Subjects, by the
Preaching of St. Damianus and his Fellows, Bed. lib. 1. hist. Ang. cap. 17, 18.
etc. Guil. Malmesbur. lib. 1. hist. Ang. and Pont. Ang. lib. 1. cap. 1.
sent from Rome to that effect; And the second time, 400 years after that
again, when our Predecessors the English Saxons were converted by St. Augustine
and his Fellow-Preachers, sent by St. Gregory the Great, then Bishop of Rome,
to the same end. And if it be most certain, and cannot be denied, that these
two so great and universal benefits rightly considered are the highest under
Heaven that our Land could receive from any mortal then, and that the
Obligation of this double Spiritual Birth of ours is so much greater than the
Bond we owe to our carnal Parents, by how much more weighty and important is
our Eternal Salvation than our Temporal Life and Generation: let all men
consider the barbarous ingratitude of this man, that barketh with such spite
against the Sea of Rome, the Mother of our Christianity, and against her
Bishops, the Workers of so high a Blessing to us. And with this consideration I
leave the modest and discreet Readers to judge of the matter, as Reason and
Religion shall induce them, and not as the rage of this and other such raving
people would incite them.

3. Thus I wrote then, and to this declaration and conclusion of mine, our
Knight takes upon him now to answer in these words: Whereas this Roman
Advocate says, Wast. page 192. An impertinent and cavilling Answer of the
Knight.
That this Land ought to bear more reverence to the Sea of Rome than other
Nations, for that it has received more singular benefits from thence, namely,
that it was converted from Paganism to Christian Religion by the special
Diligence, Labor, and Industry of the same See; I answer, First, That it is
apparent by sundry Testimonies, that this Land was converted to the Faith long
before that time by you specified, and not by the Bishop of Rome. Gildas
testifies that Britanny received the Gospel in the time of Tiberius the
Emperor, and that Joseph of Arimathea was sent by Philip the Apostle from
France hither, where he remained till his death. And Bid (our Country man
likewise) does testify, That in his time this Land kept Easter after the
manner of the East Church; by which my be gathered, that the first Preachers
came hither from the East parts of the World, and not from Rome. More proofs
might be set down, but I spare them.

4. Mark (good Reader) what manner of Answer this is to my former Speech. and
how directly these people do go to the matter. I said before, That the Isle of
England, wherein so many at this day do rail against Rome, has more obligation
of Love toward the same for benefits received, than diverse other Countries;
for that the people of this Island have been twice converted by men sent from
thence; once, under Pope Eleutherius, almost 200 years after Christ, and again
under Pope Gregory the Great, about the year of our Lord 600. Now to this the
Knight. thinks to have answered well, by affirming two or three things; First out
of Gildas, That Britanny received the Gospel in the time of Tiberius the
Emperor, before any or these two Conversions named by me: Which how likely it
is, ( Tiberius living but five years after Christ's Ascension) shall after be
examined. Secondly, That Joseph of Arimathea was sent by Philip the Apostle out
of France into Britanny, which yet the true Gildas has not: But by these two
Examples the Knight would show, That in Britanny the Faith of Christ was not
first of all planted from Rome, nor by the Popes thereof, or by their industry.
And to the same effect he allegeth out of Bid, the used of observing Easter
after the manner of the East Church remaining amongst the Britans in his time;
whereof he infers, as you see, That it is most like that our first Preachers
were from the East, and not from the West Church.

5. But suppose all these things were true; do they overthrow that which I said
before in my Ward-word, that the Britans were converted under Pope Eleutherius,
or the Saxons under Pope Gregory, and by several Preachers sent from Rome by
them? How impertinent the Answer of the Knight is.
They prove only that before these two public Conversions, which we owe to the
Church and Popes of Rome, there might be some sparkles of Christian Faith also
in Britanny by other means; which I never denied, but only said that I would
have Englishmen grateful to Rome for these two; which Conversions no man can
deny, without apparent impudence, as after more amply shall be showed, where
also these Examples alleged out of Gildas and Saint Bede shall be examined, how
far they are true, or do make for the purpose here in hand.

6. So that this first part of Sir Francis's Answer being nothing to the
purpose, as you see, though all were granted, which he allegeth; Let us hear his
second part. Secondly, (says he) though it be granted that Eleutherius sending
hither Preachers from Rome in King Lucius his time, did frist convert this Land
to the Christian Faith, I say.
I say that there is not now the same Faith in Rome that was then: There were
then no Masses said, no setting up of Images in Churches, etc. Here now, if we
will take Sir Francis's word, we have a sure warrant by his [I say] that the
Faith in Rome is not the same now, that it was in Pope Eleutherius his time;
and that in particular, there were neither Masses then, nor Images. Wherein you
may note, first, that cunningly he holds his peace of the Conversion of
Englishmen under St. Gregory, (which most concerns us that be of this
Nation) for that he dares not deny that both Mass and Images were in use in
his time in the Roman Church and Faith; and so brought into England by St.
Augustine that converted us: Bed. lib. 1. hist. Ang. c. 34.
which is evident in Saint Bede in every place of his Story, and particularly
where he relates the first entrance of St. Augustine and his Fellows into
Canterbury, in Procession, with a Cross and Image of our Savior in a Banner,
and that they said their first Masses there in an old Church of St. Martin,
builded, as he says, by the old Christian Romans before their departure out of
Britanny.

7. And for the time of Eleutherius, under whom the Britans were converted,
though it were not hard also to prove the same particulars; yet will I not take
that disputation now in hand, but shall leave it to a better occasion afterward
in this Treatise; where, without standing upon these particular two Doctrins of
Mass and Images, here mentioned by the Knight, I shall show more general and
firm Arguments that the Faith of the Church of Rome under Eleutherius, The
Faith of Rome one and the same under Pope Eleutherius, Pope Gregory, and Pope
Clement VIII.
200 years after Christ, was the very same, and no other, than was that under
St. Gregory, 400 years after; that again, nor this under Gregory different from
that which now is in Rome under Clement VIII. a thousand years after Gregory,
and shall endure to the worlds end.

8. This, I say, we shall demonstrate afterward most clearly: but yet, to the
end the Reader may see in the mean space how much credit is to be given to this
Knight's [I say], let him but read the fourth Chapter of his good Masters, Mass
confessed in the second Age after Christ.
and chief historical Doctors, the Magdeburgians, touching the second Age of
Christ, wherein Eleutherius lived, toward the end, as also the beginning of
the third Age immediately ensuing, and he shall find that in the second Age,
Magdeburg. cent. 2, and 3. cap. 4. de doct. Ignat. Epist. ad Smyrnens.
under their ordinary Title of Inclinatio Doctrinae complectens stipulas and
errores Doctorum; that is to say, The falling away of Christian Doctrine,
containing the stubble and errors of Doctors, they reprehend Ignatius, who was
St. John Evangelist's Scholar, for using the phrase, Offerre and Sacrificium
immolare, to offer and make Sacrifice; as also the holy Martyr Irenaeus, for
saying, Iren. lib. 4. cap. 32.
That Christ had taught a New Oblation in the New Testament, which the Church
receiving from the Apostles, does offer up throughout all the world, etc. And
in the third Age they accuse that blessed Bishop and Martyr St. Cyprian of
Superstition for saying, Cyprian lib. 2. Ep. 3.
Sacerdotem vice Christi fungi, and Deo Patri sacrificium offerre; that the
Priest supplying the place of Christ, Tertull. lib. de coena Domini. Martial in
Ep. ad Burdegal.
does offer Sacrifice to God the Father. They reprehend also Tertullian for
using the phrase, Sacrificium offerre; to offer Sacrifice. They condemn also
St. Martial, Scholar of the Apostles themselves, for saying, Sacrificium Deo
creatori offertur in ara; Sacrifice is offered to God our Creator upon the
Altar among Christians.

9. So that, if by our Mass Catholics understand no other thing but the public
external Sacrifice appointed by Christ in his Church, as we do not; then may we
see that (by confession of the Magdeburgians themselves) this Mass was as well
in use in Eleutherius his time, as in time of Gregory I. after him. And the
like might we show about the use of Images, but that it were over long for this
place; our intention being only to treat of the Conversion of our Country to
Christian Religion; and to note by the way, Which is most to be credited by a
discreet man, Sir Francis 's [I say] reverted.
either the I say of a Courtly Knight, affirming that Mass was not in the time
of Eleutherius; or the Testimonies of so many grave and Learned Fathers to the
contrary, that lived in the same Age, to wit, Ignatius, Martial, Irenaeus,
Tertullian, Cyprian, and others.

10. And this being sufficient for refutation of both parts of Sir Francis's
idle reply, I shall go forwards to discuss a little the first entrance of
Christian Faith into England; how, and in what time, and by whom it is likely
that it might be done before the days of Eleutherius; and whether this first
Conversion or sowing the Faith in our Island may be ascribed also to Rome, as
well as the other more public Conversions afterward? Which if it fall out to be
so, then has the Knight, instead of diminishing our Obligation to Rome, not a
little increased the same, by mentioning also a third Conversion from that See,
which I for brevities sake, and for that it was less notoriously known than the
other two, thought good to pretermit in my Ward-word; but now, being moved
thereunto by Sir Francis, who fights mightily (for the most part) against
himself, alleging matters that make for us, I shall now briefly discuss more in
particular this affair.

The beginning of preaching the Christian Faith, and progress thereof.
11. First then, no man can deny but that the Death, Resurrection, and Ascension
of our Savior, the coming of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles, and their
beginning of Preaching presently upon the same, was in the eighteenth year of
Tiberius, the third Emperor of Rome; who living five years after, and Caius
Caligula other four, there entered Claudius, who reigned fourteen years, and
Nero after him as many, who in the last year of his Reign put to death St.
Peter and St. Paul, St. Peter having come to Rome, according to Eusebius, in
the second year of Claudius, which was eleven years after the Resurrection of
Christ, Eusebius. in chron. An. Christ. 44.
though some Authors differ in that account. Eusebius his words, translated out
of Greek by St. Jerome, are these: Petrus Apostolus, Natione Galilaeus,
Christianorum Pontifex primus, etc. Peter the Apostle of the Country of Galile,
the first chief Bishop of Christians, after he had founded the Church of
Antioch, went to Rome; and having there preached the Gospel, remained Bishop of
the same City for twenty five years together, etc. St. Paul was sent thither
Prisoner by Festus, Governor of Judaea, in the second year of Nero's Reign,
Eusebius. in chron: Beda lib. 1 hist. Ang. cap. 3.
that is, fourteen years after St. Peter, according to the same Eusebius.

12. The next year after St. Peter came to Rome, which was the third year of
Claudius his Reign, there began to be such War in Britanny, as the Emperor
himself resolved to go in person thither; and so he did, with admiration of the
whole world. The first entrance of Christian Faith into Britanny.
And if there were any Christians in Rome at that time, as it is likely there
were, (the Christian Faith having been now preached in the world some dozen
years after Christ's Ascension) it is very probable that some went with him
into Britanny; and that this was the first sparkle of planting Christian Faith
and Religion in those Countries; but much more afterward, as their number
increased, seeing that this War continued for forty years together; that is to
say, to the fourth year of Domitian, when as well extern Histories, as our
William of Malmsbury, Malm. in Fastis anno ab urbe condita 838. Christi 86.
(to omit other Heathen Writers) does teach, That Britanny was wholly subdued,
and brought into a perfect form of Province. And in this time there being
continual going and coming from Rome to Britanny, and Christian Religion every
day increasing in Rome, the same could not choose but be kindled also in
Britanny, especially for two or three Considerations. First, Reasons of the
repair of Christians to Britanny under Claudius.
for that there were many Britans inhabiting in Rome at that day; some for
Hostages, some for their own Pleasures, thereby to fly the Wars and unquiet
state of their own Country, others taken and carried by force, as Corn. Tacit.
lib. 12. Ann.
Caractacus Sylurum Rex, Caractacus King of the Sylures, who inhabited that
part of Britanny which at this day we call South Wales, who being taken, was
sent to Rome by Ostorius Governor of that Country for Claudius the Emperor, in
the 11th. year of his Empire, and much Nobility with him, as Tacitus in his
Story does relate.

13. Some also, both Romans and of other Nations, being Christened, and flying
the Persecution which was in Rome against such Men, especially under Nero, got
themselves into Britanny, as a place of more liberty, and less subject to
Examinations in such matters, by reason of the Wars and Tumults there. And this
is conform to that which Gildas the ancient Britan writes in his Complaint of
the Overthrow of Britanny; Gild. de excidio Britan. c. 6.
where having declared the extreme Calamity come upon his Countrymen by that
War and Victory of the Romans against them under Claudius, adds presently
these words: Interea glaciali frigore rigenti Insulae, etc. In the mean space,
while these Wars lasted, there appeared, and imparted it self to this cold
Island, (removed further off from the visible Sun, than other Countries) that
true and invisible Sun, which in the time of Tiberius Caesar had showed it self
to the whole World, I mean Christ, vouchsafed to impart his Precepts, etc.

14. This is the sum and true sense of his Sentence, though the words be somewhat
intricate, and his style obscure; which Sir Francis understanding not, cites
this place of Gildas (as before you have heard) to prove that Britanny received
the Gospel under Tiberius Caesar: which he says not, nor is not likely, Gildas
misunderstood by Sir Francis.
(as before has been declared) both in respect of the small time which
Tiberius lived after the Apostles began to preach, as also for that in those
days there was no War in Britanny, whereof Gildas speaks immediately before.

15. And thus much of the Time and Occasion whereby Christian Religion began
first in Britany, within the first fifty years after Christ's Ascension;
whereto also we may add the Testimony of Nicephorus, Niceph. l. 3. hist. cap.
1. Theod. lib. 9. de curandis Graec. affectib. Sophron. in Catalog.
and before him of Theodoretus and Sophronius, ancient Writers, who do
testify, That Brittaniae Insulae, etc. The Britan Islands fell in division
among the Apostles, in their first partition which they made of the World. And
it is most like that St. Peter being come to Rome to teach and convert the
Western-parts of the World, as Italy, Spain, and France, by name; these Islands
also received the same benefit from him. And so say our Authors, whom
afterward I shall allege for his being in Britanny.

16. And this is another point of Obligation betwixt England and Rome, (if Sir
Francis can be content to hear it) to wit, that the first Bishop of Rome went
in person to convert our Country, as afterward we shall hear grave Authors
affirm, to whom I remit me. Though who indeed were the very first Teachers in
Britanny, and Preachers in particular, or Helpers thereunto, is not so certain;
our ancient Historiographers, by reason of the variety of Times, and our
Countries Calamities, having left no clear Testimony thereof. True it is, that
our later Writers of the English Nation, Holinsh. in descript. Britan. romans 1.
cap. 9. Cambd. in sua Brit. p. 162.
namely Holinshed and Cambden, do affirm, That one Claudia Ruffina a Noble
British Lady, living then in Rome, and being the Wife (as they say) of one
Pudens a Roman Senator, and Mother of the two famous Christian Virgins Praxedes
and Pudentiana, did send diverse Books and Messages unto her Friends in
Britanny, and thereby helped much to their Conversion. And this may appear (say
they) as well by the Salutation sent from her by St. Paul's Pen to Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.
when he said, Eubulus, Pudens, Linus, Claudia, and all the Brethren, do salute
you; as also for that she was the first Hostess or Harbourer of St. Peter and
St. Paul at their coming to Rome, The story of Claudia Ruffina a British Lady.
it may be conjectured that she was one of the first Christians of the City.
Whereof it may be inferred, that if it be true that she sent those first
Messages, Books or Messengers of Christian Knowledge into her Country, she was
also the first, or one of the first Helpers to that Conversion.

17. But now the proofs of this matter are not so strong as I could wish or
desire, for the Honor of our Country; but let us hear them as they be. First,
the proof that she was a Britain, is by certain Verses of Martial the Poet,
written unto her in his Epigrams, thus: Mart. lib. 11. Epig. 35.
Claudia caeruleis cum sit Ruffina Britannis
Edita, cur Latiae pectora plebis habet?
Whereas Claudia Ruffina is born of the Britans (that paint themselves) how
comes it to pass that she has gained so much the good wills of the Italian
People? And then he goes forward to praise her also for her Beauty, exceeding
the Beauty either of Italians or Grecians. He commends her besides for three
Children which she had born to her Husband, and these Children our men would
interpret to be the foresaid two Virgins Praxedes and Pudentiana, together with
Novatus their Brother, all Children of Pudens the Senator abovenamed.

18. But although I could wish much (as I said) for the Honor of our Nation, that
this thing were true, especially her being the Wife to Pudens, and Mother of
the foresaid Children, that were all Saints; yet have I great Arguments to the
contrary: Arguments against the story of Claudia Ruffina.
Whereof the first is the silence of all Antiquity in this behalf. Martial also
being a Heathen, and Enemy to Christians, would hardly have commended her so
much, and written Epigrams to her of her rare Beauty, if she had been a
Christian, which was the most odious thing that might be in those days; nor
could she be so Beautiful in his time, living under Vespasian and Titus, and
dying under Trajan, during whose Reign it appears in Martial that these
Verses were written; for so much as she must needs be very old in those days,
Baron. in Martyr. ad diem 19 Maii.
seeing that Pudens his House, placed in declivo Montis Scauri, in the side of
the Hill called Scaurus, was the first (by Tradition of all Antiquity) that
received St. Peter, and afterward St. Paul in Rome, and is at this day a Church
dedicated to his Daughter St. Pudentiana; and from the arrival of St. Peter to
Rome, until the time of Trajan, were almost sixty years. So as if she were Wife
of Pudens, and Mother of those Children, when St. Peter came to Rome, she must
needs be very aged, when Martial wrote those Verses of her Beauty. Besides
this, Bed. Ado. Vsuard. in Martyr. ad 14 Call. Junii.
our own Bid, Ado Archbishop of Trevers, Usuardus, and other ancient Authors
in their Martyrologies, do assign another Wife unto Pudens the Senator, as
Mother to the foresaid three Children, whose Name was Sabinella; so that, though
it be true that there was such a British Lady named Claudia Ruffina in Rome
commended by Martial under Trajan, and that St. Paul did commend another
Claudia and Pudens for Christian Religion in his second Epistle to Timothy,
(all which is sufficiently proved;) yet that this Claudia Ruffina was the
Claudia mentioned by St. Paul, or that the same Ruffina was a Christian, or
Wife to Pudens, or Mother of Praxedes and Pudentiana, (which are the principal
Points whereof the matter depends;) This, I say, Points not proved in the
Story of Claudia Ruffina.
is not proved, nor any part thereof, but only huddl'd up by our later
Heretical Writers, under a show of other Proofs, to wit, that there was such a
Claudia that was of Britanny, and another by St. Paul named; which are
impertinent. Points to the Principal that should have been proved. And hereby
we see that Heretics are but slight Provers, and very deceitful in all matters,
as well Historical as Doctrinal.

19. Wherefore, to let this pass, and to speak of the first Ecclesiastical
Teachers of Christian Religion in England, who through the great perturbation
of Wars (as has been said) were not so well known, The first Preachers of
Christian Faith in England.
nor distinctly observed, nor delivered to Writing in those days, as otherwise
they might have been; yet find I some mention (though dispersed) of three several
Apostles of Christ to have Preached there, to wit, St. Peter, St. Paul, and St.
Simon of Chananee, surnamed the Zealous; two Apostolical Men also in these
first troubled Times to have been sent thither, Aristobulus a Roman, whom St.
Paul named in his Epistle to the Romans, and Joseph of Arimathea, a Nobleman of
Jury, that buried Christ: Of all which Five we shall speak somewhat in order.

20. And first of St. Peter himself to have been in England (or Britanny) and
Preached, Founded Churches, and Ordained Priests and Dencons therein, Metaph.
apud Surium, die 23 Junii. page 862.
is recorded out of Greek Antiquities by Simeon Metaphrastes a Grecian. And it
seems to be somewhat confirmed by that which Innocentius I. Bishop of Rome
has left written above 1200 years agone, saying, That the first Churches of
Italy, Innocent. Epist ad Decent.
France, Spain, Africa, Sicilia? and the Islands that lie betwixt them, were
founded by St. Peter, or his Scholars, or Successors. For which cause Gulielmus
Eysengrenius, in his first Centuria, or hundred years, does write also, Eyseng.
cent 1. part 7. did. 8.
That the first Christian Churches of England were sounded by St. Peter under
Nero. Whereunto it may be thought that the foresaid Gildas had relation, when
expostulating with the Britain Priests of his time for their Wickedness, (for
which the Wrath of God had brought in the English Saxons upon them) he
objecteth among other things, Quod sedem Petri Apostoli inverecundis pedibus
usurpassent; Gild. p. 2. Ep. de excid. Brit.
That they had usurped the Seat St. Peter with unshamefac'd feet: meaning
thereby either the whole Church of Britanny first founded by him, or some
particular place of Devotion or Church which he had erected. And finally,
Alredus Rienuallus, Alred. apud Sur. 5. Jan. page 131.
an English Abbot of the Order of Cisterce, left written about 500 years agone
a certain Revelation or Apparition of St. Peter to an holy man in the time of
King Edward the Confessor, showing him how he had Preached himself in England,
and consequently the particular care he had of that Church and Nation, etc.

21. If any man ask, What time it might be that St. Peter left Rome, About the
time that St. Peter went into Britanny. Acts 18. Baron. tom. 1. Annal. pa. 512.
An. Christi 58.
and went into Britanny, and other Countries round about? Cardinal Baronius, a
famous Learned Historiographer of our time, thinks that it was then when
Claudius the Emperor banished all the Jews out of Rome, (as in the Acts of the
Apostles it is recorded) among whom it is like that St. Peter also, being by
Nation a Jew, retired himself, and took that occasion to go into diverse Pagan
Countries to preach the Faith of Christ, that thing belonging especially to his
Charge as Head of the Apostles, according to his own words of himself, Act. 15.
Elegit Deus per os meum, audire gentes verbum Evangelii and credere. God has
chosen and appointed that Gentiles shall hear and believe the Word of the
Gospel by my mouth. This then was the cause why he was so diligent and careful
to go and preach everywhere Christian Religion, to the end he might fulfill and
accomplish this Will and Ordination of his Master. And this was one cause also
(to wit, his absence from Rome) why, according to Baronius and other Learned
Men, St. Paul writing to the Romans did not name or salute him in his Epistle,
whereof our Heretics do brabble much. And thus much of St. Peter.

Of St. Paul 's going into Britanny.

Theod. Ep. ad Tim. and in Ps. 116. lib. 9. de curand. grac. af. Sophron. Sermon.
de not. Apost.


22. Of St. Paul's being in Britanny, there are not so many particular
Testimonies; yet the foresaid Theodoretus does affirm, That from Rome he made
certain Exoursions, in Hispanias, and in Insulas, quae in Mari jacent; into
Spain, and the Islands lying in the Sea near about. And in another place (as
the Magdeburgians do cite him) he writes expressly, That St. Paul Preached to
the Britains. And the like has Sophronius Bishop of Jerusalem in his Sermon of
the Nativity of the Apostles. Venantius also Fortunatus, a most Learned and
Holy. Man, writing above a thousand years agone of St. Paul's Peregrination,
says thus: Transit and Oceanum, vel qua facit Insula portum,
Quasque Britannus habet terras, atque ultima Thyle.
He passed over the Ocean-Sea to the Island that makes a Haven on the other
side, Arnold. Mirm. in Theatro.
even to the Lands which the Britains do possess, etc. For which respect
Arnoldus Mirmannus, in his Theater of the Conversion of all Nations, affirms
St. Paul to have passed to Britanny in the fourth year of Nero, Anno Domini 59;
and there to have Preached, and afterward to have returned again into Italy.
And so much of St. Paul; who having twelve or thirteen years permitted him by
Christ after his coming to Rome before his death, for helping St. Peter, and
for assisting the West-parts of the World, and St. Peter himself almost twice
as much: it is not unlike (their Zeal being considered, and the state of times
weighed) but that they made many Excursions, as the former Authors do write.
And thus much of them.

Of Simon the Zealous.

Niceph. lib. 2. hist. cap. 40. Dor. in Synops. Baron. ad diem 28. Octobris.
Magdeb. cent. 1. lib. 2. c. 2.


23. For the Preaching of the third Apostle, Simon Chananaeus, surnamed the
Zealous, we have the Testimony of Nicephorus out of Greek Monuments, to whom
agrees Dorotheus a very ancient Writer; as also the Greek Martyrology, as
testifies Baronius in his Annotations upon the Roman Martyrology. And by this
also we see, that albeit St. Peter had undertaken to preach to the West-part of
the World, yet did other Apostles also help him therein; as St. Paul in Italy
and Spain, and this Simon in Britanny and other places, and St. Philip in
France, etc.

Of Aristobulus 's being in Britanny.

Mir. in theatro de conver. gentium, page 43. Dor. in Synops. Baron. ad diem 25
Martii. Rom 6.


24. Of Aristobulus also, St. Peter's Scholar, do testify in like manner the
foresaid Authors, Mirmannus, Dorotheus, Baronius out of the Greek Martyrology,
that he was sent by St. Peter into Britanny, and there made a Bishop. And that
Aristobulus was a principal known Christian in Rome before St. Paul's arrival
there, it appears by the Epistle of the said Apostle to the Romans, where he
saluteth him in these words; Salute those that be of the house of Aristobulus:
Nor is it read that ever this Aristobulus came back from Britanny to Italy
again. And this of him.

Of Joseph of Arimathea 's coming into Britanny.
25. Of Joseph of Arimathea his coming into France, and his sending thence into
Great Britanny, either by St. Philip (as some say) who preached then in Gaul,
or (as Others hold) by St. Peter himself, as he passed that way to and from
Britanny; and how he obtained a place to exercise an Eremitical Life for him
and his ten Companions in the Island called Avallonia, where Glastonbury after
was builded: albeit I find no very certain or ancient Writer to affirm it, yet
because our later Historiographers, for two hundred years past or more, do hold
it have come down by Tradition, Jo. capg. in SS. Britan. Catal. Polid. Virg. in
hist. Ang. li. 1. Cambd. in desc. Brit. page 162. Harpesf. in hist. Eccl. f. 3.
(and namely Johannes Capgravius, a Learned Man of the Order of St. Dominick,
and others after him.) I do not mean to dispute the matter here, but rather to
admire and praise the Heavenly Providence and Goodness of Almighty God, who in
these very first days of his Gospel procured for so remote an Island so
excellent Spiritual Fathers, Founders, and Patrons, both of contemplative and
active Life in Christian Religion; the first Four which I have named being all
Preachers, and this Fifth having come out of Jury unto Marsilia in France with
St. Mary Magdalen and her Company, and seen her extraordinary Austerity of
Contemplative Life, and Zeal of Solitude, and doing Penance therein; he began
that kind of Life also in Britanny, as our Writers do testify, and namely
Cambden among others does observe. Solitariam vitam amplexi sunt, Cambd. in
desc. Provin. Belg. Britann.
etc. ut severo vitae genere ad Crucem preferendam se exercerent. Joseph and
his Company did take upon them a solitary life, that with more tranquillity they
might attend to holy Learning, and with a severe kind of conversation exercise
themselves to the bearing of Christ's Cross.

26. And albeit John Fox (out of whom Sir Francis has stolen all that he says
in this matter, and most of the rest that be Historical, though suppressing his
Name) does cavil upon this man's going into England; making him first a
Preacher, and not an Eremite; and then saying, That he came not from Rome, but
out of Jury and France, Fox's Cavillations refuted.

Cypr. Ep. 45.


and consequently that the Church of Britanny is not the Daughter of the Church
of Rome, nor had not her first Birth or Institution from thence; (and yet St.
Cyprian glories in that his Church of Carthage in Africa, and all the other
Churches under her in Mauritania and Numidia, had received their first
Institution of Christian Faith from Rome, as from their Mother:) All the World
may see that this is but a foolish and absurd Cavil of Fox; for that albeit St.
Joseph came not immediately from Rome, nor was a Roman by Birth, (as none of
the Apostles were;) yet he taught in England the Roman Faith, that is to say,
the same Faith that St. Peter, and St. Paul, and Aristobulus, that came
immediately from Rome, had taught before him, or did teach jointly with him in
Britanny. Of which Roman Faith St. Paul had written to the Romans themselves
before the going of St Joseph into Britanny: Fides vestra annuntiatur in
universo mundo; Romans 1.
Your Faith is preached and divulged throughout the whole World; signifying,
That the Christian Faith planted in Rome by St. Peter, was derived already for
a Platform into all other parts of the World round about. For which cause
Tertullian writing in Africa, said, That the Authority of his Church came from
Rome. Tert. l. de prescrip. cap. 36.
Vnde nobis quoque authorit as praesto est, says he. And St. Cyprian (as
before has been noted) called the Roman Church, Matricem caeterarum omnium,
the Mother and Original Church of all other Churches. And St. Innocentius also,
Cyp. in Ep. 45.
whose Holiness St. Augustine so much admired, does affirm, That all Churches
generally of the West-parts of the World were founded by St. Peter and his
Disciples. And St. Angustin himself had no better way to defend his Church of
Hippo, and other of those Countries, to be truly Catholic against the
Donatists, Aug. in Psalm. contra part. Donat.
than to say, that they were Daughters and Children of the Church of Rome,
though some of them were very near as far off in distance of place, as England
at this day.

27. Well then, by this we see that the shift invented to deliver us from all
Obligation to the Sea of Rome for our two Conversions, under Eleutherius,
Heretical wrangling turning to their own confusion.
and Gregory I. by saying that some had preached Christian Religion first in
Britanny, before these two public Conversions fell out, is a foolish shift, and
diminishes not our said Obligation, but increases rather the same. For if
this first Preaching and first Faith taught in England by our first Preachers,
was the Roman Faith, and derived principally from the City and Church of Rome,
by the Preaching of St. Peter and St. Paul, Aristobulus and others, as has
been declared; and if the very first Beams or Sparkles thereof, before any
Preachers perhaps were sent, came by the access of some Roman Christians upon
the Wars and other occasions, which before has been declared; then all this
rather multiplieth our Bonds to Rome, than diminishes the same. And so instead
of two Conversions from Rome, (whereof I spoke in my Ward-word) now we find
three. And consequently a triple Obligation is come upon us for a double.

28. And this shall suffice to the first Answer of Sir Francis, or rather
simple shift, by which he would avoid our Obligation to Rome, persuading us
that our first Preachers came not from thence, but from Asia, and the East
Church. Of which Argument, though I have said more here than I meant to have
done; yet for that Sir Francis, and all other Heretics of our time, for hatred
to Rome, do seek certain Reasons, or rather foolish Conjectures, to prove the
same, I shall be forced to say somewhat more thereof in the Chapter following.

CHAP. II.
An Answer to certain Cavillations, Lies, and Falsifications of Sir Francis,
and his Masters, Fox and the Magdeburgians, about the first Preaching of
Christian Religion in Britanny.

ALbeit the fond heretical wrangling before rehearsed against Rome, deserves
not so large a Confutation as I have already bestowed thereon, especially in so
clear a matter as are the manifold benefits which our Island has received from
the Sea of Rome; yet for that it seems to be a general Conspiracy of all
Heretics of our time, as well Lutherans as Zwinglians, Calvinists and Puritans,
to take from Rome (if they could) all the merit of bringing Christian Faith
into our Country, I am forced in this place to stand longer upon the matter
than otherwise I would, for that there follows also another Consequence
hereof, Iren. cont. haereses.

Tert. de praescrip.

Cyp. l. 4. c. 8. de unit. Eccles. A consequence of the ancient Fathers to be
noted.


of no small moment, which St. Irenaeus, Tertullian, St. Cyprian, St. Augustine,
and others, are wont to urge greatly against Heretics, to wit, That if our
Church be the Daughter and Disciple of the Church of Rome, then ought it to run
unto her in all doubts and difficulties of matters of Faith. Wherefore we shall
briefly discuss the truth of this Affair.

2. Besides the Proofs set down in the former Chapter how the chief of our
first Preachers came from Rome immediately, as St. Peter, St. Paul, and St.
Aristobulus; and that the other, as St. Simon of Chananae, and St. Joseph of
Arimathea, if they did not come from Rome, yet preached the Roman Faith conform
to the Preachings of St. Peter and St. Paul: there remain two other Conjectures
also very probable to the same effect, to prove that St. Joseph was specially
directed into Britanny by the same Apostles. The first is, for that King Inas
above 900 years past, when he laid the Foundation of Glastonbury-Abby in memory
of St. Joseph and his Fellows that had lived a solitary Life there, he caused
these Verses to be written in the Church, as Cambden and others testify, Guil.
Cambd. in desc. Brit. de provin. Belg. An. Dom. 690.
Anglia plande lubens, mittit tibi Roma salutem:
Fulgor Apostolicus Glasconiam irradiat.
Be glad, England, for that Rome sends Health to thee, and Apostolical
Brightness does lighten Glastonbury. Which could not well be spoken, if the
coming of these Saints and first Inhabiters there, had not some relation to
Rome, and to the Apostles that sent them.

B. Rheu. l. 3. rerum German. sub Hello. Pant. de viris Germ. part 3. Stumpf.
chron. Helvet. l. 7. c. 22.
3. Moreover I find in the ancient Chronicles of the Helvetians, and sundry
Authors (as B. Rhenanus in his Story of Germany, yea and Pantaleon an Heretic,
and others) do testify, That one Suetonius, a Nobleman's Son of Britanny,
being converted in Britanny by such Christians as first planted the Faith
there, and called (after his Baptism) Beatus, was sent by them to Rome to St.
Peter Apostolorum Corypheo (as the Story says) that is, Eyseng. cent. 2. part
5. did. 2. The story of St. Beatus a Britan, Scholar to St. Peter.
to the chief Head of the Apostles, to be better instructed and confirmed; who
returning backward again from Rome toward Britanny through Switzerland, found
such flocking of People unto him, and such propension to Christian Religion, as
he stayed continually among them, and built himself an Oratory to exercise a
Monastical Life there, near unto a Town called in their Language Vndersewen,
not far from the Lake of Than, where he died about the year of Christ 110. An
Dom. 110.
And for that this man applied himself to a Monastical Life, and brought the
same purpose with him out of Britanny, (as it seems,) the conjecture is not
improbable, but that he was converted and sent to Rome to St. Peter by St.
Joseph and his Fellows that followed the same Life in Britanny, and that they
had particular correspondence with the said Apostle in that behalf.

4. And thus much being added for confirmation of that which was said and
discussed in the former Chapter about the first Preaching and Receiving of the
Faith in Britanny; there remains now, Whether the first Preachers in Britanny
were of the East Church, or West,
that we see the Objections which Sir Francis and his Men and Masters do bring
against this, to prove that the first Teachers of Christian Faith in Britanny
were rather Grecians, and of the East Church in Asia, than of the West Roman
Church: For which Assertion having no Author at all that ever wrote thereof,
nor any man living or dead that hitherto ever affirmed it, beside themselves,
or before Luther's days; they are forced to build their whole imagination (I
mean Sir Francis, and his Master Sir John Fox, and Fox his Masters again
Illyricus Vigandus Judex, and Faber, that make the Quadrillio, or Round-Table
of the Magdeburgtans in Saxony) upon this bare Conjecture, and fond Inference,
That for so much as in Bede's time some in Britanny observed the day of Easter
after the fashion of some East Churches, (for all did not so use it,) therefore
it was like that the first Preachers of that Island came not from Rome, The
foolish Inference of Heretical Cavillers.
(which these men cannot abide to hear) but from the East; as though (forsooth)
this abuse might not have entered after those first Preachers, though they had
come from Rome. But let us hear their words about this matter.

5. First, Sir Francis writes thus: Bid our Countryman does testify, Wastw.
p. 192.
that in his time this Land kept Easter after the manner of the East Church, by
which may be gathered, that the first Preachers came hither from the East-parts
of the World, and not from Rome. Mark, I pray you, the Knight's good gathering:
Might not a man as well argue thus; That diverse Relics of the Pelagian, or
other ancient Heresies, were found in some parts of Britanny in Bede's time;
Ergo, The first Preachers in Britanny were Pelagians, or other Heretics? But
let us hear John Fox, who taught Sir Francis this Argument, though the other
were not so grateful a Scholar as to name him. I take (says he) the Testimony
of Bid, Fox page 95. Col. 2. nu. 78.
where he affirms, that in his time, and almost a thousand years after Christ
here in Britanny Easter was kept after the manner of the East Church, in the
Full of the Moon, what day of the Week soever it fell on, and not on the
Sunday, as we do now; whereby it is to be collected, that the first Preachers
in this Land have come out from the East-part of the World, where it was so
used, rather than from Rome.

6. Here you see the Argument more fully set down, and the same foolish
Collection made that was before. For except it could be proved that this Error
of keeping Easter Day with the Jews had begun and endured in Britanny from the
Apostles time downward, (which cannot be showed, but rather the contrary is
certain, as after you shall hear) this Collection is not worth a rush. And it
is to be noted by the way, that as Fox cannot tell any Tale lightly without
some notorious Lie, so here be two very manifest: The first, Bed. l. 2. Eccl.
hist. c. 4, 19. and l. 3. c. 25.
that Saint Bede affirms this Custom of keeping Easter with the Jews to have
been here in Britanny in his time, as though all Britanny had used it; whereas
in diverse places he does attribute the same to the Scots, that dwelt in the
Island of Ireland principally, as also to some of them that dwelt in Britanny,
and to some Britans themselves, Two Lies of Fox.
but all the English Church was free from it: So as John Fox his Speech of
Britanny in general is both false and fraudulent. But the other clause, That
Saint Bede testifies this, for almost 1000 years after Christ, is foolish and
impudent, seeing it is notorious that Saint Bede died in the year 735, which is
almost 300 years short of Fox his Account, and consequently could not testify
a thing so long after his death. But this the Reynard juggleth, to make Saint Bede seem to be a late Writer; whom they cannot abide, for that he sets down
the Beginning and Progress of our Church far different from theirs.

7. But I think good to put down also the words of the Magdeburgians about this
matter, The Magdeburgians Sentence about the Conversion of Britanny. Magd.
cent. 2. c. 2. p. 9.
(out of whom Fox took his Argument, and the Knight of the Fox) to the end it
may appear how one Heretic teaches another (though of different Sects) to
cavil, lie, and cogg, and do agree all in one Spirit of Malignity, though they
differ in Opinions. Thus then these Captain- Lutherans do write of this matter
in their famous lying and deceitful Centurial Story: Quis fuerit, qui primum in
Britannia Evangelium docuer it, etc. Who was the first that taught the Gospel
in Britanny, is not clear; the thing that seems nearest to the Truth is, that
the British Church was planted at the beginning by Grecian Teachers, and such
as came from the East, and not by Romans, or other of the West-Church. And to
this we are moved by two Conjectures: First, That Peter Abbot of Cluniack
writing to St. Bernard, says, That the Scotos Graeco more suo tempore solitos
olim Pascha celebrare, non Romano.
Scots in his time were wont in old time to celebrate Easter Day after the
manner of the Grecians, and not of the Romans: And secondly, for that Geffry
the Cardinal, who lived about the year of Christ 700, does testify in his
Story of Britanny, lib. 8. cap. 4. That the Britans would in no wise admit the
younger Augustine, Legate of Gregory the Great, neither acknowledge any Primacy
of the Bishop of Rome over them; which is another clear sign that Religion was
not planted there by Romans. And albeit Pope Innocentius I. in his Epistle
distinctione 12. does affirm on the contrary side, that all the Occidental
Churches, and those of Africa, were founded by Peter, or by his Disciples or
Successors; yet we judge that to have been spoken by him rather of desire of a
little Vainglory, or of Temporal Power, than for that the Truth is so, or may
be proved out of Stories.

8. Thus our Magdeburgenses, whose words I have caused to be noted more at
length, by that they require some consideration; and that by these sew, the
Reader may judge of the quality of that whole huge lying story of theirs, which
our Fox has followed in his Acts and Monuments, with above 10000 false
Additions of his own; and I speak far within number, when I say 10000. But let
us return to our present Story.

The examination of the Magdeburgians false dealing about the conversion of
Britanny.
9. First whereas they say, That to them it seems nearest to the Truth, That
Grecians and other of the East-Church, and not of the West-Church, were the
first Preachers in Britanny; it must either be very imprudently spoken against
their own Conscience, if they have read that which I before have set down out
of diverse Authors, (they having no one Author in the World of their own side
that ever wrote so, or signified so, before themselves;) or if they have not
read these Authors alleged, then it is great Presumption in them to take upon
them to write so Universal an History of all Matters, Times, and Nations, as
they profess, without procuring first to read the ancient Authors and Writers
thereof, about common and vulgar things at least. But hatred and malice to Rome
does make them blind, and so rather to run into all kind of Absurdities, than
to yield any Praise or commendable thing to Rome, or to the Bishops thereof.
But let us go forward to examine more particulars, for there are store in this
little Story or Relation about Britanny.

10. Their first Conjecture or Argument why Britanny was converted by Grecians
and not by Romans, is, as you have heard, for that Petrus Cluniacensis writes,
Scotos Graeco more suo tempore, solitos olim Pascha celebrare; That the Scots
in his time were accustomed in old time to celebrate Easter day after the
manner of the Grecians. What sense has this? The Scots in His Time did
celebrate in Old Time. What sense, I say, or construction can this have? I
confess that some Scots of old time, (especially in Ireland and Orcades, as
diverse Britans also) did hold the Asian Custom of celebrating the Easter
together with the Jews. Bed. hist. Ang. l. 2. c. 4, 19. and l. 3. c. 3, 25.
And this needed not to be proved by so late an Author as Cluniacensis, for
that Saint Bede 300 years before Petrus Cluniacensis does testify the same in
diverse places of his Works. Albeit how the Scots in Cluniacensis his time did
(as these men say) celebrate in old time Easter with the Grecians, (the Greek
Church at that time being not different in this point from the Roman, though
some in Asia minor were) this cannot be understood by any reasonable man. And
it may be it was written after Dinner by these good Germans, when they had
drunk hard, and so I leave it to their own Explication; though in what sense
soever they speak it, or it may be understood, a most fond Conjecture it is for
that which they pretend, (as we have showed) to wit, that the first Preachers
of Britanny came from the East.

11. About the second Conjecture upon the words of Geffry of Monmouth, About
Geffry of Monmouth made Bishop^ An. 1152.
whom they call Geffry the Cardinal, there are as many more unlearned and
malicious Escapes to be noted. For first, he was never Cardinal in his life, as
all our Histories do make it plain; but first a Monk, then Archdeacon of
Monmouth, then preferred by King Stephen to the Bishopric of St. Asaph in
North Wales in the year of Christ 1152, as both Matthew Paris and Matthew of
Westminster do affirm in their several Histories handling that year. Neither
did any man to our knowledge ever call him Cardinal, but only a certain
Venetian Schoolmaster named Ponticus Virunnius, who living almost a hundred
years agone, Vide Praef. in lib. rerum Brit. Gaufredi, etc. Heidelberg.
impress. 1587.
translated some part of this Geffry's British History, or rather contracted
the same into an Epitome, for the pleasure of a certain Noble Family in Venice,
who in old time had come out of Britanny. And this man, either of Error, or
Flattery to that Family, or both, calls him Cardinal forsooth, against the
clear Testimony of all others that lived with him; as soon after his Death did
the foresaid Matthew Paris and Guil. Neobrigensis, long before this other late
Venetian Schoolmaster.

12. And of this our Magdeburgians could not be ignorant, though they would
needs make Geffry of Monmouth a Cardinal also; for that in some things he
shows himself to favor the old Britans against St. Augustine that came from
Rome. Neither could they be ignorant also of the time wherein Geffry lived,
(except they will confess themselves to be very unskilful and gross Companions
indeed) seeing so many Authors do testify the same, to wit, in the year of
Christ 1152, in which year he was made Bishop of St. Asaph, and lived diverse
years after. So as our German Heretics appointing him, for his more credit, to
have lived in the year of Christ 700, do add of their own benevolence to his
Antiquity 450 years, which is somewhat more than Fox took from Saint Bede a
little before, to discredit him, and make him seem a young Author. Notable
Falsification of Fox and Magdeburgians in corrupting of Times.
And these Confederates do proceed so ridiculously in this kind of Cozenage, as
the one affirming Saint Bede to have lived 1000 years after Christ, and the other
that Geffry of Monmouth lived 700, they come between them both to make the said
Geffry to be 300 years elder than Saint Bede, whereas he was indeed 450 years
younger, the difference is in all 750 years. And this is not of Error, as has
been showed, and is most plain, but of Envy, desiring to prefer Geffry, that
seems to favor them sometimes in his Narrations about St. Augustine, and to
put back Saint Bede, that is every where and wholly against them. And if you find
this juggling in so small and short a matter as this is; imagine what passes in
their whole Volumes: I mean both of Fox and the Magdeburgians, as before I have
noted. And thus much of the Title and Time of Geffry of Monmouth: Now let us
come to his Words and Assertions.

13. First, in his sixth Book and fourth Chapter quoted by our Magdeburgians,
there is no such matter handled at all as they mention, concerning the Strife
between the Britans and St. Augustine; nor in the next two Books following, nor
in all the four Chapters of any of the rest. But in the eleventh Book and
seventh Chapter, talking of the coming of the foresaid Augustine into England,
he writes thus:

Galfr. Monumetens lib. 11. cap. 7.
Interea missus est Augustinus a beato Gregorio, etc. In the mean space was
sent into Britanny Augustine by Blessed Gregory, to preach to Englishmen the
Word of God, who were yet blind in Pagan Superstition, etc. Though among the
Britans that Christianity was yet in force, which being received from the time
of Eleutherius the Pope, had never failed until that day, etc. Among whom there
was an Abbot of Bangor named Dinoot, that had above 2000 Monks under his
charge, who answered to Augustine, when he required Subjection of the British
Bishops, and that they would join with him to convert the English Nation, That
the Britans owed no Subjection unto him, nor would bestow the labor of
Preaching upon their Enemies, seeing the Britans had an Archbishop of their
own, and that the Saxons took from them their Country; for which cause they
hated them extremely, nor did not esteem their Religion, nor would communicate
with them, more than with Dogs.

14. Lo here all that is to be found in Geffry of Monmouth to this purpose;
which is nothing else, as you see, but a passionate and choleric Answer of the
Britans, as of men afflicted and exasperated. Here is no one word of their not
acknowledging the Popes Supremacy, (as the Magdeburgians write) but only that
they acknowledged not the Superiority of Augustine over the Britans, seeing he
was only sent to the English; and that the Authority of their own Archbishop
was not taken away by his coming, for any thing they yet knew, but remained as
before. Which question of Jurisdiction between two Archbishops falls out
daily, even where the Pope's Authority is acknowledged; and so we see that it
is a manifest Lie, An absurd kind of reasoning of the Magdeburgians.
which the Magdeburgians affirm so resolutely, That the Britans would not
acknowledge any Primacy of the Bishop of Rome over them: For they speak (as you
see) of Augustin's Authority, and not of the Bishop of Rome, from whom we read
not that he had yet showed to them any Authority to place him over their
Archbishop; and consequently it is a vain and malicious Inference which the
Magdeburgians here do make out of this Answer of the Britans, (if it had been
true) that forasmuch as they admitted not St. Augustin's Authority, they
acknowledged not the Primacy of Rome, and that this again was a clear sign that
Religion was not planted in Britanny by the Romans.

15. For how clear is this, I pray you? or how hangs this together? might not
this Error of not acknowledging the Power of the Roman See, (if it had been
among them) have crept in after the first planting of Christian Faith? Will
these Germans, or Sir Francis or Fox their Scholars, deny that Ravennae in
Italy (for Example) was converted by St. Apollinaris sent thither from St.
Peter, Petrus Chrysostom. Sermon. de S. Apollinari. Et Petrus Damian. de eodem, Mombr.
tom. 2. Vide Sur. 23. Julii.
for that afterward the Bishops of that place for many years waxing proud and
presumptuous upon the presence and Court of the Exarchs and Viceroys of the
Emperors residing amongst them, did refuse to yield to the Bishops of Rome? Or
for that England at this day, by Error of Protestant Religion, refuses to
acknowledge any Subjection in Spiritual Affairs to Rome, will our men deny that
the English Nation was ever converted to Christian Faith from Rome? Who sees
not the impertinency of this kind of Argument? And yet with suchlike kind of
Arguments and Inferences, these absurd People do deceive the World.

16. But the last point of these Germans Assertion about Pope Innocentius I. is
a most egregious Impudency to say of so holy a Father, so highly commended by
St. Augustine, and other Fathers that lived with him and after him,
Centuriatores Magdburg. Flaccus Iuyric. Jo. Vigand. Matt. Judex. Basilius Faber.
That he spoke of Vainglory, and desire of Temporal Power, when he wrote above
1200 years agone, That all the West-Churches (and the British amongst the rest)
were founded by St. Peter, or his Disciples and Successors. And let any
indifferent or prudent Reader in the World consider of what weight these words
of the Germans may be, when having said That albeit Innocentius I. wrote so,
yet we judge that to have been spoken of Vainglory, etc. A proud Censure of so
great a man by three or four poor Companions, that wrote Books for their Bread,
and begged the same commonly of every Prince to whom they dedicated their
several Centuries! That so contemptible People (I say) should presume to touch
the Honor and Truth of so great and worthy a Saint and Father as was holy
Innocentius, so called commonly by St. Augustine, St Hierom, St. Basil, Orosius,
and others; Aug. tom. 1 p. 36. and Ep. 91. ad Conc. Carth. Hier. ep. ad Demet.
Basil. ep. ad innocent. Orosius in hist. lib. 2.
and whom all the rest of the World together with these men admired and
respected in his Life for such. Sancti Innocentii (says St. Hierom to the
Virgin Demetriades) qui Apostolicae Cathedrae, and beat ae memoriae Anastasii
successor and filius est tene as fidem, nec pergrinam, quamvis prudens
callidaque videaris, doctrinam recipias. Hold the Faith of holy Innocentius,
which is the Successor and Son (in the Seat of St. Peter's Chair) of Anastasius
of blessed Memory, that went before him; and do not admit any new or foreign
Doctrine, though thou may seem perhaps wise and subtle to thy self.

17. Thus wrote St. Hierom, which is another manner of Judgment of Innocentius,
both for his Holiness of Life, and Authority of Place to direct men in
Religion, than the Magdeburgians give, who would make him Vainglorious. But
thus they use all ancient Fathers that are against them. And so much for this
Chapter.

CHAP. III.
The former Controversy is more particularly handled, how the Grecian Custom
of celebrating Easter Day after the Fashion of the Jews came first into the
British and Scottish Church; and how untruly and wickedly John Fox and John
Bale do behave themselves about this matter.

BUT now let us return (if you please) to speak a word or two more of the
entrance of the foresaid Custom of celebrating Easter with the Jews into
Britanny; to wit, how, and about what time, or upon what occasion, That the
custom of celebrating Easter with the Jews came not in with the first Preachers.
it is probable that it entered. Wherein first it seems most certain, that it
could not be brought in by the first Preachers of Christian Religion, to John
Fox and Sir Francis and the Magdeburgians would have men believe. And this is
proved as well by the Reasons and Authorities alleged Sup. c. 1.
before, to show that the first Preachers in Britanny either came from Rome, or
preached Roman Doctrine; as also by the Reasons following.

First, for that if Damianus, and other Preachers sent into Britanny by Pope
Eleutherius, to instruct King Lucius and the rest in Christian Faith, about the
year 180, had found any such Custom there, contrary to the Roman Use from
whence they were sent, they would have removed the same, or at least wise have
made some mention thereof; for so much as at that time the contrary Custom of
celebrating Easter upon the Sunday was public in the Use of the Roman Church;
and Pope Pius I. had made a Decree for confirming the same against the Asian
Use about 40 years before their going into Britanny, to wit, in the year 144,
as Eusebius. in chron. an. 144. Bed. l. 2. c. 2.4. and 19.

Item l. 3. c. 25.


Eusebius testifies.

Secondly, Saint Bede declaring in many places of his Works the Contention that
was in Britanny about this Point, as well between St. Augustine and the British
Bishops, as between St. Laurentius and others his Successors with the Irish and
Scottish Nation; he shows in his second Book what Letters Honorius the Pope,
about the year of Christ 635, as also Pope John IV. some few years after, Bed.
l. 2. hist. cap. 19.
wrote to the said Nations about this Error, Pro eodem errore corrigendo (satth
Saint Bede) literas eis magna Auctoritate atque Eruditione plenas direxit. The
Pope wrote them Letters full of Authority and Learning for the correcting this
Error. And then Beda adds further, That Pope John in the beginning of his
Epistle declared manifestly, that this Heresy was sprung up among them very
lately, nuperrime temporibus istis exortam esse haeresim hanc, that this
Heresy was sprung up very lately in those days. And that not the whole Irish
and Scottish Nations, but some of them only, were infected therewith, so as
this was never universally received among them, nor begun by Antiquity.

third Reason is, for that St. German and his Fellows going twice into Britanny
almost 200 years before this time mentioned, to resist the Pelagian Heresy,
never made mention of this other Heresy of Quartadecimani, or of Paschatitae,
(for so they were called, as after shall be showed;) which yet was condemned
for an Heresy more than 200 years before that again, to wit, under Pope
Victor, as has been said, and so held in all Ages after, especially after the
Council of Nice had reproved the same, and allowed of the Roman Catholic Use;
as not only St. Beda, Bed. l. 3. c. 19.
in the place before alleged out of the words of St. Wilfrid, does testify,
Eusebius. l. 3. de vit. Constant. cap. 17, and 18.
but the same also appears by the Emperor Constantine's own Letters registered
by Eusebius in his Life. All which being so, it is more than probable that St.
German would have said or written somewhat of so great a Controversy, if he
had found the contrary Use in practice among the Britans in his days.

fourth Reason may be the Testimony of Florentinus Vigorniensis, who writes in
the year 628 of his Chronicle, Flor. Vigorn. in Chron. an. 628.
Eo tempore errorem Quartadecimanorum in observatione Paschatis apud Scotos
exortum, Honorius Papa redarguit, etc. At that time, Honorius the Pope did
reprove the Error of the Quartadecimans in celebrating Easter, sprung up among
the Scottish-men. Thus wrote he upon the point of 500 years past, whereby it is
evident that he held not this Custom to have come into Britanny with the first
Preachers of Christianity.

A Council in England about celebrating of Easter Day. Bed. l. 3. hist. c. 25.
6. Finally, it appears by Saint Bede, That a Synod or Council was gathered of
purpose in Northumberland about this matter, in time of our English Primitive
Church, in the year of Christ 664, and the 22d of the Reign of King Oswyn, who
was there present, with King Egfride his Son. The chief Disputers in this
Council on the Scots behalf, for the Eastern Custom, was one Colman, an Abbot
first, and after Bishop of Lindisferne, together with Bishop Cedda, and some
others. But in defense of the Roman Use were Agilbertus Bishop of the
West Saxons, and Wilfride an Abbot of Northumberland, afterward Archbishop of
all the Kingdom of Northumbers, Vir doctissimus, etc. a most Learned Man (as
Saint Bede calls him) who had studied both in Italy and France, etc.

7. The Question was handled about the Antiquity (as has been said) of both
Uses and Customs, A Synod and Disputation about the Controversy of celebrating
Easter in Engl.
but especially of that of the East among the Scots and British. And albeit
that B. Colman did allege the Tradition of Asia. from St. John the Evangelist
downward, as also the Writing of one Anatolius a Learned Asian Bishop, that had
written thereof almost 200 years before; yet for the Antiquity thereof among
the Scots and British Nation, he alleged no greater Continuance than from the
Abbot Columba, who lived not full 70 years before that day; for that he died
(as John Bale testifies) in the year of Christ 598. Bed. l. 3. c. 25.
Nunquid Reverendissimum Patrem nostrum Columbam (says B. Colman) and
Successores ejus viros Deo dilectos, qui eodem modo Pascha fecerunt, divinis
Paginis contraria sapuisse vel egisse credendum est? Shall we think that our
most Reverend Father Columba and his Successors, being men so beloved of God as
they were, did understand or do contrary to holy Scriptures in celebrating
Easter as we do now? etc.

8. Whereunto St. Wilfrid answered both learnedly and piously, That this Error
might be tolerable in them that lived so distant from the See-Apostolic, The
Answer of St. Wilfrid for the Roman Use.
in a Corner of the World, so long as it was held without Obstinacy; they being
perhaps pious men, that at the beginning brought it in from the East-parts, and
continued the same upon simplicity, delighted with the facility thereof, and
not understanding so easily the Catholic Roman Calculation, which had many
great difficulties, as after shall appear. Simplicitate rustica, says he, sed
intention pia, etc. ad quos Catholicus Calculator non advenerat: By a rude
kind of simplicity, but Godly intention, they erred, etc. no learned Catholic
Calculator of Times and Days having yet come to them. Of which point of
Calculation we shall speak somewhat more presently after.

9. But yet here now we see by this Disputation and Conference of that Synod,
That B. Colman himself did not ascribe the beginning of this Custom unto the
first Preachers of Ireland and Scotland, Marian. Scot. in Chron. an. 430, and
432. Prosp. in chron. eod. an. Bed. l. 2. c. 19.
nor yet unto St. Palladius nor Patritius their known Apostles, that 200 years
before that time were sent by Pope Celestinus to convert both Nations in the
year 430 and 432, as all Authors do agree. And consequently it is most probable
to be true, that which Pope John IV. before-named writes unto Thomianus,
Chromanus, and other Scottish Bishops, and to their whole Clergy, That this
Custom of celebrating Easter upon the Full Moon of March, was begun but of late
among them, (I mean among the Scots dwelling in Ireland, and in the Islands
near about, for that of them principally Saint Bede professes himself to speak.)
And thereby insinuates, that by them also the same was imparted with the Picts
and Britans and other Scots that lived in the Isle of Britanny. And by this the
Reader may see, how good an Argument it is which the Magdeburgians and John Fox
do use and urge so much; to wit, That for so much as this Greek or Asian Custom
of celebrating Easter with the Jews was found among the Scots and some Britans,
in St. Bede's time and afterward: Ergo, It is likely that the first Preachers
of Britanny came not from Rome, neither were of the Roman Religion, but rather
of the East-parts; of which Sequel I have showed the Absurdity before in the
precedent Chapter.

10. But now perhaps you will ask me, How and when it is probable that this
Custom came in among the Britans? Whereunto I answer, First, When and how the
Eastern Custom came in among the Britans.
for the Britans, that some are of opinion it was brought into Britanny it self
by Pelagius the Heretic, or some of his Followers, about the year of Christ
420, who being a Britan born, and a Monk (as some think) of the famous
Monastery of Bangor, traveled into Italy first, and then into Sicilia, Egypt,
and other East-parts of the World, to learn and study, as he professed; and by
that profession of Hypocrisy he crept into many Learned and Godly men's special
Love and Friendship: and above others he entered with St. Paulinus Bishop of
Nola, and by him with St. Augustine. Aug. Ep. 105. and de dono persever. l. 2.
c. 20.
But afterward being discovered by St. Hierom to have taught Heresies in
secret, together with his Fellow and Disciple Celestius, (who by the
description made of him by St. Hierom may seem to have been a Scottish-man,
Hierom. praef. in l. in Ezech.
for he says, Habet enim progeniem Scoticae gentis de Britannorum vicinia, for
he has his Offspring from the Scottish Nation near to the Britans;) wherefore
these two men being now discovered to be Heretics, and condemned by Innocentius
I. and by diverse Synods, are said for very shame to have retired into Britanny,
and being deadly Enemies to the Pope and Church of Rome, that had condemned
them, and considering that the Eastern Custom of celebrating Easter was
opposite to the same Church, and yet defended by many; it is thought probable
enough that they might bring in the same. Herm. Contr. an. 430. chron.
Wherewith does seem to concur somewhat the words of Hermannus Contractus a
Chronicler, that wrote above 500 years ago; who writing of the year of Christ
630, says, His temporibus Haeresis de Paschate, and Pelagiana, Britanniam
turbat; In these days the Heresy about the celebrating of Easter, and the
Pelagian, did much trouble Britanny. By which words it seems that he would
signify that these two Heresies grew to be all one in England, and
consequently like to be brought in by the selt-same men.

11. But yet, all this notwithstanding, it seems much more probable,
according to St. Bede's History, and the Reasons before-alleged, that this Use
of Easter came not in with Pelagius, but long after; for that St. German, and
St. Lupus, and others, made no mention thereof; but especially for that the
Writings of the Popes Honorius and John IV. to the Scottish Nation and Bishops
beforementioned, say, That this Custom of Easter was newly sprung up in their
days: It seems more probable (I say) that this Custom was imparted to the
Britans by the said Scottish Nation, and namely by those that dwelt (as has
been said) in Ireland, or in the Islands of Hebrides. But how they themselves
gat it, is not so certain; yet the most probable seems, that either some of
them traveling into the East-Countries, or others of those East-Countries
coming to them, brought the Observation thereof: For albeit ever after that the
same was condemned by Pope Victor, and the Truth established by the Council of
Nice, Constant. Epist. ad Episcopos apud Eusebius. l. 3. c. 18. de vita ejus.
the whole Western Church, yea also (as Constantine says) the far greater part
of all East, held the Roman Use; yet was not the contrary so extinguished, but
that diverse Churches of Asia minor, did hold and practice the same for a long
time; especially certain Heretics, as the Novatians, Montanists,
Priscillianists, Sabbatians, and others that seemed of the Devouter sort, and
therewith deceived many simple people, pretending that this Use was more pious
than the other, Exodus 12. Levit. 23.5. Numb. 9.11, etc. 28. Deuteronomy. 16.5. Mat.
26. Marc. 14. Luc. 22.
as being founded in the express words of Scriptures of the Old Testament, and
confirmed by the Example of Christ himself, who made his Easter together with
the Jews upon the fourteenth day of the Moon of March, as appears by the
Evangelists.

12. For these (I say) and other like reason, it seems (according to Saint Bede) that the simple and rude Irish and Scottish Christians (as there he
called them) falling upon the Use of this Custom, did like better of it than of
the Roman, which required more exact Calculation and Observation of Times and
Days, as before has been touched, Niceph. hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 36. and l. 5.
c. 20.
and as appears by that which Nicephorus writes, that the old Calculation of
Easter according to the Roman Use (to wit, that it should be upon the first
Sunday after the Full Moon of March) was so hard to be observed oftentimes, as
some learned men of Egypt were appointed in Alexandria to calculate every year
the same beforehand, and that the Patriarch of that Church had care to send it
abroad to other parts of the World for their Instruction and direction therein;
which Office of calculating Easter Day was exercised for diverse years in
Alexandria by one Theophilus a Priest of that Church; who afterward coming to
be Patriach, wrote diverse Paschal Epistles in Greek for direction of finding
out the true day of Easter; which Epistles were translated by St. Hierom in the
year of Christ 404. Hier. in ep. 31. ad Theoph. Epist. 64. ad Martian.
And after the said Theophilus made a Cyclus, or Calculation to serve for 100
years together, as appears by St. Leo the Pope in his Epistle to the Emperor
Martian. All which Observations and Directions being hard for men so far
distant (as Ireland and Scotland was from Alexandria) to know and keep, it is
like that they followed rather the other, which was more plain and easy.

13. And this is insinuated before by Saint Bede, when he says that St. Wilfrid
objected to B. Colman, that his Ancestors observed this Rustica simplicitate,
Lib. 3. c. 25.
by a kind of rude simplicity; and added further, that no learned Calculator of
Times had ever arrived unto them. Reasons of difficulties in the Roman Account.
And if any man will know the Reasons of the difficulties that were in this
Ecclesiastical Roman Account or Computation for celebrating Easter upon the
first Sunday after the fourteenth day of the Moon of March, let him read the
foresaid Paschal Epistles of Theophilus, as also the learned Discourse of
Anatolius Bishop of Laodicea written about forty years before the Council of
Nice, Eusebius. l. 7. hist. cap. 29.

Aug. l. 2. ad quaest. Jan. c. 1, 2.


part whereof is set down by Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical History. St.
Augustine also, in his Answers to the Questions of Januarius, showing the
reasons why the Church of Christ would not have the Feast of Easter to be
stable and firm, as that of his Nativity, Circumcision, and some other Feasts
are, but rather to follow the motion of the Sun and Moon, for diverse Mysteries
therein contained; does touch diverse points of the foresaid difficulties. But
the principal grounds that make the matter hard to the common sort, are, first,
the inequality between Annus Solaris, and Annus Lunaris, that is to say, the
Year according to the course of the Sun, and according to the course of the
Moon; the Church using the second, and not the first. And the difference
between them standing in the odds of eleven days, for equalling whereof serves
the Rule of the Epact answerable to the Cycle of the Golden Number, The Use of
Epact, Golden Number, and Cycle of Dominical Letters for observing Easter day.
consisting of 19 years Revolution, for observing the beginnings and Full Moons
that fall out in every year, seeing that Easter Day must be kept upon the first
Sunday after the first Full Moon in March, as has been said. And furthermore,
forasmuch as this fourteenth day of the Moon must be that which falls upon
the very day of the Spring Equinoctial, or immediately follows the same,
(which Equinoctium was observed by the Council of Nice to be in those days upon
the 21st of March, though since that time it fell back by little and little to
the 11th day, for correction whereof Pope Gregory XIII. was forced to make his
Reformation from the year 1582, by detracting ten days, as all men know: For
this (I say) and for that if the fourteenth day of the Moon of March should
happen to be Sunday, the celebration of Easter must, by the same ancient Eusebius.
lib. 5. Ecc. hist. c. 23. S. Amb. ep. ad Episcopos per. Aemiliam constitutos,
and Saint Bede l. de ratione temp. c. 57.
Fathers Prescription, be transferred to the next Sunday. For observing of
these Points, the Cycle also of the Sun, or Circle of Dominical Letters,
containing the Revolution of 28 years, was invented, as necessary for this
Observation. I might add much more to this effect; but this is sufficient to
show the grounds of many difficulties, as also (returning home to our Affair in
hand) to show the beginning of the Eastern Custom among the Scots, Picts, and
Britans, not to be of that Antiquity which John Fox and his Fellows would
pretend.

14. But now, besides this, Where also they do yield the reasons of this
Ordination.
we may not omit another point of more consideration for the Reader's Utility,
which is the small Piety or Religion of these Sectaries of our days; who care
not what they grant, deny, or say, so they say somewhat against Rome, her
Bishops, or Religion, even in the first Ages, or Primitive Church: For to this
end, and with this good mine, you shall see them here prefer in effect the
foresaid Eastern Custom of celebrating Easter used by the Britans and Scots,
before the Catholic Custom of Rome; albeit they well know how many Ages agone
it has been condemned not only for Error, but also for Heresy; The Sectaries
of our time allow of the celebrating Easter with the Jews.
yea though themselves do practice the contrary Custom at this day in England and
Germany. For that this is also a knack of these good men, to speak one thing
for advantage, and practice another. As for Example when the Question is about
all those Books of the Old and New Testament which by Luther and Lutherans are
rejected from the Canon of Canonical Scriptures, as Ecclesiasticus, Judith,
Hester, Macchabees, St. James Epistle, the Apocalypse, and other like: When we
reprehend the Lutherans for this point, our Protestants of England take their
parts, and defend them stoutly, as we see by the Writings of Fulk, Camp. in
ration. reddit. cap. 1.
Chark, Whitaker, and others, against F. Campian, that objected the same to
Luther and his Followers; and yet on the other side they set the same Books
forth in their English Bibles, as Books of the Scriptures. What dealing, I pray
you, is this? For either they be Scriptures, and consequently of Infallible
Truth, or no. If the first, then why do you defend the Lutherans, that call
them in doubt? If the second, why do you set them forth to the people among
Scriptures?

Luther 's Opinion of Easter. Lib. de Council.
15. The like Example may be taken from Martin Luther, who in his Book de
Conciliis does persuade the German Princes to observe Easter Day as an
immovable Feast, whenever it falls out, without expecting Sunday, as the
Roman Church does; Gal. 4.
which point he says is contrary to the Apostle, forbidding us to observe
Days, Months, and Years. And yet I do not hear but that He, and other Lutherans
to this day, do observe the Roman Use in practice of their Church concerning
this point.

And the very same may be noted here of our English Calvinists; who though in
Practice of the English Church do observe the same Roman Custom, as all men do
know, yet in their Writings they are content to impugn the same, as a matter
coming from Rome; which you may see notoriously performed by John Bale, John
Bale defends the Jewish keeping of Easter. lib. 3. c. 25.
a chief Gospeller in King Henry VIII. and King Edward's days, who treating of
the former Disputation between Colman the Scottish Bishop and St. Wilfrid the
English Abbot, in the foresaid Council of Northumberland related by Saint Bede,
praises highly the first, to wit Colman, together with his Learning and Piety
in defending the Jewish Custom; but scoffeth very contemptously and spitefully
at the second, that propugned the Catholic Roman Use, notwithstanding that Saint Bede (as before you have heard) calls St. Wilfrid Virum doctissimum, a most
learned man, and other ways also for his Holiness extolleth him exceedingly,
affirming among other points, That for his rare Learning and great Virtue he
was made Archbishop of all the Kingdom of Northumberland, divided after him
into two Bishoprics, York and Lindisferne; and when afterward (as to the best
men happens) he was persecuted and driven out by violence of King Egfrid from
his said Archbishopric, Bed. l. 3. c. 25. and l. 4. c. 3.14. An. Dom. 677, 678.
he went and preached to the South Saxons, and converted all that Kingdom,
together with the Isle of Wight, working many Miracles in like manner among
them; whereby he is truly called, the Apostle of Sussex.

16. Thus writes Bid of St. Wilfrid Apostle of the South Saxons, who
vanquished also in the former Disputations B. Colman, and converted thereby
King Oswyn from his former Rite of observing Easter with the Jews, (which he
had learned during his Education in Scotland) to follow the Roman Use. But what
(think you) says John Bale thereof? You shall hear in his own words: Stulte
respondit Wilfridus, Bal. cent. 1. script. Brit.
(says he) etc. Wilfrid answered like a Fool, saying, that the Apostle St.
John did play the Jew in many things, etc. So says Bale; which words, besides
the Contumely, contain a most false Lie, and Slander also; Bed. l. 3. c. 25.
for that Wilfrid said not so, as in Saint Bede may be seen, but only that St.
John might tolerate, perhaps, for a time certain Rites of the Old Law, as some
of the other Apostles also had done (and namely St. Paul in circumcising
Timothy) to bury the Synagogue with Honor, Act. 20.
etc.

17. But hearken yet further how this new Gospeller, and old Apostate-Fryer,
goes forward against this holy Man: Bal. cent. 1. script. Brit. in Colman.
Temporum (says he) calculatores Evangelistis opponit; Wilfrid did oppose the
Roman Computists, or Calculators of times, against the Authority of the
Evangelists. This is an open Lie, as the place in Bid will testify; for he
says only, that perhaps one cause why the rude simplicity of the ancienter
sort of Scottish Christians embraced the Jewish Custom at the beginning,
amongst other things might be, Absurd calumniations of John Bale.
for that no learned Calculator of the Roman Use had in those days arrived unto
them. He says not one word of opposing this to the Evangelists; and yet by the
way do you note, that this false Apostata would have his Reader think that this
Jewish Heretical Custom is conform to the Evangelists, than which nothing can
be spoken more wickedly. Bal. ibid.


18. But let us go forward, and see what ensues: In fine (says he) suis
praevaluit Imposturis, dementatis qui aderant Regibus, etc. In the end Wilfrid
in his Disputation prevailed by his Impostures, having bewitched the two Kings
that were present, King Oswyn and King Egfrid. Did you ever hear a more
shameless tongue? But this he wrote of St. Wilfrid, ( Obiter, and by the way)
in the Narration he makes of B. Colman. But when he comes to talk of him in
particular and severally, he is far more bitter and impudent against him;
telling us first, how that after Wilfrid had been in France, Italy and Rome, to
study, Bal. cent. 1. in Wilfrid.
and there learned the Mathematical Calculations of times out of the Gospels:
Reversus in Patriam, Romanas Consuetudines, contra Quartadecimanos, (sic enim
pios homines tunc derisorie vocabant) disceptationibus in Synodo publicis
defendebat, gerebatque circa collum reliquiarum, quas Roma tulerat, capsulam
quandam, etc. Et Archiepiscopus denique ob haec and his similia constitutus,
bis infra spatium 45 annorum, non ob Regum insolentiam, ut Polidorus immodeste
scribit, sed ob suam temeritatem, imo malitiam atque neguitias plures, A most
malicious speech of Bale against St. Wilfrid.
Archiepiscopatu pulsus est, and longo tandem confectus senio, periit Anno
Christi 710. He returning from Rome to his Country, did defend by public
Disputations in a Synod the Roman Customs against these men, (who being Pious
and Godly, were called scoffingly in those days Quartadecimans) he carried
about his Neck a certain Box of Saints Relics, which he brought with him from
Rome: And being for these and other like things made Archbishop, he was driven
out twice within 45 years from his Archbishopric; and this not by the Insolency
of the Kings that drove him out (as Polidor does immodestly write) but rather
for his own Rashness, yea Malice, and many Wickednesses, etc. And so at length
being consumed with Old Age, he perished in the year of Christ 710.

19. Behold here a Narration worthy the Spirit of a new Gospeller and old
Apostata, against so Venerable and Worthy a Pillar of our Primitive English
Church as was St. Wilfrid! Crimes objected by Bale to St. Wilfrid.
Mark how he is taxed for traveling and studying at Rome, for defending by
public Disputations the Roman Custom of celebrating Easter, which yet was
defended and decreed openly by the General Council of Nice, as before you have
heard, and after shall be proved; for bearing a Box of Relics about his Neck
brought from Rome, which no doubt is one of the things that most troubles the
Spirit of John Bale, as it did the Devils and wicked Spirits in England, who
cried, and were cast out by the same, as you may read in them that write his
Life.

20. Moreover he says, That for his own Wickedness he was driven out of his
Archbishopric, and so finally perished in the year 710. As for his perishing,
if he perished that lived so austere a Religious Life, converted so many
thousand English Heathens to Christian Faith, wrought so many Miracles as are
recorded of him; then woe to Us, that cannot imitate so great Holiness, and woe
to John Bale, that ran out of Religion, and being a Friar took a Wench named
Faithful Dorothy; and that, as himself braggeth, Bal. cent. 5. descript. Brit.
fol. 244.
Neque ab homine, neque per hominem, sed ex speciali Christi dono; Neither from
man, nor by man, but by the special Gift of Christ, as though Christ did use to
divide such Gifts to Friars that had vowed Chastity. And how good a Fellow he
became afterward, and how pleasant a Companion, you may understand by his own
words, when writing of his Works he says, Cent. ibid.
Facetias and jocos sine certo numero feci; I have written Jests and Pastimes
without any certain number; (a fit Argument for a new Gospelling Friar!) But
yet how far this exercise of Jesting was from the Gravity and Holiness of St.
Wilfrid, no man can doubt. And so himself (miserable man!) may be thought to
have perished, while the other reigns eternally in Heaven.

21. And as for Refutation of the horrible Slander, That for his Wickedness St.
Wilfrid was driven out of his Archbishopric; I have no better means present,
than to oppose against this lying Apostata the Universal Consent of all
Antiquity, especially those that wrote his Life; as Saint Bede, and after him
Hedius, Odo, Fridegenus, Petrus Blesensis, and others, who have written both
his Life and Death, as of a great Saint; and his Memory and Festival
Celebration is held throughout the Universal Church upon the 12th day of
October, See the Martyrology of Vsuard. and the Annot. of Molan. die 12. Oct.
and Baron. upon the Romans Martyr. eodem die.
as all Martyrologies do testify. And thus much of the Insolency of John Bale
against the person of St. Wilfrid.

22. But now, whereas further he is not ashamed to defend the Jewish Custom,
and the Quartadecimans condemned for it, saying, That they were pious men, and
were called by the nickname of Quartadecimans for a scoff only; I am forced to
deal further therein, and to show him first to be an Heretical and most
shameless Calumniator, for that the name of Quartadecimani, or Quatuordecimani,
(signifying those that observe the fourteenth day of the Moon of March to
celebrate Easter) is an old name appointed to those that held that Heretical
Use for many Ages agone, as may appear by St. Epiphanius, that wrote 1200 years
agone, whose words are these: Epiph. haeres. 50.
Emersit rursus mundo alia Haeresis Tesseradecatitarum appellata, quos
Quartadecimanos quidam appellant; There is another Heresy sprung up in the
World of some that are called in Greek Tesseradecatites, which others in Latin
do call Quartadecimans, etc. The Explication of which words St. Augustine after
him, in his Book of Heresies written to Quod-vult-Deus, does set down thus:
Aug. har. 29.
Hinc appellati sunt, quod non nisi quartadecima Luna mense Martio Pascha
celebrant; These People are called by the Greek words Tesseradecatites, and by
the Latin Quartadecimans, for that they do celebrate Easter upon the fourteenth
day of the Moon of March. Unde etiam Quartadecimani cognominati sunt, says
Nicephorus, lib. 4. Histor. cap. 36. for which cause they are called also
Quartadecimans.

23. And yet further the same men were called also by a third name of
Paschatites, as appears both by St. Philastrius Bishop of Brixia, somewhat
before St. Epiphanius; who in his Catalogue of Heresies numbering up these
Paschatites, Philast. in catal. hares.
yields the reason of their name in these words: Qui asserunt quartadecima
Luna celebrandum esse Pascha, non autem sicuti Ecclesia Catholica celebrat; Who
affirm that Easter Day is to be celebrated upon the fourteenth of the Month of
March, (upon whatsoever day it shall fall out, and not as the Catholic Church
does accustom to expect the Sunday.

24. Well then, we see that St. Wilfrid, and other Roman Catholics of his time,
did not invent the name of Quartadecimani for a scoff to disgrace godly men
thereby, as ungodly John Bale blusheth not to avouch; but that it is an old
name, invented and appointed by the Universal Primitive Church, to them that
defended obstinatly the Jewish Custom of celebrating Easter Day strictly upon
the fourteenth day of the Moon of March, according to the Prescript of the
Mosaical Law; which Custom has been accounted naught, Jewish, and Heretical,
for the space of 1400 years, to wit, ever since the Decree of St. Victor, Pope
of Rome, against the same, since which time all Authors that have written of
Heresies, have held for Heretics those that defended this Custom; as may appear
first by Tertullian, Tert. de praescrip. advers. Haeres.
that lived in that very time of Pope Victor, or presently after; as also by
the first Council of Nice, which was held some hundred years after Victor
again, and Victor's Decree therein confirmed; as after again in the Council of
Antioch, Council. Ant. cap. 1.

Council. Laod. cap. 7.

Theod. l. 3. c. ult. de fab. haer. Niceph. l. 4. hist. c. 36. Damasc. haeres.
50.


gathered together almost 50 years after that of Nice; and somewhat after that
again, by the Council of Laodicea; and then by Philastrius and Epiphanius
before cited; and finally by St. Augustine, Theodoretus, Nicephorus, Damascenus,
and others that ensued. And the Defenders of this Heresy, (howsoever John Bale
and his Fellows will sanctify them now again for pious men, for that they hold
against the Roman Church) were so odious to the Catholic Fathers, even of the
Greek and Eastern Church, especially after the Determination of the Council of
Nice, (which Determination, though it be not extant now in the said Councils
Decrees, yet is it testified sufficiently, both by Theodoretus, and the Letters
of Constantine himself, Theod. l. 6. c. 9. Eusebius. l. 3. de vit. Constant. c.
17, 18. Socrat. l. 6. hist. c. 10, 20.
recorded by Eusebius, that Socrates in his Story writes of St. John
Chrysostom, Archbishop of Constantinople, these words: Eis, qui in Asia Festum
Paschatis quartodecimo die mensis primi celebrabrant, Ecclesias, non secus quam
Novatianis, ademit. St. Chrysostom did take away Churches throughout his
Jurisdiction from those that in Asia did celebrate the Feast of Easter upon the
fourteenth of March, no less than from the Novatian Heretics themselves: And no
less does the same Author report of Leontius Bishop of Ancyra in Asia, and
other Eastern Bishops.

25. And the reason hereof was not only for that by this different Custom of
celebrating Easter there grew great Schisms amongst Christians, but for that
indeed the true Formality of this Heresy (consisting in that they would make
it of necessity to keep the Old Law in this behalf) was begun first by an
Heretic called Blastus, as appears by Tertullian, who (to use his own words)
says thus: Latenter Judaismum introducere voluit, dicens, Tert, l. de praesc.
cont. haeres.
Pascha non aliter custodiendum esse, nisi secundum Legem Moysis quartodecimo
mensis. He meant covertly to bring in Judaism, affirming that Easter was not to
be kept, but according to the Law of Moses, upon the fourteenth day of the
first Month. Why the Asian Custom of celebrating Easter was condemmed.
For refutation of which Heresy, Tertullian says, Quis autem nesciat, quoniam
Evangelica gratia evacuatur, si ad Legem Christus redigitur? Who does not know
but that the grace of Christ's Gospel is made void, if Christ be reduced again
to the Observation of the Mosaical Law?

26. This then was the very essential point of this Heresy, and of them that
defended the same; to wit, That they would bind Christians to the observation
of this point according to the Mosaical Law. Against which point of Obligation
St. Paul is so earnest in many places of his Epistles, as he resisted St. Peter
openly, for that by his Conversation only he did seem to force or bind men to
Judaical Observations: Gentes cogis Judaizare: Gal. 2.
you do force Gentiles to follow the Jews. And for this cause he wrote so
earnestly to the Galatians: Ecce, ego Paulus dico vobis, si circumcidamini,
Christus nihil vobis proderit; Gal. 5.
Behold, I Paul do testify unto you, That if you do circumcise your selves,
(or use this Mosaical Ceremony) Christ shall profit you nothing.

27. And again, he tells them in the same place, That whosoever uses but
this one Ceremony of Circumcision, How the celebrating of some Ceremonies or
Customs for a time might be lawful.
binds himself thereby to the observation of all the Old Law, and
consequently does deprive himself of the whole Grace of Christ; which yet is to
be understood (as ancient Fathers do expound) after the Gospel of Christ was
fully divulged, and in them that did use any of these Ceremonies as of
necessity; for that otherwise we read of the Apostles themselves, gathered
together in Council, that they gave leave to Christians for a time at the
beginning, abstinere a sanguine and suffocato, Acts 15.29.
to abstain from Blood, and that which is strangled, or rather did ordain the
same: which yet afterward was taken away again by Authority of the Church; so
as it is evident that the toleration was for a time only, and as a thing
indifferent without obligation. And for like respect we read of St. Paul
himself, that albeit afterward he did forbid to the Galatians the use of
Circumcision with such severity as you have heard, yet at the beginning he
circumcised Timothy for respect of the Jews, as St. Luke testifies, for that
the Gospel was not yet so far preached, Acts 16.3.
as it made the Observations of the Mosaical Law to be wholly unlawful;
especially if they were used as things indifferent, and not of necessity; as it
is probable that both St. John Evangelist, Polycarp, and others of the
East-Church did, How the Roman Use began of celebrating Easter upon a Sunday.
when for a time they used the Festival Day of celebrating Easter, as an
indifferent thing, obliging no man to follow the one or the other Use; to wit,
either this of the fourteenth day commanded by the Old Law, or the other of the
Sunday brought in by Tradition from St. Peter and St. Paul in the Roman Church;
Bed. l. de ratio temp. c. 42. Ignat. ep. 6. ad Magnes. and 8. ad Philip. Apoc.
1.10.
as, among others, St. Protherius Patriarch of Alexandria (by the Testimony of
Saint Bede) does write to Pope Leo: And long before them both, St. Ignatius
Bishop of Antioch (which Church was founded by St. Peter) does testify in
diverse Epistles, that Easter Day was to be celebrated upon a Sunday. Yea, St.
John himself, making mention of dies Dominicus, the Lord's day, in the
beginning of his Apocalypse, as of a solemn Day above the rest, (which no man
will deny to be Sunday) there is no other reason why this day should be called
our Lord's Day with so special Title of Festivity, but only for that it was
dedicated in the Apostles time to the Resurrection of Christ. And if in every
Week it be kept Festival for that respect, and that the whole Sabbath be turned
into it; then much more just is it that the great Sabbath of Christ's
Resurrection should be once a year celebrated upon this day. Yet was the
matter, as you have heard, left for arbitrary and indifferent for diverse years
in Asia, without constraint on either side.

28. But when in process of time the Bishops of Rome, especially Pope Pius I.
and Victor, had perceived that by this Toleration and Difference of
Observation, not only Schisms and Dissension grew, but Heresy also and Judaism
was meant to be brought in; then the said Pius I. in the year of Christ 148.
(as Eusebius testifies) made a Decree against the Asian Jewish Observation;
Eusebius. in Chron. an. 148. De consecrat. dis. 3. cap. Nosse. and ibid. dis. 4.
cap. Celebritatem. Eusebius. l. 5. hist. c. 23, 24.
and after him again, in the next Age following, Pope Victor seeing the same
inconveniences greatly to increase, wrote a Letter to Polycrates Bishop of
Ephesus to gather a Synod against it about the year of Christ 249, as Eusebius
testifies. And when he perceived, that both He and diverse Asian Bishops did
stand more stiffly in defense thereof than he expected; yea, that they began not
only to show obstinacy therein against the former Decree of Pope Pius and the Sea of Rome, but to draw near also to the very formality of Heresy before
mentioned, to wit, that it was necessary to observe the Fourteenth Day; nay
further, that it was ex Evangelii praescripto, and secundum Regulam and Normam
Fidei, by the Prescription of the Gospel, and according to the Rule and Norm of
Faith, Ibid. cap. 22.
as the said Polycrates in his Epistle to Pope Victor writes: When Victor (I
say) saw this, he resolved, after Counsel taken by Conference with diverse
Synods both of the West and East Churches, The Decree of Pope Victor about
keeping Easter.
to Excommunicate those Asian Bishops that resisted, if they would not agree.
Which Determination albeit Irenaeus and some others at that time did mislike,
and dehort Pope Victor from it, as a thing perilous and scandalous, and
subject to many troubles, (as Eusebius reports,) yet did never any of them
say that he could not do it; but rather, when he had done it indeed, they did
accommodate themselves thereunto both in West and East, ratifying and
confirming the same by diverse particular Synods, Niceph. l. 4. c. 36.
as Nicephorus recounteth; to wit, in Jerusalem, Caesarea, Tyrus, Ptolomais,
Corinth, Lions of France, where St. Irenaeus himself was Bishop, and other
places, etc.

29. And finally the Council of Nice confirmed the same, as the Fathers thereof
do testify by their particular Letters to the Clergy of Alexandria, whose
words are these, as Theodoretus relates them; Theod. l. 6. c. 9.
Scitote controversiam de Paschate susceptam, prudenter sedatam esse: Ita ut
omnes fratres, qui Orientem incolunt, jam Romanos, nos, and omnes vos, sint
consentientibus animis in eodem celebrando deinceps sequuturi. You must
understand, that the Controversy about celebrating Easter taken in hand by us,
is prudently pacified: so as all our Brethren that inhabit the East-parts will
follow for the time to come the Romans, (or the Roman Church) Us, (and the
Authority of the Council) and all You (of the Egyptian Church) with full
consent of mind in celebrating the same Feast. Note here, That the Council does
put the Authority of the Church of Rome in the first place, even before
Themselves, and then Themselves and the Authority of the Council in the second
place, and those of Alexandria in the third; which is another reckoning than
our Heretics are wont to make of the Roman Church.

30. Constantine also the Emperor, The testimony of Constantine the Emperor.
writing his Letters to all Bishops of the Christian World, that had not been
present at the Council of Nice, nor could come, yields account unto them,
with great Christian Modesty and Zeal, of the chief Matters handled in that
Council: Where coming to speak of the Decree of celebrating Easter, he says
thus: Eusebius. l. 3. de vit. Constant. c. 17.
Cum de sanctissimo Festo Paschatis disceptaretur, communi omnium sententia
videbatur rectum esse, ut omnes ubique uno, eodemque die illud celebrarent:
When the Question was proposed about celebrating the holy Feast of Easter, it
seemed good, by the common consent of all that were present in this Council,
that all Christians should celebrate the same in one and the self-same day;
which day he shows to be Sunday, and refuteth at large the Custom of
celebrating the same with the Jews upon the fourteenth day of the Moon, though it
were a Feria concluding thus: Eusebius. ibid. c. 8.
Quae cum ita se habent, etc. Which things being so, do you willingly embrace
this Decree of the Council as a great Gift of God, and a Commandment sent from
Heaven; forasmuch as whatsoever is decreed by holy Council of Bishops, that
must be ascribed to God's holy Will. Wherefore do you declare and denounce unto
all our dear Brethren living among you, the Decrees of this Council, and namely
the Decree of celebrating this holy Feast, etc.

31. Thus wrote our good British Emperor Constantine, with a far different
Spirit from those Christian Inhabitants of Britanny who afterward defended the
contrary Custom, without respect of holy Decree of the Nicene Council; The
wicked Spirit of our Sectaries.
but far more opposite and contrary is the wicked Spirit of John Bale, John
Fox, and other such latter Brutish rather than British Sectaries, that even in
our days, after that the Roman Catholic Use has been received for thirteen
hundred years since the said Council, they are content, for hatred of the Name
of Rome, to bring it into Controversy again, and to allow rather the Jewish
Use, and to praise them that defend it in our Country, (as you have heard)
rejecting and defacing others that stood for the Catholic Party, though never
otherwise so famous and illustrious for their Learning and Virtue, as Beda,
Agilbert, Wilfrid, and others the chiefest Pillars of our Primitive English
Church were. But this is their shameless Spirit, to dishonor (wherein possibly
they can) their Forefathers.

32. And thus much of this matter, about the first Conversion, or Preaching of
Christian Faith in Britanny under the Apostles. Now will we pass to the more
public Conversion of our Land under King Lucius, which (as in my Ward-word) I
called the First in respect of our two public Conversions from Paganism, so do
I here name it the Second in regard of the former Preaching in the Apostles
Time. About which Conversion, though in effect our Modern Heretics dare not deny
the same, yet shall you hear no less wrangling of them about this than the
former, for the great grief they receive in that it should be said or thought
to come from Rome.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Second Conversion of Britanny under King Lucius, by Pope Eleutherius,
and Teachers sent from him, about the year of Christ 180; and of the notorious
absurd Cavillations of Heretics about the same also.

ALL that hitherto has been spoken is about the first Preaching of Christian
Religion in Britanny by particular men within the first Age, or hundred years
after Christ; which our Roman Enemies, only upon Envy and Animosity, without
any one Testimony of Antiquity, will needs take from Rome and the Roman Church,
and give it to the Grecians of Asia, and to the East parts, as you have heard.
Now do follow two other more famous and public Conversions of the said Island
under the two renowned Popes of Rome, and by their special Industry; which are
acknowledged and registered by the whole Christian World, and do so much press
the Spleen and move the Gall of our Rome-biters, as they leave no corner of
their Wits unsifted to discredit or reject the same.

Reasons moving King Lucius to enquire of Christian Religion.
2. The first Conversion was (as the Warder says) under Pope Eleutherius
toward the end of the second Age after Christ; when King Lucius of Britanny
hearing of the great and horrible Persecutions of Christians in Rome, and of
their often Martyrings, and that they remained constant notwitstanding in their
Christian Faith, to all men's admiration, and that their number did increase
daily, even of the chiefest Nobility, and that two worthy Senators in
particular, Pertinax and Tretellius, had been lately converted from Paganism to
profess Christ; yea, that the Emperor himself, Marcus Aurelius, then living,
began to be a Friend to Christians in respect of a famous Victory obtained by
their Prayers, Baron. in annal. Ecc. an. Christi 183. tom. 2.
(all which things Baronius shows the Emperor's Legate in England to have
told Lucius:) For these causes (I say) and for that he hated the Romans and
their Old Religion, to whom he understood the Christians to be contrary, he
resolved to be instructed in that Religion. And understanding the chief
Fountain thereof to be at Rome, contented not himself either with Instructions
he might have at home by Christians there, nor yet from the Christian Bishops
flourishing then in France, as St. Irenaeus, Photinus, and others, but sent men
to Rome to demand Preachers of Eleutherius the Pope; who directed to him two
Romans, When K. Lucius was converted.
named Fugatius and Damianus, by whom the said King and his Country were
converted about the year of Christ 180, as John Fox holds) but as Baronius
thinks 183; from whom Pamelius; Genebrard, Nauclerus, and other
Chronographers do little dissent; though Marianus Scotus does put it in the year
177. And this Conversion of Britanny under King Lucius, is testified both by
the ancient Books of the Lives of the Roman Bishops, attributed by some to
Damasus, as also by the ancient Ecclesiastical Tables and Martyrologies yet
extant, as Baronius proves; and by Bed de gestis Angl. l. 1. c. 4. and de sex.
aetat. sub. Ant. Vero. Ado in chron. sub. Commodo Imp.

Mar. Scot. in 6. atat.

Pol. Virg. l. 1.


Saint Bede in his History of England, and after him by Ado Archbishop of
Trevers, and Marianus Scotus anno 177, and all Authors since.

3. This then being so, and John Fox the Father of Lies not ^^^ing openly to
impugn the same, yet grants he the thing with such difficulty and strainings,
and tells the story with so many hems and haws, ifs and ands, Interpretations
and Restrictions, as a man may see how greatly it grieveth him to confess the
substance thereof; I mean of this second Conversion by Pope Eleutherius: and
therefore he turns himself hither and thither; now granting, now denying; now
doubting, now equivocating, as is both ridiculous and shameful to behold. For
as on the one side he would gladly deny the Truth of this Story, so on the
other side, being pressed with the Authorities before alleged, and general
consent of all Writers, he dares not to utter himself plainly, but
endeavors to leave the Reader in suspense, and doubtful whether it were true
or no; which is the effect most desired commonly of Heretical Writers, to bring
all things in doubt and question, and there to leave the Reader. John Fox his
Tergiversation.

Fox Act. and Mon. p. 96. col. 2.


And to this purpose does the Fox tell us first, That diverse Authors of later
Times do not agree about the certain year wherein this Conversion of King
Lucius did happen; some saying more, and some saying less. But what is this to
the overthrow of the thing it self? For that about the particular times wherein
things were done, there is often found no small variety among principal
Writers, and about principal Points and Mysteries of our Faith; as, about the
coming of the Magi, and Martyrdom of the Infants; about the time of Christ's
Baptism, yea also of his Passion, what Year and Day each of these things
happened; which yet does not derogate from the certainty of the things
themselves.

4. And this is his first Cavil, or rather light Skirmish, First Cavil.
whereby he would somewhat batter or weaken the credit of the Story, before he
comes to lay the full Assault, which ensues immediately, with seven double
Cannons planted by him, which he calls seven good conjectural Reasons,
against the Tradition of Antiquity about this Conversion of Britanny from Pope
Eleutherius. Wherein notwithstanding you must note, That he proposes the
Controversy as though his purpose were only to prove that Pope Eleutherius was
not the first that converted England; which thing, The effect of 7 Cannons
planted by Jo. Fox to batter the story of K. Lucius conversion from Rome.
as it might be granted in the sense before often touched, if he spoke or meant
plainly, so finding him to deal guilefully, and to go about to prove in the end
(as appears by his Conclusion) that Eleutherius converted not King Lucius at
all, but only helped perhaps to convert him, or to instruct him better in
Religion (being a Christian before) I am constrained to examine briefly the
Force (or rather Fraud and Folly) of these his seven Arguments, to the end you
may judge thereby, how he behaveth himself in so main a Volume as his Acts and
Monuments do contain, seeing that in this one matter he bears himself so
fondly and maliciously, And for brevities sake I will reduce the said seven
Arguments to three general Heads or Kinds; showing first, that all are
Impertinent; secondly, that some, besides Impertinency have also gross
Ignorance; thirdly, that others, besides these two commendations, have Fraud
and plain Imposture in them.

5. To the first kind of Impertinent do appertain his fourth, fifth, and sixth
Arguments handled by me before against the Magdeburgians, to wit, that Saint Bede
said in his time, That the Britans celebrated Easter after the fashion of the
East-Church; that Petrus Cluniacensis testifies the same in his days of some
Scots; Fox his first kind of Arguments Impertinent.
and that Nicephorus says that Simon Zelotes preached the Gospel in England.
All which three Arguments, as they do serve to no purpose here, but to show
that Fox steals all out of the Magdeburgians, so no other Answer is needful
to be made unto them, than that which before has been written; seeing that,
all being granted that here is said, yet proves it nothing that the Faith of
Britanny came not from Rome; and consequently all is impertinent.

The second kind of Arguments, Impertinent and Ignorant.

Fox page 95.


6. Of the second sort both Impertinent and Ignorant Arguments, are his second
and third probations: My second reason is (says he) out of Tertullian, who
living near-about, or rather somewhat before this Eleutherius, testifies in
his Book contra Judaeos, that the Gospel was dispersed abroad by the sound of
Apostles in diverse Countries; and then among other Kingdoms he recites also
the parts of Britanny, etc. Thus you see how impertinent it is to the purpose
we have in hand; for that it concludes not but that Pope Eleutherius after the
Apostles time might convert King Lucius and his People publicly by Fugatius and
Damianus, as we affirm. And then secondly, it includes notorious Error and
Ignorance, The Age of Tertullian falsified.

Tert. lib. de pallio c. 3. n. 42.


in that he says Tertullian lived before Eleutherius; for that it is proved
out of Tertullian's own Works and Words, especially in his Book de Pallio,
(wherein he yields the reason wherefore he changed his Habit from a Gown to a
Cloak, as Christians were wont to do in those days) that he was converted to
the Christian Faith in the tenth year of Pope Victor, that was Successor to
Eleutherius, which was Anno Domini 196. And moreover, he wrote his Book contra
Judaeos, cited by Fox, diverse years after that again, as Pamelius and others do
demonstrate in his Life. Jac. Pamelius in vit. Tertull. page 29.
So as Eleutherius reigning fifteen years before Victor (as all Authors do
agree) it follows that he was Pope twenty five years before Tertullian was a
Christian: And for so much as the Conversion of England is assigned to have been
in the fifth year of Eleutherius, it follows that Tertullian was not a
Christian in twenty years after that time. And thus much for his second Reason;
now let us hear his third.

Fox ibid. col. 2. n. 73.
7. My third probation (says he) I deduct out of Origin, whose words are these;
Britanniam in Christianam consentire Religionem: That Britanny did consent in
Christian Religion; whereby it appears the Faith of Christ was sparsed here
in England before Eleutherius. Mark his own Contradiction; mark his Inference,
and note his Imposture. He affirms out of Origin, That Britanny did consent
in Christian Religion; and yet he says in his Inference, Whereby it appears
it was sparsed in England; Sparsing imports, that particular men here and
there were converted; Consent imports a general Conversion: So that by
Origen's words of consent it may seem, that he meant the public Conversion made
by Eleutherius; and by Fox's own false Interpretation and foolish Inference he
is made to say, that there were only certain sparkles of Christian Religion in
his days in Britanny. Orig. hom. 4. in Ezechiel circa medium.
But the true words of Origin corrupted by Fox do make the matter more clear;
who disputing against the Jews, urges them with this Question, Quando enim
terra Britanniae ante adventum Christi in unius Dei consensit Religionem? For
when did the Land of Britanny agree in the Religion of one God Before the
coming of Christ?

8. Here you see the words of Origin, first not truly but corruptly alleged
before by John Fox; and secondly, that Origin does speak them of a consent in
Religion throughout all the Land of Britanny, and thereby seems to signify,
not the particular Conversion of several men before Eleutherius his Time, (as
Fox would enforce it,) but rather the public Conversion (as I have said) under
King Lucius and Eleutherius; which Conversion, according to the former Account
of Fox himself, The Age of Origin perverted.

Eusebius. l. 7. hist. c. 1.


(who says it was in the year of Christ 180) was about 76 years before the
Death of Origin, for that (as Eusebius testifies) Origin died in the year of
Christ 256, and was of age 69 when he died, so as he was born seven years after
our said Conversion under Lucius, and consequently he might mean of this
Conversion in his former Homily. And it is not only Ignorance, but wilful
Malice and Imposture also, in John Fox, to make his Reader believe (as before
in Tertullian, so in this Man) that he was either Equal or Elder than Pope
Eleutherius. And for this cause, that Origin in his foresaid Homily must needs
mean of a former Conversion of Britanny, that came not from Rome. Consider the
Man's Honesty and Wit in these shifts.

9. And albeit this may be sufficient, and more than enough, to show his false
Dealing and lack of Fidelity in every thing he handles, yet will I add his two
last Arguments, which he calls his first and seventh; and in which (as I said
before) that not only the former two qualities of Impertinency and Error are to
be found, but manifest Fraud also, and wilful Deceit. Let us hear his words.
But first I must both pray and prevent the Reader to take in patience the
hearing of one and the self-same thing many times repeated, A request and
prevention to the Reader.
for that we having to deal with three several Parties, that do tell us Tales
by retail one to another of them, (to wit, Sir Francis, Sir Fox, and Messieurs
the Magdeburgians) we cannot well see or set down what each of them says, and
borrows one of another, but by repeating the same things; yet shall it be
very briefly. Thus then writes Fox, in that which he calls his first
probation against the first Conversion of England by Eleutherius.

10. My first probation (says he) I take out of the Testimony of Gildas, Fox.
page 96.
who in his History affirms plainly, That Britanny received the Gospel in the
time of Tiberius the Emperor, and that Joseph of Arimathea was sent by Philip
the Apostle from France to Britanny. Gild. lib. de Victoria Aurel. Ambrosii.
Here you see first not only crambe recocta, according to the Proverb; that is
to say, Coleworts and other Trash twice sodden; but many times also both sodden
and set before us: for all this you heard before more than once, both out of
Sir Francis and the Magdeburgians. And when all is granted, yet is the whole
Argument but a vain and childish Cavil; for it proves only that Damianus and
Fugatius, sent by Eleutherius, were not the very first of all that preached
Christian Faith in Britanny; which we never affirmed, but only that Britanny
was converted publicly under Eleutherius, which this impugneth not. And
secondly, for the receiving of Christ's Faith under Tiberius the Emperor, I
have showed before that it is unlikely, seeing Tiberius lived but five years
after the Ascension of our Savior, and that the place alleged for it out of
Gildas (if he mean the true Gildas now extant) proves it not, but only that
Christ himself appeared to the World in the time of Tiberius, and that the
Faith of Christ entered Britanny afterward under Claudius, as may appear
evidently to him that will read and examine the place with attention. Which the
Fox perceiving, thought it not best to allege us the said true Gildas
published by Polydor Virgil, and allowed by all Learned Men of Christendom,
whose Title is, A forged Gildas brought in by Fox.
De excidio Britanniae, but runs to a forged Gildas, De Victoria Aurelii
Ambrosii, to confirm his Allegation withal; of which Gildas the said Polydor,
after due Examination of the matter, writes as follows:

11. Extat item alter libellus (ut tempestive lectorem nefariae fraudis
admoneamus) qui falsissime inscribitur Gildae commentarium, Pol. Vir. l. 1.
hist. page 16.
haud dubie a quodam pessimo impostore compositum, etc. Sane is nebulo long
post homines natos impudentissimus, etc. There is extant besides, another Book
also (that I may by this occasion advertise the Reader in time of a wicked
Imposture) which is most falsely entitled, The Commentary of Gildas, devised,
no doubt, by some naughty Deceiver, etc. Truly he was the most impudent Knave
that ever lived, etc. Thus said Polydor of the Inventer of this Book; and as
much would he have said of Sir John Fox, that obtrudeth the same for a true
Author, if he had lived in our days. And seeing that the Calvinists themselves
of Heidelberg in Germany, taking upon them to set forth all the British
Writers, Anno 1587, (as Gildas, Geffrey of Monmouth, Ponticus Virunnius, and
others) durst not set forth this feigned Gildas alleged by Fox, but only the
former true Gildas printed before by Polydor; it is a token that Fox is more
impudent and more greedy to deceive, than they; as you shall much more perceive
by his last Argument ensuing.

Fox page 96. Fox's last and falsest Argument.
12. For my seventh Argument (says he) I may make my probation by the plain
words of Eleutherius, by whose Epistle written to King Lucius we may understand
that Lucius had received the Faith of Christ in this Land before he sent to
Eleutherius for the Roman Laws; for so the express words of the Letter do
manifestly purport, as hereafter follows to be seen.

Thus says he, and cites for his proof in the Margin, Ex Epistola Eleutherii
ad Lucium; and by this last and strongest Argument of his, the silly Fellow
thinks to strike the Nail dead, and to prove that King Lucius was a Christian
before he received Preachers from Pope Eleutherius; and consequently, that all
is false which Antiquity has held, attributing the Conversion of that Kingdom,
and of the King himself, to the Bishop of Rome. For which cause Fox adds
presently, Peradventure Eleutherius might help something either to convert the
King, or else to increase the Faith newly sprung up then among the People.

13. So defines he the matter; and consider, I pray you, what he attributes
to Eleutherius in this Conversion: Peradventure (says he) he might help
something to King Lucius his Conversion. And is not this a great matter,
especially being qualified (as it is) with the restriction Peradventure? If a
man should say of Aesop's Fables, that peradventure some of them in some points
might be true; were it not as much as John Fox does attribute to all this
Consent of Authors for this Conversion under Pope Eleutherius; seeing he says
not absolutely, Eleutherius did convert King Lucius, or help indeed thereunto,
but that peradventure he might help something, etc.? You may mark the
diminutives used by Fox to lessen the benefit, to wit, peradventure, might,
something, etc. and thereby consider what a holy stomach he has to Rome,
Contempt of the Testimony of Antiquity.
and what little account he makes of the Authority or Consent of all
Antiquity, when they make against him.

14. But now let us weigh further his Proofs, and by them also his Frauds and
Impostures. First of all for Proofs, that King Lucius was a Christian before he
dealt with Eleutherius, he alleges the Epistle it self of Eleutherius; which
he sets down as authentical, citing only in the Margin, Ex vetusto codice
Regum antiquorum, taken out of an old Book of old Kings, but tells not where
we shall find this old Book; and it may be (perhaps) of as good credit (if it
were found) as the Book of Gildas before alleged, De Victoria Aurelii
Ambrosii, or as many other fabulous things be in the Story of Geffrey of
Monmouth, and John Fox after him.

About the Epistle of P. Eleutherius to K. Lucius cited by Fox.

Fox page 96. col. 2. n. 40.


15. And indeed if we consider the beginning of the first words of the Epistle
it self, we shall find certain doubts, which neither Fox nor his Fellows will
ever be able to solve; as first of all, that it was written after Eleutherius
was dead; for so it appears by the Account of Time noted in the Title, which
is this in Latin, as Fox relates: Anno Domini 169 a Passione Christi scripsit
D. Eleutherius Papa, Lucio Regi Britanniae ad correctionem Regis and Procetum
Regni, etc. Which words Fox omitteth to translate into English, for that they
make against him, and therefore would not have his unlearned Reader to
understand the absurdity thereof; for they say, That Pope Eleutherius wrote
this Epistle to Lucius King of Britanny, to correct both Him and the Nobility
of his Kingdom, in the year 169 after the Passion of Christ: To which 169 years
if we add other 33, which Christ lived before his Passion, they make 202; which
is 19 years after Eleutherius's Death, who died in the year of Christ 184, as
all Authors agree. For which cause Fox himself, in this very place, and
elsewhere often, does appoint the Conversion of King Lucius to have been in the
year of Christ 180, and the 10th of Eleutherius his Reign; but this Epistle
appoints it 22 years after, to wit, Anno Domini 102. So wise a man is Fox in
bringing it in!

16. Secondly, this Epistle was written in Latin, and so should Fox have
delivered the same unto us wholly, if he had dealt plainly: Fox's subtilty in
concealing the Original in Latin.
But he has not so done, but only gives us the Title in Latin, without any
Interpretation, as now has been said; and the remnant (or at leastwise so much
as he thought convenient) in English only, and this of his own Translation,
without letting us see the Original; and so he plays the Fox in every thing.
But, to return again to this Latin Title of the Epistle, there is another cause
why John Fox would not translate it into English; and this is, for that it is
said therein that it was written by the Pope ad correctionem Regis, and
Procerum Regni, etc. to correct the King, and Nobility of the Realm: which
proves that the Pope took himself to be their Superior also in those days, and
they to be subject to his correction. For which causes Fox's Scholars,
Holinshead, Hooker, and Harrison, do leave out this Title altogether in their
Chronicles; for that the word Correction upon the King and Nobility, is an
odious thing in these days, especially from Popes.

17. And thus much of the Title, and Fraud used therein. Now let us pass to the
Body of the Epistle. Thus it begins in John Fox's Translation; Fox page 96.
Ye require of us the Roman Laws and the Emperors to be sent over unto you,
which you may practice and put in are within your Realm. The Roman Laws and the
Emperors we may ever reprove, but the Law of God we may not. You have received
of late, through God's Mercy, in the Realm of Britanny the Law of Christ, etc.
Thus says the Epistle, and out of these last words John Fox does frame his
former seventh Argument, That King Lucius had received the Faith of Christ
before he sent to Eleutherius for the Roman Laws. Well, suppose it was so, and
that this sending was a second Embassage some years after his Conversion; how
does this infer that King Lucius was a Christian before he dealt with
Eleutherius, or before he sent the first time unto him; and so that he was
rather converted by Grecians than by Romans, as the next immediate words of Fox
are? And that hence it may be inferred that Eleutherius did rather help perhaps
to his Conversion, or to increase the Faith newly sprung up, than convert him.
Are not these notorious shifts, and shameless windings of our Fox, to delude
his Reader.

18. But you will ask me perhaps, how I do prove that this was a second
Embassage sent by King Lucius to Eleutherius, and the Pope's Answer to the
same? Whereto I say, that this is confessed and proved by Fox himself; who
writing of King Lucius says, That some years after his Conversion, when he had
put his Realm in Order for matters of Religion, he wrote again to have the
Civil and Imperial Laws sent over to him, whereby to govern his Kingdom
according to Christian Religion.

19. All this, I say, does Fox set down afterward very particularly, Fox Act
and Monument page 96. col. 2. n. 30.
showing that after King Lucius and his Realm had received the Baptism of
Christ, were made Christians, and had turned twenty-eight Heathen Flamens, and
three Archflamens, that were before of Gentiles, into so many Christian Bishops
and Archbishops: All this being done and well settled, Act and Mon. ibid.
the foresaid King Lucius (says he) sent again to the said Eleutherius for the
Roman Laws, thereby likewise to be governed, as in Religion now they were
framed accordingly: Unto whom Eleutherius again writes after the tenor of
these words following; Ye require of us the Roman Laws, etc.

20. Whereby it is evident, that this Letter of Eleutherius (if it be true, and
not feigned by Fox) was written to King Lucius some number of years after his
Conversion, seeing he could not setttle his Realm, as here Fox describes, but
in some good space of time. Holinshead, Hooker, and Harrison (Disciples also of
this Fox) in this do take upon them to determine the Time, (though I know not by
what Authority) saying, That it was three years after King Lucius his
Conversion and Baptism. Holinsh. p. 24. descript. Angl. col. 2. n. 40.
The Faith of Christ (say they) being thus planted in the Island, Anno 177, it
came to pass the third year of the Gospel received, that Lucius did send again
to Eleutherius the Bishop, requiring that he might have some brief Epitome of
the Order of Discipline then used in the Church, etc.

The contrariety between Fox and his Scholars.
21. Thus hold they, and that upon this second Embassage followed the foresaid
Letter of Eleutherius to King Lucius. Which if it be true, then let them give
Sentence of their good Father, what an egregious Hypocrit and Deceiver he was,
to argue out of this Letter, That, forasmuch as it appears by the same, that
King Lucius was a Christian when this Letter was written: Ergo, King Lucius was
not converted by Eleutherius, but by some other before him, though perhaps he
might help somewhat to his Confirmation in Religion, etc.

About the substance of Eleutherius's Epistle to K. Lucius 183.
22. But now to the substance of the Letter it self, or rather of the piece or
parcel that it has pleased Fox and these his Scholars to impart with us. You
must note first, That these good Scholars seeing their Master to have left us
this English Epistle of Eleutherius so imperfect and curtailed, as it seems
to have neither end or just beginning, do say that the rest was lost, which yet
Fox tells us not. Secondly, they seeing the Title to make much against them,
left it out, as before has been said. Thirdly, touching the very Corpse it self
of the Epistle set down by him, they put it down so different both in Words,
Sentences, Authorities, and Texts of Scripture, from that which Fox has; as it
shows either the thing to be wholly feigned by Them, or their Master; or that
they have a great Liberty and Privilege to alter the same at their pleasures.

23. And this would be sufficient for this matter; but further perchance you
might demand, Why this Epistle of Eleutherius is alleged and urged so
earnestly by them, seeing it seems to make so little for them? Whereunto I
answer, First Cause.
That the chiefest Causes seem to be two or three. The first, That Fox might
frame thereupon his former foolish Argument, That forasmuch as by this Epistle
it appears that King Lucius was a Christian when this Epistle was written by
Eleutherius, it may seem that Eleutherius converted him not, nor any other sent
from Rome; the falsehood and childishness of which Argument has been
sufficiently laid open before.

Second Cause.
24. The second Cause is, to found two points of Doctrine thereon. The one, That
Scriptures only are sufficient to govern any Kingdom without other
Ecclesiastical, Civil, or Temporal Laws; which yet themselves do not practice,
where they have Dominion, as experience teaches us. The other point is, That
every King is God's Vicar, that is to say, absolute and supreme Head in all
Causes as well Spiritual as Temporal within his Realm; and to this end is
brought in the Testimony of this Letter of Eleutherius, not only by Fox,
Holinshead, Hooker, Harrison, Hastings, and other of that Crew, taking one from
another that Argument; but even their great Champion Jewel, as Holinshead
relates in the first Volume of his Stories.

Hol. l. 4. hist. Ang. c. 19. p. 52.
25. The Reverend Father John Jewel (says he) sometime Bishop of Salisbury,
writes in his Reply unto Harding 's Answer, That the said Eleutherius, for
general Order to be taken in the Realm and Churches here, wrote his advice to
Lucius in manner and form following: Jewel fo. 119.
Ye have received in the Kingdom of Britanny, by God's Mercy, both the Law and
Faith of Christ; ye have both the New and the Old Testament; out of the same,
through God's Grace, by the advice of your Realm make a Law, and by the same,
through God's sufferance, rule your Kingdom of Britanny; for in that Kingdom
you are God's Vicar, etc.

26. These are the words alleged by Master Jewel out of this Epistle; which
differ not much from that which is in Fox and Holinshead: But both of them do
add a third Clause out of the said Epistle, which is this; Fox Acts and Mon. p.
96. Hol. descript. Brit. page 25.
A King has his name of Ruling, and not of having a Realm. You shall be a King
while you rule well; but if you do otherwise, the name of a King shall not
remain with you, but you shall utterly lose and forgo it, which God forbid. And
then makes Holinshead this Annotation in these words; Hitherto out of the
Epistle that Eleutherius sent unto Lucius; wherein many pretty Observations are
to be collected, if time and place would serve to stand upon them.

27. So he says; but what Annotations these are he declares not, though it be
easy to guess by others which he makes in other places: For that in the very
next page before he makes us a very grave Discourse, The first point of
Eleutherius's Epistle.
How that Lucius sent to Rome the second time for a Copy of such politic Orders
as were then used in the Regiment of the Church; but that Eleutherius, for
diverse reasons, thought it best not to lay any more upon the Necks of the New
Converts of Britanny, than Christ and his Apostles had already set down to all
men in the Scriptures. And is not this a wise Discourse? as though no Temporal
Laws were to be made in a Christian Commonwealth, but only those that are set
down in Scriptures. Who sees not the madness of these Conclusions or
Illations? Nay, who does not consider how greatly this matter is against
themselves? That King Lucius dwelling so far off from Rome as he did; yea,
being otherwise an Enemy to the Roman Nation, as these men confess that he was,
did notwithstanding so highly respect, even in those ancient days, the Sea and
Bishop of Rome, that he submitted himself thereto, and demanded from thence
direction, not only in matters of Religion, and Ecclesiastical Laws, but in
Temporal and Civil also; and Eleutherius knowing his own Authority over him and
his, doubted not to appoint them what was to be done. And albeit Mr. Jewel
does call it an Advice, as you have heard, yet the Title of the Epistle
implies more, saying, that it was ad correctionem Regis and Procerum Regni, as
above we have declared. And this for the first point contained in this Epistle.

28. And for the second, How Temporal Princes are God's Vicars also.
wherein Eleutherius says that King Lucius was God's Vicar or Vicegerent (as
Holinshead translateth it) within his own Realm; what Catholic ever denied
this, or that any lawful Temporal Prince is not God's Vicar and Substitute in
governing his People under him? Sure we are, St. Paul speaking even of a
Heathen Prince or Magistrate, says, Romans 13.
Dei enim minister tibi est in bonum; for he is God's Substitute to thee for
thy good. And in another place, teaching Servants how they should obey their
Heathen Lords and Masters, he says, Servi obedite Dominis carnalibus, cum
timore and tremore, Ephesians. 6.
sicut Christo; Servants obey your Carnal or Temporal Lords, as to Christ
himself. And again in the same place, Sicut Domino, and non Hominibus; As unto
our Lord Jesus, and not as unto Men. And does not here the Apostle confess
expressly, that Temporal Lords and Princes, yea though they were Pagans, are
Christ's Vicars and Substitutes in their Government of Temporal Affairs? But
yet I do not think that either Fox or Holinshead will say that they were
Christ's Vicars also in Spiritual Affairs, or Heads of the Church within their
Realms, as by this Epistle of Eleutherius they would make King Lucius seem to
be.

29. And so finally, Whether this Epistle of Eleutherius be true or feigned,
Reasons which make the Epistle of Eleutherius suspected.
it makes little for them, but much rather against them. And there be diverse
things in it which do make it probable that it is a feigned matter. First, for
the time set down in the Title, showing it to be written after Eleutherius was
dead. Secondly, for that neither Fox nor Holinshead would deliver it unto us in
Latin as it was written. Thirdly, for that the Copy set down by Holinshead has
many Texts of Scriptures full little to the purpose, and fondly applied, John
Fox plays Reynard the Fox.
and unworthy the great Learning of Pope Eleutherius; which John Fox
perceiving, like a wily Fox indeed, left them quite out of his Copy; professing
notwithstanding to put down the Epistle wholly, as he found it.

30. Fourthly, the last point of Doctrine therein taught, That Kings are no
longer Kings than they rule well; and do lose and utterly forgo the same, when
they do otherwise; is a Doctrine not fit for Eleutherius, but agreeing rather
with that of Husse and Wickliff mentioned before in the Second Encounter, as
condemned by the General Council of Constance. Encount. 2. c. 4.
And this shall be enough about this first Heretical Cavillation concerning the
Conversion of Britanny under Pope Eleutherius, which our English Sectaries, for
hate to Rome, will needs call in doubt. But not being able to stand in this
quarrel, they fly to another of more moment, which shall be handled in the
ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. V.
Of another Heretical Shift about the former Conversion of Britanny under Pope
Eleutherius and King Lucius, as though the Faith of Rome that was then, did not
remain now; which is reproved by two evident Demonstrations, the first
Negative, the other Affirmative.

WHen all the former Foxly Shifts and Devices will not serve to shake off the
praise of our Britans Conversion from Rome by means of Eleutherius, our Fox
diggeth to himself another starting-hole, whereunto, when he is pressed, to
run; and his good Cub Sir Francis follows him diligently at the heels. The
Fox his words are these: But grant we here, Fox 's Confession, Act, and Monum.
page 96.
that it be as they would have it, (and indeed the most part of our English
Stories do confess it) neither will I greatly stick with them therein: yet what
have they got thereby, when they have cast all their gain? In few words, to
conclude this matter, if so be that the Christian Faith and Religion was first
derived from Rome by Eleutherius, let them but grant to us the same Faith and
Religion that was taught in Rome, and from thence derived hither by
Eleutherius, and we will desire no more: For then was there not any Universal
Pope, 1, 2, 3, 4.
neither any Name or Use of the Mass, nor any Sacrifice Propitiatory, nor any
Transubstantiation, neither any Images of Saints departed set up in the
Churches, etc.

Comparison between the Fox and the Cub.

Wast. p. 192.


2. Thus says the Fox, granting by Testimony of most Writers that which before
he labored so much to impugn. Now let us hear the Cub, how well he has
learned to bark after his Sire: Though it be granted (says he) that Eleutherius
sending hither Preachers from Rome in King Lucius his time, did first convert
this Land to the Christian Faith; I say, there is not now the same Faith in
Rome that was then: There were then no Masses said, no Transubstantiation
known, no setting up of Images in Churches, no Universal Pope, etc.

3. Here you see the self-same Speech, with the self-same Spirit, betwixt the
Cub and the Fox, the Scholar and the Master; but that the Scholar alters
somewhat the order, to cover thereby his borrowing from the other: Nay, we may
note another thing also, which is usual in such people; the Scholar is more
earnest and eager than his Master of whom he took it, and more over-lashing; so
as what the one speaks but doubtfully, the other affirms most resolutely;
what the one says, the other swears. Let them grant us (says Fox) the same
Faith which was then at Rome, and we desire no more. This was somewhat modest,
though False and Hypocritical; for he means it not, whatsoever you grant him,
or prove against him. But what says his Scholar? I I say (quoth he) there is
not now the same Faith in Rome that was then. This is more resolute and
peremptory as you see: For who says it I pray you? I say it (quoth he) as tho
he would challenge the field of him that will dare to deny it, or prove the
contrary. But who are you (Sir) that we should yield unto you this Pythagorical
Authority of ipse dixit? granting all things upon your own Assertion without
further proofs? if you be the Man that so often before have been made a mouse,
and your Credit so many times shaken by showing your false dealing, then may it
be now an Argument rather to the contrary: to wit, Sir Francis says this or
that without alleging any Proof, Ergo it is probable that the matter is either
feigned or falsified, and this consequence you shall see much confirmed both in
him and his Father Fox, by this that here we are to examine.

4. For first, both of them do affirm (as you have heard) and that with great
Asseveration, that in the Time of Eleutherius the Pope, that is to say, in the
second Age after Christ, there was not the Faith in Rome that now is: For that
there was no mention or knowledge then, either of any universal Authority of
the Church or Bishop of Rome, or of the name or use of Masses, or Sacrifice
propitiatory, or of Transubstantiation, or of Images used in Churches, and the
like.

5. To which vain Arguments of both these poor Men, I might answer
sufficiently, by telling them (if they will learn) that albeit it were true in
some sense, that these Doctrins, which here they allege and some other in
Controversy between us, were not found in the Second Age, when Pope
Eleutherius lived, so expressly set forth, as in other Ages afterward, when
better Occasion was offered, and the Times did more permit the same: yet is
this no good Argument to prove, that they were not believed then also in the
Catholic Church. For if this Consequence should be admitted, then as well might
it be admitted also against many other principal Points and Articles of our
Faith, which are acknowledged and believed by Protestants also at this day, tho
not expressly handled, discussed or determined in those first two hundred Years
after Christ: as for Example, the Name and Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, the
two distinct Natures, and one Person in Christ, Points of Religion not expressly
handled or determined by the Church within the first two hundred years.
his two distinct wills, the Virginity of our Blessed Lady both before and
after her Childbirth, the Proceeding of the Holy Ghost, as well from the Son,
as from the Father, etc.

6. All which Points and some others are not found to be handled so clearly and
distinctly by Authors of the first two hundred Years, as afterward, partly for
that they were occupied in other matters against Gentiles and Heretics that
touched not these Points and partly for that General Councils could not yet be
gathered together, to discuss and declare them distinctly; tho no good
Christians will or may doubt, but that they were believed in the Church before,
from Christ downward, and that the General Councils that determined them
afterward for Articles of true Belief against Heretics, that had called them in
question, did not so determine them, as if they had made them Articles which
were not before (for this the Church could not do, as is held by all Catholics)
but only that they being Articles of True and Catholic Belief before, the
Church did now declare them to be such.

Wherefore this being so, I might answer (and I see not how they could reply)
that John Fox and his Scholar may as well deny and call in question all or any
of these foresaid Articles, as the other, which they recite. For that they were
as little, or perhaps less specified in the first two hundred Years, than these
which they object.

7. But I will deal more liberally with our Minister and Knight, Two ways of
Proof; the one negative, the other affirmative.
and will seek to satisfy them with Reason, who do brabble and argue against
us without Reason. I shall endeavor to do the same by two ways, hoping to make
their Folly appear to every indifferent Man by them both. The first shall be
via negativa, the negative way, by putting them to some proof. And the second
shall be affirmative, showing them what Proofs may be brought for our side.
Nothing doubting but that each shall be sufficient to satisfy the equal
Reader: Let the first kind of Argument then, by the way of negative, be this.

8. We deny that the Faith now held in Rome, and namely the Articles here
mentioned of the Pope, Mass, Transubstantiation, and use of Images, were not
believed in Pope Eleutherius's days, as now for the substance of the Doctrine.
And let them prove it if they can, and if they say, that it is hard to prove a
negative, we are content that they prove only an affirmative, whereby the said
negative may be inferred, to wit, that any one of these Doctrins did begin to
enter into the Church after Eleutherius. And to this Proof they are bound in
all equity and reason, as we shall show by our sequent Discourse. For if it be
true, that the Articles and Points of Doctrine here mentioned by Fox and Sir
Francis wherein they differ from us, The first way of argument negative against
Protestants.
be indeed not things heard of, or believed at Rome in the time of Pope
Eleutherius (which yet they deny not, but that in other Ages after they were
generally received) then follows it, that Fox and his Fellows must show the
Time, Place, Men, and Occasion of their beginning, to wit, when, where, and by
what Men, and upon what Causes, and with what Authority, or Induction or
Violence, or by what Deceit, or with what Contradiction of others, these
Doctrins entered first, and were continued in the Church. All which Points we
can show of every other Error or Heresy, that has risen and was held for
such, from Christ's Time to ours.

9. And if either Fox or his Cub, or any of that Kennel can or will show this,
and join issue with us upon this one Point, we do accept thereof, and the
matter may be quickly dispatched. But if this cannot be done, then must we
follow the Rule of St. Augustine held by him for infallible in such Affairs: The
first ground of St. Augustins rule.
to wit, That when any Doctrine is found generally received in the known visible
Churh, at any Time, or in any Age, whereof there is no certain Author, Time, or
Beginning found: then is it sure, that all such Doctrine has come down from
Christ and his Apostles.

10. This does that holy Doctor and great Pillar of Gods Church Saint Augustine
affirm and reiterate in every place of his Works against Heretics of his Time,
which argued, as our Men do, by denying only, and putting Catholics to Proof.
As for Example, against the Donatists, denying the custom of baptizing Infants,
for that it was not in Scripture, nor recorded by Fathers of the first Ages,
Ang. l. 4. de Bapt. cont. Donat. c. 6.
Saint Augustine answers thus, Illa consuetudo, quam and tunc homines sursum
versum aspicientes non videbant a posterioribus institutam, recte ab Apostolis
tradita creditur. That Custom of Baptizing Infants, which Men before us in the
Church looking upward to Antiquity, did not find to have been ordained by them
that came after the first Ages, is rightly believed to have been delivered by
the Apostles.

11. And again in another place speaking of Ecclesiastical Customs, he says,
Quod universa tenet Ecclesia, Lib. 4. de bapt. c. 24.
nec Conciliis institutum sed semper retentum est, non nisi anthoritate
Apostolica traditum rectissime creditur. That, which the universal Church does
hold, and was not instituted by any Council, but has been still retained in
the Church, this we may most justly believe to have come from no other
Authority, than from the Apostles.

And the like Speeches unto this has St. Augustine in diverse other places both
of this Book against the Donatists, as l. 2. c. 7. and l. 5. c. 23. as also
lib. de Vnitat. Ecclesiae. c. 19. and Epistola 118, etc. And as for that he
speaks of Institution by Councils, he means of Customs and Ceremonies, and
not of Articles of Belief. Which no Council can appoint, but only declare and
expound, as before we have showed.

12. This Position then of St. Augustine is most true and consonant to the
Doctrine of all other Fathers in that behalf, that when any thing is found
generally received in the Church, and no Author, Institutor, or Beginning can
be found thereof, this without all doubt comes down from the Apostles. And of
this position may be alleged two infallible grounds. Two reasons why that
which is generally received in the Church and has no known beginning, may be
presumed to come from the Apostles Joan. 14.15, 16. Mat. 16.
The one of Faith, the other of evident Reasons. For in Faith who can think so
basely of Christ's Power or Will in performing his Promises made unto his
Church, to conserve her in all Truth unto the Worlds end, as that he should
permit her notwithstanding to admit or teach generally any one false Article of
Doctrine, and much less, so many as these men object against us? For whereas he
promised his Holy Spirit to be with her unto the Worlds end, and that she
should be the Pillar and Firmament of Truth to direct others, and finally that
hell gates should never prevail against her: How should all this be performed,
if she fell into those Errors, of which Protestants accuse her? or what greater
Victory could the gates of Hell have against her, than that from an Apostolical
Church, of whom Christ spoke, she should become an Apostatical Church, as these
Men do call her? which is the greatest Blasphemy against Christ and his
Divinity, that possibly can be imagined, seeing it does evacuate his whole
Incarnation, Life, Death, Doctrine, Resurrection, and other Benefits of his
coming, which were all employed to this end, to make unto himself a Church and
Kingdom in this world, that should direct Men in all Truth to their Salvation.
And this being taken away, and the other granted, that the Church her self may
fall into Error and false Doctrine; then is there no certainty in any thing. And
consequently it cannot be that any erroneous Doctrine should be taught or
received generally by the Church. And this is the first ground of St Augustin's
Assertion.

13. But besides this, there is another founded in Reason and Experience, The
second ground of St. Augustin's rule.
which cannot be denied. And for that it is a consideration of great Importance
and may serve the Reader to many purposes of moment, for discerning of Doubts
and Controversies; I shall desire him to be attent in perusing the same. We do
find by Experience, and that not only in Ecclesiastical, but Temporal Affairs
also: That when Orders, Laws and Customs are once settled in any Commonwealth,
it is hard to alter or take them away, or to bring in things opposite or
different to them, without some Resistance, Dispute, Contradiction, or at least
some Memory thereof, how, why, and by whom it was done. As for Example, if a
Man would go about to bring in any Innovation in the particular Laws of London,
and much more in the general Laws of all the Land: no doubt, but he should find
some Resistance therein, some that would dispute about the matter, alleging
Reasons to the contrary: others would resist and oppose themselves; and when
all did fail, at leastwise some Record, Story or Memory would be left of this
Change.

14. But much more if this matter did concern Religion, which is most esteemed
above other Points. As for Example, if a Man would begin to teach any Points of
Doctrine at this Day in England contrary or different from that which is there
received, and established by public Authority; he would presently be noted and
contradicted by some no doubt: as we see the Puritans, Brownists, Family of
Love, and other such newer Teachers have been, and the History thereof is
notorious, and will remain to Posterity.

15. And this is the very reason also, why all Heretics and Heresies from the
beginning did no sooner peep up in the visible Catholic Church, but that they
were noted, impugned confuted, and finally cast out from that body, to the
Devils dunghill. And the Records thereof do remain, who were the Authors and
Beginners, who the Favorers and setters forward, at what time, upon what
occasion, under what Popes and Kings, and other suchlike Circumstances. And
this will endure to the end of the World.

The proper state of the Question.
16. This then being so, we now come to the state of our Question, and to join
with the Protestants upon this Issue, That seeing the Doctrins before
mentioned, of the Popes Authority, Sacrifice of the Mass, Transubstantiation,
Use of Images, and the like, were found to be generally received and believed
in the Visible and Universal Catholic Church of Christendom, when Martin Luther
first began to break from the same; yea, and many Ages before, by their own
confession, they must show us when the said Doctrins were brought in afterward
to the Church, not being there, nor believed therein before; to wit, by what
Man or Men, with what Authority, Constraint, or Persuasion, with what
repugnance of them that misliked the same, and other like Circumstances before
mentioned; which if they be not able to do, most certain it is, that whatsoever
they prattle against these Doctrins, saying they were not in Eleutherius's
time, it is nothing but Cavils and Heretical Shifts.

17. And now that they cannot show any such particularities for the entrance or
admittance of these Doctrins into the Church, is most evident: For whatsoever
time they assign for their beginning, we can still show, that before that time
they were in use, if they mean of the Things themselves, and not only of Words
or Phrases. Transubstantiation ever in the Cath. Church.
As for example, when they object, That in the Council of Lateran under Pope
Innocentius III. in the year of Christ 1215. the word Transubstantiation was
first used; we answer, That albeit that word was then added for better
explication of the matter, as these words Homousion, Consubstantial, Trinity,
and the like, were by the first General Council of Nice; yet the substance of
the Article was held before, from the beginning, under other equivalent words
of Change and Immutation of Natures, Transformation of Elements, and the like.
As for Example, that of St. Ambrose speaking of the words of Christ in the
Consecration, Amb. l. 4. 5, and 9. de Sacramentis.
Non valebit sermo Christi, ut species mutet elementorum? Shall not the words
of Christ be of power to change the Natures of Elements? -- And again, Sermo
Christi, qui potuit de nihilo facere, quod non erat, non potest ea quae sunt in
id mutare, quod non erant? "The Speech of Christ that was able to create of
nothing that which was not before; shall it not be able to change things that
are already into that which they were not before? He means the Bread and Wine
into the Body and Blood of Christ, as himself does expound.

18. So as here we see the change of the Natures of Elements, and of the
Substance of one Body into another, averred by St. Ambrose long time before the
Council of Lateran; which is the same that we mean by Transubstantiation. And
conform to this do speak also other ancient Fathers, as well Greek as Latin;
and one thing is specially to be noted, That both the Greek and Latin Church
did agree therein in the said Council; there being present two Patriarchs of
the Greek Church, The Council of Lateran under Innocentius III. Anno 1215.
to wit, those of Constantinople and Jerusalem, and others both Archbishops,
Bishops, and Prelates: So as of both Churches the Archbishops were 70, the
Bishops 412, Abbots and Priors 800, and Prelates in all 1215, together with the
Legates, Doctors and Ambassadors of both Empires, West and East, as also of the
Kings of France, Spain, England, Jerusalem, and others. So as this point of
Doctrine about Transubstantiation was not hanled in corners, but publicly: and
the Council does not deliver the same as any New Doctrine, but only as an
Explication of That which ever had been held before.

19. And the same is answered to the other-like Heretical Cavils about other
points here objected by Fox and Sir Francis of an Universal Pope, the use of
the Mass, and Propitiatory Sacrifice, the setting up of dead Men's Images, and
the like. For if they understand by the first the Primacy and Supreme Authority
Ecclesiastical of the Sea of Rome, and her Bishops; and by the second, the
Christian external Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of our Savior, instituted by
himself as the Complement of all other Sacrifices that went before; and by the
third, Sacred Memories and Images of Christ and his Saints, that are not dead,
but living and reigning everlastingly in Heaven: then are all these Doctrins
(howsoever disguised by Heretics with different words, to make them more
odious) most true and Catholic Doctrins, and received in the Church from the
beginning, and continued from the Apostles downward.

20. And albeit these People, to continue cavilling, do allege diverse times, A
silly shift of the Heretics.
that the first of these Articles, about the Popes Supremacy, did begin first
under Pope Gregory the Great and Phocas the Emperor, about the year of Christ
600; and that the last, about the Use of Images, was decreed in the second
General Council of Nice, about the year 700; and that the other of the Use of
Mass began by little and little they cannot tell when: yet is this all most
ridiculous, and themselves dare not stand to any certain time by them assigned;
for that presently we appoint another time before that wherein these things
were also acknowledged; which they cannot do in the Heresies by us objected to
them, for that we show indeed the very true time wherein they began, and had
their offspring, together with the proper Authors, Places, Occasions, and
other-like particularities, recorded not by our selves, but by other
authentical Writers before us, so as reasonably there can be no doubt thereof.
And herein stands the true difference between us: We really and substantially
show the Beginning and Authors of their Heresies, for that they are Heresies
indeed; but They cannot show the Beginning or Author of any of our Articles of
Belief since Christ and his Apostles, for that they are no Heresies, but
Catholic Doctrins, and have ever endured from Christ downward; though in some
Ages more than other, they have been expounded or declared by Fathers and
Councils, according to the necessities of the time; and this is one proper
Office of the Holy Ghost, appointed for Guider of the Church to explain
matters, as doubts do arise.

21. Wherefore this is the first way of trial whether the foresaid Articles of
the Roman Religion, taught at this day, about Transubstantiation, Mass, The
Inference upon all the former Negative Argument.
and the like, be the same that Pope Eleutherius held, and sent into Britanny,
or not. And I do call all this kind of Argument Negative, both in respect of
our Adversaries, that deny them to have been then in use, and of Us, that deny
them to have been brought in afterward: And they ought to prove the second,
seeing they cannot deny but that they were once generally in use, and received
over Christendom. Whereof we do make the former most infallible Inference with
St. Augustine, That forasmuch as they were once in use, and generally received,
and no particular beginning can be showed of them or of their entrance: Ergo,
They came from the Apostles themselves.

22. To this Inference the Sectaries and Heretics of our time have one only
shift more; which is, That albeit these Doctrins have for many Ages been
received generally in the Church of Christendom; yet that they crept into the
same by little and little, and finding no resistance, began at last to be
universally believed. But this creeping Instance can have no place here by any
probability: For, to say nothing of the Providence of God in protecting his
Church from such creeping Errors, nor yet of the Promises of Christ
beforementioned to the same effect, That Heresies could not creep into the
Church without being espied.
Reason it self does demonstrate also that this possibly could not be; For if
the Doctors and Fathers of the Church did note and discover from time to time
every least Heresy or Error that did peep up in their days, and this not only
in Heretics, but in diverse principal Fathers also that held any particular
Opinions, as is manifest in St. Cyprian, Lactantius, Arnobius, Cassianus, and
others; If this diligence (I say) were used by them in all other occasions, how
could it happen that so many, so manifest, and so important Doctrins, as are in
controversy between Us and Protestants, should be let pass without Note or
Contradiction, if they had been either New or Erroneous? How should it come to
pass (I say) that no one of these ancient Fathers should ever impugn any of
these Doctrins, if they were New Opinions, and brought into the Church contrary
to the Doctrine that was before, as these men do say? Yea, how should it fall
out that no one Record in the World should be left by our Ancestors, that at
such a time, by such or such occasions, began the Doctrine of Purgatory, of
Praying to Saints, of the Real Presence, of the Use of Images, of Mass and
Sacrifice, of seven Sacraments, and the like, that were not held in the Church
before?

An experimental deduction.
23. And that this is impossible, may be showed by this experimental Deduction,
which now I will set down. Let us imagine that none of these Doctrins were in
the first Age under the Apostles; and namely, that then there were but two
Sacraments, no Purgatory at all, or any External Sacrifice held. We ask them
concerning the second Age, wherein Justinus, Polycarpus, Irenaeus, Clemens
Alexandrinus, and Tertullian, were chief Teachers, whether these Doctrins were
in this Age, or no? If they deny it, though we might prove the contrary out of
their Works; yet, not to pass from this first kind of Argument, we ask the like
of the third Age, under Origin, Cyprian, Dionysius Alexandrinus, Pamphilus,
Arnobius, and the rest? And if they deny of this Age also, that these Doctrins
were not held by them, we go to the fourth Age, under Athanasius, Hilarious,
Optatus, Basil, Nazianzen, Ambrose, Hierom, Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Cyrillus:
In whose Writings every where there is mention of all these Doctrins, as
afterward in our second Argument we shall show out of the Protestants
themselves; and namely the Magdeburgians, that profess to note all.

24. Now then, I ask our Adversaries touching this creeping Instance, how could
these Doctrins so creep into the Catholic Visible Church in this fourth Age for
example, and be received so generally over all Nations, Countries, and
Kingdoms, by these principal Lights, Captains, Watchmen, and Guiders of the
same, as no Note, Detection, Resistance or Memory should be left of any Doubt,
Dispute, or Opposition made against them? Is this likely? Is this possible?
Read all the Fathers Works over, and find, if you can, but one place wherein
one Father did ever hitherto note another for holding Purgatory, Praying to
Saints, believing the Real Presence, or the like, as they did Cyprian (though
otherwise a most Learned and Holy Man) for teaching Re-baptization of Heretics,
and some other Fathers for other particular Opinions different from the
Catholic Doctrine of that Age. Whereof we may infer, That they would have done
the like also in these other points, if they had been held for new or erroneous
in those days. A Consideration of much importance.
And hereof also may be inferred another Sequel or Observation of very great
moment against our Heretics, That when soever any Doctrine is found in any of
the ancient Fathers, which is not contradicted nor noted by any of the rest as
singular, that Doctrine is to be presumed to be no particular Opinion of his,
but rather the general of all the Church in his days; for that otherwise it
would most certainly have been noted and impugned by others. Whereby it
follows, that one Doctor's Opinion or Saying in matters of Controversy not
contradicted or noted by others, may sometimes give a sufficient Testimony of
the whole Churches Sentence and Doctrine in those days; which is a point very
greatly to be considered.

25. But yet further, to all this may be added another Consideration of no
small weight, which is the difficulty of bringing in certain Doctrins, The
difficulty of bringing in five new Sacraments.
if any man would have attempted it; as for Example, the Doctrine of Seven
Sacraments: If there had been but Two only before in the Apostles time, it had
been an extreme great Novelty to have added Five more, which never would have
been admitted without much strife and resistance, seeing all Catholics do hold,
that Christ only could institute Sacraments, for that He only could assure the
Promise of Grace made thereunto, as excellently does declare the Council of
Sess. 7. cap. 1.
Trent, and long before that again the Master of Sentences; and 4 did. 5. q.
10 art. 2. and part. 3. q. 64. act. 4.
St. Thomas, in the name of all Catholics, did leave that Doctrine registered,
and there can be no doubt thereof.

26. Wherefore this Truth being admitted, That the whole Church has no
Authority to institute any Sacrament, or to alter any thing about the
substantial parts thereof; to wit, the Matter, Form, or Number, (as the same
Council of Trent in another place declares; Sess. 21. c. 7.
) how was it possible that five whole Sacraments should be added or brought
into Catholic Doctrine, and received and believed throughout Christendom without
any resistance or opposition at all, if there had been but two only instituted
by Christ, and exercised by the Apostles in the first Age? How, I say, could
five more be brought in afterward? By whom? at what time? in what Country?
etc. Impossibilities
For if any one had begun to do it, others would have resisted; it being a
matter of so high moment. And if one Country, Province or Church had admitted
them, another would have refused; or at leastwise there would have been some
Doubt or Disputation, and some general Meeting and Synod, or Council gathered
about that matter; and some parts would have admitted one Number, and some
another, as we see that the Sectaries of our time have done since the matter
has been called in question by them; some allowing five, some four, some
three, some two. But no memory of any of these differences being to be found
among Catholics, most certain it is that this Number came down from Christ and
his Apostles themselves.

27. The like, or greater difficulty, The difficulty of bringing in the use of
Confession.
would also have been about the use of Sacramental Confession, if it had not
been appointed by Christ, and put in ure presently, and so continued from time
to time: For that it being a thing in it self most repugnant to man's sensual
Nature, to be bound to open his particular sins to another, with that Humility
and Subjection which Catholic Doctrine does prescribe in the use of that
Sacrament; clear it is, that if it had not been in ure even from the Apostles
time, and that as a matter of absolute necessity, it could never have been
received afterward, nor yet brought in by any Human Power, Art, or Device. For
who (I pray you) should or could bring in such a thing of so great repugnance
and difficulty upon the whole Christian Church? Will they say any Pope? Let
them name either Him or Them, together with the Time, and other
Particularities; which they never will be able to do.

28. Besides this, I ask them further, What Pope would ever have attempted
this, if it had not been by Obligation before him; seeing that Popes
themselves, the more Great and Eminent they be above others, the more natural
repugnance must they needs find in themselves, to go and kneel down at the feet
of an inferior Priest, and confess unto him their most secret sins? And the
like may be said of Temporal Princes and Emperors; who if any Pope or Power
Ecclesiastical would have laid such a burden upon them, not used nor of
obligation before, how would they have yielded unto it? which of them would not
have answered, that seeing their Fathers and Ancestors were saved without this
subjection, and irksom obligation of revealing their particular sins, they
would hope to be so also? And finally, some great Difficulty, Doubt, or
Contention would have been about this matter, before it could have been so
brought in, and established all over the Christian World, as we see by
experience it was; and at leastwise some memory would have remained thereof in
Histories, which we find not, and consequently we may conclude that there was
never any such thing. And this is sufficient for our first Argument. Now let us
pass to the second.

CHAP. VI.
It is proved by the second kind of Affirmative or Positive Arguments, That the
Points of Catholic Doctrine, before denied by Fox and Sir Francis, were in use
in Pope Eleutherius his Time, and in other Ages immediately following; and this
by Testimony of Protestant Writers themselves.

ALbeit the Reasons and Considerations before alleged, whereby our Adversaries
are willed to show the beginning of such Articles and Points of our Catholic
Doctrine as they deny to have come down from the Apostles Time, were sufficient
to put them to silence, being not able to perform any part thereof, and
consequently also may open the eyes of any studious Reader to see the Infirmity
of Their Cause, and the Strength and Truth of Ours; yet will we, for greater
satisfaction of all sorts, pass over to the other part also of Positive and
Affirmative Proofs, which are so abundant in this behalf, as if I would set
them down all, this only point would require a particular Treatise; wherefore I
mean to abreviate the matter, as much as I may.

Two means of proofs by citing Authors.
2. For which respect, whereas there are two means to set down these Proofs; one
out of the Authors themselves that lived in the same Age with Eleutherius, and
the next after; and the other to cite the same out of Protestant Writers: I
have made choice of the second way in this place, both for that it is shorter,
and seems also more sure and effectual. For if I should cite the places, as
for Example in the second Age, St. Irenaeus lib. 5. advers. haeres. for the
Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, and the same, lib. 4. cap. 77. and with him
Justinus Martyr, q. 103. together with Theophilus, Athenagoras, Clemens
Alexandrinus, for Freewill, and the same Clemens, lib. 5. stromatum, and diverse
others of that Age, for the Merit of Good Works, for the manner of doing
Penance, and the like; and if I should allege the said Irenaeus, lib. 4. cap.
32. for the Sacrifice of the Mass, and Justinus Martyr Apolog. 2. and Clemens
Alexandrinus, lib. 7. Stromatum, about the Rites and Ceremonies of the said
Mass, and the same Justinus, q. 136. and the same Irenaeus, lib. 1. c. 18. for
the Ceremonies of Baptism and Chrism used in those days: If (I say) I should
allege these, and other Authors of that time, for positive Proofs of Catholic
Articles against Protestants in Eleutherius's days, the matter would first grow
to be very long; for that I must allege the places at length, seeing that
otherwise the quarrelling Adversary would say that I left out the Antecedents
and Consequents, Ordinary cavillation of the Adversary.
as themselves are wont to do, when they mean not to have any Text rightly
understood; Secondly, they would quarrel with us (when they see themselves
pressed) about the Authors Books, whether they be truly theirs or no; and
thirdly, about the Translation, Words, and Sense. All which would bring a long
Dispute.

3. But now finding that certain Authors of their own Religion, (if they be of
their Religion) I mean the Magdeburgians, called otherwise Centuriatores, have
taken upon them to set down the whole Story of the Church, and have herewithal
treated as well of the Doctrine, as also the Doctors of every Age; I have
thought best to take my Proofs out of them, being Confessions, as it were,
against themselves and their Mates the Calvinists (though not very friendly Mates
in many matters of Doctrine, as you shall hear) and their Story being the very
Ground and Fountain of all John Fox his Volume of Acts and Monuments, except
only those things which concern England in particular; wherein whether he or
they behave themselves with less Honesty or Conscience, is hard to say: but in
this Treatise you shall have diverse tastes of them both. And this being spoken
as it were by the way of Preface, we shall now take in hand the matter proposed.

4. These men being four Saxons, whom before we have named, gathered together
in the City of Magdeburg, to wit, Flaccus Illyricus, Joannes Vigandus, The
story of the Magdeburgians.
Matthaeus Judex, and Basilius Faber, and in Religion strict or rigid
Lutherans, took upon them (as has been said) to write the whole Ecclesiastical
History from Christ to their Time by Centuries or Ages, allowing 100 years to
every Age, whereof they are called Centuriatores. And in every Age they handle
these and like Chapters, Of the Church, and increase thereof, or Doctrine
therein taught; Of Heresies and Heretics; Of Doctors, and Writers, and the
like. But amongst other points especially to be noted to our purpose, that
presently after the Apostles in the second Century, they make this Chapter,
repeating the same in every Age after: Inclinatio Doctrinae, A proud title
against the Fathers Writings.
complectens peculiares and incommodas opiniones, stipulas, and errores
Doctorum quae palam quidem, hoc est, scriptis tradita sunt: That is, The
declining of true Christian Doctrine, containing the peculiar and incommodious
Opinions of Doctors, their Errors, Straw, or Stubble, which were left publicly
by them, that is to say, in their Writings.

5. This is the Title of this Chapter in every Age, and those last words seem
to be added, thereby to insinuate to the Reader that the said Doctors inwardly
did hold perhaps many more Errors, and Straw-opinions, in these men's judgments,
than they left openly in writing. And by this arrogant Title you may see these
four good Fellows mean to judge and censure all from the beginning of Christian
Religion unto their days; and among others they will censure John Fox also, and
his Fellows, as you may see in the Preface of one of their Centuries, dedicated
unto the Queen of England the third year of her Reign, 1560, where having told
her Majesty a long Tale of the Gospel and pure Word of God, naming the same
above half a hundred times (if I have counted right) in this one Epistle, and
showing how Princes must have no other Rule of Government than the said Word
(but yet understood as these men will interpret it) they tell her also, that
they now do bring her Antiquity to look upon, yet complaining that few in
ancient Times did write luculenter, and cum judicio, Magd. in praef. Ep.
dedicat. ad Elizab. Angl. Reginam in cent. 4.
perspicuously and with judgment. And then again, Sacrosanctae antiquitatis
titulo plurimos quasi fascinari, ut citra omnem attentionem, rectumque
judicium, quantumvis tetris erroribus applaudant: That very many are as it were
so be witched with the holy Title of Antiquity, that without all attention and
upright judgment, they do give willingly consent to never so foul Errors, if
they be set down by Antiquity.

6. Lo here what an entrance this is of them that profess Antiquity, to
discredit by their Preface all Antiquity of Christian Religion, and of the
eldest and primitive Church, whose Acts and Gests they promise to set down; but
the very point indeed is, that they themselves will be Judges of all (as the
fashion of proud Heretics is) and admit only so much as makes for their
particular Sect, Magdeburgians against the Calvinists.
and discredit, or reject the rest. And in this point our English Calvinists
are like to find as little favor at their hands, as we that are Catholics,
and less too; for that by the whole course of Antiquity they do show these men
to be clearly Heretics, and their Opinions about the Sacraments, Invisibility
of the Church, and other like, to be Heretical: whereas our Doctrins which they
find in ancient Fathers differing from them, they call either incommodious
Opinions, Blots, Stubble, or Errors of Doctors, as before you have heard, and
not lightly Heresies. As in this their Preface to the Queen they admonish her
Majesty more carefully to beware of Their Doctrine than of Ours, in these words;
Cent. ib. page 9. Tom. 4.

The Magdeb. speech to her Majesty against Calvinists.


Cum jam varia grassentur quasi factiones opinionum, etc. Whereas every where
now-adays diverse factions of Opinions grow up among them, that profess the
Gospel; there are some among others, who by certain Philosophical Reasons go
about to evacuate, or make void the Testament of our Lord, so as they would
remove the Presence of the true Body and Blood of Christ from the Communion,
and would by a certain strange perplexity of words deceive the people against
the most clear, the most evident, the most true, and the most potent words of
our Savior himself: Wherefore your Majesty must principally look to this point,
and provide that the Articles of our Faith be kept without such Pharisaical
Leaven, and that the Sacraments instituted by Christ be restored without all
corruption and adulteration. Thus far the Magdeburgians to her Majesty, by
which you may perceive why I call them Fox his Masters in lying, but not his
Mates in believing.

7. To come therefore now to our purpose; I might, as before has been said, if
it were not over long, use two ways for this positive Proof, That these
Articles denied by Fox and his Scholar were heard of and acknowledged in
Eleutherius's time: The first by citing the places themselves out of the
principal Doctors that then lived; but this (as I have said) would be
overlong. Yet one place I cannot omit of Irenaeus in the very Age we speak of,
Iren. l. 3. c. 3. advers. haeres. A notable speech of Irenaeus, that lived with
Eleutherius.
and written while Eleutherius yet lived. The words are these: Maximae and
antiquissimae Ecclesiae, etc. We showing the Tradition of the greatest and most
ancient Church of Rome, known to all the World, as founded by the two most
glorious Apostles Peter and Paul (which Tradition and Faith she receiving from
the Apostles, has preached and delivered unto us by Succession of her Bishops
from time to time unto our days) do confound thereby all those [Heretics] which
by any ways, either through delight in themselves, or vainglory, or blindness
of understanding, do gather otherwise than they should: For that unto this
Church, in respect of her more Mighty Principality, it is necessary that all
Churches must agree, and have access; that is to say, all faithful people
wheresoever they live. In which Church the Tradition that has descended from
the Apostles, has ever been kept by those that live in any place of the World.

8. And again, a little after, having for proof of his Faith, and confirmation
of Apostolical Tradition, recounted all the Bishops of Rome from St. Peter to
his days, he says, Nunc duodecimo loco, etc. Now in the twelfth place from the
Apostles has Eleutherius that Bishopric, and by this Succession (of the
foresaid Roman Bishops) is the Tradition of the Apostles conserved in the
Church, and the Preaching of the Truth has come down unto us; and this is a
most full Demonstration, that one and the same lively Faith has been conserved
in the Church from the Apostles time, and delivered unto us in Truth etc.

A collection upon Irenaeus's words.
9. Lo here Tradition of the Apostles delivered and conserved by the Succession
of the Bishops of Rome! Lo here the Church of Rome called so long ago the
Greatest and most Ancient of all other Churches, her Principality both named
and confirmed! Behold the Obligation of all other Churches of the World, yea
and of all faithful Christians, to agree and have access to Her! See here all
vainglorious and self-willed Heretics confounded by Irenaeus, with the only
Tradition and Succession of this Church of Rome and her Bishops, even from St.
Peter's time to Eleutherius, that lived with Irenaeus! What Catholic man could
say more at this day? And will any jangling Fox or Sir Francis avouch yet
without shame, that none of these points were ever known or heard of in
Eleutherius's time?

10. Well then, this is one way to confound them, if I would follow it. But
being over tedious, I mean to take another, and show out of their own
Historiographers the Magdeburgenses, that all these Doctrins denied by Fox, and
his Follower here, were known and in ure among the chiefest Writers in the
primitive Church, and first Ages after Christ.

And first of all, to begin with this very matter first named by them, About
the Primacy of the Pope and Chapter of Rome. Cent 2. cap. 4. page 63.
Of the Primacy of the Pope and Church of Rome: The Magdeburgians have an
especial Paragraph thereof, De primatu Ecclesiae Romanae, under the foresaid
Title of the incommodious Opinions, Stubble, Straw, and Errors of the Doctors
that lived within the first 200 years after Christ. And in that Paragraph they
not only do allege for Stubble this last Authority of Irenaeus by me cited,
(though they allege it so miserably maimed, as of six parts they leave out more
than five) but also another place of St. Ignatius, that lived in the first Age
with the Apostles themselves, to the same purpose, which they cite in like
manner under the same Title of Straw, and Stubble, and incommodious Opinions.
Ignat. epist. ad Romans
And then passing to the third Century, or second Age after that of Christ,
they cite Tertullian for the same incommodious Opinion, Tert. l. de praescrip.

Cent. 3. cap. 4. page 84.


about the Primacy of the Roman Church and Bishop, saying of him, Non sine
errore sentire videtur Tertullianus claves soli Petro commissas, and Ecclesiam
super ipsum structam, etc. Tertullian does seem not without Error to think that
the Keys of the Church were given only to St. Peter, and that the Church was
built but on him.

11. They cite also four or five places out of St. Cyprian, where he holds
the same with Tertullian, and so they are both confuted for Stubble-Doctors
together. Yet go they further with St. Cyprian, citing diverse other places out
of him to the same effect for the Bishop and Church of Rome, all which they
take for Stubble; as where he says, One God, one Christ, one Church, Cyp. l.
1. ep. 8.
one Chair builded upon the Ark by the Word of our Savior; and three or four
like places more, which for brevity I omit; and finally they say of him, and
three other Fathers of his time, Cyprianus, Maximus, Vrbanus, and Salonius,
Cyprian egregiously abused by the Magdeburgians.
do think that one [Chief] Bishop must be in the Catholic Church, etc. Lo, four
old Fathers that lived almost 1400 years agone, and were the Lights of that
Primitive Church, rejected here by four drinking Germans gathered together in
some warm Stow of Magdeburg, tippling strongly (as a man may presume) and
judging all the World for Stubble besides themselves; for which cause the third
person in this Quaternity is called perhaps Mattheus Judex. But let us go
forward.

12. They are not content with this rejection of St. Cyprian, but they fall
upon him again in these words; Cyprian affirms expressly, Cyp. c. 4. ep. 8.
without all foundation of holy Scripture, that the Roman Church must be
acknowledged by all Christians for the Mother and Root of the Catholic Church,
And further yet in another Treatise, That this Church is the Chair of Peter,
from which all the Unity of Priesthood proceeds. And finally, Cyprian, say
they, Tract. de simplic. Praelat. Cyp. l. 1. ep. 6. and l. 4. c. 4. ep. 9.
Origin. tract. 1. in Mat. and hom. 15. in Levit.
has diverse other perilous Opinions about this matter; as for Example, That
he tyeth the Office of true Pastorship to ordinary Succession, and that he
denies that Bishops can be judged, etc. And Origin also in this Age has no
mean blots about the Power and Office of the Church, etc.

13. Hitherto are the words of the Magdeburgians against the chief Writers of
these two first Ages after the Apostles, concerning the point of Principality
and Supremacy of the Church and Bishop of Rome, so clearly confessed by the
said Fathers (as the Magdeburgians do grant) and on the other side so boldly
denied by the Fox, and the Knight his Follower and Proselyte, as a thing not so
much as heard or dreamed of in these first Ages: whereof you have heard their
several and resolute asseverations before; Let them but grant me, says Fox;
and then I say, quoth the Knight, there is no such matter, etc. And by this one
point only of the five Articles before objected by them, and denied flatly to
have been known or believed in Eleutherius's time, you may see how they behave
themselves, and what may be said on our part, and how great a Volume this Book
would grow unto, if I should prosecute all the other four Articles also by them
mentioned before, and should pass through the first three or four or five
hundred years after Christ (for so much our Adversaries sometimes, upon a good
mood of bragging, will seem to allow us) to show, not out of the Books and
Writings of the ancient Fathers themselves, for that this were over long, but
what these Magdeburgians do note and gather against themselves, out of their
Works, for the Antiquity of that Doctrine which they impugn, rejecting afterward
all again with this only frivolous and fond Cavil, That these Opinions of the
Fathers were but naevi, stipulae, and palia Doctorum; stains, stubble, and
straw of Doctors; opiniones incommodae, etc. and incommodious Opinions.

Greg. de Valent. The ridiculous manner of proceeding of the Magdeburgians.
14. Wherein it is well noted by a Learned Man of our time, That these Fellows
do proceed, as if one being suspected or accused of Theft, Heresy, or any
other grievous Crime, should willingly present himself before the Magistrate or
Senate of the City; and there first of all, for his clearing, should bring in
for Witnesses against himself the best learned, most grave, ancient, and best
reputed honest men of all that City, to testify that he is indeed such a one,
to wit, a false Thief, an Heretic, or the like; but yet, having so done, would
endeavor to refute all these again by one bare rejection, saying, that they
spoke rashly and incommodiously, and that they were overseen, and knew not what
they testified, or were in a dream when they spoke or testified against him;
and finally, that all were deceived, and he alone to be believed against them
all. And would this shift (think you) countervail so grave Witnesses against
him? or would any indifferent Judge leave to condemn him for this evasion? or
would any man think him much better than mad that would take such a course of
Defense? And yet this is the very course of these Magdeburgians, who citing
first the gravest and most ancient Fathers of Christendom against themselves,
do reject the same again with this only jest and contumely, that they spoke
incommodiously, ignorantly, and were Stubble-Doctors.

15. Well then, for so much as concerns the first Article mentioned by Fox
and Sir Francis, as a thing not heard of in Eleutherius's time, (to wit, the
Universality and Primacy of the Church and Bishop of Rome) you see, that with
going to the Authors themselves of that Age, the Magdeburgians do make it clear
against themselves. About Mass and Sacrifice.
And for the second point concerning the use of Mass, and Propitiatory
Sacrifice, we have cited sufficiently before in the first Chapter of this
Treatise out of the same Magdeburgians, who condemn diverse of the most ancient
Fathers for testifying this matter; and we may do the like in all the other
Articles specified by Fox and his Knight, but that it would be over tedious.
And therefore I do remit the curious Reader to the Volumes of the Magdeburgians
themselves, if he have so much time to lose as the reading thereof does
require: Only in this place I am to note unto him, for his better Instruction,
three or four kinds of shifts and frauds used ordinarily by these Protestant
Germans, in setting down these and other like matters out of the Fathers, which
I shall do in the next ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. VII.
The same Argument is continued, and it is showed out of the Magdeburgians, how
they accuse and abuse the Fathers of the Second and Third Age, for holding with
Us against Them.

Diverse are the shifts and frauds, and manifold the abuses, which Protestant
Writers, and namely the Magdeburgians, do offer to the ancient Fathers, Three
manner of fraudulent shifts in alleging and discrediting the Fathers.
in examining their Sentences about Controversies in Religion: Whereof one
principal may be accounted, that of four or five places, or more, that may be
alleged out of them for Us and our Doctrine, in the question proposed, they
will not cite two, left the multitude of Authorities (if they allege all that
Irenaeus about the Principality of the Church of Rome; which being set down
somewhat at length, as it is in the Author, makes the matter clear; but
shuffled up in four or five words, after a most curtailed manner (as the
Magdeburgians do allege them) do scarce make any sense at all: which is the
thing the Alledgers do desire, thereby to discredit the Author.

2. Their third fraud is, that having alleged the first Authorities for Us,
Cyprian that famous Bishop, Doctor, and Martyr, and the Christian Phoenix of
his Age (as St. Augustine judges of him) these men do handle him in this sort.

3. Cyprianus sine Scriptura loquitur, Cyprian speaks without Scripture;
Cent. 3. c. 4.
Cyprianus superstitiose fingit, Cyprian does feign superstitiously; Cyprianus
male judicat, Cyprian judges naughtily, and the like. Nay, they endeavor to
discredit the whole multitude of Doctors and Fathers in every Age: As for
Example, in the beginning of the first Age next after the Apostles, they write
thus: Tamesit haec aetas Apostolis admodum vicina fuit, etc. Cent. 2. c. 4. p.
55.

The judgment of the Magdeburgians concerning the second Age.


Albeit this Age wus nearest to the Apostles, yet the Doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles began to be not a little darkened therein, and many monstrous and
incommodious Opinions are everywhere found to be spread by the Doctors
thereof. Perhaps some cause hereof might be, for that the Gift of the Holy
Ghost in these Doctors, did begin to decay, for the ingratitude of the World
toward the Truth.

4. Lo here what a Preface this is, to make contemptible to the Reader all the
Fathers of the very first Age after the Apostles! But what then do you think
they will say of the next following? You shall hear by their own words in the
Preface of that Age, which are these: Cent. 3. c. 4. p. 17.
Quo longius ab Apostolorum aetate recessum est, eo plus stipularum Doctrinae
puritati accessit; The farther that we go off from the Apostles Age, the more
Stubble we shall find to have been added to the Purity of the Christian
Doctrine. Thus they say of these two Ages, and by this last Sentence you may
imagine what they will say of all the Ages following.

5. And this is now spoken by them by way of prevention, to discredit generally
the Fathers of these first Ages, when they say any thing against them: But when
they come to particulars, Magdeburgians Quips against the Fathers.
they have notable Quips for them; whereof, for Example-sake, we shall let you
hear some few, whereby you may as well learn their sharp Wits, as heretical
Spirits. About the matter of Man's Free Will, About Freewill.
whether it were wholly lost by Original Sin, (as Protestants say) or wounded
only, as Catholics hold, and strengthened again by God's Grace, to do good in
him that will; they write thus of the Doctors of the second Age: Nullus fere
Doctrinae locus est, Cent. 2. c. 4. p. 53.
qui tam cito obscurari coepit, atque hic de libero arbitrio; No one place or
part of Christian Doctrine began so soon to be darkened, as this of Free Will.
And then they go on thus with the chiefest Doctors of that Age: Iren. l. 4. c.
72.
Irenaeus disputes not distinctly, and wresteth the Speeches of Christ and of
St. Paul in favor of Free Will, saying, That there is Free Will also in Faith
and Belief: Sed haec satis crasse dicuntur, and aliena sunt a scripturis; But
these things are spoken grossly by Irenaeus, and are far from the sense of
Scriptures. But whether these Good Fellow- Saxons may be accounted less gross
in Wit or Grace than Irenaeus, is easy to guess.

Clem. Alexan.
6. From St. Irenaeus they pass to Clemens Alexandrinus, another Pillar of that
Age, saying, Eodem modo Clemens Alexandrinus liberum arbitrium ubique asserit,
ut appareat in ejusmodi tenebris non tantum fuisse omnes ejus saeculi Authors;
verum etiam in posterioribus eas subinde crevisse and auctas esse: Clemens
Alexandrinus does in like manner everywhere affirm Free Will; All Doctors in
Eleutherius's time said to be in darkness about Free Will.
whereby it appears, that not only all the Doctors of this second Age were in
the same darkness, but that the same did grow, and was increased in the Ages
following. Behold here their general Sentence, both of this Age, and the other
ensuing! To what end then should we allege more particulars in this matter,
seeing their resolution to discredit all? In the third Age they do shamefully
slander Tertullian, Origin, Cent. 3. c. 4. p. 77.
Cyprian and Methodius for the same Doctrine of Free Will, saying, They do abuse
the Scriptures intolerably for maintenance thereof.

Cent. 4. c. 4. p. 291.
7. For the fourth Age having given this general Sentence, Patres omnes fere
hujus aetatis de libero arbitrio confuse loquuntur; All the Fathers almost of
this Age do speak confusedly of Free Will, etc. They add also, contra manifesta
Scripturae sanctae Testimonia; contrary to the manifest Testimonies of Holy
Scripture. And then they take in hand to course seven chief Fathers and
Doctors; in particular, Lactantius, Athanasias, Basilius, Nazianzenus,
Epiphanius, and Hieronymus, saying, That they were all deceived, all in
darkness, all misled about this Doctrine of man's Free Will. So as it is no
marvel if Sir Francis's sharp sight discover so many thick Clouds and Darkness
in the Catholic Church of our days, seeing his Masters the Magdeburgians
discover so many in the Primitive Church, as by this you may see.

The Controversy of Justification.

Cent. 2. p. 59.


8. About the point of Justification they begin the next Age after the Apostles
thus: Doctrina de Justificatione negligentius and obscurius ab his Doctoribus
tradita est. The Doctrine of Justification was delivered by the Doctors of this
second Age after Christ more negligently and obscurely than it ought to have
been. Cent. 3. p. 79.
And the same they say of the third Age also: Hunc summum Articulum de
Justificatione obscuratum esse, justitiam enim coram Deo operibus tribuerunt;
that this chief Article of Justification has been obscured in this Age, for
that the Doctors thereof did attribute Justice before God unto Works, and not
to only Faith, etc. And then again in the fourth Age they reprehend greatly
Lactantius, Cent. 4. p. 191.
Nilus, Chromatus, Ephrem, and St. Hierom, for the same Doctrine. The other
lower Centuries I have not lying by me, but it is easy to guess what these men
will say of later Ages Authors, seeing they do exagitate so greatly the more
ancient.

9. About the Sacrament of Penance, About the Sacrament of Penance.

Cent. 2. p. 62.


which is another Controversy betwixt us, they write in the beginning of the
second Age thus: Quod jam tum coeperit haec pars Doctrinae de poenitentia
labefactari, ex Tertulliano, Cypriano, and Haeresi Novatiana infra patebit;
That this part of Christian Doctrine about Penance, even then (in the first Age
after the Apostles) began to be weakened, shall appear afterward by Tertullian,
Cyprian, and the Novatian Heresy. Thus they write boldly and confidently as
you see. And then in the Age following, Cent. 3. p. 81.
Plerique hujus saeculi Doctores, Doctrinam de poenitentia mire depravant; The
most of the Doctors of this Age do wonderfully deprave the Doctrine of Penance.
Cent. ib.
And what is the reason think you? They tell us presently; Ad ipsum tantum opus
poenitentis, seu contritionem, eam deducunt, de fide in Christum nihil dicunt;
They reduce Penance only to the works of the Penitent, that is to say, unto
Contrition, and do speak nothing at all of Faith in Christ. But who does not
see this to be a notorious slander? For how is it possible to have Contrition
without Faith? Consider then how little it is to be wondered at, if these
Companions and others of their Crew do slander and calumniate Us that live in
these days, when they shame not to do it against so many Holy and Learned
ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church. But let us go forward.

10. About the Perfection and Merit of Good Works, About Good Works.

Ibid. p. 59.


these Censurers affirm also, That the true Doctrine of Christ in this behalf
was obscured in the second Age, immediately after the Apostles: And they do
wonderfully by name fall out with Clemens Alexandrinus, for that he says,
Gratia salvamur, Clem. l. 5. strom.
sed non absque bonis operibus; We are saved by Christ's Grace, but yet not
without Good Works; which is the very Exposition that Sir Francis himself
holds before in the second Encounter, but his Masters here do deny it. And
then in the next Age they say, Enc. 2. c. 16.
Magis, quam superioris saeculi, Doctores hujus aetatis, Ibid. p. 80.
a vera Doctrina Christi and Apostolorum de bonis operibus declinarunt; The
Doctors of this Age are fallen away from the Doctrine of Christ and of his
Apostles about Good Works, more than the Doctors of the former Ages. And then
in particular they cry out of Origin, that he writes, That God gives Glory to
every one in the Life to come, Orig. l 8 in Ep. ad Romans Cyp. l. Epist. ep. 25.
pro mensura meritorum, according to the measure of his merits. Et simili
errore (say they) Cyprianus meritorum praecedentium defensione obvelari peccata
subsequentia. And that Cyprian by like Error (to Origin) does say, that by the
defense of precedent Merits, Sins that follow may be covered. Which they cannot
abide to hear.

11. Well, I might run over many other things, as about Laws of Fasting, About
Fasting, Virginity, observation of Holydays.

Cent. 2. p. 65.


Observation of Holydays, Virginity, Continence, and the like, wherein the
ancient Fathers no less disagreed from our new Gospellers, than We do at this
day: And they complain thereof even at the first entrance of the second Age,
saying, Doctrina de liberate Christiana nonnihil coepit obscurari, etc. The
Doctrine of Christian Liberty began greatly to be obscured in these days. Note,
I pray you, that still their complaint is of obscurity and darkness no less in
those ancient first Ages, than now they complain of Ours, and with the
self-same reason. For what is the reason, think you, Cent. 2. p. 65.
why they complain so greatly here of Christian Liberty abridged 1500 years
agone? You shall hear the particulars which they allege, complaining first of
these words of S. Ignatius, Scholar to the Apostles: Ignat. Epist. ad Phil.
Do not dishonor (says he) the Holydays; do not neglect the Fast of Lent, for
that it contains the imitation of God while he lived upon Earth; despise not
the Passion-week, but do you fast Wednesdays and Fridays, and give the rest of
your meat to the Poor, etc.

12. Thus said he, Against Martyrdom.
and it misliked greatly the Magdeburgians to hear so much talk of Fasting. And
from this complaint they pass to another against all the Fathers of that Age,
saying, De Martyrio nimis magnifice sentire caeperunt; The Doctors of this Age
did begin to have too magnificent an Opinion of Martyrdom. Sacred Virginity.
And about the Consecrating of Virgins to Christ, they mislike greatly certain
speeches of St. Ignatius; as for example, Ep. ad Antiochen. Virgins videant,
cui se consecrarint; Let Virgins consider well, to whom they have consecrated
themselves. And again, Epist. ad Thrasen. Eas, quae in Virginitate sunt,
honorate, sicut sacras Christo; Do you honor them that live in Virginity, as
consecrated unto Christ. And yet further, in his Epist. ad Hieronem. Virgins
custodi, tanquam Sacramenta Christi; Have care to keep Virgins as Sacraments of
Christ. Which kind of Speeches misliking our Magdeburgians, they say, That they
were an occasion, Page 65.
and opened the way to those things, which afterward were thereupon founded,
concerning Cloisters and Vows.

13. In the next Age after, to wit, the third, they also complain greatly of
the same things, and many other the like As namely about Chastity and
Virginity, Cent. 3. p. 86.
Nimium praedicari and extolli Continentiam; That Continency and Chastity was
too much commended and extolled. And they are so earnest against Tertullian,
St. Cyprian accused to hate Women.
Origin, and Cyprian, for this matter, (especially the latter) as they do
accuse the Holy Man for hatred to Womankind, saying, Ex professo quasi ubique
detestatur multebrem sexum; He does everywhere almost even of purpose detest
Womankind. But in what sense, I pray you? In no other point (without doubt) but
that he had no desire to have a Sister for himself, as each of our
German-Ministers may be presumed to have. But why is this false slander of
detesting Womankind laid upon holy St. Cyprian by these good Fellows? Forsooth,
Cyp. l. de bono Puditiae.
for that he praised so much Virginity, affirming, as they allege him, That
Virginity does equal it self to Angels; yea, if we do examine well the matter,
we shall find it to exceed Angels; for that, contrary to Nature, it gets a
Victory in Flesh, Cyp. Sermon. de nativ. Christi.
against Flesh, which Angels do not. And again, in another place, Albeit
Marriage be good, and instituted by God, yet Continency is better, and
Virginity exceeds all. Behold the cause why these Protestants affirm St.
Cyprian to have hated the Feminine Sex.

Martyrdom.
14. They say also of Martyrdom, that the Fathers of this Age spoke immoderately
thereof: Martyrium immodice extulerunt omnes hujus aetatis Doctores; All the
Doctors of this Age did praise immoderately Martyrdom. And then again, Page 83.
Invocation of Saints.
of Invocation of Saints, Videas in Doctorum hujus saeculi scriptis non obscura
vestigia invocationis Sanctorum; You may see in the Writings of the Doctors of
this second Age clear steps of Invocation or Prayer to Saints. And then of
Purgatory, Semina I urgatorii in aliquot locis apud Originem subinde sparsa
videas; You may see the Seeds of Purgatory dispersed in this Age in the
Writings of Origin. And you must note, that these good Fellows do speak by
diminutives of purpose, calling it signs or footsteps of Prayer to Saints, and
Seeds of Purgatory, and the like. But presently in the next Age they accuse
openly, and by name, St. Athanasius, Cent 4. c. 4. p. 295.
St. Basil, St. Gregory Nazianzen, St. Ambrose, Prudentius, Epiphanius and
Ephrem, eight great Doctors, and principal Guides of the Christian Church,
Ibid. p. 304.
for this Error of Praying to Saints. They accuse also, for express holding of
Purgatory, Lactantius, Prudentius, and St. Hierom, in the same Age.

Traditions. Monastical Life. Relics.
15. They accuse all the Doctors of this Age for attributing too much to
Traditions and Observations of the Church, especially about Monastical Life,
Virginity, honoring the Memory and Relics of Martyrs. And they are so earnest
and impudent in these fancies of theirs, as having cited the Fathers Sentences
against themselves, they cannot let them pass without intolerable reproachful
words: So do they accuse holy Athanasius of Superstition for commending
Virginity. Page 300.
And having alleged a long place of St. Basil in praise of Monastical Life,
they add this Censure, Quae quidem omnia and praeter, and contra Scripturam
sunt; Lib. 2. ad Marcell.
All which words (of St. Basil) are both besides and contrary to holy
Scripture. Then take they in hand St. Ambrose, saying, Nimis insolenter
pronunciat de Virginum meritis Ambrosius: Ambrose does pronounce too too
insolently of the merits of Virgins. Ephr. l. de luctamin. spiritus cap. 2.
And for that holy Ephrem had said, That all pious people shall come merrily in
the Day of Judgment before the face of Christ, but especially Monks, and other
such as have lived in Deserts in Chastity, Labors, Watchings, Fastings, and the
like. These good Fellows, whose greatest Labors of Penance have been to drink
and be merry in warm Stows, saying, Page 301.
Quid potest monstrosius dici contra meritum Christi? What can be spoken more
monstrously against the merit of Christ? And then to a Godly Speech of St.
Ambrose, Amb Sermon. 6. de marg. tom. 3. and in orat funeb. de obitu Theodosii.
about the pious honoring of Martyrs Tombs, they give this Censure, Cogitet
pius Lector, quam tetra sint ista; Let the Godly Reader consider how horrible
these things are, uttered by Ambrose.

16. And in another place, upon certain words of St. Ambrose about the holy
Cross found out by St. Helena, they have in their injurious Speeches, Multa
commemor at superstitiosa, quae vehementer contumeliosa sunt in meritum
Christi, and repugnantia Fidei; Ambrose does reckon up many superstitious
things, which are greatly contumelious against the merit of Christ, and are
contrary to Faith. And thus they go forward against the rest of the Doctors and
Fathers that agree not with them in their Fancies and Heresies; and generally
having sought to discredit, about the Article of Justification and Good Works,
this fourth Age after Christ, and the chief Doctors thereof by name, as
Lactantius, Gregory Nyssen, Hilarious, Nazianzen, Ambrose, and Ephrem; they
conclude with this contumely against them all: Jam cogitet pius Lector, Cent.
4. p. 293.
quam procul haec aetas in hoc Articulo, de Apostolorum Doctrina desciverit;
Let the Godly Reader now consider how far this fourth Age departed from the
Doctrine of the Apostles in this Article of Good Works and Justification.

17. Well then, The sum of this Chapter, and shameful shifting of Heretics.
in all these points of Controversy between Us and the Protestants, to wit,
the Primacy and Principality of the Church and Bishop of Rome, the Sacrament
and Sacrifice of the Altar, otherwise called the Mass, Freewill, Justification,
Penance, Merit of Good Works, Traditions, observing of Fasts, Holydays, Sacred
Virginity, Continency, Monastical Life, Prayer to Saints, Purgatory, Memory and
Relics of Martyrs, and other like, (which in effect are the principal points
wherein the Protestants do disagree from us) we see by the testimony and
witness of their own men that the ancient Fathers of Eleutherius's days, and
the next two Ages after him (for I go no lower) did wholly agree with us
against them; and this so far forth, as the Magdeburgians do say more than once
of all the Doctors of the second Age after Christ, (wherein Eleutherius lived)
That they erred, and lived in darkness, for that they held with us, as now you
have heard. Cap. 5. number. 2
And with what face then does John Fox say a little before, Let them but leave
us the Religion that was in Eleutherius 's time, and we will ask no more? With
what forehead also does Sir Francis, his Scholar, add, Supra ibidem.
I say there is not now the same Faith in Rome that was then; there were then
no Masses, no Universal Pope, etc.? But with such men do we deal, that care not
what they say or deny, so they may bear out the matter for the present, and
seem always to have somewhat to say.

18. But now will we leave this, and pass to another Conversion under St.
Gregory the Great, which concerns us Englishmen more particularly than the
former; whereabout you shall see no less Heretical Fraud and Malignity used
than in the other beforementioned, if not more; for that these people finding
all Antiquity against them, and having no other Authorities for proof of their
Religion, but only their own Inventions, with some light show of Scripture
expounded by themselves, are forced to use most shameful and desperate shifts,
when their Cause is examined by the Histories of former Ages. And so much of
this point.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the third Conversion of our Island and English Nation by St. Augustine and
his fellows sent from Pope Gregory the first, Anno 596. And of diverse Heretical
Shifts and Impudences to deface the said two excellent Men, and the Religion
brought into England with them.

YOu have heard the two Shifts before used about the first public Conversion of
Britanny by Pope Eleutherius, to wit, first of all to discredit this Story so
much as in them lay, and then being forced to grant it, their last Refuge was
to say, that the same Faith was not then in Rome that is now, nor that the
Points of Doctrine now believed and taught, were known and acknowledged then.
Both which Shifts have been most evidently refuted, and the same Religion
showed to have been in Rome under Pope Eleutherius, which at this day is there
taught.

2. But now there remains the other public Conversion of the English Nation
from Pope Gregory under King Ethelbert of Kent some four hundred years or more
after the other, in which neither of the two former Shifts can be used by our
Adversaries. For neither can they deny or bring in doubt the History it self,
recorded by all Writers of that time, and since, (and namely and most
abundantly by our Countrymen Saint Bede, Bed. l. 1. hist. Ang. c. 23. and
deinceps.

Malm. de gest. Regum. Ang. l. 1. and de Pont. Angl. l. 1.

Galf. mon. hist. Ang. l. 11. c. 22.

Huntingt. hist. l. 3. c. 1.


and his Continuator William of Malmesbury, and others) nor can they say that
the Faith of Rome then derived into England, was any other than that, which is
now in Rome. Which latter Point, he that will see proved substantially, and
examined Article by Article, and Point by Point, by conferring the Doctrine,
Rites and Ceremonies brought into England by our said Apostle Augustine, with
that which at this day is taught and practiced in the Roman Churh; let him read
the Translation of the said Story of Bid, put into English by our famous
learned Countryman M. Doctor Stapleton, with his notes to the same, and the
learned Treatise, which thereon, and by that Occasion he made, Entitled, The
Fortress of Faith, which shows the same to be conform likewise to all
Antiquity.

3. Wherefore our wily Knight Sir Francis seeing this, has answered not one
Sentence or Syllable in this his Reply or Wast-word, to this Conversion of
Englishmen under Pope Gregory, tho I urged the same somewhat earnestly in my
Ward-word. And yet for that upon other Occasions, he says once or twice in his
Book, That Augustine brought in the Romish Religion: as tho the Romish Religion
had been different at that day from that of the Christian Britans; and for that
his Master John Fox (out of whom he has stolen all this Story) runs also to
this Shift upon diverse Occasions: I am forced to say somewhat thereunto in this
place.

Two new wicked devised shifts.
4. You must then understand, that Fox and his Fellows being excluded from the
former two Shifts (as I have said) and yet forced to use somewhat against this
evident Deduction of our English Faith from the Sea of Rome, they betake
themselves to other Refuges, as absurd, or rather more, than the former. The
first whereof is, to discredit by all means, they can devise, the Authors of
this Conversion, to wit, St. Gregory the Pope, and St. Augustine our Apostle.
About this time, Fox Act. and Mon. p. 107. coll. 2. n. 84.
(says Fox) departed Gregory Bishop of Rome, of whom it is said; that of the
number of all the first Bishops before him in the Primitive Church, he was the
basest, and of all them that came after him he was the best.

The defense of St. Gregory against Heretics.
5. Lo here Envy and Malice how blind they are; for as for Baseness, if he means
in Blood or Worldly Honor, it might perhaps with more probability have been
attributed to all, or any of the Popes that were before him, than to Gregory,
who was (as is known) the Son of a most Noble and Rich Senator Gordianus, as
all Authors do testify. Ioannes Diac. in vita Gregor. Magni.
Whose Palace on the Hill Scaurus near to that of the Emperors, is at this day
a fair Church and Monastery; and this Man being his Fathers Heir, built with
his own Substance seven Monasteries, and endued them with rents before he
entered into any religious Order himself. Wherefore touching Birth and wordly
Wealth, this was so far off from the Baseness, wherewith Fox would disgrace
him, as he might perhaps with more probability have subscribed this note (as
before I said) to any other Pope from St. Peter downward, then to St. Gregory.
And as for rare and singular Learning; (which impugneth also Baseness) or for
Holiness of Life, (that increases much Nobility) I think John Fox dares not
to make St. Gregory inferior to many Popes that went before him, tho he were
no Martyr, as many of them were. So that hard it were to determine wherein this
Baseness does consist, but that the simple fellow would needs say somewhat to
so great a Man's Disgrace. And for terming him the best of all that followed,
this is not so much to praise him, as to dispraise the rest; or to make base
and best to fall out in Tune, and so we must pass it over as an impertinent
Speech.

6. But if we should stand upon the Testimonies of Antiquity in this behalf, to
oppose them against John Fox, as namely Joannes Diaconus that wrote his Life,
and many other after him; we should oppress the poor Fellow with Multitude of
Witnesses; yet cannot we let pass two that lived in Spain at the same time, the
one and the other soon after. The first is Isidorus Archbishop of Sevil, who
writes thus presently upon his Death: Gregorius Papa, Isid. de viris illustris
c. 27. The testimony of Isidorus concerning St. Gregory.
Romanae Sedis and Apostolicae Praesul, compunctione timoris Dei plenus and
humilitate summus, tantoque per gratiam Spiritus Sancti scientiae lumine
praeditus, ut non modo illi praesentium temporum quisquam, sed nec in
praeteritis quidem par fuit unquam. Pope Gregory Bishop of the Roman and
Apostolic See, being full of Compunction of the Fear of God, and most high in
Humility, was endued by the Holy Ghost with so great light of Knowledge, as not
only any Man of the present time is equal unto him, but neither of the Ages
past.

7. This is his judgment, which holy St. Hildefonsus Archbishop of Tollet,
having cited in a Book of his of the same Title not long after, yields as it
were the Reason of this Asseveration of St. Isidore in these words: Hildef.
libel. de viris illustr. The judment of St. Hildefonse.
Ita enim cunctorum meritorum claruit perfectione sublimis, ut (exclusis omnium
illustrium virorum comparationibus) nihil illi simile demonstret antiquitas.
Vicit enim sanctitate Antonium, eloquentia Cyprianum, sapientia Augustinum,
etc. For St. Gregory did shine with so high a perfection of all kind of merits,
as (the comparisons of all other worthy Men being excluded) Antiquity has
nothing to show like unto him, seeing that in Holiness he surpassed St.
Anthony, in Eloquence St. Cyprian, in Wisdom St. Augustine, etc.

Thus wrote these Men in those days, and albeit it may seem some kind of
exaggerations; yet we may hereby behold the judgment of those Ages, and the
sense of these two learned and holy Prelates, how different they were from John
Fox and his Mates in our days, that seek so fondly to discredit so rare a Man;
and this shall be sufficient for St. Gregory.

8. Now as for our Apostle St. Augustine, though the malice of our Heretics be
exceeding great, both against his person and actions; yet is Fox oftentimes
forced to speak well of him and his company, as in these words: Fox Act. and
Mon. col. 2. n. 5. p. 105. Fox praises St Agustin our Apostle against his Will.
At length when the King (Ethelbert) had well considered the honest
Conversation of their Life, and moved with the Miracles wrought through Gods
hand by them, he heard them more gladly; and lastly by their wholesome
Exhortations and Example of godly Life, he was by them converted and Christened
in the year abovesaid 596. and the 36 of his Reign.

9. Thus writes he there; and moreover talking of a great and special Miracle
wrought by St. Augustine in sight of the Britans, then his Adversaries, for
confirmation of the Roman Doctrine in observing the Easter-feast, as now it is
used, (which Miracle was the restoring of a blind Man to his sight, by only
kneeling down and praying to God for him in the presence of the multitude whose
Prelates had attempted the like before, but could not atchieve it) he says,
Fox. Act. p. 107. col. 1.
that the stories both of Bid and Polychronicon, Huntington Iornalensis,
Fabian, and other more do agree in this matter; And yet in the very next Page
following, he goes about to discredit him by all means possibl^, and to
diminish the Opinion of Sanctity in him: For talking of a certain meeting of
seven Britan Bishops with him, where they say St. Austin being now made
Archbishop and Primate of England, would not raise nor move his Body at their
coming in, Fox writes thus, Much less would his Pharisaical Solemnity have
girded himself as Christ did, and wash his Brethrens feet after their journey,
but how knows John Fox this? Fox seeks to discredit St. Augustine.
Hear his Reason; Seeing his Lordship was so high, or rather so heavy, or
rather so proud, that he could not find in his heart to give them a little
moving of his Body, etc.

By this is his Affection seen to the Man, and also by that he would gladly
bring him in some manner of suspicion, to have been some part of the cause of
the slaughter of the Britan Monks of Bangor, slain by Ethelfred a Heathen King
of Northumberland, for that they come to Chester to pray against him. Whereas
Fox himself notwithstanding does confess, that both Huntington and other
Authors (and he might have said also Bid himself) do say, Bed. lib. 1. hist.
c. 35.
that St. Augustine was dead when this slaughter happened, nor could any way
this matter appertain unto him, or to any occasion given by him; yet does
another Companion of John Fox go further, and more maliciously against this
holy Man our. Jo. Bale. cent. 1. scrip. Brit. fol. 35.
Apostle, to wit, John Bale the Apostate Friar, who writes thus: Augustinus
Romanus a Gregorio primo ad Anglosaxones papistica fide initiandos Apostolus
mittebatur. "Augustine the Roman was sent as an Apostle from Gregory the first,
to convert the English-Saxons to a Popish Faith. Behold here, how ancient
Papists, the Catholics of England, are by this Man's Opinion.

Bales scurrulity against St. Augustine.
11. I pass over the rest of Bales false and contumelious Speech concerning St.
Augustine, as that he being ignorant of the Scriptures, taught false Doctrine,
and that he made himself Archbishop by violence; that he attended more to get
tithes and oblations for Masses, than to preach the Gospel, and that he was
cause of the slaughter of 1200 Monks, and other such like reproachful lies;
against whom I could propose the whole stream of the best Authors ever since
his time, both domestical and extern, if it were worth the striving with so
contemptible an Adversary: and if nothing would restrain the Liberty of so
reproachful a Tongue; yet at leastways the respect of our Nation converted by
him, and so many great miracles wrought by him to that effect, as both Saint Bede
and others do recount, and Fox dares not deny, ought to have some bridle to
this shameless Apostata. For that not only Saint Bede, Malmesbury, Marianus,
Scotus, Sigebert, and others do recount them; Of the miracles wrought by St.
Augustine.
but even St. Gregory himself wrote the same by his own pen to Eulogius
Archbishop of Alexandria, who had written unto him of some like miracles
wrought in Egypt also about that time, in the Conversion of new Christians. St.
Gregory's words are these,

Greg. l. 7. Epist. 30. Ind. 1.
12. Sed quoniam etc. But for that truly the good, which they do there, is much
increased by the joy you take in other men's good also: I will requite you with
the like good News, as you have written to me. Know then, that whereas the
English Nation placed in the corner of the World, have remained hitherto in
their Infidelity, worshipping stones and blocks, I did by the help of your
Prayers these days past (God as I hope, moving me thereunto) send unto that
Nation a Monk of my Monastery to preach unto them; who upon my License
afterward being made Bishop in the Countries near unto them, St. Gregory's
Relation of English Affairs.
arrived at last unto that end of the world. And now Letters are come unto us
both of his Health, and his Work that he has in Hand; and surely either he, or
they that were sent over with him, do work so many miracles in that Nation, as
they may seem therein to imitate the Power and Miracles of the Apostles
themselves; and in this very last Solemnity of Christ's Nativity past, there
were above ten thousand Englishmen baptized by the hands of this our Brother
and fellow Bishop, etc.

13. Thus far St. Gregory, who is another manner of Witness than Fox or Bale,
tho Fox does confess (as you have heard before) both the virtuous Life and
Miracles of St. Augustine and his fellows. And if he do so indeed, and do think
them to have been wrought by Gods Power, and not by the operation of Satan;
then it is great Blasphemy both in him and his fellows, to think that God would
concur by Miracles to the planting of false Doctrine and Error, which
scornfully they call the Papistical Faith. Whereof now we shall treat more in
particular, having disputed these things about Saint Augustin's Person.

14. About which Doctrine these good Fellows seem to quarrel much more, About
the Doctrine brought in by St. Augustine.
giving simple People to believe, that he brought from Rome a different
Christian Religion from that, which was in Britanny before, as out of Sir
Francis own words alleged may appear: And albeit John Fox in his History
treating of this matter, does not dare to affirm it plainly, but rather seeks
here and there to pick out some differences between the Roman Religion, that
St. Augustine brought in, and that which is now, as for example where he says:
Fox p. 107. col. 2.
Note by the way (Christian Reader) that whereas it is said that Augustine A
wise consequence; for that now also Fonts would hardly suffice to baptize 10000
in a day.

Fox in Protest. p. 9.


baptized ten thousand English Saxons upon a Christmas day in a River, it
follows (says he) that then there was no use of Fonts, etc. Yet in a certain
Preface of his, which he calls his Protestation to the whole
Church-of-England, he has these words, All this while about the space of 400
years ( after the Conversion of King Lucius) Religion remained in Britanny
incorrupt, and the Word of Christ truly preached; till about the coming of
Augustine and his Companions from Rome, many of the said Britan Preachers were
slain by the Saxons. And after that began the Christian Faith to enter and
spring amongst the Saxons after a certain Romish sort; yet notwithstanding
somewhat more tolerable than in other times, which after followed, etc.

15. Thus writes Fox maliciously enough (as you see) to bring in doubt and
discredit our first Christian Religion, planted by St. Augustine; Whether St.
Augustine taught the Saxons true Religion.
but yet hereby it is evident, that if Englishmen were ever true Christians
either at their first Conversion, or for more than 900 years after, they were
Roman Christians. But whether they were ever true Christians indeed or not,
that Point Fox dares not plainly to determine in this place; but only as the
fashion of Heretics is, to call matters in question and leave them in doubt,
so does he, and (as one said well) To lay the Eggs for another to hatch the
Serpents. For that Fox his Scholars, Holinshed, Hooker, and Harrison, and other
like, have presumed upon this foundation, to determine resolutely the matter,
that Englishmen were never true Christians indeed before Luther began his
Doctrine, which appears in these their words following, Holin. in descript.
Britan. c. 27. col. 1.
speaking of the Inhabitants of Britanny. When the sheep of Gods pasture (say
they) would receive no wholesome fodder, it pleased his Majesty to let them run
on headlong from one iniquity to another. Insomuch that after the Doctrine of
Pelagius, they received that of Rome also, brought in by Austin and his Monks;
whereby it was to be seen, how they fell from the Truth into Heresy, and from
one Heresy still into another, until at last they were drowned in the pits of
Error, dug up by Antichrist, etc.

Whether Englishmen were ever true Christians before Luther's time.
16. Thus do write these Companions, of the first Conversion of Englishmen by
St. Augustine, but whether they mean of the Britans, or of Englishmen, or of
both, that fell into these pits, it is not so easy to judge: For they name
both to determine or distinguish neither People; and which way soever you take
it, it has not only falsehood and impiety; but open contradictions also in it
self. For it they mean the Britans, then it is evidently false, that they were
converted by St. Augustine and his Monks. And if they mean of the English, it is
much more false, that they ever received the Doctrine of Pelagius, or fell from
Truth to Heresy, as these fantastical Men both ignorantly and maliciously do
affirm. But let us hear yet further their blasphemous and desperate Speeches of
our first Apostle St. Augustine.

Holinsh. ibid.
This Augustine (say they) after his arrival converted the Saxons indeed from
Paganism, but as the Proverb says, bringing them out of Gods Blessing into the
warm Sun, he imbued them with no less hurtful Superstition, than they did know
before. Most vile blasphemy against the first Christian Englishmen.
For beside the only Name of Christ, and external contempt of their pristin
Idolatry, he taught them nothing at all, but rather an exchange from gross to
subtle Treachery, from open to secret Idolatry, and from the name of Pagans to
the bare Title of Christians, etc.

17. Lo here these Men's censures of the first Conversion of our English Nation
to Christianity. They compare Paganism to Gods blessing and our new Christian
Religion to the warm Sun, and all our Forefathers Faith and Religion, more than
900 years together, they define to be nothing but Superstition, Treachery and
Idolatry, no less hurtful than the Paganism it self, which they professed
before, and that they lived and died only with the bare name of Christians
without the Substance, etc. And consequently are most certainly damned all
eternally. Now if the worst Devil that is found in hell had a mouth, and should
be let forth to preach, curse, or scold against us, as these men do; could he
speak worse or more blasphemously (think you) against the first Christianity of
our Nation, or against God himself, that testified the Truth and Sanctity
thereof by so many rare miracles, as before has been showed? Could this Devil
(I say) in his own shape or language speak more opprobriously of our primitive
English Christian Church, then these new Gospellers do? especially if we add
that which Friar Bale has in these words, Baleus descript. Britan. cent. 1.
fol. 35.
Carnalis illa Anglorum Synagoga, quae Roma venerat, illam persequebatur
Ecclesiam, quae secundum Christi Spiritum apud Britannos erat. That Carnal
Synagogue of English Christians, that came from Rome, did persecute the Church
that was in England, according to the Spirit of Christ bfore Augustine came.

18. Behold our first Christian English Church not only called a Synagogue, but
a carnal Synagogue: and the British Church which a little before Holinshed
condemned (as you heard) of Heresy, is now called the true Church, according
to the Spirit of Christ. But what spiritual Man (think you) was this, that so
speaks of Spirit and condemns our primitive English Church of Carnality?
You shall hear him described by his own pen, and first of his Vocation, Ibid.
cent. 5. fol. 245. How John Bale became a Friar.
how he became a Friar. Duodecim annorum puer (says he) in Carmelitani
Monachatus Barathrum, Nordovici detrudebar. When I was a Boy of twelve years
old at Norich, I was thrust into the pit of being a white Friar. So he says,
and out of these words two things may be noted of his spirit, which is no doubt
of lying, for that both of them are slanderous fictions of his own; first that
he was made a Friar at the Age of twelve years, for that no Religious Order can
admit Men to the same, De Reg. juris l. 6. c. Non solum. and Caet. in Sum.
Council. Trid. sess. 28. cap. 15.
according to the Ecclesiastical Canons, but of convenient years, and fit to
make their choice for so great an attempt, as is to renounce the World, and
lead a Religious Life, according to the vows they make, which before the
Council of Trent was at Fourteen years, whereunto the said Council added two
years more. It might be then perhaps, that this Boy was put into the White
Friars Monastery at Norwich at twelve years old, to sweep the Church, or
cleanse Candlesticks, or other such Offices fit for that Age, and his Person;
but not to be a Friar, or to be admitted into the Order it self, and much less
(which is the second lie) can it be probable, that he was forced thereunto, as
here he tells his Readers; for that it is well known, that such Profession
were not available, for which cause every Order of Religion has their
Noviceships, or times of Probations appointed, wherein Men are to be proved,
and to prove also themselves, and to have free liberty to make their Elections,
without force or constraint at all. And so do all true Religious Men know and
profess, albeit this miserable Apostate having lost all spirit and sense of
Religion, and become wholly carnal indeed, would have it thought that he was
put into Religion against his will.

19. But how did he get himself out again, (trow you) from this Servitude into
Liberty of the Flesh, World, and Devil, and of his new Gospel, you shall hear
it also from himself, Apparente Dei verbo (says he) deformitatem meam vidi,
How Bale was unfriared and made an Apostate.
etc. "The Word of the Lord appearing, I saw mine own deformity of being (to
wit) a Priest, and a Friar. Well, and what followed? Horribilis bestiae
maledictum charecterem deinceps erasi: I did presently then scrape out the
cursed mark or character of the horrible Beast: So he calls his old Character
of Priesthood, his Vows of Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, and other
Obligations of Religion.

20. But what was the means to scrape out these Characters? you shall have it
from himself in like manner. Non enim (says he) ab homine, Bale ibid.
neque per hominem, sed speciali Christi and verbo, and dono, uxorem
fidelissimam accepi Dorotheam: For that I took unto me (and you must mark the
word enim that yields the cause) a most faithful wife. Dorothy (some Nun you
may imagine, as faithful in keeping her Vow of Chastity as himself) and this not
from any Man, nor by any Man's help, but by the special gift and word of Christ,
etc. Lo here Christ made a wooer for this Friar to marry a Nun against both
their Vows and Promises made to him before; and is not this a fit Spiritual
Father to call the whole Primitive Church of England a Carnal Synagogue, etc.

21. But yet hear him out further, what he writes of our first Christian King
Ethelbert, and of the Religion received by him from St. Augustine, and thereby
consider what manner of Men this new Gospel brings forth. Ethelbertus Rex
(says he) Romanismum, cum adjunctis superstitionibus tandem suscepit; hac
nimirum adjecta condition, ut omnino liber, and non coactitius esset novus
ille Deorum cultus: King Ethelbert at length having heard the Preaching, Fox p.
105. col. 2. nu. 5.
and considered (as Fox says) the Miracles and virtuous Life of St. Augustine
and his Fellows, admitted the Roman Religion with all the Superstitions
adjoined thereunto; but yet with this condition, that this new worship of Gods
(which he now admitted) should be altogether free, and no way subject to
Coaction, etc. In which words the Apostate (if you mark him) does not only
speak blasphemously of our whole first Christianity, calling it a new Worship
of many Gods; but seems also to insinuate, that it was so admitted by King
Ethelbert at the beginning, as it might be free for Men to leave it again, when
they would. Than which contumelious slander (if he mean it so) nothing can be
spoken or imagined more absurd or wicked. Let any Man read St. Gregory's
letters to King Ethelbert after his Conversion, Bed. l. 1. hist. c. 33.
and he shall see an other Lesson there taught him: to wit, his great and
perpetual Obligation to God for so singular a Benefit, confirmed from Heaven
with so many Miracles, and such other points.

The wicked intents of our Sectaries.
22. But by this we may see, whither these Men's drifts do tend: which is to
discredit all Antiquity and Religion, and to bring in question whether
Englishmen were ever true Christians hitherto or no. And as for the space of
900 years together after St. Augustin's time unto Luther, these Men deny it
flatly, for so much as they say, that our first Faith received from Rome, was
not the true Faith of Christ, nor of Christendom; but a particular Romish
Faith, full of Error, Superstition, and Idolatry, as you have heard; yea worse
(if we will believe Holinshed, Hooker, and Harrison) than was the Paganism,
which Englishmen professed before their Conversion: And then follows, that
for so much as they hold also, that the longer Religion endured in England, the
worse it waxed: needs must they conclude, that when Luther began his Gospel,
our Fathers and Grandfathers were no Christians at all, and much less true
Christians. And this for them.

That Protestants cannot be sure that they are Christians according to Fox and
Holinshed.
23. But if we will talk of our selves, that now live in England, we must needs
also conclude the same: to wit, that after all Mutations made in England about
Religion, since Luther began, the Protestants cannot be sure with any Reason,
that they are true Christians, or have yet received the right Faith or Gospel
unto this day. Which I prove thus, First for that the Gospel preached by
Luther, was never yet admitted wholly into England: For at the very beginning
thereof under King Henry, it was contradicted by him and the State, See the
Acts of Parliament Anno 31. Hen. 8. c. 14. and anno 32. c. 26. and anno 34. c.
1.
during his whole Reign, yea condemned for Heretical, as by many Decrees as
well of Parliaments as otherwise by particular Ordinances is manifest: his
Majesty always holding Luther's Opinions for Heresies, and according thereunto,
burned the Professors thereof for Heretics unto his dying day, as is notorious:
Though in one Article about the Popes Supremacy he concurred with them; but not
as taking the same from Luther or his Doctrine: So as Luthers Gospel (if it were
a Gospel, as John Fox calls it every where in his Acts and Monuments) was
never yet received in England. For that in King Edwards days the Doctrine of
Zuinglius and not of Luther was admitted. Which Doctrine Luther always held for
opposite to his, and for plain Heresy, as before at large has been declared.

24. And as for her Majesty's time that now is, clear it is that neither of
both the former Doctrins or Gospels have formally, or fully been admitted: I
mean neither the Lutherans or Zwinglians, Enc. 1. c. 3, 4, 5.
but rather the Doctrine of a third, opposite in many Points to them both; to
wit, of John Calvin. And yet neither has this Gospel been so frankly or
generally received or practiced, as the chief Professors thereof, and such as
take themselves to follow the same most exactly (I mean the Puritans) do remain
content, but rather complain, that their true Doctrine indeed and Gospel, was
never hitherto truly established in our Country, Super ibid.
as in the first Encounter against Sir Francis we have showed abundandtly.

25. So as if the first Gospel of St. Augustine, brought into England from Rome,
wherewith our Ancestors lived and professed Christianity for 900 years
together, were not the true Gospel of Christ indeed, nor the other Gospel of
Martin Luther, that appeared to the World in the year 1517 was ever admitted
into England in King Henry's time, that died in the year 1547. And if from
thence forward under King Edward, Zwinglius's Doctrine and not Luthers, was
established, for the English Gospel of that time: And if under her Majesty that
now is, neither of these two, but Calvin's Doctrine and Gospel has been admitted
(though yet with such Restrictions, and Alterations, as the purest Patrons
thereof say it is not their Gospel, but a patched thing, as Enc. 1. c. 6.10 and
12.
before at large we have declared) what follows then (I say) but that we
Englishmen have yet no true Gospel at all, nor ever had, and consequently we
were never yet true Christians, nor are at this day: For that the Christianity
of the ancient English from King Ethelbert to King Henry VIII. was no true
Christianity, as these men say; and much less will they grant of the Religion
established by King Henry, as opposite as well to Protestants as to Catholics.
That also of King Edward's days was different from all; and that which now is
in England, is contradicted as well by Lutherans, Zuinglians, and Puritans, as
by Catholics. Where then, and among whom, shall we find the true Gospel?

26. One only shift these people do pretend, which is to run to the Britans
Religion at that time, when St. Augustine came into England; for this both Fox
and Bale do acknowledge to have been the right Religion, and (to use their
words) the naked unspotted Gospel, and far different from the Romish Religion
that Augustine brought in from Gregory: wherefore that point rests now to be
examined. And albeit you have heard a little before how Holinshead accuses the
Britans Religion of Pelagianism and other Heresies, Baleus descrip. Brit. cent.
1. fol. 35.
yet Bale writes thus: Prius illic fuerit Christianismus, etc. Christian
Religion was in Britanny before the coming of Augustine and his Fellows: But it
was not to their commodity, for that it was without Masses, and without
distinction of Meats or Days; and the Britans observed the bare naked Gospel,
without Jewish Ceremonies, etc.

27. So writes he. And Fox (as before you have heard) said, Fox in his
protestation to the Church of England, p. 9.
That for 400 years after Pope Eleutherius and King Lucius, Religion remained
in Britanny incorrupt, and the Word of Christ truly preached, till about the
coming of Augustine and his Fellows from Rome, etc. And yet he cannot deny but
that in this space both the Pelagian and other Heresies had entered also among
them, and that some Relics thereof remained even when Augustine arrived. And
whereas they say, that the British Religion before the coming of Augustine was
incorrupt, and free from all Jewish Ceremonies, it is ridiculous; forasmuch as
we have showed Sup. cap. 3.
before, that the chiefest difference between these two Religions at that day
was about a Jewish Ceremony observed by the Britans, against the Order and
Faith of the Church of Rome, to wit, the superstitious keeping Easter day upon
the fourteenth of the first Moon of March, together with the Jews.

28. But as for other substantial points of Faith, (especially such as be at
this day in controversy between Us and Protestants, as Mass, Sacrifice,
Fasting, observing of Holydays, and the like here named) the old Britans
Religion did agree with that of Rome, brought in by St. Augustine, and so has
continued until this day; and this shall we show in the Chapter following. So
as if the old British Faith was the true Faith, We have it among Catholics at
this day, and not Protestants, as shall be declared.

CHAP. IX.
That the Roman Religion, brought into England by St. Augustine under Pope
Gregory, was the very same that was brought in before under Pope Eleutherius by
Fugatius and Damianus, and continued afterward among the Britans until the
coming of St. Augustine to the English Nation.

WE have showed before how that the Christian Faith, preached in England in the
Apostles time, was the Roman Faith; and that the increase, or public
Establishment thereof again under King Lucius, was also from Rome; Sup. c. 1,
3, 5, 6.
and finally, that the third propagation was in like manner from the same City,
under Pope Gregory by St. Augustine. Now remains it that we show and declare
how the Britans, from King Lucius's time until the coming of St. Augustine
(which was 400 years, and more) downward, did not alter their Faith, nor yet
the Sea of Rome Hers; and consequently, that the Faith remaining among the
Britans when St. Augustine entered, and that which was brought in by Him from
Rome, and taught unto the English, was all one.

That Rome changed not her Faith from Eleutherius to St. Gregory.
2. And first for the Church of Rome, if we count the Bishops thereof that held
that Seat from Eleutherius, the fourteenth Pope after St. Peter, who died Anno
Domini 196, until the beginning of Pope Gregory I. the sixty-sixth Pope, who
was chosen Anno Domini 590: In this space (I say) of 400 years, there passed
fifty Popes all of one Faith; nor shall it be found that any one of them
changed his Religion, or was different in belief the one from the other; which
is a sufficient proof that the Roman Faith in Gregory's time was the same that
it was in Eleutherius's time.

3. And as for the Britans, we read not but that from the time of King Lucius
they continued the Faith received under him from Pope Eleutherius, until the
rising up of the Heretic Pelagius, which was somewhat more than 200 years
after; and for other 200 years again after that, to wit, from the time of
Pelagius until the coming of St. Augustine, we find not in any History that the
Britans (being once delivered from the Heresy of Pelagius by the help of St.
German and Lupus, That the British Christian Faith was the same with the
Romans. Sup. c. 3.
Bishops of the Roman Faith) ever changed their Religion in any one substantial
point; nor that they swerved from the general Faith of the rest of Christendom,
except only some few of them infected with the foresaid Heresy whiles it
lasted, and the Custom of keeping Easter Day with the Jews: Which before we
have showed to have been perhaps some remainder of Pelagianism, or otherwise
brought in after. But howsoever it got in, certain it is, that in other
substantial points of Doctrine and Religion, there was no difference between the
Britans and Romans at that day, to wit, under Pope Gregory that sent hither
Augustine; which I show by the Reasons following.

Augustine at his coming had found any other substantial difference of Belief in
the British Faith, from that which he brought from Rome, he would have
reprehended the same, as well as he did their different Custom in celebrating
Easter after the Jewish manner, and some few other Rites of less moment; or at
leastwise, being afterward made Archbishop and Primate of all the Land, and
conferring with the British Bishops in Council, (as Fox says he did) he would
have communed with them about the same, or objected it unto them, Fox page 117.
col. 2.
or at leastwise have made some mention thereof, either in his Letters to Pope
Gregory (as he did of far lesser matters) or to some other man. But any such
thing we do not read; and consequently it may be concluded certainly, that
there was no such difference in matter of Faith and Doctrine.

5. Another Reason may be taken on the other side, from the Britans toward
Augustine; who being in Controversy with him about his preaching to the Saxons,
whose Conversion for the present they seemed not to desire (in respect of many
injuries received from them, as Saint Bede affirms) they did observe all
Occasions, Causes, and Reasons, which they might allege by any probability,
why they would not join with him in that Work; and if they could have alleged
this Cause, That the Doctrine which he preached had been different in any one
point from that which they had received and observed before, it had been a very
sufficient excuse and reason for them. But we do find no such exception
alleged by them, and consequently we may conclude (as before) that there was
none.

6. Our third Argument or Reason may be deduced from the consideration of
Gregory I. who was chosen Pope about the year of Christ 590, at what time there
was Unity and Conformity of one Religion throughout all Christendom, except
only in some places of the World certain Relics of Greg. l. 5. ep. 14.
Pelagians, Philas. l. de haeres.
Origenists, Greg. l. 3. ep. 32.
Donatists, and Greg. l. 10. in Job. c. 29.
Eutychians, out of whom sprung also in those days the Niceph. l. 18. c. 53.
Arminian Errors, as appears by the History of those times, especially out of
St. Gregory's own Works. Neither do we read that the Britans were noted with
any of these Heresies, but only with Pelagianism some years before; from which
they had been delivered by the Preaching of the French Bishops St. German and
St. Lupus, and by the diligence of their own Metropolitans St. Dubritius and
St. David afterward. Seeing then St. Augustine came from Rome by Italy and
France, and was directed to the Bishop of Arles, Bed. l. 1. c. 25.
from whom he passed through France into Britanny; it is certain he brought no
other Faith than the Universal Faith of Christendom received and believed in
those days: From which seeing that Britanny was not held nor noted to be
different, nor yet Excommunicated, (as certain Bishop of Ireland appear to have
been by diverse Letters of St. Gregory himself, Greg. l. 2. ep. 36. indict. 10.
and l. 9. ep. 61. indict. 4.
written to them in their reprehension for participation with certain
Schismatics;) it follows, that the Faith which St. Augustine brought, and that
which the Britans had before, must needs be one and the self-same in all
material and substantial points.

7. To which effect also may be added, That in the very next Age among Britans,
before the English entered, The presence of British Bishops in Foreign Councils.
there were British Bishops in diverse General and National Councils; as in the
time of Constantine and Pope Sylvester we read, That one Restitutus, a famous
Bishop of London, was present at the Synod of Arles in France, in the year of
Christ 325, and subscribed to the same, as by the Acts of the said Council
appears; See Syn. 2. Arelatens. to. 1. Council. and the subscriptions.
wherein among other points was ordained, That no man having a Wife should be
made a Priest without his Wifes consent, promising to forbear her Company for
the time to come. It appears also by the Apology of St. Athanasius, Cap. 2,
and 3. Athan. Apol. 2. cont. Arrian.
that diverse Bishops of Britanny were present at the Council of Sardica, held
for St. Athanasius against the Arians, about the year of Christ 350; as also
the Council of Ariminum, wherein though the greater part of that Council were
beguiled by the Arians, yet St. Hilary does praise diverse good Bishops for
their Constancy, and among other, Provinciarum Britannicarum Episcopos, certain
Bishops of the Britan Provinces. By all which is showed, that the Christian
Religion of Britanny was Catholic and Universal, and concurring in all points
with the Roman in those days, as Athanasius and St. Hilary, who praised these
Bishops, Hilar. de Syn. advers. Arrian.
are known to have done; and consequently it cannot be presumed that either the
British Religion should be different from the Roman in the next Ages after,
when St. Gregory sent St. Augustine to convert the English, or that the Roman
Religion brought in by St. Augustine should be different from the British,
except only in certain Rites or Relics of Pelagianism, which yet were not
generally received of all, as before has been declared.

Observations out of Histories.
8. The fifth Argument stands upon some Observations taken out of Histories,
and other Monuments of Antiquity; whereby it may be gathered more or less what
points of Religion, among such as are now called in Controversy by
Protestants, were believed in those days by the ancient Britans. For albeit the
Story of that Church before the coming of St. Augustine be not so left written
by any authentical Writer, as were to be wished, and as other Countries have
(and namely ours by Saint Bede) and this in respect of the manifold Wars, great
Miseries, and continual Calamities fallen upon the British Nation for 200 years
together before the Conversion of the English, (whereby neither the orderly
Succession of their Bishops, neither their meeting in Synods and Councils,
neither the observation of Ecclesiastical Discipline, neither their
Communication with the Churches of other Countries, and especially the Sea of
Rome, could be so well performed or recorded) yet of the small Sparkles and
Relics that do remain, it is not hard to guess (besides the Reasons and
Considerations before-alledged) what Religion the Britans were of, and whether
their Faith agreed more with the Protestants of our days, than with the
Religion of St. Augustine brought in from Rome, and continued by Catholics unto
this present.

Chrysostom. orat. cont. Gentes, quod unus est Deus.
9. For first, if we will hear external Authors, St. Chrysostom testifies
against the Gentiles in his days, that in Britanny there were Altari a Christi
dedicata, Altars dedicated to Christ; which Altars do infer Sacrifice, and
Sacrifice Priesthood, as in his Books de Sacerdotio he proves. So as in St.
Chrysostom's Age, which was the very same wherein the Saxons entered into
Britanny, the Britans Religion was Catholic, according to St. Chrysostom,
agreeing as well with the Western as Eastern Church, whereof himself was. For
if they had been different, or had followed any other Religion than the Common,
he would not so much have bragged of them, as against the Gentiles he did.

10. But let us return to British Authors themselves. If we read over with
attention the little Treatise or Epistle of Gildas, which he writes of the
Destruction and Conquest of his Country, (he being the only Author indeed of
entire credit which we find extant of those ancient times) we shall find signs
and footsteps enough what Religion the Britans were of, though his purpose was
not to write any Ecclesiastical History. He lived a good while before the
coming of St. Augustine, and in the second part of his said Treatise
reprehendeth grievously the most horrible sins of the Britans, for which these
Calamities of the Picts, Scots, and Saxons, came upon them. And he begins
his complaint first of their Kings and Judges, saying, Reges habet Britannia,
sed Tyrannos; Judices habet, Gild. de excidio Britan. c. 26.
sed impios; crebro jurantes, sed perjurantes, voventes, sed continuo
propemodum mentientes: Britanny has Kings, but they are become Tyrants; it
has Judges, but they are impious; swearing often, but forswearing; making
Vows, but presently almost breaking the same, etc.

11. Here we see that breaking of Vows was held for no small sin in those days.
The Britans use of taking Sanctuary, and swearing upon Altars.
But he goes further, talking of the said Princes; Inter Altaria jurando
demorantes, and haec eadem ac si lutulenta paulo post saxa despicientes, cujus
tam nefandi piaculi non ignarus est Constantinus: They run to the Altar and
swear, (when they are in necessity) and a little after they despise the said
Altars again, as if they were but dirty Stones, of which wicked Sacrilege King
Constantine is not ignorant, etc. Here you see Altars made of Stone in those
days, and Princes accustomed to swear by Altars, and to seek their Refuge in
peril or necessity by running to them, and staying by them in Sanctuary, or
when they would do any act with religious solemnity; and that it was counted a
heinous sin to break promises made upon Altars in those days; which yet
Protestants make no scruple of.

12. But now what this Oath of King Constantine was, (whereof Gildas speaks)
and in what form it was made, it appears in the next words after, which
amongst other are these: Gildas ibid.
Hoc anno post horribile juramenti Sacramentum, quo se devinxit, etc. Deo
primum, Sanctorum demum Choris, and Genetrici comitantibus, etc. latera
Regiorum tenerrima puerorum vel praecordia crudeliter inter ipsa (ut dixi)
sacrosancta Altaria nefando ense, hastaque prodentibus laceravit; ita ut
Sacrificii coelestis sedem and purpurea pallia coagulati cruoris attingerent,
etc. Even this year, after a most dreadful Oath, whereby Constantine bound
himself, etc. first to God, and then to the whole Choir of Saints, and the
Mother of Christ accompanying the same, etc. he pierced with his wicked Sword
and Spear the most tender sides and hearts of two young Princely Children; and
this so near to the holy Altars, as their Purple Cloaks all besprinkled with
Blood did touch the seat of the heavenly Sacrifice, etc. Behold here an Oath
broken, which was made to God upon the holy Altars, in the sight of his Mother,
and of all the Saints of Heaven, for the preservation of the said two Princely
Children committed to Constantine, and most cruelly murdered by him, even at
the side of the said Altars, so near that their Purple Cloaks did touch the
seat of the heavenly Sacrifice. Which is the same phrase that other ancient
Fathers did use to describe holy Altars; calling them the Seat of the blessed
Sacrifice, or (which is all one) the Seat of the Body and Blood of our Savior.
Quid est enim Altar, Optat. lib. 6.
(says Optatus) nisi seeds Corporis and Sanguinis Christi? What is an Altar,
but the seat of the Body and Blood of Christ?

13. And now I would ask our men, whether these speeches of Gildas do agree
better to Protestants Religion or to Ours? Would any Protestant speak or write
thus? But let us hear how he goes forward against another Britan Prince of
that time, called Aurelius: Among many other Crimes, Against King Aurelius.
Gild. ibid. page 122.
he objecteth this: Propria uxore pulsa, furciferam germanam ejus, perpetuam
Deo viduitatis castimoniam promittentem, suscipis; Thou having driven away
thine own Wife, take unto thee her wicked Sister, which had promised to God
perpetual Chastity of Widowhood. And then to another wicked Prince, Against
King Maglocunus for leaving to be a Monk.
Maglocunus, he objecteth, That having made a Vow to be a Monk, he returned to
the World again, saying, Coram omnipotente Deo, Angelicis vultibus, humanisque,
perpetuo Monachum vouisti, etc. O quam profusus spei coelestis fomes
desperatorum cordibus (te in bonis permanente) inardesceret! o qualia,
quantaque animum tuum Regni Christi praemia in die Judicii manerent! etc. Thou
did vow to be a perpetual Monk before Almighty God, in the sight both of
Angels and Men. O how great a flame of heavenly-hope would burn in the hearts
of them that now despair of thee, if thou had remained in that good state! O
how great Rewards of Christ's Kingdom would remain for thee in the day of
Judgment, etc.

14. Thus says he. And would Protestants (think you) speak thus also, seeing
John Fox does so greatly condemn our ancient Kings and Princes of the English
Nation, Fox Act. and Mon. p. 103.
for that so many of them in the fervor of the Primitive Church, made
themselves Monks? Yet Gildas (you see) on the contrary side, commends highly
that Fact in the Prince Maglocunus, and greatly condemns him for leaving that
holy state: And hereby also is refuted that foolish refuge of Fox and his
Companions, who say and affirm without shame, that Monks had no Vows in those
days; but only that Monasteries were Schools and places of Learning without
any Obligation to persevere therein, or to abstain from Marriage, etc. But let
him show, that every one of those 2000 Monks, that he says lived in the
Monastery of Bangor together, did ever marry, or pretend to have Liberty so to
do after they were professed Monks, and then he says somewhat. And as for
vowing and public profession made to God in the sight of his Angels, and the
whole Church: the matter is evident enough in this place, what was then in use
among the Britans.

Against Priests that said Mass seldom and ill. Gil. ibid page 132.
15. But let us pass from Princes to Priests. What says Gildas of them? You
shall hear his Words: Sacerdotes habet Britannia, sed insipientes, etc.
Ecclesiae domus habentes, sed turpis lucri gratia eas adeuntes, etc. raro
sacrificantes, and nunquam puro cord inter altaria stantes, etc. Sedem Petri
Apostoli immundis pedibus usurpantes, etc. Britanny has Priests, but without
Wisdom, etc. They possess the houses of the Church, but go unto them only for
filthy lucre's sake, etc. They do seldom sacrifice, but never go to the Altar
with a pure heart, etc. They do usurp the Seat of Peter the Apostle, with
unclean feet, etc.

16. Lo here, Massing and Sacrificing Priests in those days, which are so hated
and persecuted at this day in England, though, God be thanked, free from these
Vices of impure Life, Gildas ibid.
which here is objected to the Priests of that time. But let us hear yet Gildas
further: In Apostolicis sanctionibus ob inscitiam hebetes, They are dull in
observing Apostolical Sanctions, for that they are unlearned and understand
them not. Lo here Priests reprehended for lack of skill in the Ecclesiastical
Canons, and Apostolical Decrees. And yet he goes further: Desperatius errant,
quo non ab Apostolis, vel Apostolorum successoribus, sed a Tyrannis, Ibid. p.
133.
and a patre eorum diabolo emunt sacerdotia, These Men do err the more
desperately, Buying of priesthood. Act. 2.
for that they buy unto themselves the Office of Priesthood not of the Apostles
or their Successors (as Simon Magus would have done the Holy Ghost) but of
Tyrant Princes, and of the Devil their Father.

17. Here you see that Priesthood in those days was not wont to be given by the
Authority of Lay Princes, but by the Successors of the Apostles, to wit,
Bishops. And then further he goes forward showing how these naughty Priests,
being once possessed of that Dignity, and made proud thereby, presumed to say
Mass unworthily: Gildas ibid.
Manus non tam venerabilibus aris, quam flammis inferni ultricibus dignas, in
tale schema positi sacrosanctis Christi sacrificiis extensuri, These Priests
being once put in this Dignity or Ornament, they presume to stretch out their
hands to the most holy Sacrifices of Christ, tho their hands be more worthy of
the burning flames of hell, than to touch the venerable Altars.

Altars and Sacrifice among the Britans.
18. Thus he wrote of Altars and Sacrifice among the Britans in those days, and
diverse other Points like unto this, which for brevity's sake I omit; only I
would ask our Men in general, whether this be spoken as of Protestants or no?
And then would I demand of John Fox in particular how that can be true which he
affirms; That the Britans had no Mass in those days, seeing Gildas talks so
much of Priests that did Sacrifice upon Altars? And if he will say that Gildas
uses not the word Mass, it is a plain Cavil, seeing nothing is signified by
the Mass, but only the external Sacrifice of Christians here mentioned. And
that the word Mass was generally used in the Latin Church for Sacrifice long
before this time of Gildas, appears by many Authors, but especially by St.
Aug. to 10. ser. 237. and 251. de temp. and in council. Milevit. c. 12. and
Cartha. 2. c. 3. and Council. Carthag. 4. c. 84. quibus interfuit Augustinus
Epiph. haeres. 50. Eusebius. l. 5. hist. c. 23. and in vita Constant. l. 3. c. 17.
Augustine the Doctor, in diverse places of his works, whereof some in the
Margent we shall note.

19. I would ask also of John Bale, how the Religion of the Britans was the
pure and naked Gospel in those days (for so he says) if it had in it not only
that custom of the Jews before mentioned of the Quartadecimani; but all these
other Points also, which his Church counts for Errors, to wit, of Professed
Monks, and Consecrated Nuns, of Sacrificing upon Altars, and the like, how (I
say) could this British Church be accounted by him and his, so pure and
unspotted? But little heed is there to be given to these Men's saying or
unsaying, but as the present occasion of necessity urges them. And therefore
we will go forward to show some other Observations in this kind.

CHAP X. The continuation of the same matter, wherein is showed, by diverse
Proofs and Examples, that the Britans before St. Gregory's time, were of the
same Religion that he sent into England by St. Augustine, to wit, of the Roman.
AND first of all to begin with the first Entrance of our first English
Apostles, Saint Bede writing of the City of Canterbury, at the coming of St.
Augustine, before King Ethelbert was converted, says thus, Bed. l. 1.6. c. 27.
Erat autem prope ipsam civitatem ad orientem, Ecclesia in honorem St. Martini
antiquitus facta, dum adhuc Romani Britanniam incolerent, etc. In hac ergo ipsi
primo convenire, psallere, orare, Missas facere, praedicare and baptizare
coeperunt, A Church dedicated to St. Martin among the ancient Christian Britans.
There was a Church near to the City on the East side, built in old time in the
honor of St. Martin, while yet the Romans did hold Brittany, etc. Wherefore in
this Church, Augustine and his company did first use to meet together, to sing
Psalms, to Pray, to say Masses, to preach, and to baptize the People, etc.

2. Note here, that seeing the Romans left England presently upon the
destruction of Rome by the Goths (to wit about the year of Christ 400 which was
some fifty years before the entrance of the Saxons) then was the use of
building Churches in the Honor of Saints in practice among the Britans and
Roman Christians of those days living in Britanny. And forasmuch as this Church
of St Martins was found fit to say Mass, and Baptize in, An evident
Demonstration that the British Religion agreed with that of St. Augustine.
according to the use of Rome, and for that the Britan Christians were never
found to have reprehended, or misliked this manner of serving God, used by St.
Augustine and his Fellows: it is an evident Argument, that the same was and had
been in use also among them from all Antiquity: neither was it a novelty
brought in by St. Augustine.

3. Moreover about the same time of the Romans going out of Britanny, or soon
after (to wit, about the year of Christ 440) it appears by Bid, that the two
French Bishops, St. German and St. Lupus the first time, St. German and St.
Lupus.
and St. German and St. Severus the second time, came into Britanny to resist
the Pelagian Heresy and to reestablish the Catholic Faith that was among them
before. And so they did as well by working many Miracles, as by their
Preachings, which Bid recounteth at large throughout many Chapters. Bed. l. 1.
hist. c. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
But now that these three holy Bishops, (the first of Antisiodore in France,
the second of Troy in Campany, the third of Trevers in Germany) were all of the
Roman Religion, and held in all Points of Controversy against the Protestants
of our Time, That St. German, St. Lupus, and St. Severus were Roman Catholics.
both in Doctrine and Practice, is evident, not only by that the Roman Church
does hold them all three for Canonized Saints, and celebrateth their Memories,
the First upon the 31 of July, the Second upon the 29 of the same Month, the
Third upon the 15 of October, which would never be permitted if they had been
different in any one Point of Faith; but also the same is clear, as well by
their own Writings that are extant, and by their Lives written by others, as
also by diverse things recounted by Saint Bede in his Story of their Doings in
England: as namely where he writes of St. German, how he cured the Tribunes
Daughter of Blindness by his Prayer, Relics of Saints. Ibid. c. 18.
and by applying the Relics of certain Saints unto her Eyes in the sight of all
the People. Deinde (says he) Germanus plenus Spiritu sancto; etc. Then St.
German full of the Holy Ghost, did invoke the Name of the Blessed Trinity, and
presently took from his side a certain Box of Saints Relics, that he was wont
to carry about his neck, and with his hands did put them upon the maids eyes,
which out of hand received perfect sight therewith. Whereat the Parents of the
maid rejoiced exceedingly, and all the People did tremble at the sight of the
miracle, etc.

4. Thus writes Saint Bede of that Act. And further that the said Bishop went to
the Sepulcher of St. Alban (which even at that time appears to have been kept
with great Devotion) prayed to the Saint largely, and there left in his
Sepulcher part of the Relics of all the Apostles, and of diverse other Saints,
which he had brought with him out of France, and carried away with him, in
exchange thereof, much of the earth that was died with the Blood of St. Alban.
Which he would not have done if he had been a Protestant. And then yet further,
talking of another famous Miracle and Victory achieved by the said St. German
against Heretics, with sounding out the word Alleluia, Saint Bede says, Ibid. c.
18. The use of Lent among the Britans.
Aderant Quadragesimae venerabiles dies, quos religisiores reddebat praesentia
sacerdotum, etc. The venerable days of Lent were come, which the presence of
these Priests (of God) made more religious, etc.

5. Behold here now almost 200 years before St. Augustine came into England, the
use of Relics of Saints, of praying to Martyrs, and honoring their Sepulchers,
the use of Alleluia, the Religious Observation of Lent, and such other Points
recorded to be in practice among the Christian Britans. Is this
Protestant-like, think you? or can these men be presumed to have been of our
new Religion? But let us proceed to talk of some Britan Teachers and Pastors
themselves.

6. Geffrey of Monmouth in his British Story, much esteemed and alleged by our
Adversaries, writes, that at a certain Feast of Pentecost at Chester, about
the year of Christ 522. (as Bale holds) King Arthur being present, there was
a great meeting of Princes, St. Dubritius Primate of Britanny Anno 522.

Galf. hist. Brit. l. 9. c. 12. and 13.


Lords, and Bishops for his Coronation, and that of the three Archbishops of
Britanny at that time (which were London, York, and Chester) Dubritius
Archbishop of Chester did the Office of the Church that day, of whom he says,
Hic Britannia Primas, and Apostolicae Sedis Legatus, tanta religione clarebat,
ut quemcunque languore gravatum, orationibus sanaret. This Man being Primate of
Britanny, and Legate of the Sea Apostolic, was so famous for his Religion and
Sanctity, as he did heal any sick Man by his Prayers.

7. Lo here the Popes Legate among the Britans did also Miracles before the
coming of St. Augustine. And then further talking of the Church Solemnity that
day, Ibid. p. 70. Procession and Organs.
he says, Postremo (peract a processione) tot organa, tot cantus fiunt
utrisque templis, etc. Lastly the Procession being ended, there were so many
Organs did sound, and so great variety of Music heard in both Churches, as was
wonderful etc. Behold Procession and Organs in Britanny before St. Augustin's
coming. This Man afterward left of his own will the said Archbishopric, and
became an Ermit, as both Jeffrey, and John Bale do testify, which Protestant
Bishops are not wont to do.

8. And further Bale writes of him that he died the 18 day before the Calends
of December, Anno Domini 522. and that his Body afterward in the year of our
Lord, 1120 the Sixth of May was translated under Urban Bishop of Rome, to the
Church of Landaff in Southwales. All which could never have been done, nor
permitted by the Bishop of Rome, if there had been any Suspicion, that he had
held any Point of Doctrine different from the Church and Faith of Rome at that
time; which makes also the matter evident, that the Heretical Custom of
celebrating Easter according to the Jews,) which in St. Gregory's time was
found in Britanny) was a latter custom not held by all, but by some few only.

9. In this Man's place was made Archbishop the famous Man David Menevensis
King Arthurs Uncle (as Jeffrey and Bale do testify) who passed the said
Archbishopric from Chester to St. David's, and so it is called at this day of
his Name. This David (says Bale) was a goodly Man of Stature, Bal. descript.
Eccles. fol. 30. St. David of Wales Anno Domini 540.
about four cubits high, learned and eloquent, and after ten whole years Study
in the Scripture, expounded the same as a Trumpet, carrying always the Text of
the Gospel with him. He extinguished the Relics of the Pelagian Heresies in
Britanny, preached incessantly, cured many sick, and built twelve Monasteries
and was held for a very great Saint in his days, and canonized afterward by
Calixtus II. Bishop of Rome, etc. Per Calixtum secundum (says he) Papisticorum
deorum ascribitur in Catalogum, He was put in the Catalogue of the Papistical
Gods by Calixtus the Second. Whereby appears, that the Britans were not only
Papists in those days before the coming of St. Augustine; but had Papist Gods
and Saints also there. Yet this Man might live (according to Bale) to have seen
the times of St. Augustin's entrance; for that he says he flourished in the
year 440. and lived in all 146 years, though Gerrad Cambrensis, Polydor, Camb. in
Catal. script. Britan. Polid. l. hist. Angl. in fine.
and others do make him somewhat more ancient.

10. And for that we have talked here of John Bale, and that the testimonies
taken from Enemies themselves are of greatest weight against themselves: we
shall in this place touch certain Points briefly of the chief Preachers and
Pastors among the Britans in those days; to wit, for the next two hundred years
before the coming of St. Augustine into England. Which Preachers are mentioned,
Fox in his Protestation to the Church of England. p. 9.

19 British Bishops and Doctors pretended by Fox to have been Protestants.


and much praised both by Fox and Bale, as true Teachers in those days, whereof
Fox writes thus: In this Age (to wit after the Peace restored to the Church by
Constantine) followed here in the land of Britanny; Fastidius, Ninianus,
Patricius, Bacchiarius, Dubritius, Congellus, Kentegernus, Helmotus, David,
Daniel, Sampson, Elnodugus, Assaphus, Gildas, Henlanus, Elbodus, Dinothus,
Samuel, Nivius, and a great sort more, which governed the Britan Church by
Christian Doctrine a long season: albeit the civil Governors for the time were
dissolute and careless, (as Gildas very sharply does lay to their Charge) and
so at length were subdued by the Saxons. And all this while about the space of
400 years (to wit from the time of King Lucius) Religion remained in Britanny
incorrupt, and the word of Christ truly preached, until about the coming of St.
Augustine, and his Companions from Rome, etc.

11. Here now you see the chief Teachers of the British Church (Nineteen in
number) for the space of 400 years (as Fox avoweth) set down in order, and
highly praised by him; but neither his Order or Argument is worth a rush.
Neither Order nor Argument good in Fox.
For as for his Order, he begins with Fastidius, that lived not two hundred
years before St. Augustin's coming, tho he name four hundred. And then he
puts some before, that lived long after the rest, and sometimes skippeth
over 100 years together from one to another, as you shall see by the Examen.
And for his Argument, how many lies and errors it contains, shall easily
appear by the Sequel of this Discourse. For first concerning two of the chief
in this Catalogue contained, (to wit, Dubritius and David, Archbishops of the
Britans) you have seen before, that they were Roman Catholics and canonized
many Ages after their Death by Roman Bishops, which they would never have done,
if they had differed from them in any Point of Religion. But now let us see of
the rest, for I see not what reason there is, why Fox should so commend these
two.

12. The first four are Fastidius, Ninianus, Patricius, and Bacchiarius, all
which are found to have been Catholic Men, and held the common Faith of Rome in
those days, nor any of them ever favored any of these new Doctrins, brought in
by our new Gospellers. Fastidius Priscus Trit. de script. Eccl. Bal. fol. 23.
Trithemius makes mention of Fastidius whose Surname was Priscus, Bishop of
the Britans, a Man of rare Life and great Learning in the Scriptures, and a
singular Preacher, and lived in the time of Honorius and Theodosius the
Emperors, about the year of Christ 420. The same do write of him both Honorius,
Gennadius, and Bergomas. And John Bale concurreth with the rest, adding that he
was Archbishop of London, and that amongst other his Works he wrote one De
Viduitate servanda, of keeping Widowhood, without marryig again. By which only
work you may know that he was not of John Bale's Religion. What we have written
also of the Religion of St. German and his fellow Bishops, that came into
England, may easily declare what Religion this Man was of, who being then
Archbishop of London, must needs be presumed to have had a great part in their
calling in, as also to have joined with them against the Pelagians, which he
would not have done, if they had not been all of one Religion. And thus much of
him.

St. Ninianus. Bed. c. 4. Hector. Boet. l. 7. and 15. Joan. Fordonius l. 3. c.
9.

Bal. ibid.


13. Of St. Ninianus, who converted the Picts to Christian Religion, Saint Bede
makes most honorable mention in the Third Book of his Ecclesiastical History,
and the Roman Martyrologe does cite him for a Saint upon the Sixteenth day of
September. Which would never have been permitted, if he had been in any one
thing different from the Roman Faith. Nay John Bale writes of him thus:
Ninianus Bernitius ex Regio Britannorum sanguine procreatus, Italiam adhuc
adolescens petiit, Romae apud divini verbi ministros mysteria veritatis edoctus
ad plenum, celer in patriam remigrabat, etc. miraculis ac sanctitate
clarissimus obiit anno 432. St. Ninian Bernitius being descended of the Blood
of the King's of Britanny, went in his youth into Italy, and being fully taught
the Mysteries of Gods Word in Rome, he returned swiftly to his Country again,
where he flourished exceedingly in Miracles and Sanctity of Life, and after
died in the year of Christ 432.

Mark here, that Princes Children became Priests in those days, and went to
Rome to learn Divinity, and that this Man having done so, and brought back into
Britanny the Christian Doctrine of Rome, wrought Miracles thereby. Ergo he was
no Protestant, so that here Bale testifies against himself.

St. Patricius. St. Palladius.
14. There follows of Patricius in John Fox; but indeed he should have put
Palladius before Patricius. For so does Bale, and he has Reason; for that he
was a famous Teacher in Britanny, and sent from Rome by Pope Caelestinus before
Patricius, as Bale does note, saying first of Palladius: Hic a Caelestino
Romanorum Pontifice Antistes mittebatur etc. This Man was sent Bishop from
Caelestinus Pope of Rome, Bal. ibid. fol. 23. Marian. Scotus. in Chron. eodem.
Anno 430.
to drive out of Britanny the Pelagian Heresy, which at that time had infected
the greater part thereof, and to reduce the Scots to true Piety, etc. He
flourished about the year of Christ 431. etc.

Prosper in Chron. ann. 432. and 434. Bed. l. 4. hist. cap. 30.
So says he. And the same is confirmed by that which Prosper (a far better
Author than Bale) writes in his Chronicle, where he says that Palladius was
sent by Caelestinus Pope in the year 432 into Britanny; but especially to the
Scots, as testifies also Saint Bede in his Story. So as in this time also the
Popes of Rome had Supreme Care in Spiritual Affairs both among the Britans and
Scots, seeing he appointed them Bishops from Rome.

15. And this is confirmed also by the other Example of Patricius, St.
Patricius.
who (as John Bale says) was surnamed Mangonius, and was born in Britanny of
the Family of Senators, and thereby called Patricius, but yet of kindred by his
Mother to St. Martin Bishop of Tours, studied Divinity in Rome, and thence sent
by Caelestinus the Pope to preach to the Irish-men. Bal. descript. Frit. Cent.
1. fol. 25.
Istum (says he) ad Scotos and Hibernos post Palladium Graecum misit, ut eos a
Pelagianorum tueretur erroribus: This man did Caelestinus Bishop of Rome send
to the Scots and Irish-men (especially those that lived in Britanny) after
Palladius the Grecian, to defend them from the Errors of the Pelagians.

16. Behold the Care and Authority of the Bishop of Rome in those days! But
what follows in Bale? Ibid.
This man (says he) did preach the Gospel unto the Irish-men, with incredible
fervor of spirit, for forty years together; and did convert them to the
sincere Faith of Christ. He was most excellent both in Learning and Holiness;
and among other Miracles that he did, he continued in Praying and Fasting forty
days and forty nights, founded many Churches, healed many sick, delivered many
possessed of Devils, and raised to life sixty that were dead, etc.

17. Behold the effects of Preachers sent forth by the Bishops of Rome,
recounted by the Heretics themselves: Let Fox or Bale show us any such Example
of Miracles, wrought by Preachers sent by them and their Sect. And that this
man also was made Bishop by Caelestinus the Pope, Prosp. cont. lib. Collat. in
fine. Bed. hist. Ang. l. 1. c. 13. and in l. de sex aetat. Mar. Scot. l. 2.
sex. aetat. an. 432.
and sent hither after Palladius, is testified by St. Prosper, that lived in
that time, and after him by Saint Bede, Marianus Scotus, Sigibert, and others;
who say also, that he died in the year of Christ 491, being of the age of 122
years; and his Memory is held in the Roman Calendar upon the 17th day of March,
etc. And now our Fox and Bale being taken in these Examples to speak against
themselves, we might pass over the rest with silence, assuring the Reader that
all is like unto this. Yet some points more we shall note.

18. The fourth before named Bacchiarius, Bacchiarius. Joan. cap. in catal. SS.
Brit. Polid. Virg. 1. histor.

Harpesf.. 6. cap. 22. Congellus.


though he be not mentioned by John Bale, yet other Authors do report that he was
brought up in Rome, and in good credit with Pope Leo I. to whom he dedicated a
Book written in defense of his Pilgrimage to Rome. He had been the Scholar of
St. Patricius; and by this you may guess of what Religion he was.

19. Congellus is the sixth Preacher of true Religion cited in Fox's Catalogue,
(for of Dubritius, which is the fifth, we spoke before) whom Bale says to have
flourished about the year of Christ 530, and that he was the first Abbot of the
Monastery of Bangor. But what more think you? Ab isto Monachismus a Pelagio
introductus, etc. From this man (says he) the Religion of Monks brought in by
Pelagius the Heretic, was not only spread over Britanny under show of true
Religion, but was dilated also into other Countries, etc. Behold how Fox and
Bale agree! Fox says, He was a true Preacher of the Word of God; Bal. fol. 29.
and Bale says, He was a Father of Pelagian Monks. And note here by the way,
that Fox professing to show the continual Succession of the Britan Church,
leapeth from Patricius to Dubritius of whom we spoke before, and between whom
there was above 100 years distance, if we believe Bale and other Authors. And
then follows Kentegernus and Helmotus before David Menevensis, who should
have come after him in respect of time; though of Helmotus Bale makes no
mention; Kentegernus.
but of Kentegernus he says, That he flourished in the year 560, and lived in
all 185 years; which, if it be so, he must needs be alive long after the
entrance of St. Augustine. He says, He was a Monk, and had three hundred
Scholars in one College, which he sent to preaching here and there, etc. Bal.
fol. 32.
And then he adds further, Melote utebatur, etc. He used a Garment made of
Goats skins, with a straight Hood, having a white Stole about his Neck after
the fashion of the Primitive Church. He converted many to the Faith of Christ,
recalled many Apostatas, drove out Pelagians, built Churches, ministered to the
sick and healed their sickness, and lived in very great Abstinence, etc. Thus
he describes him, and whether this description does agree to a Protestant
Minister, or to a Catholic Abbot, let the Reader consider.

20. There do follow in Fox's Catalogue, David, Daniel, Sampson, Elnodugus
Asaphus, and Gildas. But of St. David, the first of this number, we have spoken
before in this Chapter. And as for Gildas, (which is the last of this Rank)
Bale says, He was a Monk of Bangor. And further it may easily appear by the
speeches themselves, which before we have alleged out of him in the former
Chapter, of what Religion he was.

Jo. Capg. in catal. Sanct. Brit.
Of Daniel, Sampson, and Elnodugus, though John Bale speak little or nothing, yet
Capgrave, Leland, and others, show that they were of the same Religion with the
rest, Daniel being the first Bishop of Bangor, and Sampson next after St. David
was Bishop of that place.

St. Asaph received his Consecration from Rome.

Bal. ibid. f. 34.


21. Of Asaph, Bale says, He was Scholar to the foresaid famous Abbot
Kentegern, and was made Bishop of Elgoa in Wales, which of his name was called
Asaph ever since. He flourished in the year 590, and saw the coming in of
Augustine and his Fellows from Rome; and was the first of the Britans (says
Bale) qui a Gregorii Romani Discipulis in Angliam adventantibus Auctoritatem
and Unctionem accepit; that took his Authority and Unction (or Consecration)
from the Disciples of Gregory Bishop of Rome, that came into England. So
writes Bale, and by this shows that St. Asaph held nothing against the Roman
Religion, seeing he accepted his Authority and Consecration from the Bishop of
Rome. Besides this, this Bishop St. Asaph has his Memory celebrated in the
Roman Martyrology upon the first day of May, which he should not if he had been
different in any one point from the Roman Religion.

22. And so being come down now to St. Augustin's time, it is to no purpose to
go any farther, or name the rest that do ensue in Fox, to wit, those five,
Herlanus, Elbodus, Dinothus, Samuel, and Nivius, for that they lived after St.
Augustin's entrance: whereas Fox's promise was to cite only British Teachears
that were before him, and different from the Roman Religion, whereof he has
named hitherto none. Bal. ibid. f. 135.
Besides that of three of these five Bale writes not; and as for Dinothus
Abbot of Bangor, he was the chiefest of those who opposed themselves against
Augustine, and set other men against him also in Synodo Wiccionum, and was
severely punished afterward for the same by the Providence of God, Bed. l. 2
hist. c. 2.
as Saint Bede notes, to wit, by the Sword of Ethelfredus a Heathen King of
Northumberland long after the Death of St. Augustine, when the said Dinothus and
1200 Monks were slain at Chester by the Soldiers of the said Ethelfride,
Augustino jam multo ante tempore (says Saint Bede) ad Coelestia Regna sublato;
St. Augustine being taken to Heaven long before; though Bale be not ashamed to say
that it was done by his suggestion, praising the foresaid Dinothus and his
Confederates, for that they would not preach Baptism and celebrate Easter Day,
according to the Custom of Rome, and Universal Catholic Church.

23. So as now we see that these men care not what they say or avouch, so they
say somewhat against Rome, and those that any way favored the same; wherein
passion does so greatly blind them, as they cannot discern when they allege
matters plainly against themselves, as you have seen in the former enumeration
of British Teachers, Pastors, and Prelates; whom they would have us think to
have been of a different Religion from that of Rome; whereas their own words,
testimonies, condition, and state of life, do testify the contrary. And so I
leave these men to their folly and impudency in this behalf.

CHAP. XI.
The Deduction of the aforesaid Catholic Roman Religion, planted in England by
St. Augustine, from his time to our days; And that from King Ethelbert, who
first received the same unto King Henry VIII. there was never any public
interruption of the said Religion in our Land.

HAving showed before, how that the Roman Catholic Faith was first preached in
our Island under the Apostles, and then again in the next Age under Pope
Eleutherius, and thirdly four Ages after that again under Pope Gregory; and
that all this was but one and the self-same Religion, continued, renewed, and
revived in diverse times, under diverse States and People of the Realm; there may
seem to remain only now two other points considerable in this affair: The
first, Whether this Religion brought in by St. Augustine to England were held at
that day for the only true Religion of Christendom, and so accepted by all the
World? The other, Whether that Religion then planted has come down, and been
continued in England ever since, by continual Succession, until the first
public alteration made thereof in our days? For if this be so, then is the
demonstration easy to be made even from the Apostles Times to Ours.

2. And for the first, though we have handled the same somewhat before, That the
Religion brought in by St. Augustine was Catholic.
yet briefly we will add now, That there can be no doubt at all in this matter
with men of Reason and Judgment, but that St. Augustine and his Fellows brought
in with them the whole Body of Religion, as well touching Articles of Belief,
as Ceremonies, and Ecclesiastical Customs, which were at that time in use at
Rome whence they came, and in other Catholic Countries by which they passed,
namely, Italy, France, and Flanders, Greg. in epist ad Aug.
from which Countries Pope Gregory himself exhorts them by his Letters to
take such good Ecclesiastical Uses as they should see most agreeable to Piety,
Edification, and Devotion; which is a sign that all those Countries agreed
fully in Faith and Belief with Rome at that day, and were perfectly Catholic,
though in some external Ceremonies belonging to Devotion there might be
difference. And forasmuch as the French Bishops St. German, St. Lupus, and St.
Severus, Bed. l. 1. hist. c. 18, 19, etc.
150 years (as has been said) before the entrance of St. Augustine, planted in
Britanny the French Catholic Faith against the Pelagians; and these men coming
from Rome, found no fault therewith, most certain it is that all was one. And
finally if we do consider the Works, Writings and Actions of Pope Gregory,
related by us before, partly out of St. Isidore, living at that time in Spain,
partly out of his own Epistles yet extant, written to the chiefest Bishops of
the Christian World, and their Answers to him again, together with their
agreement in Faith and Religion. If we do consider also the Heresies condemned
in his days by Him and his Authority, as the Eutychians, Monothelites, and
others, which our Protestants also do condemn for Heresies at this day. By all
this (I say) and by infinite other Arguments and Demonstrations that may be
made, it is most evident, that either Christ had no Visible Church or Catholic
Religion in those days, Either no true Church or Religion was in St. Gregory's
time, or else it was the Roman.
(which were most foolish and wicked to imagine) or that the Religion of St.
Gregory and his Church of Rome, and others of others of the same Communion, was
in that Age the only true Catholic Church, and consequently had in it the only
true Catholic Faith and Religion of Christ whereby Christians might be saved;
which also is proved most evidently by infinite Miracles wrought in England, and
in diverse other Countries, upon manifold occasions, during this time of our
Primitive Church, as shall appear more in particular in the deduction of our
second point; which is the continuance of this same Religion from St. Augustine
to Thomas Cranmer, the first and last Archbishops of Canterbury, following by
Succession the one the other for the space of above 900 years; the first dying
a Saint, the last ending in Apostasy, as after shall be showed.

The continuation of Religion from St. August. downward.
3. Wherefore, to come to the second point about the deduction of Catholic
Religion in our Nation from St. Augustine downward; first of all, Saint Bede
talking of the planting thereof, and of our first Primitive Church, (whose
progress and increase he describes for the space of almost 140 years after the
entrance of St. Augustine) has these words: Gregorius Pontifex Divino admonitus
instinctu, Bed. hist. Ang. l. 1. c. 22.
servum Dei Augustinum, and alios plures cum eo Monachos, timentes Dominum
misit, praedicare verbum Dei genti Anglorum, etc. Gregory the Pope, being
admonished by heavenly Instinct, did send God's Servant Augustine, and others
Monks with him, that feared God, to preach his Word to the English Nation, in
the 14th year of Mauritius the Emperor, which was of Christ 596, and the 4th
after that St. Gregory was made Pope.

St. Aug. and his Company landed in the Isle of Thanet.
4 These holy men landed in the Isle of Thanet belonging to the Kingdom of Kent;
for that the whole Dominion. of the Saxons in those days (which was all the
Land, except Scotland, and the other part now called Wales, whither the
relics of Britans were retired) was divided into seven several States and
Dominions, The 1 Kingdom of Kent converted to Christian Faith, anno Dom. 600.
Bed. l. 1. hist. Malm. l. 2. hist.
which they called Kingdoms. The first whereof (to speak of them according as
they received the Faith) was the Kingdom of Kent, whose King Ethelbert (being
the fourth in number from Hengistus, that began the same about the year of
Christ 450) afterward, first of all other, received the Christian Faith at the
preaching of St. Augustine, about the year of Christ 600; that is to say, an
hundred and fifty years after they had reigned as Pagans there.

2 Kingdom of East Saxons converted 604.
5. The second Kingdom was of the East Saxons, and contained the Shires now
called Essex, Middlesex, and Hartfordshire. The first founder of which Kingdom
was Erchenwine about the year of our Lord 527, as Stow and some others do hold,
though Malmesbury does write otherwise; but both do agree, that under King
Seebert, or, as Lib. 2. cap. 5.
Bid calls him, Sabered) those Provinces were converted to Christian
Religion by the preaching of St. Mellitus, Fellow to St. Augustine, and first
Bishop of their chief City of London, whither he was sent by St. Augustine from
Centerbury, in the year of Christ 604.

3 Kingdom of the East Angles converted an. Dom. 609. Malm. l. 1. hist. c. 6.
6 The third Kingdom was of the East Angles, which contained the Shires of
Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge, and the Isle of Ely. Which Kingdom was begun about
the year of Christ 492, by one Vffa, but converted after to Christian Religion
under King Sigebert, about the year of Christ 609, and that by the preaching
principally of their first Bishop Felix, born in Burgundy in France, being
ordained Bishop of a City there; called Dunwich at that time, which now is more
than half consumed with the Sea.

The 4 Kingdom of Northumbers converted an. 626.
7. The fourth Kingdom was of the Northumbers, which contained many Shires
toward the North; to wit, Lancashire, Yorkshire, Cumberland, Westmorland,
Northumberland, Durham, and some part of Scotland. The first Monarch of this
Kingdom is accounted Ida; and it received the Faith of Christian Religion under
their 13th King, Edwyn, in the year of Christ 626, by the Preaching of St.
Paulinus, sent thither to preach by Justus, the fourth Archbishop of
Canterbury; by whom the said Paulinus was translated from the Sea of Rochester
to be Archbishop of York.

8. The fifth Kingdom was of the West Saxons, 5 Kingdom of West Saxons,
converted 635.
which contained the Countries of Cornwall, Devonshire, Dorsetshire,
Somersetshire, Wiltshire, Barkshire, and Hampshire. The first Founder thereof
was Cerdick, about the year of Christ 509; and under Kenegilsus their fifth
King they received the Christian Faith, by the preaching of St. Berinus their
first Bishop of Dorchester, in the year of Christ 635.

9. The sixth Kingdom was of the Mercians, or Middle-Countrey, 6 Kingdom of
Mercians, converted 635.
being in that time the greatest of all the rest, and containing some fifteen
or sixteen Shires, as Gloucester, Hereford, Chester, Stafford, Worcester,
Shrewsbury, Oxford, Warwick, Darby, Leicester, Buckingham, Northampton,
Nottingham, Huntington, and Rutland. The first Founder of this Monarchy is said
to be one Creda, about the year of Christ 586; and the Conversion thereof to
Christian Faith was about the year of Christ 635, under Prince Peda, Son and
Heir unto the notable persecuting Pagan Peda. Their first Apostle was B. Finan,
who baptized King Peda against his Father's will in the Kingdom of the
Northumbers, at a Town by Berwick called Ad murum, and this by the instance of
the good Christian King Oswyn, King of Northumberland, who gave King Peda his
Daughter in Marriage on this condition, That he would become a Christian.

10. The seventh Kingdom was of the South Saxons, 7 Kingdom of the
South Saxons, converted anno 662.
containing the Shires of Sussex and Surrey; and began about the year of Christ
478, by one Aelus a Saxon, and was converted to Christianity under King
Ethelwold, (or Ethelwach, as Saint Bede names him, about the year of Christ 662,
by the preaching especially of St. Wilfrid their first Bishop, who erected a
Monastery for the Episcopal See in a place called Seolyce or Selcey.

11. Well then, thus we see that within the space of forty years, more or less,
six Kingdoms of England received the Gospel, and the seventh not long after,
under their first Preachers and Apostles before mentioned. And what great
variety of Miracles God did work by these his Servants, and their Helpers and
Assistants in this Work of the Conversion of our Country, is evident by all
Stories of that time and after; and no man but an Infidel or Miscreant, can
with any probable reason call them in doubt.

12. And it seems that the promise of our Savior made to his Apostles at his
last farewell, in St. Mark's Gospel, Marc. 16.
for Miracles to be wrought in the Conversion of Nations, (especially of
Gentiles, Greg. hom. 29. de festo Ascens. Domini. Marc. 16.
as St. Gregory observes) was as abundantly fulfilled in the first Conversion
of our English Nation, as of any other probably in the World. The Signs and
Miracles (says Christ) which shall follow them that shall believe in me, or
receive my Faith (especially in the beginning) are these: That they shall cast
out Devils in my Name; they shall speak with new Tongues; they shall remove
Serpents, and if they should drink Poison it shall not hurt them; they shall
lay their hands upon sick men, and therewith heal them, etc.

13. All these things promised Christ our Savior, and performed them most
abundantly in the first Conversion of Nations, while the said Miracles were
necessary to plant and confirm the Faith. Why Miracles ceased afterward.
But when (as St. Gregory in the place before alleged says) the young Plants
had no more need of such daily watering by Miracles, then ceased they. Though in
our Country and Primitive Church they endured no small time, as were easy to
show, if I would stand in this place to run over the Ecclesiastical Stories of
the least part of the aforesaid seven Kingdoms; whereof yet many things will be
spoken of afterward.

14. For only in the Kingdom of Kent, for the first hundred years after the
Conversion of King Ethelbert, there possessed the Sea of Canterbury from St.
Augustine unto Bertualdus, (who died in the year of Christ 730, and with whom
Saint Bede ends) eight Archbishops, The Primitive Church of Kent.
all most Godly, and Holy Men, to wit; Augustine, Laurence, Melitus, Justus,
Honorius, Deusdedit, Theodorus and Bertualdus. Which Bishops were held for
great Saints in our Primitive Church, as appears by the writing both of Saint Bede, that lived also himself in that Age, and by William of Malmesbury, that
lived some Ages after. Who yet alleges a more Ancient Author than himself,
Malms. l. 1. de gestis Pont. Ang. pa. 112.
called Gosselinus, that wrote the Lives and Miracles of all those Eight
Archbishops of Canterbury, and of some other Saints of our Country. Horum
(says he) and non minus sancti Letardi, etc. Of these Archbishops as also of
St. Letard, that in Ancient time came in with Q. Berta, the Author before
mentioned Gosselinus has written their marvelous and admirable virtues, out of
Bid and others. Adding also many things, which he saw himself with his own
Eyes, showing the great Miracles and Signs, which they did, etc. He does
recount also the Rank of Kings, with their Kindred, that lay Buried in his days
in the Church of St. Augustine at Canterbury. Which he does worthily call the
lights of England, and the Senators of the English Heavenly Court of
Parliament. And to this Quire of Saints and Crown or Diadem of our Eternal King
Christ, he adds other precious Stones also of Inestimable Glory, to wit St.
Adrian the Abbot, and St. Mildred the Virgin, as Conspicuous in Glory of
Miracles as the rest, etc.

15. Thus writes Malmesbury of these servants of God of the Church of
Canterbury, for the first hundred years after Christ's Faith received: but he
that would recount the like of all the other six Kingdoms and English Churches,
should have great store of matter. Especially, if he would enter into the
particular Lives and Actions of such eminent Holy Men, as that Age by the force
and virtue of that Primitive Christian Religion brought forth. And then, if
with all this he remember in like manner that most certain principle before
mentioned; that God would never have concurred with such abundance of Piety,
Holiness, An infalliable principle.
and Miracles to the setting up of a false Religion; he will easily see, how
plain a demonstration this is for the truth of that Religion, which was thus
planted amongst us, by St. Augustine, and Maligned by these Sectaries of our
time.

Catholic Religion planted in England with great power of Miracles.

Marc. ultimo.


16. Well then, in this manner was Religion first planted among us, according to
that which St. Mark the Evangelist says of the first Preachers and Preachings
among other Nations and Gentiles in his time: To wit, Domino cooperante and
sermonem confirmante sequentibus signis, Christ working with them, and
confirming their Preaching with Signs and Miracles. And this Faith being once
planted, did take such deep Root by the said watering of Christ the Author
thereof, as it continued and held out from time to time, through all
difficulties and differences both of times, Men, and State, and by Peril,
Divisions, Enmities, and cruel Wars, that fell out every day between those
Seven Kingdoms, until they were united all under one Monarchy some 200 years
after; to wit, under King Egbert, King of the West Saxons. And from him again
the same endured other 200 years unto King Edward the Confessor before the
Conquest.

17. And that which is worthy also the noteing in this case, is, that during
the time of all this Enmity, Emulation, Suspicions, Jealousy of Kingdoms and
States, and Bloody Battles between these Kingdoms for the space of the foresaid
200 years, from their Conversion to Christianity until they came to be a
Monarchy: One Catholic Religion under States that were enemies.
They all lived under one Archbishop and Primate of Canterbury, holding their
due subordination and good correspondence with him, and by him with the Sea of
Rome, and other Catholic Countries for matters of Faith and Ecclesiastical
Affairs, no otherwise than if they had been all Friends, yea Subjects and
Provinces of one and the self same Kingdom, and this is the virtue and force of
Catholic Union. Whereas amongst Sectaries, every little difference of Temporal
States, (yea of Towns, Cities, and Governments) does presently cause a
diversity also in Faith and Religion. Diversity of States works diversity of
Religion amongst Sectaries.
As we see at this day, that Saxony (for example) where the name of the
Protestants first began, being under a different Prince has a great difference
also in Religion from other parts of Germany, that call themselves Protestants,
and the Kingdoms of Denmark and Swedeland, though they profess all Lutheranism,
yet is the manner so different in these different States, as not only the one
will not depend of the other in any sort of subordination or Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction (as in England we see they did) but neither do they agree in any
one Form of Religion, or substance of belief in all points, no nor in one state
it self, where all profess themselves to be Lutherans, as in Saxony, where the
higher Saxons allow only rigid or straight Lutherans: But the lower Saxony
allows only the softer sort, and expels the rigid or severe Lutherans; as
the other do them, where they get Dominion.

18. Geneva and Berne are both Cities and States of the Switzers, and both of
them profess Protestancy, though not according to Luthers Doctrine. But yet the
Temporal State of the said two Towns being different, the Magistrates have
appointed a different and distinct Form. Which in England also we see by
experience, how much they differ from those of Scotland, Holland, and France,
who profess themselves Protestants of the same Calvinist School: But every
Nation and Church after his own fashion. And finally what differences have
risen in England it self, during her Majesty's only Government, betwixt
Puritans, Brownists, Family of Love and State Protestants (as In his humble
motives an. Domini 1601.
Thomas Diggs calls them) no Man can be ignorant. But to what differences and
divisions they would grow in two or three hundred years (if Sects could last so
long, and that the States which profess them were Enemies in Temporal Affairs
as it was in England) is easy to guess.

But the reason hereof is manifest, to wit, Why Sectaries do change so often
their Religion under different States.
that for so much as Sectaries making their own judgments and inventions the
Rule of their Belief and Religion, and their Temporal Princes their absolute
Guiders and immediate Heads in Ecclesiastical matters: it must needs follow,
that as these Princes or States do change or alter for any respect whatsoever
(as they do for many) Religion also must needs alter and change for contentment
or interest of the said States or Princes.

19. But to return to our Deduction and Continuation of Catholic Religion among
the English Saxons after they came to be a Monarchy, (to wit, Affliction by the
Danes from the year 800 downward.
from the year of Christ 800) it is first to be noted that as soon as God had
delivered them from one affliction (which was the continual Civil Wars of one
Kingdom with an other) he sent them a second Calamity, far greater perhaps than
the first, enduring for other 200 years, which was the continual incursions and
devastations of the Danes. Who pursued them not only for Temporal respects, to
get their Country from them, but also for Religion it self (the said Danes
being then Pagans;) as appears by the cruel Murders and Martyrdoms as well of
St. Edmund King of the East Angles, S. Edmund and S. Elphegus Martyred by Danes.
Martyred by them about the year of Christ 885, as of Holy Elphegus Archbishop
of Canterbury, some Ages after, about the year 1011 and of diverse others
overlong hear to recount. And yet notwithstanding, when the said Danes,
Osbertus in vita S. Elph. apud Sur. 21. April Malm. lib. 1. Pontif. Angl. pa.
116. Matthew. West. monast. an. Dom. 1011. and 1012.
with their King Canutus Son of Swanus, came once by Gods Holy grace to be
Christians (which was soon after the foresaid Martydom of the Holy Archbishop
Elphegus) they submitted themselves with Humility and fervor of Spirit to that
very same Christian Faith of their Enemies the Englishmen, which they had
persecuted in them before, taking them also for their instructors. Which is a
token, that there was no other Christian Faith known in the World at that day
for them to embrace, but only that which the English professed, to the
embracing whereof, there is no doubt, but the Miracles wrought continually in
confirmation of the truth of that Faith (as well at the Tombs of the foresaid
Martyrs St. Edmund and Elphegus slain by the Danes themselves, as other ways
also) did greatly move and animate them.

20. But whatsoever the chief motives were to move this Nation to embrace
Christian Religion, this is certain, that soon after this time of St. Elphegus
his Death, God delivered the whole Kingdom of England into the Danes hands
under the foresaid King Canutus, The good Acts of King Canutus after his
Conversion.
about the year of Christ 1020. And he Reigned and held the same peaceably for
almost twenty years. In which time he being now Christian did many notable Acts
of a good Religious King; Went to Rome for Devotion to visit the Holy
Sepulchers of St. Peter and St. Paul, gave great Alms there and else where,
made just Laws in England, loved and favored exceedingly the English Nation,
used them with all confidence both at home, and abroad, Married King Emma
Mother to King Edward the Confessor, thereby to unite himself the more to the
Nation. And finally became of a Persecutor and Conqueror, one of the best
Kings, that England perhaps had in many Ages to Govern her.

21. William of Malmesbury living (as it has been said) some 500 years agone
under King Henry the first, Son to William the Conqueror, writes many most
excellent Religious Acts of this King Canutus, saying amongst other things
thus: Malmes. de gist. Regum Angl. l. 2. c. 11.
Monasteria per Angliam, etc. He did repair all the Monasteries in England,
that were overthrown or defaced by the Wars of his Father Swanus or himself. He
did Build Churches in all the places, where he had fought any Battles. And
appointed Priests for the said Churches, who should Pray continually to the
Worlds end for the Souls of them that had been slain in those places. He was
present at the Consecration of a goodly Church in a place called Aschendum
(where he had his chiefest victory) causing both the Nobles of the English and
Danish Nation, to offer with him Rich gifts to the said Church, etc.

The building the Abbey of Edmundbury, and rich endowment thereof by King
Canutus.
22. Over the Body of Blessed St. Edmund, which the Ancient Danes had slain, he
Builded a Church worthy the greatness of his Kingly Heart, appointing there
both an Abbot and Monks, and giving them many Possessions. In so much as by the
greatness of his gifts, that Monastery at this day is above all the rest in
England. He took up with his own hands the Body of St. Elphegus Archbishop of
Canterbury (slain not long before by his Danes) and caused the same to be be
carried unto Canterbury: Reverencing the same with worthy honor. He gave such
great Gifts and rare Jewels to the Church of Winchester, that the shining of
precious Stones, did dazzle the Eyes of such as did behold them, etc. In the
Fifteenth year of his Kingdom he went to Rome by Land, and having stayed some
days there, and redeeming his sins by Alms in those Churches, he returned by
Sea to England, etc.

23. Thus and much more does William of Malmesbury write of this notable King
Canatus a terrible and fierce Warrior before his Conversion, and much given to
Blood and Impiety, whereby may easily be seen, what force Catholic Religion is
of, to make change in a Man's manners, where it truly enters. Let Protestants
show us some such examples of Princes Converted to their Religion. But to go
forward in Malmesbury: he sets down after all this a large Epistle of King
Canutus, which he wrote from Rome, or in the way homeward, unto the two
Archbishops, Egetnothus and Alfricus, the first of Canterbury, the other of
York, and by them to the whole Realm, giving them account of his Journey to
Rome. Where amongst other things he writes thus: King Canutus his Letter from
Rome. Malm. ibid. fol. 14.
Canutus Rex totius Angliae, and Denmarkiae, and Norvegiae, and partis
Suecorum, etc. notifico vobis, me noviter ivisse Romam, oratum pro Redemptione
peccaminum meorum, etc. I Canutus King of all England, Denmark and Norway, and
part of Swecia, etc. do give you to understand that of late I went to Rome, to
pray for the Redemption of my sins, and for the health of my Kingdoms and
people: having made a vow of this Journey long ago, but could never perform it
until now, by reason I was hindered by the Affairs of my Kingdoms. And now I do
yield most hearty thanks to Almighty God, that he has granted me this Grace to
come and visit in my Life time the Blessed Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul and
all the Sanctuary that is within and without this City: and according to my
desire to honor and worship the same in my own person, etc.

24. Thus he wrote. And moreover adjoined many other pious Ordinances in the
same Epistle to be observed in England, for Restitutions to be made, Alms to be
given, and other good deeds to be done, exhorting all to perform them
willingly, and threatening them that should do the contrary. And William of
Malmesbury says, How King Canutus performed his good desires when he returned
from Rome. Ibid. fol. 42.
that returning after to England he caused the same to be strictly observed.
And gave many new privileges to Churches. And one among other to the Church of
Canterbury, which Malmesbury sets down at length, and in the end has these
words; Si quis vero, etc. If any Man shall perform this my Ordination with a
prompt will, Almighty God by the Intercession of the most Blessed Virgin Mary
and all his Saints, increase his portion in the Land of the living. And this
Donation of Privilege is written and Promulgated in the Presence of me King
Canutus, in the Wooden Church, in the year of Christ 1032.

23. Thus far writes William of Malmesbury of this Kings Pious disposition
after his coming from Rome. Stow in Chron. page 116.
And John Stow adds out of Henry of Huntington, as follows. After this
time, Canutus never bare Crown upon his Head, but he set the same upon the Head
of the Crucifix at Winchester, etc. And thus much of his Piety and other Fruits
of true Christian Faith, which he had received. And it is no small Argument of
the Divine Power thereof, that it could so mollify and change so fierce a
Warrior and cruel a Persecutor as this King was before his Conversion.

26. So as now we have brought down the continuance and succession of one, and
the self same Christian Religion in England from St. Augustine and King
Ethelbert, unto King Canutus, for the space of 400 years. And that this was no
particular Religion of England alone, but the Common General Faith not only of
Rome, but of all Christendom besides, at that day, and consequently the only
Catholic Religion of those Ages, appears in like manner by other words of the
Kings former Letter Recorded by Malmesbury, where he says. Sit autem vobis
notum, etc. Be it known unto you, that in this last solemnity of Easter, there
was a great Assembly of Nobility here in Rome, Ibidem apud Malm. fol. 41.
together with Pope John and the Emperor Conrade (to wit, King Canutus was
Catholic.
all the greatest Princes from the Hill Garganus unto this other next the Sea)
all which did receive me most honorably, and did present me with Magnificent
Gifts, etc. Thus wrote the King: Whereby we may easily perceive, that King
Canutus was held in all Points for a perfect Catholic Prince, seeing that both
Pope John the 20th. and the Emperor Conrade the 2d. did esteem and honor him so
highly.

27. After Canutus succeeded in the Kingdom of England his two Sons Harold and
Hardicanutus, for two or three years. 1043.
And then King Edward the Confessor, for Twenty-three years together. After
whose Death the second Harold Son of Earl Goodwin holding the Kingdom by
violence, against both English and Danes, scarce one year, William Duke of
Normandy came in, as all Men know, and Conquered the Land toward the end of
the year 1066. and held the same all days of his Life, and so has his
posterity after him by Male or Female unto our time, The Succession of Catholic
Religion since the conquest.
and have continued the same Religion, which he found or brought into England
(for all was one) for the space of 500 years unto King Henry the Eighth's time,
which may be proved beside other ways, by the Succession of our Archbishops of
Canterbury. Stigand an English Man, being the Twenty-third from St. Augustine,
holding the same, when William the Conqueror got the Crown, to whom succeeded
Lanfranc, and to him Anselmus, and so successively one after another: none of
them ever being noted to be contrary to his Predecessor in Religion, until
Thomas Cranmer in King Henry the Eighth's time. Who applied himself to the
Religion, which the State and Prince liked best to allow of in that time. And
after the Kings Death, agreed to break his last Will and Testament, in changing
that Religion into Zuinglianism, Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury.
most detested by his Majesty. And after again Conspired to put down and
destroy all the Kings Children, and to set up the Duke of Suffolks Daughter.
And finally, was put to Death both for Heresy and Treason in Queen Mary's
time, as after more particularly shall be showed. And this was the first change
of Religion in any Archbishop of Canterbury, from the beginning unto his days.

The conclusion of this deduction.
28. So as from King Ethelbert, the first Christened English King, unto King
Henry the Eighth being the Eighteenth from William the Conqueror, and more than
Eighty from the said Ethelbert, one and the self same Faith endured in England,
and the self same Church flourished, under so many different both Kings and
Nations, as before has been showed. And the like we have declared to have been
for the first 600 years under the Britans, to wit, that they never were known
to have changed their Religion. Which being so, the deduction and demonstration
is so clear, as any reasonable Man can either make or require for proof, that
one and the self same Religion endured from the beginning to the ending among
them.

29. Unto which kind of proof the Ancient Holy Father and Martyr St. Irenaeus,
gives great Authority by a like Argument. For that having made the like
Enumeration of the Bishops of Rome, (as we do now of our Archbishops of
Canterbury) against the Heretics of his days, and that from St. Peter downward
to Pope Eleutherius, that lived with him, he infers this conclusion: Est
plenissima haec ostensio, Iren. l. 3. adversus haeres. cap. 3.
unam and eandem vivificatricem fidem esse, quae in Ecclesiis ab Apostolis and
conservata and tradita in unitate, etc. This is a most full proof, that one and
the self same lively Faith, has been conserved in the Church from the Apostles
days unto our time, delivered from one to another in unity, etc. And if that
were a most full proof and demonstration in St. Irenaeus judgment against the
Heretics of his time; The same is now much more to us, having seen the
Succession of so many Ages since, and noted the manner of like proof and
Argument in all other Fathers after him. As namely of St. Augustine, Aug. in
psalm. contra partem Donati. Aug. ep. 165.
Numerate sacerdotes velab ipsa Petri Sede, and in ordine illo Patrum, quis cui
successit videte. Number the Priests that have succeeded the one to the other
even from the Seat of Peter himself. And then further. In hoc ordine
Successionis nullus Donatista Episcopus invenitur. No one Donatist Bishop is to
be found in this rank of Succession. And yet more.

Aug. ibid.
30. Et si in illum ordinem Episcoporum quisquam traditor per illa tempora
subrepsisset, nihil praejudicaret Ecclesiae. And if any Traitor in those days
should have crept into that order and rank of Roman Bishops (for of them he
speaks) it should not have prejudicated the Church of God.

31. Which saying of St. Austin may serve us, not only to Answer whatsoever
Heretics do, or may object true or false against the Lives of any latter Roman
Bishops, but for defense also of the Rank and Succession of our Archbishops of
Canterbury, notwithstanding the Apostasy of Thomas Cranmer his Apostasy does
not prejudicate the Sea of Canterbury.
Thomas Cranmer, or any other his like, that for these latter years may have
crept in (as St. Austin says) or been thrust in, and by violence occupied that
See and Seat unworthily, either in respect of his life, or Religion, or both;
seeing that the former Succession as well of Men as of Doctrine, from St. Austin
to Cranmer, is manifest and evident for the space of 900 years without
interruption; as also that they were united all this time in Faith and Doctrine,
with the Universal Church of Christendom, as Members and Branches of their Head
and Body; and that the first breach and interruption made thereof in that See
by Cranmer and continued after him by some, of his followers, was noted
presently and contradicted, yea censured and condemned also by Sentence of the
whole Church, and thereupon rejected and abhorred by the principal of his own
people, both Clergy and Laity at that time.

32. And the same contradiction endures to this day, and will do ever, in
those that conserve their Ancient Faith and Religion, and do adhere to the
lawful Succession of his Predecessors against him and his partners, until it
please Almighty God to put the said order and lawful Succession in joint again,
and restore that chief and head conduct of our Country to his former integrity,
whereby the Water of true Catholic Religion was wont to be derived to the
people of our Land, and will be again when Gods wrath for our sins shall be
pacified, and his mercy induce him to permit (as often otherwise he has done)
that all return to the accustomed Ancient course of Catholic Faith, and
Religion again, seeing in very deed there is none but that; for so much as
Sects and new Religions are but inventions and entertainments of time, whilst
God punishes some sins in his Servants, and after all returns where it was
before.

33. And this have we spoken by the way, and by occasion of Cranmer that was
the first Archbishop of Canterbury that ever brake from the Roman Faith, but,
notwithstanding his Apostasy, Catholic Religion was not extinguished in
England by that, but remained there still all King Henry's time, as also during
the Reigns of his three Children, King, and Queens, Edward, Mary and Elizabeth
unto these our days, as in the next Chapter following more largly and
particularly we are to demonstrate.

CHAP. XII.
How Catholic Religion has continued and persevered in England during the
times and Reigns of King Henry the Eighth and his three Children, King Edward,
Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, notwithstanding all the troubles, changes,
alterations and tribulations that have fallen out, and that the same Religion
is like to continue to the Worlds end, if our sins hinder not.

THE deduction which we have hitherto made of Catholic Religion from our first
Conversion, under St. Gregory and King Ethelbert of Kent, Anno Domini 600. Anno
1509.
unto the Reign of King Henry the Eighth with whom concurred in the Sea of
Rome, Leo the Tenth and Clemens the Seventh and other Popes Successors of St.
Gregory, has been for the most part in time of Peace and without any public
discontinuance at all, but now are we to prosecute the same matter from the
alteration made by King Henry downward unto our days, Anno Domini 1530.
and therein to show, that albeit in the external Face and Form of Religion,
there have been diverse Mutations, as Tempestuous Winds and Storms for the
present, yet has the Catholic Religion held firm her continuance throughout
all these Tempests, yea showed her self more clear, eminent and notorious by
the Confession of her most constant Members, then she did before in peace,
which is the proper privilege and excellency of truth, 1 Timothy 3. The Catholic
faith grows by persecution and affliction, and heresy is overthrown.
and of the Catholic Church (that is the Pilar of Truth) above all Sects and
Heresies (as St. Cyprian, St. Austin, and other Fathers do note) to come out of
Persecution, as Gold out of Fire more bright, illustrious, and eminent than
before, or as an excellent Ship well Tackled and skilfully guided, breaks
through the Waves without hurt at all.

2. And this has been proved now by the experience of 1600 years, wherein this
Ship of the Catholic Church has passed through no fewer storms than there are
years and overcome them all; whereas many hundred Sects and Sectaries in the
mean space have been broken in pieces, perished and consumed, either by
division among themselves, or with a little externe Persecution or Discipline
of the Church, whereof I shall not need to allege many examples, for that the
World is full of them, and all Histories do testify, and our former deduction
has made it clear, and one Domestical example of our own days there is before
our eyes, which may serve for all the rest, to wit, that some severity being
begun by our State against two opposite Religions in England, the Catholics and
Puritans, (though much more rigorous against the former than the second) yet has
Catholic Religion increased thereby, and Puritanism been broken and in a manner
dissolved. The Reason of which different success we shall touch afterward. Now
to the purpose we have in hand.

3. For the first Twenty years of King Henry's Reign unto the year of Christ
1530 no Man can deny, but that the integrity of Catholic Religion, Union and
Communion with the rest of Christendom, and perfect subordination to the Sea
Apostolic of Rome remained in England whole, as the said King had received it
from the most prudent, Religious, and Victorious Prince his Father King Henry
the Seventh, and he again from his renowned Ancestors, whom yet King Henry the
Eighth as he did excel in knowledge of Learning, So was he nothing inferior to
them in zeal of defending the purity of Catholic Faith, as may appear by the
multitude of Sectaries and Heretics as well Waldensians, King Henry zealous in
Catholic Religion.
Arrians, Anabaptists, Lollards and Wickliffians, as Lutherans, Zuinglians,
Calvinists, and the like, burned by him, for dissenting from the universal
known Church and Roman Religion in the first said Twenty years of his Reign,
which Fox sets down with great complaint and regret, and we shall after
declare more at large in the Second and Third parts of this Treatise.

4. And when Luther afterward rose up, in the Eighth year of this glorious
Kings Reign, which was the year of Christ 1517 King Henry caused first the
Famous Learned Bishop John Fisher of Rochester to confute the Mad fellow, and
after he vouchsafed to do the same himself by a most excellent Book, King
Henry's Book against Luther, Dedicated to Leo 10. An. Dom. 1523.
which I have Read, and seen subscribed with his own hand, with the Dedication
thereof, by his Ambassador Dr. Clark (after Bishop of Bath and Wells) unto Pope
Leo the Tenth, who in gratification thereof, gave his Majesty and all his
Posterity, the most Honorable Style and Title of Defender of the Faith.

The beginning of the Kings breach with the Pope.
5. And thus continued King Henry and the Religion under him in England, until
the foresaid year 1530. at what time there happened a most fatal and
unfortunate contention between Clement the Seventh the Pope and him, about his
Divorce from Queen Katherine. He began first to show his grief and displeasure
against Cardinal Wolsey, and secondly against the whole Clergy of England,
Condemning the one and the other in the Forfeiture of Praemunire, who in their
submission and supplication for Pardon, either of fear or flattery, called him
Supreme Head of their Church of England. Stow An. Dom. 1530.


6. The King also began to show openly his disgust with the Pope for not
yielding to his pretense and Petition: But what? Was the Kings Religion changed
by this? Or did he alter his judgment in Faith for this disaffection toward
the Pope? No truly, as well appears by his other actions; For he frequented
the Mass no less than before, he burned Heretics more than ever, as appears
by Fox his account, and so you shall see in all the residue of his Life, which
were Sixteen years after this. King Henry winked for a time at some heretics.
And albeit at this time being much troubled with this breach with the Pope, he
attended less to repress Heresy for some years, than he had done before, yet
was his judgment no less against them than from the beginning, and the longer
he lived, the more grew his aversion from them, as may easily appear to him,
that will but look over the years that ensued after this disgust and breach
with Pope Clement the Seventh. For albeit in the next year after, to wit, 1531
he proceeded to show his aversion from that Pope, yet did not he neglect the
punishment of Lutherans, as may appear by the burning of David Foster,
Valentine Freese, Heretics burned An. Dom. 1531.
John Tenkesbury the old Man of Buckingham, and other which Fox does complain
of.

7. In the year 1532. The King proceeding in the same coffeehouse with the
Pope, did certain things rather to terrify him, than to make any change of
Religion, Thomas Audley.
as making Sir Thomas Audley Chancellor in the place of Sir Thomas More, which
Audley was suspected, to favor Lutheranism: In using also familiarly Thomas
Cromwell a Man of the same humor or worse. Thomas Cromwell.
To which end also he going over into France, conferred with Francis the French
King, and persuaded him to Summon the Pope to a General Council, but he would
not, whereupon King Henry returning into England, not only spoke open words
against Pope Clement, but suffered one Dr. Cutwyn, Dean of Hertfort, to Preach
publicly against him in a Sermon before the King himself, Fa. Elstow
contradicts the Preacher in defense of the Pope before the King.
in the Church of the Franciscan Friars of Greenwich, who passed so far in that
vein, as a grave Religious Father Named Elstow, reprehended him publicly out
of the Quire or Roodloft, for which he was sent to Prison. And this was the
first open contradiction, that King Henry had within his Realm about this
Controversy with the Pope, and yet does Fox recount unto us diverse of his
Martyrs most opposite to the Pope, that were burnt by the Kings Authority this
year, as namely: James Baynam, Robert Debnam, Nicolas Marish, Robert King, and
others.

8. There followed the year 1533 wherein his Majesty was Married to Queen Ann
Bullen, Anno 1533.
and consequently this year passed most in Triumph about Coronation of the said
Queen, as also the Birth and Baptism of her Majesty that now is: So as little
was done in matters of Religion any way, but a great Gate seemed to be opened
to the Protestants and to Luthers favorers by this Marriage, in so much that
Fox does assign the ground of his Gospel principally from this year in respect
both of the Kings and Queens inclination, as he presumes, and of the great
Authority of Cranmer, Cromwell, The beginning of Fox his Gospel in England.
and some other that he calls his Gospellers, or Patrons rather of his
Gospel. And yet if you behold the external Face of the English Church at this
day, all these named and others held the Catholic Faith, Use and Rites, and
both King and Queen, Cranmer and Cromwell; went as Devoutly to Mass as ever
before, and so remained they in outward show (I mean the former three) even to
their Deaths; And Cromwell when he was to die, protested on the Scaffold, that
he was a good Catholic Man, and never doubted of any of the Church Sacraments
then used, and the like would Cranmer have done no doubt, if he had been
brought to the Scaffold in King Henry's days, as he was to the Fire afterward,
in Queen Mary's, which had been a happy case for him.

Anno 1534.
9. There ensued the year 1534, which was the year indeed of open breach with
Rome, for that an Excommunication being set forth by Pope Clement VII. against
King Henry VIII. upon notice given of his Marriage, and the said
Excommunication set up in Dunkirk and other Towns in Flanders, which did import
the consent also and concurrence of Charles the Emperor; and then certain
Prophesies being blown about at home, as coming from Elizabeth Barton, surnamed
the holy Maid of Kent, The first year of open breach with Rome.
about the King's Deprivation, he was much more exasperated than before; and so
calling a Parliament, caused the Pope's Authority to be wholly extinguished,
and transferred to himself, and made diverse Bishops in order to preach at
Paul's Cross against the Pope's Supremacy over the Catholic Church. But what?
may we think that these Bishops did in so small a time change their belief in
matters of Faith? The King also being angry with diverse Friars, as namely with
F. Elstow beforenamed, that contradicted Cutwyne the Preacher when he inveighed
against the Pope's Authority, did this year, Hol. page 964: The Franciscan
Friars put out of their Convents.
upon the 11th of August, ordain, That all the observant Friars of St.
Francis's Order should be thrust out of their Convents, beginning with
Greenwich where the said contradiction was made, and to seem somewhat to favor
the Augustin-Friars, of whose Order Luther had been, he commanded them for the
present to be put in their places, yet did he at the very same time cause John
Frith to be burned in Smithfield for denying the Blessed Sacrament, and this by
his own particular order; which Frith and his Master Tyndal were the greatest
Enemies that Friars had.

Heretics burned an. 1534.
10. He burned also this year Henry Poyle, William Tracy, and other Protestants,
as Fox testifies in his Calendar: So as we may see that the King's Faith was
as before; and though he were content to suffer some new-fangl'd Spirits to
ruffle at this time, as namely Friar Barnes in London, where he preached most
seditiously, Stow an. 1534.
and Hugh Latimer in Bristol, where, as Stow says, he stirred a notorious
Tumult, causing the Mayor to suffer Lay men to preach, and to prohibit and
imprison Priests, and other like Disorders; yet what the King thought inwardly
of them, he declared afterward by his acts, when he burned Barns, and cast
Latimer into the Tower, and kept him there with evident danger of his life so
long as himself lived; which disposition of King Henry, Tyndal smelling at the
same season, wrote from Flanders to his Scholar John Frith, See the Letter of
Tyndal to Frith, set down by Fox. p. 987.
Prisoner in the Tower of London, in these words: And now methinketh I smell a
counsel to be taken, etc. But you must understand, that it is not of a pure
heart, and the love of Truth, but to avenge themselves, and to eat the Whores
flesh, and to suck the marrow of her bones, etc. So wrote that honest man,
signifying that King Henry was resolved to make an outward show in favoring
the Gospellers, not for love or liking he had of them, but to revenge himself
of the Pope, and to enjoy the Goods of Monasteries, and other spiritual
Livings, which he, in his blasphemous heretical vein, calls the Whores flesh,
and marrow of her bones.

11. Well then, this was the beginning of their Gospel in England, by their own
Confession and Interpretation; and so whatsoever was done from this year
forward, against Catholics or Catholic Religion, unto the 31st year of his
Reign, which was of Christ 1540, to wit, for five whole years, was upon these
grounds, and to the former ends of Revenge and Interest, if we believe
Protestants themselves; in which point notwithstanding, for that diverse Godly,
Learned and Zealous men could not be content to follow the King's affections as
others did, and namely Bishop Fisher of Rochester, Sir Thomas More late
Chancellor of England, and diverse most Reverend and Venerable Abbots, Priors,
and Doctors, and other their like, they were content to give their Blood in
defense of Catholic Unity against this Schism, as the Abbots of Glastenbury, of
Whaley, of Reading, Dr. Forest Queen Catharine's Confessor, Dr. Powel, and the
like.

12. Some others, and amongst them one most near to the King himself both in
Blood and Affection, namely Cardinal Pool, opposed himself by public Writing
from Padua, as we may see by those three learned Books left by him in Latin, De
Unitate Ecclesiae. Others also of the same Blood Royal, as the Marquess of
Exceter, and Countess of Salisbury (the said Cardinal's Mother) showed their
dislike, which afterward was the cause of their ruin; and many Shires also of
the Realm at this time, not being so patient as to bear these Innovations, took
Arms, and fell into great Commotions, as in Lincolnshire, Yorkshire,
Somersetshire, and some other Provinces, making all their Quarrels for matters
of Religion.

13. So as by this we see that Catholic Religion remained still in England both
in Prince and People, but that the Prince for a time thought good for other
ends to tolerate and wink at disorders therein, until the aforesaid year of
1540; when calling all his Realm together both Spiritual and Temporal to examine
well this matter of Religion, they decreed that famous Statute both in
Parliament and Consistory Ecclesiastical, called the Statute of six Articles,
The Statute of six Articles, An. 1540.
or as John Fox names it, the whip with six strings or lashes, in which Decree
are condemned for detestable Heresies all the most substantial points of
Protestants Doctrine, especially of Zwinglians and Calvinists, and most severe
punishment of Death appointed unto the Defenders and Maintainers thereof,
whereby the Catholic Judgment and Censure of the whole Realm in that behalf was
seen, and the King himself made further declaration thereof presently for his
own part, by putting away his German Wife Anne of Cleve, by which the
Gospellers had thought to have drawn him further into League and Religion with
the Protestant German Princes, and by punishing Cromwell, the Head and Fountain
of most of these Innovations, by the loss of his Head. The burning of Friar
Barns a Lutheran, with Gerard and Jerome, Zwinglians.
He burned also immediately after this Statute in Smithfield, upon the
promulgation thereof, three famous Heretics, Barns, Jerome, and Gerard; the
first an earnest Lutheran, the other two Zwinglians.

14. All these demonstrations I say King Henry made this year of his Catholic
Opinion and Judgment in all points, except in matter of Supremacy, which was
his own Interest. And for the other six years which he lived afterward, he
varied not from this, but rather confirmed the same, as we may see by his
burning of Anne Askew for denying the Real Presence in the Sacrament, not many
months before his death; and by his own hearing of Mass in his bed, and
receiving the blessed Sacrament on his knees when he was not able to stand on
his feet; but especially by that which Bishop Gardener testified while he
lived, and preached the same in a public Sermon at Paul's Cross, that the said
King not long before his dying day, when he sent him Ambassador to a Diet in
Germany, K. Henry gave Commission for his reconciliation with Rome.
gave him special Commission in secret to procure by the means of some Catholic
Princes, and of the Pope's Legate and Nuntio there, some honorable condition for
his Majesty's reconciliation with the Pope and See of Rome again; which though
God of his secret Judgment permitted him not to effectuate by the shortness of
his life, yet appears it by this what his sense in matters of Religion was.

15. So then now we have that Catholic Church and Religion continued in England
during King Henry's Reign, both in Prince and People, though much turmoil'd by
Faction, Schisms, and Heresy, wherein notwithstanding she no more lost her
possession and continuance, than she did in time of the raging Arians,
Donatists, or other Sectaries that prevailed in power for the present time,
either generally, or in some particular Provinces, as Lutherans and Zwinglians
also did in King Henry's days in diverse places, or do at this day, which yet
was and is so, as they are easily distinguished from the other, not only by the
Divisions and Differences among themselves, but also for that the Union of the
Catholic Religion does ever show it self in some Regions adjoining; yea
commonly also even in those very places where these Sects do range and bear
most rule, some Catholics do remain to contradict them openly, and to plead for
their old possession; Catholics increased by Persecution.
and the greater the Persecution is, the greater and more eminent is this
Catholic contradicting part stirred up and increased by the very Power and
Virtue of the Cross of Christ in Persecution, as before has been noted.

16. And this was the state of Catholic Religion in King Henry's Reign; to wit,
that it was held and defended publicly, except only the Article of
Ecclesiastical Supremacy denied to the Pope, whereunto notwithstanding many
thousands of the Realm never agreed, and consequently were truly Catholics.
Heretics also were punished, especially those three Sects that principally
ranged at that time, to wit, Lutherans, Anabaptists, and Zwinglians, (all three
taking their Origin from Luther) so as of all these three Sects King Henry
burned many; and albeit of the fourth sort of men that opposed themselves
against him, to wit Catholics, he put diverse also to death under the name of
Papists, yet both this very Name, as also the different manner of their Deaths,
but above all the nature of their Cause, does evidently distinguish them from
the other, and show that their Deaths were true Martyrdoms, and the others due
Punishment for their Wickedness.

The name of Papist not justly punishable.
17. For first, the name of Papists, that signifies them to hold with the Pope
as Supreme Head of their Church, imports no more hurt or offense than if any
Sedition moved within any Realm, those that hold with the King should be called
Kinglings; or those, for example, that hold part with the Mayor of London, when
any Apprentices would raise Rebellion against him, should scornfully be called
Mayorists; and generally for a man to hold with his Lawful Superior cannot be
termed a Faction, and much less an Heresy.

The different punishments upon Catholics and Protestants does show what K.
Henry thought of them both.
18. Secondly, the very difference and manner of punishment used by King Henry
toward both parts; the one by Fire, the others by Beheading and Hanging, does
evidently show what difference he made of them; the one as of Heretics, and the
other as of men offending against his State and Person after he had made the
Supremacy Ecclesiastical to be a matter of his State and of his Royal Dignity;
whereby also he showed that he was no Gospeller.

19. But now for the third point, which is the most important of all the rest,
to show the difference in these men's Causes, and that the Catholics suffered
innocently for their Conscience, and consequently were true Martyrs; and that
the other sorts of Sectaries were punished deservedly as Malefactors, it is not
hard to prove to him that is of any mean consideration or indifferency in
matters. For first, who will not grant but that he that is an honest and good
man when he goes to bed (for example) cannot easily be made an evil man in his
sleep, without any motive of his affection or free will at all? And again, He
that is a good and true Subject toward his Prince and Country this day, how
can he well to morrow be judged a Traitor, (the highest sin of all other) if in
the mean space he change not his mind, nor do any act of word or deed contrary
to that he did before: And yet this was the Cause of the Catholics put to death
under King Henry for the Supremacy.

20. As for Example, Sir Thomas More was Prisoner in the Tower of London upon
some displeasure, in the year 1534; where he attending only to his Prayers (as
In his Epistles.
himself testifies) and to the Writing of some Spiritual Books pertaining to
the contempt of this present transitory World, there passed in the mean time a
Statute in the Parliament House, appointing that whomsoever did not believe the
King's Majesty to be Supreme Head of the Church of England in causes
Ecclesiastical, should be a Traitor, and suffer death for it; which seeming a
new and strange thing unto him, and contrary to the belief of all his
Forefathers, he could not so soon conform himself thereunto, and consequently
refused (when he was demanded) to subscribe to the Statute, and to make so
great a change in his Faith upon the change of others; for which soon after he
was put to death, not for that he had attempted, altered, The true cause of
Catholics suffering under K. Henry.
or innovated any thing, as you see, but for that he would not alter and make
innovation. And this was the proper true cause of all Catholics that suffered
for the Supremacy under King Henry VIII.

20. But on the contrary side, the others that were put to death by him as
Sectaries, did wickedly and presumptuously alter and innovate of their own
heads many things about Belief and Doctrine different from that which they had
received, and contrary to the Belief of all their Forefathers, ancient
Christians for many Ages together; and that with such obstinacy, as no Reason,
Authority, Discipline or Order, no Witness Human or Divine, could prevail with
them; and albeit for this obstinacy each Sect pretended Scriptures for
themselves, yet the virtue and substance of Scriptures consisting in their true
meaning, and interpretation thereof, it was intolerable pride and insolency in
them to arrogate to themselves the said true Interpretation and Exposition
before the whole Church of God that went before them: And hereof ensued the
justness of their punishment, which in Catholics can have no place, as before
has been showed. Yet one Example of each sort of these men shall we here
allege, thereby better to declare the Case.

21. King Henry during his Reign caused sundry sorts of men to be put to death
about matter of Religion, as is notorious; and first, The condemnation of
Anabaptists and Arians by K. Henry.
certain Anabaptists and new Arians, namely in the 27th and 30th years of his
Reign. In the former of these two Condemnations were nineteen Men and six
Women, as Stow and others do relate; and in the second were three Men and one
Woman condemned. These Anabaptists denied, amongst other points, that Children
ought to be baptized before they come to years of discretion, and can actually
believe; for defense of which Doctrine they stood resolutely upon many clear
places of Scripture as to them then seemed; to wit, Qui crediderit and
baptizatus fuerit, salvus erit, Marc. 16. He that shall believe and be
baptized, shall be saved. Absurd positions of Anabaptists and Arrians in K.
Henry's time grounded upon Scriptures pretended.
Lo (say they) it is necessary to believe as well as to be baptized; which
Infants being not able to do, ought not to receive Baptism in their Infancy; or
if they do, they must be rebaptized again when they come to years of
discretion. Thus reasoned they. And besides this Text, they and their chief
Masters do allege almost thirty places of Scripture more, which seem most
plain and evident to them, as by their Books that are extant appears.

22. The like places they do allege also for that other absurd Position of
theirs, That no Magistrate may punish by death: as for example, those words of
God, Exodus 20. Non occides, Thou shall not kill; and again the saying of our
Savior, Omnes qui acceperint gladium, gladio peribunt, Matthew. 26. All that use
the sword shall perish by the sword. Thus said the Anabaptists, from which by
no means could they be drawn, but went willingly to the fire for testimony of
their Opinions. The Arians also denying the Equality of God the Son with the
Father, alleged no less plain places, as they would have them to seem; namely
that of Christ himself in St. John's Gospel, chapter 14. Pater meus major me est,
My Father is greater than I; and many other, which were too long here to
recite. And this of them, who burned together obstinately in one fire in
England.

23. But what shall we say of the Lutherans? Do not they allege plain places
also, both against Us and Calvinists as themselves think? For against
Calvinists, in defense of the Real Presence in the Sacrament, they urge the
plain words of Christ as we do: Hoc est corpus meum: This is my Body. And
against us, for their gross Opinion that the substance of Bread and Wine
remains together with the Body of Christ, they allege many places of
Scripture where it is called Bread, which places the Zuinglians accepting, do
turn the same against the Lutherans, affirming that for so much as it is so
oftentimes called Bread in the Scripture, The condemnation of Lutherans and
Zuinglians by King Henry.
it is not the true Body of Christ at all: And this passed between Friar Barns
and the two Apostata Priests Gerard and Jerome, burned with him: The first a
fervent Lutheran, the other two earnest Zuinglians, all three consumed by Fire
at one Stake in Smithfield by King Henry's appointment, in the Thirty-second
year of his Reign.

24. But now was there a third or fourth sort of Sectaries in K. Henry's days,
who were neither Anabaptists, Arians, nor yet perfect Lutherans or Zwinglians,
but would have the Controversy of the Blessed Sacrament and Real Presence, to
be an indifferent thing to be believed, or not believed. as every Man should
think best: The opinion of Tyndall and Frith agreeing with neither Lutherans
nor Zwinglians.
So held William Tyndall, as also his Scholar John Frith, whom John Fox does
compare to St. Paul and Timothy, Frith being Burned in Smithfield by the Kings
express Commandment in the Twenty-sixth year of his Reign, and Tyndall not long
after in Flanders by the said Kings procurement, as more largely we shall
declare in the Third Part of this Treatise, when we come to examine John Fox
his Calendar of Martyrs. Now it shall be sufficient for proof of that we say to
allege Fox himself, who setting down the Articles of Frith for which he was
Burned, assigns this for the first. Fox page 942.
First (says he) the matter of the Sacrament is no necessary Article of Faith
under pain of Damnation, etc. But may be believed or not believed as every Man
shall think best. And for proof thereof alleges diverse Arguments out of
Scripture, that the Fathers forsooth of the Old Testament, were saved by the
same Faith that we are, and yet were not bound to believe the Real Presence,
etc. And Fox seems to like well both of this Argument and of the Heresy.

25. Now then here be four or five sorts of Sectaries Condemned by King Henry,
and all defended themselves by show of Scriptures, but for that each of them
does reserve the interpretation of Scripture to themselves, and thereby
teaches new Doctrine, contrary to that which was received generally in the
known Church before them, to whose judgment and interpretation they will not
yield themselves: Hereof it followed, that the indictment of Heresy lies
truly and justly against them, and that they were worthily Condemned and Burned
for this Pride, self-will and obstinacy. But on the contrary side against the
Catholics, that died for the Ecclesiastical Supremacy of the Pope, none of
these Accusations can justly be laid, for that they do neither stand upon their
own judgment, nor have invented any thing of new, nor do adhere to their own
Interpretations, or Exposition of Scriptures, but being accused, do make their
Plea and Defense far otherwise, to wit, that they found this Doctrine of the
Popes Supremacy in use and practice before they were born, The different plea
or defense of Catholics from heretics,
as a thing received from Age to Age by the known Catholic Church time out of
mind: that they see all Christian Kingdoms and Princes to have embraced the
same, and General Councils to have allowed thereof: That the Texts and Examples
of Scripture alleged for the proof of this Article, and all others whereon
they stand, are not inventions of their own, but so expounded by Ancient
Fathers and uniform consent of the Catholic Church; that all our Christian
English Kings from our first Conversion unto King Henry the Eighth acknowledged
this Spiritual Authority of the Bishop of Rome; and King Henry himself defended
the same most earnestly with his own Pen, not many years before, against Luther
and Lutherans: That it is not a thing devised but delivered, as Tertull. l. de
praescript. adversus haeres.
Tertullian said, of the Catholic Faith, and therefore if any point thereof
were to be altered, it must be done by the same Authority by which it was
delivered to them, to wit by the whole Church, Councils, and General Pastors
thereof.

26. This was the Defense and Pleading of Catholics under King Henry the Eighth
to excuse themselves from Treason, objected against them, for holding the Popes
Supremacy; wherein you see diverse notorious differences between the Defense of
the Sectaries, and them, for that amongst the Sectaries, every one held what
himself thought best, of things invented by themselves, every one cited
Scriptures, and interpreted them as he listed, without Authority, President or
Example of former Ages, and consequently they are justly called Heretics, that
is to say choosers. For that they chose to themselves what to believe in every
Sect, and reduced the last and final resolution of all things to their own
Wills and Wits, which in matters of belief is the highest Crime that against
God and his Church can be committed.

27. But on the other side the state and condition of the Catholics, and their
cause is quite opposite to this, for that they stick to Authority, Obedience,
Integrity, Example of their Ancestors; they bring nothing of their own; they
invent or innovate nothing: They stand only upon that which they have found
Established to them, not by this or that Man, or by this or that Author of any
Sect, or by this or that particular Congregation, fellowship, or Faction, or by
this or that Town, City, Province, Kingdom, or Country, but generally by the
whole universal Church and Pastors thereof, and therefore properly and truly
are called Catholics, which is to say Universal and general.

28. And this shall suffice to show the difference between the Catholic
Martyrs, and Heretical Malefactors put to death in King Henry's time, The
disagreement of Fox his Calendar Martyrs.
whereof yet we shall Treat more largely in the third part of this Treatise,
where we are to handle the particular Stories of Fox his Calendar-Martyrs, and
to compare and parallel them with ours, showing that yet never Dogs and Cats,
nor yet Sampsons Foxes did ever so disagree in natures and conditions, as these
good Martyrs did in Faction and contrariety of opinions amongst themselves, and
consequently could not be Martyrs or witnesses of any one Faith whatsoever.

29. And with this also will we end the Discourse of King Henry's Life, having
sufficiently showed (as to me it seems) that the Catholic Religion held her
footing and continuance also under there Reign of this King, no less perhaps
than before, yea she showed her self much more to the World, by the Persecution
which then she suffered, than before in the time of peace; for that the Famous
and Illustrious Martyrdoms of such excellent Men as were Bishop Fisher, Sir
Thomas More, Dr. Forest and many other such Worthies, that suffered Martyrdom
in those days, did more Illustrate her, and made extern Nations to talk more of
the Zeal and Constancy of English Catholics, than ever they would have done if
that Persecution had not fallen out; and the like success has happened since
both under King Edward the Sixth and her Majesty that now is, as briefly we
shall here declare.

30. And as for King Edwards Reign, as it was but short, King Edward the 6th.
his Reign.
and the first passage from Catholic Religion to open Profession of Heresy: So
was it not so sharp for effusion of Blood as under King Henry: For that the
King being very young, and those that Governed in his Name not thoroughly settled
in their States and Affairs, troubled also with much Division and Emulation
among themselves, could not attend to prosecute matters so exactly against
Catholics, as some of their desires and Appetites were; yet began they very
well, as we may see by the most unjust Persecutions and Deprivations of two
principal Bishops, Gardener of Winchester, and Bonner of London, by such
violent Calumnious manner as was proper for Heretics to use. The particulars
whereof John Fox does set down at large, whereby a Man may take a taste what
they meant to have done, The attempts of Cranmer and Ridley and others of their
crew in King Edwards days.
if they had had time. For that Cranmer and Ridley that had been Bishops in
King Henry's time, and followed his Religion and humor while he lived, being
now also resolved to enjoy the Preferment and Sensuality of this time, so far
as any way they might attain unto, getting Authority into their hands by the
Protector and others that were in most Power, began to lay lustily about them,
and to pull down all them both of the Clergy and others, whom they thought to
be able or likely to stand in their way, or resist their inventions.

31. And hereupon diverse were laid hands on and Imprisoned, diverse fled over
Seas, sundry most Captious and Calumnious Questions and Demands were devised to
entangle Men: As Namely: Whether a King of one year old, were not as truly a
King as at Forty or Fifty, which if you did grant concerning the Title and
Right of his Crown (which is true) then presently they inferred, that King
Edward, being but Nine years old, wanting yet discretion might also be lawful
Head of the Church, and determine Controversies of Religion, yea change the
Faith and Religion which his Father and all his Ancestors Kings and Princes of
England, all Parliaments, Synods, and Councils before his days had left unto
him for the space of a Thousand years and more. And albeit he had not
sufficient judgment to understand what Religion meant, yet was he made judge
thereof by virtue of his Birth and Succession to the Crown. The attempts of
Seymor the Protector, and John Bale in flattery toward him.
And this Point was wonderfully urged by the Protector Seymor, to all
Preachers, Prelates, and Bishops of that time, that they should inculcate the
same to the people in their Sermons, to the end that himself taking all the
said Child Kings Authority upon him, might be Head and Judge in his place:
Whereunto that he might seem the more fit and able for his excellent learning,
John Bale the Apostata Friar that lived under him, was not ashamed to Publish
in Print, and place him for a Learned Author amongst his Illustrious British
Writters, Bal. descript. Brit. cent. 5. fol. 237.
for that some Proclamations perhaps passed by his hands, though otherwise he was
known to be so unlearned, as he could scarce Write or Read.

32. But yet (as I said) this Doctrine or rather Paradox, of the Child Kings
supereminent ability, high Authority and Supreme Ecclesiastical Power to
determine, alter, change and dispose of matters of Religion at his pleasure,
though he were but of one year old, was sounded in Pulpits every where at this
time; whereof Sir John Cheke the Kings Schoolmaster amongst others Wrote a
several Treatise, besides the large Message sent in the Kings Name (but of his
Writing) to the Catholic people of Devonshire, as after shall be showed. The
same also was objected grievously against Bishop Gardener and Bishop Bonner by
Name, that they had not in their Sermons appointed unto them by the Protector,
so sufficiently urged this Point of the Kings Ecclesiastical Power in his
Nonage, as was required. And this especially for that the people in diverse
parts of the Realm, and namely those of Devonshire, seeing such alterations to
be made in Religion under the Minority of a Child, quite contrary to the Laws
and Statutes left by King Henry the Eighth, See Stow and other Chroniclers in
the year 1549.
and that all things went backward both at home and abroad (the Towns we had in
France being lost, or upon the point of losing) they complained first, and
after took Arms for defense of their Ancient Religion, in the beginning of the
third year of this Kings Reign, the people of Sommersetshire and Lincolnshire
beginning first in the Month of May; and then in July the people of Essex,
Kent, Suffolk, Norfolk, Cornwall, and Devonshire, and in August those also of
Yorkshire, all crying and demanding to have the Catholic Religion remain as it
was left by King Henry, at leastwise until King Edward came to lawful age,
thereby to be able to determine and judge of matters of Religion; which demand
did wonderfully trouble and vex the Lord Seymour Protector, and other new
Gospellers, who being hungry after Catholics Goods, could abide no delay in
making this desired Innovation.

33. And albeit, before these Insurrections fell out, The general aversion of
English-people against the entrance of Heresy.
they did well see by diverse attempts that the heart of the people was wholly
against those their Innovations in Religion, as appears plainly by a Speech
of the Lord Rich, then Chancellor, to the Sheriffs and Justices of Peace of all
Shires, gathered together in London in the year 1548, being the second of King
Edward's Reign, as at large you may see in Fox: yet such was their importunity
in this behalf, Fox p. 1185.
as they would needs go forward; which thing pleasing John Fox well, Fox ib.
1186.
he writes thus: By this you may see what zealous care was in this young King,
and in the Lord Protector his Uncle, concerning the Reformation of Christ's
Church.

34. The same Fox also sets down in another place what the young King
answered to the Devonshire-men that desired that the state of matters in
Religion might remain as King Henry had ordained and left them; and in
particular they required that the Statute of Six Articles against Heretics
might stand in force until King Edward came to full age. Whereunto let us hear
his Answer, and consider thereby how matters went in those days. To the first,
about the Statute of Six Articles made by his Father, and inviolably kept all
days of his life, the little Child answered thus: Know you what you require?
Fox p. 1189.
They were Laws made, but quickly repented; too bloody were they to be born of
Our people: You know they helped Us to extend rigor, and to draw Our Sword very
often; yea, they were as a Whetstone unto Our Sword, and for your Causes We
have left to use them; and since Our mercy moved Us to write Our Laws with Milk,
how be you blinded to ask them in Blood, etc?

35. And then further he says, But to leave this manner of reasoning with you,
K. Henry's Laws rejected by his Son K. Edward.
We let you wit, That the same Laws have been annulled by Our Parliament with
great rejoice of Our Subjects, and not now to be called by Our Subjects in
question. Dare any of you stand against an Act of Parliament, etc? Assure you
most surely, that We of no earthly thing make such account, as to have Our Laws
obeyed, for herein rests Our Honor; and shall any of you dare to breath
against Our Honor, etc? Lo how little account this little King Child was taught
to make of his old Father's Laws; and how thundringly to speak for the
maintenance of his own! But when they came to the second point about his
Nonage, he is yet more resolute; for thus he writes:

36. In the end of your request (says he) you would have Our Fathers Laws
stand in force until Our full age. But to this We think, if ye knew what ye
spoke, K. Edward's reply to the demand of the people of Devonshire.
you would never have uttered that motion, nor ever have given breath to such a
thought. For what think you of Our Kingdom? Be We of less Authority for Our
Age? You must first know, that as a King We have no difference of years nor
time; but as a natural Man, and Creature of God, We have Youth, and by his
sufferance shall have Age. We are your rightful King, your liege Lord, your
King anointed, your King crowned, the sovereign King of England, not by Our
Age, but by God's Ordinance; We possess Our Crown not by Years, but by the
Blood and Descent from Our Father King Henry VIII. etc.

37. All this, and much more, did they make the innocent young King to talk and
write in defense of their Innovations, who had more Interest therein than He.
And as for the Catholic People, albeit they denied not but that he was a true
King in his minority of Age, yet no man was so foolish as to think
(notwithstanding all these preachings to the contrary) but that it was a
different thing for matters of Religion to be altered now in his Name, than
afterward by Himself when he should come to Age.

38. But among all others, none urged this Argument so much, nor with such
Authority, as the King's eldest Sister the Princess Lady Mary, Heir-apparent to
the Crown; who being a zealous Catholic, and yet wishing well also to the
Protector, Q. Mary's admonition unto the Protector and Council.
did by sundry Letters, to be seen in Fox, admonish both Him and the rest of
the Council, That they should look well what they did, during the King's
minority, in altering the Will, Laws and Ordinances of his and her Father King
Henry, for that afterward they were like enough to be called to account about
the same when the King her Brother should come to full years. Moreover she
admonished them. That they had no Authority to make such alteration in so great
matters as they did, but ought rather to conserve things in the state left unto
them by King Henry her Father, according as by solemn Oath they had sworn unto
him before his death that they would do (but especially about matters of
Religion) until the King her Brother came unto lawful Age.

Heresy in K. Edward's days entered by violence.
39. By all which is clearly seen how the Catholic Religion remained in England
most substantially rooted in King Edward's days, and that Heresy entered only
from the teeth outward, and was maintained by violence of Temporal Authority,
and according to that was the success: For after many toils and turmoils, one
killing another of those that governed, when they thought they had laid a sure
Platform to continue the same, by excluding the Lady Mary and Lady Elizabeth,
and thrusting in Jane the Duke of Suffolk's Daughter, after King Edward's
death, and had so plotted and fortified that Design, as they thought it sure;
the only Zeal of the common Catholic People, for the recovering the use of
Catholic Religion again, overthrew all, and placed Queen Mary, as is notorious
to the World. And afterward, if we consider the end of most of them, which in
those days being Counselors, for Ambition, or other respects, were promoters
of Heresy, as Dudley, Pembroke, Winchester, Arundel, Shrewsbury, Paget, and
others, they all died Catholicly, and most of them in this Queens days, when
with much favor of the State they might have showed themselves Heretics.

Catholic Religion restored by Q. Mary.
40. And thus much for the Reign of King Edward; after whom Queen Mary
succeeding, restored Catholic Religon to her seat and ancient possession again;
which having endured only five years, it pleased God to give another trial and
probation to his Servants, by a new alteration, in the beginning of her
Majesty's Reign that now is: but yet not so forsaking them, nor their Cause,
but he left sufficient testimony in our Realm at that time what Religion had
born rule unto that day, and how and when the change began. For first of all
the Bishops and chief Prelates of the Realm not only resisted this mutation,
but most of them suffered Imprisonment or Banishment for the same, as London,
Winchester, Durham, Carlisle, Worcester, Lichfield, Ely, Lincoln, Peterborough,
Asaph, Chester, though some few other were not at first put in Prison, but
detained only in Custody, and deprived, as York, Exceter, Bath and Wells. I
will omit other principal men, as Deans and Archdeacons of Churches, as Dr.
Cole of London, Bishops and Archdeacons deprived and imprisoned for Cath.
Faith, An. 1560.
Dr. Steward of Winchester, Dr. Robinson of Durham, Dr. Setland of Worcester,
Dr. Rambridge of Litchfield, Dr. John Harpesfield of Norwich, Dr. Joliff of
Bristol, Dr. Boxall of Windsor, Dr. Nicholas Harpesfield of Canterbury, Dr.
Dracott of York, Dr. Peter of Buckingham, Dr. Cheasey of Middlesex, and many
others, which were overlong to rehearse all. I omit also Dr. Fecknam Abbot of
Westminster, and the two learned Priors of the Carthusians, Chasey and Wilson,
and many other Religious Men, that left their Livings and the Realm, not to be
forced to yield to this change. Which multitude of learned Witnesses, (not to
speak of infinite others of less degree) being the chief throughout all Shires
of England where they dwelt, did well show by their constant profession unto
their dying days what root and foundation Catholic Religion had in England at
that time; and has yet, I doubt not, as after shall be showed.

41. And albeit in these forty years and more that have endured since the
beginning of this change, the Temporal State of our Realm has for our sins
been opposite and enemy to this Religion, with full intent to extirpate and
extinguish the same, yet such is the everlasting force of Truth, and so
faithful is the holy Providence of Almighty God for defense thereof in times of
most need and pressure, that the Catholic Faith, and Profession thereof, has
never been more eminent and illustrious in England, than in this time of so
grievous affliction; The constancy of English Catholics in this time of
Persecution.
there having been above an hundred Priests (not to speak of others of other
Degree) that have made profession thereof at the Bars and Benches of most of
all the Tribunals and Judgment-seats of England, and have sealed also their
Confession with most willing offering of their Blood.

42. And indeed that which is most rare and worthy noting in this affair, is
that most of them were born and bred in England during the time of her
Majesty's Reign, and were brought up in the Religion that now is professed
within the Realm; diverse of them also had studied at the Universities of Oxford
and Cambridge, where they had heard the adverse Part allege for themselves
what they could, and themselves had read and examined with no small diligence
what grounds the Protestants had for their Opinions; which being done, they
went over the Seas to hear and see the Catholic Party, and so resolve
themselves more substantially in such matters as nearest concerned their
eternal Salvation; wherein being thoroughly satisfied in all their doubts, they
passed further, and became Priests, and so returned into England again to
impart to others the hidden Treasure of Truth which themselves had found out.
The constant resolution of diverse Catholic Priests.
And albeit diverse of them were of that Kindred and Parentage, and so qualified
also in themselves, that they might have lived both wealthily and at their ease
if they would have followed the World and present course of Times, yet made
they choice rather to fall into manifold Dangers, Imprisonments, and Death it
self, than to forsake the truth of Catholic Religion, or forbear to communicate
the same to others; which is another manner of ground and foundation for their
Constancy, than John Fox recounteth in many of his Martyrs, who upon toys
became Protestants, and of mere ignorance and obstinacy went to the Fire for
the same; as namely, Joan Lashford, Joan Lashford. Fox p. 1547, 1517.

Agnes Potten. Joan Trunchfield.


a married Maid (as he says) of twenty years old, that took aversion from the
Mass when she was but eleven years old, (upon very good grounds you must imagine
in those years of her Age;) as also Agnes Potten and Joan Trunchfield, the
Wives of a Beer-brewer and Shoemaker of Ipswich, resolved to go to the Fire,
upon a certain Vision that one Samuel a Minister told them that he had in the
Prison with them. And upon the same ground it seems another Wench, Rose
Nottingham.

Fox p. 1547.


called Rose Nottingham, embraced the said Minister and kissed him in the
street as he went toward burning.

43. Andrew Hewit in like manner, an Apprentice of London of nineteen years
old, determined to die with John Frith (then in the Tower of London) for the
Opinions that he would die for, though yet he did not know what his Opinions
were. William Hunter also, another Apprentice of London, William Hunter.
and of the same age of nineteen years, running away from his Master, and
finding an old English Bible lying in the Chapel of Burntwood, fell to reading
thereof, Fox p. 1395. an. 1555.
and thereby presently became a Protestant in diverse Opinions, and would needs
burn for the same. Rawling White likewise is recounted by Fox to have been an
old poor Fisherman in Wales, Rawling White.
and hearing of a certain new fresh Doctrine to be had out of the Scriptures in
English, and grieved that himself was not able to read them, he put his little
Boy to School to learn to read, who being somewhat instructed in that Art, he
caused him to read Scriptures unto him, Fox p. 1414.
and profited so much therein within a little time, that the old Fisherman
began to be a Preacher; and so leaving his Occupation, went up and down Wales
with his Boy after him bearing the Bible, out of which he took upon him to
preach at every Town and Tavern thereof, seeking thereby to pervert such as
were no wiser than himself; nor could he be restrained from his wilful folly,
until the Bishop of Cardiff apprehended him, whom afterward also he was forced
to burn, for that he stood obstinate in his fantastical Opinions, which were
such as scarce agreed with any Sect whatsoever. And finally, Laurence Sanders,
a famous scarlet Martyr of theirs, being a married Priest, and seeing a little
Bastard of his brought to him in Prison by the Woman that bare it, he was so
tenderly affected thereunto, as in great vehemence of spirit he said to the
standers by, What man of my Vocation would not die to make this little Boy
legitimate, and prove his Mother to be no Whore?

44. And of this I might give infinite Examples out of John Fox, what
substantial grounds and motives many of his Martyrs had to run to the Fire, or
rather how without all ground or probable reason in the world, Heretical
hastiness to burn for their Errors.
but only wilful Pride and Obstinacy, most of them thrust themselves to death,
no less than in old times did the Massilians, Montanists, Circumcellians, and
Martyrians, most famous Heretics, upon the like madness, as after we are to
show more at large in the Cap. 2.
third Part, where I am to treat of these matters more particularly, and to
give you (if I be not deceived) large matters of laughter, or rather of
compassion, in this behalf. Now this shall be sufficient to show both the great
number and respective quality of domestical Witnesses for the Catholic Faith,
and continuance thereof in our Country during the time of this sharp
Persecution under her Majesty, and that never more than in this time has the
Catholic Church been perspicuous, honorable and eminent in our Realm; which is
altogether contrary to that which John Fox ascribes to his Church, whose
Invisibility, Obscurity, and lurking from the eyes of men, he both grants and
excuses, by the presence of Persecution against her; whereas we hold on the
other side, that the true Church (and consequently Ours) is ever more visible
and notoriously known in time of Affliction and Persecution, than in Peace.

45. And so we have showed by Example of our English Church, especially in this
present Age, wherein not only domestical sufferings at home have come by Fame,
Books, and Writings to the knowledge of Foreign Nations, and thereby also the
notice of so many worthy constant Catholics that are within the Realm; but
whole Troops also both of English Men and Women in Exile for their Consciences,
do represent the same daily to their eyes, as it were by a lively spectacle, to
the wonder of the Christian World. But above all the rest, they must needs be
greatly moved with the sight of whole Companies, Families, and Communities of
English of both Sexes, of tender Age, and those for the most part of very
principal good Birth and Parentage, that have come forth of our Country for
the love of Religion, and lived with great Edification in other Nations, partly
in Colleges and Seminaries, partly in Religious Convents and Monasteries,
yielding great admiration to strangers for their rare Virtues of Piety,
Patience, Contentment and Devotion. And as for Colleges and Seminaries, A
great number of English Youths in Exile for Religion.
those of St. Omers and Doway in Flanders, of Rhemes in France, of Rome in
Italy, of Valliadolid, Sevill, and St. Lucars in Spain, and of Lisbon in
Portugal, do sufficiently testify. And as for Monasteries both of Men and
Women, they are not unknown; as that venerable Company of English Carthusians
in Mechlyn, the honorable Religious Houses of English Noble and Gentlewomen in
Bruxells, Lovain, and Lisbon, whose rare Virtues do singularly edify all those
that know them, and greatly illustrate the Name of our Country for Religious
Piety with Foreign Nations. All these (I say) do bear witness at this day to
the whole World, and to us also, that, God be thanked, the fire and fervor of
Catholic Religion, which Christ came to plant upon Earth, is not extinguished
by so long and grievous Persecution in our Country, but rather increased, at
least in Intention, as Philosophers do speak, though not in Extension.

46. And truly, when I consider the matter more seriously with my self, The
Conclusion of the first Part of this Treatise.
I doubt much whether England, if it had continued Catholic, had ever enjoyed
such excellent Education for their Youth at home, as by occasion of this
Tribulation God has given them abroad in Foreign Nations. Certainly the
Example is rare, and never heard of in former times, and at this day the like
is seen in few other Nations besides Us; but in none of those that have
suffered for Catholic Religion is this Blessing found so abundantly as in Ours,
God make us grateful for it; for if our Ingratitude turn not the course of his
Mercies hitherto used toward us, it seems evident that he will not suffer
the Seed of Catholic Religion to be extinguished in England, having conserved
the same so potently and strangely unto this day, which is from the first
preaching of the Apostles and Apostolic-men to the Britans, unto the time of
Pope Gregory I. under whom our English Nation was converted, as has been
declared, and from thence again downward unto Us, which is more than a thousand
years; and so I doubt not but he will to the Worlds end, if our sins deserve
not the contrary. And this shall serve for this first Part, containing the
Deduction and Continuance of Catholic Religion in England without interruption,
for more than fifteen hundred years together. Now will we pass to the second
Part, to examine the same Succession in Protestants Religion throughout all
these Ages, if it may be found; making our Conclusion, as after you shall see,
That as our Religion entered first, and has never left England unto this hour,
so the Religion of John Fox, in the form that he would have it, was never yet
admitted into England publicly, by any Prince or Potentate whatsoever, until
this present day, nor ever like to be. And this shall serve for the first Part
of our Treatise.

The End of the First Part.
The Second PART of this TREATISE, CONTAINING The SEARCH after the Protestants
Church, From the beginning of Christendom to Our Days.
The ARGUMENT.
HAving declared in the former Part of this Treatise how the Faith of Christ
was first preached to the Britans at two several times, and then to the English
Nation, and all by Roman Preachers; and that the same Faith has continued from
Age to Age in a visible conspicuous Church until our days: there remains now,
that we examine in this second Part, Where the Protestants Church was in all
this time, and whether they had any at all? And if they had, of what sort of
men it consisted, and whether it were the same with the Church
before-described, or partly the same, partly different; or whether they could
stand together, being opposite in any one point of Faith? Moreover, whether the
one did persecute the other, or might be reconciled or agreed together? And
finally, what is the state of the one and the other at this day? For
examination of which points, we shall have occasion to run over again with more
advice all the former sixteen Ages from Christ downward, and therein to see and
consider, What Church either flourished or prevailed throughout every Age,
either Ours, or that of John Fox; and which of them is likeliest to have come
down from the Apostles? As also, Whether that Church which was visibly founded
by the Apostles, and put on foot by them and theirs, could perish, or vanish
away to give place to another? And these are the principal Points of this
second Part discussed in the Chapters following; though first, before we enter
into this examination, we have thought good to treat certain general Points,
that make way thereunto, as by the next Chapter you shall perceive.

CHAP. I.
Of how to great Importance Ecclesiastical Succession is for trial of true
Religion; and how Sectaries have sought to fly the force thereof, by saying,
That the Church is invisible; How fond a shift this is, and how foolishly John
Fox does behave himself therein.

THE Sentence of the Philosopher is known to all, That contraries being laid
together, do give light the one to the other; as white and black proposed in
one Table, do make each color more clear, distinct, and lively in it self. For
which respect we having laid open before, in the first Part of this Discourse,
the known manifest Succession of Christian Religion in our Isle of England,
first from the Apostles times among the Britans, for the first six Ages after
Christ; and then again among the Englishmen, for nine Ages more since their
first Conversion from Paganism; we are now to examine what manner of visible
Succession John Fox does bring us forth of his Church, that is to say, of the
Protestants of his Religion, (for the said 1500 years, or fifteen Ages) if any
such be; for that by this comparison of the One with the Other, the Nature and
Condition of both Churches will be understood. But yet first I mean to note by
the way certain principal points to be considered for better understanding of
all that is to be handled in this Chapter, or about this whole matter of
Ecclesiastical Succession.

2. Whereof the first may be that which I have touched in the end of the former
Chapter, to wit, of how great importance this point is, The principal point to
be noted of Succession.
(I mean the Succession and Continuation of Teachers, the one conform to the
other in matter of Belief and Religion) for clear demonstration of Truth in
matters of Controversy, and for staying any discreet man's judgment from
wavering hither and thither in his belief, according to that which holy St.
Augustine said of himself, and felt in himself: For that considering the great
diversity of Sects that swarmed in his time, and every one pretending Truth,
Antiquity, Purity, and Authority of Scriptures, and himself also having been
misled by one of these Sects for many years, was brought by God at length to be
a true Catholic, and to feel in himself the force of this visible Succession of
the Catholic Church. And therefore, writing against one that in time past had
been his Master, as Head of the former Sect wherein he had lived, to wit,
Faustus Manichaeus, St. Augustin's estimation of Succession.
after diverse other reasons alleged of his confidence and assurance of Truth
in the Catholic Church, and of his firm resolution to live and die in the same,
he brings for his last and strongest reason the perpetual Succession of
Bishops in the same Church, and especially in the Church of Rome: Aug. ep.
cont. Faust. Manich. c. 4. tom. 6.
Tenet me in Ecclesia (says he) ab ipsa Petri sede, usque ad praesentem
Episcopatum, successio Sacerdotum, etc. I am held in this Church (against all
you Sectaries) by the Succession of Priests and Bishops, that have come down
even from the first seat of St. Peter the Apostle, to the present Bishop of
Rome (Anastasius) that holds the seat at this day, etc.

3. Lo here the force and estimation of Succession with St. Augustine. Whereunto
are conform all other ancient Fathers, if we would stand to allege them; yea
they stand so firmly upon this point, and do make so great account of it, as
they do generally note Heretics and Sectaries for the contrary defect, to wit,
that they have no Succession or orderly continuation either of Bishops or of
Faith among them, but did leap hither and thither, (as ours do at this day,)
challenging to themselves now this and now that, without either Order,
Interest, Continuation, or Succession: Aug. quaest. 110 in nov. and vet. Test.
Ordinem (says St. Augustine) ab Apostolo Petro coeptum, and usque ad hoc
tempus per traducem succedentium Episcoporum servatum perturbant, ordinem sibi
sine origin vendicantes. Heretics do trouble and break the order of succeeding
of Bishops begun by St. Peter, and brought down by Off spring, one Bishop
succeeding another; and so challenge unto themselves a certain Order without
beginning.

4. To which effect also Tertullian, more than 200 years before St. Augustine,
challenging Heretics to this Combat of Succession, said, Tert. l. de praescrip.
advers. haeres.
Edant Haeretici origines suarum Ecclesiarum, evolvant ordinem Episcoporum
suorum, etc. Let Heretics set forth the beginning of their Churches, let them
recount the order of their succeeding Bishops if they can. And then having set
down for his part, and for proof of true Catholic Succession, the whole rank of
the Bishops of Rome, from St. Peter to Pope Eleutherius that lived in his days.
[Mark, I pray you, the proof he uses, though he were of the Church of Africa.]
He glories as though he brought forth an invincible Argument against all
Heretics, challenging and provoking them to do the like if they could: Tert.
ibid.
Consingant (says he) tale aliquid Haeretici; Let Heretics bring forth or
devise any such things for proof of their Church if they can. And consider here
(gentle Reader) how Heretics remain confounded by Tertullian's judgment for
want of Succession.

Iren. l. 4. advers. haeres. c. 4.
5. But this is not only Tertullian's Opinion; for St. Irenaeus, before him
again, objecteth the same to Heretics, against whom he wrote, saying* Obedire
oportet eis, qui successionem habent ab Apostolis, qui cum Episcopatus
successione charismata veritatis acceperunt; You ought to obey these who have
their Succession from the Apostles, who together with the Succession of their
Bishoprics, have received from time to time the gifts or privileges of Truth.
And in another place, Ibid. c. 45.
Apud quas est ea, quae est ab Apostolis successio, hi fidem nostram
custodiunt, and scripturas sine periculo nobis exponunt; With whom the
Succession of Bishops from the Apostles time downwards is found to have
remained, these are they who conserve our Faith, and do expound the Scripture
unto us without danger. Behold the virtue of Succession, which this blessed
Bishop and Martyr St. Irenaeus esteemed so highly in his days, as he ascribed
thereto both the infallible Conservation of Faith, and true Exposition of
Scriptures.

6. And it is to be noted, that he speaks not only of Succession in Belief,
as every one of our Sectaries will seem to pretend, that they have it among
themselves from the Apostles, (which yet is ridiculous, and manifestly false,
as before has been declared, and after shall be more in particular;) but he
speaks expressly also of the external Succession and Continuation of Bishops,
ascribing to them, and proving by them, the Succession of one and the self-same
Faith: The force of Succession with Irenaeus and other Fathers.
And to that end does he number up all the Bishops of Rome from St. Peter to
his time, as Tertullian before-alledged did, (notwithstanding the one lived in
France, and the other in Africa,) proving by that Succession of Roman Bishops
the true Succession of one and the self-same Catholic Faith to have endured,
not only in these several Countries, but also over all Christendom, and that
from Christ to those times; esteeming this to be a most invincible Proof and
certain Demonstration, or (to use St. Irenaeus his own words) plenissimam
ostensionem, a most full probation against all Heretics whatsoever.

7. According to which Principle and sure Foundation, all other Fathers also
that have ensued since, from Age to Age, have stood very resolutely upon this
point of Succession, Hier. dia. ult. cont. Lucif.
against the Heretics of their times. Brevem (says St. Hierom) apertamque
animi mei sententiam proferam, in illa esse Ecclesia permanendum quae ab
Apostolis fundata usque ad diem hanc durat; I will utter briefly my sentence
and judgment; we must abide in that Church, which being founded by the
Apostles, has endured unto this day. As if he had said, We must be and abide
in that Church, which as it was visibly founded and spread over the World by
the Apostles Preaching, so it has visibly been continued under her Bishops and
Teachers unto this day. Which sentence of his St. Augustine, that lived with
him, though somewhat younger, confirms in these words: Aug. l. de utilitate
credent. c. 17.
Dubitabimus nos illius Ecclesiae considere gremio, quae ab Apostolica sede per
Successiones Episcoporum (frustra haereticis circumlatrantibus) culmen
Authoritatis obtinuit? Shall we doubt still to rest in the lap of that Church,
which has kept continually the height of her Authority by Succession of
Bishops from the See-Apostolic unto this day, notwithstanding the vain barking
of Heretics on every side of her?

8. Thus said St. Augustine of the visible Church in his days, which had not
continued much more than 400 years. But what would he say if he lived in our
days, Barking of Heretics against Succession, as St. Augustine terms it.
after almost 1200 years Succession more since he wrote this, when he should
hear far greater and more spiteful barking of Heretics against the same, than
he heard in his days? though then also he heard much, and much of that which we
hear now. But if St. Augustine should live now again, there is no doubt of one
thing; which is, that he would make this his Argument of Succession far more
strong against our Heretics, and esteem it so much the more, by how much the
Power of Christ has showed it self more Omnipotent in continuing the same
since, for so many Ages more after him, amidst so many troubles and turmoils,
changes and alterations of Empires, and Kingdoms, and Temporal States, as
before we have noted. And if in England we can number above seventy Archbishops
of Canterbury, all of one Religion, the one succeeding the other, since our
first Conversion by St. Augustine our Apostle, (not to speak any thing of the
British Church before us) as you may see confessed by Cambden and other new
heretical Writers of our own; and that this English Church was the same in
Faith and Belief with the British, In descr. Cantii.
(as before has been showed) and both of them one with the Roman and General
Church from the very beginning to this time, what an Antiquity is this? and how
clear and evident a Succession? And how would St. Augustine urge this Argument
against our Protestants, if he were now alive again.

9. Sure I am, that if any one Baron, Earl, or Duke in England could show but
the half of these years for the continuance and possession of any Temporal
State, Lordship, or Land in England, he would highly esteem thereof, and
thereby make a glorious defense against any wrangling Companion that should
presume to pretend the same, and deprive him thereof, if he could truly say and
prove (as we do in the Cause of our Church) that his Ancestors for 1300 years
together had continued in that possession. But no man can prescribe any such
time in temporal matters, and therefore are they well called Temporal, for that
they change in a little time. And he that will read the foresaid Cambden's
Story, toward the end of every English Shire, A comparison between the durance
of the Church and temporal States.
(where he takes upon him to recount the Earls or Dukes that have had their
States and Titles over that Shire) he shall see such a broken Succession in
those States and Signories as it is pitiful to behold, no Dukedom or Earldom
continuing lightly three or four Generations together in any one Name or
Family. And this is the frailty and uncertainty of human things.

10. But for matters of Religion appertaining to the Soul, Almighty God has
given another manner of force unto Succession both of Men and Faith. As for
example, in the Law of Nature, he made the same to endure by only Tradition,
without Writing, for more than 2500 years, under the ancient Patriarchs before
and after the Flood of Noe. And afterward again in the written Law, the Jews
continued the possession of their Religion by Succession of Bishops and
Ecclesiastical Governors from Moses unto Christ, above 1500 years,
notwithstanding all varieties of times and calamities. And no less from Christ
to our Age has he continued the same in a much more glorious sort and manner.
In which latter time of Christian Religion (to speak only of this for the
present) so many mutations have been made, both in the Roman Empire it self,
and all other Realms and Kingdoms round about us, as all men know, and may be
seen in Histories: And yet has the Succession of the Catholic Church and
Pastors thereof, together with the Union of Faith therein taught, been most
miraculously conserved amongst all these tossings and turmoils, breaches and
divisions of Temporal Kingdoms; which could never have been, but by the
Omnipotent Hand of our Savior that has defended it; especially considering
withal the great multitude of Sects and Heresies that from time to time have
risen, and attempted to impugn the same, but could never prevail. And this is
sufficient for this first and principal point of the virtue and force of
Ecclesiastical Succession.

11. The second point to be considered is, That when Luther's new Religion
began, and could allege no Successors of Bishops, The second principal point
to be considered about the visibility of the Church.
or ancient Teachers for it self, but was much pressed with this other of the
Catholics, he devised a certain notorious and ridiculous shift, to say, that
the true Church was invisible to the eye of man, and only seen by God, and
consequently had no need of any visible or external Succession of Men. And this
shift of his is discovered by that he writes both against In defens. l. de
servo arbitr.
Erasmus, and Lib. cont. Cathar.
Catharinus, and in his wicked Treatise Part 1.
de abroganda Missa privata, for taking away private Masses; where having had
Conference with the Devil, (as himself confesses) he asks very stoutly, Who
can show us the Church, seeing she is secret, and to be believed only in
Spirit? To whom if any man would oppose S. Aug. that says, Aug. in tract. in
ep. Joan.
digito ostendimus Ecclesiam, we can show the Church with our finger, should
not Luther be well matched think you?

12. The like held for a time Cap. de Conciliis.
Brentius, as appears in his Confession of Wittemberg, and some others of
that Sect. But this Opinion of Luther did not long please his Followers; for
that In locis com. loco 12. de Eccles.
Ph. Melancthon, his chief Scholar, did soon after teach the contrary, viz.
That the Church was visible to the eyes of men also. And the Cent. 1. l. 1. c.
4.
Magdeburgians do hold the same, defining everywhere the Church to be a
visible Company of Men. Which going back of the principal Lutherans in this
point (it being done by a certain Consultation had thereof among themselves, as
Apol. 1. part 3. Calv. l. 4. Inst. c. 1. 3.
Fredericus Staphylus the Emperor's Counselor, that had been one of them,
affirms) was some Cause perhaps that Calvin, coming presently after them,
took upon him to defend the same Doctrine again, saying, Nobis invisibilem, etc.
We are forced to believe the Church to be invisible, and to be seen only by the
eyes of God. Lo Calvin puts necessity in this point of Belief.

Why Lutherans left the Paradox of the invisibility of the Church.
13. The Causes that moved the chief Lutherans to go back from their first
Opinion about the invisibility of the Church, were principally the apparent
Evidences and Demonstrations which Catholics do allege both out or Scriptures,
Fathers, common sense and reason, for overthrow of that most fond and
ridiculous Paradox. And first, out of holy Scriptures both of the Old and New
Testament; these men being not able to allege any one place where the Name of
God's Church is applied to an Invisible Congregation; the Catholics on the
contrary side pressed them with many most evident Texts of Scripture, where it
was and is used for a visible Company of Men: as that in the Book of Numbers,
chapter 20. Cur eduxisti Ecclesiam Domini in solitudinem? Why have thou brought the
Church of God into the Desert? And again in 3 Kings, chapter 8. Convertitque Rex
faciem suam, and benedixit omni Ecclesiae Israel, omnis enim Ecclesia Israel,
stabat, etc. The King turning his face about, did bless all the Church of
Israel, for that all the Church of Israel was present, etc. Which places, and
many the like, cannot possibly be understood of an Invisible, but of a Visible
Company.

14. And much more, if we consider the speeches of Christ and his Apostles in
the New Testament; Matt. 18.
as these words of Christ, Dic Ecclesiae, si Ecclesiam non audierit, etc. Tell
the Church, and if he hear not the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen
or Publican. But if the Church were invisible, neither could a man complain to
the Church, nor hear the Church. Moreover St. Paul exhorts the chief Pastors
of the Ephesians to attend diligently to their charge, Acts 20. In quo vos
Spiritus Sanctus posuit Episcopos regere Ecclesiam Dei: In which the H. Ghost
has placed you as Bishops to govern the Church of God. But how could they,
being visible men, govern a Company that was invisible, and not to be seen?

Act. 15.18. Evident Scriptures for the visibility of the Church.
15. And yet further, when St. Paul and St. Barnabas went up from Antioch to
Jerusalem, the Scripture says, Deducti sunt ab Ecclesia, etc. They were
brought on their way by the Church of Antioch; and when they came to Jerusalem,
suscepti sunt ab Ecclesia; they were received by the Church. And yet further,
ascendit Paulus and salutavit Ecclesiam; Paul went and saluted the Church, etc.
All which places cannot agree possibly to an invisible Church; and yet that
this was the true Primitive Church of Christ, no man can deny.

16. And finally, when St. Paul does teach Timothy his Scholar, 1 Timothy 3.
Quomodo oporteat conversari in Domo Dei, quae est Ecclesia, etc. How he should
converse and govern the House of God, which is his Church, Columna and
Firmamentum Veritatis, the Pillar and Firmament of all Truth, Ibid. All this (I
say) had been spoken to no purpose, if the true Church of Christ were
invisible; for how can a man converse in a Congregation which he cannot see or
know; or how can the Church be a Pillar and sure Firmament of Truth to resolve
all Doubts and Questions that may fall out about Scriptures, Articles of
Belief, and Mysteries of Christ's Religion, if it be an invisible Congregation,
that no man sees, discerns, or knows where or how to repair unto it, nor
who are the persons therein contained?

17. And lastly, not to stand longer upon this matter, Evident reasons that the
true Church must be visible containing both good and bad.
that is so evident in it self, and plain to common sense and reason; if the
true Church of Christ be a Society not of Angels, Spirits, or Souls departed,
but of Men and Women in this life, that must be governed or govern therein; how
can they be invisible? And if they must have Communion together in external
Sacraments, and namely in Marc. ult. Ephesians. 4. 1. Pet. 3.
Baptism, and participation of the Body of Christ; if they must Romans 10. Luc.
12. 1 Timothy 6.
profess the Name and Doctrine of Christ externally to the World, as also to be
Mat. 5. Luc. 11. Joan. 15.
persecuted and put to death for the same; if all men must repair unto them,
and those that be out of the Church to enter and be received therein, and those
that be in her to be resolved of their doubts, to lay down their complaints, to
be governed and directed by her, and finally to obey her under pain of
Damnation: how can all this be performed, Mat. 28. 1 Cor. 12. 1 Timothy 3.5. St.
Augustin's Discourses about the visibility of the Church.

See St. Aug. in Psalm. 44, 47. and l. 2. cont. Petil. c. 32, and 104. l. 2.
cont. Cresco. c. 36. and l. 4. c. 58. tract. 1, 2. in ep. Joan. etc. 4. collat.
3. diei in Brevie.


if she be invisible to man's eyes, and only seen by the eyes of God?

18. To allege Fathers and Doctors in this behalf were both endless and
needless, for that all of them everywhere almost are occupied in setting forth
not only the Visibility, but the Splendour also and Greatness, yea the multitude
and external Majesty of Christ's Church throughout the World in their days: and
only St. Augustine may serve for all, who dilateth himself everywhere in this
Argument, showing how the little Stone prophesied by Daniel was grown to be a
huge Mountain, and terrible to the whole World: and that the Tabernacle of
Christ (which is his Church) was placed by him in the Sun to be seen of all;
and that it was a City upon a Mountain which none could be ignorant of; and
other like Discourses founded on evident Scriptures. Whereby is refuted not
only the first shift of Luther and Calvin making the true Church of Christ
invisible, but also the second of these latter Lutherans, who (though overcome
with the former proofs) do grant the Church to be a visible Company, yet do
they deny it to be that external conspicuous Succession of Bishops and
Councils, which have been most eminent in the known Christian Church from the
Apostles downward; but rather to be some few obscure and contemptible people
(which they call the Elect) that have lived or lurked from time to time in
shadows and darkness, and known to few or none.

19. But this second device is more fond than the former; A second fond device
of Lutherans about an obscure Church.
for where shall a man seek out these hidden Fellows to treat with them, or to
receive Sacraments at their hands? how shall they be known? how may they be
trusted? whence have they their Authority? what Succession bring they down by
imposition of hands from the Apostles time? may not every Sect of Heretics make
themselves Christ's Church by this device? Wherefore of this second point there
need to be said no more.

20. There remains then a third point to be considered by the Reader before
we come to set down the Succession of John Fox's Church; The third point of
John Fox's Opinion about the true Church.
who having considered with himself that both Luther and Calvin did hold it to
be invisible; and on the other side, that diverse chief Lutherans had changed
their Opinions therein, and held it to be visible, (especially Flaccus
Illyricus, and the rest of the Magdeburgians, who were to write a whole Story
of their own visible Church in their Centuries, and Fox, to follow them step by
step therein, in his English Acts and Monuments) the poor man was brought to a
very great perplexity; forasmuch as on the one side, to leave Luther (but
especially Calvin) seemed very hard unto him; and on the other side, not to
stick to the Magdeburgians, that are his Masters in his Story, seemed hard
also: But especially and above all was he troubled (as it seems) with the
reason and necessity of the matter it self; for if the Church of Christ be
invisible, how can Fox or the Magdeburgians write so great and large stories
thereof? A great perplexity of John Fox. Illyr. gloss. in Matthew. c. 1.
To which effect Illyricus writing upon the Genealogy set down by St. Matthew's
Gospel, of the true Church from the beginning, says thus: Ostendit ista series
Ecclesiam and Religionem veram habere certas historias suae originis and
progressus; This Genealogy proves that the true Church and Religion have
assured Histories of their beginning and progress.

21. Thus said Illyricus, for that he and his Fellows were then in hand (as
has been said) with their Ecclesiastical Histories named Centuries; which they
could not well have written, holding the Church to be invisible; neither yet
John Fox could begin so great a Volume with that Opinion. Fox's new Opinion
making the Church both visible and invisible.
Wherefore, after much breaking his brains about this matter, (as it seems)
he comes forth with a new Opinion never heard of perhaps before, affirming
that the true Church of Christ is both visible and invisible, to wit, visible
to some, and invisible to others; visible to them that are in her, and
invisible to them that are out of her. You shall hear his words.

Fox in his protestation to the Church of England, p. 2.
22. Although (says he) the right Church of God be not so invisible in the World,
that none can see it, yet neither is it so visible again that every worldly eye
may perceive it; for like as is the nature of Truth, so is the proper condition
of the true Church, that commonly none sees it but such only as be members and
partakers thereof; and therefore they which require that God's holy Church
should be evident and visible to the whole World, seem to define the great
Synagogue of the World, rather than the true spiritual Church of God.

23. Thus says he; wherein you see that he makes the true Church visible, but
only to such as are in her, and Members thereof. A device (I think) never heard
of before, and fit for the Brains of John Fox, which were known to be out of
tune for many years before he died; for if he do not trifle and equivocate,
(meaning one-where internal Visibility by Faith, and another-where external
Visibility to the Eye) but does mean indeed as he should do, and as the
Controversy is meant, of external visibility to man's eye, then is it most
ridiculous that none can see the true Church in this World, but he that is a
Member of her; for she is to be seen as well to her Enemies and Adversaries, as
to her Friends and Children; the One to impugn and fight against her, the Other
to acknowledge and obey her. And I would (for examples sake) demand of John
Fox, Whether Herod and Nero, that persecuted the true visible Church of Christ,
were of that Church or no? For if they were not, then by his sentence they
could not see her, and consequently not persecute her.

24. His comparison also between Truth and the true Church does not hold; for
that Truth is a spiritual thing, to be seen only by the eye of our
Understanding, but the true Church, consisting of visible Men and Women, may be
seen by man's eye; though the truth thereof (to wit, whether this or that visible
Congregation be the true Church of Christ) is a matter of Understanding and
Belief, confirmed unto us by such Arguments as before we have recited, and
others. So as albeit the aforesaid Persecutors Herod and Nero (for Example) did
not see the Truth of that Church which they persecuted, How Enemies and
Persecutors do see the true Church.
in respect of their Doctrine, (for then perhaps they would not have done it)
yet did they both see and know that this was Christ's visible Church, to wit, a
Congregation professing his Name and Doctrine; yea, they might know further that
it was his true Church, seeing it was begun visibly and evidently by him and
his Apostles in their days, and so continued on without interruption; and if
they had further known and believed (as we do) that he had promised to maintain
and defend this Church unto the worlds end, then must they either have doubted
of his Fidelity or Power to perform it, or must have believed also that this
Church could not fail; whereof Protestants doubting, must needs doubt also of
the one or the other, to wit, of the Fidelity and of the Ability of our Savior
to perform his promise. And this is the force of Succession even with Enemies
and Infidels

25. But now let us pass to the principal matter intended in this Chapter,
which is, the Succession or Deduction of the Protestants Church, Fox in the
Title.
promised by John Fox in his Acts and Monuments; Wherein (says he) is set
forth at large the whole race and course of the Church, from the Primitive to
these latter times of ours, etc. Thus he promises in the Title; but how he
does perform it in his whole Book, we shall see afterward in this Declaration.
-- Though in part we may perceive his drift, by that he protests to the Church
of England before his entrance into his Story in these words:

I have taken in hand (says he) this History, The purpose of John Fox in his
Protest. p. 3.
that as other Story-Writers heretofore have employed their travail to magnify
the Church of Rome, so in this History might appear the Image of both Churches,
but especially of the poor, oppressed, and persecuted Church of Christ; which,
though it has been so long trodden under foot by Enemies, neglected in the
World, not regarded in Histories, and almost scarce visible and known to
worldly eyes, yet has it been the true Church only of God; wherein he has
mightily wrought hitherto in preserving the same in all extreme distresses,
continually stirring up from time to time faithful Ministers, by whom always
has been kept some sparks of this true Doctrine and Religion. And for so much as
the true Church of God goes not lightly alone, but is accompanied with some
other Church or Chapel of the Devil to deface and malign the same; necessary
it is, that the difference between them both be seen, and the descent of the
right Church to be described from the Apostles time, etc.

26. Here we see all John Fox his drift laid down. First, he means to
contradict all former Writers that have magnified the Church of Rome, and the
Greatness and Glory thereof, which he calls the Devil's Chapel: And in this
he must contradict all the ancient Fathers and Writers for diverse hundred years
after Christ, as Irenaeus, Tertullian, Augustine, Optatus, and other Writers,
that bring down the descent of the true Church of Christ, by the Succession of
the Bishops and Church of Rome, as before you have heard. And secondly Fox
means to set out another Christian Church, trodden under foot before,
neglected in the World, not regarded in Histories, and almost scarce visible or
known; and yet was, and is (forsooth) the only true Church of Christ, keeping
some spark of his true Doctrine and Religion, (he does not say that all was true
which she held, nor that all Christ's Doctrine was taught in her, but only some
sparks or scraps of true Doctrine) And further he promises, that he will
describe the descent of this Church from the Apostles time.

27. This is John Fox his promise, and we accept thereof. And though it be scarce
worth the performance to show us a hidden, obscure, and trodden down Church in
every Age, that keeps some sparks of true Doctrine and Religion, (for that
every Sect and Heresy, not denying Christ and his Doctrine wholly, does so,)
yet shall we accept and exact the same (being never so miserable and beggarly)
as we go over the whole course of Times and Ages from Christ downward,
following therein the distribution it self that John Fox has appointed to be
observed in his Story; to wit, What is to be handled about John Fox's Church.
from Christ to Constantine 300 years; from Constantine to S. Gregory as much;
from S. Gregory and S. Augustine, our Apostles, to the Conquest 400 and odd
years; from the Conquest to Wickliff other 300 years; from Wickliff to Luther
about 240; from Luther's time to ours somewhat less than a hundred. In all
which variety of Times we shall examine briefly, Whether John Fox his Church
were on foot or no? What Continuance or Succession it may be said to have had?
Where, when, and by what men, it was begun, continued, and acknowledged? What
Doctrine it held, and whence, and with what Union or Conformity with it self, or
with the Catholic Roman Church? Which Catholic Church being showed and declared
in the first Part of this Book to have been founded by the Apostles, and
conserved visibly from that time hither by Succession of Bishops and Prelates,
Governors and Professors thereof, will easily also bring in the Notice and
Certificate of John Fox his opposite Church, whereof now we begin to treat.

CHAP. II.
The particular Examination of the Descent or Succession of John Fox his Church
in England or elsewhere, for the first Three Hundred years after CHRIST, to
wit, unto the time of Constantine the Emperor: And whether any such Church was
extant then in the World or no, and in Whom.

HE that will consider the proportion of John Fox his Book of Acts and
Monuments in the latter Edition, he shall find it the greatest perhaps in
Volume that ever was put forth in our English Tongue; and the falsest in
substance, The substance of John Fox's Book.
without perhaps, that ever was published in any Tongue. The Volume consists
of above a thousand Leaves of the largest Paper that lightly has been seen,
and every Leaf contains four great Columns; and yet, if you consider how many
Leaves of those thousand he has spent in Deduction of the whole Church, either
His or Ours, and the whole Ecclesiastical Story thereof, for the first thousand
years after Christ, they are by his own account but threescore and four, to
wit, scarce the thirtieth part of that he bestows in the last five hundred
years.

2. And further, if this his thousand years Story, containing threescore and
four leaves, be sifted and examined what it contains, not four of them do
appertain to that which he should handle (which is, the visible Deduction of
his Church) as we shall endeavor briefly to show, The division of 1060 years
into four principal parts.
dividing the whole thousand and threescore years, from Christ to William the
Conqueror, into four distinct John Fox himself in his Book; to wit, the
Constantine, containing 300 years; the second from Constantine to K.
Ethelbert's Conversion by St. Augustine, containing other 300 years; the
Ethelbert, and other six Kings of England reigning jointly with him, unto King
Egbert the first Monarch of the English Nation, which Egbert to William the
Conqueror, containing the same, or some few more years.

3. Let us now follow (I say) John Fox throughout all these Ages and different
stations of times, and see out of what Holes or Dens he will draw his little,
hidden, trodden down Church, different from the Roman Visible Church, and yet
endued notwithstanding from time to time with some little sparks of Truth;
which he promises to bring down from the Apostles to our time. In the first
300 years then, The first 300 years from Christ to Constantine.
from Christ to Constantine, whereas all other Ecclesiastical Writers, and St.
Luke amongst the rest in his Acts of the Apostles, chapter 2, 3, 4, etc. do set
down the visible beginning of Christ's Church by his Apostles and Disciples;
their strengthening and confirmation by the coming of the Holy Ghost; their
preaching and converting of others; their great and many Miracles, and thereby
the establishing and wonderful increase of the said Church throughout the
World, and continuance of the same downward by Succession of Bishops, (but
namely and specially of the Bishops of Rome, Sup. c. 8, 9.
as before has been declared, and is to be seen in the Writings of Dionysius
Areopagita, Josephus, Justinus, Egesippus, Clemens, Irenaeus, Tertullian,
Origenes, Julius Africanus, Cyprian, Eusebius, and others of these Ages:) John
Fox follows no such order at all, nor ever so much as mentions any descent
of Bishops of His Church or Ours; but only (to spend time, The impertinent
course taken by John Fox.
and fill up Paper) takes upon him to translate out of Eusebius and other
Authors, the Martyrdoms of such as suffered for Christian Religion in the ten
general Persecutions of these first 300 years; setting the same forth also in
painted Pictures, for no other purpose (as it seems) but only to entertain
his Reader with some strange and delightful Spectacle; and afterward so to join
his Protestant burned Martyrs with those of the Primitive Church, as the
Painting being somewhat alike, the simple Reader might thereby be induced to
think that there was no great difference, either in their Persons, or Cause of
suffering.

4. But I would ask John Fox, Reasons to prove that the old Martyrs were of our
Church, and not of Fox's.
To what purpose of his was the bringing in of all these Martyrs of the
Primitive Church throughout the World? Were they His, or Our Martyrs, think
you? For to both of us they cannot be Martyrs, that is to say Witnesses, we
being of a different belief; for that we of our part do hold resolutely the
saying of Nisi integram inviolatamque servaverit absque dubio in aeternum
peribit.
St. Athanasius in his Creed, That whosoever does not hold all and every point
of the Catholic Faith entirely, shall perish eternally. If therefore he will
say they were his Martyrs, he must prove that they were in all and every point
of His Religion, and not of Ours. And to examine this point (to wit, of what
Religion they were, whether more of Ours, Who do more honor the ancient Martyrs.
or of His) diverse considerations may be brought in: As first, Who of us do
more honor them? We keep their Days and Feasts, as all men know; we put them in
our Ecclesiastical Calendar and Martyrology; we keep their Relics; we honor
their Tombs; we call upon them in Heaven to pray for us, as reigning in most
high Glory with Christ: All which Protestants do mislike; yea, See Fox's
Calendar in the beginning of his Volume.
John Fox by name has put the most of them (I mean of the Martyrs of these
first 300 years) quite out of his Ecclesiastical Calendar, to give place to
John Wickliff, John Husse, Martin Luther, and other like Companions, as may be
seen in the very first pages of his Book; which is a sign that we esteem and
honor them more than they; which we would not do, if we did not persuade our
selves that they were of our Religion, and not of Protestants, in any point of
Controversy between us.

5. Moreover the Christian visible Church of that time, (to wit, The second
Reason.
of those first 300 years, wherein these Martyrs suffered and were put to
death) would never have registered them for Saints, nor admitted them into the
number of true Martyrs, if in all points they had not been of her Faith and
Communion; no more than she did those of diverse Sects, namely of the
Marcionists and Montanists, who were very many, and bragged of Martyrdom, and
of God's assistance therein, no less, but much more, than true Catholics; as
Apollinaris, Cap. 15.
a most ancient Bishop (related by Eusebius in his fifth Book of Ecclesiastical
History) does testify at large. Yea, these Heretics (especially the latter
sort) were so forward in Martyrdom, as they held it was not lawful to flee in
time of Persecution, as may appear by Tertullian, who defended the same also
after he was fallen into that Heresy himself. St. Cyprian does inveigh often
against the Martyrs of the Novatians, and St. Epiphanius against those of the
Euphemits, surnamed (for the multitude of their false Martyrs) Martyrians; and
Tert. l. de fuga in persecut. Epiph. in panar. haeres. 80. Aug. cont. literas
Petiliani l. 2. c. 83. and cont. 2. ep Gaudentit l. 2. c. 26. and alibi.

Of heretical Martyrs.


St. Augustine no less earnestly does detest those Martyrs of the Donatists,
who, rather than they would lack Martyrs, were ready to murder themselves. All
which Martyrs notwithstanding were rejected by the Catholic Church, (though in
show they died for Christ) for that they agreed not with her in all points of
Faith and Belief. And consequently we may infer for most certain, that seeing
the Catholic Church of that time (and of all times since) has held these
Martyrs before mentioned of the first ten Persecutions for true Saints and
Martyrs indeed, and have continued their honorable remembrance, both by
Histories and celebrating their annual Feasts and Memories; sure it is, that
they agreed fully with the said known Catholic Church of those Ages. Whereof we
infer again, That seeing the Faith of those first 300 years was continued (as
Supra c. 5, 6.
before we have proved) in the second 300 years, and so consequently downward,
and delivered to us; and forasmuch as the Church of Rome was held still for
Head of all this Church, it cannot be that these Martyrs were of John Fox's
Religion, and consequently are to no purpose brought in by him, but only for
that he had nothing else to talk of, or to make a show of handling some pious
matter in his Book.

6. The third Reason.
Moreover, if we would take upon us to reflect upon all that is extant of the
sayings and doings of these Martyrs recorded in their Histories, we might soon
discern of what Religion they were, and whether they were John Fox his Martyrs
or Ours: As for example, in that Answer of St. Andrew.
St. Andrew the Apostle and holy Martyr, which he made to Aegeas the Proconsul,
that exhorted him to sacrifice to Idols: See the story of his passion written
by the Church of Achaia in those days, and cited by Remigius in Psalm. 21. and
by Lanfrank lib. cont. Berengar. and by St. Bernard Sermon. de St. Andrea, and
many others. St. Laurence.
Ego (says he) Omnipotenti Deo (qui unus and verus est) immolo quotidie, etc.
I do sacrifice daily to Almighty God (that is One and True) not the flesh of
Bulls, or blood of Goats, but the immaculate Lamb upon the Altar, whose flesh
after that all the Faithful People have eaten, the same Lamb that is sacrificed
remains whole and alive as before. This man, as you see, spoke not as a
Protestant Martyr.

7. The Speech also of St. Laurence Martyr, that suffered in Rome under the
Emperor Valerianus (the same year that St. Cyprian did in Carthage) his Speech
(I say) to Pope Sixtus Bishop of Rome, whose Deacon he was, and who was carried
to Martyrdom three days before him, does not show that he was a Protestant, but
rather a plain Papist, as both St. Ambrose, St. Augustine, and other later
Authors, Amb. l. 1. Officior. c. 41. and l. 2. c. 28. Aug. tract. 27. in Joan.
and Sermon. de Sanctis.
do relate the same. Cum videret Laurentius (says St. Ambrose) Sixtum
Episcopum suum ad Martyrium duci, flere coepit, etc. When Laurence the Deacon
saw his Bishop Sixtus to be carried away to Martyrdom, he began to weep, not
for the others suffering, but for his own remaining behind him; wherefore he
cried unto him in these words: Whither do you go (O Father) without your Son;
and whither do you hasten (O holy Priest) without your Deacon? You were never
wont to offer Sacrifice without a Minister; what then has displeased you in
me, that you leave me behind you? Have you proved me perhaps to be a Coward?
Make trial, I pray you, whether you have chosen unto your self a fit Minister,
to whom you have committed the dispensing of our Lord's Blood: And then, seeing
you have not denied unto me the Fellowship of administering Sacraments, do not
deny me the Fellowship of shedding my Blood also with you.

St. Laurence speaks like a flat Papist.
8. Thus talked St. Laurence of his Deacon's Office in dispensing the Blood of
Christ from the Altar, and in ministering to his Bishop while he offered
Sacrifice; which is a phrase far different from Protestants manner of Speech.
But if we consider the Speech of the Heathen Emperor to St. Laurence, set down
by Aurelius Prudentius above 1200 years past, objecting to Christian Priests
their sacrificing in Gold, and dispensing the Blood of our Savior in silver
Cups, and the like; we shall easily see of what Religion this Martyr was. Hunc
esse vestris Orgiis Prudent. in hymn. de Sancto Laurentio.

Mor emque and artem proditum est;
Hanc disciplinam foederis;
Libent ut auro Antistites.
Argenteis scyphis ferunt
Fumare sacrum sanguinem,
Auroque nocturnis sacris,
Astare fixos caereos, etc.
We hear (says the Persecutor) this to be the fashion and device of your
Feasts, and discipline of your Confederation, that your Bishops must sacrifice
in Gold, and dispense Blood in Silver Cups, and that in your Night-Vigils you
have Waxen Torches in Golden Candlesticks. etc. And thus much of St. Laurence,
whose Persecutor speaks like a perfect Protestant, which is an Argument that
himself was none.

9. Now as for the other glorious Martyr and Bishop St. Cyprian, Pont. Diac. in
vi^. Cyprian. See also the 28 Epistle of S. Cyp. himself. Supra p. 1. c. 6.
who suffered under the same Emperor, and in the same year that Pope Sixtus
and St. Laurence did, (as appears by Pontius his Deacon that lived with him) we
have showed before that the Cent. 3. c. 4.
Magdeburgians do reprehend him sharply (I mean St. Cyprian) for this very
point about offering Sacrifice, for that he says, Sacerdotem vice Christi
fungi, and Deo Patri sacrificium offerre, lib. 2. ep. 3. That the Priest does
perform the Office of Christ, and offers Sacrifice to God the Father. So as
now we have here three Massing or Sacrificing Priests, Old Martyrs massing
Priests.
(which is the highest Crime objected to Priests now in England) and a Massing
Deacon that helps to Mass, and all four most glorious Martyrs, within these
first 300 years, to wit, St. Andrew the Apostle by his own Confession, St.
Sixtus Bishop of Rome by the testimony of St. Laurence, St. Cyprian Bishop of
Carthage by the accusation of the Magdeburgians, and St. Laurence the Deacon by
testimony of Prudentius, St. Ambrose, and others. And it were overlong to pass
any further in this examination (for that the Examples would be infinite) this
bebeing sufficient to show how little it makes for John Fox his purpose to
have brought in this so large and particular a story of all the Martyrs of the
first ten Persecutions, they being so opposite to his late Protestant Martyrs
as they are.

10. Well then, this is sufficient for these Martyrs. But what shall we say to
the whole intent and drift of John Fox, which should have been (as you know) to
lay before us the continual descent (throughout these first three Ages) of his
poor, oppressed, and persecuted (and yet the only true) Church of Christ,
almost scarce visible or known to worldly eyes, etc? This, I say, he should
have showed and laid open to us, for that we find no other Christian Church
known in the World in these first 300 years, but only One; which, though it were
much persecuted yet was it neither obscure, nor hidden from the eyes either of
good or bad, but most visible and apparent to all the World. The glorious state
of the Cath. Church under Constantine.

Eusebius. l. 4. de vit. Constant.


And in the end of these 300 years, (to wit, under Constantine the Emperor,
and Silvester the Pope of Rome) the same came to be so magnificent and
glorious, as all the World remained astonished thereat; which appears partly
by that which Eusebius and all other Ecclesiastical Writers do recount in the
Life of the said Constantine; especially Eusebius, that wrote four whole Books
of the said Constantine's Life and Actions, (who was a most excellent Christian
Emperor:) And, amongst other points of his most pious Devotion, it is recorded
that he builded four goodly Churches within the City of Rome, Four Churches in
Rome built by Constantine.
carrying Earth to the first Foundation of them with his own hands, and
adorning them with holy Images, endowing the same with rich Possessions,
Furniture, and Ecclesiastical Ornaments, and consecrated precious Vessels for
Divine Service; dedicating the one of them (which was his own Palace of
Lateran) unto our Savior and St. John Baptist, the other to St. Peter, the
third to St. Paul, and the fourth to St. Laurence, all which do remain unto
this day; and the very manner of building thereof, with their Altars, Fonts,
Pictures, and other suchlike Antiquities, do well show without Books what
manner of Religion was then in use.

11. This was the known visible Church then of Christians in those days, as
glorious and renowned as can be imagined. Of which Church one wrote at that
time to Constantine himself thus: Julius Firmicus l. ad Imp. de abol. Idol.
Quis locus in terra est, etc? What place is there in the whole Earth, which
has not received the Faith of Christ, either where the Sun rises, or where it
falls? where the North Pole is elevated, or where the South, all is filled
with the Majesty of this God. Optat. l. 2. cont. Parmen.
The same writes Optatus; Concedite Deo, etc. "Yield this unto Christ, who is
God, that his Garden spread it self over all the World: Can you deny unto him
now, but that Christians do possess both East, West, North, and South, as also
the Provinces of innumerable Islands? And the same has St. Basil in his 72d
and 75th Epistle, and the like St. Hilary lib. 6. de Trinitate. This then was
the greatness of this Universal Catholic Church at that day; and of this Church
were counted the head Bishops (for all these 300 years) the Popes and Bishops
of Rome, as appears by the deductions made by Supra c. 4, 5.
Irenaeus, Tertullian, and others, before mentioned; and in this Church was
held to be all Catholic Truth, and none out of it: Which being so, I would
gladly know what poor, obscure, trodden-down Church, neglected in the World,
not regarded in Histories, and almost scarce visible or known (which yet he
says to be the only true Church of God) can John Fox find us out in these
first 300 years? especially seeing he says also, that it must be different
from the Church of Rome, as from the Devil's Chapel; and that it must come
down from the Apostles time, and always hold some sparkles of true Doctrine.

The obscure mathematical Church of John Fox.
12. For Example or Proof whereof notwithstanding, he mentions no one Man,
Woman, or Child that was of that Church in all these 300 years; and
consequently he drives us to imagine or seek out who they are that made up this
obscure Church of his, different and opposite to the Roman: And I can find
none, except the known Heretics of these first three Ages, to whom the
description of his Church may easily agree; for first, none will deny but that,
albeit they were many in number, as Simon Magus and his Followers, the
Nicolaits, Cerynthians, The chief Heretics of the first 300 years.
Ebionites, Menandrians, Saturnians, in the first Age; Basilidians, Gnostics,
Cerdonists, Marcionists, Valentinians, Encratites, Montanists, and others, in
the second Age; as also, Helchesits, Novatians, Sabellians, Manichees, and many
more, in the third Age; and that in diverse Countries and Provinces they had
their Followers, their Churches, their Assemblies, under the name of Reformed
Christians, Elect People, and men of more perfection than the rest: yet, in
respect of the glorious Catholic Church that shined throughout the World, they
were just as John Fox describes his People here, to wit, a poor, oppressed,
and persecuted Church, How old Heretics were persecuted.
etc. Oppressed by force of Truth, and persecuted by the famous Writings of
Catholic Doctors against them, as (after the Apostles themselves) St. Ignatius,
Justinus Martyr, St. Dionyse of Corinth, St. Polycarp, Irenaeus, Clem.
Alexandrinus, Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian, Ammonius, Pamphilus, Arnobius, and
others: They were persecuted also by the Excommunications and spiritual
Censures of all Catholic Bishops throughout the World, but especially by the
Popes of Rome, from St. Peter to Pope Silvester, which were Thirty-three in
number, all Martyrs, and every one of them condemned the Heretics of his time.

13. This accursed new Church also of Heretics had the other quality ascribed
in like manner by John Fox to his Church, to wit, that they were neglected in
the Christian World, and not regarded in Stories; but only to recount them to
their shame and damnation. Finally, the last commendation also was not wanting
to them, that they were almost scarce visible or known, How old Heretics agree
to John Fox's Church.
in respect of the flourishing Catholic Church. And lastly, these congregations
and swarms of Heretics (though never so much divided among themselves) continued
indeed from the Apostles by a kind of broken Succession of times, the one
rising, and the other falling. And they had the last point also specified by
John Fox, of keeping some sparks of true Doctrine in Religion: Aug. l. 2.
quaest. Evang. c. 40.
for that (as St. Augustine writes) Nulla falsa Doctrina est, quae aliqua Vera
non intermisceat; There is no Doctrine so false, which does not interlace some
true things. And this is proper to Heresies; for that otherwise, if they had no
points of true Doctrine, they should be rather Apostates than properly Heretics;
for that Apostates are those that deny all Christ's Doctrine, but Heretics do
grant some parts, and deny others.

14. About which point of old Heretics, A point much to be noted.
and their Affinity with the Protestants of this Age, it is worth the noting,
That whatsoever some of our late English Writers (especially the Minister O. E.
or Matthew Sutcliff) do prattle to the contrary, yet shall you never find any
one Article of those that are in controversy, and held by us at this day
against the Protestants, to have been held singularly by any one old Heretic in
that sense as we do hold the same, and much less condemned for Heresy in him
or them by the Church in these days, or by any one Father thereof. And on the
other side, you shall find diverse Doctrins held by them, and condemned in them
by the Church for Heresies, (I mean the Heretics of the first 300 years) which
the Protestants do hold at this day properly, and in the same sense that those
Heretics did: And We do condemn the same for Heresies in Them, as the Primitive
Church did in the Other. As for Example, that of the Pseudo-Apostoli, Heretics
called false Apostles, who did think only Faith to be sufficient to Salvation
without Works; Aug. l. de fide and oper. c. 14. and de unico bap. c. 10.
against which Heresy St. Augustine says were written the Epistles of St.
James, St. Jude, St. Peter, and St. John.

15. That other point also, Apud Thoed. dial. 3.
which St. Ignatius reports of certain Heretics in his time, Qui non
confitebantur Eucharistiam esse Carnem Salvatoris nostri Jesu Christi, quae pro
peccatis nostris passa est; Who did not confess that the Eucharist was the
Flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ that suffered for us. That other Doctrine in
like manner that Theodoretus writes of the Novatians, His, Theod. l. 3.
haeret. fabulat. c. 35.

Old Heresies held formally again by Protestants.


qui ab ipsis tinguntur sacrum Chrisma non praebent: quocirca eos, qui ex hac
haeresi Corpori Ecclesiae conjunguntur, benedicti Patres ungi jusserunt; To
those that are baptized by them (the Novatians) they do not give holy Chrism,
for which cause, whosoever returning from that Heresy are to be joined to the
Body of the Catholic Church, the holy Fathers commanded that they should be
anointed with the said Chrism.

16. Cornelius also, Bishop of Rome, complains that the said Novatus and
Novatians did not receive the Sacrament of Confirmation: For speaking of
Novatus he says, Qui sigillo Domini ab Episcopo non signatus fuit, Cornel.
Papa apud Eusebius. l. 6. hist. c. 35.
quomodo (quaeso) Sanctum Spiritum adeptus est? He that was not signed with the
Seal of our Lord by the Bishop, how could he (think you) obtain the Holy Ghost?
The same Heretics also denied the power of absolving from sin in Priests, as
also Confession and Satisfaction, according as the same holy Bishop and Pope
Cornelius objecteth unto him, by the testimony of St. Cyprian. Cyp. l. 4. ep. 2.


And finally, to go no further within these first 300 years, St. Hierom
objecteth for an Heresy to the Manichees the denying of Man's Free Will,
saying, Manichaeorum Dogma est hominum damnare naturam, and liberum auferre
arbitrium: Hier. in prooem. dialog. contra Pelag.
"It is the Doctrine of the Manichees to condemn Man's Nature, and to take away
Free Will. Chrysostom. hom. 43. in Joan.

Aug. l. cont. Manich. and ep. 28.


So says St. Hierom; and St. Chrysostom and St. Augustine do also testify the
same of the Manichees expressly. And though perhaps the Manichees held that
Doctrine upon other grounds than Protestants do, yet in the Heresy it self they
do plainly symbolize and agree.

17. These are matters then most evident and clear, nor can they be denied, but
that these Opinions are held by Protestants at this day, in the very same
words, sense, and meaning, as they were by the forenamed old Heretics, wherein
also they were anathematized and condemned by the known Catholic Church of
these ancient Ages.

Old Heresies fraudulently objected to Catholics.
18. But now, when on the contrary side some Sectaries of our time (to cure or
cover this wound of theirs) will needs, like Apes, object to us again, That we
hold some old condemned Errors and Heresies also, (or rather some shadow or
similitude thereof) you shall ever find one of these two frauds or falsehoods in
their Objection, to wit, that either they object unto us that which we indeed
hold not at all, or at least not in the sense which they object it, or that the
thing in truth is no Error in it self, nor ever was held or condemned for such
in the sense and meaning in which we hold it, though it may have some little
external similitude with that which was an Error: As for Example; O. E.
objecteth unto us, The 1 fraud.
That we do symbolize and participate with two old Heresies; the one of the
Angelici, Aug. haeres. 39.
qui Angelos adorabant, that did adore Angels, as St. Augustine says; the other
of the Collyridians, (so called of the Greek word Collyra, signifying a little
triangular Cake or Bun, that those Heretics, being Women, did offer in
Sacrifice to our Blessed Lady.) But in both these Examples we utterly deny that
we agree in Doctrine or Practice with those Heretics; seeing that we neither
adore nor worship with Divine Honor Angels or other Saints, nor do offer
Sacrifice to the Mother of God, but only to God himself alone; though in the
Honor and Memory also of his Mother, D. Thom. 2.2. q. 85. art. 2.
and other Saints glorified by him; which Doctrine of ours is extant in all our
Books. So as here is manifestly found the first fraud of our Adversaries, which
is, to object to us that which we hold not indeed.

The 2 fraud.
19. And the other falsehood also cannot be denied, whereby they affirm the
Doctrine which we truly hold and practice in this behalf, about honoring of
Saints, to have been at any time held for Error, or condemned by the ancient
Catholic Church, or Teachers thereof, for such. Truth it is, that the
Magdeburgians are not ashamed to note this for an Error in Origin; Invocandos
Angelos Origenes putavit, homil. 1. in Ezech. Origin thought Angels to be
invoked. And then again, Cent. 3. c. 4. and de Angelis.
Hanc formulam invocandi Angelos proponit, Veni Angele, suscipe conversum ab
Errore pristino, etc. And he sets down this form of praying to Angels, Come
Angel, receive him that is converted from his former Errors, etc.

20. But I would have the Magdeburgians, or any of their Partners, show me when
or where this Sentence of Origin was ever noted or condemned by Antiquity for
Error or Heresy, as some other Doctrins of his were. Certain it is, they
cannot; which is a singular Argument against them; for that those Watchmen of
the Church, that noted and condemned those other Errors of his, would have
noted also this, if it had been taken for an Error in those days. And further,
About honorring and Invocation of Angels.
I say to the Magdeburgians, Let them tell us whether other holy Fathers (yea,
the chiefest of God's Church) after Origin did not hold the very same Doctrine?
Sure I am, that the Magdeburgians themselves, in the very next Century after,
do condemn by Name St. Ephrem and St. Hilary for this Doctrine of Invocation of
Angels in the same sense that Origin did hold it. And then again, Cent. 3. c. 4.
in the same third Century, they do reprehend by Name for Invocation of other
Saints (which is the same Controversy) the gravest Doctors of the Church, to
wit, St. Athanasius, St. Basil, St. Gregory Nazianzen, St. Ambrose, St.
Epiphanius, Ephrem, and Prudentius, citing their plain words, and condemning
their Doctrine in this behalf. So as if this were an Heresy, all these Fathers
were Heretics, which were a blasphemous cogitation to think, and much more to
speak or utter. And thus much of the first Objection about honoring Angels and
other Saints, wherein Protestants do only calumniate our doings, as you see.

21. As for the Collyridians, he that will read St. Epiphanius, Epiph. l. 3.
to. 2. haeres. 78, 79.
who writes of that mad fond fantastical Error of certain Women in Thracia
(for so he terms them) that would needs make our Blessed Lady a Goddess, and
offer Sacrifice unto her, he shall find this Father to handle two things at
large. First, About the Heresy of the Collyridians.
That notwithstanding our Blessed Lady, for the Privilege of bearing the Savior
of the World, be highly to be honored, yet not ultra decorum (as his words be)
that is, not more than is decent or beyond the limits of a Creature; seeing she
is not God, though the Mother of God: And consequently these Thracian Women did
foolishly and wickedly, in devising this public Sacrifice unto her.

22. Secondly, That albeit this their Sacrifice had been offered by them to God
himself, yet was it unlawfully done by Women; for that neither in the Old or
New Testament (says he) was it appointed that Women should do the Function of
Sacrifice, but Men only, and those Priests.

And this Argument St. Epiphanius prosecuteth very largely; Mark this discourse
of Epiphanius about sacrificing in the New Law.
proving that in the New Testament and Christian Church the Apostles only, and
other Priests succeeding by Imposition of hands, had Authority to sacrifice;
but no Woman, no not the Mother of Christ her self, who should have had that
Privilege above all other Women, if any of her Sex might have been admitted.
And after our Blessed Lady he adds these that follows: Epiph. ib.
Fuerunt (says he) quatuor filiae Philippo Evangelistae prophetantes, sed non
sacrificantes, etc Philip the Evangelist had four Daughters that prophesied,
but not that sacrificed. And again, Et ministrarum quidem Diaconissarum
appellatarum Ordo est in Ecclesia, Ibid. haeres. 79.
sed non ad sacrificandum, etc. Diaconissis indiguit Ecclesiasticus Ordo,
nusquam autem eas Presbyter as aut Sacrificulas constituit, etc. Vnde igitur
hic rursus Mulierum fastus and insania muliebris? There is (says he) in the
Christian Church an Order of them that are called Diaconesses, but not to
sacrifice. The Ecclesiastical Order had need of these Diaconesses (at the
beginning) but yet never ordained them as Priests or Sacrificers. And whence
then is now come again, this pride of Women, or womanish madness, as to take
upon them to sacrifice in the Church?

23. By all which Discourse you may easily see what was the true Heresy
condemned in these Collyridians, to wit, Colere Sanctos ultra modum and
decorum, Christians Sacrifice.
as the words of holy Epiphanius are; that is, to worship Saints beyond measure
and decency, and above the nature and condition of Creatures; which is
forbidden by God's Church, but not to honor Them as Servants of His, and Him in
Them. You will see also what Opinion and Use of Christian Sacrifice there was
in Epiphanius's days, and how it was denied to Women, and practiced by Priests
only: which yet the Sectaries of this Age cannot abide to hear of. The visible
succession of the Church in the first 300 years.
And here now will we make an end of these first 300 years after Christ;
wherein, as you see, John Fox has put down no Succession of his Church at all,
either in Men or Doctrine: For as for men (to wit, Bishops, Pastors, and
Teachers, succeeding one to another from the Apostles downward) they were all
of the Roman visible Church; and so were all other that bear the name of
Christians, (except the Heretics before named:) and of the said Roman and
Catholic Church the chief Leaders were, from St. Peter unto Silvester,
Thirty-three Popes, (as before has been mentioned) all Martyrs, and Witnesses
of the same Faith. And in other principal Patriarchal Seats, wherein the
Apostles had held the first Chairs, (as Antioch, Jerusalem, Alexandria, and
the like) there had succeeded other holy Bishops, as also in infinite other
places throughout the World; so as in the Emperor Constantine's time, who lived
in the end of these first 300 years, and was the first Christian Emperor that
publicly professed Christian Religion, the said Christian Church was so
glorious, that in the first General Council of Nice there were 318 principal
Bishops joined together, the most of them of Asia only. Whereby we see how
Illustrious and Eminent the said Catholic Church and Religion was at that time.

The sum of that which has been said hitherto.
24. By which we do most evidently infer, That either John Fox his obscure and
trodden-down Church, scarce visible (as he says) to the World, was not at all
in those days, or else it lurked only in some of the forenamed Heretics: For if
he say that the great perspicuous Roman Church was his at that time, then how
does he define his Church to be obscure, and scarce visible to the World? And
moreover, we have showed Part. 1. c. 5, 6.
before, that the Bishops, Doctors, Teachers, Martyrs, and chief Members, or
Guiders of this great illustrious Church, were opposite to Him and his Church
both in Faith and Doctrine; and this by the confession of his own Doctors and
Writers, the Magdeburgians and others, that reprehend and condemn the Fathers
of the second and third Ages for holding diverse principal Points of Doctrine,
now also in controversy, against Them, and for Us. And we have showed also,
that this great Universal and Catholic Church had all Truth in it that was
revealed by Christ, and not some sparks only, as Fox requires in his Church;
and that it had continual Succession of multitudes of true Teachers without
interruption, and not one starting up in one Age, and another in another,
wherewith Fox seems to be contented for the continuation of his Church.

The conclusion of this Chapter, with an offer to Fox.
25. And finally, if Fox, coming at length to be ashamed of his former
definition of an obscure and trodden-down Church, and of the sparkled Doctrine
of Truth therein taught, should leave the same, and offer to lay hands on the
Great, Illustrious, and Visible Church of the first 300 years, saying that this
was His, (which yet you have seen by many Arguments demonstrated that it cannot
be) I shall be content to admit so ridiculous a pretense for a time, with
condition that he will stand to it, and go forward with this Church in the
sequent Ages, and not to disclaim from Her to his hidden Church again. Which if
he yield unto, then have we now a Visible and Eminent True Church on foot (by
confession of both Parties) which we must follow to the Worlds end, for that
she cannot perish again, Part. 1. c. 8.
as before we have declared. For which cause I am to prosecute the same from
Age to Age in this Treatise, from this time downwards to our days, in the
Chapters that do ensue: where we shall see who sticks to her, and who flies
from her; who follows her constantly, or who gives the slip; for that she
being now once so Potent, Notorious, and Illustrious, as both Parts do confess,
(if he will stand to it in earnest that she is his Church also) it is not
possible that she should be lost, shrink, or fade away again; but that all the
World must see it, How, Where, When, and by Whom so great an Accident should
fall out; neither can Fox and his People, being now once in Her and of Her, (by
his own pretense) be found out of her afterward, but only by Apostasy, or
Heresy, and running away. This then let us examine in the Ages following.

CHAP. III.
The prosecution of the same matter; to wit, of the Descent of the Catholic and
Protestant Church for other Three Hundred years; that is, from Pope Sylvester
and Constantine, to Pope Gregory, and Mauritius the Emperor: And where John
Fox his Church lay hid in this time.

AND thus (having run over the first three Ages after Christ) we must now pass
to the second station, which is for other 300 years, beginning from Constantine
the Emperor downward unto the time of St. Gregory, under whom St. Augustine
came into England; in which space of time the Catholic Christian Church spread
over all the World (as before you have heard) did grow, and confirm it self
powerfully, (especially after Persecution did cease, as by all Stories
appears) having had thirty-two Popes between Sylvester and Gregory, whereof
thirty were holden for great Saints, and three or four were Martyrs.

2. The Fathers and Doctors also of these three Ages were most excellent men
both Grecians and Latins; and it seems that what wanted in these three Ages
from the former three in the Glory of Martyrdom, it was supplied by the
Excellency of Learning. As for Example; in the fourth Age after Christ, (which
is the first of the second three) did flourish Eusebius, Lactantius, The
Fathers, Doctors and Councils of the second 300 years after Christ.
Rheticius, Juvencus, Athanasius, Hilarious, Optatus, Climacus, Basil,
Nazianzenus, Ambrose, Prudentius, Hierom, Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Cyril, and
diverse others In the fifth Age St. Augustine, Possidonius, Sulpitius, Orosius,
Cassianus, Prosper, Vincentius Lyrinensis, Falgentius, and many more. And in
the sixth Age Cassiodorus, Emisenus, Procopius, Fortunatus, Venantius,
Evagrius, Gregorius Turonensis, and Gregory the Great. All which filled the
World with their excellent Books both Greek and Latin; besides many General,
National, and Provincial Councils; whereof five were Universal, the first of
Nice, the second of Constantinople, the third of Ephesus, the fourth of
Chalcedon, (wherein there were 630 Bishops) and the fifth was of Constantinople
the second time; but of Provincial and National Councils there are received to
the number of almost seventy to have been held in this time.

3. By all which concourse of Testimonies the Force and Unity of Catholic Faith
is showed, to wit, that these Fathers, Doctors, Popes, John Fox finds not a
hole for his poor Church in those 300 years.
and Councils agreeing together all throughout the World in one and the
self-same Faith and Religion, and continuing the same from Age to Age, with so
great Authority of Respect and Majesty, as not only all Ecclesiastical Persons,
of what Nations soever, and other Christian People, but all Temporal Princes,
Kings and Emperors in like manner, (except such as were noted with any
particular Heresy, as some Emperors of the East) did wholly submit themselves
with one consent. Whereby this visible Illustrious Roman Church was made so
Great, and Universal, notorious and known, embracing all Christendom, as it is
wholly impossible for John Fox to find out any creeping hidden Church bearing
the name of Christian in these three Ages, and yet different from this visible
and splendent Church of Rome, which he calls the Devil's Chapel: And much
more hard will it be for him to find out this in these latter three hundred
years, than in the former; for that the external Glory of this Church was
increased much more in these three Ages, than in the first three before treated
of, which passed all in Persecution.

The Heretics of the second 300 years after Christ.
4. The Heresies also and Sects of this time (being above Fifty in number) were
beaten down more strongly by the foresaid Fathers, Bishops, and Councils, than
before, by reason they had more time and leisure from Persecution to attend
unto them, than had those of the former three Ages. The principal Heresies of
this fourth Age were Meletians, Donatists, Arians, Novatians, Macedonians,
Luciferians, Aerians, Eunomians, Apollinarians, Aetians, Priscillianists,
Jovinians, Vigilantians, Collyridians, Helvidians, Antimarians, and other the
like. And in the fifth Age were Pelagians, Nestorians, Eutychians, and other
such Rabble. And in the sixth Age, Severians, Monothelites, Chrystolytes,
Agnoites, Sadduces, Theopaschites, and the like. Out of which Synagogues and
Congregations of wrangling Spirits, which succeeded one another in diverse
Times, Places and Countries, and opposed themselves maliciously out of their
obscure corners against the shining Light of the foresaid Catholic Church, if
John Fox will frame his poor and beggarly Church, (which yet he holds for the
only true Church of God) oppressed, and trodden down (as he says) and almost
scarce visible to worldly eyes, In his protestation to the English Church, p. 9.
he may do it with great probability; for that these Fellows were neglected and
trodden down indeed by the other opposite Roman Church; and yet did they (as
John Fox requires for the Succession of his Church) continue and rise up from
time to time, (though by no orderly Succession of Bishops or Doctrine, as has
been said) yea they had that other quality also proper to John Fox his Church,
that they always kept some sparks of true Doctrine and Religion together with
their Heresies.

So as in this respect of obscurity and contemptibility, John Fox may easily
join his Church with them; as also in having some sparkles of true Doctrine, but
not the whole body of true Doctrine among them.

Communication of Doctrine between Protestants and Heretics of the second 300
years after Christ.
5. He may join also in diverse particular Doctrins, which these men held as
peculiar Heresies to themselves, and were condemned by the Church for such in
those days, and are held also in these days by John Fox his Church in the very
self-same words, sense, and meaning, as they were held by those Heretics: As
namely, he may join with the Donatists who said, that thy were the only true
Church, and called the Succession of Bishops in the Church of Rome (as
Sectaries do at this day) the Chair of Pestilence; and moreover, that the whole
Church besides themselves had erred, etc. which is the common Song of our
modern Protestants. And further, if you will see how near of Kin these
Donatists and our Protestants be, Aug. lib. de haeres. haer. 69. Optat. l. 2.
idem l. 6.
both in Manners, Conditions, Doctrine and Belief, read St. Augustine, Optatus,
and other Writers, that objected against them these things following; to wit,
That they had cast the blessed Sacrament of the Altar to Dogs, overthrew
Altars, broke Chalices and sold them, cast a Bottle of holy Chrism out of the
Church-window, shaved Priests heads to take away their Unction, turned Nuns out
of their Monasteries to the World, polluted all Church stuff, and the like: And
whether John Fox and his Fellows do not join also in these Points, let the
Reader judge.

Aug. haer. 54.
6. They may join in like manner with the Eunomians for their only Faith, who
affirmed (as St. Augustine says) quod nihil cuiquam obesset guorumlibet
perpetratio ac perseverantia peccatorum, si hujus, quae ab illis docebatur,
Fidei particeps esset; That the committing and perseverance in never so great
sins could not hurt him that was partaker of their Faith. Pacian. ep. 1. and 3.
ad Simpron.

Aug. haer. 53.


They may also join with the Novatians of that time in denying the Churches
power in forgiving sins. They may join with the Aerians, who taught (as St.
Angustin says) non oportere orare vel Oblationem offerre pro mortuis; that we
ought not to pray or offer Oblations for them that be dead; and further, That
solemn Feasts are not to be appointed by the Church, but every one to fast when
he would, lest he should seem to be under the Law, etc.

7. Thus testifies St. Augustine of him; and of Jovinian, that followed him,
Aug. haeres. 82. Hier. lib. cont. Jovinian.
both the said Father, and St. Hierom (that wrote against him) do accuse him to
have held, That all sins were equal before God; that fasting from certain meats
was not profitable; that chaste Marriage was equal in honor and merit to
professed Virginity in Nuns; and that he had been cause that some Nuns had
married in Rome; and finally, that the reward in Heaven was equal to all men.
And is not this good current Protestant Doctrine and Practice at this day? But
let us go forward. They may join also with the Helvidians, or Antidicomarians,
in impugning our Blessed Lady, and equalling Marriage with Virginity: And much
more with Vigilantius, in impugning the continent sole Life of Clergymen,
Hier. lib. cont. Vigilantium.
Worship of Martyrs at their Tombs, use of Candles and Torches in the Church by
daytime, Invocation of Saints, Vows of Poverty, and the like.

8. I will go no further, for that this is sufficient to see what Communion
John Fox his Church did hold in these three Ages, either with the common known
Catholic Church of Christ, or with these lurking Assemblies of Heretics pursued
and persecuted by the said Church; The poor shift of John Fox.
and for that John Fox is guilty to himself in this behalf, he has proceeded
accordingly in his Acts and Monuments: For whereas he promises a several Book
of these second 300 years, under this Title; The second Book, Fox page 95.
containing the next 300 years after Christ, etc. he not finding any sufficient
matter for his purpose to patch up this second Book withal, as he did the
former, with recounting the Martyrs of those days; what shift devises he
(think you) to blear his Readers eyes with all, and to seem to say somewhat in
the continuation of his Story? You shall hear briefly; and by this one trick
you may learn to know the man and his meaning for the time to come.

9. First he writes but five leaves in all for the continuation of the Story
of these second 300 years: John Fox's shift to fill up this second Book.
A short Volume you will say for so great and copious an Argument. And yet
further, you must know, that of these five leaves he passes two in telling
tales and matters that fell under Pope Eleutherius and King Lucius more than a
hundred years before, An. 180.
and consequently it should have been told in his former Book by order of Time
and Story; and then the other three leaves he spends in setting down the
entrance of the Saxons into England about the year of Christ 449, and the
Succession of their Pagan Kings unto St. Augustin's coming. So as of all the
foresaid glorious Christian Church for 300 years together, (to wit, from Pope
Sylvester and Constantine unto Pope Gregory and Mauritius the Emperor, wherein
she flourished more than in any other three Ages) we find only five Leaves
designed, but scarce three Lines performed: Whereby you may perceive how little
part John Fox persuadeth himself to have in these three Ages for his hidden
Church. You may consider also what an honest Bargainer he is, and how well he
performs his promise made in the first page of his whole Work, wherein he
says, Fox in the Title of his Acts and Monuments.
That he will set forth at large the whole Race and Course of the Church, from
the Primitive Age to these latter times of ours, etc. whereof you see he has
performed nothing at all hitherto, either largely or briefly: I mean, of this
Race or Course of any Church, General or Particular, Domestical or Foreign,
Good or Bad, True or False, His or Ours; for of the first 300 years he wrote
only the ten Persecutions, as you have seen; and of the second 300 years he
writes nothing at all.

10. Which (if you consider well) is a strange confession of his own weakness
and poverty, seeing that these three Ages (to wit, the fourth, fifth, and
sixth) are the most abundant of matter that are to be found in the Church of
Christ from the beginning; and so might he see by the Centuries of his Masters
the Magdeburgians, who do enlarge themselves much more in these three Ages than
in the former, enforced thereunto by the multitude of matter, though all against
themselves, as before has been noted, and here will also appear; which John
Fox well perceiving, thought best by slight of silence to avoid that
inconvenience of treating a History so apparently against himself. Which slight
notwithstanding (or rather flight) every man of mean understanding does easily
see, considering that (according to the Argument of his Book, and particular
promise made before) he should have declared to us, That the Religion of
Britanny in these 300 years next before the entrance of St. Augustine, was for
Him, and His Church, and not for Ours; yea, different from the Roman Religion
brought in by Augustine, In his Protestation to the English Church, page 10.
as often you have heard him protest; and here had been the proper place to
have proved it, if it had been provable. And whereas in the same Protestation
of his, prefixed before his whole Volume, he avouched (as you have heard) that
the chief British Preachers and Teachers of these times before St. Augustin's
coming (as Fastidius, Ninianus, Patricius, What Fox should have treated in his
second Book and second 300 years after Christ.

Sup. part 1. cap. 5.


Dubritius, Congellus, David, Asaphus, Gildas, and others before mentioned)
were true Teachers, and taught the Gospel rightly, according to the Protestant
Faith, and consequently were of his Religion; he ought here to have proved the
same by their Writings, Lives, Acts and Monuments, as I have showed the
contrary by all these kind of Arguments and Proofs before. But the Fox knowing
the difficulty and peril of this Combat, would not enter into the same, nor
take upon him to defend or justify any thing at all, though never so much
promised or protested in his Prefaces and Preambles at the beginning. Whereof
the Reasons are these that ensue.

11. First, For that touching the British Church during these three Ages he had
in truth nothing at all to write or relate, but what would be manifestly
against himself, if he had written or related it, and descended to particulars.
For (according to that you have heard before in diverse places of this Treatise)
that as the first Faith of the Britans came from Rome, and thereby they were
made Members of the Roman Church from the beginning, so remained they united
with the same in all points of Faith and Religion, (except some few abuses
crept in among part of them, toward the latter-end of these three Ages) until
the Conversion of the English by St. Augustine to the same Roman Faith. Which
point is proved so evidently by so many Signs, Why Fox writes nothing of the
Church of Britanny in these three Ages.
Arguments, and Demonstrations, as little comfort might John Fox have to enter
into this Discourse or Examination; and consequently, though he had promised in
the beginning to treat this Subject of the British Church, yet coming to the
place and time when he should have performed his promise, he thought better to
withdraw himself slightly by utter silence, than to put himself in Briars by
making any mention at all thereof. And thus much for his silence concerning the
Christian Church of Britanny in these three Ages.

12. But for the general Catholic Church of Christendom, though these times yield
abundant matter, (as has been said) yet the whole stream and current thereof
running quite against him, he thought best in like manner to decline craftily
the meddling or wrestling therewith: And so much the more, for that he had seen
the pitiful plight wherein his Masters the Magdeburgians had cast themselves in
their fourth, fifth, and sixth Centuries, by over-large relating the Acts and
Gests of these three Ages against themselves and their own Religion; being
forced to spend a great part of their Labors not so much in relating what the
Fathers of those Ages writ or held, as to answer and refute the same, and show
that it was not true, nor the said Doctors and Fathers to be believed therein.
Which trouble John Fox (like a wily Fox indeed) thought best to avoid by Art of
Silence. I will in this place, for examples sake only, and to give you a taste
of the said Magdeburgians dealing throughout their whole Work, (from which John
Fox takes the principal parts of his) let you see some points taken out of
their fourth Century, dedicated to her Majesty of England, with a sharp
Invective (as before has been showed) used by them against the Calvinists
therein; which Century contains the fourth Hundred year after Christ, Exc. 2.
c. 5. sup. p. 1. c. 6.
and the first of the three which now we have in hand, from Constantine
downward; wherein they spend above 400 Leaves in Folio, and more than twice as
much in the other two Centuries that ensue; John Fox not having bestowed four
Leaves upon all three Ages, as you have heard.

13. And that you may perceive how this one Century of the Magdeburgians comes
to make so great a Volume, you must note, that it is divided into certain large
Chapters or Heads of different matters. As for example; first, The substance
and method of the Magdeburgians Centuries.
of the propagation of Christian Religion in that Age, and the State thereof
throughout all Countries, Kingdoms and Nations; which is a large matter, as you
see, comprehending the Stories of all Ecclesiastical Writers. Secondly, of
Persecutions, Troubles, and Jars that have passed; as also of Peace and
Tranquillity. Then of Doctrine, good or bad; then of Heresies; then of Rites and
Ceremonies; then of Ecclesiastical Government; then of Schisms; then of Synods
and Councils; then of Bishops, Doctors and Teachers, their Lives, Works, and
Actions at large; then of Heretics, their beginnings and endings; then of
Martyrs; then of Miracles; then of Pagan Commonwealths also; and other such
points capable, as you see, of long Discourses: Which I thought fit once to
note, to the end that those which have not read the Centuries may know in
general what matters they handle, and what method they use therein.

14. Secondly, it is to be noted about the same affair, That in all these Heads
and Chapters there be diverse things which are not in controversy among us, I
mean between Catholics and Protestants, but are common to us both, at least in
some degrees. Other Points there are, that they affirm and we deny, or we
affirm and they deny. There is a third kind also of Points, wherein, though We
and Protestants do not agree fully, either in the Doctrine or in the Practice,
yet one Sect of them differs more or less from us than the other. And in all
these three Points you shall see some brief Examples of the Magdeburgians
manner of proceeding in this fourth Age: Noting to you first by the way their
own Testimony of the excellent Learning of the Doctors and Teachers thereof in
these words: Habuit haec aet as, si quae unquam alia, Cent. c. 4. p. 159.

The praise of the Doctors and Fathers of the fourth Age by the Magdeburg.


plurimos praestantes and illustres Doctores, ut Arnobium, Lactantium, etc.
This Age (if ever any other) had very many most excellent and famous Doctors,
as Arnobius, Lactantius, Eusebius, Athanasius, Hilarious, Victorinus, Basilius,
Nazianzenus, Ambrosius, Prudentius, Epiphanius, Theophilus, Hieronymus,
Faustinus, Didymus, Ephrem, Optatus, and others; out of which we shall show and
declare what was the form of Christian Doctrine used in this Age.

15. Lo there the Testimony of the Magdeburgians of the famous Doctors,
Teachers, and Leaders of Christ's Church in this Age! And being such as they
say, so excellently Learned, and endued with Christ's Spirit for Guiding of his
Church; is it probable (think you) that these four German Magdeburgians,
Illyricus, Wigandus, Judex and Faber, shall come to presume afterward to
condemn them all of Ignorance and lack of Spirit, when they speak against them?
Truly they cannot do it with any shame fac'dness or modesty at all, or be
believed by any discreet man, if they do it. Well then, let us examine this
point a little.

16. In their Chapter of Doctrine, when they talk of these Points, of God, and
the B. Trinity, of Three distinct Persons, of the Natures and Wills of Christ,
and other such matter, (wherein They and We do not differ) they allege these
Fathers abundantly: And no marvel, for as long as they teach Catholic Doctrine,
they have all the Fathers Works and Volumes for them; but when they touch any
Point wherein there is controversy between us, there they fall out presently
with the said Fathers for holding against them. As for example, in one
Paragraph of this Chapter and Doctrine, (which Paragraph is, de lib. Arbitrio)
they begin it thus: About Free Will.

Cent. 4. p. 211.


De lib. Arbitrio, quae commode and tollerabiliter a Doctoribus hujus aetatis
tradita videntur, sic habent; Those things which seem unto us to have been
commodiously and tolerably delivered by the Doctors of this Age about
Free Will, are these that follow. Wherein they censure first (as you see) all
Doctors of this Age, so greatly extolled by them before, as though they had
delivered many things incommodious and intolerable about Free Will; as indeed
afterward in another Chapter, Ib. page 287, and 291.
entitled, The declining of true Doctrine, (containing the incommodious
Opinions and Errors of these Doctors) they speak more plainly thus: Patres
omnes fere hujus aetatis de lib. Arbitrio confuse loquuntur, and contra
manifesta Scripturae fanctae testimonia; Almost all the Fathers of this Age do
speak confusedly of Free Will, and against the manifest testimonies of holy
Scripture. And for proof of this they name in particular Lactantius,
Athanasius, Basil, Nazianzen, Epiphanius, Hieronymus, and Gregorius Nyssenus;
condemning them all, for not denying altogether Free Will in man after his Fall.

Cent. 4. p. 231.
17. Again, in the same Chapter of Doctrine, and Paragraph de Poenitentia, they
begin thus: Doctrinam de Poenitentia, ut gravis per sese, and magni est
momenti, ita satis tenuiter and frigide (quantum quidem ex scriptis ejus videre
est) quemadmodum and in superioribus saeculis tractatam videas ab hac aetate:
Nos igitur ea, quae de hac part mediocriter and recte, and utiliter dicta esse
videntur recitabimus: The Doctrine of Penance, as it is a grave matter in it
self, and of great importance, so we do see it handled by this Age (as also by
the former Ages) very slightly and coldly, as we may see by their Writings
extant: Wherefore we shall recite here those things only of this matter, which
seem unto us to have been spoken by the said Fathers with some mediocrity,
rectitude, and utility, etc. See now their Judgment and Censure of all the
Fathers, not only of this Age, but of all the former Ages also since Christ, as
having written both slightly and coldly! And yet further, in another Chapter of
declining Doctrine, Cent. 4. c. 4.
they say, Poenitentiam haec aetas (ut fere and superiores) neque recte
definiit, neque parts ejus satis explicavit; imo nec de Fide (necessaria
Poenitentiae part) propemodum aliquid habet: This fourth Age, as neither the
other three before, have either given the true definition of Penance, nor
sufficiently declared the parts thereof; nay they speak nothing almost of
Faith, which yet is a necessary part of Penance.

18. Thus they pronounce boldly of all the Ages since Christ, not excepting
that of the Apostles themselves, And who can suffer so wicked a slander, as
though they had made no mention of Faith at all, or as though when they prescribe
Fasting, Prayer, Sorrow, and Tears to Penance, they excluded Faith? whereas it
is evident, even unto Children, that no man can perform these things, except he
have first Faith, and do believe in him whom he seeks to please and pacify.
I say nothing here of the intolerable Injuries and false Calumniations which
they do infer upon the holy Fathers, without all cause, if their words were
examined. As for example, in this very place, they condemn St. Ephrem, Cent. 4.
p. 294. Ephr. l. 2. de compunctione cordis, c. 3.
for depraving Penance, and excluding Faith from the same, for that he says,
Per lachrymas hujus brevissimi temporis peccata (Deus) dimittit, etc. Et, cum
sanaverit, mercedem conferet lachrymarum; God (says this Saint) does pardon
our sins by our tears shed in this short time of our life; and, when he has
healed us, he will give us a reward also for our tears Who sees not but that
this holy Father supposes Faith in him that does weep, and consequently is not
subject to the wicked slander of the Magdeburgians, affirming him to exclude
Faith? Yet thus they use both Him and all Fathers lightly, when they cite them,
to refute their Sentences; alleging them commonly with some false
Calumniation. But let us go forward.

19. When they come to speak of the Doctrine of the Blessed Sacrament and Real
Presence (for that in this they hold with us against the Sacramentaries, The
blessed Sacrament. Cent. 4. page 242. Ambr. lib. 4. de Sacr. c. 4.
and Calvinists) they do Cite the Fathers abundantly. As that of St. Ambrose:
Didicisti, quia quod accipis corpus Christi est. Thou have learned, that the
thing which thou receivest, is the Body of Christ. And again: Bibi sanguinem e
Christo, idque in veritate, non in umbra aut similitudine. I have drunk the
Blood of Christ, and that in truth not in a shadow or similitude. And then out
of St. Hillary: Si vere verbum caro factum est, Hill. l. 8. de Trinitate.
and nos vere verbum carnem cibo dominico sumimus. If the word of God be truly
made Flesh, then do we truly receive that Flesh in the Lords Supper. And
further they allege St. Hierom, Arnobius, Juvencus, and others of this Age,
that have the like Testimonies, and clear Speeches for proof of this verity.
Which do seem to them so strong and manifest demonstrations against the
Zwinglian, and Calvinian Doctrine, avowing to the contrary, That they hold them
for obstinatly blind, that deny or resist the same. And this, for that the
Doctrine pleases them. But if we step a foot further to the Doctrine of this
Blessed Sacrament made also a Sacrifice, and so testified by the same Fathers,
that affirmed the Real Presence: Then our good Magdeburgians, that commended
them so highly before, do flatly leave both them and us, and do place their
sayings in their other Chapter of incommodious Speeches. Accompting them for
Straw, and Stubble, and Erroneous Doctrine. Incommode dictum est; (say they)
quod citatur ex Athanasii libello, etc. It was spoken incommodiously by
Athanasius in his Book of the Image of Christ, where he denies expressly that
there is any thing remaining in this World of the Flesh and Blood of Christ,
but only that which is daily made Spiritually by the hands of Priests upon the
Altar. It is a new phrase also of Nazianzen, Nazianzen. orat. 1. in Juliam.
when he says, Mox incruenti Sacrificii oblatione manus commaculat, presently
he did stain his hands with the oblation of the unbloody Sacrifice. Again they
accuse St. Ambrose for using these words, Missam facere, Offerre, Ambr. lib. 5.
ep. 33. Nissen Orat. Catechistica.
Offerre Sacrificium, etc. To say Mass, to offer, to offer up Sacrifice, etc.
They reprehend Gregory Nyssen, for teaching of Transmutation, or
Transubstantiation: Dei verbo Sanctificatum panem, in Dei verbi corpus credimus
immutari. We do believe that the Bread which is Sanctified by the word of God,
is by the same word of God changed into the Body of the Son of God.

20. It would be overlong to Treat of all the Points in Controversy for which
the Magdeburgians do reprehend and Condemn the Fathers of this Age, Cent. 4.
page 292.
which so highly they commended a little before. For about Justification by
Faith only, they Condemn by Name Lactantius, Nilus, Chromacius, Ephrem, Hier.
in cap. 3. ad Galat.
and St. Hierom. And why? for that he says, non sufficit murum habere fidei,
nisi ipsa fides bonis operibus confirmetur. It is not enough to have the wall
of Faith, except Faith be confirmed with good works. Enc. 2. cap. 16.
Which yet you have heard approved by the Sentence of Sir Francis Hastings
before.

21. They condemn the same Lactantius together with St. Gregory Nyssen, Cent.
4. page 293.
St. Hillary, St. Nazianzen, St. Ambrose, St. Ephrem, and Theophilus
Alexandrinus, for Attributing to much to good works; but especially to those
that are voluntary. Theoph. Alex. lib. 3. de Paschate.
Inter omnia opera (say they) Electitiis plurimum haec aetas tribuit. Sic enim
ait Theophilus; hi qui jejunia, id est, Angelicam conversationem in terris
imitantur, per continentiam brevi and parvo labor, magna sibi and aeterna
conciliant praemia. But among all other works (say the Magdeburgians) this Age
does Attribute most unto voluntary works or such as are chosen by a Man's self,
for so says Theophilus Archbishop of Alexandria, those that do follow
Fasting, that is to say an Angelical Conversation upon Earth, do gain unto
themselves by this short, and small labor of abstinence, great and eternal
rewards.

Cent. 4. p. 242. Hill. in Ps. 118.
22. About Satisfaction they reprehend greatly, and put it for an Error in great
Hilarious, for that he writes upon these words of the 118 Psalm, My eyes have
brought forth fountains of waters, etc. Haec poenitentiae vox est, lachrymis
orare, lachrymis ingemiscere; This is the voice of true Penance, to pray with
tears, and sigh with tears. And again, Haec venia peccati est, fontem fletus
stere, and largo lachrymarum imbre mad fieri; This is the forgiveness of sin,
to weep a whole fountain of tears, and to wash our selves with a large shower
of weeping, etc. This did greatly discontent our Good Fellow- Germans, but St.
Hilarious was of another Opinion.

The Fathers condemned for diverse Doctrins held against Protestants.
23. What should I recite here other Controversies, seeing it would but tire the
Reader? For about Invocation and Prayer to Saints, they condemn by name St.
Athanasius lib. de Incarnatione, for praying to our Lady; St. Basil, oratione
in quadraginta Martyrs, for praying to the said Forty Martyrs; St. Gregory
Nazianzen, oratione in Basilium, for praying to St. Basil after he was dead,
also for praying to St. Cyprian after he was martyred, Orat. in Cyprianum; they
condemn also St. Ambrose, lib. de viduis, for praying to St. Peter and St.
Andrew, and our Lady; they condemn Prudentius for praying to St. Laurence; and
in another place to St. Vincentius and Cassianus Martyrs, Him. in Laur.
Vincent. and Cassian. They condemn Epiphanius, for saying that Prayers of the
Living do help the Dead, Haeres. 75. They condemn St. Ephrem for saying, that
the Saints in Paradise did pray for them that are alive, lib. 1. de
compunctione cordis, cap. 13.

Cent. 4. p. 299.
24. As for unwritten Tradition, they condemn all the Fathers of this Age one by
one, reciting their Sentences, and rejecting them. They condemn by name
Lactantius, Prudentius, and Hieronymus, for holding Purgatory; they condemn St.
Epiphanius, Epiph. tom. 2. lib. 2.

Cent. 4. p. 303.


for affirming that the Church admits no man to marry after he is Priest; Et
haec certe sancta Dei Ecclesia cum sinceritate observat; And truly the holy
Church of God (says Epiphanius) does observe this Custom with all sincerity.
And thus much be spoken only about one Chapter, (to wit, of Doctrine) having
over-skipped many other things for brevity-sake in the same Chapter.

25. But if I would pass to other Chapters, (especially that of Rites and
Ceremonies, which is their sixth in order) there would be no end. For first, in
the very first Paragraph about Rites or Ceremonies belonging to Churches
Service, and public Meeting, (which is but one of almost twenty Paragraphs
contained in this Chapter) they set down these Rites following, which do easily
show that Our Religion, and not Theirs, was in practice in this fourth Age.
Cent. 4. cap. 6. p. 407. number. 50, 54. Eusebius.
As for example, the Building of Churches in Honor of Saints by Constantine and
others at the beginning of this Age, and dedicating them to the same Saints,
out of Eusebius and other Authors, page 407. nu. 50. Dedications also and
Consecrations of the same Temples or Churches, and the Days of the said
Consecration kept Holy and Festival with great solemnity, Athan.
out of Athanasius and others, S. Basil. Socr. l. 5. c. 22. Theod. l. 5. c. 18.
Opt. l. 6. Zoz. l 6. c. 6. Eus. l. 4. de vit. Constant. Opt. l. 1. cont. Parmen.
ibid. Service at midnight used in the Churches at that time, out of St. Basil
and others, ibid. Altars builded in Churches for Christian Sacrifice, by the
testimony of Socrates, Zozomenus, Theodoretus, and others, ibid. The
Interpretation also, what an Altar means, set down by Optatus; Quid est
Altar, nisi seeds Corporis and Sanguinis Christi? What is an Altar, but the
seat of the Body and Blood of Christ? Images also set up and painted in
Churches in this Age, out of Zozomenus, Eusebius, Optatus, and others, page
409. Caereas Candelas, and Lampades; Torches, Wax-Candles, and burning Lamps,
set up in the Church by Constantine himself, out of Eusebius, lib. 4. de vita
Constant. page 410. Basil.
Of Vigils and Watches kept in Church-Feasts, out of Basil, Theodoret, and
others, ibid. The use of Litanies in those days, Basil. ep. 63. Zozim l. 4. c.
16.
they show out of Basil, Theodoret, and others, ibid.

26. I leave many more Rites and Catholic Ceremonies set down by them in this
first Paragraph, which is, of public Meetings, Churches, etc. But if I would
pass from this unto many other Heads handled by them, as, about the use of
Baptism, and administration of other Sacraments and Sacrifice, about Feasts,
Fasts, Marriage, Burying, Honoring Martyrs Tombs, Pilgrimages, consecrating of
Monks and Nuns, and other such points, (which these Magdeburgians do handle
here at large out of the Fathers of this Age, and practice of that Church, to
the number of nineteen or twenty, all against themselves) it were sufficient to
make a several Book apart. As for Example, about Baptism they teach us, That
those who are to be baptized must first be confessed of their sins; Cent. 4. p.
118, 119, 120.
that they must say abrenuntio tibi Sathana, and omnibus operibus tuis; that
they must be prepared by Exorcisms, and after Baptism be anointed with holy
Chrism; that they must fast a certain number of days before their Baptism; that
they must thrice be dived in the water; that they must have Lamps lighted at
their Baptism. And for the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar, they show us, How it
was wont to be administered, and sent (when occasion was offered) from one place
to another; how often it should be received, and with what reverence, and with
what Vigils and Prayers before; and how it was wont to be carried to them that
lay on their Deathbed; and how they were bound to confess it openly to be the
true Body and Blood of Christ, before they received it; and what great Miracles
fell out for proof and confirmation of the truth about this Real Presence.
These, p. 431, 432.433.
and almost infinite other points like unto these, the Magdeburgians do prove
at length to have been in use throughout this fourth Age by the Testimonies and
Writings of the principal Doctors thereof.

27. Wherefore I will leave the Reader to consider, what manner of people these
Lutheran Writers are, who do record so many important Testimonies against
themselves; and having alleged them, then they refute all again presently with
this bare shift, that they are either Jewish or Pagan Ceremonies brought in by
the Fathers upon Superstition, and so not to be regarded; and this they think
to be sufficient to refute them all. As for Example, The ancient observation of
Fasts.
talking of the Ceremony of Fasting in those days, what Meats they did eat, and
how rigorously they abstained, and how long, these good fellows do write thus:
Jejunia observasse religiosius, quidem seu superstitiosius, quam superioribus
saeculis hujus aetatis Christianos Historiae testantur; Histories do testify
unto us, that the Christians of this Age did observe Fasting-days more
religiously, or rather more superstitiously, than any Age before, for that
Human Traditions began now to be more multiplied; and Epiphanius does say, that
the Fast of Wednesdays and Fridays was observed at this time, as a Tradition of
the Apostles, but we find no such thing in their Works. Thus said these
Germans, that never perhaps fasted a day in their life, nor ever abstained for
Devotion-sake from any good morsel of Meat, that their Lips could reach unto.
And so much of these men, for they are not worth the spending of time to refute
them.

Well then, by these few Examples taken out of two Chapters only of the
Magdeburgians about this fourth Age, we see what may be gathered, if we would
go over all the three Centuries for these three Ages (from Constantine to St.
Gregory;) and thereby also we see the reason why Fox wrote so little of these
three Ages, being wholly against them.

28. But now perhaps the Reader will ask, how it falls out that John Fox
having dedicated a special Book (to wit, his second of Acts and Monuments) unto
these three Ages after Constantine, (for so is his Title:) how, I say, Fox p.
95.
he could make up a distinct Book, and yet say nothing of the Ecclesiastical
Affairs therein contained? How Fox fills up his second Book with matter not
to his purpose.
Whereunto I answer, That this is another Foxly fetch of his, to promise and
not perform, and to do one thing for another; for that despairing to have
matter to his purpose out of the former three Ages (as has been showed) he
slideth away slightly to another Argument, which he had not promised in his
Title; to wit, of some things fallen out in our English Church in the next 200
years after, from the time of St. Augustine and King Ethelbert, unto the time of
King Egbert, first Monarch of the English, about the year of Christ 800. But
for that these two Ages, (to wit, the seventh and eighth) do contain the times
of our primitive English Church, I think best to treat severally thereof in the
next Chapter following; this being sufficient to show, that in these second 300
years John Fox had as little room for his Church, as in the former.

CHAP. IV.
How matters passed in the Christian Church, both abroad, and at home in
England, during the third station of Time, from Pope Gregory and Ethelbert King
of Kent, unto Egbert our first Monarch, containing the space of two hundred
years.

The third station of Times, from K. Ethelbert, an. 600, to K. Egbert, an. 800.
THere follows in order the third distinction or station of Times appointed by
John Fox in the beginning of his History, and promised by him to be handled
distinctly in the prosecution of his Work; and so indeed this station ought to
have been above the rest, for that it contains the time of our English
primitive Church, to wit, the two first hundred years thereof from St. Augustine
downward. But (as you have heard before) he finding scarce any thing in these
two Ages, which delighted his heretical humor, no not our very Conversion it
self from Paganism to Christian Religion, he shuffleth the same over in the end
of his foresaid second Book, together with the second 300 years after Christ,
from Constantine to Pope Gregory, as before has been showed. So as he
includes the Acts of 500 years of the most Famous and Glorious Times that ever
were in the Church of God, (whether we respect the General and Universal
Church, or the Church of England in particular) in a little Book of a dozen
Leaves only, Why Jo. Fox shifted over these 200 years so slightly.
of which dozen Leaves the least part does concern this time; whereas, when he
comes down to handle the Acts and Gests of John Wickliff, John Husse, Hierom
of Prague, and other such paltry Heretics, not worth the talking of, he writes
whole Volumes, and many hundred Leaves together; but of these 200 years of our
first Conversion and primitive Church, Fathers, Doctors, and Saints thereof, he
writes both very little and most contemptuously; and yet wanted he not Authors
to give him matter in this behalf, seeing that Saint Bede (that lived in the
first of these 200 years) has left five whole Books of the Acts and Gests
thereof, besides other that have ensued, as Gosselinus, Malmsbury,
Westmonasteriensis, and others.

The contemptuous writing of John Fox in this station of 200 years.
2. But the truth is, that John Fox seeing these times to be wholly against him,
and that they lay down more clearly before us (if it may be) than the rest,
(especially to Englishmen) the Truth and Evidence of the Catholic Roman Faith,
he had no heart nor courage to deal much therewith, but sought to shuffle over
in silence, so much as he might conveniently, and the rest to discredit by
scoffs, taunts, corruption and falsification, as after you shall see; for I
have thought good to make a distinct Chapter of these two Ages, and thereby
somewhat to let you see and behold what passed therein (though very briefly) and
how John Fox does behave himself in relating the same.

3. First then, Popes and Emperors of these 200 years.
if we consider the Universal Church of Christendom in these 200 years, (which
are the 700 and 800 years of Christ) there are recounted to have sitten in the
Roman See Thirty-three Popes* from Gregory I. to Leo III. and in the East
Empire (the West being decayed before) some Nineteen or Twenty Emperors reigned
one after another, from Mauritius to Constantine VI. and Irene his Mother, in
whose time Charles the Great of France was made Emperor of the West by the
foresaid Pope Leo III. The chief Doctors from an. 600, to 800.
And during this Race of time the said Universal Church flourished greatly by
Learned Men and Holy Bishops; whereof the principal were St. Isidorus
Archbishop of Sevil, Sophronius, Leontius, Theodorus Archbishop of Canterbury,
Venerable Bede, Johannes Damascenus, Paulus Diaconus, Alcuinus our
Countryman, Vsuardus, and others.

4. This time had many Learned Councils also; Council General.
whereof two were General, the one being the third of Constantinople, the other
the second of Nice: Whereby were beaten down all the Heretics of those days;
the principal whereof were the Jacobites, the Armenians, Monothelites,
Neophonites, Heretics of this time.
Lampetians, Agnychites, Iconomachians, or Image-breakers, and other the like.
Besides all this, there was added to the Greatness of this Church the new
Conversion of many Countries from Paganism to Christian Religion. Conversion of
England.
Amongst which may principally be recounted our English Saxons, as also by
their means diverse Provinces afterward of High and Low Germany. And this for
the continuance and going forward of the Christian Catholic Church in general,
planted by Christ, and brought down by Succession from the Apostles time.

5. But if you will talk of our new English Church, planted in this mean space,
and inserted or united to that General Catholic Church, as a Branch or Member
to the whole Body, and as a new Daughter subordinate to her Mother, we shall
see her progress to be conform thereunto; to wit, that she multiplied mightily
in these 200 years, both in Number, Doctrine, and great Piety of Life; which
John Fox himself is forced to confess, in that he having told us of the
Conversion of seven English Saxon Kingdoms within the compass of this time, he
sets down diverse Tables in the end of all, The growth and progress of the
English primitive Church in this time.
whereof one is of seventeen Archbishops of Canterbury, from Augustine to
Celnothus that lived with King Egbert; and another Table of thirty Cathedral
Churches, Abbeys, and Nunneries builded, and abundantly endowed by Christian
English Kings, Queens, and Bishops of that time; and a third Table of nine
several Kings, besides many more of chief Nobility both Men and Women, who
leaving the World and their Temporal States, entered into a Religious Life the
more strictly to serve Almighty God. All which John Fox is forced to recount
against himself, and finds no one in all this time of 200 years, (and much
less any company) on whom he dares lay hands to build up his hidden Church in
England withal.

6. And it is to be noted by the Reader, and by us to be repeated again for
better memories sake, (that which before we admonished) to wit, that Fox
finds these 200 years of our first English primitive Church so barren of
matter for his purpose, as in the whole story thereof he spends only eight
Leaves of Paper, and these rather in deriding and scoffing the same, and
principal Pillars thereof, than writing any Ecclesiastical History. For which
cause, Fox's scoffing story of the English primitive Church. p. 107, 113, etc.
you shall find these Notes and Titles commonly written over the heads of his
Leaves and Pages, Augustin's arrival in Kent; Gregory the basest Pope, but the
best; Proud Augustine; Lying Miracles; Shaven Crowns; Beda his Birth, and the
like. Bed. l. 1. hist. c. 21.

Fox p. 113.


Of which Learned Holy Man's Story (I mean Saint Bede) he makes so little
account, as in the same place reciting a Letter out of him written by a holy
Man (Ceolfride Abbot of Sherwyn in Northumberland) to Naitonus King of the
Picts, he says thus: The Copy of which Letter, as it is in Bid, I have
annexed; not for any great reason therein contained, but only to delight the
Reader with some pastime in seeing the fond Ignorance of that Monkish Age, etc.
Whereby we may see the drift of this pleasant Fox in these his Acts and
Monuments; which is, to discredit that whole Time, and all our Primitive Church.

Mat. 18.
7. But yet, to the end that the saying of Christ may be fulfilled in him, Ex
ore tuo te judico, Serve nequam; I do judge thee out of thy own mouth, thou
wicked Servant: I shall here set down two National Synods gathered in England
in these two Ages by two famous Archbishops of Canterbury; the one Theodorus,
Bed. l. 4. hist. c. 5.

Malm. de gest. Pont. Angl. l. 10.


in the year of Christ 680, and related by Beda; and the other St. Cuthbert, in
the year 747, related by William of Malmsbury after Bede's death, and both of
them set down by Fox. And by viewing the Decrees of these two Synods, you will
see whether those Ages were so fond in Ignorance as Fox makes them. Out of the
first Synod, held at Thetford, Fox gathers ten Decrees in these words:

Fox p. 112. col. 2. n. 63. Decrees of an English Synod, an Dom. 680. out of
Fox.
8. I. That Easter Day should be uniformly kept and observed throughout the
whole Realm upon a certain day, viz. prima 14 Luna Mensis primi. II. That no
Bishop should intermeddle within the Diocese of another. III. That Monasteries
consecrated unto God should be exempt and free from the Jurisdiction of
Bishops. IV. That the Monks should not stray from one place (that is, from one
Monastery) to another without the license of their Abbot; also to keep the same
Obedience which they promised at their first entering. V. That no Clergyman
should forsake his own Bishop, and be received in any other place without
Letters Commendatory of his own Bishop. VI. That Foreign Bishops and Clergymen
coming into the Realm, should be content only with the benefit of such
Hospitality as should be offered them; neither should they intermeddle any
further within the Precinct of any Bishop, without his special permission. VII.
That Synods Provincial should be kept within the Realm at least once a year.
VIII. That no Bishop should prefer himself before another, but must observe the
time and order of his Consecration. IX. That the number of Bishops should be
augmented as the number of People increased. X. That no Marriage should be
admitted, but that which was lawful; no Incest to be suffered; neither any man
to put away his Wife for any cause, except only for Fornication, after the Rule
of the Gospel. And these be the principal Chapters of that Synod, etc.


Fox p. 115: col. 1. n. 84.
9. Out of the second Synod, held at Clonisho, Fox gathers thirty-one Decrees,
as follows:

The Decrees of a second Synod, out of Fox, an. Dom. 747.
I. That Bishops should be more diligent in seeing to their Office, and in
admonishing the people of their faults. II. That they should live in a
peaceable mind together, notwithstanding they were in place dissevered asunder.
III. That every Bishop once a year should go about all the Parishes of his
Diocese. IV. That the said Bishops, every one in his Diocese, should admonish
their Abbots and Monks to live regularly; and that Prelates should not oppress
their Inferiors, but love them. V. That they should teach the Monasteries,
which the secular men had invaded, and could not then betaken from them, to
live regularly. VI. That none should be admitted to Orders, before his Life
should be examined. VII. That in Monasteries the reading of Holy Scripture
should be more frequented. VIII. That Priests should be no disposers of secular
business. IX. That they should take no money for baptizing Infants. X. That
they should both learn and teach the Lord's Prayer and the Creed in English.
XI. That all should join together in their Ministry after one uniform Rite and
manner. XII. That in a modest voice they should sing in the Church. XIII. That
all Holy and Festival-days should be celebrated at one time together. XIV. That
the Sabbath day be reverendly observed and kept. XV. That the seven hours
Canonical every day be observed. XVI. That the Rogation-days, both the greater
and lesser, should not be omitted. XVII. That the Feast of St. Gregory and St.
Augustine our Patron should be observed. XVIII. That the Fast of the four times
should be kept and observed. XIX. That Monks and Nuns should go regularly
apparelled. XX. That Bishops should see these Decrees not neglected. XXI. That
the Churchmen should not give themselves unto Drunkenness. XXII. That the
Communion should not be neglected of the Churchmen. XXIII. Item, That the same
also should be observed of the Lay men, as time required. XXIV. That Laymen
first should be well tried, before they entered into Religious Order. XXV. That
Alms should not be neglected. XXVI. That Bishops should see these Decrees to be
notified to the people. XXVII. They disputed of the profit of Alms. XXVIII.
They disputed of the profit of singing Psalms. XXIX. That the Congregation
should be constituted after the ability of their Goods. XXX. That Monks should
not dwell among Laymen. XXXI. That public Prayer should be made for Kings and
Princes.


These Decrees and Ordinances being thus among the Bishops concluded, Cuthbert
the Archbishop sends the Copy thereof to Boniface, which Boniface (otherwise
named Wenfride, an Englishman born) was then Archbishop of Mentz, and after
made a Martyr, as the Popish Stories term him.

10. Thus far I thought good to set down the Decrees of these two Synods of the
first two Ages of our primitive Church in the words themselves of John Fox;
whereby you might see, or at leastwise make some guess of the Learning and
Virtue of these times, which Fox endeavoreth by all means to bring in contempt.
Which point, (I mean of their Learning, Piety, and Godly Solicitude for
governing our new-founded Church of England) would more evidently have appeared
by these two Synods, if this lying Historiographer had not used here also his
too Fox like tricks of falsifying and fraudulent omission of other things,
which he should have related. For better understanding of these which he has
here set down, I shall speak a word or two of them briefly; for it were infinite
to follow him in all these traces, turnings, and windings of his.

Deceitful turnings and windings of Fox.
11. First then, touching the former Council or Synod held by Theodorus
Archbishop of Canterbury, and related by Saint Bede (for of this only will I
treat for brevities sake, to show an Example thereby how you may trust John Fox
in the rest which he writes) these points may be noted: First, That whereas he
says, that this Synod was held in the year of Christ 680, and quoteth Bid for
the same in his Margin, he falsifieth him plainly; for that Bede's words are
these, set down at length.

Bed. l. 4. c. 5.
Fact a est haec Synodus ab Incarnatione Domini sexcentesimo septuagesimo
tertio; quo anno Rex Cantuariorum Egbertus, mense Julio obierat, etc. This
Synod was made in the year after the Incarnation of Christ 673; in which year
Egbert King of Kent was dead in the month of July before. The same testifies
Saint Bede in other words in the very same Chapter, Bed. ibid.
saying thus: That this Synod was gathered the 24th of September in the third
year of the Reign of King Egfrid of Northumberland; who began his Reign,
according to Stow, in the year of Christ 670. Wilful Errors of John Fox.
All which Fox having seen, yet sets down as out of Bid that it was in the
year of Christ 680.

12. Secondly, Fox writes thus of the place: In the time of this Theodorus a
Provincial Synod was held at Thetford, mentioned in the Story of Bid. But he
that will read Saint Bede himself, shall find these words: In loco qui dicitur
Herudfrod; Bed. l. 4. c. 5. Cambd. in desc. Britan. Com. Hartf. p. 302.
In a place called Herudfrod, that is Hartford, as William Cambden does
testify in his Description of Hartfordshire, citing also this very Council out
of Bid held at Herudfrod. So as I marvel how doting Fox did fall upon Thetford.

13. But thirdly, there follow more malicious changings and falsifications in
citing the Articles themselves of this Synod; whereof he scarce relates any
one without some alteration, as each man may see that will compare them with
the Original of Saint Bede himself. I shall touch for example the first and the
last of the ten, for that they have more express malice in them than the rest,
which I do let pass.

Fox p. 112.
14. The first Decree of this Synod was, says Fox, That Easter Day should be
uniformly kept and observed throughout the whole Realm, upon one certain day,
viz. prima 14 Luna Mensis primi; that is to say, upon the first 14 Moon, or day
of the Moon of the first Month, to wit, of March. Which is just as the Jews do
observe it, against the Use and Custom of the Church of Rome; and is an old
condemned Error and Heresy, as before you have heard discussed at large in the
second, third, and fourth Chapters of this Treatise. And you must note that Fox
makes this Decree to say, that this fourteenth Moon, or fourteenth day of the
first Moon of March, (for this is the phrase of Ecclesiastical Calculation, to
say, Luna prima, Luna secunda, Luna tertia, for the first, second, or third day
of the Moon) must be certain, or certainly observed, so as it may not be
altered, nor Easter observed upon any other day; wherein stands the formality
of the former Error, as has been declared, for that it puts a necessity of
observing the old Jewish Law, and thereby does evacuate the force of Christ's
Grace and Gospel, as you have heard before discussed. Which being so, will you
easily believe that the whole Church of England could be brought to decree such
an Error in a public Council, and that Saint Bede in particular would ever relate
the same with his approbation, seeing he mislik'd the same so greatly in some
of the Britans, Sup. c. 2, 3, 4.
as in the former Chapters of this Treatise we have declared?

15. Well then, let us see what the words of Saint Bede himself are in this
Synodical Decree corrupted by Fox: Primum Capitulum, (says he, Bed. l. 4.
hist. c. 5.
relating it out of the words of the Canons themselves) ut sanctum diem Paschae
in communi omnes servemus, Dominica post 14 Lunam primi Mensis; The first
Article of our Decrees (says the Council) is, that we do all in common observe
the holy day of Easter upon the Sunday next after the fourteenth Moon of the
first Month.

16. Thus says the Decree, truly related by Saint Bede, quite contrary to that
which Fox related before; he putting out and putting in of his own, The wicked
falsifying of S. Bid by Fox.
without shame or conscience, what he thought best in this little Sentence, to
make those Fathers seem to say (as he would have them) in favor of a condemned
Heresy. To which effect he puts out (as you have seen) the word Dominica,
which makes or marreth all the matter, and then for post 14 Lunam, written at
large in Saint Bede, he puts in prima 14 Luna, Fox is taken in his malicious
dealing about the Decree of Observation of Easter.
short in numbers only, to make it more obscure, adding prima of his own, and
putting out post from the words of the Council, thereby to make the sense more
clear in favor of the Heresy; for that prima 14 Luna Mensis primi (which are
his words) do signify the fourteenth day of the first Moon of March expressly.
And moreover, he adds of his own these words, upon one certain day, which the
Decree has not; meaning thereby, that this fourteenth day must be observed
with such certainty, as it may not be altered or deferred to any Sunday, but
must be observed as an immovable Feast; which out of Luther we have showed
before also to be his meaning. Sup. c. 3.
And thus much of the first Decree.

17. The last and tenth Decree has no less fraud and malice used against it by
Fox than this first; for the malicious shameless Fellow would make those
Fathers of that Synod to favor the Doctrine and Practice of the Protestants in
putting away their Wives for Fornication, and marrying another: for to this
effect he cites the Canon. Tenthly, Fox 112.
That no man may put away his Wife for any cause, except only for Fornication,
after the Rule of the Gospel: And there breaks off, as though the Council had
said no more, nor added any further caution or explication of their meaning.
Whereof it would ensue (as Protestants do infer) that seeing a man may put away
one Wife for Fornication, About marrying a second Wife, the first being alive.
and is not bound to live unmarried, if he have not the gift of Continency he
may lawfully take another Wife, as the practice of Protestants is at this day
in England. But the Reader must know, that immediately after the former words by
him recited, there follow in the Canon others that mar all his Market; for thus
they lie together.

18. Nullus conjugem propriam, Bed. l. 4. c. 5. page 227.
nifi (ut sanctum Evangelium docet) Fornicationis causa relinquat: Quod si
quisquam propriam expulerit conjugem legitimo sibi matrimonio conjunctam, si
Christianus esse recte voluerit, nulli alteri copuletur; sed ita permaneat, aut
propriae reconcilietur conjugi: Let no man leave his own Wife, but only, as the
holy Gospel teaches us, for the cause of Fornication; and if any man should
put away his Wife that is joined unto him by lawful Marriage, if he will be a
true Christian let him not marry another, but either remain so in Continency,
or be reconciled to his own Wife again.

19. Lo here the fidelity of John Fox in relating matters! This Canon
determines two things, you see: First, That a man may not leave the company or
cohabitation of his Wife, but only for the sin of Fornication committed by her:
The second, That being so separated, he may not marry another for any cause,
but either must remain continent, or be reconciled to his former Wife again.
And this was the Doctrine of the Catholic Church then, and is now; which our Fox
would fain have concealed from his Reader, and have made him believe, that the
old primitive English Church had been for Them and their Practice at this day.
But the poor Reynard is taken at every winding, when he is followed, which were
impossible to do in all his false doublings. And so these two Examples only
shall suffice to show his tricks in this first point of Falsification. Let us
pass to the second of wilful Omission.

Guileful Omissions of John Fox.
20. There remains to say a word or two of his Omissions, whereby he leaves
out of purpose from his Story those things which might give Credit or
Reputation to our English Church in these ancient times, which he seeks by
all means to make ridiculous and contemptible. As for Example, the Number and
Quality of the Prelates and Learned Men that then flourished, and were present
in these Synods; the Reasons, and Arguments, and other like Circumstances,
partly set down by Saint Bede and other Authors upon diverse occasions, and partly
registered in the very Prefaces of the Synods themselves. As for Example, in
this first Synod here cited, they begin thus:

Bed. l. 4. c. 5.
21. In Nomine Domini Dei and Salvatoris Jesu Christi, etc. In the Name of our
Lord God and Savior Jesus Christ, reigning for ever, and governing his Church,
it pleased him that we should meet together, according to the Custom of the
Venerable Canons of the Church, to handle necessary business of our English
Church: Wherefore we met together upon the 24th day of the Month of September,
A Synod holden at Herudfrod, an. 673.
in the first Indiction, in a place called Herudfrod; I Theodorus (though
unworthy) appointed by the See-Apostolic Bishop of the Church of Canterbury,
and our Fellow-Bishop and Brother the most Reverend Bisy Bishop of the
East Angles, and our Brother and Fellow Priest Wilfrid Bishop of the Nation of
the Northumbers was present by his proper Legates; there were present also our
Brethren and Fellow-Priests, Putta Bishop of the Castle of Kent commonly called
Rhofessester, Eleutherius also Bishop of the West Saxons, and Winfrid Bishop of
the Mercians. And when we were all come together, and every man set according
to his Order and Degree, I said unto them,

Most dear Brethren, I beseech you, for the Fear and Love of our Savior, that
we may handle here in common the things that belong unto our Faith, to the end
that these things which have been decreed and defined by the Holy ancient
Fathers about the same, may be kept incorrupt by us all, etc.

22. This is part of the Preface to the first Synod, out of which the former
Decrees related and corrupted by Fox (as you have heard) were taken; and by the
very words of this Entrance or Preface there is more serious gravity signified
than Fox would seem to acknowledge at this day in England. But seven years
after this again the said Theodorus made another Synod, passed over in silence
by Fox, but Saint Bede relates the same in these words:

Bed. l. 4. c. 17.
23. His temporibus audiens Theodorus, etc. At this time Theodorus the
Archbishop hearing that the Church of Constantinople was greatly troubled by
the Heresy of Eutyches, Leo PP. epist. 10. ad Flavian. Theod. dial. 2. Evagr.
l. 2. c. 4. A second Council of Archbishop Theodorus.
(that denied two Natures to be in Christ, or that his Flesh was like ours) and
desiring greatly that the Churches of England, over which he had Jurisdiction,
should continue free from such Infection, he gathered together a Synod of very
many Venerable Priests and Learned Bishops; and finding them, after diligent
enquiry made, to agree all together in one Catholic Faith, he thought good to
set the same down by Synodical Letters, for Instruction and Memory of
Posterity; which began thus: In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ our Savior,
in the Reign of our most pious Princes and Lords, Egfrid King of the
Northumbers, Anno 10. upon the fifteenth day before the Calends of October, the
eighth Indiction; and Etheldred reigning over the Mercians, the sixth year of
his Reign, and Adulphus being King of the East Angles, the seventeenth year of
his Reign, and Lodtharius being King of Kent, in the seventh year of his Reign,
and Theodorus by the Grace of God Archbishop of the Isle of Britanny and of the
City of Canterbury being President of the Synod, together with the rest of the
Bishops of the same Island, venerable men sitting with him in Council, and the
holy Sacred Gospel being laid before them, in a place called in the Saxon
Tongue Hedtfield, after treaty had, they expounded the right Catholic Faith in
this manner:

24. Sicut Dominus noster Jesus, etc. As our Lord Jesus, taking our flesh upon
him, did deliver unto his Disciples, that saw him in person, The manner of
decreeing in old Synods and National Councils according to their Ancestors.
and heard his speeches, and as the Symbolum or Creed of the holy Fathers have
delivered unto us, and as generally all whole and universal Synods, and all the
company of holy Fathers and Doctors of the holy Catholic Church have taught us;
so do We, following their steps, both Piously and Catholicly, according to
their Doctrine (inspired to them from Heaven) profess and believe, and
constantly confess, according to the said holy Fathers Belief, That the Father,
the Son and the Holy Ghost are properly and truly a consubstantial Trinity in
Unity, and Unity in Trinity, etc. We receive also the holy and universal five
Synods that have been held before our time by the blessed Christian Fathers our
Ancestors, to wit, those 318 holy Bishops in the first Council of Anno 315.
Nice, against Arius and his wicked Doctrine, and of the 150 other Bishops in
the first Council of Anno 380.
Constantinople against the Heresy of Macedonius, and of the 200 Godly Bishops
of the Council of Anno 428.
Ephesus against Nestorius and his Errors, and of the 230 Bishops in the
Council of Anno 457.
Calcedon against Eutyches and his Doctrine, and of the other 165 Fathers
gathered together in the second General Council of Anno 532.
Constantinople against diverse Heretics and Heresies, etc. We do receive all
these Councils, and we do glorify our Lord Jesus Christ, as they glorified
him, adding nothing, nor taking any thing away. We do anathematize and accurse
also, both by heart and mouth, all those whom these Fathers did anathematize
and accurse, and we do receive them whom they received, etc.

25. Behold here the manner and form of Catholic Councils of old time; who laid
down first the Gospel in the midst, and then after due examination of
Scriptures, considered that Antiquity of Fathers and Councils had determined in
God's Church before them, even from Christ and his Apostles downward; and
therein insisted, agreeing all in one, and rejecting and accursing all new,
contrary or different Doctrins and Doctors; and by his means, and by the
assistance of the Holy Ghost promised by Christ unto his Church, has she
continued now for 1600 years one and the self-same; whereas Sectaries lacking
this Humility, Wisdom, and Subordination, but especially God's Grace, are
divided and consumed among themselves.

26. But I will pass no further in this point; this which I have said being
sufficient to show that there were more Learned men in England in these times
of our primitive Church, than fantastical Fox would have men believe; which is
greatly confirmed by that which Malmsbury writes, Fox p. 113.
(and Fox also confesses the same) That a General Council being gathered, soon
after this which we have mentioned, in Constantinople both of the East and West
Church against the Monothelites, An. Dom. 682. The Council of Constantinople in
Trullo.
(that denied two distinct Wills of Christ) our Archbishop Theodorus, with some
other Learned men of our English Clergy, was called for by Pope Agatho to be
one of his Legates in the said Council, where there were 331 Bishops gathered
together by order of the said Agatho Bishop of Rome, against the Patriarchs of
Antioch, Alexandria, and Constantinople, (which thing shows the great Power
and Authority of the Bishop of Rome, even in Greece it self, at that day) the
Emperor Constantine IV. being present himself.

Plat. in vit. Agath. PP. Paul. Diac. l. 1. hist. Malm. l. 1. de gest. Pont.
Angl. p. 112.
27. And to this Council (as is said) was the foresaid Theodorus Archbishop of
Canterbury, with diverse other Bishops, called by name by Pope Agatho, as we may
see in his Letter to the said Council cited by Malmsbury in these words:
Sperabamus de Britannia Theodorum, etc. We did hope to have had from Britanny
Theodore my Brother and Fellow-Bishop and Archbishop of that great Island, and
a Philosopher, together with others which hitherto do remain there, and then to
have joined them to our Humility; and for this cause we have hitherto deferred
the Council. Vides quanti eum fecerit (says Malmsbury) ut ejus expectatione,
Universale Concilium differret; "You see of what account this Archbishop was
with Pope Agatho, that he would defer a General Council for his expectation.
Thus writes he; whereby every indifferent man will easily see that this time
of our primitive English Church (which Fox by contempt so often calls
Ignorant and Monkish) was not devoid of rare Learned men; and so has continued
until our days, frustra circumlatrantibus haereticis, Aug. l. de utilitate
credendi, c. 17.
(to use St. Augustin's words) Heretics in vain barking on every side against
it. With whom John Fox thought good to bear a barking part also; and not being
able to find out any one hole or corner for his Church in those Ages, except
only among the Heretics before named; he thought good at least to rail and spit
at them as he passes by, and so will he do more and more the lower he goes,
until at length he fall to plain Apostasy, and forsaking them openly will join
with the known condemned Heretics and Enemies of this Church; which Church
hitherto notwithstanding he will seem in some sort to follow, though lazily and
dragging behind, and as it were weary of her Company, and looking about him,
which way he may give the slip, and betake himself to his heels; as will better
appear by that which ensues.

CHAP. V.
The fourth station or division of Times from King Egbert unto William the
Conqueror, containing the space of some 260 years; and how John Fox his Church
passed in these days, and whether there were any Pope Joan, or no.

The fourth station from an. Dom. 800, to 1066. Fox p. 121.
YOu have heard before how John Fox in his second Book, promising to handle but
300 years, touched in the Acts of 500 in less than a dozen Leaves, showing the
small store of matter he had for his Church in those Ages. Now his next Book is
entitled thus: The third Book, containing the next 300 years from the Reign of
Egbert unto the time of William the Conqueror. So is his Title. And yet, if you
count the years from the beginning of King Egbert his Reign, (Anno Domini 802,
according to Stow, or 800, according to others) unto the entrance of the
Conqueror, Anno 1066, you shall find but only 264 years; and from King Egbert
his death but 234. So as Fox is in no one thing exact or punctual. And these
264 years may be counted the fourth station, or parcel of Time from Christ
downward; which now we are briefly to examine and run over, as we have done the
former Stations and Limitations appointed.

2. First then, concerning the general Roman Church, it continued in these
Ages, as in the former, by continual Succession of her Bishops and Governors,
altering nothing in Belief and Doctrine from her Ancestors. And briefly to
repeat the sum of all, there ruled in the Sea of Rome in these two Ages and an
half, (as supreme, known, and acknowledged Pastors of this great visible
Church) some sixty Popes, from Leo III. that crowned Charles the Great, (and
thereby restored the Western Empire) unto the time of Alexander II. under whom
Duke William of Normandy conquered England. And in the Western Empire there
reigned some eighteen Emperors in this space, from Charles the Great to Henry
IV. and in the Eastern Empire some twenty five, from Nicephorus I. to
Constantine X. All which Popes, Emperors and Princes were of one Religion,
Faith and Belief in those days. And albeit soon after the Sea of
Constantinople, and Greek Church, by occasion of Emulation against the Roman
Empire, did begin to withdraw their due Obedience from the Roman Church, and
thereby fell by little and little into diverse errors of Doctrine also, and
finally were delivered over (as all the World sees) into the Subjection and
Servitude of the Turks; yet in these Ages there was Union and due Subordination
between both Churches: The eighth General Council.
Which may appear by that one only General Council being held at
Constantinople, (even against Phocius, that was Patriarch of the said City)
being gathered by order of Pope Adrian II. and Basilius the Grecian Emperor
concurring therein. This Council was of 300 Bishops, and confirmed by the said
Pope Adrian, An. Dom. 870.
being the eighth General Council in order, and the fourth of those that were
held in Constantinople. Whereby it comes also to be noted, That all the
General Councils held hitherto in the Christian Church (for the space of 900
years) being eight in number, as has been said, from the first Council of Nice
unto this, and from this to the first General Council of Lateran, holden in the
year of Christ 1115, under Pope Innocentius III. were all held in Greece, but
yet by order of the Bishops of Rome, sending thither their Legates, and
confirming the same afterward by themselves, without which confirmation they
were never held for Lawful in the Christian World; which is no small Argument
of the Greatness and Authority of the Church of Rome from time to time.

3. It shall not be needful to speak of the particular Heresies of these two or
three Ages, which in effect were none of any name, but only two, The Heresies
of these Ages.
the Iconoclasts, or Image-breakers, and the Berengarians, or Sacramentaries,
both of them agreeing in their particular Heresies with the Calvinists of our
Times, though in many other things different, as it is wont to be. The first of
them was begun before these Times by Leo III. Emperor of Constantinople,
surnamed Isaurus, about the year of Christ 750, as before has been noted, and
renewed again by Claudius Taurinensis. The second was begun 300 years after by
Berengarius, about the year of Christ 1050, and abjured by him again, as
hereafter shall be showed.

The chief Doctors and Fathers that defended true Religion in these Ages were
Turpinus, Eginhardus, Haymo, Rabanus, Frecolphus, Hincmarus, The Fathers and
Doctors of these Times.
Jo. Diaconus, Remigius, Theophylactus, and others, in the ninth Age; and then
in the other, Odo, Ado, Rhegino, Luitprandus, Rhatbodus, Abbo Floriacensis, and
others; and the other half of the eleventh Age, Bruchardus, Petrus Damianus,
Lanfrancus, and many others.

4. And this was the state of the Universal Christian Church in these Ages;
whereunto in all respects was conform the particular Church of England, as the
Daughter to her Mother; which may be demonstrated partly by the continual
Descent of Archbishops in England, which were to the number of Sixteen, The
Archbishops of Canterbury in these Ages.
from Celnothus that lived with King Egbert, unto Stigand that possessed the Sea of Canterbury when William the Conqueror came in, though afterward he caused
him to be deposed by a Commission from Rome, in the year of Christ 1070, as
John Stow and others do note.

5. I do pretermit the Succession of other Bishoprics in England for Brevities
sake; Kings of England in this Time.
the Kings also of England that possessed that Crown from Egbert to William the
Conqueror were some Twenty in number, (if we count Canutus the Dane and his two
Children among the rest.) All which Kings, of what Nation or State soever,
agreed fully in Faith and Belief with the said Archbishops and Bishops of our
Land, and They again with the whole Universal Roman Church, as appears by
their Acts and Monuments, and John Fox also confesses.

6. Which being so, it is hard to say or imagine where John Fox in these Ages
will pick out a different Christian Church (though it be never so poor and
creeping) for Him and His, either in England or out of England, during this
time. And much more hard it is to think how he can devise any visible
Continuation of the said obscure and trodden-down Church (as he promised to do)
even from the Apostles Time to our Age. Fox in protest. ad Eccl. Angl. page 10.
His only refuge must be (as before we have often noted) to run to the
condemned Heretics of these times, if he find any for his purpose. Which yet he
dares not openly to do, as you have seen throughout all the former Ages: But
afterward, when he comes near home, to wit, after Pope Innocentius III. and
John Wickliff, he takes more heart, affirming Our Church to have utterly
perished, and a new visible Offspring of his Church to have started up; to
wit, all the Sectaries and Heretics cast out and condemned of our Church, as
you shall see more particularly when we come to that place.

7. For the present Ages that we are now in, he does not so much as lay hands
upon the Iconoclasts or Berengarians, nor does seem to count them for his
Brethren, though in the principal Points of their Heresies they agree with Him,
as is notorious. And John Fox, to have some visible Members of his Church in
these Ages, ought to have shaken hands with them; but the poor Fellow was
ashamed to build his Church openly of so ancient Heretics; though afterward, when
he begins to build indeed, and to gather Stones together, he calls for the
Berengarians again which now he casts away, as after you shall see.

8. But now perhaps you will ask me, If John Fox do set down no Succession in
these Ages (as neither in the former of His Church or Ours,) what does the
simple Fellow in all this third Book of his? Whereto I answer first, That
albeit he promises in the Title, What Fox handles in these 300 years.
That this third Book shall contain the Acts and Monuments of 300 years,
together with the whole race and course of the Church, etc. yet has the whole
Book but seventeen Leaves in all, which is little more than one Leaf to every
twenty years race and course of the whole Church. And surely, he that so
courseth over an Ecclesiastical History, may be called rather a Courser indeed,
than an Historiographer.

9. Nay further, he is so envious to the famous Acts of our English Church in
these days, (especially with Foreign Nations) as he either concealeth utterly
the same, or makes reproachful mention thereof. As for Example, when he
speaks of the most Famous and Renowned Saint of our English Nation,
Martyrolog. Romans 5. Junii. Willeb. in ejus vita. Vicelius in hagiolog. Epitome
operum Bed an. 754.
St. Wenfride, (called afterward Bonifacius) and accounted by all Authors the
Apostle of Germany, for that he began principally their Conversion, and was
afterward most gloriously Martyred by the Pagans for preaching Christ's Gospel,
with above Fifty Fellows, the most of them Englishmen. Of this man (I say) how
speaks Fox? You shall hear presently. But first shall you see the words of a
German Writer in his praise: Primus omnium (says he) qui Australes Germaniae
parts, Adams Bremens hist. Ecc. c. 4.
etc. The first of all that brought the Southern parts of Germany to the
knowledge of Christian Religion from Idolatry, was Wenfride, an English- man by
Nation, a true Philosopher of our Savior, St. Boniface an Englishman an
Apostle of Germany, an. 750.
and after for his Virtue called Boniface, and Archbishop of Moguntia. And
albeit some Authors do name some others that preached in sundry places before
him, yet this man (as another Paul the Apostle) did go before all in Labor of
Preaching, etc.

10. So writes Adam Bremensis a Saxon, a Canon of the First and Head Church
that was builded in Saxony after their Conversion by the preaching of
Englishmen; for so he shows in particular that Englishmen were their
Converters, but especially four most famous Learned Preachers, and fervent
Ze^lots in multiplying the Christian Faith, to wit, Willebrordus, Willebaldus,
Willericus, and Willehadus; all which were renowned Apostolical Bishops in
Germany. St. Willebrord, an. 730. B. of Vtright. Bed. l. 3. hist. c. 27. and l.
5. c. 23. Tritem. de viris illust. l. 3. c. 137.
Willebrord was sent over out of England with eleven Companions toward the
Conversion of Germany by the holy Abbot St. Egbert, as both Saint Bede and other
Authors after him do testify; and by Pope Sergius II. was made Bishop of
Vltraiectum in Frisia, and was the Apostle of that Country, as also a principal
Converter of the Kingdom of Denmark.

11. St. Willebaldus an. 760. B. of Ayste, Democrit. l. 2. de missa in catalog.
Episc. de Ayste. Marcell in vit. S. Suneberti, c. 6, and 14.
Willebaldus was Bishop of Ayste in Saxony, where he converted many thousands
to Christian Faith, and was canonized with universal joy of all that Country by
Pope Leo VII. in the year of Christ 1004, as Authors do recount.

12 S. Willehad B. of Breme, an. 780.
St. Willehad and St. Willerike were both Bishops of Breme in Saxony: Post
Passionem Sancti Bonifacii (says our foresaid German Author) Willehadus Adam
Bremens, c. 9, 11, 12.
and ipse Angligena fervens amore Martyrii properavit in Frisiam, etc. After
the Passion of St. Boniface, St. Willehad (an Englishman also) burning with
the love of Martyrdom, made have also to come into Frisia, where the other was
Martyred, etc. And then shows he how this blessed man, after the Conversion
of many Thousands, was sent by the Emperor Charles the Great to preach to the
Northern Parts of Saxony; which he did with great fervor, till Windekind, a
Pagan Tyrant of that Country, moving War against Charles, drove him out: upon
which occasion he retired himself to a contemplative Life for two years
together in France, until after he was called out again by the said Charles to
be Bishop of Breme, in which Charge he both lived and died most holily.

13. And next to him succeeded one of his Disciples, Willericus, St. Willericus
B. of Breme. an. 790.

Brem. in hist. c. 12.

Erpold. Lindenb. in hist. Archiep. Brem. in Willericum.


and led an Apostolical Life in the same Charge for the space of 50 years
together, as Adam Bremensis, Erpoldus Lindenbrughensis and others do testify.

These Men's Acts then, and other suchlike, had been fit matter for John Fox to
have handled in his Ecclesiastical History of these Ages; especially if he
could have showed that any one of these that wrought so infinite Miracles, both
alive and dead, (as the former Authors do testify) had been of his Religion.
But Fox does pass over all with silence, (I mean both Them and their Actions,)
but only that he takes occasion to speak contemptuously of the first, and
Father of the rest, St. Boniface: For having spoken of the latter Synod of
those two which we mentioned in the former Chapter to have been held in England
by Theodorus and S. Cuthbert Archbishops of Canterbury, he writes thus:
Cuthbert the Archbishop of Canterbury sent the Copy of the Synod to Boniface,
Fox p. 115.
otherwise named Winfride, an English man, then Archbishop of Mentz, and after
made a Martyr, as the Popish Stories term him.

14. Behold John Fox scarce counts him a Martyr, though he were put to death by
Pagans for preaching Christian Faith. And a little after, meaning to put down a
certain Godly Epistle of the said Boniface, or Wenfride, written to Ethelbald
King of the Mercians, reprehending him for his licentious Life, Fox writes
thus: I thought this Epistle not unworthy here to be inserted, Ib. col. 2. n.
78.
not so much for the Authors sake, as for that some good matter peradventure
may be picked thereout for other Princes to behold and consider, etc.

Fox goes about to discredit S. Boniface.
15. Here now you see the Estimation and Affection of John Fox to Boniface, of
whom the Christian World of those Times both thought and spoke so reverendly
for so many Ages. But let us hear what John Bale will say; for he being an
Apostata, Bal. cent. 1. script. Brit. fol. 54.
will be more contumelious, I trow: Winifridus Bonifacius (says he) claro
Anglorum sanguine Londini natus, etc. Winifrid (called also Boniface) was born
at London of Noble English Blood, and afterward went to Rome, where Pope
Gregory II. having tried the Man's Faith, and seen his Magnificence of Mind, or
rather his shameless Pride, thought him a Fellow fit for his Affairs, and so
sent him with full Authority into Germany, to a wild People (as then they were
called) to force them to his Faith. The wicked Speech of Jo. Bale against St.
Boniface.
Neither has there been any man since the Birth of Christ that has more
properly expressed the second Beast in the Apocalypse with two Horns, than he;
for that the Pope being the great Antichrist, he was the second, etc. He did
sign with the Pope's Character a hundred thousand men in Bavaria only,
adjoining them to the Kingdom of Antichrist, rather by Fear than by pious
Doctrine, etc. He built the Monastery of Fulda, where no Woman might enter, etc.

16. Still you see one quarrel of John Bale against Monks is for shutting out
Women from their Monasteries; which as it was holily instituted and observed by
ancient Monks, so if it had been well kept in his Monastery of Norwich, it may
be he had continued a Monk, as he began, and never come acquainted with
Dorothy, that drew him out from thence, as himself Bal. cent. 5. fol. 245.
confesses. But is there any wicked tongue in the world that can speak more
impiously than this Fellow does of so rare an Apostolic Man, and of his
Actions; yea, of the Conversion of Infidels to Christian Faith, and their holy
Baptism, calling it, signing them with the Character of the Beast? Who but a
Beast indeed, or a man of a beastly mind, would speak so? If I should allege
the Testimonies of all ancient Authors since his time in praise and admiration
of so zealous and holy a Martyr, I should oppress both Fox and Bale with their
very Names and Authority.

17. But to return to Fox again. You have heard what he omitteth of the Church
of England, which he might well have discoursed of in handling these Times.
Seeing he passes over our particular Church so slightly, you will demand,
perchance, what he writes or sets down of the Universal Roman Church. Truly
in effect he handles nothing of moment nor coherence; though, to bring in a
certain impertinent Tale whereof he desires to speak, to wit, About the Fable
of Pope Joan.
of Pope Joan, he sets us down a short Rank of some few Popes, but namely of
Pope Leo IV. unto whom he adjoyneth Pope John VIII. and after him Benedict III.
and then Pope Nicholas I. And this Pope John VIII. (which entered between Leo
and Benedict) he will needs have to have been a Woman, whom he calls Pope
Joan: And albeit John Fox's words be as foolish and blasphemous as they are
wont in such cases, yet will I recite them here, to the end you may see what
truth pr probability this so much blazed and canvased Heretical Fiction has in
it.

Fox (...). Fox's feigned Fable of Pope Joan blasphemously related.
18. And here next (says he) follows now and comes in the Whore of Babylon
rightly in her true colors, by the permission of God, and manifestly without
all tergiversation to appear to the World; and that not only after the
spiritual sense, but after the letter, and the right form of an Whore indeed:
For after this Leo above mentioned, the Cardinals proceeding to their ordinary
Election, after a solemn Mass of the Holy Ghost, to the perpetual shame of
them, and of that See, instead of a Man Pope elected a Whore indeed, called by
the Name of John VIII. who sat two years and six months, etc. The Woman's
proper Name was Gilberta, etc.

19. Behold John Fox describes so particularly this Woman and her Election, as
if he had been present, and seen all pass. But suppose all this were true which
he has written, (as we shall prove it presently to be altogether false:)
Suppose, I say, that by Error such a Woman had been chosen; what had ensued of
that? or what had this prejudiced the Church of Christ? St. Augustine asks the
very same Question in a like case, when having recited up the Popes of Rome
from Christ to his days, (to wit, from St. Peter to Pope Anastasius) he makes
this demand; What if any Judas or Traitor had entered among these, or been
chosen by Error of men? Aug. ep. 165. ad literas cujusdam Donatistae.
Si quisquam Traditor (says he) per illa tempora subrepsisset? If any Traitor
in those days had crept in, what had ensued thereof? And then he makes the
Answer presently, Nihil praejudicaret Ecclesiae, and innocentibus Christianis.
And the very like do I answer in this case: For I would ask John Fox, If,
immediately after the Apostles time, (whiles yet he confesses the Church of
Rome to have been in good state, and the true Church of Christ) any Woman, or
Hermaphroditus, If Pope Joan had been, she had not prejudiced the Church.
or any that had not been baptized, or if a Layman, and not Priest, (and
consequently not capable of that Place and Dignity) had by Error of men crept
into the Office of chief Bishop, (which as it may happen by human frailty, so
yet we assure our selves that the Providence of God will never permit it in so
high and supreme a Dignity of his Church;) but if it should have happened out,
had this prejudiced that Apostolic Church, or made it the Whore of Babylon, as
Fox infers of his latter Church? Truly I think he dares not say so; for
that it is evident it were a plain cavil: the only inconvenience of that case
being (if it should fall out) that the Church should lack a true Head for the
time, as she does when any Pope dies until another be chosen. And whatsoever
inconvenience can be imagined in this case, is more against the Protestants
than Us; for that their Church admits for lawful and supreme Head thereof
either Man or Woman, which our Church does not. Here then is seen John Fox's
Folly in urging this point.

20. Again, I would ask the simple Fellow, that repeateth so often the word
Whore in this place, as though he were delighted therewith, Whether that word
used by St. John in the Apocalypse, (to wit, Meretrix Babylon) were meant of a
particular person, as he applies it, or rather of a City or Multitude? If he
will answer any thing at all, he must needs grant the second; for that the
Vision describes plainly the City of Rome, situated upon seven Hills, that
slew the Martyrs of Christ, and infected the whole World with the variety and
confusion of her Idolatries; The Whore of Babylon was the persecuting City
(...) Rome (...) the (...) Emp(...)
which Sentences being not applicable to the Church or Congregation of
Christians in those days, (that was holy, as Fox will confess) but rather to
the State and present condition of Rome under those Pagan persecuting
Emperors, that afflicted Christians, and forced men to Idolatry, (which State
was prophesied that it should fall, and be overthrown soon after by Christ's
Power, as we have seen it fulfilled:) All this, I say, being put together and
considered, it is a most ridiculous thing to apply this Prophecy of the Whore
of Babylon (as Fox does) to any particular Pope, John, Joan, or Jill, if any
such had been.

21. But the very truth is, that this whole Story of Pope Joan is a mere Fable,
and so known to the more learned sort of Protestants themselves, but that they
will not leave off to delude the World with it, for lack of other matter. If
you ask me, How it began, and has continued in men's mouths so long? I answer,
Either upon simplicity, or malice, or both. The beginning of the Fable of Pope
Joan.
Upon simplicity it seems it was begun by the first Author and Relator
thereof, Martinus Polonus, that lived about 300 years agone, and above 400
after the thing is said to have fallen out; Mart. Polon. in vit. Imperat. and
Pontif. Papa 109. an Christi 855.
who was a very simple man, as appears by many other fabulous Relations which
he makes: And yet does not he aver it, but only with this limitation, (ut
asseritur) as it is said; whereby he shows to have received it only by vulgar
Rumor, without any certain Author or Ground. And we shall afterward show the
occasion of the foresaid false Rumor.

22. But the matter being once on foot, it was carried on, partly by curiosity
of latter Writers, that took it out of Polonus, as Platina, and See a large
refutation of this Fable by Onuphrius in his addition to Platina.
others relating it with the same restriction, (ut aiunt, as men say,) and
partly by malice and emulation of them that favored the German Empire against
the Pope, and were glad to have such a matter of some Dishonor to object
against the Sea of Rome; which humor our latter Sectaries also have thought
best to continue.

23. But if we go to more ancient Writers, such (I mean) as lived in the very
time or soon after the matter is pretended to have fallen out; that is to say,
with Leo IV. that held the Sea eight years, six months, and three days, from
the year of Christ 847, to 855; and with Pope Benedictus III. that immediately
followed him after some few days of vacancy, to wit, from the year 855, to 858.
These Authors, I say, do show evidently, that these two Popes, being both
Romans, succeeded immediately one after another, without any John or Joan
coming in between them. As for Example, Anastasius Bibliothecarius, a man of
great Reputation, that lived in both these Popes times, and was present at both
their Elections, and wrote the particulars thereof, shows amongst other
points, Anastas. in vit, Leon. 4.
That Leo IV. died the 16th day before the Calends of August, and that all the
Clergy of Rome being gathered together (he does not say the Cardinals, as
foolish John Fox does, for that that kind of Election was not then in use) with
one consent did choose Benedict III. etc.

Ancient Authors that do exclude Pope Joan.
24. Thus writes Anastasius; and with him do agree the Historiographers that
followed next after him, as Audomarus, Luitprandus, Rhegino, Hermanus
Contractus, Lambertus Schafnabergensis, Otho Frisengensis, Conradus, Abbas
Vrspergensis, and others long before Martinus Polonus; who in their
Chronologies do place Benedictus III. immediately after Leo IV. without
admitting any other Man or Woman between them. And the very same also does
write Ado Bishop of Vienna, Ado in chron. an. Dom. 855.
that lived at the same time; Leone obeunte, Benedictus in sede Apostolica
constituitur; Leo IV. being dead, Benedict was placed for him in the
Apostolical See. And as for Joannes VIII. they do place him four Popes after
Leo IV. to wit, next to Adrianus II. and say he was a Roman, and reigned ten
years distinctly. So as if they should miss in this count of Popes and Years,
the Error must needs be manifest in Chronology. Yea, not only Latin Writers,
but even the Greek Historiographers Zonaras, Cedrenus, Curopalatas, and others,
that wrote before Martinus Polonus of matters concerning the Latin Church in
those days, and were no Friends to the same, and would have been content of
such an Advantage to object against it, yet write they nothing thereof at all;
which is an evident proof that there was no such matter.

An Argument out of English Historiographers for overthrowing the Fable of Pope
Joan.
25. But besides these Authorities of external Authors, I have one Argument also
of no small moment (as it seems to me) taken from our ancient English
Histories written in the Latin Tongue; to wit, William of Malmsbury, Henry
Huntington, Roger Hoveden, Florentius Vigorniensis, and Matthew of Westminster;
whereof the first four lived 500 years agone, and are elder than Polonus, and
the latest of them 300 years, and was equal with him; and no one of them all
makes any mention of this Pope Joan; which yet in reason they should have done
above others, for that they do all agree that in the time of Pope Leo IV.
toward the end of his Reign, about the year of Christ 853, King Ethelwolph
before mentioned, Son to King Egbert, (having put his Kingdom of England in the
best order he could, and left the Government thereof for his absence to his
eldest Son Aethelbald, assisted with the helps of his second and third
Brothers, Athelbricke and Athelred) took his journey for Rome, The going of K.
Ethelwolf and Prince Alfred to Rome.
leading with him his fourth Son Alured or Alfred, (who afterward also was
King) which he loved most tenderly above the rest of his Children. And coming
to Rome, he delivered the same Alfred (being yet of very young Age, according
to the account of Matthew Westminster) into the hands of the said Pope Leo IV.
to be instructed and brought up by him, (as John Fox also relates;) and that
the said Pope received him with great kindness, and was his Godfather in the
Sacrament of Confirmation, detaining him there with him. But how long this
Prince stayed in Rome after his Father's return, though it be not set down in
particular, yet that it was some number of years seems evident, both for that
he returned more Learned, and otherwise better qualified, than any Saxon King
had been before him, and for that we find no mention of his Acts in England
until in the Reign of his third Brother Athelred, (for all three reigned in
order after Ethelwolf their Father) upon the year 871, Stow an. 871. Mat. West.
849. Floren. in chron. eodem an.
at the famous Battle of Reading in Barkshire, fought against the Danes, where
he being present, and Lieutenant to his Brother the King, though he were but
Twenty-two years old, (according to the account of Florentius and of Matthew
Westminster,) yet seeing the Enemies Army to press upon him, and his Brother to
stay over long at Mass, he gave them Battle in a very unequal place, but with
such Valor, as he obtained a notable Victory, etc. But to our purpose of Pope
Joan.

26. It is very like, by that which I have said, that this Prince Alfred living
in Rome when Pope Leo IV. died, and when Pope Benedict III. was chosen, Why
English Writers should have written of Pope Joan more than others, if any such
had ever been.

Mart. Polon. l. 4. de Pont. an. 855.

Plat. in Joan. 8.


must needs have known also Pope Joan, if any such had entered and lived two
years and a half between them, as Fox would have it: And further, that some of
our ancient Historiographers, writing of those Times so particularly as they
do, would have made some mention thereof; especially if this She-Pope were an
English-woman, or called Joannes Anglus, (as Polonus says, or Anglicus, as
Platina relates; or if she were born, brought up, or had studied in England,
as the Magdeburgians and others of their Sect devise; or if she went up and
down the World in the company of an English Monk of the Monastery of Fulda, as
John Fox does fable:) It is like, I say, that if any of these things had been
true, Prince Alfred, or some of his Train residing then in Rome, would have
known her, or been acquainted with her, or with the Monk that led her about, or
at leastwise have received some special help at her hand when she came to be
Pope, which would have deserved some memory in our Histories. But our foresaid
Writers do not only not make any mention of her, or of any John or Joan English
Pope that came between Leo IV. and Benedict III. but do expressly exclude the
same, by placing the one immediately after the other, and assigning them their
distinct number of years before mentioned, to wit, eight years and three months
to Leo, and two years and six months immediately following to Benedictus III.
For so does Malm. in fact. Reg. and Episc. Ang. an. 847, and 855.
Malmsbury in his Chronology, and Flor. Vigorn. in chron. an. 853, and 858.
Florentius in his Chronicon, and Mat. West. in chron.
Matthew of Westminster in his History, whose words are these: Anno Gratiae
855, Leone Papa defuncto, successit ei Benedictus annis duobus, mensibus sex,
and diebus december; In the year of Grace 855, Pope Leo IV. being dead, Benedict
III. did succeed him, and sat two years, six months, and ten days, etc. Which
agrees with all the other ancient extern Authors before mentioned. So as here
is neither place nor time left for Joannes Anglicus to have come between them.

27. And all these Authors did write (as has been noted) either before or with
Martinus Polonus, who is taken to have been the first Relator of this Fable.
And though in some printed Copies of the Chronicles of Marianus Scotus and
Sigebertus (somewhat elder than Martinus Polonus) there be mention in a word or
two of this Tale, with this ground, (ut ferunt) as men say, yet in more ancient
Manuscript Originals, found in There is extant the Original of Sigebertus in
Monast. Ie mlacensi in Flanders, and of the corruption of Marianus Scotus in
this behalf, read him that sets forth Metrop. Alberti Cranzii, anno 1574.
Flanders and other places, no such thing is seen, but rather to the contrary,
with diverse evident signs and conjectures, that those few words now found in
the printed Copies were added by others afterward in Germany, where the Work
lay for many years, during the Contention of the German Emperors against the Sea of Rome.

28. But besides all this, there ensues another Argument more evident (in my
Opinion) than any of the rest hitherto alleged, for overthrowing of this Fable;
which is, That about 170 years after this devised Election of Pope Joan, (to
wit, upon the year of Christ 1020) the Church and Patriarchs of Constantinople
being in some Contention with Rome, Pope Leo IX. wrote a long Letter to
Michaell Patriarch of Constantinople, reprehending certain abuses of that
Church, A most evident Argument against the Fable of Pope Joan.
and among other that they were said to have promoted Eunuchs to Priesthood,
and thereby also a greater inconvenience fallen out, which was, that a Woman
had crept in to be Patriarch; which yet he says that for the horror of the
Fact he would not believe. Absit (says he) ut velimus credere quod publica
fama non dubitat asserere, Epist. Leon. 9. cap. 5. and 23.
etc. God forbid we should believe that which public Fame doubts not to
affirm, which is, that the Church of Constantinople, by promoting Eunuchs to
Priesthood (against the Canon of the Council of Nice) promoted once a Woman to
the Bishops See, which is so abominable a thing, as the horror thereof does not
permit us to believe it, etc.

29. Thus wrote he; which no doubt he would never have dared to do, if the
Patriarch of Constantinople might have returned the matter back upon him again,
and said, This was but a slanderous report falsely raised against the Church of
Constantinople; but that a Woman indeed had been promoted in the Roman Church.
How could Pope Leo have answered this Reply? Wherefore most certain it seems
that at this time there was not so much as any rumor or mention of any Woman
Pope that ever had been in the Roman Church, this being 250 years before
Martinus Polonus wrote; A probable conjecture of the first Origin of this Fable
of Pope Joan.
for which cause also it is thought very probably that this rumor of the
Church of Constantinople might be the occasion of the Tale raised after against
Rome, for that Martinus Polonus being a very simple Man, and living so long
after, (as has been said) and hearing an uncertain fame of a Woman promoted to
Chief Priesthood, might ascribe that to Rome, which belonged to Constantinople;
which being once written by him, passed to others after him, and so came to our
Heretics.

30. Finally, howsoever this be of the first occasion or invention of the
Fable, certain it is that most evidently it is a Fable; and that, if other
Arguments failed, yet there be so many Incongruities, Simplicities,
Absurdities, Varieties, and Contrarieties in the very Narration it self, as it
discovers the whole matter to be a mere Fable and Fiction indeed, and a rumor
of vulgar people, without ground. Mart. Pol. in vit. Imp. and Pont. an. 855.
For Martinus Polonus begins his Narration thus: Post Leonem sedit Joannes
Anglus Natione Margantinus; After Leo III. sat John English, by Nation a
Margantine; but where this Country of Margantia is, no man can tell. And it
follows, Quae alibi legitur fuisse Benedictus III. which other where is read
to be Benedictus III. So as this man seems to confound him with Benedict, and
consequently ascribes to him the same time of his Reign that is assigned to
Benedictus; (to wit, two years and five months;) and yet presently after he
says, That Benedictus was a Roman, Son to Pratolus, etc.

Plat. in vit. Joan. 8.
31. Platina, that took it out of this Man, to make the Tale somewhat more
probable, begins thus; Joannes Anglicus ex Maguntiaco oriundus, etc. John of
England born at Maguntiacum, etc. Then how could he be John or Joan of England,
if he were born at Maguntiacum? and where is this Maguntiacum? and how does it
agree with Margantinus used by Polonus? But then come in the Cent. 9. c. 20.
Magdeburgians, and say contrary, that he was Moguntinus, oriundus ex Anglia;
of Mentz.
Moguntia in Germany, born in England: And contrary to this, Bibliander
(another German Sectary) contradicts that again, saying in his Chronicles,
That he was not born in England, Bibliand. in tabulis Chronic.
but brought up and studied there. And so you see their contradiction about the
place both of Birth and Country.

32. But besides this, there are infinite other disagreements and inconveniences
in this Story; for that some do feign him to be Joannes VIII. some IX. John Fox
says, That she was called Gilberta before, Fox p. 124.
and that she went with an English Monk out of the Abbey of Fulda in Germany to
Athens, and there studied in Man's Apparel: whereas it is known that This is
evident by Cedrenus and Zonaras in vit. Michael. and Theod. Imp. an. Christi
856.
Athens at that time had no School in it all, nor in any many years before. If
she were bred also or brought up in England, or went in an English Monk's
Company, (as Fox says,) and if she were an English Priest's Daughter, (as the
Magdeburgians devise;) it is like that Prince Alfred, or some of his Train,
residing then in Rome (as before has been said) would have heard or known of
the matter.

33. But John Fox goes further, and tells us out of his fingers ends, Fox
ibid.
That the Cardinals (forsooth) met solemnly after the death of Leo IV. said
their Mass of the Holy Ghost, and so proceeded to their ordinary Election, and
brought forth Gilberta, etc. But this is all scoffing Foolery, for that
Cardinals had not the Election of Popes at that time: Ancient circumspection in
choosing Popes.
And he that will read the foresaid Anastasius Bibliothecarius (that was
present at the Election of Pope Benedictus, and describes the particulars
thereof) shall see another manner of Election in use at that day by the whole
Clergy. Moreover he shall see that the Custom was not to choose at that time
any but such as were known and tried men, and such as had lived for the most
part of their Life in Rome it self, and had given great satisfaction in their
Manners, and behaved themselves well in other inferior Ecclesiastical Charges
laid upon them.

34. All which being so, let any man of reason tell me, how it is possible to
imagine that men of those times were so fond and absurd, as to choose to so
high a Dignity among them an unknown Man or Woman, whose Parents and Country
were not known, nor proof had of their Conversation, and much more that they
would choose such a person as this is reported to be, having wandered the World
up and down with a Monk, as Fox affirms? How could all this lie hidden? Was
there none that either by Countenance, Voice, or other Actions of hers, could
suspect this Fraud? How happened her own Lovers had not discovered her, or her
Incontinent Life? How could she pass through Priesthood and other
Ecclesiastical Orders? How by so many under Offices and Degrees, as they must
before they come to be Popes, without descrying?

35. And finally (not to stand upon more Improbabilities) either this Pope Joan
was young, or old, when she was chosen. If she were young, that was against the
Custom, to choose young Popes, as may appear by the great number of Popes that
lived in that Dignity above the number of Emperors, that succeeded often in
their Youth; besides, it is a most unlikely thing that the whole Roman Clergy
would choose a Pope without a Beard, especially a Stranger. But if she were old
when she was chosen, then how did she bear a Child publicly in Procession, as
our Heretics affirm? How did they not discern her to be a Woman or an Eunuch,
seeing she had no Beard in her Old Age.

36. Again, how could she be nine months with Child in that place, without
being discovered or suspected by some? How durst she go forth in public
Procession, when she knew her self to be so near her time? How is she said to
have gone from the Palace of St. Peter to St. John Lateran, whereas the Popes
lay not then in the Vatican at St. Peter's, but at St. John Lateran it self?
Finally, there are so many fond Improbabilities and moral Impossibilities in
this Tale, (especially being joined with the grave Testimonies of so many
ancient Authors and Historiographers as before we have recited to the contrary)
as no man of any mean judgment, discretion, or common sense, will give credit
thereto, but will easily see the vanity of so ridiculous a Fiction: Wherefore
this shall suffice for the Confutation of this Heretical Fable, though (as before
has been showed) if it were or had been true, yet no prejudice could come to
Us thereby, that hold, No Woman, good or bad, can be Head of our Church.

CHAP. VI.
The Narration of English Ecclesiastical Affairs during this fourth station or
distinction of Time is continued, and the Absurdities of John Fox are
discovered.

WHerefore now we shall return to follow the Thread of John Fox's Story again.
And whereas you asked me before, What indeed the poor Fellow performs in this
his Third Book? I now will answer, as then I began to say, Why Fox falls out
with the ancient Christian English Kings and Queens.

See Fox from p. 130, 131, etc.


That in very deed he merely trifleth out the time, handling noting of that he
should have done of the orderly Descent, Race, or Course of the Church, but
telling us impertinent and trivial matters, and for the most part not
Ecclesiastical, but Temporal, to be found in every Chronicler; to wit, certain
scraps of the Lives of our English Kings, from King Egbert, Ethelwolf,
Ethelbald, Ethelred, Alured, and the rest, unto King Edward the Confessor, and
so to William the Conqueror, censuring every Prince (when he speaks of
spiritual matters) for their belief, actions, and doings in Religion. As for
Example, Fox p. 120.
reprehending them for that they builded so many Monasteries, and much more for
that so many of them and their Children entered to be Monks and Nuns; that they
gave so much Lands, Livings and Privileges to Abbeys and Churches; and for that
they went on Pilgrimages, offered Alms for their Sins, ordained Masses to be
said for them when they were dead; that they believed so easily Miracles, went
to Shrift, humbled themselves to Priests, and other suchlike Religious
Actions, which do greatly displease Fox.

2. And to show you some few Examples, he begins first with Ethelwolf Son to
King Egbert, misliking a certain Donation of Lands which he gave to the Church
in his time for Alms, to pacify (as he says) God's wrath, thereby the sooner,
for diverting the cruel Persecution and Inundation of the Danes, The Donation
of King Ethelwolf, an. 844. Fox p. 120. Malm. l. 2. de gest. Angl. Reg.
which had begun in his Father King Egbert's time, and endured still to the
utter Desolation of the Land. His words are these: Post multiplices
tribulationes ad affligendum usque ad internecionem, Ego Ethelwolfus Rex, etc.
After many Tribulations afflicting us even to death, I king Ethelwolf, together
with the Council of my Bishops and Princes, have taken this wholesome and
agreeable resolution, to give some Portion of the Land of my Inheritance unto
God and the B. Virgin Mary, and to all the rest of his Saints, to be possessed
by them for ever, etc. to the end that they may pour out Prayers for us to God
so much the more diligently, etc.

3. Thus far John Fox; though William of Malmsbury does relate the same far
differently, and much more largely, telling what Bishops were present at the
making of this Chart; to wit, Alstane Bishop of Shirbourn, (afterward
translated to Salisbury) and Swithin Bishop of Winchester, and what Psalms and
Masses were appointed by the said Bishops for the King in respect of these Alms
and the like. All which do greatly displease John Fox, but help him nothing at
all, but disgraceth rather his new Church, this happening in the year of Christ
844.

4. The like Donation does Fox recite out of William of Malmsbury made by
Ethelbald King of the Mercians some years before, (to wit, Fox ibid.

The Donation of K. Ethelbald. Malm. l. 1. de gest. Reg. Angl.


about the year of Christ 740,) where he says, Ego Ethelbaldus, Merciorum Rex,
pro amore Coelestis Patriae, etc. I Ethelbald King of the Mercians, for the
love I have to my Heavenly Country, and for the health of my Soul, have thought
good to study how by good works I may free the same from the chains of sin:
Wherefore seeing Almighty God, for his Mercy and Clemency, without any
precedent Merit of mine, has given me my Crown of this Government; I do
willingly, out of that which he has given me, restore to him again by way of
Alms that which follows, etc.

5. Thus far that good King; which greatly also misliketh John Fox. And he
says in particular, that two things do much offend him in these Donations to
Churches and Monasteries: The first, Fox. p 120.
That they should erect these Monasteries of Monks and Nuns (says he) to live
solely and singly by themselves out of the holy state of Matrimony. And
secondly, That unto this their Zeal and Devotion was not joined the knowledge
of Christ's Gospel, especially in the Article of our free Justification by the
Faith of Jesus Christ.

6. Lo here what two quarrels our Fox has picked out against these ancient
Christians! The first, That so many did profess the holy State of Virginity and
Continency. The other, That by doing so many good works they lacked the
knowledge of the Protestants Gospel, which justifies by Faith only, without
good works. But they might answer, with St. James, Jam. 2.
Thou have Faith, and I have Works: show me thy Faith without Works, and I will
show thee my Faith by Works. And that these good works did proceed of Faith,
contrary to the Cavil of John Fox, is evident by those pious words of the King,
where he says, Seeing Almighty God of his Mercy and Clemency, without any
precedent Merit of mine, has given me my Crown, I do willingly restore to him
again, etc.

7. But Fox goes forward in jesting at the said King Ethelwolf, saying, Fox p.
123.
That he that had been once nuzl'd up (in his Youth) among Priests, he was
always good and devout to holy Church, etc.

And then passes he on to show, How after he had established matters in his
own Kingdom, he went to Rome, and carried with him his little Son Alured, or
Alfred, committing him to the bringing up of Pope Leo IV. as before has been
said; where also he re-edified the English School, founded by King Offa, and
destroyed by Fire a little before under King Egbert. Moreover he gave (says
Fox) yearly to be paid in Rome 300 Marks to be distributed in this manner; The
Alms and pious deeds of K. Ethelwolf.
100 Marks to maintain the Lights of St. Peter 's Church, and another hundred
Marks to maintain the Lights of St. Paul 's Church, and the third hundred to be
disposed in good works at the Pope's appointment. At all which Fox jesteth also
merrily, building his Church by these Mocks and Mews.

8. And to like effect he recites a Miracle registered by William Malmsbury,
Fox p. 133.
and by the Charter of King Ethelstone, Son and Heir to King Edward the elder;
which King having escaped a great Danger at Winchester, where one of his
Subjects, named Duke Alfred, and other of his Nobles, conspiring together
presently after his Father's Death, would have put out his eyes: But he
escaping that Danger, took the said Alfred Prisoner, and for that he denied
that he had any such intention, the good King thought there was no better
Trial, than to send him to Rome to Pope John XI. to be tried by a solemn
religious Oath before him. A Miracle in Rome upon an English Duke. an. 933.
The Pope made him swear before St. Peter's Altar, who forswearing the said
Conspiracy, fell down presently before the said Altar in the sight of all the
People, and was carried thence in the arms of his Servants to the aforesaid
School or Englishmen, where he died the third night after; wherewith the Pope
and all Rome remained astonished, and the Pope sent presently into England, to
know of the King whether he would pardon him, and suffer his Body to be buried
in Christian Sepulcher; which King Ethelston, after consultation had with the
rest of his Nobility, and by the earnest intercession of Duke Alfred's Friends,
was content that he should be so buried; but yet by Sentence of the whole Realm
the Possessions of the said Alfred were adjudg'd to the King's use, who
bestowed them all upon Churches and Monasteries, to the Honor of God and St.
Peter, which had given this Judgment in the Controversy.

9. All this is testified by the said King's Charter recorded by Will. of
Malmsb. and recited by Fox; Malm. l. 2. de gest. Reg. Angl. fol. 28.
and the said Charter toward the end has these words: Et sic judicata est
mihi tot a possessio ejus in magnis and modicis, quam Deo and Sancto Petro
dedi, nec justius novi quam Deo and Sancto Petro hanc possessionem dare, qui
emulum meum in conspectu omnium cadere fecerunt, and mihi prosperitatem Regni
largiti sunt; And by this means the whole Possession both great and small (of
Duke Alfred) was adjudged unto me, which I gave unto God and to St. Peter; nor
do I know to whom I should more justly give the same, than to God and to St.
Peter, who made my Adversary to fall down in the sight of all men, and gave
unto me the Prosperity of my Kingdom. Thus wrote he about the year of Christ
933, as John Fox counts; and I marvel he would relate this Story, being so
much against himself and his Religion, and in confirmation of ours, Miracles
wrought in Rome in confirmation of Catholic Religion, an. 933.
as it is; for that it shows that God and St. Peter in those days wrought
Miracles in Rome, when Fox says that the Faith and Religion of Rome was far
out of order from the true Gospel: But this is the misery and calamity of this
poor Fellow and his Cause (as often before I have noted) that either he must
write nothing at all of these Times and Ages, or else he must write Testimonies
against himself.

Fox p. 126.
10. I will give you one short Example more, where he allegeth us a Narration of
a very old Writer, which he says he had in Manuscript lent him by one named
William Carre, and thereupon he cites it still by the name of Historia
Cariana; Ex vetusto exemplari hist. Carianae.
this Story being written (as it seems) in those Ages, and of the Miseries
that happened to England by the Incursions of Danes and other Infidels, seeks
out the causes of God's wrath in this behalf, saying thus: In Anglorum quidem
Ecclesia primitiva, Religio clarissime splenduit, etc. In the primitive Church
of England Religion did most clearly shine, insomuch that Kings, Queens,
Princes, Dukes, Consuls, Barons, and Rulers of Churches, incensed with the
desire of the Kingdom of Heaven, labored and stirred (as it were) amongst
themselves to enter into Monastical Life, and into voluntary Exile and
Solitariness, forsaking all to follow their Lord; where in process of time all
Virtue so much decayed among them, that in Fraud and Treachery none seemed like
unto them; neither was to them any thing odious or hateful, but Piety and
Justice; nor any thing in price and honor, but Civil War and shedding Blood:
Wherefore Almighty God sent upon them Pagan And Cruel Nations like swarms of
Bees.

Fox relates matters against himself.
11. This relates Fox out of his Carian Story; and I know not to what end he
should relate it, but only to show that while Englishmen lived Godly according
to the fashion of their primitive Church, they esteemed and honored highly
Religious and Monastical Life, and many leaving the World, with the Pleasures
and Possessions thereof, entered into that Religious Course, endeavoring to
follow and imitate their Lord and Master therein, and that so long was England
happy and blessed by God: To which effect if John Fox do allege the same, then
is it evident what a good Conclusion he does make against himself and his
Religion at this day, that are such professed Enemies to that kind of life so
highly here commended, and consequently the Relator thereof does show himself
to be as well John Fool as John Fox, not considering what makes for him or
against him.

12. But to the end that we should not think that he has made Peace or
Friendship with Monks for all this, or that he likes their Life or Profession
any thing the better for so many praises given them by ancient Authors, he
scoldeth at them every where and upon every occasion, writing over the Pages
and Titles of his Book these Superscriptions: Monks, Superstitious Monks, Monks
married, Monks mere Laymen in old times, and the like. And if I should number
up the manifest Lies which the miserable and poor spiteful Fellow inventeth for
some show of proof, you would take pity of Him, and not of the Monks. You shall
hear one short Discourse of his about them, and thereby you may judge of the
rest.

13. Monks (says he) were nothing else in old time, Fox p. 138. A lying
Discourse of Fox about Monks.
but Laymen leading a more stricter Trade of Life, as may sufficiently appear
by Augustine, lib. de moribus Ecclesiae, cap. 3. Item lib. de oper. Monachorum.
Item Ep. ad Aurelium. Also by Hieron. ad Heliodorum, writing these words, Alia
Monachorum est causa, alia Clericorum: Clerici pascunt Oves, ego pascor. One
thing pertains to Monks, another thing to them of the Clergy: They of the
Clergy feed the Flock, I am fed, etc. By all which is evident, that Monks were
no other in former Ages of the Church, but only Laymen, differing from
Priests, etc.

14. Thus writes Fox; which alone were sufficient to show his peevish Fraud
and Folly in all his Writings. For albeit St. Augustine, in the places by him
quoted, had written any such thing as he affirms, (which is quite false, and
so shall the Reader find that will examine the places, Whether Monks were mere
Laymen in old time, or no?
) yet the very words of St. Hierom by Fox himself adjoined do clearly interpret
both his own and St. Augustin's meaning, and convince Fox for a mere malevolent
Caviller; for that St. Hierom does not deny that Monks are Clergymen or
Priests, for then he should deny himself to have been a Priest, or of the
Clergy, seeing he confesses himself to be a Monk: but his meaning is to show
the different End and Office of some Clergymen (to wit, Secular Priests and
Bishops that have care of Souls) from Monks; for that the one do attend
principally to Action, the other to Contemplation; the one to Preaching, the
other to Praying; the one to feed others, the others to be fed; in which latter
number St. Hierom for humility puts also himself, whom yet I think John Fox
will not affirm to have been a mere Layman, and not Priest and Clergyman. And
so is this cavil of his against Monks (that in old time they were Laymen)
showed to be most vain and malicious: For what will he say of St. Basil, St.
Nazianzen, St. Augustine, St. Gregory? were they not Monks, Priests, and Bishops
also? how then were Monks merely Laymen in old time?

15. The like notorious Folly, conjoined with Falsehood, he uses to prove
married Monks, alleging St. Athanasius's words, Epist. ad Diacont. qui ait, se
novisse and Monachos and Episcopos conjuges and liberorum patres: who says,
that he knew both Monks and Bishops married men, and Fathers of Children. But
what proves this? Do not we see every day, even now in our Church, both
Bishops, Priests, and Religious men, that have once been married, and some of
them also to have had Children, and after the death of their Wives to have
entered into Ecclesiastical and Religious Orders? What fond deluding of his
Reader is this? He should have proved that they had married after they had been
Priests or Monks, and then had he said somewhat: But this he could not do, and
so thought best to make a fond flourish of the other.

16. Nay, in the very Greek Church at this day, where Priests are permitted
that were married before, though their Wives be living, yet if their said Wives
die, they are not permitted to marry again. And as for Monks, (out of which
Order only Bishops are made in that Church) they were never permitted to marry
after their profession of Religion. Epiph. l. 2. tom. 1.
Nay, St. Epiphanius (a chief Pillar of that Church when it was perfectly
Catholic, about 1200 years agone) says plainly, (as the Magdeburgians also
allege him,) That the holy Church of God admitted not in his days any man to
Priesthood, or Episcopal Dignity, that either married the second time, or did
not abstain from conversation with his first Wife, Magd. cent. 4. c. 4. p. 303.
if she lived, after he was admitted to Priesthood: Revera (says he) non
suscipit sancta Dei praedicatio post Christi adventum eos, qui a nuptiis,
mortua ipsorum uxore, secundis nuptiis conjuncti sunt, propter excellentem
Sacerdotii Honorem and Dignitatem. Et haec certe Sancta Dei Ecclesia cum
sinceritate observat, etc. In very truth the holy preaching of God after the
coming of Christ does not admit those to be Priests, who after their first
Marriage, and their Wife dead, do join themselves again in second Marriage. And
this does the holy Church of God observe with sincerity, in respect of the
excellent Honor and Dignity of Priesthood, etc. So says Epiphanius, and adds
presently, Epiph. ibid.
Sed adhuc viventem and liberos gignentem, etc. "But further than this, the
said holy Church of Christ does not admit to Priesthood a man of one Wife, if
he live and get Children as before; but only she admits Him to be a Deacon,
Priest, Bishop, or Subdeacon, (especially where the Clergy is sincere) who is
content to contain from his Wife that he used before, or live in Widowhood if
his Wife be dead.

A clear testimony of St. Epiphanius for the Continency of Monks and Priests in
his days.
17. Thus writes this holy Doctor, not only of his own Judgment, but of the
whole Consent of the Universal Catholic Church in his days; not only of Monks,
that make a more strict profession of Chastity, but of all Clergymen also that
lived in Holy Orders, to wit, Subdeacons, Deacons, Priests, and Bishopss. Of
whom thus much be spoken by occasion of John Fox his notorious Lie, That Monks
were only Lay men, and married in old time. And by this we may see his
affection toward Them and their Profession. And there were no end, if I should
prosecute all his peevish picking of quarrels against them, upon every
occasion, or without occasion, thereby to show his Heretical Stomach in that
behalf. One only Example I will show you more, and so make an end.

A notable story of K. Alfred, how he received comfort in his tribulation by
St. Cuthbert.
18. There is a Story recorded by William of Malmsbury, and other ancient
authentical Authors (as Fox himself confesses) touching our foresaid famous
English King Alfred, fourth Son to the forenamed King Ethelwolf, and Nephew to
King Egbert, brought up in Rome by Pope Leo IV. (as has been said) who being
driven into great Extremities by the Conquest of the Danes against him, was
relieved and comforted by the appearance of St. Cuthbert, miraculously
foretelling him what should succeed in those Wars, and confirming the same with
other Predictions also, which afterward were fulfilled: Which Story, though it
be one of the most rare that is to be read in our English Histories, and with
most comfort also by him that will consider it with attention and indifferency;
and testified also unto us as authentically as any Story may be in this kind,
(not only by the said Malmsbury above 500 years agone, but by diverse others in
like manner, and of like credit, as Fox himself is forced to confess:) yet, for
that St. Cuthbert, principal Actor therein, was an unmarried Monk, he cannot
abide the Story, but calls it a dreaming fable, and so does pretermit the
same in four words. I shall recount it as briefly as I can out of Malmsbury:
Solebat ipse (says he, Malm. l. 2. de Reg. Angl. fol. 23.
meaning King Alfred) in tempora postea faeliciora reductus, casus suos
jucunda, hilarique comitate familiaribus exponere, qualiterque per B. Cuthberti
meritum eos evaserit, etc.

19. King Alfred was wont afterward, when he was brought from his misery to
more happy times, to recount pleasantly and courteously to his familiar Friends
the Chances and Calamities which he had passed, and how he had escaped them by
the Merit and Benefit of blessed S. Cuthbert, etc. So begins Malmsbury his
Narration; the sum whereof is this:

20. King Alfred and his Ancestors having lost unto the Danes all the North,
East, and West parts of England, he had only three Shires to hide himself in
upon the South Sea, to wit, Somersetshire, Hampshire and Wiltshire, whither
also the Danes followed him with a great Army under their Captain Gormond: And
the poor King being destitute of all human help, wanting both Money, Victuals,
and Men, (for all forsook him upon fear) he had no other refuge for saving his
Life, than with a few trusty Servants of his, and his Mother (the doleful
Queen) to fly into a little Island in Somersetshire, called then Adaling,
(wholly beset with Waters and Mire in the midst of marishy ground, and a little
Wood joined thereunto) to hide themselves in, where himself and his Mother
being lodged in a certain Swineherd's Cottage, the rest made shift for
themselves as they might, lying on the ground. The pitiful case of K. Alfred
pressed by the Danes, an. 879.
But two things for the present pressed them most: The first, hunger for want
of Victuals; the second, fear of Gormond's Camp that lay so near them.
Wherefore sending forth his men to seek some Fish by night, (for that they
durst not show themselves by day) the King and his Mother with woeful hearts
reposed a little their weary Bodies and Minds in the said Swineherd's House;
and being entered into a little slumber, Behold (says the Story) there appeared
to the King St. Cuthbert, telling him both his Name, and that he was sent to
him by God to comfort him, and to tell him, That albeit his Justice had
hitherto chastened English- men for their sins by the Sword of the Danes, yet
that he would not extinguish them, in respect of so many Saints that had been
of that Nation; and from this day forward would set them up again; Modo tandem
Deus indigenarum, Malm. ibid.
Sanctorum meritis super eam misericordiae oculo respicit. Now at length God,
for the Merits of English Saints, does look upon England with the eye of mercy.
He told him further, That himself from this state of extreme misery should be
restored very shortly to a flourishing state of his Kingdom: For which he gave
him presently a sign or token, saying, That albeit that night was a very
contrary time to Fishers, both for that all Rivers were frozen, and a little
Rain being fallen upon the same, had made it unfit for men to travel in that
Art; yet his men should come home all laden with incredible abundance of Fish.
Thus he told him, persuading him, that when he should see all these things
performed, he should remember to be thankful to God and his Servants for their
favor toward him, and so departed.

21. The King being wonderfully comforted with this Vision, The appearing of
St. Cuthbert to K. Alfred and his Mother.
awaked for Joy, and calling upon his Mother the Queen, who lay near him, and
had enjoyed the self-same Vision, they recounted together all particulars,
expecting with greediness when their Servants should return from fishing to
confirm the same; which soon after ensued; Et tantam piscium copiam exhibuere
(says Malmsbury) ut cujusvis magni exercitus ingluviem, exaturare posse
videretur; And they brought with them to the King so great store of Fish, as it
might seem to be sufficient to satisfy the hunger of never so great an Army;
wherewith King Alfred being encouraged, he adventured a strange attempt, which
was to go into the Danes Camp with one Servant only, feigning themselves
Musicians, A strange attempt and victory of K. Alfred upon the vision of St.
Cuthbert.
where with singing of Songs and sounding their Instruments they passed through
the whole Camp, discovering their disorders, and where and when they were more
weak; and so retiring themselves to their Company, and arming such men as he
could, secretly set upon them with such fierceness, as they killed many, and
put the rest to flight, and constrained the Danes with their said King Gormond,
to demand Peace and offer Hostages for the same. Which were accepted upon two
conditions: The first, That all of them should retire out of England, except
such as would be Christians: The second, That these Christian Danes should be
content only with the Kingdom of the East Angles, to wit, Norfolk and Suffolk.
All which was admitted, and King Gormond himself made a Christian, and God-son
to King Alfred, accepting the said Kingdom of the East Angles as tributary unto
him; and from this day forward King Alfred went gaining more and more, putting
his Enemies to flight, until he had recovered his whole Kingdom again. And this
both He and his Mother were wont to recount all the days of their life after;
and the Events themselves did evidently declare the truth of the Miracle,
recorded (as has been said) by our best Historiographers. All which
notwithstanding, John Fox writes thus: Fox p. 128. The great impudence of John
Fox in rejecting all our ancient Historiographers.
Let us pass over these dreaming Fables, though they be testified by diverse
Authors, as William Malmsb. Polychronicon, Roger Hoveden, Jornalensis, and many
more, etc. Whereby you may see what a faithless Ecclesiastical Chronicler this
Fox is, that passes over things of purpose that are left written by so many
grave Authors; and then how perfidious he shows himself in censuring for
dreaming Fables so important Miracles showed by God for testification of his
Love and Providence toward our Country, and the saving and restoring thereof.

22. For which Infidelity this miserable Fellow has no other Argument
(excepting only his foresaid hatred to St. Cuthbert and other Monks) but only
for that the Vision was in time of sleep or slumbring, and for that cause he
calls it a dreaming Fable. Which kind of Argument if we should admit, we must
evacuate also, and bring in doubt and contempt, most of the principal Mysteries
and Miracles of the Old and New Testament; where commonly things were revealed
to God's Servants in Visions by sleep, How God does appear and reveal matters
oftentimes in sleep.
as Genesis 28. Vidit Jacob in somnis Scalam stantem; Jacob did see a Ladder in
his sleep. And again in the same Book, cap. 31. Dixit Angelus Dei ad me in
somnis; The Angel of God said unto me in my sleep. Joseph also had all his
affairs revealed unto him not only in sleep, but also per somnia, by Dreams
indeed, Genesis 37.40, 41.

23. The like is related of Saul, 3 Reg. 3. and of Daniel, Dan. 7. And finally,
God promises by Joel of Saints of the New Testament, senes vestri somnia
somniabunt, Joel 2. which St. Peter in the Acts of the Apostles, (cap. 2. ver.
17.) interprets of true Visions sent from God by the Holy Ghost, saying, This
is the meaning of that which is said by the Prophet Joel, which shall come to
pass in the latter days, I shall pour out of my Spirit upon all Flesh, and your
Sons shall prophetize, and your Daughters and young men shall see Visions, and
your elder people shall dream Dreams, etc. And finally, if we consider the
Story of our Savior's Infancy recounted by St. Matthew's Gospel, we shall find
the most part of his Mysteries revealed to our Blessed Lady and St. Joseph in
sleep; as, Mat. 1.20. Gabriel apparuit Joseph in somnis; The Angel Gabriel
appeared to St. Joseph in his sleep, and told him that he should not put away
his Wife. And then in the 2d. chapter, talking of the Magi, He says, Et
responso accepto in somnis; They receiving an answer from God in their sleep
that they should not return to Herod, they returned another away. Who being
gone, the Evangelist says again, Ecce, Angelus Domini apparuit in somnis;
Behold the Angel of God appeared to Joseph again in his sleep, and warned him
to fly into Egypt. And then, when he should come out of Egypt again, he
being in doubt whither to go, Admonitus in somnis secessit in parts Galileae;
He being warned in his sleep what to do, went and carried Christ into the parts
of Galile, etc.

24. Lo here a very frequent custom of Almighty God to warn men of his will in
time of sleep! And albeit all kind of Dreams or Representations in time of
sleep be not easily to be credited, as the 2 Paral. 33. Levit. 19. Deuteronomy. 18.
Psalm. 72. Number. 12.6.
Scripture in other places does admonish us, yet God says also, Si quis fuerit
inter vos Propheta Domini in Visione apparebo ei, and per somnum loquar ad
illum; If there be any among you that is a Prophet of God (to whom I mean to
reveal my secrets) to him I will appear in Vision, and to him will I speak in
sleep. And this is sufficient to show that all are not dreaming Fables which
are uttered in sleep, as the incredulous and infidel humor of John Fox and of
modern Heretics would have it seem when it is against them.

25. But in their own Sectaries they do admire and extol any thing never so
fantastical, yea though it be a Vision or Revelation from the Devil himself; for
so Luther in his Book about the abrogating of the Mass does recount of himself,
how the Devil did appear unto him by night, Luth. l. de abroganda Missa.
and reasoned with him against the said Mass. And in another Book written to
the Senators of the Cities of Germany, and talking of other Sectaries that did
brag of Visions, Voices, and Apparitions of Spirits, (to wit, the Swinkfeldians
and Anabaptists) says thus of himself: Ego quoque fui in Spiritu, atque etiam
vidi spiritus (si omnino de propriis gloriandum est) forte plus quam ipsi adhuc
intra annum videbunt; Luth. l. Teutonico ad Senator. Civit. Germ.
I my self was also in Spirit, (which he speaks in imitation of St. John the
Evangelist in his Revelations) and have seen also Spirits, Apoc. 1.10.
(if I must needs glory of my own Gifts) and perhaps I have seen more Spirits
than they which brag so much of seeing Spirits will see within one year. This
said Luther of himself; and hence we must imagine that he so often said of
himself, Luth. cont. Reg. Angl.
Certum se esse Doctrinam suam e Coelo esse petitam; That he was certain his
Doctrine came from Heaven. And Sleydan everywhere in his Story does compare Him
and his Visions and Revelations with those of the old Prophets.

26. Carolstadius also, a chief beginner of the Sacramentary Doctrine, braggeth
(as Kemnitius a chief Lutheran reports) that it was revealed unto him from
Heaven how he should understand those words, Hoc est Corpus meum, Kemnit. in
repet de Eucharist. art. 31.
by different pointing of the Sentence from that which it was wont to be. And
Zuinglius affirms of himself, That he had a Voice by night from Heaven,
Zuingl. in subsid. de Euch.
(which yet Luther says was from the Devil) telling him how he should expound
those words, Hoc est Corpus meum, contrary to all Antiquity, by the Example of
those words of Exodus, Phase, idest, transitus Domini, etc. Mat. 16. Exodus
12.11.
And we are a little after to show more at large in this Infra cap. 8. part. 2.
Treatise how John Fox also had a Voice and Revelation from Heaven on a Sunday
morning as he lay in his Bed, about understanding of the mystical Numbers in
the Apocalypse of Forty-two months assigned by the Angel to the Reign of
Antichrist. Apoc. 13.5.


27. But if we should recount all the Visions and Revelations which John Fox
does attribute to his ragged Martyrs that he sets down in his Calendar, The
visions of John Fox's Martyrs.
and how highly he would have them esteemed, there would be no end. Let any man
read what he writes of the Visions and Voices that Samuel a Minister of
Ipswich had in his sleep when he was in Prison: He fell into a sleep, Fox p.
1547. col. 1. number. 46.
(says Fox) at which time one clad in white seemed to stand before him,
comforting him in these words, Samuel, Samuel, be of good cheer, etc. No less
memorable is it (says Fox) and worthy to be noted, touching the three Ladders
which the said Samuel saw in his sleep set up toward Heaven, whereof one was
greater and longer than the other at the beginning, but after all three made
equal. Which Vision Fox does expound thus: That Samuel being in Prison with two
Women of his Sect, Agnes Potten a Beer-brewer's Wife, and Joan Trunchfield a
Shoemaker's Wife, of the same Town; Agnes and Joan were persuaded by Samuel to
burn with him, as after they did: And consequently (says Fox) though Samuel was
the greater Ladder at the beginning, and higher toward Heaven (as being a
Minister or Preacher) and the other two lesser Ladders signified by the
Brewer's and Shoemaker's Wives; yet at length were they all three made equal by
the Glory of Martyrdom.

28. Thus reasons Fox. And then coming to speak of the same two Women apart,
he shows, that Agnes Potten, the Brewer's Wife, had Visions also: Fox p. 1398.
Potten 's Wife (says he) in a night a little before her death, being asleep
in her bed, saw a bright burning fire right up as a Pole. By which Vision he
shows, that the Shoemaker's Wife, who was fearful to die, and would have
drawn back, was encouraged by the other also to go to the fire. And do you not
see here the Spirit of the Circumcellians and Massilians, Ridiculous Dreams and
Visions allowed by John Fox in his Martyrs.
to run wilfully to death? From this, Fox passes to recount another strange
prophetical Dream of one William Hunter, an Apprentice of London Nineteen years
old, who would needs be burned also, and nothing could keep him from it; much
encouraged, as it seems, by his Dream.

29. And from this again he runs to other more solemn Dreams and Visions of
John Rough, a Scottish Minister, Director of a certain secret Protestant
Congregation in London in Queen Mary's days; and of one Cuthbert Sympson, the
Deacon or Clerk of that Congregation; which two had Dreams and Visions, the one
concerning the other of them. Which Fox thinks worthy of so great
consideration, as he writes thus in his Margin: The Visions sent to God's
Saints concerning their afflictions. Now then touching the first, St. Rough,
you must know, that he had been a Dominican Friar in Scotland, (as Fox
confesses) and from thence running away into England gate himself a Mate, or
(as he calls her) a Kate; with whom lying in bed, he had a Vision of his
Fellow Sympson, The Scottish Apostate Friars Dream and his Kate. Fox p. 1843.
col. 1. number. 44.
which Fox recounteth in these words: The Friday at night before Master Rough
was taken, being in his bed he dreamed that he saw two of the Guard leading
Cuthbert Sympson, Deacon of his Congregation, to Prison, and that he had the
Book about him wherein were written the Names of all them that were of that
Congregation. Whereupon being sore troubled, he awaked, and called to his Wife,
Kate, strike light, for I am much troubled with my Brother Cuthbert this night.
And when she had so done, he gave himself to read on his Book a while; and then
feeling sleep to come upon him, he put out the Candle, and so gave himself to
rest again; and being asleep, he dreamed the like Dream; and awaking therewith,
he said, O, Kate! my Brother Cuthbert is gone. So they lighted a Candle again,
and rose. This is the Vision of the Scottish Friar, which caused his Kate twice
to strike fire and light the Candle, as you see.

30. The other Vision of his Clerk Simpson (that kept the Beadroll of the Names
of his secret Congregation, and was afterward burned with him in Smithfield)
Fox describes in this manner: Before Simpson 's burning (says he) being in
the Bishop's Cole-house in the Stocks, he had a very strange Vision or
Apparition, which he himself with his own mouth declared to the Godly Learned
Man Master Austen, and to his own Wife, etc. Thus begins Fox to relate the
Vision; noting first (as you see) that he spoke it with his own mouth, as though
it were a great matter. And then he enters to make a long Apology against the
Papists in defense of these Visions, though theirs be not to be believed.

Fox p. 1844.
31. They will ask me (says he) why should I more require these to be credited
of them, than theirs of us? This is the demand which he frames in behalf of
the Papists; and I think no man will say but that it is reasonable. Let us hear
his Answer: First (says he) I write not this, binding any man precisely to
believe the same, as they do theirs. Lo here is a Foolery with a manifest Lie;
the Foolery is in telling us so precise believing all Visions and Dreams, which
no wise man ever thought or spoke; the Lie is in that he affirms us to teach
that such precise belief is necessary in Visions among us. But let us hear him
further in his Answer to the former demand: Ibid.
It is no Argument (says he) to reason thus: Visions be not true in some;
Ergo, they be true in none. This part we grant; but what is this to his purpose
or proof? His meaning is, that Ours be not true Visions, and His be. But who
shall be Judges? He and His would be. But this is no reason; and we on the
contrary do say much more equally, How far Catholics give credit to Visions,
and how they examine the same.
Nec mihi, nec tibi; neither He, nor We, as particular men, ought to judge of
these things; but the Catholic Church, which by her Bishops and Pastors does
examine the Proofs, Weight and Moment of every one of these things that fall
out, and according to the Quality, Merit and Condition of them to whom they
happen, as also of the Witnesses and Testimonies whereby they are proved, she
does judge of the Truth or Probability of every thing: And to Her therefore we
stand, and not to the fantastical broken Brains of John Fox, that makes
Miracles and Visions where he lists, and authorizeth or discrediteth them,
when it pleases him again.

32. And thus much by occasion of St. Cuthbert's Apparition to King Alfred;
Heretical hatred against St. Cuthbert.
the Holiness of which Saint, how highly it was esteemed in the days of this
King, about the year of Christ 878, you hereby see, himself living 200 years
before, for that he died upon the year 687, the 20th of March, which day has
ever since been celebrated with perpetual Memory, not only by the Church of
England, but also by the Universal; and that most worthily, as may appear by
his Life written largely by Saint Bede. Bed. l. 4. hist. c. 27, 28, 29. vid
Praefat. Bal. cent. 1. script. Brit. in Cuthb.
Howsoever John Fox does speak contemptuously of him here, and his Fellow John
Bale does revile him: But for what, think you? You shall hear his complaints:
Omnia ad amussim Monachus didicit quae ad Monachismum spectare novit, nulla
penitus de Evangelio facta mentioone; He being a Monk, learned exactly all
things that appertained to the Life of Monks, but never made mention of the
Gospel. And is this likely or probable, think you, that he never so much as
mentioned the Gospel, seeing that Monks Profession and form of Life is taken
out of the Gospel? Mat. 19. Bal. ibid.
But what more ensues? You shall hear the Apostata utter his Spirit: Faemineum
gensn (says he) exosum ei erat, etc. Women-kind was hateful unto him, etc.
This is the same Accusation that the Mgdeburgians laid to St. Cyprian, (if
Supra part 1. cap. 6.
you remember) for that he praised Virginity. But how does Bale gather this
hatred of St. Cuthbert against Womankind? It follows: Decretum fecit contra
Mulieres, Ibid.
ne ejus ingrederentur Monasteria; He made a Decree against Women, that they
should not enter into his Monasteries? This Decree Friar Bale, that loved
Womankind, liked not. But he adds a further Accusation: Ibid.
That in the second year of his Bishopric St. Cuthbert left the same, and no
less hypocritically than idly made himself an Anchorite, leading for the rest
of his days a solitary retired life. See what matters they pick out to object
unto God's Saints, which themselves cannot or will not imitate.

33. Finally, to end this Chapter, and therewith this fourth station or Time,
John Fox, after much trifling here and there, sets down in the last words of
this his third Book a very brief Catalogue of the Archbishops of Canterbury of
these Ages, with this Title: The Archbishops of Canterbury of this time scoffed
at by Fox.
The Names and Orders of the Archbishops of Canterbury from the time of King
Egbert to William the Conqueror, etc. Which he begins with Etheldrenus, that
was the Eighteenth in Order, and ends with Lanfrancus, who was the
Thirty-fourth, making certain Notes, or rather Scoffs and Jests upon them all;
especially upon those that were most renowned for their Holiness and multitude
of Miracles, recorded by old Writers; as namely, St. Dunstan, of whom Malmsbury
and others having left written, That, Malm. l. 1. de gest. Pont. Ang. fol. 115.
among other Miracles happened unto him, one was, that his Harp (wherewith he
was wont in his Youth to praise God, after the imitation of King David,)
hanging up by his Bedside on a Pin upon the Wall, he heard one night a voice
of Angels sing in his Church this Verse; Gaudent in Coelis animae Sanctorum: at
which time his said Harp also gave a sound of it self, moved either by the said
Angels, or otherwise by Miracle from God. Whereat John Fox in his Heretical
Vein makes much Pastime, though (as already you have heard, and shall do more in
the third Part of this Book) he esteems highly certain devised Miracles of
his miserable Martyrs. And so much of this.

34. But now, as touching the principal Point of all this Discourse, (which
ought to have been the visible deduction of his Church from King Egbert to
William the Conqueror) there is not one word spoken; for all that he writes is
of our Church, and this in Lies, Fables, Scoffs, and Taunts, (as you see) but
of his own Church nothing, no not so much as of any one person, that in all
agreed with him or his Church in these days concerning Religion. Nay, let him
show us any one Man, Woman, or Child, Heretic or Catholic, in all this time,
who was fully of the Religion now held in England; and that these believed no
more nor less than Fox and his Fellows do at this day, and we will yield that
he has brought us forth some visible Church and Succession thereof, though it be
but of three or four persons.

35. Lo with how little we are content! And seeing Fox will not dare, nor any
man for him (in my opinion) to take upon him this Enterprise, to wit, to show
the succession of any three or four persons throughout the space of this first
1000 years after Christ, who did in all things believe and profess the Faith
and Religion that now is held in England, (whereunto also John Fox himself
agreed fully while he lived, as may appear by the Puritanical Points in his
Story, which he commends and defends in the Lives of Rogers, Hooper, and
other their first English Parents, as after shall be showed:) For So Much (I say)
as this is so, and that never any three persons, of what Condition, Heretics
seek to pull down, and not to build up.
Religion, Sex or Sect soever, can be showed to have agreed fully in the
Protestants Religion that now in England is professed, not only for the time of
these first thousand years of Christianity, but neither for the other five
hundred next following; Part. 3.
nor that our English Protestants of these days will bind themselves in all and
every Point of Doctrine, Faith and Belief, to stand to any one visible
Congregation, Church, Conventicle, Society, or number of men whatsoever,
professing the Name of Christ, that have been known to live upon Earth, from
the Apostles time downward, but that they do vary from them in one Article of
Belief or other.

36. If all this (I say) be true and most certain, and made evident by this our
deduction, and that we offer to join any further Issue that shall be demanded
with any Protestant living upon this point, that shall have any thing to say or
reply in this matter. This being so, then is it evident what a Succession of
the Protestants Church John Fox brings, or is able to bring down, or any man
for him, notwithstanding his vain brag and flourish in the first Title of his
Book, Fox in the Title of his Acts and Monuments.
That he would set down the whole race and course of the Church, etc. The Folly
and Falsehood of which flourish shall better also appear by that which ensues
from the Conquest downward.

CHAP. VII.
The fifth station of Time, containing other Three hundred years from William
the Conqueror unto the time of John Wickliff; wherein is examined, Whether the
Catholic Roman Church did perish in this time, as Fox affirms? Here is
treated also of Pope Hildebrand, and of the Marriage of Priests.

YOU have seen, good Reader, by our former Treatse, The fifth station from an.
Dom. 1066, to 1370.
how brief and barren John Fox has been hitherto in relating unto us
Ecclesiastical matters for more than a thousand years: For though he promised in
the first Title of his Book, (as before you have heard) that he would set forth
at large the whole race and course of the Church from the primitive Age unto
these latter Times of ours, etc. And again in another Title, Fox in his Title.
Fox p. 1.
that he was to lay before us the Acts and Monuments of Christian Martyrs, and
matters Ecclesiastical passed in the Church of Christ, from the primitive
beginning to these our days, as well in other Countries as namely in the Realms
of England, and also of Scotland, discoursed at large, The brevity and
barrenness of John Fox in preforming his promise.
etc. yet this large Discourse for more than a thousand years is concluded by
him in less than seventy Leaves of Paper, whereof almost fifty are of
impertinent matter, to wit, of certain Differences which he would pick out
between the old Roman Church and that which is now; and in the relation of the
first Ten Persecutions under Heathen Emperors, which before we have declared
how little they appertain to his Argument or Subject taken in hand, which was
to set down the race and course of the whole Church. And this being so, you may
consider what store of Ecclesiastical matters he finds to his purpose in
these first thousand years, seeing he scarce spends thirty whole Leaves
therein, whereof also the far greater part (I mean of that he writes in these
few Leaves) is mere temporal or impertinent, as in part you have heard. And how
then does he tell us of Ecclesiastical matters discoursed at large, etc. and of
the whole race and course of the Church set forth largely by him, etc. Do you
see how these men do face, and lie to deceive their Readers?

2. But let us not complain (I pray you) of brevity or barrenness in John Fox,
nor lack of Volume, seeing he has set forth the greatest, perhaps, that ever
was in our English Tongue: And if he have been over-short for the thousand
years past, unto the time of William the Conqueror, he will as much exceed in
length now for the other five hundred years that are to ensue from the
Conqueror to Queen Elizabeth, upon which time he bestows above 900 Leaves.
And the reason of this so notable difference or inequality is that which we
have touched before, to wit, Why Fox writes so little of the former Ages, and
so largely of the sequent.
that he finding the whole course of these former Times and Ages of the
Christian Church to be against him, nor daring openly to reject that Church,
nor manifestly to join with her Enemies adjudg'd by her for Heretics; he chose
to speak as little of those Times and Affairs as he could. But now he has
taken another resolution much more desperate in hand; which is, to deny Our
Church to be any longer a Church, and to set up another of His in her place, by
which means he will come to have matter enough; for that this being supposed,
and he presuming that all the Acts and Monuments of this Church (I mean the
General Roman Church) received hitherto throughout the World for Christ's
Church, are wicked and rebellious unto God, and Acts of the Devil's Synagogue,
from the time that John Fox assigns of her Fall and Apostasy; and that on the
contrary side, all the Writings, Actions, and Gests of all sorts of Heretics
against this Church from that time, How Fox comes to increase his latter Books.
are the Acts and Monuments of the true Church of Christ: Supposing all this, I
say, (as Fox does) there cannot want matter, either on the one side or the
other, to fill up Volumes: And the lower he passes downward, the more matter
he finds, for that Sects and Sectaries increasing daily, (whom he registreth
for Saints and Pillars of his Church) the Volume of his Book must needs grow
greatly. And so is it seen by this fourth Book, wherein from the Conquest to
the latter-end of King Edward III's Reign, when Wickliff began, (containing 300
years, to wit, from Anno Domini 1066, to 1370,) there are spent above 100
Leaves of Paper; which is much more than was in the former 1066 years. But in
the fifth Book from John Wickliff's time to King Henry VIII. (which are but 140
years) are contained upon the point of 200 Leaves; and then again from the
beginning of King Henry's Reign to the entrance of Q. Elizabeth, (being but
fifty years) he spends above 600 Leaves. And by this you may judge both of
the Subject and Substance of John Fox's huge Volume, though we are to look into
the same somewhat more particularly also as we pass it over in this and the
ensuing Chapters.

3. Well then, this being his device and resolution for the present, to have no
longer patience with our Church, but wholly to deny the same, his greatest
difficulty seems to be about the Time and Causes; to wit, where, or when, or
how, or upon what occasion, she perished or vanished away; for seeing she has
continued by his Confession also for so many Years and Ages, and come down unto
our days, under the self-same Succession of Bishops, Pastors and Teachers as
before, and consequently also with the self-same Doctrine and Religion, and with
the same external Power and Majesty which it was wont: it seems a very hard
thing upon the sudden either to annihilate so Great and Mighty a Kingdom, An
impossible device to annihilate this universal visible Church.
or (which is much more difficult) to make so strange a Metamorphosis and
Mutation in her, as that she having been hitherto the Church of Christ, his
Spouse, his Kingdom, his dearest Beloved, and beautified with his Graces,
directed by his Spirit, enriched with his most precious Gifts and Endowments,
and so acknowledged also by Fox' himself in former Ages; that now she should
become Christ's Enemy and Adversary upon the sudden, and the Kingdom of Satan,
his Eternal Foe, and yet to retain still the Name, Place, Estimation, and
external Dignity which she had before, professing with no less show of duty her
Obedience and Love to Christ, than in former times she was wont. A strange and
incredible mutation.
This Change and Metamorphosis (I say) is most wonderful, and incredible to all
those that believe Christ to be God, and to have been able to perform his
promise, that Hell-gates should never prevail against this Church. Wherefore we
are to examine somewhat more diligently in this Chapter, how this matter could
fall out, and when, and by what occasion come to pass; for that so great and
rare a Mutation as this is never fell out yet in the World before. Though
Temporal States and Kingdoms have had their changes; nay, all temporal
mutations of Empires, Kingdoms, States and Monarchies, have been made
principally to show the contrary stability and immutable continuation of
Christ's Church once planted in the World, as in part we have declared Sup. cap.
before, showing how that in all times and seasons, in all variety and
variations of States, People, Countries, and Dominions, (as well in England as
elsewhere) the Christian Catholic Religion remained one and the same among them
all. To which effect also is that notable Prophecy of Daniel, Dan. 2.44.
when (foretelling first the breaking and overthrow of all four Monarchies by
him mentioned) he adds, as a notorious opposition to the same, the stability
and immortality of Christ's Church and Kingdom once set on foot in these words:
The Prophecy of Daniel about the stability of Christ's Church.
In the days of these Kingdoms God of Heaven shall raise up a Kingdom that
shall never be dissipated, neither shall this Kingdom be given to another
people: This Kingdom shall consume and wear out all the other Kingdoms, but it
self shall stand for ever.

4. Thus says Daniel; and the most of these Points we have seen verified and
fulfilled already; for God of Heaven has raised this Kingdom and visible
Church of Christ, which then seemed a strange matter; he has increased and
continued the same for a thousand years and more, as Fox will confess, (which
is a longer time than any Temporal Monarchy lightly has continued without
change;) he has overthrown in this time and consumed the other Kingdoms and
Monarchies mentioned by him, Now remain the other two Clauses to be fulfilled
in like manner, to wit, That it shall stand for ever, (or, as Christ expounds
it, usque and consummationem saeculi, to to the Worlds end;) and then, quod
alteri populo non tradetur; that this Kingdom shall not be delivered over to
another People from that which possessed it from the beginning. The quite
contrary whereof teaches here John Fox, affirming this Church (that has been
accounted the true Church and Kingdom of Christ for a thousand years past) is
now no more his Church or Kingdom; nor these Popes, Bishops and Pastors (that
are found in her to have come down by continual Succession) are now no more the
true and lawful Guides or Governors thereof; but that it appertains to
others: and consequently this Kingdom of Christ is taken from them, and
delivered to another People, to wit, to the Berengarians, to the Waldenses, to
the Albanenses, to the Wickliffians, Lutherans, Zuinglians, and other like
people of latter Ages.

5. This is John Fox his mad Assertion, wherein you see he should prove two
Points: First, That our Church, is lost and fallen, and our Men rightly
dispossessed of the Interest thereof: And then, That his Men (to wit, these new
Sectaries) have entered into a just possession of that Name and Title of the
true Church: Both which Points we deny. You shall see how he begins to prove
the first; that is to say, the Fall and Overthrow of the Universal visible
Church, surnamed the Roman.

And thus hitherto (says he) stood the condition of the Church of Christ, In
his Protestation to the Church of England.
(meaning the next Ages before the Conquest) albeit not without some repugnance
and difficulty, yet in some mean state of the Truth and Verity, till the time
of Pope Hildebrand, called Gregory VII. which was near about the year 1080. and
of Pope Innocentius III. in the year 1215. by whom all was turned upside down,
all Order broken, true Doctrine defaced, Christian Faith extinguished, etc.

6. Here you see John Fox to assign two Times and two Popes, when and by whom
not only the true Church was overthrown, but Christian Faith also utterly
extinguished, (to wit, Gregory VII. and Innocentius III. two of the most
Renowned men both for Virtue and Learning that have possessed that See since
the time of our Conquest, or in many Ages before, if we will believe all the
ancient Authors that have written of them,) wherein I dare join Issue with Fox,
or any of his Cubs whatsoever that will defend him in this notorious slander
against these two worthy Men: For as for Innocentius III. he is affirmed to
have been one of the most excellent Popes for good Life and rare Learning that
for these thousand years held that See. Of whom Blondus, P. Innocent, 3. Blond.
decad. 2. l. 7. p. 297.
amongst other Authors, writes thus: Suavissimus erat in Galliis famae odor,
gravitatis, sanctitatis, ac vevum gestarum ejus Pontificis, etc. The fame and
scent of this Pope's Gravity, Holiness of Life, and Greatness of his Action,
was most sweet throughout all France, etc. And for his Learning, the same
Author says, Libros Doctrina plenos scripsit; Geneb. in chron. an. 1198.
Cicarell. in vit. Innocent. 3. Platin. ibid.
He wrote most Learned Books. In which kind diverse Authors do report that he
wrote more than most of the other Popes of Rome before his time put together.

7. And as for Gregory VII. albeit he had many Enemies stirred up against him
by the Emperor Henry IV. and others, whom he sought to punish and reform for
their Misbehavior; yet, if we will believe the chief Authors of that Age, and
those that lived either with him, or next unto him, (as Anselmus Archbishop of
Canterbury, Anselm. Ep. ad Abb. Hryfarg. Mar. Scotus. Lamb. Scaph. Vinc.
Gallus. Sigebert. Avent. and omnes in chron. an 1075, 1076, etc.
Marianus Scotus, Otho Frisingensis, Aeneas Sylvius, Lambertus
Schafaaburgensis, Vincentius Gallus, Abbas Vrspergensis, Aventinus, Sigibertus,
Tritemius, and many others) he was not only very Learned, Wise, and a Man of
great Courage in resisting the foresaid most dissolute Emperor, that lived
scandalously, and oppressed the Church, but also he was reputed of a most holy
Life, insomuch as God wrought diverse Miracles by him.

8. The very form of his Election, recorded by Platina, Sabellicus, and others,
About Pope Hildebrand, alias Gregory VII.
does show what he was, when they say, Elegimus hodie, 21 Maii Anno Domini
1072, in verum Christi Vicarium, Hildebrandum Archidiaconum, virum multae
Doctrinae, magnae Pietatis, Prudentiae, Justitiae, Constantiae, Religionis,
etc. "We have chosen this day, the 21st of May 1072, for true Vicar of Christ,
a Man of much Learning, great Piety, Prudence, Justice, Constancy, and
Religion, etc. This was the testimony of the whole Clergy of Rome, that knew
him better than John Fox and his Fellows. Against whom Lambertus
Schafnaburgensis, talking of his whole Life afterward, says, Signa and
Prodigia, quae per Grationes Gregorii Papae frequentius fiebant, and zelus ejus
fervent issimus pro Deo and Ecclesiasticis legibus satis eum contra venenatas
detractorum linguas communiebant; The Signs and Miracles which oftentimes were
done by the Prayers of Pope Gregory VII. and his most fervent Zeal for the
Honor of God and defense of Ecclesiastical Laws, did sufficiently defend him
against the venomous Tongues of Detractors.

9. Vincentius also Gallus in his History relates out of a more ancient
Historiographer than himself, named Gulielmus Historicus, Hildebrandum dono
prophetiae praeditum fuisse; That Hildebrand the Pope was endued with the gift
of Prophecy; which he shows by diverse particular Examples of Events foretold
by him. And this of Gregory VII.

The Vices of the Emperor Henry IV.
10. But what do the same Authors, yea Germans themselves, write of their
Emperor, his Enemy, Henry IV.? Surely it is shameful to report his Adulteries,
Symoniacal selling of Benefices, Robberies, and spoiling of poor particular
men, thrusting in wicked men into places of Prelates, and the like: Principes
Regni rogat (says Lambertus) ut patiantur ipsum Vxorem repudiare, An. Dom.
1069.
etc. He did request the Princes of the Empire that they would suffer him to
put away his Wife, telling them what the Pope by his Legate had opposed to the
contrary. Which being heard by them, they were of the Pope's Opinion: Principes
aiebant aeque censere Romans Pontificem; ita fractus magis, quam inflexus Rex ab
incepto abstinuit; The Princes affirmed, That the Bishop of Rome had reason to
determine as he did, and so the King (rather forced, than changed in mind)
abstained from his purposed Divorce.

11. Lo here the first beginning of falling out betwixt the Emperor and the
Pope; which was increased, for that two years after (as the same Author says)
the Pope deprived one Charles for Symony and Theft, to whom the Emperor had
sold for Money the Bishopric of Constance. And this he did by a Council of
Prelates and Princes held in Germany it self, the Emperor being present: Lamb.
Schaf. An. Dom. 1071.
Cum etiam (says he) Rex in Judicio assideret, causamque Caroli, quoad posset,
tueretur; Bishop Charles was deposed, notwithstanding that the King was present
in that Judgment, and defended him and his Cause as much as he could. And this
was an increase of the falling out between them: But the constancy (says the
same Author) and invincible mind of Hildebrand against Covetousness, Lamb. ibid.
did exclude all Arguments of Human Deceits and Subtilties.

Vrsp. an. Dom. 1068.
12. Vrspergensis in like manner, who lived in the same time, reckons up many
particulars of the Emperor's wicked behavior in these words: Coepit Principes
despicere, Nobiles opprimere; "He began to despise the Princes, oppress the
Nobles and Nobility, and give himself to Incontinency. Lib. 4. Annalium Boiorum.
Which Aventinus (an Author not misliked by the Protestants) utters more
particularly in these words: Henricum stupris, amoribus, impudicitiae, and
adulterii flagrasse infamia, nec amici quidem negant; The very friends of Henry
the Emperor do not deny but that he was infamous for his wicked life in
Lechery, Fornication, and Adultery.

13. And finally, not to name any more, Marianus Scotus (that lived in those
days) writes thus of the whole Controversy between them: Mar. Scot. in chron.
an 1075.
Gregory VII. (says he) being stirred up by the just clamors of Catholic Men,
and hearing the immanity of Henry the Emperor's wickedness, cried out against
by them, did excommunicate him for the same, but especially for the sin of
Simony, in buying and selling Bishoprics; which fact of the Pope did like very
well all good Catholic men, but displeased such as would buy and sell
Benefices, and were favorers of the said Emperor.

14. And thus much be spoken of the Learning, Lives and Virtue of these two
particular Popes, Gregory VII. and Innocentius III. whom John Fox would needs
have us believe that they had overturned God's Church, and extinguished
Christian Religion utterly in the World. But especially he rages every where,
and with greatest acerbity, against Gregory VII. dilating himself in many large
Discourses of that Argument, and telling so many and apparent Lies of Him, and
his Acts and Ends, as were a matter incredible to him that has not examined
them. Neither may I stand to recount them all, or the greater part (for it
would require a Volume) but by one or two you shall be able to judge of the
rest.

I read and find (says Fox) that in a Council held at Rome by Pope Hildebrand
and other Bishops, they did enact three things: First, Fox p. 158. c. 2
That no Priest hereafter should marry Wives: Secondly, That all such as were
married should be divorced. Thirdly, That none hereafter should be admitted to
the Order of Priesthood, but should swear perpetual Chastity.

15. Truly it is a strange thing to see and consider the wilful obstinacy and
precipitation of Heretics. Fox has gathered out three Points decreed in this
Council; which Council yet he cites not, nor any Author for it, and so with
more safety he plays the Davus. He leaves out a fourth Point, which was the
principal or rather only Point touching Priests Marriage handled in that
Council; to wit, That what Priest soever should be known to keep a Concubine
under pretense of his Wife, or should be known to have bought his Benefice by
Simony, and would not repent or amend, they were forbidden to enter the Church
and say Mass, and other men were forbidden to hear their Mass. With which
Decree many licentious Priests, that would not be restrained from their loose
Life, being offended; and many more Laymen, A great contradiction against Pope
Hildebrand for his Christian Zeal.
that depended on the said Emperor, taking their part, cried out against this
good Pope, for that he went about to reform these two scandalous Abuses, Simony
and Fornication, in the worser sort of Priests. And two notable Calumniations
amongst others they raised against him: The first, The first Calumniation.
That he did not hold the Mass to be good or available which was said by a
Simoniacal or Adulterous Priest; which he never said nor meant, but only that
for a punishment, and in detestation of those sins, he would have men to
forbear the hearing of such Priests Masses, seeing there wanted not other good
Priests to supply their places and Functions: Neither was he the first Pope
that made the like Decree for punishing of Concubinary Priests, Distinct. 32.
c. Praeter verum etc. nullus.
by forbidding other men to hear their Masses; for that both Pope Alexander II.
and Nicholas II. his Predecessors made the same Decree, as appears in their
Canons yet extant.

The second Calumniation Fox ubi supra Cent. 11. c. 7.
16. The other Calumniation against this Pope was this, which Fox and the
Magdeburgians do here set down, That he was the first that began to forbid
Marriage of Priests in the West-Church, for so are the words of the
Magdeburgians: And hereupon has John Fox framed out of the Council the three
Points before mentioned, as handled and decreed then, (which is false) and
passes over the fourth with silence, wherein the only Controversy consists.
And this appears in the Lines immediately following in Fox, where he puts
down the Copy in English of Pope Gregory's Bull about this matter, wherein he
says thus: Fox p. 158. col. 2. n. 80.
If there be any Priests, Deacons, or Subdeacons, that will still remain in the
sin of Fornication, we forbid them the Churches entrance till they amend and
repent; but if they persevere in their sin, we charge that none presume to hear
their Service.

Many Falsities and Impostures of Fox.
17. By which words we see that Pope Gregory did not treat here as Fox says,
That no Priest hereafter should marry Wives, (as though it had been in use or
lawful before) or that such as were married should be divorced by this new
Decree: And much less was it decreed now, as Fox devises, That none hereafter
should be admitted to the Order of Priesthood, but should swear perpetual
Chastity. All these Points (I say) are either feigned or fraudulently set down
by our Fox, as though these things had been in lawful use before, and that now by
Pope Gregory began this prohibition. But you have heard by Pope Gregory's own
words, that he presumes that all Priests that after Priesthood have Carnal
Conversation with Women, do live in Fornication, according to the Doctrine,
Custom and Practice of the ancient Catholic Church of Christ. And therefore
where Fox uses the words Marriage and Lawful Wives, Pope Gregory calls it
Fornication and Concubinary Life. And so it is in the Canon, Distinct. 32. c.
Praeter verum apud Anton. tit. 16.

Tritem. in chron. an. 1075.


Officium Simoniacorum, and in Fornicatione jacentium, scienter nullo modo
recipiatis; Do you not wittingly admit the Office or Service of such Priests as
live in Simony or Fornication. And Tritemius relates the matter thus: Laicis
interdixit, ne Missas Sacerdotum Concubinas habentium audire praesumant; Pope
Gregory forbad Laymen to hear the Mass of such Priests as were known to have
Concubines.

The true state of the Controversy.
18. This then was the Controversy, Whether Priests that lived with Women
(contrary to the ancient Canons of the Catholic Church) were rightly punished
by Pope Gregory, Pope Alexander, Pope Nicholas, and some other Popes, by
debarring them to say Mass publicly, or other men to hear their Masses? The
Controversy was not, Whether it was lawful for them to marry or no; or whether
they should promise Chastity at their entrance into Priesthood? For this Pope
Gregory took as a thing determined from all Antiquity before him, especially in
the Latin Church. And so testifies Marianus Scotus, that lived in his time:
Marian. Scot. in chron. an. 1096. and tom. 4. Conc. p. 79.
Iste Papa (says he) Sinodo facta, ex decreto S. Petri Apostoli, and S.
Clementis, aliorumque Sanctorum Patrum vetuit and interdixit Clericis (maxim
Divino Ministerio consecratis) Vxores habere, vel cum Mulieribus habitare, nisi
quas Nicena Synodus, vel alii Canones exceperunt; This Pope ( Gregory VII.)
having made a Synod, did according to the Decree of St. Peter the Apostle, The
Council of Nice forbidding wives to Priests and Bishops.
and St. Clement his Successor, and of other holy Fathers, forbid unto
Clergymen (especially to such as were consecrated unto God's Service) to have
Wives, or to dwell with Women, excepting such only as the first Council of Nice
and other Ecclesiastical Canons did except or permit.

19. This testifies Marianus of the Pope's intention, and that he made his
Decree according to the Decrees, Canons, meaning and practice of all holy
Fathers his Predecessors, from St. Peter downward, in the Latin Church. And if
we go to the Council of Nice for the exception here mentioned, what Women were
allowed to dwell in house with Priests in those days, we shall find all Women
to be forbidden to live with Bishops, Priests or Deacons, Conc. Nic. Can. 3.
praeter Matrem, Sororem, vel Amitam; the Mother, Sister, or the Aunt: But no
mention at all of the Wife, which should have been the first that should have
been excepted by the Council, if any such thing had been lawful or permitted in
those days. For albeit in the Greek Church, where this Council was held, some
were made Priests that were married before; yet were they never permitted to
marry after they were Priests, nor are they at this day. And if we consider the
whole stream of Greek Fathers in this behalf, The whole stream of ancient Greek
Fathers against the marriage of Priests.

Origin hom. 23. in lib. Number.


we shall see them no less by their Writings than by their Doings and Examples,
join with the Latin Church in this Point about the Continency of Priests and
Bishops even from the beginning. Illius solius est offerre Sacrificium (says
Origin above 1400 years ago) qui perpetuae se devoverit Castitati; To him only
belongs to offer Sacrifice, who has vowed himself to perpetual Chastity.

20. Behold Sacrifice and vowing of Chastity in Priests of the Greek Church,
above 700 years before the time that Fox says it was decreed first of all by
Pope Gregory VII that they should not marry. And Eusebius, in the next Age
after, being one of them that were of the Council of Nice, says, Eos, Eusebius.
l. 1. Demonstrat. Evang. c. 9.
qui sacrati sunt, and in Dei ministerio cultuque occupati, continere deinceps
seipsos a commercio Vxoris decet; It becomes them that are consecrated and
occupied in the Service of God, to contain themselves for the time to come from
all dealing with Wives. There follow in the same Age with Eusebius diverse other
Fathers; as, St. Cyrill, St. Gregory Nyssen, St. Chrysostom, St. Epiphany; all
which writing of this matter, are of the same Opinion. Cyr. Cat. 12.
Qui apud Jesum been fungitur Sacerdotio, abstinet a Muliere, says St. Cyril;
He that performs the Office of a Priest well in the sight of Jesus, (that is
to say, is a good Christian Priest) does abstain from all Women. To like sense
do write St. Gregory Nyssen, lib. de Virginit. cap. ult. and St. Chrysostom,
hom. 2. de patien. Job. And as for St. Epiphanius, we have alleged him Sup. c.
3. Cent. 4. p. 303. Epiph. tom. 1. l. 2.

Item haeres. 59.


before, as reprehended by the Magdeburgians, for affirming this Rule of
Priests Continency from Marriage to have been observed in his time throughout
the whole Church, with great sincerity wheresoever good Clergymen were.

21. It were in vain to allege the Latin Fathers, for that our Enemies confess
them to be all of the contrary judgment to them. But when no other Argument
were, the very Example of so great a multitude of famous, learned, and holy
Bishops, Doctors, Teachers and Preachers of those first Ages after Christ, that
lived Continent, and were not married, (as St. Ignatius, St. Polycarp, Clemens
Alexandrinus, St. Athanasius, St. Basil, St. Gregory Nazianzen, St. Chrysostom,
St. Epiphanius, St. Cyril, and many others of the Greek Church; as also St.
Cyprian, St. Hillary, St. Ambrose, St. Hierom, St. Augustine, and above Fifty
Popes of Rome, held all for Saints, and the most of them Martyrs, in the Latin
Church:) These Men's Example (I say) is a sufficient Argument to show what was
the Spirit of Christ in those days, to him that has any feeling thereof.

22. But to say no more of this, but to return to make an end of our speech of
Pope Gregory VII. (whom our Protestants, for his singular Virtue and Constancy
in God's Cause, cannot abide,) Fox concludes thus of his death: Fox p. 164.
Antoninus writes, That Hildebrand as he lay a dying desired one of his
Cardinals to go to the Emperor, and desire of him forgiveness, absolving both
Him and his Partners from Excommunication, etc. And true it is, that St.
Antoninus Archbishop of Florence relates some such thing upon other men's
speeches, saying, Quod misit Cardinalem ad Imperatorem and ad totam Ecclesiam,
ut optaret ei Indulgentiam; That he sent the Cardinal to the Emperor and to
all the Church, to wish him Indulgence. And what marvel (if it had been so)
that a man lying at Deaths door would gladly be at peace with all the World?
But why has not Fox set down the other words of Antoninus presently following?
Anton. part. 2. tit. 16. cap. 1. 1.
Quae tamen vera esse non credo, multis de causis; Which yet for many causes I
do not believe to be true. Here you may see that Fox is still a Fox.

Naucl. generat. 37.
23. Nauclerus reports, That his last words lying on his Deathbed in Salerno,
were those of the Psalm, Dilexi Justitiam and odivi Iniquitatem, propterea
morior in exilio, etc. I have loved Justice, and hated Iniquity; and for this
do I die in banishment, being driven away from my See by the violence of the
Emperor. The death of Gregory VII.
Thus wrote Nauclerus of him, though a German, adding these words: Vir fuit
Gregorius times Deum, Justitiae and Aequitatis amator, in adversis constans;
Pope Gregory was a man that feared God, a great lover of Justice and Equity,
Plat. in vita Greg. 7.
constant in Adversity. And Platina, that flattereth not Popes as our
Protestants do confess, writing of him, says, Vir certe Deo gratus, etc. Truly
he was a man grateful to God, Prudent, Just, Clement, and a Patron of all Poor,
but especially of Pupils and Widows. Cranzius also a German says: Henricus
Gregorium septimum virum sanctum insectatus est; Henry the Emperor persecuted
Pope Gregory VII. being a holy Man.

24. But to omit this, and to speak no more of Popes Lives or Learning,
especially of these two (Gregory and Innocentius) so well known but only to
consider their Faith and Belief, (for That principally indeed concerns our
purpose, seeing that albeit they should be Wicked or Unlearned, yet might they
be true Popes: A ridiculous device of Fox how 2 Popes overthrew the Church.
) I would ask John Fox, What one Article of Belief any one of these two Popes,
living more than an hundred years the one after the other, did they differ in
from their Predecessors, or were noted by their Successors for the same? And if
no such Article can be brought forth, (as most certainly there cannot) how then
could these two Popes, either jointly or severally, overthrow so great a Church
dispersed over all the World (as was at that time the Roman) and much more
extinguish the whole Christian Faith, as John Fox affirms?

25. Is not this plain madness, to affirm that any one or two Popes could
overthrow a whole Church, or extinguish Christian Faith; especially living an
hundred years one from the other as has been said? For if the first had done
it, then what needed the help of the second? or if the same Church persevered
in Christian Faith for an hundred years together after the first, then did not
he overthrow the same. And yet does John Fox delight himself so much in this
Fancy, that in diverse places of his Book he foundeth his whole Discourses
thereon, as we shall see in the Chapter following.

CHAP. VIII.
Here follows a dreaming Imagination of John Fox, contrary to it self, about
the Fall of the Roman Church, and Rising of Antichrist; with the rest that
remains of our Ecclesiastical History from the Conquest to Wickliff.

JOhn Fox taking upon him in his vein of fancy to distinguish Times, and to
determine when the Church of Rome fell sick and died, when Antichrist was born,
and other like vain imaginations, proving also the same by certain Revelations
made unto himself as he lay on his Bed upon a Sunday in the morning: he sets
down for a ground this distinction of Times in the very beginning of his Acts
and Monuments in these words: First (says he) I will treat of the suffering
time of the Church, which continued from the Apostles Age about 300 years.
Secondly, of the flourishing time of the Church, which lasted other 300 years.
Thirdly, of the declining time of the Church, which comprehends also other
300 years, until the loosing out of Satan, which was 1000 years after the
ceasing of the Persecution. Fourthly follows the time of Antichrist, or the
loosing of Satan, or desolation of the Church, etc.

2. Lo here John Fox makes a different Account from the former, as though the
time of Antichrist, and loosing of Satan for overthrowing the true Church, had
begun much sooner than under Pope Gregory and Innocentius, to wit, from the
year of Christ 900, which was almost 200 years before Gregory VII. was born.
And yet does he also contradict himself in this, if you mark him; for that he
says this loosing of Satan was about the thousandth year after the ceasing of
Persecution; which ceasing being counted by Fox himself from the time of
Constantine the Great, (when he says Satan was bound up for 1000 years) the
ending thereof must fall, not upon the year of Christ 900, as in this his
Account, but rather upon the year of Christ 1300, at which time he was let
forth again, (if we believe John Fox) and had power given him, not only to
impugn, but to overthrow the Church contrary to that which Christ had promised,
Matthew. 16. That Hell-gates should not prevail against her.

3. But let us see a third place, where John Fox handles this Mystery
different from both these now alleged; to wit, in the beginning of his fifth
Book, from Wickliff downward, where he makes another Account yet of binding
and loosing of Satan, and overthrowing the true Church: And this (forsooth)
out of the 20th Chapter of the Apocalypse by a large Text; Fox diverse times
contradicting himself about binding and loosing of Satan.
which having recited, he says thus: By these words of the Revelation three
special things are to be noted: First, the being abroad of Satan; Secondly,
his binding up; and Thirdly, the loosing out of him again after a thousand
years consummate, etc.

4. Thus he has there. And then a little after he makes his Account thus: The
binding up of Satan, after peace given to the Church (counting from the 30th
year of Christ) was Anno Domini 294; which lasted for 1000 years, until Anno
1294, about which year Pope Boniface VIII. was made Pope, and made the sixth
Decretals, confirmed the Order of Friars, and privileged them with great
freedom.

So writes Fox, and confirms his Sentence by certain old Verses written by a
Monk (as he says) which affirm that Cum fuerint anni completi mill ducenti
Et decies seni post partum Virginis Almae;
Tunc Antichristus nascetur Daemone plenus.
That is, When a thousand two hundred and threescore years after the Virgins
Childbirth shall be finished, then shall Antichrist be born, replenished with
the spirit of Satan. Which Fox will needs have to be meant by the foresaid
Bonifacius VIII. as though He above others had overthrown the Church, and had
been the first Antichrist among Popes: Which if it were true, then can it not
fall either upon Gregory VII. or Innocentius III. no nor upon Boniface himself
named by him; for that he was not made Pope 34 years after this devised
Prophecy did appoint Antichrist to be born, to wit, 1260; seeing he was made
Pope (as Fox also confesses) Anno 1294.

5. But the best pastime is to hear what immediately follows in Fox, which
are these words: These Verses (says he) were written (as appears by the said
Author) Anno Domini 1285. Well, Sir John! and what of this? does not this
overthrow all the credit of your Prophecy, seeing it shows that these Verses
were written 25 years after the day appointed by the Prophecy was past?

6. So we see, that this man having toiled so much to draw all that is spoken
in the Apocalypse, or Book of Revelation, concerning Antichrist, and the
binding and loosing of Satan, to fall upon the Popes and Roman Church; he
cannot tell where to lay it, but plays notoriously the Fool, and is contrary
to himself, as by the examination of the three places alleged may appear. For
in the first he affirms Christian Faith to have been extinguished either by
Pope Gregory VII. (in the year of Christ 1080) or by Innocentius III. in the
year 1215; In protest. p. 9.
and here he will have it to have been under Bonifacius VIII. which was almost
another hundred years after Innocentius.

7. In the second place he will have the loosing of Satan, and consequently
also the Fall of the Church, to have been almost 200 years before Gregory VII.
(that is to say, Acts and Mon. page 1.
in the year of Christ 900) and all the rest downward, to have been under
Antichrist, which he calls the time of Desolation, and Reign of Satan over
the Church. And he confirms the same again in the beginning of another
Treatise following; where repeating the division of his whole Work, he says,
That his intention is, first to declare the suffering time of the Church, Fox
p. 27. c. 1.
for 300 years; secondly, the flourishing time, for other 300; thirdly, the
declining time, for other 300 years; fourthly, the time of Antichrist reigning
and raging since the loosing of Satan for other 400 years; fifthly, the
reforming time of Christ's Church in these latter 300 since John Wickliff
begun, and after Luther, and other like people.

Thus says Fox; wherein he agrees somewhat (as you see) with his last former
Account, that Satan was let loose to overthrow the Church, about the year of
Christ 900; which yet is quite contrary to that which he writes in his first
place before alleged, that the foresaid Church was overthrown by Pope Gregory
VII. and Innocentius III. some hundreds of years after that time. But much more
contrary it is to that which he writes lastly out of the Apocalypse, in his
fourth place alleged; to wit, That Satan was bound up for a thousand years;
which number of years after the first Ten Persecutions, he says, must begin
from the year of Christ 294; which he endeavoreth (though fondly) to prove out of
the 13th Chapter of the Apocalypse, where it is said, That Power was given by
the Dragon to the Beast, (to wit, to Antichrist) to speak Blasphemy, Apoc. 13.5.
and to do what listed him for Forty two months; which make (as all men know)
three years and a half; which is the time allotted by St. John (according to
all ancient Fathers Interpretations) to the Reign of Antichrist in the end of
the World. And it is so expounded in other places of this Revelation it self,
to wit, by these words, a time, times, and half a time; Apoc. 12. Apoc. 11.11.
and in another place by 1260 days; and then again by 42 months. All which
numbers being examined, do make up just the foresaid three years and a half,
prophesied and expressed in like manner by Daniel the Prophet. Dan. 11.


9. And in this there is no doubt or question among Catholics or ancient
Writers, but that Antichrist (a particular person designed for that end from
the beginning of the World) shall appear, and have power given him from the
Devil to turmoil and afflict the Church of Christ for the space of three years
and a half before the day of Judgment. Only the Heretics of our time, to divert
these Prophesies from the true Antichrist, and apply them to certain Bishops of
Rome, do beat their heads how to devise out some new Expositions of these
numbers never heard or thought of before: And namely John Fox, more fondly than
the rest, will have the number of 42 Months to import 294 years, that is, every
Month to signify seven years, or (as fantastically he calls it) a Sabbath of
Years. For proof whereof, having neither Authority nor any one Example of
Scripture, he confirms it by a Revelation of his own, as after you shall hear.

10. His device therefore is, That the 1000 years wherein Satan is said in the
Ayocalypse to be tied up, must begin, as you see, after the said 294 years of
Heathen Persecution were ended. So that the loosing out of Satan against the
Church again, must fall in the year of Christ 1294, when Bonifacius VIII. was
chosen Pope; or, as the Monks Prophecy was, upon the year 1260, when
Antichrist was born. Which is both contrary to that he said before, that he was
loosed about the year 900; as also that the Popes, Gregory VII. and Innocentius
III. (by Sathan's help, no doubt,) overthrew the Church about the year of
Christ 1080, or 1215: For if that Satan was bound, and not loosed until the
year of Christ 1294, how could he overthrow the Church before?

11. Wherefore all these new Interpretations of the words of the Apocalypse are
but fantastical devices of wrangling Heretics, Aug. l. 20. de Civit. c. 6, 7,
8.9.

Primas. 19. and Bed. in 20 Apoc. Greg. l. 9. mor. c. 1. and l. 35. c. 20.
Apoc. 20. Joan. 12.


seeing the ancient Fathers do interpret all these things far otherwise. And
first, they put the binding up of Satan for 1000 years there mentioned, before
the other number of 42 Months given to Antichrist to work his will; and do say,
that the said loosing of Satan began from the very Death and Passion of
Christ, when the power of Satan was bound, according to the saying of Christ
himself in St. John's Gospel, drawing near to his Passion; Now the Prince of
this World shall be cast forth. And secondly, they do interpret these 1000
Years not to signify any certain time, but generally to signify all the whole
course of time between the death of Christ and the coming of Antichrist, three
years and a half before the Day of Judgment, according to the ordinary phrase
of Scripture. As for Example, Quod mandavit Deus in mill generationes; Psalm.
140.
God has commanded his Precept to be kept for a thousand Generations, that is
to say, to the Worlds end, and not for any certain time. And again in Job, Job.
9.
If a Just man should contend with God, he cannot answer him one for a thousand.

12. This then is the ancient Interpretation of holy Doctors, quite contrary to
these new fancies of John Fox, whose Expositions are both contrary to himself,
(as in part you have seen) and opposite to the words and sense of Scripture it
self. For whereas first these 42 Months (importing by his Account 294 years)
were given to Satan to work his will against the Saints of God; the Scripture
says, they were given to the Beast (that is to say, to Antichrist, Apoc. 13.4,
5, 6
) by the Dragon, and not to the Dragon himself: And secondly, whereas he would
needs have the 42 Months to signify 294 years, the Scriptures do expound them
by 1260 days, which make just three years and a half, as has been said.

13. Thirdly, Fox shall never find any place or example in Scripture, where the
word Month either in Greek or Latin does signify seven Days, Weeks, or Years,
as in Daniel the Greek word Hebdomada does and may, by its proper
signification. And yet is John Fox so fond and resolute in his device, as all
other proofs and probabilities failing him, he will needs confirm it by a
Revelation from God, which he recounteth in these words following:

Act. and Mon. p. 90.

A Revelation imparted to John Fox.


14. Because the matter (says he) being of no small importance, greatly
appertains unto the public utility of the Church, and lest any should
misdoubt me herein, to follow any private Interpretations of my own; I thought
good to communicate to the Reader that which has been imparted unto me, in the
opening of these Mystical Numbers in the foresaid Book of Revelation contained,
by occasion as follows etc.

15. As I was in hand with these Histories, etc. being vexed and turmoiled in
spirit about the reckoning of these Numbers and Years; it so happened upon a
Sunday in the morning, lying in my Bed, and musing about these Numbers,
suddenly it was answered to my mind, as with a majesty thus saying inwardly
within me, Thou Fool, count these Months by Sabboths, as the Weeks of Daniel
are counted by Sabboths. The Lord I take to witness thus it was. Whereupon thus
being admonished, I began to reckon the 42 Months by Sabboths, first of the
Months, and that would not serve; and then by Sabboths of Years, and then I
began to feel some probable understanding: Yet not satisfied herewith, eftsoons
I repaired to certain Merchants of my acquaintance, (of whom one is departed, a
true and faithful Servant of the Lord, the other two yet alive, and Witnesses
hereof,) to whom the number of these foresaid Months being propounded, and
examined by Sabboths of Years, the whole Sum was found to surmount to 294
years, containing the full and just time of the foresaid Persecutions, neither
more nor less, etc.

16. And thus you have the Revelation made to John Fox; which he says that he
relates unto us for that we shall not misdoubt the truth thereof, nor think
that he follows any private Interpretation of his own, but that it came from
God immediately. And this is the first Dream of John Fox in his Bed. And the
second ridiculous point is, that he went to three Merchants to confer this
Revelation, and that they approved the same. The third point is open Folly,
where he says that this number of 294 contains the full and just time of the
first Persecution of Christians under Pagan Emperors, neither more nor less;
which before has been confuted, and is evident in it self, seeing that from
Christ to the Victory of Constantine against Maxentius, there are assigned by
Eusebius 318 years, and yet did not this Persecution of Christians cease then
neither, but continued under Licinius and other Tyrants for diverse years after.
See then how just these Numbers fall out, neither more nor less! All which
being considered, I find no one thing so true or credible in all this
Revelation, as those words of the Spirit unto him, saying, Thou Fool, for that
this makes him a Fool indeed by Revelation. And so much of him, and of this
whole matter of binding and loosing Satan, and Reign of Antichrist: Now let us
return to the continuation of our Conference with John Fox about his Church.

The succession of the universal Church, as also of England, from the year of
Christ 1066. downward.
17. The deduction of the Catholic Roman Church from William the Conqueror
downward unto John Wickliff's time, is no less easy and clear, but rather
more, than the former deduction from Christ to the Conquest; for that the
Church was now more spread and established over the World, than in any other
former Ages. And to come unto the particulars, there sat in the Sea of Rome,
as High-Bishops of the Universal Church, from Pope Alexander II. that sent a
Banner blessed unto William the Conqueror at his entrance into England, (and
was the 162 Pope from St. Peter to our time) unto Pope Gregory XI. (under whom
Wickliff began his Doctrine) 45 Popes; and in the Roman Empire, from Henry IV.
unto Charles IV. succeeded 19 Emperors; and in the Crown of England 10 or 11
Kings, from the Conqueror to Edward III. under which Kings there succeeded by
Election in the Metropolitan See of Canterbury, from Stigand and Lanfrank unto
Thomas Arundel, 20 Archbishops. All which, both Popes and Emperors of the
Universal Church, as also the Kings and Archbishops of our Island, agree
uniformly in Faith and Religion, without any difference at all; and so it
continued in our Island. For albeit toward the end of this time John Wickliff
with his Followers, and some other Sectaries, (especially the Lollards) rose up
in our Country, and caused many troubles both in England and other places; yet
neither the State of England, nor any of our Princes, (and much less any
Bishops or Archbishops) ever suffered themselves to be infected therewith. So
as for the manifest continuation both of Men and Doctrine in these Ages, we have
no less visible Succession both of Bishops, Doctors, and Faith, than before we
have showed in the former Ages; the Succession of Bishops being evident in
every Country and Church by their particular Stories and Records, as also of
Teachers and Doctrine, as now we shall show.

18. The principal Learned Men also and Doctors of this time, The principal
Learned Men of this time.
from the Conquest to Wickliff, are known. As for Example, Burchardus, Petrus
Damianus, Lanfrank, Anselmus, Oecumenius, Marianus Scotus, Ivo Carnotensis,
Lambertus Schafnaburgensis, Rupertus Abbas, Enthymius, St. Bernard, Peter
Lombard, Gratianus, Albertus Magnus, St. Thomas of Aquin, Nicephorus Calixtus,
and many other downward. In which time there are accounted some ten or eleven
Synods and Councils to have been held in diverse Countries for suppressing of
Heresies and Sects that did from time to time peep up, and reforming of abuses
in former times; and two of them to have been General, to wit, that of Lateran,
and of Constance, wherein Wickliff was condemned.

19. The most notorious Sects also of this time, which against these Doctors,
The Sects and Sectaries of this time.
Councils and Synods did strive, were the Bogomilians, the Petrobusians, the
Arnardistes, the Waldenses, or poor men of Lions, the Albigenses of Tholosa,
the Cathari, or Puritans, the Flagellantes, or Whippers, the Begardians, the
Beguisnes and Fraticelli, or little Brethren, the Lollards and Wickliffists,
and the rest that ensued: Against all which the Church proceeded in all this
time by Censures of Councils and Bishops, as in all other times before against
such men, and must do to the Worlds end.

20. And now, this being so, tell me (good Reader) whether it be not true which
St. Augustine says, Aug. l. 1. quaest. Evang. q. 38. and tract. 2. in Epist.
Joan.
That it is as easy in all Ages to see where the true visible Church goes, as
to see the Sun at noon day when it shines clearest? And where will John Fox go
now to seek himself a private hidden Church among Christians, except he patch
it up of those Heretics by me named, and other like, as he does? And therein
deals, as if one having showed the Descent and Continuance of the most Noble
and most Ancient House of England by their Arms and Actions, would condemn them
all presently to have degenerated, and bring in a Company of Beggars or
Brothers, that have run out of that House, or were beaten from thence;
affirming These only to be of the ancient Race of that Family. Or as if a man
would say of the City of London, A fit comparison expressing John Fox his
Church.
that for these thousand years and more all those Men or Women that have been
punished by the same City for Malefactors, were the true Citizens indeed, and
the others that punished them only Intruders.

21. In which Examples, notwithstanding though they be ridiculous, yet is there
much more reason or probability than in the other; for that any temporal House
or Family whatsoever may degenerate, and be wholly perverted; and any City
whatsoever may err, alter, or be turned upside-down by disorder; but the
Catholic Church cannot, except we deny both the Promise, Power and Godhead of
Christ himself, as our Heretics in effect do, (though not in words) whilst they
make to themselves a new, scarce-visible Church, of elect people, to wit, of
their own Election, and thereby are forced to say, that the great visible
Church begun by Christ, and continued for many Ages together, did at length
(about the time appointed by Fox, though they cannot agree at what time) wholly
forsake Christ, and fall to Apostasy, becoming the Synagogue of Satan, an
Enemy to Christ, instead of his Family, Kingdom, and dearly-beloved Spouse;
which is so foul and foolish, yea ignominious and monstrous an absurdity, Psalm.
47.88. Esaias 61. Dan. 2. Mat. 16. 1 Timothy 3. Joan. 16. Mat. 18.
that it does not only contradict the whole course of Scriptures, which did
prophecy and foretell the visible durance and continuance of this Church until
the Worlds end, but that it should also be the Pillar and Firmament of Truth,
and so assisted by Christ and his holy Spirit, that it should never err, nor
bring into error, and much less fade away or perish.

St. Augustine impugneth the former absurdities.
22. The most Learned Father St. Augustine does handle this matter everywhere
against the Donatists, who, like our Protestants, would needs have the
Universal visible Church in their time to have erred and fallen from Christ,
and they only as elect Vessels make the true Church, though scarce visible to the
eyes of the World, as Fox says of his Church, gathered up of lurking Heretics
here and there, as after you shall see declared. Against which absurdity St.
Augustine disputed most learnedly, solving first the Arguments which they allege
of some evil Men or Popes that may have been in the Church, if all were true as
they say: Aug. l. 1. c. 1. contra Epist. Parmen.
Nullius hominis quamvis sceleratum and immane peccatum, etc. That no man's
sin, being never so heinous, can prejudicate the promises of God (for the
visible continuance of the Church to the Worlds end) neither can any Impiety of
any men whatsoever within the Church bring to pass that the Faith of God which
was contained in the promises made to the ancient Fathers concerning the Church
of Christ to come, and to be spread over the World, and now fulfilled in our
days, should be made void, etc.

Ibid. ep. 48. ad Vincent.
23. And again: Albeit this Church be sometimes obscured and shadowed by
multitude of scandals; yea, even then does she shine, and is eminent in her
most firm Members, etc. And yet further Sed illa Ecclesia quae fuit omnium
gentium non est, periit; Aug. in Psalm. 101. conc. 2.
hoc dicunt qui in illa non sunt. O impudentem vocem! Illa non est, quia in
illa tu non es? But perhaps you will say (says he to the Donatists) that that
Church which was gathered together of all Nations from the beginning, is not
now, it has perished, (or fallen from Christ;) thus say they which are not in
her. O impudent Speech! Is she no longer a Church, for that thou art not in her?

24. Here (I trow) Fox will be ashamed, or his Fellows for him, seeing this is
their ordinary speech, That this great visible Church began by Christ and his
Apostles, held on well for a time, but at length fell to Apostasy, as St.
Augustine says of his Heretics in the same place: Dicunt, impletae sunt
Scripturae, crediderunt omnes gentes, Aug. ib.
sed apostatavit and periit Ecclesia; These Heretics say, that the Scriptures
were fulfilled, that all Nations believed and entered into this Church, but that
after a time it fell to Apostasy, and perished. But what answers St. Augustine
to this impudent Objection? He opposes the words of Christ himself: Ecce, ego
vobiscum sum usque ad consummationem saeculi; Mat. 28.
Behold, I am with you to the end of the World. As who would say, By this
Doctrine they make Christ a Liar and a Deceiver, that promised more than he
could perform; nay, in very deed they deny hereby his whole Deity, and do
evacuate all the Mysteries of his whole Incarnation, Life, Passion,
Resurrection, Ascension, and sending of the Holy Ghost, etc.

25. For to what end was all this done, but to gather together, found,
Absurdities and Impieties ensuing upon the former Doctrine.
establish, and to conserve this Church unto the end of the World? For what was
Christ incarnate, and God made Man, but to be Head of this Church? Why did he
preach, gather his Apostles and Disciples, instruct them, pray for them, and
their continuance, leave Sacraments among them, but that they should visibly
begin this Church? Why did Christ send the Holy Ghost, but to direct and
confirm the same, not for one Age or Two, but to the Worlds end? How did Christ
command men under pain of Damnation to enter into this Church, and absolutely
to hear and obey the same, if it were only to endure for certain Ages, and then
to perish? How should Pagans, Infidels, Jews, Turks, Moors, or other like
people, (if by God's Inspiration they should have a desire to be Christians)
know what to do, or whither to go, or where to be truly instructed, if they
came after the time appointed by Fox, when the visible Roman Church had
perished; to wit, after the time of Pope Gregory VII. when Fox says, That
Christian Faith was now extinguished in the Universal visible Church above 500
years agone? And yet, on the other side, this new Church of Wickliffians,
Hussites, and others of that Sect, (which he puts to be the true Church) was
not yet born by two or three hundred years. So as then he must needs confess,
that either there was no Christian Church at all for some Ages, or that he must
place it in some other obscure Heretics and Sectaries of that time named by me
before, yet he does not agree at all in their Articles of Religion.

26. Well then, this shall be sufficient to show the absurdity of John Fox his
device for overthrow of our Church, and setting up of his own, The patching up
of Fox his Church in these Ages.
patching it up of the Heretics of these latter Ages. And yet you must note,
that for the first three hundred years next after the Conquest to this time of
the rising of Wickliff, (which contain the whole substance of his fourth Book,
and therein a hundred Leaves of Paper) he scarce finds any Heretics whom he
dares to challenge for Members of his Church fully, though some liking he
shows to the foresaid Waldenses and Albigenses. So as all the substantial
building of his Church begins only from Wickliff downward, of whom we shall
talk more particularly in the Chapter following.

27. But perhaps then you will ask me, How does he fill up these hundred Leaves
of Paper in this his fourth Book, if here also he allege so little for his
visible Church? I shall tell you briefly. He goes from King to King, The
substance of Fox's fourth Book, containing 300 years from the Conquest to
Wickliff.
and from Archbishop to Archbishop, showing what strifes or disagreements,
suits or controversies, fell out between our two Archbishops of Canterbury and
York, between our Kings, Archbishops, Religious Orders, and Secular Priests,
Canons and their Bishops, and other such quarrels in those times, making
scornful Notes upon every Point; and then he puts down a Bead-roll of all
the particular Orders of Religious Men in England, entituling the same, Fox. p.
236.
The Rabblement of Religious Orders. Then comes he in with a complaint of the
Nobles of England against the Exactions and Covetousness of Popes in those
days, and many Letters and Writings about the same, but cites commonly no
Author for any thing. Then brings he in what variance at diverse times there
passed between the Popes and the Citizens of Rome, Ibid. p. 241.
what strifes between some Popes and Emperors, betwixt Kings of France and
Kings of England, Ibid. p. 255.
and such like other matter little to the purpose he took in hand, which was to
set down the race and course of his Church.

28. But the greatest part of this Book does take up the particular Lying
Treatise against Pope Gregory VII. against Lanfrank, Anselm, and Thomas Becket,
Archbishops of Canterbury; the counterfeit devised poisoning of King John by a
Monk or Friar: the Story or Persecution (as he calls it) of the Heretics,
named Waldenses, or poor Men of Lions, and Albigenses of Tholosa, and the like.
We shall say a word or two to each Point.

Pope Gregory VII.
29. As for Pope Gregory, called before Hildebrand, he so raileth upon him, as
if he had been the wickedest man that ever lived, and the Emperor the best;
and yet have you heard the grave testimonies before of the principal ancient
Authors to the contrary in them both. But do you hear Fox himself speak. Fox p.
159. col. 2. n. 10.
Now let us proceed (says he) to the contentions between wicked Hildebrand and
the godly Emperor, etc. Lo, how he sanctifies the Emperor, for hatred to the
Pope!

Of Lanfrank.
30. Of Archbishop Lanfrank, so highly commended by all Writers for his Virtue
and rare Learning, whereby he confuted most excellently the new risen Heresy
of Berengarius, Fox p. 167.
Fox writes thus: I think, that unless Lanfrank had brought with him less
Superstition, and more sincere Science into Christ's Church, he might have kept
him still is his Country, and have confuted Berengarius at home. Do you see how
wise a confutation this is?

Of St. Anselm see Edverus in vit. S. Ansel. apud sur. tom. 2. Edmund. Cantuar.
in vit. Henr. de viris illust. c. 7. Trit. de viris illust. l. 2. c. 101. and
l. 3. c. 329.

Fox p. 175. Of St. Thomas Becket.


31. St. Anselm followed after Lanfrank in the Archbishopric of Canterbury, and
was banished by William Rufus, and died upon the 22 of April, in the year 1109,
and is held for a Saint by all Posterity, and his said day kept Festival
throughout Christendom: And yet so writes Fox his Story, as though King Rufus
(whose manners yet all English Historiographers, both Heretics and Catholics,
do greatly blame) had had the right, and Anselmus had offered the wrong;
insomuch as in one place Fox makes this Marginal Note against this holy Man:
The proud stoutness of a Prelate in a wrong Cause.

32. How large a Treatise Fox makes of St. Thomas Becket, and his contention
with King Henry II. and how shamefully he does belly and revile him everywhere,
has been showed sufficiently Encount. 2. c. 10, 11, 16.
before in my Answer to Sir Francis Hastings, as also of the Fable of the
poisoning of K. John. And as for the Histories the Waldenses and Albigenses,
Fox p. 209.
whom he means to lay for the first Foundations of his visible Church upon
Earth, he handles matters so falsely and partially, contrary to the testimony
of all Antiquity, as a man may easily see that the whole contexture of his
Story is nothing else but a perpetual woven thread of wilful and malicious
Falsehoods, and for that I shall have occasion to speak again of these Heretics
in the next Chapter, wherein we have to handle the Succession of John Fox his
visible Protestant Church from Wickliff downward, I shall say no more thereof
here, but remit me to that which ensues.

CHAP. IX.
Of the time from John Wickliff unto the beginning of the Reign of King Henry
VIII. containing about 140 years; And how the Roman Church and John Fox his
Church passed in these days.

BY that which has been said before from Age to Age of the apparent and
manifest Descent, Progress, and Continuation of the Catholic Roman Church, and
of her State and Condition, as well in England as in other parts of the
Christian World, (at the rising of John Wickliff an Englishman, about the year
of Christ 1371,) it is not hard to make the like deduction of the same Church
from that time unto the year of Christ 1560, when her Majesty that now is had a
little before begun her Reign, and established the form of Religion that now is
held in England: The state of the Roman Church when Wickliff began.
For as for the Popes and chief Ecclesiastical Governors of the Roman Church in
this time, they are publicly known; their Names, Number, and Succession one to
another from Innocentius VI. Vrbanus V. and Gregory XI. (who first condemned
Wickliff's Doctrine) unto Pope Pius V. that entered the Roman See at the
beginning of her Majesty's Reign, being in number about Thirty, and all of one
Faith and Religion the one with the other.

2. The Emperors also both of the West and East Empire (so long as it lasted)
are known to have been of the self-same Religion, Emperors of these Ages.
excepting some Disobedience and Schismatical Opinions in some of the Greek
Emperors against the Church of Rome; for which it may be thought that God of
his Justice gave them over at length, together with their Empire, into Infidels
hands, about the year of Christ 1450; Constantinus, the Twelfth of that Name,
surnamed Paleologus, being the last of that Race.

3. The manner also of proceeding in Ecclesiastical matters by this Church in
this time, was like unto the former, to wit, by conserving and continuing the
Faith of their Ancestors, and precedent times; defending the same with like
diligence against Innovations of Heretics, partly by the Writings of Catholic
Learned Men, Doctors and Preachers, which in these Ages were; as, The principal
Learned Men of this Age.
Gregorius Ariminensis, Laurentius Justinianus, Thomas de Kempis, Bartholomeus
Vrbinas, Thomas Waldensis, Joannes Gerson, Alphonsus Tostatus, Sanctus
Vincentius, Sanctus Antoninus, Sanctus Bernardinus Senensis, Nicolaus Cusanus,
Jo. Tritemius, Jo. Naucleras, Albertus Pius, Eckius, Empserus, Clicthoveus, and
many other Learned Catholic Writers: By whose diligence the Heretics in these
Ages were everywhere refuted. But especially were they repressed by the
Authority of Synods and Councils, as well Provincial and National as General
also; to which effect were their latter General Councils, General Council of
Florence. General Council of Lateran. Council of Trent.
the first of Florence under Pope Eugenius IV. against the Heretics and
Schismatics of those times, about the year of Christ 1432; the second of
Lateran under Julius II. and Leo X. about the year of Christ 1513; and the
third of Trent, against Lutherans, Zwinglians, Calvinists, Anabaptists, and
other such fresher Heretics of our days, under Pope Paulus IV. Pius IV. and
Pius V. which Council was begun about the year 1445.

4. And albeit in this time (as in former Ages) there wanted not troublesome
Spirits and new-fangling Heads to impugn and exercise this Church, as the
Wickliffians, Hussites, Pickards, Adamites, Thaborites, Orebites, and other
such Sectaries, going before Lutherans, Zwinglians, Calvinists, Anabaptists,
Trinitarians, and other like new Dogmatists of our days: yet were they always
discovered, resisted, vanquished, and condemned by the same ordinary Process of
Ecclesiastical Censures and Judgment; excommunicated, anathematized,
Condemnation of Heretics.
and delivered over to Satan, by the Authority of this Church, as all other
Heretics were in former Ages; and consequently are like to have the self-same
final end, howsoever they ruffle or resist for a time.

5. And this being now the demonstration of our Catholic Church, most clear and
evident to all them that have Eyes of Understanding to see, and Grace to
consider the Truth; let us pass over to the view of John Fox's Church, which
having been hitherto invisible from Christ downward, and only imaginary or
Mathematical, as you have seen, (for that he has scarce named any to have been
of that Church:) yet now from this time forward he will begin to exhibit unto
us a real visible Church on his part, that is to say, a Succession, or rather
Representation of diverse Professors of his Religion, or of some Points thereof
at leastwise, wherein they differ from the Roman. For he does not think it
needful for those of his Church to agree in all Articles, nor does he bind
himself to the Rule of St. Augustine: Ecclesia universaliter perfecta est, Aug.
de genes. ad litteram c. 1.
and in nullo claudicat; The true Church is universally perfect, and does halt
in no one point of Belief. But he thinks it sufficient for his men to agree
in some things against the Roman Church, and to have some sparkles of Truth in
it, as before he In his Protest. page 9.
affirmed; albeit therewithal they should have some blemishes and errors also,
as a little after we will declare.

6. The Catalogue of these Protestant Professors, whereof Fox would make up his
Church, we shall handle in the Chapter following: Now we are only to tell you,
that from this time of Wickliff downwards he means to lay down the visible
Succession of his Church, and to that effect he storeth up all those that held
the Articles of the foresaid Wickliff or Husse for Gospellers of his Church,
whatsoever they held otherwise against him, or different among themselves. And
if any of them or others were punished for their Opinions by our Church, then
does he register them for Martyrs or Confessors of the same Church; which yet
he never durst do before this time, albeit there were diverse other Sectaries in
former Ages that symboliz'd with him in diverse Articles, as has been showed.

7. Yea, in this matter we may see John Fox also play the Fox, and fetch many
windings and turnings to deceive his Reader; for that at the very entrance of
his prolix and tedious Treatise of John Wickliff, whom he proposes as a chosen
man raised up by God for lightening the World, and impugning the Church of
Rome; A starting-hole of Fox.
he leaves to himself a starting-hole for all necessities, when he shall be
pressed; telling us, That albeit in John Wickliff 's Opinions and Assertions
some blemishes perhaps may be noted; yet such blemishes they be, which rather
declare him to be a man that might err, than which directly did fight against
Christ our Savior, etc.

8. Consider, I pray you, what a Defense this is. Perhaps (says he) some
blemishes may be noted; as though the matter were in doubt whether he had any
blemishes in his Doctrine or no. Which yet after the Fox is forced to confess,
and to disclaim them openly. And further he adds full wisely, That if he have
blemishes, Fox page 390. col. 2. n. 33.
or errors in Doctrine, they are such as do rather prove that he was a man, and
might err, than that he did directly fight against Christ. Mark the manner of
his Defense! His errors do prove only, That he was a man, and might err. And so
I say also of the worst Heretics, that their errors and blemishes in Doctrine do
prove that they were men, and erring men; yea, wicked men also, in that they
obstinately defended their own errors: And so I say of Wickliff in like manner.
But mark what follows; Rather than that he did fight directly against Christ:
Which is as much as to say, that it imports not much though he impugned Christ
indirectly, if directly he did not fight against him. And may not any Heretics
that ever lived be defended in this sort? No Heretics do openly and directly
impugn Christ, but rather pretend to honor him above others; bearing ever the
Names not only of Christians, but also of the best, and most reformed
Christians: and consequently they never fought directly against Christ, but
indirectly, pretending one thing, and doing another.

9. After John Fox has greatly justified Wickliff by diverse Leaves of Paper
together, he comes to set down 23 of his first Articles condemned by the
Church of England at that day; Fox page 400. col. 2.

Special Judges appointed to examine Wickliff's Doctrine.


and that (as Fox confesses) by special chosen Judges gathered together; to
wit, eight Bishops, fifteen Religious Learned Men of diverse Orders, fourteen
Doctors, and six Batchelors of Divinity; all which Fox does name and contemn:
And yet these Articles, though in diverse points they concur with Luther,
Zwinglius and Calvin's Doctrine in these days, yet in others they do greatly
disagree; and Fox I think will not defend them. As for Example:

The fourth Article is, That if a Bishop or Priest should give Holy Orders, or
consecrate the Sacrament of the Altar, or minister Baptism, whiles he is in
mortal sin, in were nothing available.

10. Will Fox yield to this Article, think you? For if he do, we may call in
doubt whether ever he were well baptized, and consequently whether he were a
Christian; seeing it may be doubted whether the Priest that baptized him were
in mortal sin or no when he did it.

And again, the ninth Article is, That it is against Scripture for any
Ecclesiastical Ministers to have any temporal possessions at all.

This Article if Fox will grant, yet his Fellow-Ministers, Wickliff's heretical
Articles. Fox p. 400.
and his Lords the Bishops, I presume, will hardly yield thereunto, but will
pretend Scriptures to the contrary against Wickliff. Let us see the rest.

The tenth Article is, That no Prelate ought to excommunicate any person,
except he know him first to be excommunicated by God.

The fifteenth is, That so long as a man is in deadly sin, he is neither Bishop
nor Prelate.

The sixteenth is, That Temporal Lords may according to their own wills and
discretion take away the Temporal Goods from any Church men, whenever they
offend.

The seventeenth is, That Tithes are mere Alms, and may be detained by the
Parishioners, and bestowed where they will at their pleasure.

11. These were some of Wickliff's first Articles, condemned at Oxford about
the year of Christ 1380; but after he published many worse. And I would here
know of John Fox, Whether He and his Fellow-Ministers will allow of these
Articles, or no? And if not, but that they will have them accounted for his
blemishes or errors (as Fox calls them) then may we also with better reason
account for blemishes and errors his other Propositions, wherein he agrees
with the Protestants against Us; as I doubt not but that John Fox will account
those also wherein he agrees with Us against Him, which are many, and far more
than the former, wherein he joyneth with Him against Us, as may be gathered by
these few Articles alleged here by Fox himself; whereby (though mingled with much
other erroneous Doctrine, as you see) it is evident that Wickliff held diverse
Points also of Catholic Religion; as, Holy Orders, Consecration,
Excommunication, distinction of Venial and Mortal Sins, and other like. For
which cause I marvel why John Fox would allege these Articles, but only to
confound himself, and to show that his holy Patriarch Wickliff is so full of
blemishes, as scarce any unspotted thing can be found in his Doctrine.

12. But this is the beggary of this new Church, Fox's Church made up of our
Dunghill clouts.
that it cannot be made up but by such Dunghil-clouts gathered together from
under the feet of their Adversaries: For albeit Wickliff, Husse, and other like
Sectaries, did hold many more Articles with Us against the Protestants, than
with Them against us; yet such is the Integrity, Purity, Severity, yea Majesty
of our Church, that forasmuch as they agreed not in all and every point of
Belief, we (according to the Creed of Athanasius) reject them and as spotted
and blemished Rags do cast them out to the Dunghill, whom poor Fox gathers up
again with great diligence, putting them into his Calendar for Saints, and
chief Pillars of his new Church, and so consequently makes his Church of our
Shoe clouts; which how honorable thing it may be esteemed, let every man judge:
For if these Heretics did agree with him in all Points of his Doctrine, though by
joining with them he should show himself an Heretic; yet they not agreeing but
in some Points only, and impugning him in the rest, it shows a marvelous base
mind, and lack of common sense, to make them Pillars of his Church, as he does.

13. But there is yet another point worse than this; which is, that he does not
only allow of the Religion of these men, but defends also and justifies
their Life and Actions in what case soever; and though never so orderly and
lawfully condemned by the Church or State of those days, yea though they were
convinced to have conspired the King's Murder, and Ruin to the State, or had
broken forth into open War and Hostility against the same. As did Sir John
Oldcastle (by his Wife called Lord Cobham) Sir Roger Acton, Stow and Walsing.
an. 1414.
and many other their Followers, in the first year of King Henry V. which Story
you may read in John Stow truly related out of Thomas Walsingham, and other
ancient Writers.

Fox from p. 530, to 540.
14. He sets down also without blushing (I mean Fox) as well the Records of
the Chancery, as the Act of Parliament it self, whereby they were condemned of
open Treason, and confessed Rebellion; for which sixty nine were condemned in
one day by public Sentence; and yet does the mad fellow take upon him to excuse
and defend them all by a long Discourse of many Leaves together, scoffing and
jesting as well at their Arraignment and Sentence given, as also at the Act of
Parliament holden at Leicester, Anno 2 Hen. 5. cap. 7. and in the year of
Christ 1415. And after all he sets forth, in contempt of this public
Judgment, a great painted Pageant or Picture of those that were hanged for that
open Fact of Rebellion in St. Giles's Field in London, as of true Saints and
Martyrs; namely of Sir Roger Acton and others, page 540. And some Leaves after
that again, he sets out another particular Pageant of the several Execution
of Sir John Oldcastle, Fox p. 592.
with this Title: The description of the cruel Martyrdom of Sir John Oldcastle,
Lord Cobham. And more than this, he appoints unto them their several Festival
Days in red Letters, (which were the days of their Hanging) as unto solemn
Martyrs. The first upon the sixth of January, with this Title; Sir Roger Acton,
Knight, Martyr: And the other upon the fifth of February, with this Inscription
in his Calendar; Sir John Oldcastle, Lord Cobham, Martyr. Whereby we may see,
that these men do not measure things as they are in themselves, but as they
serve to maintain their Faction.

Fox makes adversary Heretics of his Church, whether they will or no.
15. And it is further to be noted, That albeit these two Rebellious Knights,
(Acton and Oldcastle) besides all other their convicted Crimes, did make public
Profession of a far different Faith from John Fox (as may be seen by the
Confessions and Protestations set down by Fox himself) yea, and the latter of
them also did openly recant all the Errors and Heresies that he had held
before; yet notwithstanding will not Fox so let them go, but perforce will have
them to be of his Church, whether they will or no. It would be over long to
rehearse many Examples; some few shall you have for a taste.

16. Page 512. Fox sets down the Protestation of Sir John Oldcastle with
this Title: The Christian Belief of the Lord Cobham. By which Title you may see
that he likes well of his Belief, and holds it for truly Christian. Well,
mark what follows! When, after other Articles about the blessed Trinity, and
Christ's Deity, Sir John Oldcastle comes to treat of the Sacrament of the
Altar, Sir John Oldcastle's Protestation at his death.
he protests thus: And forasmuch as I am falsely accused of a misbelief in the
Sacrament of the Altar, I signify here to all men that this is my Faith
concerning that; I believe in that Sacrament to be contained very Christ's Body
and Blood, under the similitudes of Wine and Bread, yea the same Body that was
conceived of the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, hung on the Cross, died
and was buried, arose the third day from the dead, and now is glorified in
Heaven. This was his Confession, and is related here by Fox: And will Fox agree
to this, think you? It may be he will, for that he says nothing against it at
all in this place.

17. But some Leaves after, repeating another Testimonial of the said
Oldcastle's Belief, witnessed by his own Friends, concerning this Article, he
writes thus: Furthermore, He believes that the blessed Sacrament of the Altar
is verily and truly Christ's Body in form of Bread. Upon which words Fox makes
this Commentary in the Margin: In form of Bread, but not without Bread, Fox p.
520.
he means. Yea, John, is that his meaning? How then stands this with his
former words, Under the similitudes of Bread and Wine? Is the Similitude of
Bread true Bread? Who sees not this silly shift of a poor baited Fox, that
cannot tell whither to turn his head? But mark yet a far worse shift!

18. Sir John Oldcastle showing his Belief about three sorts of Men, the one of
Saints now in Heaven, the second in Purgatory, Fox p. 314.
the third here Militant upon Earth, says thus: The holy Church I believe to
be divided into three sorts or companies; whereof the first are now in Heaven,
etc. the second sort are in Purgatory, abiding the Mercy of God, and a full
deliverance of pain; the third upon Earth, etc. To this speech of Purgatory,
Fox thought best (left it might disgrace his new Martyr) to add this
Parenthesis of his own, Fox's perfidious dealing.
( if any such place be in the Scriptures, etc) And by this you may perceive
how he proceeds in all the rest, to wit, most perfidiously, like a Fox in all.

19. Furthermore, he sets down at length a very ample and earnest
Recantation of the said Sir John Oldcastle, taken out of the Records, as
authentically made as can be devised. Wherein he thus protested: In Nomine Dei,
Fox p. 529.
Amen. I John Oldcastle, denounced, detected and convicted of and upon diverse
Articles savouring Heresy and Error, etc. I, being evil seduced by diverse
Seditious Preachers, have grievously erred, heretically persisted,
blasphemously answered, and obstinately rebelled, etc. And having recounted at
length all his former condemned and heretical Opinions, he ends thus: Over
and besides all this, The Abjuration of Sir John Oldcastle.
I John Oldcastle, utterly forsaking and renouncing all the aforesaid Errors
and Heresies, and all other like unto them, lay my hand here upon this Book and
Evangel of God, and swear, That I shall never more from henceforth hold these
aforesaid Heresies, nor yet any other like unto them wittingly, etc. All which
Recantation and Abjuration being related at large by John Fox, he says nothing
at all against it, but only that it was devised by the Bishops without his
consent; alleging no one Author, Witness, Writing, Record, Reason, or probable
Conjecture for proof thereof, but follows the fond shift Supra part 1. c. 5.
before touched by me against the Magd^burgenses of him that being accused of
heinous Crimes, brings in first the best Witnesses of all the City to prove
the same against himself, and then answers all with only saying, that they
are Liars, and know not what they say. In which kind I cannot omit to allege an
Example or two more for your better satisfaction in this behalf.

20. This Fox in his Protestation to the Church of England, wherein he
pretends to put the very sum of all his whole Volume, being desirous to prove
the Antiquity of this his visible Church, not only by these Witnesses, (the
Wickliffians, Hussites, Lollards, and other Sectaries of that time, above 200
years agone) but also by the testimonies of diverse Statutes and Acts of
Parliaments made against them in England at the same time; he cites sundry
Statutes and Acts of Parliament for that purpose, and presently discrediteth
the same again, telling you, That you must not believe Them, but rather Him and
His Words against them all. You shall hear him in his own words.

21. Let any man (says he) peruse the Acts and Statutes of Parliaments passed
in this Realm of ancient times, and therein consider the course of times, Fox
in his Prot. p. 10.
where he may find and read, Anno 5 Reg. Rich. 2. in the year of our Lord 1380,
of a great number that there be called evil persons, going about from Town to
Town in Frize Gowns, Fox's facility in rejecting Parliaments.
preaching unto the People, etc. Which Preachers, though the words of the Statute
do term them to be dissembling persons, preaching diverse Sermons containing
Heresies and notorious Errors, to the emblemishment of Christian Faith, etc.
yet notwithstanding may every true Christian Reader conceive of those Preachers
to have taught no other Doctrine than now they hear their own Preachers in
Pulpits preach, etc.

22. Mark here three Points, good Reader. First, That if all this were true,
that the Wickliffians had preached no other Doctrine than the Protestants do
now; yet nothing follows of this, but that Protestants Doctrine was condemned
for Heresy not only by the Church-Laws, but also by diverse Acts of English
Parliaments, above 200 years past. Which thing, what help or credit it can
bring to Fox his Religion, which stands chiefly in England by Authority of
far latter Acts of Parliament, I do not see; for that hereof only may be
inferred two Conclusions, if his premises be true: The first, That Protestants
were condemned for Heretics by Acts of Parliament 200 years agone: The second,
If those ancient Acts of Parliament were of little force in matters of
Religion; then latter Acts, that have established a different Religion, may
also be called in question, and that with much more reason and probability.

23. Secondly, I say, That this Assertion of Fox is most apparently false, (to
wit, that the Wickliffian Preachers taught no other Doctrine than the Protestant
Preachers now teach) if the Articles before alleged out of himself be truly
written by him: For neither do the Protestant Preachers in England at this day
teach the Real Presence in the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, or the Doctrine
of Purgatory, (as you have heard Sir John Oldcastle a chief Wickliffian profess
a little before) nor yet do Protestants hold those Articles of John Wickliff
himself, (which in this Chapter we have mentioned) as held neither by Them nor
Us. And much less do they hold any other Catholic Opinions, which the
Wickliffians did, together with their Heresies. So as this is a notorious
untruth, and cannot be denied or dissembled.

24. Thirdly, We may consider of the particular Point which before I noted,
That John Fox is not ashamed to cite a whole Parliament against himself, and
then in a word to reject the same, as of no credit in the World in respect of
Him and his Denial or Rejection. The Parliament (says he) calls these Frize
gown-Preachers (the Wickliffians) dissembling persons; but you must think
notwithstanding they were very honest men. The Parliament says, That they
preached Heresies and notorious Errors; but John Fox says it was true
Christian Doctrine. Whom shall we here believe, either the whole Parliament, who
lived with them, and examined both their Doctrine and doings; or John Fox, that
comes more than 200 years after them, and will needs make himself their
Brother whether they will or no, and judge also of the Parliament? But let us
hear him yet further.

Fox p. 10. in Protest.

Another Parliament rejected by Fox.


25. Furthermore (says he) you shall find likewise, in Statuto anno 2 Hen. 4.
cap. 15. in the year of our Lord 1402, another like Company of godly Preachers,
and faithful Defenders of true Doctrine: whom albeit the words of the Statute
there, through corruption of time, do falsely term to be false and perverse
Preachers under dissembled Holiness, teaching in those days openly and privily
new Doctrine and heretical Opinions, etc. Yet notwithstanding, whoever reads
Histories, and the orderly descent of times, shall understand these to be no
false Teachers, but faithful Witnesses of the Truth, etc.

26. Lo here the testimony of another Parliament of our Country, held 22 years
after the former, which John Fox rejects with the same facility that he did
the other: For whereas the Parliament, that had examined the matter,
protests, That they had found them false, perverse and dissembling People,
teaching new Doctrine and heretical Opinions; Fox averreth the contrary, That
they were good Preachers, and faithful Defenders of true Doctrine, and holy
Witnesses of God's Truth. And for proof hereof, he says, That whosoever
reads Histories, and conferreth the Order and Descent of times, shall
understand thus much to be true. But how and by what means a man shall gather
this understanding, he tells us not. And by the Historical Discourses and
Conference of times, which we have hitherto made in this Book, we understand
the contrary; finding indeed by Descent and Order of times, that these Opinions
of Wickliff, Husse, and Lollards, and the like, were new heretical Opinions
indeed, and taken and judged so by Christendom at their up rising and
appearance in the World. Wherefore this is plain impudence in Fox, to say that
by reading Histories, and noting descent of Times, these men are by him
justified from being Sectaries.

27. It follows in Fox: Fox ib. p. 10.
Of the like number also (says he) of like true faithful favorers and
followers of God's holy Word, we find in the year of our Lord 1422, specified
in a Letter sent from Henry Chichesley Archbishop of Canterbury to Pope Martin
V. of many infected here in England (as he said) by the Heresies of Wickliff
and Husse, etc. who though they be termed for Heretics and Schismatics; yet
served they the living Lord, within the Ark of his true spiritual and visible
Church. And where is then the frivolous brag of the Papists, which make so much
of their painted Sheaths, etc?

28. Do you see in what jollity of mind John Fox is put, by finding out this
Succession of his new visible Church for above 200 years downward? Do you hear
how he vaunteth of Antiquity and long Continuance, albeit indeed he names not
continuance, nor can he? for that (I think) he will not grant that the
Wickliffian Church does endure unto this day, If Wickliffian Preachers were now
alive, the Protestants would not admit them.
or that if a number of those Wickliffian holy Teachers and faithful Witnesses
of the Truth, so much praised here by him, should come into England at this
day, or Scotland, or into Germany, or Geneva, or among any other Sect or sort
of Protestants whatsoever, and should preach that Doctrine which they preached
then, (to wit, against the Church of Rome in many Points, but yet defending
that number of Sacraments which they did, the Real Presence, Sacrifice of the
Mass, together with those extravagant Articles also before mentioned, to wit,
That it is against the Scriptures that Bishops or true Ministers should have
any Temporal Lands and Livings; and that Tithes are not due; and that both
Princes and Prelates do lose their Offices, Authorities, and Dignities,
whenever they fall into mortal sin, etc.) If these men (I say) that were so
true Preachers and principal Guiders of the Ark of John Fox his true visible
and spiritual Church in those days, should revive and preach again in these
days, would his Brethren the Protestants, in England or out of England, receive
them, think you? And if it be certain that they would not, how were they true
Preachers then, and not now? or how can these and they be true Brethren of one
Faith, Religion, or Church? Does not every simple Man or Woman see this Folly
and absurd Contradiction?

29. But to return to the matter in hand, about rejecting Parliaments and other
public Testimonies, we see that John Fox with the same facility both recites
and rejects the Letter of the Archbishop of Canterbury, written to the Pope
about those Wickliffians of his time, twenty years after the former Parliament
was held; but yet in conformity of that which the said Parliament under King
Henry IV. and the other before under King Richard II. did testify, How Fox
has found out a visible Church, and from whence.
as well of the said Sectaries Hypocrisy and Dissimulation, as of their wicked
Errors and Heresies. All which Fox contemning, says to the contrary, That they
served faithfully the living Lord within the Ark of his true, spiritual and
visible Church, etc.

30. And it is to be noted, that scarce ever throughout this whole Volume of
Acts and Monuments from Christ downward (for the space of 1400 years) does Fox
talk of any visible Church on his side, but only now, when he comes to these
Wickliffians, and other like Sectaries: And yet, to speak warily also, he
adjoyneth unto it the word spiritual, to have some starting-hole to run out
when he shall be pressed about the true nature of visible Succession; which we
mean to do in the next Chapter following. But in the mean space, it is a matter
worth good laughter to hear him say, How the Members of Fox's visible Church do
hang together.
That Papists do brag of their painted, Sheath, concerning their Churches
Antiquity and Succession; and that he has sufficiently proved before by the
continual descent of his Church after the Doctrine that now is reformed, that it
has stood and been continued from the beginning, (for so are his words) yea
and that visibly, as now he adds. Whereat (I know) no man can choose but
laugh, that has read this our Treatise wherein we have showed all the
contrary, to wit, the visible Descent of the Roman Church by orderly Succession
from the Apostles time, and that John Fox has not so much as named any
different Succession or Descent of his Church distinct from the other, until
the time of Innocentius III. 1200 years after Christ. And what manner of
deduction or collection of Heretics and Sectaries he brings down from thence,
and how well they agree and hang together, either in Time, Place, Function or
Faith, we shall examine a little after.

31. But now, before we end this Chapter, we are to advertise the Reader, that
besides the Sects before named of the Petrobusians, Henricians, Waldensians, or
poor men of Lions, the Albigensians and Wickliffians, there was another Sect in
England called Lollards, more famous than the rest in respect of Lollards Tower
some what renowned in London for the Imprisonments of those Sectaries in that
place. But when and how this Sect of Heretics began is not so clear; for that
some (as Prateolus and others) seem to affirm that it took its Origin in
England as a Brood of the Wickliffists, Of Lollards and their beginning in
England.

Prat. l. 10. haeres. p. 157.


for that they were more famous there than in other places: And therefore he
says, Lollardi ex Anglia and ex Wickliffistarum Secta originem duxerunt; The
Lollards had their beginning from England, and from the Sect of the
Wickliffians, And he adds, That it was about the year 1360; which cannot
stand, for that we have showed before how Wickliff began to publish his Doctrine
after this, to wit, about the year 1370. Wherefore the Abbot Tritemius, a
German Chronicler, declares the matter more particularly and truly, Trit. in
chron. an. Dom. 1315.
saying, That there was a certain Heretic in Germany called Gualter Lolhard,
who about the year of Christ 1315, taking certain Doctrine from the Albigenses
and Waldenses that went before him, and adding (as the fashion is of Sectaries)
diverse new Opinions of his own, made a particular Sect, who were called
Lolhards. Whereby it appears that this Sect began in Germany above fifty
years before the Sect of Wickliff in England; and hereby ensued, that
Wickliffians taking afterward diverse Opinions from the said Lolhards, were
commonly also called Lolhards. And John Fox himself, reciting the Sentence of
Condemnation of Bishop Tresnant of Hereford against one William Swynderby, an
Apostata Priest, for Wickliffian Heresies, (in the year of Christ 1391, the
24th of June) he sets down these words of the said Bishop: Fox p. 429. col.
1. n. 15.
We being excited, through the Information of many credible and faithful
Christians of our Diocese, to root out pestiferous Plants, as Sheep diseased
with an incurable Sickness, going about to infect the whole and sound Flock,
that is to say, certain Preachers, Wickliffians were called Lollards.
or more truly execrable Offenders, of the new Sect, vulgarly called Lolhards,
etc.

32. Lo here Wickliffians at this time, (for such a one was this Swynderby)
were commonly called Lolhards, twenty years and more after Wickliff had begun
his Doctrine. So as rather Wickliffians are to be said to have come forth of
Lolhards, than Lolhards of Wickliffians.

33. And albeit these two Sects, beginning (as you have heard) the one in
Germany, and the other in England, with the distance of some fifty years of
their Offspring, had many Opinions common to them both, (especially against
the Roman Church, against Invocation of Saints, Fastings, Prayers, and the
Sacraments of Penance, Matrimony, Extreme Unction, and the like;) yet had they
their peculiar Opinions also, whereby they were made a several Sect. As for
Example, the Lolhards impugned not only the foresaid three Sacraments of
Penance, Matrimony, and Extreme Unction, (as some Wickliffians did, The
peculiar Opinions of the Lollards. Trit. ib.
) but Baptism and the Eucharist in like manner. They held also for their
peculiar Opinions, (as Tritemius says,) That Lucifer and his Angels were
injuriously Michael and his Angels, and consequently to be restored again at
the Day of Judgment; and that Michael and his Angels are to be damned for the
foresaid Injury, and to be delivered over to everlasting Punishment from the
Day of Judgment forward. That our Lady could not Terram autem dedit filiis
hominum, Psalm. 113.
God has given the Earth to the children of men; he does consequently punish
such Wickedness as is done upon Earth: but if any thing be done under ground,
it is not punishable. And therefore in Caves and Cellars under ground they were
accustomed to exercise all manner of Abomination. And of this he relates a
certain Story happened in Germany, which was, That one Gisla (a young woman of
their Sect) coming to be burned for Heresy, she was asked whether she were a
Virgin or no; whereunto she answered, That above-ground she was, but
underground not.

34. There followed many other Heresies also from this time downward unto King
Henry VIII.'s days, which prevailed diversely in diverse Countries, Flagellants,
or whipping Heretics.

an. Dom. 1350. Trit. in chron. an. 1350.


as the Flagellants, or Whippers, which made a new Baptism of Blood, and held
diverse Articles of the Lolhards, in Germany and Hungary, about the year of
Christ 1350, as Tritemius says. The Hussites also in Bohemia, who had their
Doctrine of John Husse, Scholar of John Wickliff, (but yet in diverse Articles
differing from him) about the year of Christ 1415, Aeneas Sylv. histor. Bohem.
cap. 35.
as Aeneas Sylvius declares at large. And upon this Man's teaching, and the
Doctrine of Hierom of Prague (that lived at the same time) there sprung up
diverse different Sects in Bohemia, as the Orebites, Adamites, Drecentians,
Gallecians, Rochezanites, The diversity of Sects amongst the Hussites.

Bon. Decad. 4. lib. 2.


Jacobites, Thaborites, and others. Whereof Aeneas Sylvius, Bonfinius, and
other Authors do treat. And Bonfinius writes, That Matthias King of Hungary
was wont to say in his days, that the Sects and Sectaries of Bohemia were so
diverse and contrary one to the other, as if no other Argument were against
them, this were sufficient to overthrow them all. And the same confusion
remains there unto this day.

35. And this shall suffice for the Heresies of this fifth station of Time;
especially such as prevailed most in England from Wickliff unto King Henry
VIII. in whose days Luther rose up, and made a new Sect. For albeit in many
Points he symbolized, and had concurrence with most of these Sects, but
especially with the Lolhards and Wickliffians, (under whose Names all Sectaries
commonly covered themselves in our Country;) yet had Luther diverse Points also
peculiar to Him and His, which made them properly a distinct and several Sect;
which himself confesses in like manner, disclaiming by Name from Husse and
Hussites in these words: Non recte faciunt, Luth. in respons. ad Rofensem art.
30.
qui me Hussitam vocant; non enim mecum ille sensit: They do not well that call
me a Hussite; for he does not agree with me in Doctrine. And as for Wickliff, we
may see the same Judgment of Luther by the testimony of Philip Melancthon,
Melanct. epist. ad Freder. Mechonium.
that says of him, Nec intellexit nec tenuit Fidei Justitiam; He neither
understood nor held the Justice of Faith, which is the very Foundation of
Luther's Gospel and Doctrine.

36. And again in the same place he objecteth diverse other erroneous Doctrins
unto him: as, That he does take away all Civil and Politic Government; that he
holds for unlawful to Priests to possess any thing proper; that no Tithes are
to be paid, and the like. Which Doctrins of Wickliff notwithstanding our John
Fox defends, commending highly the Teachers and Professors thereof, in all
his tract of Time from King Edward III. to King Henry VIII. canonizing them for
Saints that were any way punished or called in question for any of these
Doctrins, under the Reigns of King Richard II. or King Henry IV, V, VI, or VII.
and other Kings of that time. And in this Argument is spent the whole sum of
his fifth and sixth Books, in which Books the very Titles of the Pages may
sufficiently testify what is handled therein. Anno Dom. 1382.
As for Example, page 406. under the Reign of King Richard II. is this Title,
The first Law for burning the Professors of the Gospel Whereby you see that he
calls all these men, whether they be Wickliffians, Hussites, or Lolhards,
Professors of Christ's Gospel, and consequently must he needs hold for
Evangelical Truth all which they did hold: and so in effect he does, in
handling their Causes throughout these two Books, against the Bishops and
Princes that punished them, though in clear words and Categorical Propositions
he dare not do it.

37. And this is the sluttering and stammering, turning and winding of this our
Fox, as you can never know where to have him; for that now he affirms, now he
denies; now he leaves the matter doubtful; now he moves a question, but
solveth it not; now he gainsayeth and contradicts himself; now he says one
thing in words, and prosecuteth another in deed. As for Example, How Fox
behaveth himself in defending Wickliffians and their Doctrine.
He confesses before in words, (as you have heard) That Wickliff had diverse
blemishes in Doctrine, (that is to say, Errors and Heresies,) and so it may
appear, as well by that which we have set down thereof, as also by the Judgment
of Melancthon; and yet in prosecution of his Work John Fox will not stick to
commend the worst of those Doctrins, as we may see by the very Titles of the
Pages set over these Books.

38. As for Example, page 420. he puts this Title over the said Page:
Temporalities may be taken from the Clergy, etc. And then yet further, in the
same Page he puts this Head or beginning to a long Discourse about this
matter in these words: The second Disputation in the University of Prague, upon
the seventeenth Article of John Wickliff, most fruitful to be read, proving by
twenty-four Reasons out of the Scriptures, that Temporal Lords and Princes may
take away Temporalities from the Clergy, etc. This is the Title of this
fruitful Discourse for taking away all Temporal Fruits from the Clergy. But how
fruitful soever this Disputation may seem to John Fox against
Clergy-Temporalities, that perhaps could get none for himself; yet to others of
his Clergy, that possess Temporalities, I doubt much whether it will seem so
fruitful, or be so well liked of as by John Fox, who for his twenty-four
Reasons alleged for the same, may chance be related into some Rank of the
twenty-four Orders, fit for a Man of his Degree and Merits.

39. Moreover, page 426. he has this Title, Tithes proved to be pure Alms.
Which Title I think also will not greatly content the most of his
Fellow-Ministers, if their Parishioners should stand upon this Doctrine with
them, to wit, That their Tithes are pure Alms, according to the Gospel of John
Wickliff and John Fox; and consequently they may deny or detain them when they
list, or give so much thereof unto Ministers as they list, and no more, which
oftentimes perhaps would be very little. But what would these Ministers, think
you, (but especially their Wives and Children) say of this Doctrine, if once
they felt hunger come upon them thereby? yet Fox prosecuteth the same Title
over other Pages. As for Example, page 446. he has these words: Fox allows
taking away of Tithes and Temporalities from the Clergy.
Tithes not expressly commanded anew by Christ; and then has he this Note: If
Tithes be claimed by force of the Old Law, then Priests by the same Law are
bound to have no Temporalities. And this matter Fox does prosecute at large, as
one Article among other, of one Walter Brute, a Layman of the Sect of
Wickliff; in whom, says Fox, the mighty operation of God's Spirit did
effectuate such constancy, as in this and other Articles he resisted openly the
Bishop of Hereford in his time, etc. Lo here the approbation of Brute's Spirit,
whose fourth Article was, as Fox himself sets down, That no man is bound to
give Tithes; Fox p. 348.
and if any man will needs give, he may give to whom he will, excluding thereby
their Curates. Another Article also was of the said Brute, That a Priest
receiving by bargain any thing of Yearly Annuity, is thereby a Schismatic, and
Excommunicate. Which if it be true, then are his Ministers in a hard case at
this day in England, who do bargain for their Service and Wages due thereunto.

40. And so goes Fox on from Point to Point to ratify John Wickliff's
Doctrine, or at least the Professors thereof; not considering (simple Fellow)
how much they differ from him, or make against him, so they be contrary to the
Pope of Rome, or condemned by him. For further proof of which Folly and blind
Ignorance, we shall pass now to treat in a several Chapter what manner of
Continuance and Succession of his Church he devises, throughout the Rabble of
these opposite Sects, from the time of Pope Innocentius III. to the Reign of
King Henry VIII. whereby I doubt not but the Reader will remain sufficiently
instructed of these Men's madness, that of so contrary and repugnant Spirits
will needs frame to themselves the Unity of a true Christian Church.

CHAP. X.
The most absurd and ridiculous Succession of Sectaries appointed by John Fox
for the Continuance of his Church from Pope Innocentius III. downward; where
also by this occasion is declared the true Nature and Conditions of lawful
Ecclesiastical Succession.

HAving now followed John Fox throughout all this Treatise from Christ's time
to ours, to see what visible course and race he would set down, as well of His
Church as Ours, (according to his promise made in the beginning of his Acts and
Monuments) we have found him hitherto to have talked only in a manner of Our
Church, that is to say, of the Universal Roman Church, perspicuously come down
by succession of Years and Ages from the Apostles to Us; neither did John Fox
for twelve hundred years together so much as name unto us any other
Congregation of Men or Women, small or great, good or bad, (that in this time
bare the Name of a Christian Church) besides the other; nor did he pretend any
Succession, fearing perhaps those words of Tertullian Supra c. 10. Tertull. l.
de Praescript.
before recited: Confingant tale aliquid Haeretici, etc. Let Heretics presume
to feign or devise any such Succession of Bishops, Teachers and Pastors for
Their Church as we have alleged for Ours, if they dare.

2. But now, from Pope Innocentius's time downwards, John Fox presuming that
all the other Church was fallen from God, (a great presumption indeed, as
before has been showed) he brings us forth in place thereof another Company
of Men, which he says in those days made the true Church, (for that they were
condemned by the other Church, which he holds for the false.) And these were
a certain Rabblement of Sectaries different in Opinions and Professions not
only from Us, but also from John Fox and his Crew, and most of all among
themselves, being of diverse Countries, Sects, Times, Ages, Offices and
Functions, and cohering together in no other form at all of Succession, but
that one rose or sprung up after the other. For which cause Fox himself in his
Acts and Monuments does not handle their Affairs as of any Congregation that
ever met together, or saw perhaps one another, or had Conference, Order,
Subordination or Succession among themselves, but only tieth them together in a
certain List or Catalogue, as Sampson's Foxes were by the Tails. Judic. 15.
Which List or Catalogue he sets down in his foresaid Protestation to the
Church of England: Fox in Protest. ad Eccl. Angl.
telling us first, That during the time of the last 400 years, from Pope
Innocentius downwards, the true Church of Christ durst not openly appear in the
face of the World, being oppressed by Tyranny; but yet that it remained from
time to time visibly in certain chosen Members, that not only bare secret good
affection to sincere Doctrine, but stood also in the defense of Truth against
the Church of Rome.

3. This is his Assertion; which he proves by a large List or Catalogue (as I
have said) of sundry that were in this time censured and condemned in some part
of Doctrine by the said Roman Church. Fox ib. p. 10.
In which Catalogue (says he) first to pretermit Bertramus and Berengarius,
which were before Pope Innocentius III. a What Learning they were of you shall
see afterward.
Learned multitude of sufficient Witnesses here might be produced, whose Names
neither are obscure, nor Doctrine unknown, as Joachim Abbot of Calabria,
Almaricus a Learned Bishop, that was judged an Heretic for holding against
Images; besides the Martyrs of Alsatia, of whom we read an hundred to be burned
by Pope Innocentius in one day. Add likewise (says he) to these the Waldenses
and Albigenses, Marsilius Patavinus, Gulielmus de Sancto Amore, Simon
Tornacensis, Arnoldus de nova Villa, Joannes Semica, besides diverse others
Preachers in Suevia, standing against the Pope, Anno 1240, etc.

4. Thus begins Fox his Catalogue, and then goes he forward with Joannes
Anglicus a Master of Paris, Mark what men Fox does couple together as of one
Faith.
Petrus Joannis a Minorite, burned after his death; Robert Grossehead Bishop of
Lincoln, called Malleus Romanorum, etc. And further he adds Joannes de
Ganduno, Eudo Duke of Burgundy, that counseled the French King to receive the
Popes Extravagants, Dantes an Italian Poet, that wrote against Popes, Monks and
Friars, together with Petrarcha, and them Conradus Hagaz imprisoned for
preaching against the Mass, Anno 1339, etc. And to these again he coupleth
Franciscus de Arcaterra, and others burned for new Opinions, Gregorius
Ariminensis, Armachanus, Occham, and others, as though these had been all of the
same Opinions. And finally, he falls upon the Lollards, Wickliffians,
Hussites, and their Followers in England and Bohemia, succeeding one after
another, now in this Country, now in that, now upon one occasion, and now upon
another, until the Reign of King Henry III. when Martin Luther began his
Profession, who did agree and symbolize in diverse Points with the said former
Sects of Waldenses and Albigenses, Lollards, Wickliffians, and Hussites, and
differed in others, as before has been declared: And after the Lutherans did
follow again others, partly agreeing, and partly disagreeing, as Zuinglius,
Calvinus, Beza, Oecolampadius, and others unto our days, and every one
affirming his Opinions to be the New Gospel.

5. And this is the visible Succession (forsooth) which John Fox has devised
to set down for the proof of his new Church, and the Antiquity thereof for 400
years past: And it is like as if a man in England, to disgrace the City of
London, A fit similitude and comparison.
should seek out the Records of all those that have been hanged at Tyburn for
Theft or Murders for 400 years: and having found them out, should produce them
for Witnesses of the truth, and for honest men and good Citizens; condemning
both the Judges and Jurors and whole Country, that gave Sentence and Verdict
against them. And yet if you will see how John Fox plays the Fool indeed, and
braggeth of this Succession of his Church, observe what he writes presently
upon the enumeration of these foresaid Pillars of his Church.

6. Wherefore if any be so beguiled in his Opinion (says he) as to think that
the Doctrine of the Church of Rome (as now it stands) is of such Antiquity,
and that the same was never impugned before the time of Luther and Zuinglius
now of late; let him read these Histories, and peruse the Acts of Parliament
passed in this Realm of ancient time; as, Anno 5 Regis Richardi 2. 1380, etc.
Fond reasoning of Fox.
Did you ever hear a man in his Wits reason in this sort? How does this
Catalogue (I pray you) of condemned Heretics (for these last 400 years) impugn
the Antiquity of the Roman Church or Doctrine before that time? And again, Who
does deny but that the same Roman Church and Doctrine was impugned by old
Heretics long before Luther and Zuinglius; yea, and before Wickliff, Waldenses,
Albigenses, and Berengarius were born, as by our former deduction has appeared
that she was impugned by Heretics of every Age? And moreover, To what purpose
does Fox will us to read these Histories, and the Acts of Parliament passed
against Wickliffians in the time of King Richard II? To what purpose (I say)
does this simple Fellow talk and write this against himself, seeing that by
these Histories and Statutes we learn nothing (as before we have noted) but
only that his elder Brethren the Lollards and Wickliffians were condemned for
Heretics by public Authority of our Realm above 200 years agone? Which we grant
unto him without further proof?

7. Wherefore, to leave this childish babbling, that is without sense,
consequence, or reason, and to return to some more serious Argument: We shall
handle here two Points for better discussion of this Succession of Sectaries
alleged by John Fox. First, What are the Conditions necessarily required to a
good Ecclesiastical Succession, for demonstrating a Church: And then, Two
Points to be handled in this Chapter.
What manner of men these were indeed, which Fox does here assign for
Representation of his Church. And all shall be done with as much brevity as may
be.

8. The first Condition is, That this Succession of men that make the Church be
Universal both in Place and Time; that is to say, The conditions of Eccles.
Succession.

Aug in Psalm. 90. Conc. 2. and ead. fere in Psa. 56.


(to use St. Augustin's words) Non quae hoc loco est, sed quae hoc loco, and
per totum Orbem terrarum; nec illa quae hoc tempore, sed ab ipso Abel, usque in
finem, etc. That it be not in this or that particular place only, but in this
place, and throughout the whole World; and that it be not only in this or that
time, but that it be from Abel to the end of the World. By which words of St.
Augustine we see that the visible Succession of the true Church must be
Universal, first in Place, and that it must be a visible Company professing
Christ under one Faith and Doctrine, not in this or that particular Country,
Province or Place only, but over all the World, where Christians are. And so we
see it verified in the Succession of the Roman Church in our former deductions.

9. Secondly, It must be Universal in Time, True Succession of the Church must
be Universal both in place and time.
for that it must not begin from John Wickliff only, Bertramus, or Berengarius,
(as John Fox does appoint the Visibility of his Church) but it must come down
from the Apostles, and endure visibly to the end of the World; yea, from Abel
himself, (as St. Augustine says) for that even from Him Christ instituted a
visible Church, and continued the same by Succession under all three Laws, both
of Nature, of Moses, and of Grace, as St. Augustine in his Book de Civitate Dei
does declare at large, and in our days Dr. Sanders most Learnedly, in his
Excellent Work de Visibili Monarchia, does prove the same.

10. So as this Collection of Sectaries alleged here by John Fox, being neither
Universal in place, nor agreeing in Faith with the Universal known Church of
Christendom, but with particular Assemblies, (one in one place, and another in
another) nor yet having Universality of Time; as not coming down from the
Apostles Age, but only for some 400 years, as Fox himself confesses: these men
(I say) cannot make a true Church, though they have some sparks of true Doctrine
among them, as Fox braggeth; seeing it is true which St. Augustine affirms:
Aug. l. de unit. Eccles. c. 4.
Quicunque credunt, quod Christus Jesus in Carne venerit, and quod fit Filius
Dei, etc. Et tamen ab ejus Corpore, quod est Ecclesia ita dissentiunt; ut eorum
communio non sit cum toto quacunque diffunditur, sed in aliqua part separata
inveniatur, manifestum est eos non esse in Catholica Ecclesia; Whosoever does
believe, that Christ Jesus came in Flesh, and that he is the Son of God, etc.
And that they do so dissent from his Body, that is the Church; as they do not
communicate with the whole spread over all parts, but only with some separate
part, it is manifest that these men are not of the Catholic Church. And thus
much of the first Condition.

Succession is understood principally of Bishops.

Aug. l. 1. cont. advers. Leg. and Prophet. c. 20.


11. The second Point to be considered is, When the ancient Fathers do stand
upon visible Succession of Men as a Note of the true Church, they meant it
especially by Bishops, that come down by continual Succession from the Apostles
time to ours: Ecclesia (says St. Augustine) ab Apostolorum temporibus per
Episcoporum Successiones certissimas usque ad nostrum, and deinceps tempora,
perseverat; The true Church does persevere from the Apostles time unto ours,
and after us again to the Worlds end, by most certain Succession of Bishops,
Iren. l. 3. c. 3. Tert. de praesc. Opt. l. 2. cont. Donat.

Aug. ep. 165.


etc. St. Irenaeus also, Tertullian, Optatus, and St. Augustine before-alleged,
do each of them (as you have heard) deduce the visible Succession of the Church
from the Apostles to their days by the visible Succession of the Roman Bishops.

12. And finally, the Sentence of the said holy Father St. Augustine is
notoriously known in many parts of his Works concerning the importance of this
Succession: Aug. cont. ep. fundam. c. 4.
Tenet me (says he) in Ecclesia Catholica ab ipsa Sede Petri ad praesentem
Episcopatum Successio Sacerdotum; The Succession of Priests (he means
Bishops) from the Seat of St. Peter unto the present Bishop of Rome, holds me
in the Catholic Church. And again, against his old Master Faustus the Manichee:
Aug. l. 2. cont. Faust. c. 2.
Vides in hac re, quid Ecclesiae Catholicae valeat Authoritas, quae ab ipsis
fundatissimis Sedibus Apostolorum usque ad hodiernum diem, succedentium sibimet
Episcoporum serie, and tot populorum consensione firmatur; Do thou not see of
what force the Authority of the Catholic Church is, which being established by
the most firm foundations of the Apostolic See, does endure unto this day, by
the Race of Bishops succeeding one another, and by the consent of so many
Nations under their Government?

Four Points required in true Succession of the Catholic Church.
13. Behold here four things especially required by St. Augustine in Succession
of men, that must demonstrate a true Church. First, That the chief Heads
thereof must be Bishops. Secondly, They must succeed orderly one to another.
Thirdly, They must come down from the very Apostles, as before has been
showed. Fourthly, Christian Nations must agree in the same Faith under them.
All which four Points are to be found in the Succession of the Universal Roman
Church, as you have seen; but no one of them (and much less all) are to be
found in this Rabble of Heresies and Sectaries, scraped together by Fox in his
former Catalogue: For neither were they Bishops at all, but private men, as
after shall be showed, (though Fox most falsely does affirm one of them to have
been a Learned Bishop:) Nor did they succeed in Office, Function, Charge or
Jurisdiction the one to the other, or concurred in one Time, Country, or place;
but one in one corner, and another in another: One stepped up in Germany, another
in France, another in Italy, and another in England; the one a Priest, another
a Friar, another a Merchant, The successive Pillars of Fox his Church have no
connection or coherence the one with the other.
and the other a Soldier or Crafts-man, of different States, Professions, and
Conditions; yea, of different Faith and Religion also, as presently shall be
showed. Neither had they any relation one to the other, more than Botley to
Billingsgate, or Canterbury to Constantinople. And as for Antiquity, and coming
down by Succession from the Apostles, they are far from it, as Fox himself
confesses, in that he begins his Catalogue only from Pope Innocentius, 1200
years after Christ, as you have heard. So as if Christ had any visible Church
before this time, it must needs be Ours? by Fox's own confession.

14. And finally, the last Point mentioned here, and so highly esteemed by St.
Augustine, of the consent of People and Nations, tot populorum consensione
firmatur; whereof he makes such account in another place, as he says, Aug.
ep. 48. ad Vincent. Rogatian.
Anathema erit quisquis annunciaverit Ecclesiam praeter Communicationem omnium
gentium; He shall be accursed whosoever shall say the Church to be any other
but the Communication of all Nations, This quality, I say, he that shall
consider and examine in these poor Fellows alleged by Fox, (who were but a few
Outcasts of every Country where they sprung), shall find it so ridiculous and
contemptible a thing in respect of the main consent of Nations under the Roman
Church, as without laughter it cannot be spoken of.

15. Finally, of this ridiculous Succession of Heretics the same holy Father
writes fitly in these words: Aug. ep. 42. ad Mandrens. and tract. 2. in ep.
Joan.
Videtis certe multos praecisos a radice Christianae Societatis, quae per Seeds
Apostolorum and Successiones Episcoporum certa per Orbem propagatione
diffunditur, de sola figura Originis sub Christiano nomine quasi arescentia
sarmenta gloriari, quas Haereses and Schismata nominamus; Truly you see many
cut off from the root of this Christian Society (the Church) which Society is
spread over all the World by the Seats of the Apostles, and Succession of
Bishops, as it were by a most certain Propagation or Generation; and these
Fellows do brag of a certain figure or similitude of a Beginning or Succession
under the name of Christians, but are indeed withered Branches cut off from the
Vine, and these we call Heretics and Schismatics. A notable saying of S. Aug.
touching Fox's Church.
Thus says St. Augustine. And could any man describe better the Apish Imitation
of John Fox, endeavoring to bring in his Succession of a few condemned
Heretics, de sola figura Originis sub Christiano nomine gloriantes, bragging
only of a certain similitude of Beginning and Succession, under the name of
reformed Christians, but indeed cast out and condemned by the Universal Church?

16. This then is the second Point to be noted about the quality of
Ecclesiastical Succession. But another there is of no less moment, but rather
more: And this is, That those who succeed one another in the self-same Church,
The 3 Point required in Succession, unity of Faith.
be also of one Faith and Belief in all Articles of Religion. For if they
differ, though it were but in any one substantial Point, they cannot be of one
Church, nor of one Communion, nor be saved together; for that, as there is but
one God, one Christ, one Church, and one Baptism, (as the Apostle testifies)
so is there but one only Faith in the same Church to be saved by; which all men
must hold unitedly, wholly and inviolably, or else (as in the Creed of St.
Athanasius is affirmed) absque dubio in aeternum peribit, Athan. in Symb.
without doubt he shall perish eternally that disagreeth or dissenteth.

17. It were a long matter to stand here upon the proof of this Point, to wit,
how exact and severe the Catholic Church is, and ever has been, in defending
this strict Simplicity, Union, and Conformity of Faith, in all those that will
be her Children, Dom. Thom 22. q. 5. art 3. and Caet. in cundem and Greg. de
Valent. ead. 4. disp. 1. punct. 3.
St. Thomas handles the matter at large, and very substantially, and so do
other Schoolmen after him, showing, That whosoever erreth in any one Article
of Catholic Faith obstinately, loses his whole Faith in all the rest which he
seems to believe. And yields most evident reasons for the same. And of the
same severity were the ancient Fathers in this behalf; Cyp. l. 1. ep. 6. ad
Magnum. Luc. 11.
as St. Cyprian, who applying to this purpose those words of Christ, Qui non
est mecum, adversum me est; He that is not with me is against me: says, It was
meant by Christ of all sorts of Heretics whatsoever. Gregory Nazianzen also
writes, Nazian. tract. de fide.
Qui uno verbo, tanquam veneni gutta inficiunt, etc. They who by any one word,
as with a drop of Poison, do infect the simple Faith of Christ, are to be cast
out of the Church as Heretics, etc. And St. Hierom, Propter unum etiam verbum,
Hier. l. 3. Apol. contra Ruffin.
aut duo, etc. For one word or two contrary to the Catholic Faith many Heresies
have been cast out of the Church. And finally, St. Augustine having reckoned up
Eighty particular Heresies, in his Book to Quod-vult-deus, he says, That there
may chance to lurk many other petty Heresies unknown to him, Aug. l. de haeres.
in fine.
Quarum aliquam quisquis tenuerit, Christianus Catholicus non erit; Of which
Heresies whosoever shall hold any one, he shall not be a Catholic Christian,
and consequently cannot be saved.

A dreadful Censure of the Fathers against those that be infected with Heresy.

Aug. ep. 48. ad Vincent.


18. Mark the severity of this holy Man; affirming, That whosoever holds any
the least hidden Heresy whatsoever, cannot be saved. A dreadful Sentence (no
doubt) for many of our Countrymen at this day (if well they thought of their
own case) who think it lawful, or at leastwise not much dangerous, to hold
private Opinions at their own pleasure; yea many of them thinking, as the old
Donatists did, which St. Augustine relates, and greatly condemns: Nihil
interesse credentes, in qua, quisque part Christianus sit, believing that it
is not of great importance in what part (Sect or Faction) soever a man be a
Christian, so he believe in Christ. Thus thought the Donatists, and are much
reprehended by St. Augustine for it. And this no doubt is the Opinion of many
Englishmen at this day, who being tossed hither and thither with variety of
Controversies, and not knowing what to resolve, or being wearied with labor to
seek the Truth, do incline easily to this absurd Error, That a man believing
piously in Jesus Christ crucified, Enc. 1.
(or, as Sir Francis Hastings and O. E. before said, in Christ crucified,) may
be saved, and be held for a Brother, so he be against the Pope and Church of
Rome.

19. And the same shows John Fox that he believes also, in that he cites
here so many different Sects and Sectaries for his Brethren and Fathers, and
chief Pillars of his obscure and trodden-down Church, notwithstanding they
differed never so much from him in diverse Articles of their Belief, as shall
appear by the particular examination that ensues: For albeit it would be
overlong to examine the whole Catalogue before set down, yet the principal
Members thereof we shall run over, The catalogue of John Fox's Churchmen.
and thereby let you see what Truth or Substance there is in it, or Wisdom in
the Alleger. First then, he begins his Catalogue thus:

20. To pretermit (says he) Bertramus and Berengarius, (which were before Pope
Innocentius) a learned multitude of sufficient Witnesses might be produced,
etc. It was well he pretermitted these two, which were both against him flatly:
For as for Bertramus, Bertramus no Protestant.
he was wholly of the Roman Religion, and so lived and died; nor ever taught he
any one Point of Protestant Doctrine in his life, as may appear by Tritemius and
others that write of him: Trit. in verbo. Bertramus. Sand. de visib. monarch.
haer. 133.
he being a Monk, and so continued to his dying-day, which was above 800 years
agon; though after his death, when Berengarius had begun his Heresy, some of his
Followers did forge a little Pamphlet in his name, as favoring the Berengarian
Heresy against the Real Presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament; but the
fraud was presently discovered and rejected. So as this man could not be of
Fox's Communion, holding all Points of Religion against Him, and with Us. And
this is the first Folly and Falsehood of our Fox in the first Man by him alleged.

Berengarius no Protestant.
21. Now as for Berengarius, Archdeacon of Tours in France, though he once held
the Error against the Real Presence in the Sacrament, yet did he oftentimes
recant the same, as appears by his De consecrat. did. 2. c.

Ego Berengarius.


Abjurations, (which Fox himself confesses;) and in all other Points was a
perfect Catholic: Fox p. 146. Gerson l. cont. Romant.
so that we may more justly make him of Our Church, than Fox of his, if we
would take any such broken Wares as Fox does. But we reject all that are not
complete; though (if it be true which Gerson and many others do write) that
Berengarius died very penitent for his former Error, he was and is of our
Church: and whether he did or not, he cannot be of Fox's by any reason; both
for that even in this Error, while he held it, he was far different both from
Calvin and Luther, and in all the rest of his Belief an Adversary, as has been
said. To which effect the words of the Magdeburgians are to be noted, which are
these: Cent. 11. c. 10. p. 527.
Leo IX. (say they) deserved in this one thing no small praise above his
Predecessors, that presently at the beginning he condemned the Heresy of
Berengarius, together with the Author, in a Synod at Rome. So say Fox's
Masters; whereunto I marvel what he will answer, seeing they cast away that
which he so earnestly and carefully gathers up.

22. But now let us see the rest of his Rank. Joachim, Abbot Joachim no
Protestant.
Abbot (says he) of Calabria, Almaricus a learned Bishop, etc. As for Joachim,
Fox does not tell us what he held of his Opinions to make him of his Church;
nor any other Author that I have read, but only that he being an old Man, and
half out of his Wits, was censured by the Pope for certain fond Prophecies, and
some Errors also about the blessed Trinity, as appears by the Decree extant
in the Canon Law against him, and by other Authors that have written of him.
Extrav de Trinit.

Guido Carmel. Bern. Luxem. in Catalog. haereticorum.


So as he being a Catholic Man in all the rest, and never dreaming perhaps of
any Protestant Proposition in his life, Fox has no other reason to make him of
his Church, but only for that he was censured in something by the Pope. Which
how good reason it is, every man does see, forasmuch as every Malefactor
condemned by the Pope should by this reason be justified.

23. As for Almaricus the Learned Bishop, judged for an Heretic (says Fox) for
holding against Images in the time of Pope Innocentius III. First, Almaricus
was no Bishop, nor condemned only for Images.
you must know, that he was never Bishop, either learned or unlearned, but only
of Fox's making; for that his highest Degree that ever he was known to have,
was a Doctorship in Paris, he being born in the Town of Chartres, as testifies
Caesarius, that lived with him. Secondly, if he held against Images, Caesar. l.
dial. d. 5.
(as Fox there says) he was not judged an Heretic only by Innocentius for that
Heresy, but he and all other of that Opinion were condemned above 400 years
before that time by the second General Council of Nice. Thirdly, the truth is,
Conc. Nicaen. Can. 6.
That this man was condemned first by the University of Paris, and then by
Innocentius and by a Synod in Rome, for many more detestable Heresies than for
holding against Images; and some so foul, as Fox himself will be ashamed to
defend them, though he make him a Saint of his Church, and therefore like a Fox
he left them out. As for Example, the foresaid Caesarius writes thus:
Almaricus, Magister Pravitatis, haec asseruit; Almericus, a Master of Error,
taught these Propositions following:

24. That there is no Resurrection of Bodies at all.

That there is no Paradise nor Hell.

That the Body of Christ is no more in the Sacrament after the words of
Consecration, than in a Stone or Horse.

That God spoke as much in Ovid as in Augustine. And other such absurd
Propositions to the number of Twenty, for which he was burned openly in Paris
in the year of Christ 1208. Gagnin. l. 6. hist. Franc.
Cum aliis quibusdam Haereticis blasphemis in Personas S. Trinitatis, says
Gagninus; With certain other blasphemous Heretics against the Persons of the
Blessed Trinity.

25. This is related not only by the said Gagninus, but by Caesarius also,
Gers. tract. 3. in Matt.

Paul Aemil. l. 6. hist. Galliae. Geneb. in chron. an. 1208.


as before I have cited; Gerson also, Chancellor of the same University; Paulus
Aemilius and Genebrordus, two Learned and Reverend Bishops. And now let the
Reader consider what a Saint John Fox has chosen as the second Pillar of his
Church after Pope Innocentius; and how false a Companion he is, in that he
tells us that he was a Learned Bishop, and condemned only for holding against
Images. And thus much of Abbot Joachim and Almaricus, of whom John Fox made an
ill choice to be the first Founders of his Hierarchy, seeing that neither of
them agreed with Him or His in Faith and Belief. There follows in Fox, The
Martyrs of Alsatia, of whom we read (says he) a hundred to be burnt in one day
by the said Innocentius, etc. To show Fox to be a Fox in all things, and to
deal sincerely in nothing, I shall allege the words of the Authors that write
of this matter: Naucler. in hist. Tritem. in chron. Monast. Hirsang. Geneb. in
chron. an. 1215.
Certain Heretics (say they) to the number of Eighty, were burned in Argentina
in Switzerland, for that they denied Fornication to be any sin at all, for that
it is a natural act; and that it was as lawful to eat flesh in Lent as at any
other time, etc.

26. Behold what holy Martyrs these were, and whether it be likely they were
burned by Pope Innocentius, seeing they were burned in Argentina. Consider also
that of Eighty he there makes a Hundred, by the art of Exaggeration and
Multiplication. Add likewise to these (says he) Waldenses or Albigenses, with
a great number more, to which number belonged Raymundus Earl of Tholose,
Marsilius Patavinus, Gulielmus de Sancto Amore, Simon Tornacensis, etc. Here if
John Fox do take the Waldenses and Albigenses to be all one Sect, (as it
seems he does by his using the word [or] and adjoining the Earl of Tholose as
belonging to them both) then is it both false, and great ignorance also in him:
For that the Waldenses, The Waldenses, or poor men of Lions.
otherwise called the poor men of Lions, began about the year of Christ 1160,
or 1180, as other men write, before Innocentius III. came to be Pope. Their
beginning was by one Waldo, a rich Citizen of the Town, who giving all his
Wealth to a certain Community or Brotherhood of Men, (whom he called the poor
men of Lions) made a Society of them, with certain Rules, Aen. Syl. l. 4. de
orig. Bohem. cap. 35.

Vrsper. in chron. an. 1212.

Guido Carm. in haeres. Waldens.

Anton. p. 3. sum. ti. 11. c. 7.


after the form of a Religious Confraternity, (as Aeneas Sylvius describes)
pretending Holiness at the beginning, and with that pretense went afterward to
Rome, and demanded an Approbation of that Society from Pope Lucius, (as
testifies also Vrspergensis, who was then present in Rome, and saw them:) But
the Pope seeing certain Superstitions among them, refused the same. Wherewith
they being offended, began to cry out against the Pope, and therewith to defend
diverse Errors, and most absurd Heresies; whereof as some are held at this day
by the Protestants, so diverse are not; nor will John Fox, I presume, defend
them. Luxemb. in haeres. paup. de Lugduno.

Absurd positions of the Waldenses.


As for Example, these that follow, noted generally by all Authors that write
of them.

27. I. That all Carnal Concupiscence and Conjunction is lawful when Lust does
burn us. II. That all Oaths are unlawful unto Christians for any cause
whatsoever in this World, because it is written, Nolite jurare, Do not swear,
Mat. 5. Jac. 5. III. That no Judgment of Life and Death is permitted to
Christians in this life, for that it is written, Nolite judicare, Mat. 7. Luc.
6. IV. That the Creed of the Apostles is to be contemned, and no account at all
to be made of it. V. That no other Prayer is to be used by Christians but only
the Pater Noster set down in Scripture. VI. That the power of Consecrating the
Body of Christ, and of hearing Confessions, was left by Christ not only to
Priests, but also to Laymen if they be just. Will Fox agree to all this?
VII. That no Priests must have any Livings at all, but must live on Alms, and
that no Bishops or other Dignitaries are to be admitted in the Clergy, but that
all must be equal. VIII. That Mass is to be said once only every year, to wit,
upon Maundy-Thursday, when the Sacrament was instituted, and the Apostles made
Priests: For that Christ said, Luc. 22. 1 Cor. 11.
do this in my remembrance to wit (say they) that which he did at that time.
IX. Item, That the words of Consecration must be no other, but only the Pater
Noster, seven times said over the Bread, etc. X. By all which, and other
Articles, to the number of thirty three Condemned by the Church, (which
Prateolus and others do recount) a man may see, that as these Heretics agreed
with Protestants in some Points: so did they dissent in many more. Yea, held
diverse points of Catholic Religion against Protestants together with these
Errors. And consequently, I see no reason why these men should be gathered up
by John Fox, as cho^en Members of that Protestant Church: but for that they
have no other, and yet will needs seem to have some. And thus much for the
Wal^enses.


28. The Albigenses were another Sect of Heretics, The Albigenses and their
blasphemous Opinions and Actions.
rising some thirty or forty years after the Waldenses, under Innocentius III.
Anno Domini 1216. And their beginning was at a Town called Albigium, in the
Province of Tholosa. Who albeit in some points they agreed with the said
Waldenses: yet (as all Sects are wont to do) they differed greatly in many
other Articles; and grew so fast in number, as Caesarius says, Caesar.
Cistert. 5 d. dial. Anton. p. 3. tit. 19. ca. 1. Vincent. in spec. l. 3.
that in a little time they infected a thousand Cities, and great Towns round
about, and had an Army of 70000. fighting Men, to defend their Heresy. For
which Cause also, they called help from the Moors in Barbary, but yet were
overcome by the Catholic Army, that was not above 8000. (as Historiographers do
write) the Captain whereof was the most Christian Prince Simon of Momfort. And
after this Battle given, the most part of those Heretics were Converted by St.
Dominicks Preaching.

29. The Points that these Men held, Caesar. 5. did. dialog. Luxem. haeresi
Albig. Prateol. and Sand. ibidem.
besides the denial of the Popes Supremacy, Purgatory, Prayer for the Dead, and
some other such Articles, wherein they agreed with the Protestants of our days:
they held also many other Articles, wherein they disagreed both from the
Protestants and us. As for Example, I. They held with the Manichees, that then
were two Gods: one good, and another evil: and that as the good God created the
Soul, so the evil created the Body. II. They denied all Resurrection of the
Body. Absurd Articles of the Albigenses, and their Heresies.
And that it was in vain for Christians to use any kind of Prayer at all, or to
have Churches for that purpose. Seeing it profits nothing, all things being
irrevocably determined by Gods Providence. III. That external Baptism was an
idle Ceremony, and to be rejected as superfluous. IV. That men's Souls did pass
from one to another: yea, through Beasts and Serpents. And that God Created no
new Souls from the beginning of the World: but changes them only from Body to
Body, etc.


30. These, and many other such like Beastly absurdities of theirs, are
recorded by the Writers of those times, and namely by those here quoted. And
more then this, their soul wicked behavior, is related to have been so
abominable, as Christian modesty does scarce permit to be repeated: as for
Example, of doing their easement upon the Altar, and making themselves clean
with the ^all and Corporals thereof.

Their abusing the Body of a Strumpet upon a high Altar, in despite of a
Crucifix that stood there, whose Ears, Nose, and Arms they cut off, and then
tying a Haltar about his Neck, they drew him most scornfully about the Streets
of Tholosa, etc. and other like. And these are the Saints gathered up by John
Fox to frame his new Church.

31. And for that all the rest, that do ensue in his Catalogue, of particular
Men of his Religion, from those downward, to John Wickliffe, were commonly
infected with some points of these two general Sects, the Waldenses or
Albigenses: it shall not be needful to stand upon the examination, of every one
of them, seeing that their Opinions are known to be such, as they could not
possibly be of one Church with Fox and his Company. The false dealing of J. Fox.
Yet must we note this by the way also, that Fox does commit infinite
confusion, falsehood, and cosinage, in all this his enumeration, accounting some
for Disciples of the Albigenses, Marsilius of Padua.
that lived 100. years before them. As Marsilius Patavinus, who lived under
Pope Paschasius II. about the year 1110. which is more than an 100 years before
Pope Innocentius III. (as both Alvarus and Alphonsus de Castro do testify) and
never held any points of the former Heresies, Alvar. lib. 1. de planct. Eccles.
and Castr. libr. 6. contra haereses.

Gulielmus de sancto amore. Armachanus.


but only some Propositions, agiainst the Degrees, and living of Ecclesiastical
Persons. And the like falsehood is to be understood of Gulielmus de Sancto
Amore, who living about the year 1250. was a Catholic man in all points, and
only had some quarrellings with Religious Orders. As in like sort Armachanus,
Archbishop of Armach in Ireland also had. For which cause only Fox makes him
of his Church; though in matters of Religion, he held no one Article of the
Protestant Faith with him, different from the Catholic. And consequently Fox
does extremely abuse them, by conjoining them here with diverse Heretics burned
for the foresaid blasphemous Opinions

32. The like may be said of William Occam, and Gregorius Arminensis (two
Catholic Scholmen, and every day alleged for such in our Schools) Robert
Grossead also, Catholic men abused by Fox.
our Learned Bishop of Lincoln, is in the same predicament: as in like manner
Dantes and Petrarcha ( Italian Poets) that never held any jot of Protestant
Religion in the world. And yet are brought in here by John Fox, as men of his
Church and Belief, with the greatest falsehood and foolery in the world. And
this forsooth, for that in some place of their Works, they reprehend the
Manners of Rome, or Lives of some Popes in those days. Which is as good an
Argument, as if a man would prove, that St. Paul was not of the Faith, 1. Cor.
5.
or Religion of the Corinthians, for that he reprehended them sharply for
Fornication used among them.

33. Wherefore to leave the Rabble that follows of this people (as namely
thirty six Citizens of Moguntia burned An. Dom. 1390. and another company of
like people, to wit, one hundred and forty put in the Fire throughout the
Province of Narbone, and twenty four more put to death in Paris, in the Year
1210. and other particular Saints of his Church recounted and Canonized by
Fox:) To leave these (I say) and to come down to our Lolhards and Wickliffians,
and their followers in England; we have treated of their Doctrine sufficiently
in the precedent Chapter, showing how far different it was, from that of Fox
and his Fellows. But now for their Actions, we are to consider, that the
Lolhards began from the year of Christ 1320. or thereabout, and Wickliff from
the year 1370. and therewith raised infinite Troubles, Garboils, and Tumults in
our Country. As may appear by the lamentable Story set down by Thomas
Walsingham, of the whole people put in commotion in King Richard II. his time
against the Nobility, and Clergy, by these kind of people, under their
Seditious Captains Jack Straw, Wat Tiler, and the rest. And so again, under
some other Kings, The first public tumults of Lollards, and Wickliffians in
England, An. Dom. 1381. Sto. An. Dom. 1414.
whilst this Heresy lasted. And namely, against the two valiant, and most
Catholic Princes King Henry IV. and King Henry V. his Son. In the first year of
whose Reign, (to wit, King Henry V.) John Stow writes thus.

34. The favorers of Wickliffs Doctrine did nail up Schedules upon the Church
Doors of London, containing that there were an hundred thousand ready to rise
against all such as could not away with their Sect, etc. And hereon followed
the open Rebellion of Sir John Oldcastle, and Sir Roger Acton and others in S.
Giles Field by Holborn, Sup. c. 9.
which before we have touched. And yet was the providence of God such, as this
Sect could never prevail in England, neither then, or after (so Catholic were
our Princes) until some Points thereof being renewed by Luther and Zwinglius,
the later was admitted in K. Edward's days, I mean the Sect of Zwinglius, as
all men know. Being the first Sect that ever was admitted publicly in England,
either by Britans or Englishmen, from Christ to that day. For as for King Henry
VIII. though in the matter of the Popes Supremacy he admitted the Opinion of
Luther: yet in other things (as Part. 1. cap. 12.
before we have showed at large) he held in all Articles, the Catholic Roman
Faith, with singular hatred against both Lollards, Wickliffians, and Lutherans,
but much more against Zwinglians, and other such Sacramentary Sectaries. As by
his Laws made for their punishment and repression, does sufficiently appear.

35. And albeit his Majesty having yielded once, in that one Point of
Ecclesiastical Supremacy, and subordination, (which held before all the rest in
joint) it was no marvel, though Sects and Sectaries did grow upon him so fast,
as with all his severe Laws he could hardly repress them in his own days, The
great inconveniences ensuing upon King Henry VIII. yielding in one Point only
to Heretics.
yet much more were the Judgments of God seen after his death, in that
presently all was turned upside down in the Minority of his Son:
notwithstanding his Laws, Testament, and Ordinances to the contrary. And that
by those, whom he most trusted on that behalf, and who in his days had showed
themselves, most earnest against Zwinglians, and their Doctrine of the
Sacrament, as a thing most abhorred by the old King their Master. I mean,
Cranmer, Ridley, Seymor and Dudley, the chief changers of all in King Edwards
days.

36. But this is the common event, where Princes be not careful at the
beginning (as Walsingham does well note about the rising of Wickliff's Heresy
in in the end of King Edward III.'s time) when that old King was now impotent,
Heresies to be stopped at the beginning.
and wholly governed by Women, leaving the care of his Kingdom, in the Hands of
his Son the Duke of Lancaster, and others that followed him, who having partly
emulation, and jars with the Bishops of Canterbury, Winchester, London, and
some other principal men of the Clergy, and partly desiring to invade Church
Livings, which Wickliff preached to be lawful, they were content to wink at
him, yea and to use him, and his Doctrine openly, against the said Bishops, and
Clergy, as also against Monks, and Abbots in the beginning of of K. Richard
II.'s time, as appears both in the said Walsingham and Stow, who relate the
calling of Wickliff to London for this effect, where he was publicly and
scandalously born out by the said Duke, and Sir Henry Piercy, and others of
that Faction, against the said Bishops, Monks, and Abbots, which here we shall
set down, in Stows own words, taken by him out of Walsingham and other Writers,
which do contain the very sum of all the doings, and meanings of both Parties
in those days.

37. In the mean time (says he) the Duke of Lancaster ceased not (with his
Fellows) to imagine how he might bring to pass, Sto. an. Domini 1377. p. 425.
that which he had long contrived in his mind (to wit, for encroaching upon
Church Livings, and revenging himself against some Bishops, and the City of
London, that stood with them) for he saw that it would be hard for him to
obtain his purpose, the Church standing in her full State, and very dangerous
to attempt publicly, the Laws and Customs of London being in force, wherefore
he labored, first to overthrow as well the Liberties of the Church, as of the
City, for which Cause he called unto him a certain Divine, who many years
before, Upon what Cause and Motives Wickliff began his Doctrine. The Habit of
the first Wickliffians.
in all his Acts in the Schools, had inveighed against the Church, for that he
had been deprived by the Archbishop of Canterbury from a certain Benefice, that
he unjustly, as was said, was Incumbent upon within the City of Oxford: his
Name was John Wickliff, who with his Disciples, were of the common people
called Lollards, they went barefooted, and basely Clothed: to wit, in course
Russet Garments down to the Heels; they preached especially against Monks, and
other Religious men that had Possessions, etc.

38. They affirmed, that Temporal Lords if they had need, might lawfully take
the Goods of such Religious Persons to relieve their necessities, etc. And when
he had taught these, Walsingham an. ult.

Edov. 3.


and many other such Doctrins, not only in the Schools in Oxford, but also had
preached them publicly in London, that he might thereby get the favor of the
said Duke and others, whom he sound prone to hear his Opinions; The Duke and
Sir Henry Piercy commended highly his said Opinions, and endeavored to extol
his Learning, and honesty of Life above all other. Who therefore being thus set
forth with their favor, feared not to spread his Doctrine much more than before,
going from Church to Church, and Preaching his Opinions, whereupon at length,
the Bishops awakened their Archbishop, who sent for this John to come, and
answer to those things which were spoken of him. And the Duke hearing thereof,
sent for four Doctors of Divinity of every Order of Begging Friars one (for
unto them Wickliff adjoined himself, approving their poverty, and extolling
their perfection, against other Religious Orders that had Possessions) whom the
Duke advertised, that with a natural and old hate, he pursued the Religious
Persons, that had Possessions, neither was it difficult, to compel the willing
Friars, to aid him in this Point.

39. Hitherto are the words of John Stow. Whereby you may perceive the true
Causes of this new Gospel of John Wickliff, The first Motive of John Wickliff
and his favorers.
so highly commended by John Fox who affirms his Doctrine to have proceeded
from the strong operation of Christ's Spirit, etc. First you see that John
Wickliff had for his motion the desire of revenge against the Bishops and
Clergy, for that he was deprived of a Benefice in Oxford, which he had
possessed unjustly. Secondly, was he moved with envy against Monks, together
with ambition of gaining the Duke of Lancaster, and his followers by teaching
them, that it was lawful to invade Church Livings at their pleasure. Thirdly,
the very same motives of Ambition, covetousness, and emulation against the
Bishops, stirred up the Duke and his Adherents, and Fourthly, both parts, as
well the Heretics, as their favorers, were content to use and abuse the
infirmity of some emulation, between Friars and Monks about matters of
Perfection, Poverty, and Possessions. Which pious motives we do read commonly
to have been the Causes of all other ancient Heresies from time to time. As
coming from one, and the self same Spirit of him that is the proper Author of
all Sedition, Schism, and Heresy, and professed enemy to the Union of Gods
only Spouse and Cath. Church Lucifer himself.

40. Futhermore Walsingham does show, how that by this favor, and bearing out
of the Duke of Lancaster, and his Partners, both the University of Oxford where
Wickliff began, was brought to be cold in resisting him, and the Prince himself
in punishing him. And this appeared by two Apostolical Breves written by Pope
Gregory XI. in the year of Christ 1378. Registered by Walsingham. The one to the
University of Oxford, Two Apostolical Breves written into England against
Wicliffians. Walsing. in vit. Rich. 2. an. 1378.
reprehending them for their coldness and slackness in resisting the said
Heresies. And the other to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Bishop of London,
to deal with the King and Queen, and other Nobility, to put them in mind, as
well of their Duty, as also of their Negligence hitherto used in this behalf.
But what followed of this? I mean of this negligence in resisting this Sect of
Wickliff at the beginning? Truly there followed, or rather flowed such Seas of
Calamities, as were never seen in our Country before, nor scarce heard of in
others.

41. For whereas King Edward III had been a most glorious King, his end was
pitiful: The Calamities in England by Wickliff his Doctrine.
his Heir K. Richard, after infinite Sedition, contention, and bloodshed of the
Nobility and others, was deposed, and made away. The bloody division of the
House of Lancaster and York came in, and endured for almost 100 years, with the
ruin not only of the Royal Line of Lancaster, by whom specially Wickliff was
favored at the beginning (as you have heard) but with the overthrow also of
many other noble Princes, and Families, and most pernicious Wars and Garboils
continued, both at home and abroad, with the losses of all our goodly States,
Provinces and Countries in France. Unto all which, the division of hearts,
minds and judgments brought in by Wickliffs Doctrine, did help not a little, and
the Calamities so continued until the time of the most wise, Christian, and
Catholic King Henry VII. Who as he extinguished the Relics of this Wickliffian
Seed (as may appear by John Fox, who sets out in Print and painting, twelve
several Pageants of the Popes highest Greatness, Fox p. 716.717. and deinceps.

The praise of K. Henry VII.


Honor, and Supreme Power in the end of King Henry VII.'s Life:) so did he
happily also extinguish all Temporal Division, about the Succession of our
Imperial Crown. And had not our sins deserved that his Son had opened the gap
(though not perhaps meaning it) to other Sects and Divisions of Lutherans and
Zwinglians, (no less malicious and penicious than the former) England had been
a happy State at this day.

42. Well then, of these men, whom not only the whole universal Church did
condemn as Heretics for their wicked Opinions, but English Stat. an 5. Ricardi
2. an. Christi 1390. and an. 2. Hen. 4. an. Christi 1402.
Parliaments also (that had best cause to know their Lives) did Sentence by
their public Acts, for Hypocrites, Seditious, and pernicious people in Manners,
as Fox in his Protest. p. 10.
Fox himself among others confesses: of these (I say) he makes up his Church
until he come down to Lutherans, Zwinglians, and other such fresher Sectaries
under King Henry VIII. and his Children. Which Sectaries Fox will needs couple
together in one Catalogue and Calendar of Saints appointing Wickliff his Feast
upon the second of January, with the title of Preacher and Martyr (though he
died quietly in his Bed) as after shall be showed. And that of Luther upon the
17. of Feb. with the title only of Confessor, (but both of them in red
Letters.) Notwithstanding that the Authors of these three Sects do disclaim one
from another, as in the former Chapter you have heard. So as this forcible
drawing of opposite Sectaries into one Catalogue, and Calendar of Saints, is
like to that of Cacus, who drew Bulls backwards by the tails into his Cave. And
this shall suffice for the contemplation of this strange composition, and
combination of Fox his Church, from Wickliffs time down to K. Henry VIII. of
whose Reign and matters contained therein, we shall now successively begin our
speech.

CHAP. XI.
The Search of John Fox's Church is continued under the Government and Reign of
K. Henry VIII. and his Children: And it is discussed what manner of Church,
John Fox then had, or may be imagined to have had.

HAving made our former search or pursuit for the finding of Jon Fox his Church
throughout the precedent years, and Ages of the Christian world, from the
Apostles time, unto the Reign of King Henry VIII. and declared most evidently
(as to us it seems) that the said Church was never yet to be found in any of
those times and Ages, except perhaps in some such broken and contemptible
Heretics, and so opposite and contrary one of them to another, as cannot
possibly be thought to make a Church, that requires unity and conformity of
Faith: there remains now, that we proceed to examine, what may be found for
John Fox's purpose, under the Reign of K. Henry VIII. downwards to our time.
For that, (as often has been noted) of this time does John Fox brag and glory
in his Book, as of the flourishing time of his Gospel. Which appears not only
by that he imployeth the half of his whole Volume, in these, only thirty years
that passed between the breach of King Henry with the Pope, A false flattering
Picture set out by Fox of K. Henry VIII.
unto the entrance of Queen Elizabeth: but also by a brave triumphant picture
set in the first page of King Henry's Reign, with his Feet upon the back of
Pope Clement VII. and other circumstances of Heretical insolence, which
presently we shall declare.

2. But first of all you must understand, that in the 12 last pages of K. Henry
VII.'s Life, it pleased John Fox to set down pleasantly 12 large printed and
painted Pageants of the Popes greatness in those days, together with his Papal
Cases reserved to himself, his Dominion both Spiritual and Temporal, his great
Riches, the universal Obedience both of Temporal and Spiritual Princes unto
him, and other such like points. All which being but a melancholy meditation,
and Spectacle for Protestants, John Fox in the next page sets down a merrier
contemplation: to wit, King Henry VIII. placed by him in a high Throne with
Clement VII. under his Feet, Fox p. 732.
grovelling on the ground, with his Cross Keys and Triple Crown in the Dust.
Whereat many Friars are painted staring and gazing, and weeping round about,
and B. Fisher and Sir Thomas Moor pitifully also weeping, and stooping down to
help him up again. And on the other side, K. Henry is painted with the Gospel
in his Lap, and his Sword in his right hand, lifted up for defense thereof.
Which Gospel is also helped to be held up by Cranmer and Cromwell, that on his
said right hand do assist the King with great contentment of the new Ministers.
Who are painted here to stand very gravely contemplating of the matter with a
singular comfort: and all other Bishops, Abbots Ecclesiastical and Temporal men
bewailing and mourning.

3. And this is John Fox his pleasant (or rather peevish) invention, to
entertain the eyes of the simple Readers or lookers on, and to make pastime for
Fools, whereof himself was a solemn Father while he lived. And I would ask the
silly Fellow here, Fox his Pageants examined.
how King Henry, though he brake with Pope Clement, upon some matters of
displeasure (as is notorious) and refused to yield him Spiritual obedience in
England (as he and his Ancestors had done ever before:) yet how could he
justly, or truly be said to have cast him down with his Crown, and Cross, as
herein painted? Seeing that Pope Clement his Authority, power, and Spiritual
jurisdiction throughout the Christian World was no less after King Henry's
breach, than before. And albeit the Realm of England withdrew Her Spiritual
obedience from him: yet the increase of new Churches in the Indies, was of much
more Authority, and jurisdiction unto him, and his Successors in that kind,
than he or they lost in England, Germany, or other parts, that retired
themselves from his and their obedience.

4. Further, I would ask this John Deviser, that devised this wise
representation: how could K. Henry's Sword be said to be in Defense of the
Protestants Gospel, when, by their own Affirmation he was the greatest
persecutor of their Brethren that ever was King of England, from the beginning
of that Monarchy to his days? For so shows Fox himself in that he in his
Calendar of Saints, sets down more Martyrs of his Sect, made by King Henry
only, than by all the other former Kings and Queens of England, from the first
entrance of Christian Faith to his time. As we are to show more largely in the
Third part of this Treatise, when we come to examine his said Calendar. But yet
in the mean space, See from p. 663. unto 751. That K. Henry's Sword was not for
the new Gospel, but against it.
if you will have some taste, how favorable K. Henry of his own inclination was
to these new Gospellers: you may read, what Fox sets down in the second part
of his Acts and Monuments of this matter. Where among other complaints of this
Kings Reign, you shall find in one place, no less than fourteen whole pages of
Names (by way of Table or Catalogue) of godly Men and Women, (as he calls
them) apprehended, persecuted and imprisoned for the Gospels sake by the Bishop
of Lincoln in one year? The King himself being the chief Author, and Inciter to
the Persecution, as appears by a Letter of the said Kings, written to the
said Bishop of Lincoln upon the 20. of October. 1521. and the 13. year of his
Reign, which Letter Fox does Register under this Title: The Copy of the Kings
Letter for the aid of John Longland Bishop of Lincoln against the Servants of
Christ, falsely then called Heretics, etc. Fox. p. 764.


5. Lo here King Henry proved to be an Aider and Inciter of Persecution against
Gospellers, termed the Servants of God by Fox, but Heretics by the King. And if
so many of these good Fellows were persecuted by him in one Year, under one
Bishop only, within one Diocese; what may be imagined throughout the whole
Realm? Truly you may read in Fox himself very large and lamentable complaints
of this King's Reign, See from p. 887, to 912. and again from p. 949, to 957.
and diverse copious Lists of these persecuted Saints of his Church set down by
him; especially from the foresaid year of Christ 1521 to 1531, which was the
last ten years before the breach with the Pope.

6. But what did he from his breach forward? Did he spare the new Gospellers
any thing more for his breach with the Pope? Truly it cannot be denied but that
for some years he winked at their doings somewhat more than before, considering
the new difficulties wherein he had cast himself by his new disunion and
breach, as before we have noted in the end of the former Part. But as soon as
he had put his Domestical Affairs in some quiet and security, That K. Henry
after his breach with Rome was still an enemy to Protestants Religion.
he returned again to his former course and custom of restraining these new
unruly Spirits, by calling them to account for their Innovations, and
proceeding juridically against them, according to Church Canons, and according
to his former judgment in matters of Religion: Which as I might show by diverse
ways of proof, as well of Acts of Parliament, as Proclamations, Injunctions,
and other Declarations of his Will and Opinion in this behalf; so will we
allege only two or three Examples in the first kind, besides those which we
have set down in the Cap. 12.
former Part.

7. In the 31st year of his Reign, which was seven or eight years after his
breach with the Pope, there was made an Act for abolishing of diversity of
Opinions about Christian Faith, which begins thus: Whereas the King's most
Excellent Majesty is by God's Law Supreme Head, immediately under him, See
Stat. 31 H. 8. cap. 14.
of the whole Church of England, etc. intending the conservation of the same
Church, in a true, sincere, and uniform Doctrine of Christ's Religion, etc. Thus
begins his Preface. And then he determines, together with the Parliament,
That whosoever shall deny the Real Presence in the Sacrament of the Altar, or
affirm that the Communion is necessary under both Kinds, Statutes in Religion
made by K. Henry against Protestants.
or that Priests may by God's Law take Wives after Priesthood, or that Vows of
Chastity are not to be observed, or that private Masses are not to be said, or
that Sacramental and Auricular Confession is not necessary, etc. All these he
condemns as Heretics, and for such to be Apprehended, Arraigned, Condemned,
and Burned, as at large is to be seen in the Statute.

8. And the very next year after, perceiving that, notwithstanding his former
Statute against Protestant Opinions, the same did grow and were spread abroad
in England; he ordained another Statute, which begins thus: Whereas the
King's Royal Majesty, of his blessed and gracious disposition, Stat. an. 32 H.
8. c. 26.
etc. well weighing, that out of sundry outward parts and places there have
sprung, been sown, and set forth, diverse heretical, erroneous, and dangerous
Opinions and Doctrins in the Religion of Christ, whereby his Grace's
Leige-people may be induced to unfaithfulness, misbelief, miscreancy, and
contempt of God, to the utter confusion and damnation of Souls, etc. For this
cause his Majesty, according to the very Gospel and Law of God, means to have
matters determined and declared, etc.

Thus he writes in the Statute, remitting himself to his further Declaration;
The very Gospel against our new Gospellers by K. Henry's judgment.
which is wholly against Protestants, whose Faith and Religion you see here
called by the King unfaithfulness, misbelief, miscreancy, contempt of God,
heretical, erroneous and dangerous Doctrine, tending to utter confusion and
damnation of Souls, etc. And this proved by the pure Word of God, and the very
Gospel it self, as his Majesty affirms.

9. And will you have more clear testimony of his settled judgment against
Protestants than this? But yet hear further. For that the same King, diverse
years afters after this again, toward the end of his days, having had good
experience of the falsehood of Protestants in corrupting the very Scriptures
themselves by their crafty Translations, K. Henry forbids the Protestant
Translation of the Scriptures.
Notes, and Commentaries, he was forced to forbid under grievous punishments
the reading of the foresaid Scriptures in English, which before he had
permitted, as appears by a peculiar Statute made for that purpose, and for
inhibiting Protestants Books, Sermons, and Preachings, in the 34th and 35th
years of his Reign; this Statute being entitled, An Act for the Advancement of
true Religion; Stat. an. Reg. H. 8.34, and 35, c. 1.
saying therein as follows: Whereas the King's most Royal Majesty, Sumpreme
Head of the Church of England, and also of Ireland, perceives that
notwithstanding such holy Doctrins and Docucuments as his Majesty has hitherto
caused to be set forth, besides the great liberty granted unto them in having
the New and Old Testament among them; The very true and perfect exposition of
Scriptures prescribed by K. Henry against the Protestants.
which notwithstanding, many seditious, arrogant, and ignorant Parsons,
pretending to be Learred, have the perfect and true knowledge, understanding and
judgment of sacred Scriptures, etc. intending to subvert the very true and
perfect Exposition thereof, after their perverse fantasies, have taken upon
them not only to preach, teach, declare, etc. but also by printed Books,
Ballads, Plays, Rhythmes, Songs, and other fantasies, subtly to beguile his
Majesty's Leige-subjects, etc.

10. Behold King Henry's description of Protestants, their Wit, Nature,
Condition and Doctrine. But now follows the Remedy. Wherefore, to ordain and
establish a certain form of pure and sincere Teaching, agreeable to God's Word,
and true Doctrine of the Catholic and Apostolical Church, etc. Be it enacted,
That all manner of Books of the Old and New Testament in English, being of the
crafty, false and untrue Translation of William Tyndall, Will. Tyndall's
Translation of the Scriptures condemned, together with the Protestants Books.
and all other Books or Writings in the English Tongue, teaching or composing
any matter of Christian Religion, contrary to that Doctrine which since the year
of our Lord 1540 is, has, or shall be set forth by his Majesty, is clearly and
utterly abolished, etc. Thus ordained King Henry of the Protestants Books and
Doctrine; and this Censure he gave of William Tyndall's Truth and Honesty in
translating the Scriptures, whom John Fox calls not only the true Servant and
Martyr of God, Fox p. 981.
but the Apostle also of England in this our latter Age.

11. Wherefore I do not see how Fox can with any reason make King Henry to be a
Gospeller of his Religion, or so earnest a Defender of the same; or why he
should paint him with the Bible in his hand, holden up by Cranmer and Cromwell,
as before has been said, and seen in his Painting; seeing he contemned ever
their Doctrine, and burned the Professors thereof as notorious Heretics unto his
dying-day: Which is evident by many Examples, but most clear and notorious by
that of John Lambert, a famous Zuinglian, with whom in solemn public Audience
he disputed in presence of all his Clergy and Nobility of the Realm, The solemn
Judgment and Condemnatian of Lambert by the King. Anno 32. H. 8.
and caused Cranmer to do the like, and in the end made Cromwell, as his
Vicar General, to give the Sentence of Death against him, and burn him in
Smithfield; and this not two years before Cromwell's own Condemnation for like
Heresy by the King's own pursuit, as may appear by the Act of his Condemnation
yet extant. And the same, no doubt, would he have done with Cranmer, (which was
the other Upholder of his Arm, to maintain the new Gospel, according to Fox his
Picture) if he had known or suspected him, not only for an Upholder of that
Heresy, but that he had so much as secretly and inwardly favored the same. And
for this very cause did King Henry use that solemn and sharp Judgment upon
Lambert, and made Cranmer to dispute so earnestly against him for the Real
Presence (whereof afterward he made also the said Cranmer write and print a
Book for more evident Attestation therein;) and to the same end he made
Cromwell to pronounce the Sentence, that all men might see and know (but
especially his Favorites) that whomsoever he found faulty in that behalf should
expect no favor at his hand. Whereupon, when he had spoken to Lambert, asking
him, What he had to say more for himself why he should not die? And the other
falling down on his knees, remitted himself to his Princely Mercy. The King
answered with a loud Voice in these words, as Fox relates them: If you remit
your self to my Judgment, you must die; Fox p. 1026. col. 1. n. 78.
for I will be no Patron of Heretics. And by and by turning himself to
Cromwell, he said, Cromwell, read the Sentence of Condemnation against him;
(which Cromwell (adds Fox) was at that time the chief Friend of the
Gospellers) who taking the Schedule of Condemnation in his hand, read the same,
etc.

12. Thus writes Fox, and puts in the Margin this Note: The King condemns
the Martyr of Christ John Lambert. And again, in another place: Thus was John
Lambert in this bloody Session by the King judged and condemned to death, etc.
Fox and King Henry fallen out.
And then speaks he very dishonorably of King Henry about this matter, citing
him to the last Day of Judgment to receive his Sentence for that Sentence. So
as howsoever they flatter the Memory of this King for glosing with her Majesty
in outward words, yet it is clear enough what they think of him in their
hearts, and speak of him in corners. And howsoever Fox paint him out with their
Gospel in his Lap, and Sword in his hand to defend it, calling him everywhere
Gospeller; yet can they not deny but that the sharpest edge of the Sword fell
upon them.

13. And here I cannot omit to let you hear Fox's complaint of ill luck and
misfortune in this behalf, that the King, with Cranmer and Cromwell, and some
others of his Gospel and Gospellers, should so unluckily concur to the
condemning and burning of this fervent Brother of their Gospel Lambert. Here
(says Fox) it is much to be marvelled at, to see how unfortunately it came to
pass in this mattter, that through the pestiferous and crafty Counsel of
Gardyner Bishop of Winchester, Satan did here perform the Condemnation of this
Lambert, by no other Ministers than Gospellers themselves. This is Fox his
complaint, laying all the fault (as you see) upon Bishop Gardyner, as though he
had been able to have induced all these Gospellers, and among others the King
himself and his Gospelling Counselors to have concurred to the burning of
their own Brother Lambert, if they had been then of his Gospel. But the truth
is, that none of them at that time were come so far forward, as to be
Zuinglians. For as for the King himself, he hated them deadly, both then and
unto his dying-day; as also the Lutherans, though he bare somewhat more with them
than with the other, in respect of their holding the Real Presence in the
Sacrament, whereunto he was most devout. And as for Cranmer and Cromwell, it
may be that in those days they were a little touched with Lutheranism; the
former, to enjoy his Woman which he kept secretly, by whom he was also made a
Zuinglian in King Edward's days; the second, for his Gain and Advancement. Yet
the said Cromwell, coming soon after this to be beheaded, on the Scaffold said
these words among others, as Fox relates them: Fox p. 1086. The Protestation
of Cromwell at his death that he was a Catholic.
And now I pray you that be here to bear me record that I die in the Catholic
Faith, not doubting of any Article of my Faith, no nor doubting in any
Sacrament of the Church. Many have slandered me, and reported that I have been
a Bearer out of such as have maintained evil Opinions, which is untrue, etc.
And then a little after he adds again, The Devil is ready to seduce us, and I
have been seduced; but bear me witness that I die in the Catholic Faith of the
whole Church.

14. Thus relates Fox of his last Confession, and puts in his Margin this
Note: A true Christian Confession of the Lord Cromwell at his Death. Which if
John Fox mean truly indeed, John Fox is sore pressed about the L. Cromwell.
and that Cromwell himself meant it also truly and sincerely as he spoke and
was understood by the people, then died he a Catholic in all points, and
believed all Sacraments of that Church which then in England was held for
Catholic, and opposite to the new Gospellers at that time; by whom he confessed
he had been somewhat seduced, and yet denies that ever he was a Bearer out of
them, as you see. And if all this be true indeed, how then can this Confession
of the Lord Cromwell be called a true Christian Confession with John Fox;
seeing it is a Catholic Confession, and renounceth Fox his Religion utterly?
And if it were a false, feigned, and dissembled Confession of Cromwell, and
meant contrary to the sound of his words at the hour of his death; how was he a
true Christian man in so dissembling and lying, and this at his very going out
of the World? And here I would have John Fox to solve me this Dilemma, both for
his own and Cromwell's Credit; whom notwithstanding all this, Fox will needs
enforce to be of his Gospel, whether he will or no; writing of him thus in
another place: In this Worthy and Noble Person, Fox p. 1084.
besides diverse other Eminent Virtues, three things especially are to be
considered; his flourishing Authority, his excelling Wisdom, and his fervent
Zeal to Christ, and to his Gospel, etc. And so much of Him and his Fellow
Cranmer, the two chief Pillars and Under-props of John Fox's Gospel with King
Henry.

Tyndall's judgment and testimony of the first motives toward Protestancy in
K. Henry Fox p. 977.
15. And hereby we may in part in contemplate the first Beginning, Fountain,
Origin and Offspring of John Fox's Gospel in England; whereof we have spoken
somewhat before, in the last Chapter of the former Part of this Treatise, where
we alleged the words of William Tyndall written to John Fryth his Scholar at
the very beginning, when King Henry first seemed to favor the Gospel; wherein
Tyndall says, that he had smelled a certain Counsel taken against Papists; but
that Fryth must understand that it was not for God, but for Revenge, and to
enjoy the spoil of the Church. These were the first motives, if we believe
Tyndal whom John Fox holds and calls an Apostle of England: So as this
testimony coming from Him, must needs be also Apostolic, if not Evangelical.

16. But what was the progress of this Gospel so begun in England? I have
showed before, that not long after this beginning (to wit, in the year of
Christ 1536,) King Henry being disposed upon former motives to make some
certain Alterations, did not take counsel nor direction from the new Gospellers
to do it, but rather set forth a Book of his own, entitled thus: Articles
devised by the King's Highness. So do testify both Hall, Hollinshead, and
Stow. And then Hall, Hall. in chron. an. Reg. H. 8.28. fol. 228. The first Book
of alteration of Religion in England devised by King Henry.
who lived in those days, adds further; In this Book are especially mentioned
but three Sacraments, with the which the Lincolnshire- men were offended. And
then again afterward he writes, This Book especially treated of no more than
three Sacraments, where always before the people had been taught seven
Sacraments, etc. Which Articles being delivered to the people, the Inhabitants
of the North parts being very ignorant and rude, and not knowing what true
Religion meant, etc. said, Now you see, Friends, that four Sacraments of seven
are taken from us, and shortly you shall lose the other three also, except you
look about you, etc. Thus writes Hall of the beginning of the Insurrection of
Lincoln, York, and other Shires, by occasion of these new-devised Articles in
Religion. Whereby notwithstanding we see that King Henry thinking best to make
some alteration, though he meant not indeed to take away any Sacrament, (as
afterward appeared;) yet disdained he to take his Platform from the
Protestants, or Gospellers of those days, but devised of himself the Innovation
which for the present he meant to make. Whereof I have heard of a certain Story
not unpleasant, nor from the purpose, which therefore here I will set down.

17. A certain Courtier at that day (some say it was Sir Francis Bryan) talking
with a Lady that was somewhat forward in the new Gospel about this Book of the
King's then lately come forth, A certain Conference between a Courtier and a
Lady about devising Novelties in Religion.
she seemed to mislike greatly the Title thereof, to wit, Articles devised by
the King's Highness, etc. saying, That it seemed not a fit Title to authorize
matters in Religion, to ascribe them to a mortal King's device. Whereunto the
Courtier answered, Truly (Madam) I will tell you my conceit plainly: If we must
needs have devices in Religion, I had rather have them from a King, than from a
Knave, as your Devices are; I mean that Knave Friar Martin, who not yet 20
years agone was Deviser of your new Religion, and behaved himself so lewdly in
answering his Majesty with scorn and contempt, as I must needs call him a
Knave; though otherwise I do not hate altogether the Profession of Friars, as
your Ladyship knows. Moreover (said he) it is not unknown neither to your
Ladyship nor Us, that he devised these new Tricks of Religion, which you now so
much esteem and reverence, not for God, or Devotion, or to do Penance, but for
Ambition, Cocl. in vit. Luther. and Sur. ann. Dom. 1516, 1517.
and to revenge himself upon the Dominican Friars, that had gotten from him the
preaching of the Pope's Bulls; as also to get himself the use of a Wench, and
that a Nun also, which now he holds. And soon after him again three other
married Priests, his Scholars, (to wit, Oecolampadius, Carolstadius, and
Zuinglius) devised another Religion of the Sacramentaries, against their said
Master. And since these again, we hear every day of other fresh Upstarts that
devise us new Doctrins, and there is no end of Devising or Devisers. And I
would rather for my part stick to the devising of a King, that has Majesty in
him, and a Council to assist him, (especially such a King as ours is) than to a
thousand of these Companions put together.

18. It is true (said the Lady) when they are Devices indeed of Men, The Reply
of the Lady with the Courtier's Answer.
but when they bring Scriptures with them to prove their sayings, then are they
not Men's Devices, but God's Eternal Truth and Word. And will you say so, Madam,
quoth he? And do you not remember what ado we had the last year about this time
with certain Of these Hollanders, see Holinshead an. 27 H. 8. mense Maii 1535.
Hollanders here in England, whom our Bishops and Doctors could not overcome by
Scriptures, notwithstanding they held most horrible Heresies, which make my
Hairs to stand upright to think of them, against the Manhood and Flesh of
Christ our Savior, and against the Virginity of his Blessed Mother, and against
the Baptism of Infants, and the like wicked Blasphemies. I was my self present
at the Condemnation of fourteen of them in Paul's Church in one day, and heard
them dispute and allege Scriptures so fast for their Heresies, as I was amazed
thereat; and after I saw some of these Knaves burned in Smithfield, and they
went so merrily to their Death, singing and chanting Scriptures, as I began to
think with my self whether their Device was not of some value or no; until
afterward, thinking better of the matter, I blessed my self from them, and so
let them go.

19 Oh (said the Lady) but these were Knaves indeed, that devised new Doctrins
of their own heads; and were very Heretics, not worthy to be believed. But how
shall I know (quoth the Courtier) that Your Devisers have not done the like,
seeing These alleged Scriptures no less than They; and did one thing more,
which is, that they went to the fire and burned for their Doctrine, when they
might have lived, which your Friar and his Scholars before named have not
hitherto done. And finally (Madam) I say, as at the beginning I said, If we
must needs follow devising, we Courtiers had much rather follow a King than a
Friar in such a matter. For how many years (Madam) have Friars shorn their
Heads, and no Courtier has ever followed them hitherto to therein? But now his
Majesty having begun this last May (as you know) to poll See Holinsh. and Stow
of this Polling. an. 1535.
his Head, and commanded others to do the like, you cannot find any unshorn
Head in the Court among us Men, though you Women be exempted. And so I conclude,
that the device of a King is of more credit than the device of a Friar. And
with this the Lady laughed; and so the Conference was ended.

The growing and going forward of the new Gospel under King Henry. Fox p. 1036.
20 And thus much for the first devising or setting up of new Religion in
England. Now, for the going forward thereof, let us hear a large testimony of
John Fox himself, and thereby judge how Apostolic the manner was of promoting
the same. To many which be yet alive (says Fox) and can testify these things,
it is not unknown how variable the state of Religion stood in those days; how
hardly and with what difficulty it came forth; what chances and changes it
suffered, even as the King was ruled and gave ear sometime to one, and sometime
to another; so one while it went forward, and another season it went as much
backward again; and sometime clean altered and changed for a season, according
as they could prevail which were about the King, etc.

21. Here now you see both the beginning and progress of Fox's Gospel; whereof
in the Margin he makes this Note: The course of the Gospel interrupted by
malicious Enemies. Here you do hear him say, that the Birth of his Gospel came
forth hardly, and with great difficulty and straining; and then that it grew or
went backward as the King was ruled by others, and gave credit to this or that
Man or Woman: For so he comes in presently with his Examples of Queen Anne and
Cromwell. So long (says he) as Queen Anne lived, the Gospel had indifferent
success; Fox ib.
but after that she by sinister instigation of some about the King was made
away, the course of the Gospel began again to decline: But that the Lord then
stirred up the Lord Cromwell opportunely to help in that behalf; who did much
avail for the increase of God's true Religion, and much more had brought it to
perfection, if the pestilent Adversaries, maligning the prosperous Glory of the
Gospel, had not by contrary practicing undermined him, and supplanted his
virtuous proceedings.

22. Behold here a wise Discourse of John Fox! Whereby, if nothing else were,
you might perceive how justly and truly that Spirit of Majesty that spoke to
him in his Bed upon a Sunday in the morning (if you remember) called him, See
before, cap. 7.
Thou Fool: For that no man but a very Fool indeed would have brought forth
these Examples to have proved his purpose, being both impertinent, and clearly
false in themselves.

23. And first, they are impertinent, or rather against himself; for that they
show that his Gospel had no other beginning in England, but upon Affection of
Men and Women. False also are the Examples, if we consider the Times
themselves; for that the foresaid new Book of devised Articles, (mentioned by
Hall and Hollinshead, as the first public Alteration in points of Religion
discovered in King Henry) was made and set forth after the death of Queen Anne
Bullen, to wit, upon the 8th of June 1536, whereas the Queen died upon the 19th
of May before: And Fox himself, having related the said Articles and Book, Fox
p. 991. col. 2. n. 30.
as set forth after the death of Queen Anne, he says thus: This Book treated
especially but of three Sacraments, Baptism, Penance, and the Supper of the
Lord; for which the Lincolnshire- men took Arms, etc. And then he adds this
Note in the Margin, Alteration of Religion a little begins. And after again
presently this other Note, Commotion in Lincolnshire, Whereby is evident out of
his own words, King Henry's beginning of alteration af-the death of Q. Anne
Bullen.
that the first beginning of any alteration in points of Religion toward his
Gospel, was after the death of Queen Anne Bullen; and consequently it is a
ridiculous foolery which he writes before, That so long as Queen Anne lived,
the Gospel had indifferent success, etc.

24. The other Example also of Cromwell is no less apparently false; for that,
besides the particulars which you have heard before of his assisting to punish
and burn Protestants, and his Sentence of death given against Lambert, with the
Protestation he made at his own death of his being Catholic, The chiefest
credit of Cromwell, when new Gospellers were most punished by King Henry.
and never doubting of any one Point of Catholic Religion: Besides all this (I
say) it is notorious, that when the severe Statute of Six Articles was made
against all sorts of Protestants in the 31st year of King Henry's Reign, (which
was in the Month of April 1540, as appears both by the Book of Statutes it
self, and Hall, Holinshead, and other Chroniclers) Cromwell was then in his
highest Authority and Favor with the King, as is evident; for that in the time
of the very same Parliament, besides all his other great Offices before
received, (as of Baron, Chancellor, Knight of the Garter, Master of the Jewels,
Vicar General in Spiritual Affairs, and other like Titles) he was created also
Earl of Essex, and High-Chamberlain of England; Hol. an. 1540. page 950.
which Holinshead sets down in these words: The 18th of April at Westminster
was Lord Thomas Cromwell created Earl of Essex, and ordained Great Chamberlain
of England, which Office the Earls of Oxford were wont ever to enjoy: Also
Gregory his Son was made Lord Cromwell, etc. Thus writes he. And if in
Cromwell's most flourishing time this Act of Six Articles came out for
punishment of Protestants, the most severe that can be imagined, how fond and
childish a babbling was that before used by Fox, when he tells us, that as
long as the good Lord Cromwell was in credit, or bare Rule with the King, their
Gospel went prosperously, etc?

25. Well then, by all this we may see how poor and trodden down a state John
Fox's Church and Religion held under King Henry, notwithstanding all his brags,
and flattering of him in his Pictures. Which yet, that you may not think we
mean only of the temporal or external condition, or contemptibility of his
Church, (for of that perhaps he would brag, seeing he defines his Church by the
words obscure and trodden down) I would have you here consider briefly but two
things only for the end of this Chapter, which directly do appertain to the
true spiritual misery of Fox's Church and Religion in those days under King
Henry, if a Confusion of fantastical Opinions, Errors and Heresies may be
called a Religion.

26. The first is, The first point of spiritual misery of the Gospellers Church
under King Henry, Confusion.
That in King Henry's days (at leastwise for a great part thereof) the
Protestants Sects were not yet fully distinguished into their Classes or
Orders, but were a great confused heap of new Opinions, all going under the
name of Gospellers or Protestants, as well Lutherans, Oecolampadians,
Zuinglians, and other Sacramentaries, as Waldensians, Wickliffians,
Anabaptists, Libertines, and other suchlike. So as in this first Heap and Mass
of Gospellers were contained all the several Sects that since have been
distinguished; as the four Elements, and particular parts thereof, were
contained (according to the Poets Fiction) in that great confused Chaos of the
World before it was distinguished; or, to speak more properly, they were as the
Bears Whelps when first they are born, and new fallen from their Mothers Womb;
to wit, certain disform, gross, confused things, which by often licking of
their Parents are polished at last, and brought to some fashion of handsome
Creatures, such as you know Bears Whelps to be.

27. And even so was it in those days with Protestants Religion: For that every
man that would hold a new Opinion, of what Sect soever, or would speak against
the Catholic Church or Doctrine then used, was admitted presently for a Brother
of the new Gospel, and for a sincere Servant of God, and holy Gospeller, (as
John Fox everywhere calls them without distinction) whether he were a
Lutheran, Zuinglian, Anabaptist, Waldensian, Wickliffist, Lolhard, or
whatsoever else; but since that time, this Chaos has been somewhat more
distinguished and polished, and every sort of Sectaries divided into their
Classes. Luth. in parva Confess de coena Domini.

Melancthon lib. de suo Judicio ad Elect. Rhen. an. Dom. 1560. Freder. Staph.
l. de Concord. Luth. Lyndan. in dubitant.

Praet. initio lib. de vit. and sectis haeret.


Which Luther himself began first to do, noting nine distinct Sects to have
risen in few years after him out of his Doctrine, and these only of
Sacramentaries. Whereunto his chief Scholar Melancthon, a little before his
death, in his Judgment written to the Palsgrave, or Prince Elector of Rhene,
added six more to be among the Lutherans themselves. But others that have
gathered them more exactly and distinctly (as, Staphilus a most Learned Man,
and Counselor to the Emperor, Bishop Lyndan, Dr. Gabriel Prateolus, and
others) do divide them into a far great number; distributing first the
Gospellers of our time that have proceeded of Luther, and by occasion of his
Doctrine, since the year of Christ 1517, into three or four Classes; whereof the
first is of plain Lutherans, divided among themselves into eleven Sects; and
these again being subdivided into other three Classes, of soft, rigid, and
extravagant Lutherans, do make above thirty other divisions and Sects.

The different Classes and sorts of Sectaries sprung from Luther since the year
1517.
28. The second general Classis is of Semi-Lutherani, Half-Lutherans, that do
partly agree with Luther, and partly disagree; but yet with eleven differences,
which being obstinately held by their Authors and Professors, do make eleven
different Sects. The third Universal Classis or Order of new Gospellers, are of
Anti-Lutherani, those that are quite opposite to Luther, as Sacramentaries, and
the like, whereof are set down fifty-six distinct Sects, and the first of these
is of Sacramentaries, being subdivided into nine Sects, you may imagine to what
Number the Sum will rise.

29. The fourth general Classis of new Gospellers of our time are the
Anabaptists, begun by Bernard Rotman, an unlearned Fellow of the Laity, but a
Scholar and Son of Luther, about the year of Christ 1524, that is, seven years
after Luther began; and this sort of men are divided again into thirteen Sects,
as in the foresaid Authors may be read. All which deduction and distinction was
not made nor known in England, (except very confusedly) in King Henry's time;
but all were accounted good Gospellers, and of one Church and Faction, and so
would John Fox have them accounted also now: For proof whereof, How John Fox
coupleth all Sectaries in his Church.
wheresoever they were contradicted, restrained, punished or burned for what
Opinion soever, John Fox puts them down expressly for Confessors and Martyrs
of his Church; excepting only the Anabaptists, which openly he does not admit,
for that now also They are burned in England by the Protestant Magistrate; but
yet neither does he reject them by Name, but holds himself silent in their
Affair, though he does set down sundry for Martyrs in his Calendar which held of
their Opinions, as in the next Part of this Treatise we are to show by many
Examples. And thus much of the first Point, concerning the Confusion,
Obscurity, Impurity, and Imperfections of John Fox's Church under King Henry,
which was not yet strained from her Suds, if Fox at that time may be said to
have had any Church at all.

The second spiritual misery of J. Fox's Church, contradiction among themselves
in their Belief.
30. There follows the other Point, of Antipathy, Contradiction and Exposition
among themselves, that were held by Fox to have been the chief Pillars of his
Church in those days. And as for the King, Queen Ann, Cranmer, and Cromwell, we
have spoken of already. The other (if we believe himself) were Thomas Bilney,
John Frith, William Tyndall, all three rubricated Martyrs in his Calendar. And
then in black Letters (but of the same Order of Martyrdom) Robert Barns,
William Jerome, Thomas Gerard, John Lambert, Peter German, Andrew Hewit, John
Colyns, William Cowbridg, and diverse others, that not only professed his Gospel
as he says, but willingly also gave their Blood in a holy and lively Sacrifice
for testimony thereof. And to these he adds diverse holy Confessors of the
same Confession, to wit, Erasmus Roterodamus, Picus Mirandula, Philip
Melancthon, King Edward VI. and the like.

31. But now, if I should go about to draw all these Martyrs and Confessors of
his Church into any one form of Faith and Belief, good or bad, (which is
necessary, you know, to make a Church) it would prove a far harder Enterprise
than to couple all the Cats of any great City by the Heads together, and to
make them stand so for an hour of their own will, looking one upon the other,
without turning their Heads aside. For as for Bilney, See part 3. of Bilney,
die 10. Martii. an. 1531.
you shall perceive by my Treatise in the next part that he never held but very
few of the Protestants Opinions, and very many against Them, and with Us; and
abjured those few of the Protestants at two several times, and died in that
Abjuration. Tho. Bilney Jo. Frith. Will. Tyndall.
Frith also and Tyndall were most opposite to Fox in many Points of Belief: I
mean opposite both to Luther and Zuinglius in the Controversy of the
Sacrament, holding the Real Presence to be indifferent, and to be believed or
not believed as every man thinks good; with other notable particular Heresies
of their own, as in due place we are to show. Part 3. die 2 Jan. and die 6
October.

Friar Barns. Gerrard, Jerome, and Lambert.

Ridley, Hooper, Rogers, Latymer. Andrew Hewit


Robert Barns was an earnest Lutheran, as Tyndall testifies to Frith: And as
for Gerrard, Hierom and Lambert, though they were Zuinglians, yet not after Fox's
fashion, but different from him in many Points of Doctrine, as we shall declare
when we come to handle of them severally, as also of Ridley, Hooper, Rogers,
Latymer, in the next part of this Treatise; showing that under King Henry they
were only Lutherans, if so far forward at that time.

32. And as for Andrew Hewit, he was of no Religion in particular when he died,
but said only, that he would die for the Religion that John Frith held,
whatsoever it were, as Part 1. c. 12. Peter German.
before we have noted Peter German inclined indeed to Zuinglianism: But
together with that (as when we come unto his See his day, part 3. and 13 October.

Colyns and Coubridge made Martyrs. Fox p. 1033.


Holy Day we shall show) he denied Christ to have taken Flesh of the Virgin
Mary, and other like holy Assertions. As for Colyns and Coubridge, burned also
for Heresy under King Henry, and assigned for Calendar-Martyrs by Fox, upon
the 10th and 11th days of October; himself confesses afterward upon better
consideration, That he thinks them not worthy of the number of God's
professed Martyrs; but yet holds (as he says) That they are belonging to the
holy Company of Christ's Saints. The first of these two held up a Dog to be
worshipped of the People, instead of the blessed Sacrament; the second denied
the Name of Christ flatly. Which Fox not denying, excuses the matter thus,
saying, That the one and the other of them were mad, and distracted of their
Wits, as more largely we shall show afterward in the discussion of the
Calendar. And thus much of his Martyrs.

33. Now for his Confessors; Erasmus Roterodamus, Picus Mirandula, Fox's
Confessors under King Henry.
Friar Bucer, Philip Melancthon, King Edward VI. and others, (which he sets
down for Saints in the end of his Calendar and Month of December) they do agree
in Religion as just as Germans Lips, (to use the vulgar Proverb) either with
Fox, Erasmus Roterodamus.
or among themselves: For as for Erasmus, whom every where Fox makes (as it
were) the Father and first Master of new Gospelling in England, you shall so
hear him defend himself by his own words in the next Part of this die 26 December.
Treatise, as you will say they abuse him egregiously to hold him for any
Protestant at all, having written so sharply against their first Captain Luther
as he did, repeating oftentimes these words: Christum agnosco, Lutherum non
agnosco, Erasm. l. 16. ep. 11.
Ecclesiam Romanam agnosco; I acknowledge Christ, I do not acknowledge Luther,
I acknowledge the Roman Church etc.

34. And the like Injury they offer to Picus Earl of Mirandula, Picus Mirandula.
who never held any one Protestant Opinion in his life, as we shall show when
we come to his place in the Calendar. And as for Bucer and Melancthon, Bucer.
Melancthon.
they were Lutherans indeed, and open Enemies for many years against Zuinglius
and Zuinglians, that are the Flower of John Fox's Church. And though Friar Bucer
afterward (to have the free use of his Woman in England) dissembled egregiously
in some things, to please the Protector for a time, and seemed to bear with the
Sacramentaries: yet told he the Lord Dudley, then Duke of Northumberland, being
asked confidently his opinion of the Sacrament by the said Duke, Friar Bucer's
Answer to the Duke of Northumberland.
in the presence of the Lord Pagett, then a Protestant, (who testified the same
publicly afterward:) that for the Real Presence, it could not be denied, if we
believe all that the Evangelists do write. But whether all be to be believed or
no, he said merrily, that was a matter of more disputation.

Of King Edward VI.
35. And lastly, concerning King Edward VI. set down also by Fox in red Letters,
for a solemn Confessor of his Religion: If we talk of King Henry's time, he was
a very young Confessor; for that he was scarce nine years old, when his Father
died. And it is very probable, that the Religion which he at that Age could
receive, was rather such as his Father had caused him to be taught during his
life, than such as it pleased Fox to assign unto him afterward. But if Fox
mean, that he was a Confessor of their Religion after his Fathers death, albeit
it be hard to say of what Religion the Child would have been if he had lived;
yet do I think him rather worthy to be accounted a Martyr of Fox's Church, than
a Confessor. Seeing it is probable, that the bringing in of that Religion, and
change of state left by his Father, was the cause of his immature death. For
that if matters had remained as his Father left them, and no Protector chosen
(as he appointed) nor Wriothesley the Chancellor put out of his Office, nor
other Catholic Counselors (most faithful to the conservation of the Kings
Blood,) had been disgraced and displaced by that unlucky change: like it is,
that the good young King might have lived many fair years more, and his two
Sisters never have fallen into those imminent dangers of present destruction,
which they once saw themselves in, by the ambition of the new Gospelling
Faction. But enough of this, and of all the Reign of King Henry VIII. Now shall
we pass briefly over the rest that remains.

CHAP. XII.
Whether Fox's Church has had any Place under King Edward, Queen Mary, and Her
Majesty that now Reigns: and how far it has been admitted, or is admitted at
this day.

ALbeit John Fox did Paint out King Henry VIII. in the first page of his Life,
sitting with his Feet upon the Popes back, and the Gospel in his Lap, with his
Sword lifted up in his right hand, to defend the same (as before you have
heard: Two fond Pageants of King Henry and K. Edward.
) yet did he Paint Cromwell and Cranmer staying up the said Sword, least it
should fall upon the Protestants themselves, as we have showed that in effect
it did. But now in the first page of King Edward's Reign, Fox has a much more
ample and triumphant Pageant for the Child above his Father: Who though he were
but nine years old, yet seems Fox to make him a fuller Head of the Church,
than his Father, placing him in a high Throne of Majesty, and his stretched out
Sword in the right Hand, and with the other (which is the left) he delivers
the Gospel unto the People, and Prelates, that stand round about him. Where Fox
writes in the Margent this Note: King Edward delivering the Bible to the
Prelates, etc. As though the Bible had taken Authority from the Child's
delivering. Who being so tender of Age as he was, (and of likelihood scarce
able to read the same, and much less to understand it) as well he might have
delivered them the Poem of Chaucer, or the Story of Guy of Warwick, or of Bevis
of Southampton (if it had been put into his Hand to deliver) as this was by his
Uncle the Protector, that knew full near as little of the Contents, as the
Child himself.

2. But besides this Majestical representation of delivering the Gospel, there
be two or three other Pageants in the same page. The first is of pulling down
Images with great diligence every where, and burning them, Other ridiculous
Paintings of Fox.
with this Sentence written under: The Temple well purged. And then is there a
great Ship, painted with Men, Women, and Children, carrying their Church-Stuff
into that Ship; to wit, Bells, Books, Images, and Candles: and amongst other
things also, the Blessed Sacrament. And over the Ship is written thus: The Ship
of the Romish Church. And on the side this Sentence: Ship over your Trinkets,
and be packing, you Papists. And thus is John Fox's pleasant Head delighted
with these Fancies. But who sees not how childish this folly is? Seeing scarce
six years after this triumph, when Queen Mary came in, a Man might have said to
him again, and his Fellows: Ship over your Trinkets, and be packing, you
Protestants.

3. But if we consider indeed, the different Wares, and Trinkets, which this
Catholic Roman Ship carried away from England at that time, and those which the
new Protestants Ship brought in soon after from Germany, Geneva, Switzerland,
and other Places, we shall easily discover, whether the loss were greater for
our Nation, by the departure of the one, or by the coming in of the other: For
that in the Roman Ship was carried away, What the Roman Ship carried away, and
what the Protestants Ship brought into England.
not only the blessed Sacrament, as Fox says, and Painteth it out (which yet
is the highest and most precious Treasure, that Christ has left to Christians
upon Earth:) but with that also all kind of virtue, and honesty for the most
part. For that all Modesty, Gravity, Learning, Piety, Devotion, Peace, Concord,
Unity and Charity was carried away. And in the new Gospelling Ship, came in all
the contrary Vices: namely of Sedition, Division, Pride, Temerity, Curiosity,
Novelties, Sensuality, Impiety, and Atheism. And in place of many sober,
honest, and grave men, that retired themselves upon this change, there came
running into England a main number of wanton Apostata Priests and Friars, each
one with his Mate and Dame at his side, hungry and turbulent people, as Friar
Bale, Friar Bucer, Friar Coverdale, Friar Martyr, and other like. Who joined
with other of their own Sect in England, in such a vein of Innovations, as
quickly brought all upon their own Heads. And so though after all these foresaid
three Pictures, and Representations (to wit, the Bible distributed, the
Churches spoiled, and the Catholic Roman Ship sent away). John Fox does make a
fourth fair Pageant, of the Protestants kind and comfortable meeting together,
at their Communion Table, and their peaceable breaking of Bread. Yet if you
consider what presently ensued in their actions, A Picture of the Protestants
Agreement.
(I mean of their changing, chopping, pulling down, and setting up in those few
years that it endured) you will easily see the Fruits of that new Gospel.

4. For first, all begun with manifest perfidiousness against the old King,
that was dead. For whereas he had two things in abomination above the rest;
First, that his Son should have a Protector (considering the fatal events
thereof in former times) for which cause he appointed sixteen Tutors, to govern
with equal Authority, during the Minority of his Son; the other, that Heresy
(but especially Zwinglianism) should enter into his Realm: both these things
were determined contrary to the said Kings Will and Ordination, within three
days after his death, and above a dozen before he was buried. For that the
young Child being Proclaimed King upon the 28. of January, and his Father not
buried until the 14. of February, his Uncle, the Earl of Hartford, was made
Protector both of the King, and whole Realm, upon the first of the said Month
of February following: and this by the private Authority of the greater part of
the Executors only, without expecting any Parliament, or consent of the Realm,
for so great a change, and charge, as that was.

Promotions made by the Protector in the beginning of King Edward's days.
5. And albeit for obtaining the consents of the greater parts of Executors to
this mutation, great advancements and Dignities were promised, and some of them
also performed (for that the Lord Dudley was made Earl of Warwick, the Lord
Parre Marquess of Northampton, the Lord Chancellor Wriothesley, was created
Earl of Southampton, Sir Thomas Seymor was made Lord Sudley, and High Admiral
of England, and other the like; and this within fifteen days after the
Protectors Advancement) and though hope also was given to those, that were
Catholicly inclined (as the most of them were, if they had followed their
Consciences) that no great alteration of Religion should be made for the
present: yet twenty days had scarce passed, after this advancement, but that
the Protectors Fingers did so eagerly itch to be doing, and tampering about
Innovation in Religion, Holinshead. Stow and others, an. Dom. 1547.
as upon the 6. of March next following, he sent away Commissioners into all
parts of the Realm, to pull down Images, and other Ecclesiastical Ornaments,
throughout all the Churches of the Realm, and to make other Innovations by his
Authority, which now in all things he would have to be the Kings. And for that
the Chancellor Wriothesley resisted the same, and would have had it stayed
until a Parliament might be called; his Office was taken from him, thereby to
terrify others from speaking in like Cases. Bishop Tonstall also was put
beside the Council for like offense, though he were one of the sixteen
Executors appointed by King Henry. So as now the Protector would needs have all
things absolutely in his own Hand, both without Law, and before Law, yea
expressly against the Laws of King Henry yet in force.

6. And for that both he and his followers did easily see, the affection of the
Realm to be wholly against these Mutations, (as before we have showed in the
end of our former part:) he devised with the Lord Dudley, who soothed him in
all at that time, the Journey into Scotland, of Musselborough Field which all
men know, The Journey into Scotland, why it was devised in King Edward's time.
under pretense to gain the young Queen by force to Marry with the King. But
yet every man of judgment, and discourse, did easily see, that not to be a
thing likely, to get such a Princess by way of Arms from her Subjects. Neither
was King Edward of such Age, as they needed to have hastened so much, to get
him a Wife so soon (he being but nine years old) but that the matter might have
been treated peaceably with the Scots, to have concurred willingly for their
own interest, to that conjunction of both Realms by that Marriage, according as
they had done in King Henry's time. And so wrote Bishop Gardener to the
Protector, presently upon the first Sermon he heard the Bishop of St. David's in
Wales, make in London, about that matter, I mean, to exhort the people to the
enterprise of Scotland. For that now all Preachers were set a work by the said
Protector, and Earl of Warwick, to show the great Glory and utilities of that
Attempt.

7. But the true cause of this Enterprise was indeed, to have thereby a just
pretense, and occasion to raise an Army within the Land, and to call in Foreign
Forces (as they did both Germans and Italians, under Petro Gamboa that had
served King Henry at Bologne, and other Leaders) who they thought would be
always more sure unto them, than English Soldiers in occasions of Religion. And
so it fell out indeed. For the very next year after, these Foreign Soldiers,
did stand the Protector in very good stead, when diverse Shires of the Realm
took Arms for defense of their Religion, in the third year of King Edward's
Reign, as after you shall hear.

8. This then was the first Summers work after King Edward's Coronation: to
wit, that the Protector made his Voyage toward Scotland, having first sent
Commissioners and Preachers (as you have heard) into all Shires, to preach
against Images, Procession, Litanies, Pilgrimages, Mass, praying to Saints: And
this of his own Authority, without and against Law; for that no Parliament had
yet disannulled the Religion left by King Henry. Which thing so much grieved
the common Catholic people, as they began to exclaim every where against the
said Commissioners; and one of them, called Body, was slain in Cornwall, for
which diverse Men were Executed in sundry places of that Shire, and a Priest
sent up to be Hanged, Drawn and Quartered in Smithfield, for the terror of
others, for that he was said by some to have been Accessory to the said Body's
death.

9. And this was the beginning of planting new Religion in England, The rushing
in of Apostates into England.
by Authority of the Protector, under a Child-King; which Protector
notwithstanding, for that he mistrusted his home-Doctors (as well as his
home-Souldiers) to be sufficient for so great a Work as the planting of a new
Religion, he sent over into Germany for diverse strange Sectaries of what
Religion soever, so they were not Catholic: But especially he desired to have
Apostate-Friers, that had tied themselves to Sisters, assuring himself that
they would be most pliable to his purpose. And so there came into England
Martin Bucer, a Dominican Friar, who unto that day had been an earnest
Lutheran; and Peter Martyr, a Canon-Regular that inclined to Zuinglianism, but
yet came with great indifferency to preach and teach what he should be
appointed; Bernard Ochinus. Vid. Sander. l. de visib. Monarch. p. 627.
Bernardinus Ochinus was the third, who had been a Franciscan Friar, and by
taking a Woman had lost all Religion, writing a Book de Polygamia, for having
many Wives at once, and died after a Jew.

10. These three were distributed into three principal Fountains of the Land,
London, Oxford, and Cambridge; and with these joined other of the same Coat and
Profession, as Coverdale an Augustine Friar, Bale a Carmelite, and otherlike
Englishmen, as before we have showed: All which beginning to preach in diverse
parts of the Land, filled men's heads with Novelties and Contentions, but had
not the Gift of the old Apostolical Preachers, to preach the self-same Faith
and Doctrine every where; but so many men so many Opinions were set abroach,
every man following his own fancy; only they agreed in impugning the Catholic
Church, Rites, Doctrine, and Service, but among themselves they could not agree.

11. Which thing being signified to the Protector, both before his departure,
and while he was in the Scottish Journey, it grieved him exceedingly, and wrote
back to Cranmer, Ridley, and the rest, that they should seek some means of
Agreement and Conformity, and that they should make have to end the
Common-Service-Book, or Book of Common Prayer, Doctrine, and Rites, which they
had begun to treat of before his departure out of London. The causes of jars
between the new Protestant Preachers.
But this was not so easy to do, for that new Factions and Divisions were
grown now among them, especially upon the arrival of the foresaid new
Preachers, as well English, as strangers from beyond the Seas: For albeit the
strangers could not much help in making this English Communion-Book, or rather
new Mass Book; yet did they hurt and hinder the same much by the variety of
Opinions which they brought with them in matter of Doctrine; some of them coming
from Saxony, and others from Switzerland, where there were different new Sects
and Doctrins held and taught. And forasmuch as in this Book not only the Rites
and Ceremonies of Service and Administration of Sacraments, but the Doctrine
also of their Number and Nature, and other Articles of Belief, were to be
expressed, or at leastwise insinuated; hereof arose a great War, for that Bucer
would have one thing, Peter Martyr another, Ochinus a third; and then stepped
in John Bale and Milo Coverdale, freshly come with their new Doctrine and wanton
Women from beyond Seas, and would have room amongst the rest.

12. But above all others did trouble the Market at this time, two heady
married Priests, come also from beyond the Seas; to wit, John Hooper and John
Rogers, the one from Wittenberg with a German Wife, the other from Argentine
with a Burgundian Sister (as Fox testifies); who dissenting wholly from the
Course begun by Cranmer and Ridley, and bearing special emulation against them,
as accounting themselves more Learned and zealous, and more reformed than they,
(as in their Lives we shall show, when we come to their places in the
Calendar,) they being potent in Speech, and Faction, and had in estimation of
the people in respect of their former Banishment, they made this Agreement at
the first beginning much more difficult: Especially for that one Hugh Latimer,
more turbulent than any of them all, and of more regard with the common people,
for that he had been Bishop in King Henry's days, joined with Hooper and Rogers
against Cranmer and Ridley, for that they were not inclined to restore him his
Bishopric of Worcester, Stow. Anno 1539.
whereof he had been deprived by King Henry VIII.

13. Whereupon the Protector, when he returned to London from the Scottish
Voyage in the end of the Summer, he was greatly troubled to see these
Divisions: But especially, for that he found nothing ready, as he had hope? for
the new Communion-Book; but only that the old Religion was impugned, and the
new not yet framed, and infinite strife was raised both about the one and the
other. Yet a Parliament being called together upon the Fourth of November, Anno
Domini 1547, and the First of King Edward, they thought to give an attempt, to
see what might be done to have some Alteration established. But it would hardly
be, notwithstanding all Art, Power and Persuasion was used by the Protector and
his people to obtain the same: Statut. Anno Domini 1547. Edw. 6. An. 1.
For that in this Parliament they gat only two things of moment to be
determined about Religion. The first was, that all former penal Statutes made
against any Heretic or Sectary whatsoever, from King Edward the Third downward
(to wit, for the space almost of 200 years) should be revoked: But namely the
Statutes made against Lollards, Wickliffians, Hussits, Anabaptists, and the
rest, in the 1. Year of King Richard the Second, and in the 2. Year of King
Henry the Fifth, and in the 25.31.33.34 and 35. Years of King Henry the Eighth,
against what Heresies, Heretics or Sectaries soever. All these Laws and
Statutes (I say) were recalled, annulled, and taken away, together with their
punishments, prohibitions, or other restraints whatsoever; So as now every Man
might think, say, preach, or teach what he thought best. Liberty and Impunity
granted to all Heretics.
And this judges Fox to be a goodly sweet Liberty of the Gospel, where no Man
is bound nor forced to any thing. And this determined a Child of Nine years
old, against the Decrees of all his prudent Ancestors for 200 years upward.

14. But yet in all this free liberty of Sectaries, to say, write, and teach
what they list, the punishment of Death was reserved unto Catholics, that
should speak in defense of the Doctrine of the Pope's Supremacy, or in
derogation of the Supreme Ecclesiastical Headship of this young King. And this
was the first and principal beginning of the Gospel in King Edward's time, to
give every Man liberty to do and believe what he would, so he were not a
Catholic. Which is much like the opening of Prisons and common Jayls in the
beginning of a Rebellion, when all Malefactors are made free from fear of Laws,
so they will join in Faction with the Rebellious. And upon the opening of this
Gate, no marvail though all Sectaries rushed in, and among others, diverse Arians,
Anabaptists, Trinitarians, and like Heretics, began to preach presently their
Doctrins, with such publicity, as Cranmer and his Fellows, for repressing
thereof, were enforced to sit in public Judgment, and condemn diverse of them
to Death; albeit I do not see by what Law, having now revoked and annulled all
former Statutes made against Heretics for their punishment, as has been said:
And namely, he condemned Joan of Kent, (alias Joan Knell) that had been a
Handmaid of Anne Askew, Joan Knell condemned and burned by Cranmer. Sto. in
Chron. An. 1549.
burned before in the last year of King Henry VIII. for denying the Real
Presence: And Joan had profited so much under Anne's Doctrine, as now she denied
Christ to have taken Flesh of the Blessed Virgin; who was so resolute with her
Scriptures against Cranmer and his Assistants sitting upon her and her Fellows,
in our Lady's Cappel of S. Paul's Church in London, upon the 27th of April,
when he gave Sentence of Death against her, that she reproached him greatly for
his inconstancy in Religion, telling him, that he condemned not long before
Anne Askew for a piece of Bread, and now condemned her for a piece of Flesh:
And that as he was come now to believe the first, which then he had condemned;
so would he come in time to believe the second, etc.

15. And for that O. E. in his Defense of Sir Francis Hastings, would not seem
to think this matter to be true, I do assure the Reader in all sincerity, that
I have it by relation and asseveration of a worshipful and honorable Knight,
Sir Francis Inglefield.
that afterward was of Queen Mary's Privy Council, and was either present when
these things were spoken by Joan of Kent, or heard it from them that were
present; from whom also I received diverse other Particularities, which in this
Chapter and the former are touched by me; Knowing the Man to be of such Wisdom
and entire Credit, as I can hardly follow a better Author in things of his time.

16. Well then, this is the first point obtained in this first Parliament of
King Edward, that all Sects had impunity; whereof Fox glories much in these
words: These meek and gentle times of King Edward, under the Government of this
noble Protector, have this one Commendation proper to them, that during the
whole time of the Six years of this King's much tranquillity, and as it were a
breathing-time was granted to the whole Church of England, etc. Neither in
Smithfield, Fox page 1180. col. 2. n. 40. Fox his impertinent Brag of impunity
under King Edward.
nor any other Quarter of this Realm, was any heard to suffer for any matter of
Religion, either Papist or Protestant, either for one Opinion or other, except
only two; one an Englishwoman called Joan of Kent, the other a Dutchman named
George Paris, who died for certain Articles not much necessary here to be
rehearsed. Behold here Fox unwilling to rehearse the Articles of these two new
Gospellers, which were no other but the Denial of Christ himself. And for that
he says no man suffered for Religion it self (either Catholic or Protestant)
in all King Edwards days, The suffering of Catholics under King Edward.
I would ask him what he would say to so many hundreds as were slain and put to
death in Somersetshire, Devonshire, Cornwall, Lincolnshire, Norfolk, Yorkshire,
and other places, in the Third year of King Edward's Reign, that were forced to
take Arms for defense of their Religion, violently wrested from them, against
all Truth, Reason, Law, and Order? Was not this Suffering also for Religion?
But let us hear John Fox himself confess unto us the manner of entrance of his
Gospel into England.

17. After softer beginnings (says he) by little and little, Fox page 1180. n.
14.
greater things followed in the reformation of the Churches, and a new face of
things began now to appear, as it were on a Stage, new Players coming in, and
the other thrust out. For the most part the Bishops of Churches and Dioceses
were changed, etc. Bonner Bishop of London was committed to the Marshalsea, and
deprived; Gardener Bishop of Winchester, and Tonstal Bishop of Durham, were
cast into the Tower, etc. Lo here, by Fox his own Confession, what Peace and
Meekness there was used in these gentle times of King Edward, under the
Government of this noble Protector, though they were but Six years in all. And
let the Reader confess, that Fox has a special Gift to contradict himself,
though it be in the self same page. But now to the second point concluded in this
Parliament about matters of Religion.

The 2d Point handled in the first Parliament about the Blessed Sacrament.
18. The second Point was about the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, and use
thereof; which as it was a very important and principal Point for these New
Gospellers of King Edward's days to declare their Opinions, whether they would
be Lutherans or Sacramentaries; so they being wholly divided among themselves
in this point, (some of them coming from Wittemberg, and other places of
Saxony, which followed Luther, some other from Strasburg, Basil, and other
Towns among the Switzers, where the Doctrine of Zuinglius bare Rule; others that
were home-Protestants, and desired to pass no further in neither of these two
particular Sect and Factions, but only so far as was needful for holding their
Women they had taken, as Cranmer and his Fellows) they could in no case come to
any accord or agreement in this matter, but only to publish an Act or Statute,
like a Ship-man's Hose, that determined neither the one nor the other; Stat.
an. 1. Ed. 6. cap. 1.
the Title whereof was this: An Act against such persons as shall unreverently
speak against the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, (commonly called
the Sacrament of the Altar) and for the receiving thereof under both kinds. And
then begins the Statute thus:

19. The King's most Excellent Majesty meaning the Governance of his most
loving Subjects to be in most perfect Unity and Concord in all things, and
especially in the true Faith and Religion of God, and wishing the same to be
brought to pass with all Clemency on his part, as his most Princely Serenity
and Majesty has already declared, The Statute about the B. Sacrament.
etc. This is the Preface; and after coming to the matter, they say, In the
most comfortable Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Savior Jesus Christ,
(commonly called the Sacrament of the Altar, etc.) which Sacrament was
instituted by no less Author than our Savior, Mat. 26. Luc. 22. 1 Cor. 11.
both God and Man, when at his last Supper he did take the Bread into his holy
Hands, and did say, Take you, and eat: This is my Body which is given and
broken for you, etc. Which words spoken of it, being of eternal, infallible,
and undoubted Truth; yet the said Sacrament, all this notwithstanding, has
been of late marvelously abused by such manner of men before rehearsed, who of
Wickedness, or else of Ignorance and want of Learning, for certain Abuses
heretofore committed of some in misusing thereof, have condemned in their
hearts and speech the whole thing, and contemptuously depraved, despised, or
reviled the same most holy and blessed Sacrament, and not only disputed or
reasoned unreverently and ungodlily of that high Mystery, but also in their
Sermons, Preachings, Readings, Talks, Tunes, Songs, Plays, or Tests, do name
and call it by such vile and unseemly words, as Christian Ears do abhor to hear
rehearsed: For reformation whereof, be it Enacted, etc.

20. This is their Narration; and according thereunto they do set down remedy
and punishment for them that shall speak any contemptuous words, to deprave,
despise, or revile this Sacrament. But what the words or sense thereof are in
particular, or what they mean by this despising or depraving, they do not set
down, as they ought to have done if they had meant plainly; though by the words
of their said Narration it may appear this Statute was made principally against
Sacramentaries, that deny the Real Presence of the Body and Blood of our
Savior, and do dispute and reason unreverently and ungodly thereof; this being
the highest Injury, Contempt, or Depravation that can be done to it. Deceitful
dealing in this Statute.
But it pleased not the Makers of this Statute to be understood, or to deal
clearly for the present in this behalf, but rather to speak obscurely and
doubtfully, to the end they might afterward have a starting-hole to get out at,
and become Zuinglians or Calvinists when they would. The other Clause of
administering the Sacrament under both kinds to all sorts of people, they put
down more clearly, with this Exception only; except necessity otherwise
require. By which words they allow also the use under one kind in time of
necessity; which is far from that which since that time they have taught.

21. These were the two things of most moment determined about Religion in this
first Parliament. Two other things were attempted by the Gospellers, with most
earnest endeavor, but they could not be obtained. The first was to have a Book
of Common Prayer pass, which they had composed in have out of the Mass Book,
for altering the Service and Mass into English, or rather for abolishing of the
Mass, and bringing in the new Communion in place thereof. And this Book was
composed by certain appointed by the Protector and Cranmer. But when it came to
the Parliament to pass, it was misliked, The first Communion Book in English
rejected.
and contradicted not only by Catholics, but by many Protestants also.
Especially those that were the most forward, as Hooper, Rogers, and some other.
Who according to Fox, were Puritans in those days, and would neither take the
Oath of Supremacy to the young King, (as we shall show more largely when we
come to treat of them severally in the next Part of this Treatise) nor yet wear
Typpet, Cap, or Surpless. And misliked moreover the whole Government
Ecclesiastical in that time; neither agreed with the Opinions of Doctrine set
down by that Book. And so it was rejected with no small grief, both of the
Duke, Protector, and Archbishop Cranmer.

22. The other Point proposed, and rejected also, The allowance of Priests and
Friars Marriages rejected in this Parliament.
was about allowance of Priests and Friars Marriages, and Legitimation of their
Children. Wherein great force was made by them, that had taken Women first, and
sought approbation afterward, but could not get it for the present. Though in
the next Parliament about a year after, they obtained a certain mitigation
therein, as you shall hear.

23. Now then this Parliament being thus past, The resolute proceeding of the
Lord Protector.
and ended upon the 20 day of December, and the Protector much grieved, that no
more could be obtained therein, to the favor of the new Gospellers; he thought
good for the time to come, to use his Kingly Authority under the Name of the
young Child, for the altering of diverse Points in Religion, using Cranmer and
some other also of the Council for his Instruments. And first they began with
Bishop Bonner, Fox p. 1183.
as may appear by a Letter from the said Bonner written to Bishop Gardener of
Winchester the 28. of January 1548. wherein he writes thus: My very good Lord,
these be to advertise your Lordship, that my Lord of Canterbury 's Grace, this
present 28. of January, sent me his Letters Missive, containing this in effect.
That my Lord Protector's Grace, with Advice of other the King's Majesty's most
Honorable Council, for certain Considerations them moving, are fully resolved,
Candles, Ashes, and Palms forbidden by the Protector.
that no Candles shall be born upon Candlemas-day, nor from henceforth Ashes,
nor Palms used any longer; Requiring me to cause Admonition thereof to be given
unto your Lordship, and other Bishops with celerity, etc. Thus much there.

24. And after this again, upon the 11. of the next Month of February, the said
Protector with some others of the Council, at his appointment wrote to Cranmer,
and by him to all Bishops of the Realm, Commanding them to pull down all
Images, in these words, amongst others: Fox ib. Col. 2.
We have thought good (says he) to signify unto You that His Highness
pleasure, with the Advice and Consent of Us the Lord Protector and the rest of
the Council is, that immediately upon the sight hereof, with as convenient
diligence as You may, Images taken away by the Protector's Letter before the
Parliament.
You give order that all Images, remaining in any Church, or Chapel, etc. Be
removed and taken away. And in the Execution hereof we require both You, and
the rest of the Bishops, to use such foresight, as the same may be quietly
done, with as good satisfaction of the People as may be, etc. From Somerset
Place the 11. of February 1548. Your loving Friends: Edward Somerset, Henry
Arundell, Anthony Wingfield, John Russell, Thomas Seymer, William Paget.

25. And now Candles, Ashes, and Images being gone (as you see) there followed
in the next Month after, (to wit, of March) that the Protector desiring still
to go forward with his designment of Alteration, sent abroad a Proclamation in
the Kings Name, with a certain Communion Book in English, to be used for
Administration of Sacraments, instead of the Mass Book. but whether it was the
very same, that was rejected a little before in the Parliament, A new Communion
Book thrust upon Catholics by the Protector's only Authority. Fox p. 1184. Col.
1.
or another patched up afterward, or the same mended or altered, is not so
clear. But great care there was had by the Protector and his Adherents, that
this Book should be admitted, and put in practice presently, even before it was
allowed in Parliament. To which effect Fox sets down a large Letter of the
Council to all the Bishops, Exhorting and Commanding them, in the King's Name
to admit, and put in Practice this Book. We have thought good (say they) to
pray and require your Lordships, and nevertheless in the King's Majesty Our
most Dread Lord's Name to Command You, to have a diligent, earnest, and careful
respect to cause these Books to be delivered to every Parson, Vicar and Curate
within your Diocese, with such diligence as they may have sufficient time well
to instruct and advise themselves, for the distribution of the most holy
Communion, according to the Order of this Book before this Easter time, etc.
Praying you to consider, that this Order is set forth, to the intent there
should be in all parts of the Realm, one Uniform manner quietly used. To the
Execution whereof we do eftsoons require you to have a diligent respect, as you
tender the King's Majesty's pleasure, and will answer to the contrary, etc.
From Westminster the 13 of March 1548.

26. By all which, and by much more that might be alleged, it is evident, that
all that was hitherto done against Catholic Religion for these first two years,
until the second Parliament, was done by private Authority of the Protector and
his Adherents, The Confusion that insued in England upon the first Innovation.
before Law, and against Law. And now what a Babylonical Confusion ensued in
England upon these Innovations in all Churches, Parishes and Bishoprics
commonly, is wonderful to recount. For some Priests said the Latin Mass, some
the English Communion, some both, some neither: some said half of the one, and
half of the other. And this was very ordinary: to wit, to say the Introitus and
Confiteor in English: and then the Collects, and some other parts in Latin. And
after that again the Epistles and Gospels in English, and then the Canon of the
Mass in Latin, and lastly the Benediction, and last Gospel in English. And this
mingle mangle did every man make at his pleasure, as he thought it would be
most grateful to the people.

27. But that which was of more importance, and impiety; some did Consecrate
Bread and Wine, others did not, but would tell the people beforehand plainly,
they would not consecrate: but restore them their Bread and Wine back again, as
they received it from them. Only adding to it the Church Benediction. And those
that did Consecrate, did Consecrate in diverse forms, some aloud, some in
secret, some in one form of words, and others in an other. And after
Consecration some did hold up the Host to be Adored after the old fashion, and
some did not; And of those that were present, some did kneel down and Adore,
others did shut their Eyes, others turned their Faces aside, others ran out of
the Church Blaspheming, and crying Idolatry.

28. And as this Confusion was in Spiritual Matters, during these two first
years of King Edward's Reign: so no less was it in Temporal Affairs, especially
in tne City of London, The troubles and garboils in Temporal Affairs, ensuing
upon Ecclesiastical Confusion.
where a great Mortality and Pestilence was among the People, as Stow says.
And no less amazement, to see three chief Bishops sent to Prison Gardener of
Winchester, Bonner of London, and Tonstall of Duresme. But the greatest banding
was betwixt the Protector, and his Brother the Admiral, and between their
Wives, Queen Katherine Parre, and the Duches of Somerset. In which Contention
diverse Chief Ministers and Apostate Friars were sticklers; but especially Hugh
Latymer, that inveighed in his Sermons against the Admiral in favor of the
Protector. On the other side Friar Bale was wholly addicted to Queen Catherine
and her praises, having Printed and set her forth, in those very days for a
famous Writer, and one of the Miracles of Womankind in his Book De scriptoribus
Britannicis. For so he says: Bal. de script. Britan. fol. 238.
Ingenii viribus, literarum peritia, verborum elegantia, and animi generositate
foemine as dotes exuperat, etc. She does exceed the Gifts of Womankind in the
force of her Wit, in the skill of her Learning, in the elegancy of her Words,
and generosity of Mind. And again, Magnarum virtutum, ac unicum hoc saeculo
pietatis exemplar, etc. She is the only Example of great Virtues and Piety in
this our Age. With which excessive praises the Duches of Somerset, that thought
her self as Wise and Learned as the other, was so offended, that Friar Bale
could get no Preferment, while her Husband was in Authority.

29. But now came on the second Parliament, The second Parliament of King
Edward. An. 1548. 4. November.
which was upon the 4. day of November 1548. and second year of King Edward's
Reign. The Protector, and his Gospellers, had made all the preparation possible
to get Voice therein, for Establishing of that, which they desired in Religion.
As it is no marvel, if it were not hard to do, seeing the chief Bishops were
now restrained, terrified, or put in Prison; some other of the Laity also
disgraced, as the Earl of Southampton, Arundell, and others. The Lord Protector
and Dudley, Armed with the remainder of their Forces made for Scotland. And the
displeasure of the said Protector being held now for so dreadful a matter to
any that resisted his Designs, as it was expected daily, that his own Brother
the Admiral should be made away by him upon like displeasure

30. But to speak of this Parliament begun now (as we have said) two things (as
you remember) were excluded in the last Parliament, that could not pass, though
never so much desired, and urged by the Protector and his Friends. To wit, the
new Communion Book, and the allowance of Priests and Friars Marriages: but now
both of them passed; albeit the second with a greater limitation, as you may
see, for the Title of the Statute is only this, An Act to take away all
Positive Laws of Man made against the Marriage of Priests. Whereby you see,
that the Parliament being importuned by Priests and Friars, that had gotten
them Women, to have them allowed by Parliament; they only obtained to be free
from Temporal Punishment appointed for the same, leaving them to God for the
rest, whether after their Vows made of Chastity, they were bound to observe the
same, or no. Nay, in the very Act it self, they do highly commend Chastity in
Priests, saying: That it were not only better for Priests and Ministers of the
Church to live Chaste, sole, Statut. Anno 2. Edw. 6. cap. 21. Anno Domini 1548.
The Statute of Impunity for Priests and Friars to Marry.
and separate from the company of Women, etc. But that it were most to be
wished, that they would willingly, and of themselves endeavor to keep a
perpetual Chastity, and Abstinence from the use of Women. Yet forasmuch as the
contrary has been seen, etc. Be it Enacted that all Laws Positive, Canons, or
Constitutions heretofore made by Authority of Man only (which does Prohibit or
forbid Marriage to any Ecclesiastical Person) etc. Shall be utterly void and of
none effect, together with the Pains, Penalties, Crimes, Actions thereunto
Annexed, etc.

31. Thus goes the Statute. Wherein you see there is nothing, but Impunity
given to Incontinent Priests and Friars, to use Women without fear of
Punishment in this World. And thereby you may consider, that the first and
chief endeavors of these new Gospellers tended principally to break down
Hedges, and to dissolve Catholic Discipline, and to take away Punishments
appointed as well to Heretics and Heresy in general (as by the former
Parliament you have seen) as also to loose and Incontinent Clergymen for their
dissolute life. And thus much of the first Point. Let us come to the second,
about the new Communion Book.

32. This Book, though it were made new again by great diligence, both of the
Composers, which the Protector and his Followers had chosen for that purpose,
as also by the view of Cranmer, Ridley, and others of chief Authority in the
Clergy: The second Contention about their new Communion Book.
yet had it mavelous difficulty to pass, as may appear by very Act of
Parliament it self. For that it was not only contradicted by Catholics, but
also by many Protestants themselves: Misliking not only the Rites and
Ceremonies therein appointed, but the very Articles of Doctrine also. And in
this were most vehement the foresaid Faction of Hooper, Rogers, Latymer, and
some others, being at that time Puritans, as before we have noted.

33. But the chiefest, and hottest Contention of all (whereof the principal
Point of their new Religion seemed to depend) was, whether they should be
Lutherans, or Zwinglians, concerning the blessed Sacrament. Seeing they longer
well could not dissemble the same, as they had done in the former Parliament:
though otherwise (as I have said) it was somewhat hard to determine. For that to
the Lutherans inclined not only Cranmer, Ridley, and other in Ecclesiastical
Authority, that had lived, and born Rule under King Henry VIII. before. But
many of the Noble Men also, and Counselors, that were half Catholics and half
Protestants. Protestants, for liberty of eating of Flesh on forbidden days,
Possessing Church Livings, disobligation of Confession, and Restitution, and
other such Motives: But yet for other matters were rather Catholic in judgment,
and with these concurred such, as were come out of Saxony, The Zwinglian
Faction did over-bear the Lutheran in King Edwards days.
and had Studied under Luther, as Bucer, Bale, Coverdale, and others. All which
seemed to stand for the real Presence at that time. But against these were the
Sacramentaries, whose Profession being of the fresher Frame, more pleased the
Protector, and some other itching Ears, and thereby did overbear the other
side, at length by the number of some few Voices in Parliament, but yet with
great difficulty. Whereupon the said Parliament was continued in Disputation,
and Contention, especially about this matter for the space of four Months and a
half; to wit, from the 4. of November, unto the 14. of March, and in the mean
space, all was in suspense, of what Religion England should be. For as on the
one side many that knew or suspected the Protectors inclination, did think and
lay Wagers, that Zwinglianism would prevail: so others hearing that Archbishop
Cranmer, and his party stood resolutely on the other side, and had punished
diverse for speaking against the Mass, Two men cast into Prison by Cranmer for
speaking against the Sacrament of the Altar. Fox p. 1180. and 1181.
and Real Presence in the Sacrament a little before, to wit, one Thomas Dobbe a
Master of Art in Cambridge (as Fox tells us) cast into the Counter by
Cranmer, and held there till he died: and John Hume, Imprisoned for the same
Cause by the said Archbishop: This (I say) made many to expect and Bett on the
other side. But especially this doubt, and expectation was notorious in the
Universities of Oxford, and Cambridge, where Peter Martyr, and Bucer, had Read
now for the space of a year and more, and were oftentimes urged and pressed
much by their Scholars, (whereof the far greater parts in those days were
Catholics,) to declare themselves clearly, of what Opinion they wear, touching
the Sacrament of the Altar, and the Real Presence; To wit, whether they were
Lutherans or Zwinglians. But they kept themselves aloof, and indifferent or
rather doubtful, so far as they could, until the determination of the
Parliament should come. Yet was Peter Martyr put into a great strait thereby.
For that having taken upon him to Read, and Expound to the Scholars of Oxford
the first Epistle to the Corinthians (wherein the Apostle in the Eleventh
Chapter handles the Institution of the Blessed Sacrament) he had thought to
have come to that place just at the very time, when the Parliament should have
determined this Controversy.

34. But the Contention enduring longer by some Months, than he expected, he
was come to the Eleventh Chapter long before they could end in London.
Whereupon many Posts went to and fro between him and Cranmer, to require a
speedy resolution, The perpl ex ty of Peter Martyr in Oxford about expounding
Hoc est Corpus meum.
alleging that he could not detain himself any longer, but that being come to
the words Hoc est Corpus meum, he must needs declare himself a Lutheran or a
Zuinglian: But he was willed to stay, and entertain himself in other matter,
until the Determination might come; and so the poor Friar did, with admiration
and laughter of all his Scholars, standing upon those precedent words; Accepit
Panem, etc. Et gratias agens, etc. Fregit, etc. Et dixit, etc. Accipite, and
manducate, etc. discoursing largely of every one of these Points, and bearing
off from the other that ensued. But when at length the Post came that
Zuinglianism must be defended, then stepped up Peter Martyr boldly the next
day, and said, Hoc est Corpus meum, Dissembling and tergiversation of Peter
Martyr.
This is my Body; interpreting it, This is the Sign of my Body; adding
moreover, that he wondered how any man could be of another Opinion, seeing this
Exposition was so clear. Whereas if the Post had brought other News, himself
also would have taught the contrary Opinion. And this Story was testified
(whilst they were alive) by Dr. Sanders, Dr. Allen, Dr. Stapleton, and others,
that were present at this Trifling and Tergiversation of this Apostate-Frier.
And thus began our Zuinglian Gospel in England under King Edward VI.

35. Now let us hear a word or two out of the Statute it self about this
Communion Book, and profession of Zuinglianism, established in England, after
two years strife among the Protestants. Whereas of long time (says the Act)
there has been in this Realm of England diverse Forms of Common Prayer, Stat.
an. 2 Ed. 6 cap. 1.
commonly called the Service of the Church, as well concerning the Mattins and
Even-Song, as also the holy Communion, called the Mass, etc. And whereas the
King's Majesty, with the Advice of his most entirely-beloved Uncle the Lord
Protector, and others of his Highness's Council, has heretofore diverse times
assayed to stay Innovations, or new Rites concerning the premises; yet the same
has not had such good success as his Highness required in that behalf.
Whereupon his Highness, by the most prudent Advice aforesaid, The new
Communion-Book made upon the frailty and weakness of Subjects.
being pleased to bear with the frailty and weakness of his Subjects in that
behalf, of his great Clemency has been not only content to abstain from
punishment in that behalf, but also, to the intent that an uniform, quiet, and
godly Order should be had concerning the premises, has appointed the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and certain of the most learned and discreet Bishops,
to consider and ponder the premises; and thereupon, having as well an eye and
respect to the most sincere and pure Christian Religion taught by the
Scriptures, as to the Vsages of the Primitive Church, should draw and make one
convenient and meet Order, Rite, and Fashion of Common Prayer and
Administration of Sacraments to be used in England, Wales, etc. The which at
this time, by the Aid of the Holy Ghost, with uniform Agreement, is by them
concluded set forth, and delivered, to his Highness's great comfort, and
quietness of mind, in a Book entitled, The Book of Common Prayer and
Administration of Sacraments, etc.

36. This is the Preface to that Act of Parliament; whereby you may see that
this Communion-Book was devised first for bearing with the frailty of them that
sought Innovations; and then that it was performed by uniform Consent, and Aid
of the Holy Ghost, according to the most sincere and pure Christian Religion
taught in the Scriptures; and lastly, that the young Child-Prince received
great comfort and quietness of mind thereby. All which is ridiculous, if you
consider what a multitude of Errors and gross Absurdities the latter
Protestants (especially the preciser sort of them) have gathered out against
this Book; yea, after it was twice more reviewed, altered and amended,
(according to the pure Word of God) as was pretended once in King Edward's days
it self, and then again in the beginning of her Majesty's Reign; whereof, though
I have spoken sufficiently in my Defense of the first Encounter against Sir F.
Hastings, yet cannot I omit to admonish the Reader in this place to read the
ninth Chapter of the second Book, The judgment and speeches of the purer sort
of Protestants against the foresaid Communion-Book.
entitled, Dangerous Positions, etc. set forth by public Permission, and
printed in London, Anno 1593. In which Chapter you shall see put together the
words of diverse new Gospellers concerning this Communion-Book, affirmed here in
the Statute to be according to the most sincere and pure Christian Religion
taught by the Scriptures: But they say the contrary, to wit, that it is full of
corruption, and that many of the Contents thereof are against the Word of God,
the Sacraments wickedly mangled and profaned therein, the Lord's Supper not
eaten, but made a Pageant and Stage play; that their public Baptism is full of
childish superstitious toys.

37. And finally, not to stand any longer upon this proof, how the latter
Gospellers according to their pure Word of God do reject and contemn the very
pure Word of God of Cranmer and Ridley's time, (alleging for reason, among
other things, as the Survey of pretended Discipline says, cap 28. That the Sun
of the Gospel shines more clear in these days than in those:) Not to stand, I
say, upon this, Fox himself does sufficiently show that this pure Communion
Book and Order therein set down, was mislik'd and rejected by the most zealous
sort of Protestants even in those days, Fox p. 1355.
as may appear by that which the said John Fox tells us, when he talks of
the Prophetical Spirit of John Rogers the Minister that was burned in Queen
Mary's days; how he sent word to the Brethren by a certain Book-binder, that
except the Gospellers when they returned into England again (for so, says Fox,
he prophesied they should) did follow the Form and Plot set down by Him and
Hoop^r, (different from this of Cranmer and others) they should have as bad an
end as he and his Fellows had, that were burned under Queen Mary.

38. But yet for the present this was the pure Word of God, and the Work of the
Holy Ghost, and no man might mislike or reprove it without danger and great
punishment; especially if he was a Catholic, for above all others they were to
be punished, (especially the Catholic Bishops in Prison for resisting the
former Book obtruded in the first Parliament;) which yet was pardoned to
others; Catholics excepted from pardon in the Statute.
for so says the Statute immediately after in these words: That all and
singular person and persons that have offended concerning the premises, (other
than such as now be and remain in ward in the Tower of London, or in the Fleet)
may be pardoned thereof.

39. But to return to our story, and first planting of the Gospel under King
Edward, you must note, That together with this Comedy of the new Book of
Service, disputed and passed in this Parliament, wherein the Protector was a
chief Part and Actor, there was a bloody Tragedy handled in like manner,
whereof he was both Head and Instigator; for that about the midst of the
Parliament (to wit, The apprehension and condemnation and death of the Lord
Thomas Seymor by his Brother and other new Gospellers.
upon the 16th of January) he caused his Brother Lord Thomas Seymor,
High-Admiral of England, to be suddenly arrested and sent Prisoner to the
Tower, being in Mourning-Apparel at that time for the late Death of his Wife
Queen Catherine Parre; and not suffering the said Brother of his to be heard or
come to his Trial, he caused a Condemnation to pass against him in the said
Parliament, which begins thus: Whereas Sir Thomas Seymor, Knight, Lord
Seymor of Sudley, High Admiral of England, not having God before his eyes, etc.
Thus begins the Act, and then follows a long Narration of his Offenses;
as, That he desired to have the custody of the King, was ambitions, and married
Queen Catherine Parre secretly before he told the King or his Brother of it,
and after helped to make her away again with secret intention to marry the Lady
Elizabeth, if he could get her; was ungrateful for many benefits both of the
King and his said Brother the Lord Protector; Stat. an. 2 Ed. 6. cap. 18. Anno
Dom. 1548.
persuaded the young King to take the Government into his own hands, and
thereby to exclude the said Protector from his Dignity and Government. It was
inferred, That the said Lord Admiral aspired to the Crown it self, and to the
Destruction of the King's Person, Lands, Realm, Church, and Commonwealth, etc.

40. All these things (I say) and many other, are related in this Act of
Parliament of Attainder against the Lord Seymor, Sir William Sharington, and
other his Friends and Followers, but not proved at all by any thing in the
Narration. But yet such was the force of his Brother and other chief Gospellers
against him, (a doleful beginning of the new Gospel for him) as he was
condemned to be Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered, and upon favor was Beheaded upon
the 20th of March following. And presently the Protector, as triumphing both
over his Mother and Brother, (as one said in those days, for that the Church
was as well his Mother, as the Admiral his Brother) he made a Proclamation upon
the 6th of April to put down the Mass throughout the whole Realm; whereupon
there ensued such Revel presently in London and in other places of the Realm,
as was strange and pitiful: the blessed Sacrament being thrust out in have of
every Church, and Altars pulled down; The Revel that ensued presently upon this
Parliament of 4th of November. 1548.
and upon the 10th of April (being but four days after) the whole Cloister of
St. Paul's Church in London was thrown down; and together with That, a goodly
Work of Antiquity cunningly wrought, called the Dance of Paul's, environing the
said Cloister, was beaten down and defaced also; another goodly Monument in
like manner of Antiquity belonging to the same Church, called the Charnel-house
of Paul's, (where the Tombs, Bones, and Memories of dead Men were) was all
beaten down by the fury of this time, and the dead Men's Bones cast out into the
Fields, as both Holinshead, Stow, and other Chroniclers, Holinsh. Stow. Anno
Dom. 1549.
do relate.

41. And for that the Protector had designed to raise a famous Palace, worthy
of his Greatness and Renown, for his Habitation and perpetual Memory, called
Somerset-Place, he first caused the Parish Church of the Strand without
Temple Bar, together with Strand-Inn and Strand-Bridge, to be pulled down, to
give place to that Palace; and to the end he might have Stone for the same more
near at hand, and with less Charges, he caused the fair goodly Church of St.
John of Jerusalem near Smithfield (belonging in former time to the Knights of
Rhodes) to be undermined, and with Gunpowder to be overthrown, and the Stone
thereof to be applied to the building of his said House and Palace.

42. And this was the form of the first planting of the new Gospel in London by
Gunpowder, tearing and renting of ancient Monuments, and overthrowing of
Churches; far unlike to the first planting of Christian Faith in England by St.
Augustine and his Fellows, before in part by us described. And if this Revel was
in London in the sight of the Prince and Council, and where most Order and Law
ought to be kept, we may easily imagine what was practiced throughout all the
other parts of the Realm, where less respect was born to the public Magistrate,
by no less unruly Spirits than were in London; whereupon the poor afflicted
Catholic people were forced to take Arms for their defense. And from hence
began the Commotions and Insurrections above mentioned of diverse Shires for
retaining their Religion: But being overcome and oppressed by Martial Law, and
by the Troops of English and Foreign Soldiers made for the Scottish Voyage not
long before, there ensued infinite Misery, Murder, Massacre, and Mortality in
the Realm. All which the Earl of Warwick, with the help of others of the
Nobility, laying afterward to the Protector's charge, in the end of the very
next year (to wit, the 3d of King Edward's Reign) they cast him into the Tower,
deprived him of his Protectorship, and had cut off his Head also at that time,
The Protector cast into the Tower, October. 4. an. 1549.
had not the Duchess of Somerset prudently pacified the Earl of Warwick by
presenting a rich Casket of Jewels unto the Countess his Wife, (whereunto my
Author was p^ivy;) and moreover she offered a new Complot of Affinity between
the said Earl and Duke, which afterward was effectuated; to wit, the Marriage
between the Son of the Earl and Daughter of the Duke. All which, Stow an. 3,
and 6. 1555,
together with a most humble, lowly and base Submission made by the said
Protector, (which is extant in our Chronicles) moved the Earl to pardon him for
the present, and to restore him to a kind of Liberty at his own House, and
after that again to the Council and King's presence, (for of all he was
deprived) but never to the Protectorship: Nay, soon after he cast him into
Prison again, and cut off his Head, as all men know; and had thereunto the help
of many chief Gospellers, who not long after this laid other Complots (conform
to the turbulent humor and fruits of this Gospel) and made other new Alliances
between the House of Suffolk (that was most forward of all others in
Gospelling) and the said Earl of Warwick, now Duke of Northumberland; which
Alliances are supposed to have shortened the young unfortunate King's Life, and
known to have meant the Subversion of the whole Course of the Royal Line and
Succession appointed by King Henry VIII. (cutting off his two Daughters, Mary
and Elizabeth, that remained after King Edward) if God had not strangely
defended them by cutting off these Evangelical Contrivances.

43. Wherefore, to be no longer in this matter, which is clear enough of it
self, we do see how the first public Introduction of Protestant Religion that
ever was admitted in England, from Christ to that time, came in both under King
Henry, and much more under King Edward his Son; to wit, how, and upon what
occasions, by whom and what men the same was both preached and favored, and
what effects, by what means, and in what form and fashion it was performed; The
conclusion concerning the occasions, means, events, and fruits of the new
Gospel.
for as for the occasions, they have been declared before: But under King
Edward, it is evident that they were the Childhood and Infancy of a tender
young Prince, together with the Ambition, Covetousness, Pride, and desire of
sole Command, in his Uncle the Protector; which motives made him break the Will
and Testament, Laws and Ordinances, of his old Dread Lord King Henry, before
almost his Blood was cold after his death: and the like Inductions of
Promotions drew after him others, who seconded his Actions as long as they were
profitable unto them.

44. As for the men that first and principally broached these Doctrins, they
were for the most part married Friars and Apostate Priests that living in
Concupiscence of Women, and other Sensuality, desired to maintain and continue
the same by the Liberty of this new Gospel. The Promoters and Favorers of these
Men were such especially of the Laity and Clergy, as had more Interest by the
Change for their own Promotion and Advancement, than Conscience, or persuasion
of Judgment, for the Truth of their Religion; as would appear, if we should
name them one by one that then were of the Council and chief Authority. The
Effects and spiritual Fruits of this first Change were (as you have seen and
heard) the most notorious Vices of Ambition, Dissimulation, Hatred, Deceit,
Tyranny, and Subversion one of another; together with Division, Dissension,
Garboils, and Desolation of the Realm; yea, plain Atheism, Irreligion, and
contempt of all Religion that ever was known to have risen up in any Kingdom of
the World within the compass of so few years: And (that which is most
remarkable) there followed presently the Overthrow of all the principal Actors
and Authors of these Innovations by God's own wonderful hand; and this more in
these six years, than in sixty, or six score or perhaps six hundred, has been
seen to have fallen out in England in other times. And no doubt but it is of
singular consideration, A consideration of much importance.
that whereas true Christian Religion (but especially any Change or Reformation
to the better part) is admitted, there presently do ensue by usual consequence
great effects of Piety, Devotion, Charity and virtuous Life, if the Reformation
be sincere, and come from God indeed; here on the contrary side the Providence
of God did show a notorious document to the whole World, of the falsehood and
wickedness of this new Gospel, in that the first professors and promoters
thereof in our Land, fell to more open wickedness in these Five years, than in
so many Fifties before, as has been said.

45. And the chief Captain and Ringleader of all this Dance of Innovations
after the Protector himself, (to wit, the Duke of Northumberland) coming soon
after to Calamity, fell into the account and reckoning of this matter, and made
a long vehement declaration thereof in the Chapel of the Tower, before diverse
of the Council, the day before he was put to death, to wit, upon the 21. of
August 1553, showing, that he had found true by good experience, that this new
Gospel (which he had followed hitherto) tended to nothing but to Atheism in
Religion, dissolution of Life, and perturbation of the Commonwealth; which he
repeated again at his Death, and the same was presently put in Print, and so it
remained. Though Holinshed, Hooker and Harrison, Holinsh. An. Dom. 1553. page
1089.
(like false Companions as they be) do leave it out wholly of their large
Chronicle, telling only, that he and the Duke of Somerset were buried one by
the other in the Tower. But Stow proceeds more handsomely; for though he omit
the larger rehearsal of the matter, and do speak of other things less odious;
yet does he so set down the thing, as the truth may easily be seen thereby,
which the other Companions do hold from us of purpose: for thus he writes.

46. The rest of the Duke's Speech, almost in every Point, Stow in Chron. An.
1553.
was as he had said in the Chapel of the Tower, saving that when he had made
Confession of his Belief, ( Stow dare not tell what Belief, for that it was
wholly Catholic, with many vehement Protestations against the Heresies of that
time) he had these words: Here I do protest unto you, good People, most
earnestly, The Duke of Northumberland's Confession of his Faith at his Death.
even from the bottom of my Heart, that this which I have spoken, is of my
self, not being required nor moved thereunto by any man, for any flattery or
hope of Life. I take witness of my Lord of Worcester here, my old Friend and
Ghostly Father, that he found me in this mind and opinion when he came to me.
But I have declared this only upon my own mind and affection, and for the zeal
and love that I bear to my natural Country. And I could, good People, rehearse
much more even by experience that I have of this Evil, that is happened to this
Realm by th^se occasions. But now, you know, I have another thing to do,
whereunto I must prepare me, etc. And having thus spoken, he kneeled down,
saying to them that were about him, I beseech you all to bear me witness, that
I die in the true Catholic Faith. And then said he the Psalms of Miserere and
De Profundis, his Pater. Noster, etc.

47. This is Stow's Narration; whereby you see first the dishonesty and
falsehood of the other Chroniclers, that leave it quite out; and the cozenage of
John Fox, that only says it in two or three Lines, and lies most shamefully,
Fox page 120.
affirming, That he having Promise made unto him, that though his Head were upon
the Block, he should have his Pardon if he would recant, he consented
thereunto. Which yet you see the Duke protests the contrary upon his Death,
that it was not for Flattery or hope of Life, or upon any Man's Instruction,
but only upon Conscience, first to save his own Soul, and then for desire to
deliver his natural Country from the Infection of Heresy, and Calamities
thereon ensuing.

48. And thus much of those Men and their Fruits, who first planted this
Gosael. But now as for the Means whereby these things were wrought, you have
heard them before; that they were all commonly by pulling down, thrusting out,
dissolving of Discipline, giving immunity from punishments to all sorts of
Heretics, and of Marriage to loose Priests and Apostate Friars, and other like
licentious Liberties, far different from the purity, severity, and strictness
of Life used by the first Planters of Christ's Gospel. And as for the form and
fashion of this new Religion, set up under this Child-King, it was, as you have
heard both their own Men and ours testify, The form and fashion of Fox's new
Church and Religion.
compounded and patched up of all diversity of Sects and Religions, as it
pleased the Composers; many things they took and retained of ours, as well in
Doctrine, as in Rites and Ceremonies; Some things of the Lutherans, some others
of the Zuinglians; some of the Relics of King Henry's mutation, as that of the
Supreme Head of the Church, (a singular Point of Doctrine, proper to England
above all other Nations.) But most of this Composition was of their own
Inventions, which yet neither the Protestants that remained in secret under
Queen Mary, did wholly allow, as appears by that which I have cited before of
John Rogers's Prophecy, nor the other that began again under her Majesty that
now is, did wholly readmit the form and fashion, but made a new one of their
own, as by their Communion-Book is evident; nor do the purer sort of Calvinists
in these days, any way like or approve the one or the other, as before we have
showed.

49. Whereupon I may conclude as well this Chapter, as also this whole Second
Part, that neither under King Henry the VIII. nor King Edward the VI. nor Queen
Mary, had John Fox any distinct Church extant or known to the World, especially
if his Church be the Puritan Congregation, as he will seem to signify in many
places of his Acts and Monuments. But whether he have any such Church now
visible under her Majesty at this day in England, and in what state and
condition it stands, I will not stand to enquire or discuss, but do leave it
to my Lords of Lambert and London, whom most it concerns, being sufficient
for me to have showed throughout all former Christian Ages, that John Fox has
had no Church of any Antiquity; and consequently, if he he have any now, it
must be a very young Church, and of so tender Age, as he may marry her to what
Sect or Sectary he lists for her Youth, and that with hope of Brood and
Issue. And so much of all this matter.

CHAP. XIII.
The Conclusion of both these former Parts, together with a particular
Discourse of the notorious different Proceeding of Catholics and Protestants,
in searching out the truth of Matters in Controversy.

BY all that hitherto has been written and discoursed (good Christian Reader)
about the former Subject of discerning true Christian Religion, and the way
whereby to know and find the same, I do not doubt, but that of thy prudence
thou have observed a far different course holden by us that are Catholics, and
our Adversaries in this behalf, we seeking to make matters plain, evident,
easy, perspicuous and demonstrable (so far as may be) even to the Eye it self;
whereas our Adversaries, and namely John Fox, according to that which by
reading this Treatise you have seen, does altogether the contrary, intangling
himself and his Reader with such Obscurities, Difficulties and Contradictions,
both about Times, Matter, and Men, as he finds not where to begin, nor where
to end, nor yet how to go forward or backward, in that he had taken in hand;
which I suppose to have been abundantly showed by that which hitherto has been
written: For whereas we, for our parts, begin clearly with the very first Corpse
or Body of Religion, Instituted by Christ himself, and the first Professors
thereof that made a Church or Christian Congregation, and do never after leave
the same, but do deduce it visibly and without interruption from that time to
this, and thereby do show the beginning and continuance of one and the same
Religion from their days to ours. John Fox on the other side knows not well
either where to begin, where to insist, or where to end, as sufficiently you
have seen tried: For albeit in the Tile of his Book he tells us, that he will
bring down his Church from the Apostles time to ours, Page 8.
and then after in his Protestation to the Christian Reader he does tell us
farther, that his true Church is different from the great visible Roman Church;
yet in the prosecution of his Work, he sets forth and describes only the
Roman Church, as before we have declared, and does not so much as name any
distinct visible Church of his own or other, except only of such Heretics as
himself, also condemns for such, different from the said Roman Church for the
space of almost 1200 years; The sleights and shifts of John Fox in his Writings,
and then falls he into such a strange extravagant humor of building a new
Church for himself and his, out of all sorts and Sects of later Heretics, as
being not able in all Points for very shame to allow their Opinions, (which in
many Points are most absurd and contradictory both to him and us, as also among
themselves) he finds himself extremely entangled, nor cannot tell which way
to wind (though he be a Fox) nor which way to turn his Head, but is forced to
double hither and thither, to go forth and back, say and unsay, and to cast a
hundred shadows of wrangling glosses upon the whole matter, thereby to obscure
the same to the Eyes and Ears of his Reader.

2. And finally it seems to me, A Comparison expressing the different dealing
of Catholics and Protestants about seeking the true Church and Religion.
that the difference between us and him and his, to wit, between Catholics and
Protestants in this behalf, is not much unlike to that of two Cloth-sellers of
London, the one a Royal Merchant, which lays open his Wares clearly, gives
into your hands the whole piece of Cloth at midday, wills you to view and
behold it in the Sun, removes all veils, pentices, and other stoppings of
light that may give obscurity, or impediment to the manifest beholding,
handling and discerning thereof; Whereas contrariwise the other, being a crafty
Broker, or poor Pedlar, having no substantial Wares indeed to sell, but such as
are false made, and deceitfully wrought, and taken up also for the most part of
the others leavings, seeks by all means possible to sell in corners, and to
shut out the Sun, that it be not well seen, or to give you a sight thereof by
false lights only; neither will he deliver you the whole piece into your hand,
to be examined thoroughly by your self, but shows you one end thereof only,
different from the rest which he suppresseth. And this manner of proceeding
shall you find verified on their side throughout this whose Treatise, as we
have done already, I doubt not, if you have read it over with attention; yet
mean I in this place to discover the same somewhat more in particular, for an
upshot and conclusion of these first two parts of my Treatise.

3. Three special differences then I do find between our Adversaries and us
concerning the Affair of this Treatise, Three differences.
about the finding out of true Religion by the true Church, and by the
beginning, progress, and continuance thereof. The first is the estimation of
the thing it self; The second the assigning out, or description thereof; The
third the marks and properties, whereby to know and discover the same: Of every
one whereof I shall speak a word or two in order.

4. For estimation of the great importance, 1. The different estimation of the
Church, and lineal descent thereof, between Catholics and Protestants. Aug. l.
1. cont. Crescon. c. 33.
and singular moment of this matter, the difference is evident between us, for
that we affirm the finding out and holding this Church, to be of such weight,
as that all lies therein for certainty and security of belief, and for
determining of all doubts and controversies in all times and places, and in all
matters of Religion whatsoever, even from Christ to the Worlds end. For we say
with S. Augustine, when any difficulty falls out, Quisquis falli metuit hujus
obscuritate quaestionis, Ecclesiam de illa consulat; Whosoever does fear to be
deceived by the obscurity of this Question in controversy, let him go to the
Church for his Resolution, and he shall be secure. We say also with Lactantius
Firmianus before St. Augustine, Lactant. lib. 4. divin. Instit. cap. ult.
who was Master and Tutor to Crispus, Son to Constantine the Great: Sol^
Catholica Ecclesia est, quae verum Dei cultum retinet, hic autem est fons
veritatis, hoc domicilium fidei, hoc templum Dei, quo si quis non intraverit,
vel a quo si quis exierit, a spe vitae, ac salutis aeternae altenus est; The
only Catholic Church is that which has the true Worship of Almighty God in it,
and this is the Fountain of all Truth, this is the House or Habitation of
Faith, this is the Temple of God, into which whosoever does not enter, or out
of which whosoever does depart, he is devoid of all hope of Life and
everlasting Salvation.

5. Thus wrote Lactantius 1300 years ago, and adds presently these words
following, whereby he well shows the conformity of spirit of those old
Heretics with ours at this day: Lactant. ibid.
Sed tamen singuli quique coetus haereticorum se potissimum Christianos, All
Heretics do challenge to be the true Church.
and suam esse Catholicam Ecclesiam putant. But yet every Congregation of
Heretics do think themselves chiefly and principally to be Christians, and
their Church to be the Catholic Church. And do not ours so in like manner at
this day? But let us go forward to speak a word or two more of the different
estimation we make of this matter.

6. St. Cyprian, that lived more than Sixty years before Lactantius, makes the
very same account with him and us, that all is lost, if we lose or miss this
Church: Cyp. l. de simpl. Praelat.
Ardeant (says he) licet flammis, etc. Albeit such Christians as are not in
this Church should live never so well yea, should be so forward and fervous in
defense of Christian Religion, as they should burn in Flames for the same, or
be devoured by Beasts, yet this should be to them, Non corona fidei, sed poena
perfidiae; Not a Crown of Faith, but a Punishment for their Perfidiousness.
Which Doctrine of St. Cyprian, St. Augustine, as a devout Scholar of his, does
often repeat: Foris ab Ecclesia constitutus (says he to a Donatist) aeterno
supplicio punieris, Aug. Ep. 204. ad Donatum, Presbyt. Donatist.
etiamsi pro Christi nomine vivus incendereris; Thou being out of the Catholic
Church thou shall be punished with eternal torment, albeit thou were burned
alive for the Name of Christ.

7. And finally, not to go from the forenamed holy Man St. Cyprian in this
behalf, who died for the defense of Christ's Faith, and the true Catholic
Church, No man can be saved out of the true Church.
and is a most blessed Martyr and Doctor to us all, he after a long Discourse
made touching a Christian Man that misseth in this Point of finding out and
following the true Catholic Church, and yet in other things endeavors to
live well, and shows great Zeal in God's Cause, and desires in his Mind even
to die for the same, of this Man he pronounces this Sentence, Nunquam
perveniet ad Christi praemia, Cypr. Tract. de unit. Ecclesiae.
etc. Alienus est, prophanus est, host is est, habere non potest Deum Patrem,
qui Ecclesiam non habet matrem; This Man, notwithstanding all his other good
Works and Endeavors, shall never come to enjoy the Rewards of Christ in Heaven;
he is an Alien, he is Profane, he is an Enemy, he cannot have God for his
Father, which has not the Church for his Mother.

8. Thus said St. Cyprian, as also all ancient holy Fathers after him, whereof
I might allege many Authorities, if it were not over long; and the same say we
that are Catholics, and do hold the same Faith and Church with them at this
day. How much it imports each man to consider, whether he be in the true Chapter
or not.
We do hold (I say) that the first and principal Point of all other for a
Christian Man, that means his own Salvation, is to seek out the true Catholic
Church, and to consider whether he be of it, or in it, or no: For if he be not,
then all other diligence and labor is void and in vain, except it be to seek
out this; and if he be in it, then is he in the right way of Salvation; not for
that all be saved who are within her, (as in the second Point shall be showed)
but for that all those who are out of her, shall be certainly damned, as now
you have heard out of the chiefest Fathers of the ancient Catholic Church. And
this is the first Point of singular moment, for which we esteem this Church so
highly, for that no Salvation can be had without her.

9. But Secondly, The benefits by being in the Church.
we esteem also the importance of this matter by the great and excellent helps
which in this Church above all other Congregations, Christian Men have to
procure their Salvation, though all do not use the same to their best benefit,
and thereby do miscarry. For to come to some particulars, we say, That in this
Church, and no where else, is the truth of Faith, and certainty thereof, Marc.
ultim.
and this by the perpetual assistance of the Holy Ghost promised thereunto by
the Founder, God himself. Mat. 18.
In this Church is the infallible Judgment both about the Books of Scripture
and their Interpretation, as all other Doubts and Controversies, according to
that you have heard before out of S. Augustine. In this Church alone, and no
where else, is there true Priesthood by lawful Succession, Unction, and
Imposition of Hands, Joan. 20.
and consequently Remission also of Sins by the Authority they have from Christ
to that effect. In this Church is the true number, use, and force of holy
Sacraments, and Grace given by them. In this Church is Unity of Faith and
Doctrine, Communion of Saints, and of Merits and Prayers, which no where else is
to be found. And finally, in this Church alone is there warrant and security
from Error, assurance from overthrow, failing, or fading; which security is
established by the promise of Christ himself, as our God Creator and Redeemer,
and to endure unto the worlds end.

10. All these utilities and most singular benefits do we believe to be in this
Catholic Church, above all other Congregations in the world. In respect whereof
we hold this Church to be our ship, our rock, our castle, our fortress, our
mistress, our mother, our skilful pilot throughout all storms of heresies, our
pillar and firmament of truth against falsehood, our house of refuge against
tribulation, our protection, our direction, our help, aid, and security in all
points; and if any man perish in her, it is by his own default; but out of her
none can but perish. And this is our estimation of this Affair.

11. But now how different an account Protestants do make both of this, or
their own Church, is easily seen by their own words and doings: For The
contemptibility of the Protestants Church even among themselves.
as they contemn and impugn our Church, which we hold for the only true, so do
they seldom speak of their own. For when shall you hear a Minister or
Protestant Writer, allege the Authority of his Church against us, or against
his own Fellows, when they fall out (as often they do) or if he should, how
lightly is it esteemed even by themselves? You may See Luth ep. ad Alb. March.
Prusiae and ep. ad Jacob. Brem. Aurif. tit. haer. West ph. l. cont. Calvin.
Stanch. l. de Trin. and Mediat. Heshus. in defens. con. Calvinum. Calv.
admonit. contra West ph. Kemnit. ep. ad Elector. Brandiburg. Confess. Tigur.
tract. 3. etc.
read the eager Contentions of the Protestant Churches of Saxony, which are
Lutherans, against those of Heidelberg, and other Towns of the Palsgrave's
Country, that are of a different Sect; and of these again against other
Consorts of other Provinces, both of Switzerland and other parts of Germany,
yea between the soft and severe Lutherans themselves, as between the Calvinian
Churches of England and Scotland; and in England it self, between the
Protestants, Puritans, and Brownists at this day, (who are nothing else but
soft and severe Calvinists). In all which sharp Contentions, if any part do but
name the Authority of their several Church, (which is very seldom) the other
presently falls into laughter, holding the Authority thereof so ridiculous,
as it is not worth the naming; so as the Argument taken from the Authority of
the Church, (which with us is of so high esteem, as we say with See also the
two English Books, the one called Dangerous Positions; the other, A Survey of
Disciplinary Doctrine, etc. August. cont. ep. fund c. 5. Lactan. l. 4. c. ult.

What Church S. Cyprian and S. Augustine do call Catholic.


S. Augustine, That we would not believe the Gospel, if the Authority of the
Church did not move us thereunto) with these Fellows is most base and
contemptible.

12. Moreover, when they talk of their own Churches, though every Sect and
Sectary for Honors sake would be content to have them accounted Catholic, (as
Lactantius before testified of the Heretics of his time) yet do they speak it
so coldly, and do use the word Catholic so sparingly, as they will show, that
in their Consciences they do not believe it; and a man might answer them as S.
Augustine answered Gaudentius the Donatist, whose Sect being a particular
company of Heretics in Africa, presumed by little and little first in jest, and
then in earnest, to call themselves Catholics, and their Church the Catholic
Church, (as Protestants do at this day) and being reprehended for it by S.
Augustine and others, would needs prove the same by the Definition of Catholic
taken out of S. Cyprian. Aug. l. 3. contra Gaudent. Donat. cap. 1.
S. Augustine (I say) after a long refutation thereof out of S. Cyprian's words
to the contrary, concludes thus: Quid igitur, and vos ipsos, etc. Why then do
you go about both to deceive your selves and other Men with impudent Lies
against S. Cyprian? If your Church be the Catholic Church by the testimony of
this Martyr, show us that your Church does stretch her beams and boughs
throughout the whole Christian World, Cypr. l. de unit. Eccl.
as ours does; for this S. Cyprian called Catholic, etc. So as by S. Augustin's
Argument, if the Protestants cannot show that their Church has her beams and
boughs spread throughout all the Christian World, and that her Faith is the
general Faith received amongst all Christians, and not only of particular
Provinces, then cannot they call her, or esteem her for Catholic, as indeed
they do not, but for fashion sake, and from the teeth outward, as has been
showed.

13, For when they come to set her out in her best colors, they make her but a
very obscure, base and contemptible thing; first in outward show, calling her,
the poor, Fox's Protest. page 8.

The baseness and obscurity of the Protestant Church by their own confession.


oppressed, and persecuted Church (as Fox's words are) trodden under foot,
neglected in the World, not regarded in Histories, and almost scarce visible,
etc. So as where all the ancient Fathers do triumph and vaunt against both
Heretics and Heathens (as we do at this day against Protestants) that the
Catholic Church is more eminent and splendent than the Sun it self, and more
famously known than any other Temporal Kingdom or Monarchy that ever was in the
World; Fox of his Church confesses, that she is scarce visible, neglected in
the World, not regarded in Histories, etc.

14. And then again he plays fast and loose, making her visible and
invisible. Fox in Protest. ibid.

See S. August. of this very Point, Tract. 1. in ep. Joan. and lib. contra ep.
Petil. c. 14. and in Psalm. 30. conc. 2. and alibi. Chrysostom. Hom. 4. de verbis
Isaiae, vidit Dominum, etc.


Although (says he) the right Church be not so invisible in the world as none
can see it, yet neither is it so visible again, that every worldly Eye may
perceive it. So says he. But how contrary to this was S. Chrysostom, who would
not yield that the right Catholic Church could be so much as obscured by any
force or means whatsoever, and thereof vaunting against Infidels, says, It may
be, perhaps, that some Heathen here will despise my arrogance (about the
Majesty of our Church) but let him have patience to expect until I come forth
with my Proofs, and then shall he learn the force of truth, and how it is
easier for the Sun it self to be wholly extinguished, than for the Church to be
so much as darkened or obscured. Thus said S. Chrysostom. And mark (good Reader)
the difference of Spirits; S. Chrysostom vaunteth of the outward splendour and
majesty of his Church, and John Fox contrariwise does brag of the obscurity and
contemptibility of their Church. And so again, whereas we hold and highly
esteem, that our Church has all truth of Christ's Doctrine and Religion in it,
Fox writes of his Church, as before we have recorded; Fox ibid.
That by God's mighty Providence there has always been kept in her some sparks
of Christ's true Doctrine and Religion.

15. Again, whereas we glory, that in our Church there is power to absolve from
sins, Fox in the difference, etc. betwixt the old Roman Church and the new,
page 26.
security from error, and the like; Fox denies these privileges to be in his
Church, objecting unto us for an error, against the first, in a certain
Treatise of his before his Acts and Monuments, That we in our Church have
Confession and Absolution at the Priests hands, etc. And against the second he
brings in a large Conference of Ridley and Latimer agreeing together, that
the greater part of the Universal Catholic Church may err, but yet fearfully,
as you shall see more largely in the Third Part of this Treatise, Acts and
Monuments, page 1560.

Fox p. 1561. col. 2. n. 74.


when we shall come to treat of these Foxian Saints and their Festival Days,
Acts and Monuments. The same Patriarchs also do censure S. Augustin's Speech
before by me alleged, for an excessive vehemence (for so are their words) where
he says, That he would not believe the Gospel, if the Authority of the
Catholic Church did not move him thereunto; signifying thereby, as before has
been noted, August. contr. ep. Fundam. cap. 5.
that he could not know Scriptures to be Scriptures, nor the Gospel to be
Gospel, neither their sense and meaning to be such as they were taken for, but
by the Authority of the Universal Catholic Church, that had conserved them from
time to time, and delivered them to him, and to the rest of the World, for such
to be believed.

16. Wherefore to conclude this matter, seeing that John Fox does allow so well
this Doctrine of his Patriarchs, Ridley and Latimer, What John Fox takes from
his Church.
and thereby does take from the true Church (and consequently in his meaning,
from his own) all this excellent Authority which S. Augustine and other Fathers
do ascribe to the Catholic Church, to wit the Sovereignty of approving or
rejecting true or false Scriptures, of discerning between Books and Books, and
judging of their true interpretations; and seeing further he takes away from
his Church both Confession and Absolution of sins, and all efficacy of
Sacraments, leaving them only to bare Signs, that do signify and not work,
seeing he takes away from her all infallibility of Doctrine, confessing that
she may err, and contenteth himself that she retain ever some sparkles only of
true Doctrine and Religion, as before has been showed out of his own words; and
considering moreover, that he makes her so poor a thing as now you have seen,
and furnishes her with such rags, to wit, with such variety of Sectaries as is
ridiculous to name, they disagreeing among themselves, and the one most
opposite to the other in Doctrine and Belief, she being such a Church (I say) so
poor and miserable, The Protestants believe the Devil as much as their own
Church.
so obscure and ragged, so doubtful and uncertain, no marvail though they make
little account of her, or give small credit unto her, which in very deed is no
greater than is given to the worst man, or most dishonest woman living, which
is to believe her so far, as she can prove by others what she says to be true,
to wit, by Scriptures, without which witness none of her own children or
household will credit or believe her; which is a remarkable Point, for that with
the same condition they will believe the Devil himself, and must do, if he
allege Scriptures in the true sense and meaning.

17. And this is the estimation which Protestants do hold of their new Church.
Now let us pass to speak a word only about the second Point, The second
principal point wherein Catholics and Protestants do differ.
which concerns the assigning out, or description of this Church. Clear it
is, and cannot be denied, that Catholics do assign such a Church as may be seen
and known by all men, begun visibly by Christ himself in Jury, when he gathered
his Apostles and Disciples together, and continued afterward with infinite
increase of Nations and People, Countries and Kingdoms, that in tract of time
adjoined themselves thereunto, and that this most manifest, notorious and known
Church, has endured ever since under the name of the Christian Catholic
Church, for the space of sixteen hundred years, as we have showed before both
largely and particularly in the former Treatise, which is plain dealing, clear
and manifest; whereas on the other side, the Protestants of our days following
herein the steps of old Heretics their Ancestors, do seek to assign such a
Church, as no man can tell where to find it; for that it is rather imaginary,
mathematical, or metaphysical, than sensible to man's eyes, consisting (as they
teach) of just and predestinate men only, whom, where, or how to find, you see
how uncertain and difficult a thing it is, in this mortal life.

18. Wherefore as the ancient Fathers condemned wholly the Heretics of their
times, for this fond and pernicious device, and wrote eagerly against the same,
as S. Cyprian against the Novatians, S. Epiphanius, Cypr. l. 4. ep. 2. Epiph.
in haer. Cathar. Aug. l. de haer. c. 69. and 88. and l. 3. contr. Par. men. c.
2.
and S. Augustine against the Donatists and Pelagians: for that under this cover
and color they would make themselves to be the only true Church, to wit, every
Sect their own Sectaries and Congregation, saying that they only are
predestinate, just, holy, and God's chosen people, and consequently also his
only true Church; so do we at this day stand in the very same controversy with
Protestants that seek the same evasion and refuge.

19. And he that has but so much leisure as to read over the Conference of the
Third day, had between S. Augustine and other Catholic Bishops on the one side,
The Conference at Carthage between Catholics and Donatists.
and the Bishops of the Donatists on the other side, at Carthage, by the
Emperor's persmission and appointment, even upon this very Question of
assigning the Church, he shall see the matter most clearly handled; and that
the Catholics of this time do urge nothing in this Point, but that S. Augustine
and his fellow Catholic Bishops did urge in that Conference against the
Donatists, and that the Protestants of our time do take no other course of
shifting and defending themselves therein, than the Donatists did in those
days: for that after infinite delays and tergiversations used before they could
be brought to this Conference, which S. Augustine sets down in the collation
of the first and second day, when at length in the third days meeting they came
to join upon the Controversy in hand, they began first about the word Catholic
it self, which the Catholics urged against the Donatists, as we do now against
the Sectaries of this Age; and the Donatists sought to avoid the same by the
very same sleights which ours do, as appears by S. Augustin's words.

Aug. in Breviculo Collat. 3. cap. 3.
20. Donatistae (says S. August.) responderunt, Catholicum nomen non ex
universitate gentium, sed ex plenitudine Sacramentorum institutum; and
petiverunt, ut pro barent Catholici, etc. The Donatists did answer, That the
Name Catholic did not import the universality of Nations, (professing our
Christian Faith) but the fullness rather of Sacraments (which they held to be in
their Church;) and farther they required, that the Catholics should prove that
all Nations did communicate with them and their Church; which thing when the
Catholics most willingly admitted, and desired of the Judges, that they might
be suffered to prove it, the Donatists presently ran to another Question,
slipping from this Cause of the Church that was in hand.

The first point discussed between S. Augustine and the Donatists about the Name
Catholic.
21 Thus writes S. Augustine of this matter, whereby you see that the Catholics
in those days, as we in these, did urge those Heretics with the force of this
Name Catholic, and with the signification and possession thereof on their side,
importing (as they inferred) the universality of all Nations professing the
Faith of Christ, so as they in those days assigned the great universal, visible
and known Church for the true, which Church had been gathered by the Conversion
of all Nations; whereas the Donatists to fly this Argument, were forced to
say, that the Name Catholic signified only the universality or fullness of
Sacraments; and consequently in what particular Congregation soever this
fullness was sound, (as in theirs forsooth they pretended it was) there was the
only true Catholic Church, which was a plain shift, as you see. And is not this
the self-same manner of proceeding of all our Sectaries at this day? Does not
every one of them brag, that their Church only has the fullness and right use
of Sacraments, and the true Preaching of God's Word? Do not the Lutherans say
this? Do not the Zuinglians, Calvinists, Brownists, and Puritans Preach the
like? And do not the Anabaptists and Trinitarians affirm the very same? This
then was a very shift in the Donatists, and so it is in our Protestants.

The second point between the Doatists and Catholics.
22. After this first running from the Cause, S. Augustine shows that the
Donatists full sore against their wills, were brought unto it again by
Marcellinus, the Tribune, appointed by the Emperor to assist in that
Conference. And whereas the Catholics had given up some days before a large
Writing, showing by infinite Testimonies of holy Scriptures, that the Church of
Christ foretold by his Prophets, and instituted by himself, could not be any
particular Church or Conventicle in Africa, or out of Africa, but an universal,
visible and illustrious Church spread over all Nations, and with which all
Nations converted to Christ should communicate in one. The Donatists (says S.
Aug.) after a long Conference and Council held among themselves, did answer
this Writing of the Catholics, by another large impertinent Writing of theirs,
but quite from the purpose, not answering so much as one Text alleged by the
Catholics for this Universality of the Church. Non solum (says S. Augustine)
pertractare, August. Coll. 3. cap. 8.
sed omnino nec attingere voluerunt. The Donatists not only would not handle
fully, or answer these Testimonies alleged by the Catholics, for the
Universality and extern Majesty of the Church, but not so much as touch any one
of them.

23. And then says he farther, Nec aliquod testimonium in tam prolixa epistola
sua, proferre ausi sunt de scripturis sanctis, quo assererent, Ecclesiam partis
Donati esse praedictam and praenunciatam; sicut tam multa Catholici
protulerunt, pro Ecclesia, cui communicant, quae incipiens ab Jerusalem toto
orb diffunditur, etc. Neither durst the Donatists in so large an Epistle of
theirs (which they gave up) bring forth any one Testimony of Holy Scripture,
whereby they might prove that the particular Church of the part or Faction of
Donatus, was prophesied or foretold by the said Scriptures; whereas the
Catholics on the other side brought forth many Scriptures for proof of that
Universal Church with which they communicate; which Church beginning from
Jerusalem, was spread over all the World. And thus writes S. Augustine of
their dealing in that Point.

24. And presently after this he shows that they fell to the discussion of a
third Point, to wit, whether the true Catholic Church of Christ, The third
point discussed between the Catholics and Donatists at Carthage.
to whom he promised those singular Graces and Privileges which the Scripture
sets down, should consist of good men only, as the Donatists held; or of the
mixture of good and evil in this Life, as the Catholics taught; wherein the
Donatists thought themselves to have a great advantage: First, for that it
might seem to the simple people there present, to be a more pious Opinion to
hold, that only good men were God's Flock, and of his true Church: Secondly,
for that they had many places of Scripture that might seem to favor the same,
C^llat. 3. cap. 8.
(for so says S. Augustine) Illud ostendere tentaverunt, prolatis multis
testimoniis divinarum scripturarum, quod Ecclesia Dei, non cum malorum hominum
commixtione futura praedicta sit. They endeavored to show by many Testimonies
alleged out of holy Scriptures, that it was not foretold or prophesied of the
Church, that she should consist of the mixture of good and evil men, etc.
Behold here how old Heretics abounded also in alleging Scriptures, as well as
ours at this day, but all from the purpose; for whatsoever the Donatists
alleged out of Scriptures for the sanctity and purity of God's Church, it was
either to be understood of the triumphant Church in the next Life, or of the
better part of the Church in this Life, to wit, such as are not only of the
external Body of the Church, but also of the Soul, as this holy Father
speaks; that is to say, endued and adorned with all necessary Virtues.

25. But on the contrary side, when S. Augustine and his Fellow Bishops, A
contention about the Parables of Christ concerning the Church. Matt. 13. Matt.
3. Luc. 3.
to prove that Christ's Church in this World consisted both of good and bad,
alleged those evident Parables of our Savior, used about this matter; as that
of the Net cast into the Sea, that comprehended all kind of Fish both good and
bad, some to be cast away, and some to be used: That also of the Barn-floor,
which had in it both chaff and corn, the one to be burned, the other to be laid
up in God's eternal Granary: The other also of corn and cockle permitted to
grow in one field to the day of Judgment; and of the sheep and goats that live
in God's Flock under the self same Shepherds in this World, Marc. 3. and 13.

Mat. 29.


but yet the one to be consumed with everlasting Fire in the end thereof; and
the other to be taken into eternal Joy. When these Parables (I say) with many
other Testimonies of Scripture, had been alleged by the Catholics against the
Donatists Heresy, it was wonderful to see what shifts, deceits, and
tergiversations they used to avoid the same; denying some, as invented by
Catholics; Collat. 3. c. 9.10, and 11.
others they sought to avoid by false and crafty Expositions, and other such
shifts, which you may read at large in S. Augustine.

26. And for that this may be sufficient for a taste, to show the different
manner of proceeding between Catholics and Heretics, both old and new, about
this Point of assigning out the true Church, where, and in whom it is, and how
to be found; The third principal difference about the proprieties and marks of
the true Church.
I shall pass no farther in this matter, but only add a word or two of the
third Point, which is the difference between us in laying forth the proprieties
and notes, whereby this Church may be known and distinguished from all others;
which Point, though it may sufficiently be seen and gathered by that which
already we have said, yet for promise sake must somewhat also be spoken here;
which in effect shall be nothing but this, That the difference between us and
the Protestants in delivering these proprieties, is not far unlike to that of
two Gentlemen, that should send forth two Servants into the Marketplace, A
Comparison of different giving of notes to find a thing by.
where many Men are to seek out some Learned Physician, (for Examples sake)
giving them certain notes to find him by, but far different; for that the one
delivers either general notes only, that are common to all, or most Men; as
that he has a head, beard, two eyes, two arms, and the like; or else certain
inward invisible proprieties; as that he is learned, meek, chaste, etc. That he
is a good Physician, cures excellently well, and follows therein exactly the
Precepts of Hypocrates and Galen; and finally, has all things necessary or
needful for that effect. Which marks being little to the purpose, as you see,
for knowing or discerning out the said Physician from any other, the Messenger
might weary himself, before he found that which he sought for.

27. But the other that sends forth his Messenger, considering that marks and
signs must be more known than the thing it self, whereof they are marks, and
not common to many, but proper and peculiar to that which is sought for;
tells his Servant, what special Name the Physician is called by, what age,
what countenance, and what stature he is of, what apparel he wears, what
gesture and manner of going he uses, what sound of voice he has in speaking,
and above all where he dwells, how his house may be found, known and
discerned from all others: All which signs being given, we must needs say, that
the Searcher is a very simple or negligent Fellow if he miss him.

28. And this very difference is to be noted between the Protestants and us in
delivering proprieties to know the Church by, for that the Catholics give sound
and sure notes, proper and peculiar to one only Church, which is the true
Catholic Church, and these notes not invented by themselves, but founded in
Scriptures, and delivered by the Tradition of Christ and his Apostles, and used
by the ancient Fathers and Doctors of the Church, to this very purpose of
distinguishing her thereby from all Congregations and Conventicles of Heretics
whatsoever: Proprieties and Marks the true Church given by Catholics.
Of which notes and proprieties you have heard some before, mentioned in the
Conference between S. Augustine and the Donatists, as the Name Catholic and the
ancient possession thereof; Universality over all Christendom, and multitude of
Nations and Gentiles converted to one Christian Church and Faith,
participating, and holding the Communion of one and the self-same number of
Sacraments: whereunto are added by other Fathers, and the self-same Doctor in
other places, diverse, other proprieties also, as antiquity with continuation
and succession from age to age, visibility with most perspicuous and
illustrious progress, apparent and admirable to the whole world; unity and
conformity in Doctrine by one Rule of Faith throughout all ages; notorious
sanctity in many members of this Church testified by infinite miracles, and
supernatural operations; the conversion of infinite Pagans and Gentiles, with
overthrow and extirpation of their Idolatry, which was a thing prophesied to be
fulfilled by the true Church only.

29. These notes (I say) and diverse others are set down by holy Fathers, as
both proper and peculiar to the only true Catholic Church of Christ, and
agreeing to no Heretical Congregation whatsoever; as also manifest and
notorious and most easy to be judged of by all people. For these two
conditions ought to have true marks, as before has been mentioned; the first,
that they be peculiar and not common; the second, that they be more notoriously
known, and more easily found out, than the thing it self which they do
demonstrate: whereof you may read in particular in S. Cyprian against the
Novatians, S. Hierom against the Luciferians, S. Augustine against the Donatists
and Pelagians, Optatus against the same Donatists, and Vincentius Lyrinensis
against all sorts of Heretics; and this is the real and substantial dealing of
Catholics.

30. But the Protestants on the contrary side do give such marks and notes as
are either general and common, or else more obscure and harder to be found out
and judged of, than the matter in controversy, as before we have signified, by
the Comparisons of seeking out the Physician; as for Example, Luth. lib. de
conc. part ult.
Martin Luther, Father of our Protestants, having left the Communion of the
true Church of God, and made a new Conventicle to himself, would needs make it
the true Church of God, and prove the same by certain marks and proprieties
devised by himself, which he sets down to the number of Seven; The marks of
the Church fondly set down by Heretics.
whereof the first was, the true Preaching of the Gospel; the second, the right
Administration of Baptism; the third, the lawful use of the Eucharist; the
fourth, the due Exercise of the Ecclesiastical Keys in Absolving and retaining
Sins; the fifth, the lawful Election of Ministers; the sixth, public Prayer,
and Singing of Psalms in a known Tongue; the seventh, the Mystery of the Cross
in bearing tribulations. These were Luthers notes, which other Protestants
after him; and namely the Magdeburgians, and John Calvin, Magdeb. cent. 1. lib.
2. c. 4. Calv. l. 4. Instit. cap. 1.
do abridge to the number of two only, to wit, the true Preaching of the
Gospel, and the sincere use of Sacraments.

31. But now what manner of notes these be, which every Sect may and do
challenge as proper to themselves, (which they cannot do with any probability,
with the marks and notes of the Catholic Church before set down) is easy to
judge; for what Sect will not say and swear also, if need be, that they only
Preach the Word of God truly, and that they only Administer the Sacraments
rightly, and that they use the Ecclesiastical Keys duly, and that the Election
of Ministers is lawfully made among them, and that they have public Prayer and
singing of Psalms, bearing the Cross, and the like? and it is harder to
convince them in any one of these notes, than in the principal point it self,
to wit, that they are not the Catholic Christian Church of Christ; so as these
marks being common, and not proper, and less manifest than the thing it self,
whereof they are put for marks, it follows that they are fond, vain and
ridiculous, and that the inventors thereof did rather seek to obscure and hide
the Church, than to declare, and manifest the same by such proprieties.

32. And here will we make an end of all this Discourse, reserving the rest
unto the third part, which is to be Printed severally, for that the bulk of
these two has grown to a sufficient bigness for one Tome or Volume; only I
might note to the Reader in this last Paragraph, that as our Adversaries do
imitate the Donatists in the Point before mentioned, out of their Conference
with S. Augustine and other Catholic Bishops; so have they done it also
hitherto, Protestant Ministers do fly public Conference as the Donatists did.
in flying all equal and lawful Conference with us, as the Donatists did with
those old Catholics, so much as lay in their power, until it was imposed upon
them by commandment of the Emperor at the petition of S. Augustine, and the
Catholic Party, as the said Father does relate in his forenamed Book written of
that Conference, telling us two points in particular of their dealing in that
Affair, which he expresses in these words, Qui causam bonam non se habere
sciebant, id egerunt primum, ne collatio fieret, aut causa ipsa ageretur, Aug.
in Brevit. Praefat. ad coll. 1. diti.
sed quia hoc obtinere minime poterant, id effecerunt multiplicitate gestorum,
ut quod actum est, non facile legeretur. The Donatists knowing they had an evil
Cause, endeavored first to bring to pass that the Conference should not be
made, nor the Cause it self be handled at all; but when they could not obtain
this, then went they about to put down so many things in writing as they might
not easily be read.

33. Thus writes St. Augustine; and for this cause thought he good to set down
a Sum of all that passed, calling it Breviculum Collationum, showing
perspicuously the infinite Cavils, Frauds, and Shifts of these Heretics, to
avoid all due trial; for when after all other delays, both Parties were now met
together, Coll. 1. cap. 8. The tergiversation of the Donatists to fly public
Trial.
Instare caeperunt (says he) ut prius ageretur de tempore, de mandato, de
persona: de causa, tunc ad negotii merita veniretur. The Donatists began to
make new instance, (after all other Cavils and Exceptions taken before) that
first it might be treated about the time that this Conference should endure,
and about the Emperor's Commandment or Edict, and Clauses thereof, and about
the Person as well of the Judge and Assistants, as the Disputers of both parts;
and finally of the whole cause of difference, what had passed therein between
them hitherto; and then after all this (forsooth) they should come to examine
the merits of the principal Business or Controversy in hand, which in effect
would never be, for that about every one of these Points the Donatists had many
Quarrels, as S. Augustine shows, and by each one thereof they sought delays;
and particularly whereas order had been taken that 18 Bishops of each side
should suffice, Coll. 1. c. 11.12, 13, and 14.
they would needs have all their side to be admitted; and so for ostentation
sake they entered (says S. Augustine) with great pomp into Carthage to the
number of 279 Bishops of that Sect of Donatus (a pitiful sight for Catholics)
together with all their Train. Other shifts, delays, and tergiversations of
theirs, I leave for brevities sake to be read in S. Augustine himself.

How English Ministers have fled public Conference hitherto.
34. But how well our English Adversaries have imitated this manner of
proceeding of the Donatists, for shifting off all public Conference and Trial
for these 44 years of her Majesty's Reign, being so often and earnestly
demanded at their hands, is sufficiently known, and needs not to be proved or
repeated here. But if it would please Almighty God to inspire her Majesty to
force them thereunto, as he did the Emperor, to compel the Donatists to a
public Trial, I do not doubt, but the like Issue would ensue, and the like
Sentence be given in that Cause, Coll. 3. c. 25.
by any indifferent Judge, as was given by Marcellinus in the former
Controversy, to wit, (as S. Augustin's words are) Confutatos a Catholicis
Donatistas, omnium documentorum manifestatione pronunciavit. Marcellinus did
pronounce by his Definitive Sentence, that the Catholics had confuted the
Donatists, with manifestation of all kind of Learning. And so much for this
Matter.

The End of the Second Part.
FINIS.

