THE Redeemer's Friend; OR, A SERMON On John 11. part of the 11th Verse, (With
some Additions) Preached at the Funeral of the Reverend, Learned, and Faithful
Minister of the Gospel, Mr. SAMVEL FAIRCLOVGH, Who departed this Life, December
31, 1691.

By NATH. PARKHURST, M. A. and Vicar of Yoxford, Suff.

ACTS 8.2. Devout Men carried Stephen to his Burial, and made great Lamentation.

Multis ille bonis flebilis occidit;
Paucis flebilior quam mihi.
Horat. Carm. lib. 1. Ode 24. At post nubile Phoebus,
Qui occidit solummodo dormit.
Et qui dum vixit Christum dilexit,
Dormit Redemptoris Amicus.
London, Printed by J. D. for Nathanael Ranew, at the King's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1692.

To the Reverend Mr. JOHN FAIRCLOUGH, AND Mr. GEORGE JONES, With their
Religious Consorts; AND TO Mrs. MARTHA SHUTE; The Brethren and Sisters of the
Deceased Mr. SAMVEL FAIRCLOVGH.
My much Honored Friends,
IF the Printing of this Sermon needs an Apology, you must favor me with a
Defense, at whose Request I have preached and published it.

The Design of the Discourse is partly to awaken careless Sinners, (if any such
vouchsafe it a reading) by endeavoring to ruin their Hopes of Favor with the
Redeemer, while they persist in Ways of Ungodliness, refusing the Terms of the
Gospel.

And there being another sort of Men among us, not far from the Kingdom of God,
almost Christians, of fair Morals, seeking to enter Heaven, but not
apprehending the right way of attaining it; I earnestly desire this Sermon may
be Eyesalve to these Laodiceans, who court Sobriety and Forms, and decline
Zeal, that their Understandings may be cleared: for the Light in them is
Darkness.

May these perceive that the Morals of Heathens philosophiz'd, and the
Profession of the Christian Doctrine put together, do both come short of
Godliness, and that renewing of Mind that qualifies Men for everlasting
Salvation.

And as for Persons of real Godliness, I hope what I have said, may encourage
their Progress in Holiness, and minister to their Consolation. And that these
may be the Successes of what you have drawn into public View, let your Prayers
attend its going forth, that it may prosper, the Lord wording with it.

But whatever may be the Fruit of this Instruction, the Occasion of it has
induced no little Sadness upon your Hearts, being deprived of the Conversation
of an endeared Brother. And you must be allowed to deplore so great and
sensible a Loss. For he that was dear to his Friends and Acquaintance, must
have been much more so to his Relations, and Relations that knew what value to
put upon the Grace and Learning, Religion and Breeding, Piety and Temper
conspicuous in him.

To me the sight of Him was a Pleasure, and his Conversion always an
Entertainment: And therefore I cannot wonder if you are in danger of grieving
overmuch. But beware you pass not the Bounds God sets to your Resentments, and
that your Mournings may not overflow the Banks of Patience, Submission, and
Resignation to the Divine Will.

Remember what Job said in a very mournful Case, Shall we receive Good at the
Hand of the Lord, and not Evil? You have received much Good from his Hand; your
Family has had a great Portion of Divine Favors; God has made it an eminent
Nursery of accomplished Preachers, who have led the Way to Heaven, and been
instrumental for much Good in the Church of God. And many Temporal Blessings
has he also heaped upon you. And therefore you must the more sofily lament
your Loss.

And as a mighty Mitigation of your Grievance, consider where your absent
Brother is, and in what Company, and how employed! He is in Paradise, in the
Heaven of Heavens, in the Company of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
Martyrs, and Spirits of just Men made perfect, with Angels, and with Christ,
praising, loving, enjoying, and delighting in God.

Let these Things qualify your Griefs; and imitating him in his Pattern,
rejoice in hope of meeting him in the glorious Mansions above. And if this
short Monition may contribute, through Divine Blessing, to your Consolation
under this Cloud, it will he no small Satisfaction to him who is

Your faithful Friend and Servant, NATH. PARKHURST.

A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF Mr. SAMVEL FAIRCLOVGH.
John 11. part of the 11th Verse. Our Friend Lazarus sleeps.


THese Words were spoken by our Blessed Lord and Savior to his Disciples, and
at first not understood, until he had explained them in ver. 14. where he said
plainly, Lazarus is dead: And this was no new way of expressing Death; for it
very ordinarily occurs in the Style of the holy Scriptures: When the Kings of
Judah died, they are said to sleep with their Fathers: And they that die in the
Lord, are said to sleep in Jesus. And even in Heathen Authors, Sleep is put
frequently for Death; (...) signifies the Dead, and (...) and Dor^^^orium are
used not only for a Sleeping, but also for a Burying-Place.

And concerning the Person here spoken of, besides his Name, we have in this
Chapter his Relations; he was the Brother of Mary and Martha; and an Intimation
of the Esteem and Affection our Lord had for him, ver. 5. Now Jesus loved
Martha, and her Sister, and Lazarus. Whereupon, we may fully conclude him a
true Disciple of Christ. And accordingly may from the Words observe:

I. That true Disciples of Christ, or sincere Christians, are honored with the
Title of Christ's Friends. II. That sincere Christians, tho honored with the
Title of Christ's Friends, yet are not privileged from dying. III. That tho
they are not privileged from dying, yet Death is qualified and softened to
them: to them Death is a Sleep, or as a Sleep.
I. Observe, That sincere Christians are honored with the Title of Christ's
Friends. So Lazarus is called in the Text; and all the Disciples together, and
all his mystical Members, are thus dignified in John 15.13, 14, 15. John 15.13,
14, 15.
Greater Love has no Man than this, that a Man lay down his Life for his
Friends. Ye are my Friends, if ye do whatever I command you. Henceforth I call
you not Servants, but I have called you Friends. Thus Abraham also was
honored, being called the Friend of God. And all his spiritual Children, i. e.
sincere Believers, are Partakers of the like Honor and Privilege.

And here it will be requisite, 1st. To give some account of sincere
Christians, that each of us may make a Judgment of our selves. And 2dly. To
show what are the Tokens and Instances of Christ's Friendship toward sincere
Christians, that it may appear not a Rhetorical Sound of Words, but a Reality
that they are the Friends of Christ. And,

First, (That the Discourse may not walk in Darkness) I shall give some account
of sincere Christians in these following things.

1. Sincere Christians are few in Number, comparatively few. Christ's Flock is
a little Flock. Strait is the Gate, and narrow the Way that leads to Life, and
few there be that find it. If we substract the Numbers of the Ignorant,
Profane, Worldly-minded and Formal, the Remainder is comparatively small. And
thus it has been in all former Ages. Evermore the Number of the Faithful has
been little, compared with the Ungodly. In the Days of Noah, all Flesh had
corrupted their Way: Very few in the World had then any serious regard to God;
He only and his Family escaped the Deluge. In David's time, Psalm. 13.3.
all, i. e. the most, were gone aside, Psalm. 13.3. In the times of Elias, seven
thousand only in Israel kept themselves from the Pollution of Idolatry. Romans
11.4.
In the times of Jeremiah, the common People were generally poor and foolish,
and knew not the Way of the Lord: and the Great Men had broken the Yoke, and
burst the Bonds in sunder. In our blessed Savior's time upon Earth, the
Magistrates and Ministers of the Jewish Church, and the People were generally
corrupt and wicked. In the Apostles time, notwithstanding the great Success of
the Gospel, yet the Faithful remained in comparison few, so that there were not
Friends enough to preserve the Apostles from violent Death. And this Age surely
is not much better than the former Ages of Christianity, or those under, the
Mosaical Dispensation. The Number of good Men is still small. I should be glad
to find an Error in the Computation, but am much afraid it is too true, that
neither in our own, or any other Reformed Church, can be showed a Community of
the quantity of a Village, wherein the Majority are sincere in the Profession
of Christianity. Wherefore (to use the solemn Words of the great Apostle, Ephesians.
4.17.) I say and testify in the Lord, Ephesians. 4.17.
that they are in a perishing Condition, in Paths leading to the Chambers of
everlasting Death, who follow the Generality of this present Generation.

2. Sincere Christians are, in the Family of the World, generally of the
younger House, inferior in worldly Respects. Not many wise Men after the
Flesh, not many mighty, 1 Cor. 1.26.
not many noble are called, 1 Cor. 1.26. Some Princes, some Nobles, some
Persons of Quality, some Men of Parts and Learning are among the effectually
called: But the Instances are rave. And this was mystically represented in the
Advancement of Judah, Ephraim, David and Solomon, who were all younger Brothers
in their several Families. Commonly. Men great in Place and Power, in Wealth
and Honor, in Wit and Parts, take the wrong Way, despise Religion, and neglect
Godliness. Thus it was in our Savior's time; the Jewish Sanhedrim, and almost
all Persons of Name and Authority in that Church, opposed the believing Jesus
was the Christ. And accordingly it was laid as an Objection against receiving
him and his Doctrine, that the Men of Reputation did not acknowledge him: John
7.48.
Have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed in him? John 7.48.

3. Sincere Christians, as they are few, and commonly inferior in the World,
so likewise they are a scattered and dispersed Generation, not in a Body
together, but as it were, one of a City, and two of a Tribe, mixed with others,
till Death makes the Separation. As our Lord, in respect of the kind of his
Death, was numbered with Transgressors; so in all Civil Respects these are mixed
with the Wicked, as Subjects of the same Prince, Natives of the same Country,
Dwellers in the same City, Members of the same Family, and it may be sitting at
the same Table. The Divine Wisdom permits them not to be separated in this
Life. The Tares must grow with the Wheat, till the consummation of all Things.

4. Sincere Christians, tho thus mixed with the Ungodly, are yet very differing
from them. They have another Father, another Birth, another Country, another
Spirit, another Practice, and live another Life. They are born of God, Citizens
of Heaven, refined in their Spirits, holy in Practice, and live a Life of
Faith. They are in the World, but are not of it, having their Conversation in
Heaven.

They have differing Employments, Affairs that other Men neglect, other Joys
and Sorrows, Complaints, and Fears, and Hopes, than the Men of the World have,
and Meat to eat the World knows not of. They are new Creatures, very differing
from the Men of this World, and from what themselves once were.

5. (To proceed to their distinctive Character) Sincere Christians are Persons
of some considerable knowledge of God, Christ and the Holy Spirit; of the Fall
of Man, and the depravation of Humane Nature; of the Covenant of Grace, of God
in Christ (as a Sacrifice and Mediator) reconciling Sinners to himself; of the
Doctrines, Precepts, Promises and Threatenings in the Scriptures. They are also
Penitents, weary and heavy-laden under (the Burden of their Sins, sick of their
Offenses and Transgressions of the Divine Laws, poor and contrite in Spirit.
And they live by Faith in Christ, with entire dependence upon him, as a
Prophet, Priest and King, as a Propitiation for Sin, and as an Advocate with
the Father. And they give themselves to Prayer, pouring out not only Words, but
their Hearts to God. And in the assistance of the Spirit of God, they live
soberly, righteously and godly, crucifying the Flesh, striving against Sin,
resisting Temptations, delighting in the Law of God after the inner Man;
opposing the Law in their Members, that rebels against the Law of their Mind;
endeavoring to have respect to all God's Commands, and that none of them may
be grievous; studying to walk worthy of God unto all pleasing, and to adorn the
Doctrine of God their Savior in all things; and humbling themselves for their
Infirmities, and coming short of any Duty.

Secondly, I shall show what are the Tokens and Instances of the Redeemer's
Friendship toward sincere Christians. And,

1. He converses with them, meets them in sacred Ordinances; and wherever two
or three are gathered together in his Name, he is in the midst of them; and in
secret Places in Prayer and Meditation, manifests himself to them, encouraging,
strengthening them, and sometimes assuring them of his Love. And hereby he
accomplishes that Promise in Revel. 3.20. If any Man hear my Voice, Revel. 3.20.
and open the Door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with
me.

2. Christ does great things for them; He washes them from their Sins in his
own Blood, clothes them with the Robes of his unspotted Righteousness, appears
in the Presence of God for them, carries their Names upon his Breast in the
true Holy of Holies, justifies their Persons, presents their Prayers to his and
their Father, perfumes all their weak Services and imperfect Offerings by his
prevailing perpetual Intercession, and so makes them grateful to God, and a
sweet smelling Savor.

3. Christ invests them with glorious Privileges; John 1.12.
he gives them Power to become the Children of God; Revel. 1.6.
makes them Kings and Priests to God and his Father; renders all things
subservient to them, even the holy Angels, who are ministering Spirits sent
forth for the Good of them that are Heirs of Salvation. Heb. 1.14.
And he makes all things to work together for their Good; Romans 8.
for their Afflictions refine them, and work in them the peaceable Fruits of
Righteousness. Their Temptations exercise, prove and strengthen their Graces;
their Infirmities lead them to much Humility and dependence upon God; their
Falls and Miscarriages (being recovered by Repentance) make them more diligent
and watchful.

4. Christ will in the end bring them near to himself, John 17.24.
that they may be with him, John 17.24. and will advance them (whatever that
means) to a sitting with him in his Throne, Revel. 3.21.
Rev. 3.21. He will render them in a manner equal with the Angels, and like
them they shall live the Life of Spirits, neither eating nor drinking, nor
building nor planting, nor marrying or being given in Marriage. And they shall
live and reign for ever with him in Heaven, and eat of the Tree in the midst of
the Paradise of God, yielding most delightful, intellectual and spiritual Food.
They shall be as Pillars in the Temple above, established in Happiness, and
Ornaments in that Place of Glory. They shall have the Vision of God, i. e. the
utmost knowledge of him, that humane Faculties are capable of in their full
Strength. They shall have everlasting Joy, and drink of Rivers of holy
Pleasures at God's Right Hand for evermore. The Lamb that is in the midst of
the Throne, shall lead them to these Fountains of living Waters, Revel. 7.17.
Revel. 7.17. These are some Instances of Christ's Friendship toward serious
Believers, sufficiently demonstrating that they are in reality his Friends.

II. Observe, That sincere Christians are honored with the Title of Christ's
Friends, yet are not privileged from dying. How holy soever any are, how
useful soever, how much soever in favor with God, and endeared to the
Redeemer, yet Death comes upon them, and lays them asleep. The best of Men must
die. Abraham is dead, and the Prophets are dead; only Enoch and Elias found
another Passage to the heavenly Mansions; and the last Generation shall not
die, but be changed, 1 Cor. 15.51. 1 Cor. 15.51
All others must die, according to the Decree and Appointment of God. So that
unless the Day of Judgment be nearer than it is reasonable to imagine, we must
expect to take up our Lodgings in Graves and Tombs, tho sanctified, tho serving
our Generation by the Will of God; and how much soever others may need us, our
Dissolution is coming: But this is our Comfort, that living in the Lord, we
shall die in the Lord; and Death shall be our Advantage, tho we cannot be
privileged from it.

III. Observe, That tho sincere Christians are not exempted from dying, yet
Death is qualified and softened to them: To them it is but a Sleep, or but as a
Sleep.

1. In respect to their Bodies, it is a Rest from Pain, Sickness, Weariness,
Labor, Noise and Disturbance. The Grave is their Bed, they are quiet in it,
and never disturbed of that Rest, till awakned with the joyful solemn Sound of
the last Trump, and the Voice of the Archangel, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16
and the Shout attending our Lord's last Appearing, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.

2. In respect of their Souls; tho Death is not a Sleep, as Sleep signifies an
unactive Rest, yet Death puts the Souls of the Godly into better than a Sleep,
into a perfect Repose and cessation from all Toil, and into a State of most
active Love and Joy: for Angels come and carry them, upon their dislodging from
their Bodies, into Abraham's Bosom, to the Spirits of just Men made perfect,
into the third Heaven. And whereas good Men complain while they are here, that
they can neither love nor joy in God as they desire, Infirmities impeding and
straitning the willing Mind; there they love God to the utmost of their Duty,
to the full extent of their Capacity, and according to all the desire of their
Hearts: And in like manner they there joy in God, without any Impediment to
that ravishing Exercise.

3. Death to sincere Christians is but a Sleep, in respect of the succeeding
Morning of the Resurrection. In this respect Death is but a long Sleep, as
Sleep is a short Death. And tho the Death of the Ungodly may also be termed a
Sleep, yet not in the qualification, and softness of its meaning, respecting
sincere Christians: For the Ungodly have no Rest in their Souls upon their
Departure, but Extremities of Grief and Horror: And the Morning of the
Resurrection brings them no manner of Comfort, but proves most dreadful to them.

But to sincere Christians Death is as a sweet Sleep, out of which they awake
joyfully: And upon the sounding of the Trumpet, their Graves open, they throw
off the dusty Covering, rise up, and put on the Dress of Immortality, and go
forth and meet the Bridegroom, and are ever with the Lord.

Such are the Instructions from the Text. The Improvement follows in several
Uses.

First; Since sincere Christians arc honored with the Title of the Friends of
Christ, let us all become sincere Christians, let us answer that great, holy
and glorious Name by which we are called, not serving Sin and Satan in the
Livery of Christ's Disciples. Let us live agreeably to our sacred Name and
Profession; let us fill up the Title of Christians with the Quality, and
Temper, and Practice becoming them that are so called: Let us think, speak,
act, pray, and live as Christians; as such let us be Penitent, Holy, Humble,
Charitable, Lovers of God and Men, Temperate, Chaste, Mortified and
Heavenly-minded: Let us cast away all the Works of Darkness, and renounce the
hidden things of Dishonesty, and serve God in Holiness and Righteousness, in
cleanness of Hands, and purity of Heart, mortifying the most secret Sins and
spiritual Wickednesses, of which the World can take no notice.

But it may be said, Who is sufficient for these things? we want power to live
the holy Life that becomes our Christian Profession. My Answer to this is, May
you be more fully convinced of your Impotency: but withal, remember, God can
draw you, Christ can strengthen you, and the Holy Spirit can influence, change
and renew you. Look up to Heaven; pray, plead, importune God for Supplies of
needful Grace; and wait for it in the sedulous use of the appointed Means of
reading and hearing the Word of Grace and Life, and meditating therein. It is
worthy of the utmost Endeavors, and you will not repent of any Labor it can
cost you, when once you have attained to serious Godliness; for the Friendship
of Christ attends it, and Happiness enough is included in his Love, who has
all Power in Heaven and Earth.

Secondly; Since real Christians are the Redeemer's Friends, and since the
Death of sincere Christians is qualified, and only as a Sleep, let as many of
us as are Christians in Reality and Practice, be reconciled to Death, and not
be uneasy under the expectation of it: Let us raise our Faith, and dismiss our
Fears, believing there is no harm to us in Death: It is but the Sleep of a long
Night, and then comes a Morning; the Day breaks, and the Shadows flee away, and
our Beloved leads us to the Mountains of Spices. Cant. 8.14.


Let us consider, Death cannot prejudice us, being blessed with Christ's
Friendship; for hereupon, Death is ours. The Spirit of God, by the Apostle's
Hand, has put Death it self into the Inventory of our Goods and Blessings, 1
Cor. 3.21, 22. All things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollo, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22.
or Cephas, or the World, or Life, or Death.

And whereas Death parts us from our Friends here, that Wound is presently
healed by its bringing us to Christ our high and everlasting Friend, according
to these Scriptures, 2 Cor. 5.8. Absent from the Body, 2 Cor. 5.8.
and present with the Lord. Phil. 1.23. Having a desire to depart, Phil. 1.23.
and to be with Christ. Luke 23.43. Luke 23.43.
To day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

Death is indeed a Violence upon Nature; and at first sight we cannot but
decline it as unnatural to our primitive Constitution, a Fruit of Sin, and a
mighty Humiliation and Abasement of one part of us; for it carries our Bodies
under the Earth, and makes them a Prey to the vile Worms, and renders them
noisome to the Living, who convey them thither in their own defense. But our
Relation to Christ qualifies all this, turning the Grave into a Bed, and Death
into a sweet Repose.

Thirdly; Since Death is thus qualified to the Friends of Christ, let us
examine whether we are the Friends of our Lord and Savior. Many presume it,
and are Strangers and Enemies to him in effect, (and by just Interpretation)
instead of being in a League of Friendship with him. And some fear they are not
his Friends, who are surely in his Favor. And this makes it necessary that we
pass an Inquest upon our selves; and I shall assist it, by answering two
Questions, Who are not, and who are the Friends of Christ?

Quest. 1. Who are not the Friends of Christ? And to this I reply in the
following Particulars.

1. Scorners of Piety and Holiness are none of his Friends. They that walk in
the Counsel of the Ungodly, and sit in the Seat of the Scornful, having a rank
Enmity against Religion, and the Power of Godliness, are no Friends of the
Redeemer, who gave himself for us, Titus 2.14.
to redeem us from all Iniquity, and to purify to himself a peculiar People
zealous of good Works, Titus 2.14.

Scoffers at Holiness, holy Persons, and holy Things, cannot find Favor with
him that is holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from Sinners.

It is mavelous and astonishing, that any Men (especially making any
Profession of the Christian Faith) should sink so deep into Profaneness, as to
put a Scorn upon religious, holy Practices, and pious Exercises: But Hell and
Earth together do breed such Monsters. Original Sin, blown up by Satan's Arts,
the Venom of the old Serpent put to the native Depravation of humane Nature,
produces this prodigious Birth, viz. a Scorner of holy Things. But such have
certainly no Alliance or Friendship with him that taught Holiness, and lived it
to Perfection. Such may be secure through a mighty hardness of Heart, and God's
giving them up to a blindness of Mind; but their Destruction was foretold very
early: Enoch the seventh from Adam, Jude, ver. 14,15.
pophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousands of his
Saints, to execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly
among them, of all their ungodly Deeds which they have ungodly committed; and
of all their hard Speeches which ungodly Sinners have spoken against him. Jude,
ver. 14, 15.

2. Such as have only an Outside of Religion, and not that of the hidden Man
of the Heart, are none of Christ's Friends: For all the Churches shall know he
searches the Heart, and tries the Reins. His piercing Eye sees the Rottenness
within the painted Sepulchers; and he will unmask all Hypocrites, and favors
only Israelites indeed, and without Guile.

If Men content themselves only with repeating the Creed, and a bare attendance
upon Divine Ordinances, with the Shadow of Religion instead of inward
Mortification, and real Godliness, they are not accepted with him, that knows
what is in Man.

To them that have only shining Lamps of Profession, he will say, Depart from
me, ye Workers of Iniquity, tho they could prophesy in his Name, and in it do
wonderful, i. e. miraculous Works.

There is nothing more apparently cautioned against in the Scriptures, than
this depending upon the external part of Religion, with a neglect of the inward
substantial things of it: Romans 2.28. Romans 2.28.
He is not a Jew that is one outwardly, neither is that Circumcision that is
outward in the Flesh. And it is equally true, he is not a Christian that is one
outwardly only, nor is that Baptism sufficient that is only upon the Flesh.

Be not deceived, God is not mocked; God will render to Men according to their
Works.

3. They who take any part of Religion for the whole, are none of Christ's
Friends. Some are sober, and sober only; and some are sober, and morally
righteous, and make a great Figure in a debauched Generation: but they are not
sober, and righteous, and godly. Such partial Christians will not be favored
by the impartial Judge: he respects none but them that have a sincere Respect to
all his Commands. Almost Christians can be but almost happy: And they that are
not far from the Kingdom of God, if they advance no farther in Religion, will
have their Portion with Hypocrites.

Secondly, The other Question is, Who are the Friends of Christ? And the Answer
is, They that sincerely keep his Commands. He that has my Commands, John 14.21.
and keeps them, he it is that loves me, and I will love him, John 14.21. They
also that delight in the Ordinances of his Worship, and love his People, and
Interest, and his Appearing, saying, Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly; who live
by the Faith of the Son of God, and desire to know nothing comparatively but
Christ and him crucified, counting all things Loss for the Excellency of the
knowledge of Christ: And they that imitate him in living a holy Life; these, and
these only, are the Redeemer's Friends. The rest are as yet his Enemies, and
will not that he should reign over them.

And now let us inquire diligently of which Number we are, whether Friends or
Enemies to Christ? It is time to make this Scrutiny: Death is coming, the pale
Messenger is on his way, and drawing near. The Funerals which we frequently
attend, are a loud Warning of our approaching Change. And if a little Time will
launch us into an Eternity, it is Wisdom to obtain the Resolution of this
Question speedily, whether we are the Friends of Christ or not?

And now having discoursed the Observations from the Text, and directed the
Improvement of them, that which remains, is to accommodate the Words of the
Text more particularly to our solemn Occasion, and to our deceased Brother and
Friend. And,

1. Our Friend, and our Lord's Friend, sleeps, or plainly speaking, is dead;
but it is qualified and softened to him and his Friends: his Death is but as a
Sleep; he sleeps in Jesus, and will awake again, and put on Immortality.

2. Our Friend sleeps; he was not priviledg'd from dying: Neither his Parts;
nor Graces, nor his Knowledge and Learning, nor his Usefulness, and Endearedness
to his Relations and Acquaintance, nor yet the Love and Prayers of his Friends,
could exempt him from the Stroke of Death. God had set him his Bounds of being
active and patient. He has served his Generation by the Will of God, and is
fallen asleep.

3. Our Friend, and a Friend of no ordinary Character, sleeps in the Arms of
Death, and better, in the Bosom of Christ: A Citizen of no mean City, the
Heavenly Jerusalem; a Man of no common Qualifications, eminent in Parts, in
Learning, and in Piety; not of the Laodicean Temper, nor of the Sardian
Complexion, but strictly holy, and having a Zeal for God and Religion, (the
despighted thing in this crooked Generation) great in Wisdom, Prudential, of
much Moderation, abounding in Charity, a Lover of God and Men, full of Faith,
and of the Holy Ghost, full of Almsdeeds, filled with great Measures of Grace
from the Fullness of Christ; one that had a clear Head, and a warm Heart; who
understood and lived the Gospel; a Pattern of Goodness, a Blessing to his
Acquaintance, and an Ornament to his Family.

All this he was in his Life and Health; and in his Sickness these things were
very considerable in him. God made him exemplary in Patience, filled him with
Peace, and rendered him a mighty Pattern of the most eminent and most desirable
things under Heaven, i. e. a longing for Death, not merely to be delivered from
an Unease, but upon the hope of passing into everlasting Rest and Joy. He
waited for Death, as Sisera's Mother for him, Judge. 5.28. saying, Why is his
Chariot so long incoming? Judge. 5.28.
Why tarry the Wheels of his Chariots?

4. Our Friend sleeps, a Friend in no ordinary Station, a Minister of the
Everlasting Gospel of the Blessed God; a Steward of the sacred Mysteries; one
of Heaven's Heralds; an Ambassador for Christ; a careful Shepherd; a faithful
Watchman; a Preacher of Righteousness; and in preaching, clear, judicious,
fervent; driving the blessed Design of promoting both Faith and Godliness; and
able Minister of the New Testament.

And in this Province he shined very openly, while Laws permitted him; and when
that Protection failed, this Light was unhappily obscured from public View; I
say, unhappily; for it had been alone worth an Act of Comprehension, to have
included this one so valuable a Man.

What shall I more say? He was worthy (God made him so) of his Name and Family,
(a Family that has had an eminent Share of Piety, Learning and Ingenuity)
worthy of the Friendship of all that knew him, and knew the Value of Goodness,
mixed with Parts and Erudition. And may there be now an Elisha for the Spirit
of this Prophet to rest upon, among the Sons of the Prophets.

Such was our Friend that sleeps, whose Faith, Holiness and Patience, Love and
Zeal, let us follow; that as he did, we may live and die in the Lord, and may
with him, living and dying, be found among the Friends of Christ, our blessed,
glorious and merciful Redeemer.

FINIS.

