printer's device of Nath. Brook.

THE SINNERS REMEMBRANCER: OR, A serious Warning to the Wicked, To prevent his
Destruction, and hasten his Reformation.

By RICH. PARR, D. D. Rector of Bermondsey in Southwark.

Whereunto is added Christ's gracious Intentions of Peace and Mercy toward
Sinners.

Quest. What must I do to be saved? Acts 16.30.

Answ. Repent and be converted; that thy sins may be blotted out when the time
of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. Acts 3.19.

LONDON: Printed by J. G. for Nath. Brook at the Angel in Cornhill. 1663.

To my Honored Friend and Patron, Sir EDMOND BOWYAR of Camerwell Knight: And
the Lady HESTER BOWYAR, his virtuous Consort.
SIR,
MY obligations to you as my Patron from whom I received that Portion of
subsistence here at Camerwell, which Providence cast upon you to bestow, and on
me to receive for the support of the Ministry in this place; together with that
Relation I have to you, and kidnesse for you, as a friend and care of your soul
as a Pastor, have put me upon the dedication of these few serious thoughts
about saving Reformation.

I cannot better express my Love and Respects to you, then by wishing and
laboring for you that you may be Eternally saved; and no way can I find out
otherwise to be effected, then that you be a real sincere convert.

I have observed for some years past, that you make it much of your business
to keep up communion with God both in public and private, which puts me in a
great deal of hope you are in a fair way, both to receive further counsel, and
to use all good means to bring about that in your soul and life which may fit
you for that glory which is above in heaven.

I offer therefore these (though but weak endeavors of mine, in comparison of
those many worthier labors of those Authors you have to converse withal) to
your serious consideration; and if these add any thing to you, my mite will
prove a mighty blessing.

The subject is weighty, and if the arguments be so too, then they claim your
subjection; for you must yield to Reason, and you must follow the Directions,
or else you sin against the Reason of a man, and the Rules of Religion, and the
happiness of your own soul; If you read what I have written without prejudice
and prevarication, and ponder without lightness and wavering; if you put in
practice every duty commanded, and renounce every sin, and forsake with
invincible resolution in good earnest, and without procrastination, those sins
be they many or few, profitable or pleasurable, open or secret, which you your
own self are tainted with, and follow Christ fully, and deny your self wholly,
and believe in the Lord Jesus, and live Holily, and continue so believing, and
so living to your dying day: Then nothing in this present world can hinder your
everlasting happiness when you go hence; But if you or any man follow their
own inbred naughtiness, and walk after the flesh, and put off Reformation,
and live impenitent, and die unconverted; all the Angels in heaven, nor men on
earth, nor treasures of riches, nor all honors of this world, nor greatness,
policy, learning, nor any thing, nor all things, can procure your
justification, pardon or salvation at last. Nay if you live and die impenitent,
and in a state of unregeneracy and unconverted, Christ himself will never own
you, nor will his precious blood be a propitiation for you; This I suppose you
know already and believe, yet this I am bound to acquaint you withal as my
full persuasion, and after this rate (you can testify) I have always preached
for all the space I have been your monitor in this place: and oh that both you
and I, and all that desire to be saved eternally may reduce all the doctrinalls
about this point of Reformation into our constant practice, and espouse the
thoughts of these things into our most retired and serious consideration, which
will prove the rarest pleasure in the world, and give the fullest satisfaction
to that soul which is preparing for heaven.

Sir, I need not say much more to you, but to entreat you to peruse at your
leisure these short monitions, being An earnest Swasion to a speedy
Reformation, and if they give any advantage or help toward your great work,
that one thing necessary, give God the praise and thanks.

And Madam, For an advantage to those many good wishes I have for you, your
nearness of blood to one that is dearest to me of any person in this world,
makes me attempt this little tender of my Counsel to you also, hoping that by
your serious perusal you may either resolve to attain to what is wanting to
make your conversion complete, or take occasion hereby to bless God that it is
already begun in you, and in some good degree wrought, and so labor to go on
in a course toward greater perfection, in order to the accomplishment of that
ever to be sought after and mightily to be longed for happiness in heaven at
your departure hence, which is the enjoyment of Christ, and the completely full
and filling joys at Gods right hand in the kingdom of glory.

And this is all the harm I wish you, and that this may be both your Lot, that
you may be heirs together of the same grace which may put you (through Christ)
into the full possession of the same Glory, is the earnest desire to you and
for you both, of him who is one that loves you upon the best account, And

Your friend and servant for the work of Christ, RI: PARR.
Camerwell, Jun. 25. 1660.
The Contents of the Chapters in this Treatise.
CHAP. I. The Introduction. Persuading every Soul to heed his own Salvation,
and endeavor it as his chiefest concernment, and to consider it speedily,
seriously, and wisely. page 1. CHAP. II. The hopeful sinners prayer. p. 14.
CHAP. III. Of Reformation in the notion of it, as it is intended for practice.
p. 20. CHAP. IV. Of man's state before Reformation, implying the necessity of
amendment. p. 23. CHAP. V. Containing a catalogue of sins which are altogether
inconsistent with the state of saving grace, and do most necessarily infer
damnation to them that are guilty, and will not be reformed. p. 31. Sect. I.
Wilful gnorance. p. 34. Sect. II. Infidelity. p. 36. Sect. III.
Unrighteousness. page 38. Sect. IV Idolatry. p. 40. Sect. V. Adultery, with
Fornication, Effeminatenesse, Buggery, Beastiality. p. 43. Sect. VI.
Drunkeness. p. 46. Sect. VII. Gluttony. p. 49. Sect. VIII. Covetousness. p.
52. Sect. IX. Murder. p. 56. Sect. X. False and vain swearing. p. 61. Sect. XI.
Lying. p. 66. Sect. XII. Theft and Sacriledg. p. 69. Sect. XIII. Disobedience
and Rebellion. p. 72. Sect. XIV. Pride and Vainglory. p. 81. Sect. XV. Schism
and Heresy. p. 85. Sect. XVI. Witchcraft. p. 92. Sect. XVII. Hypocrisy. p.
95. Sect. XVIII. Apostasy. p. 103. Sect. XIX. Making light of Gospel-mercies,
and neglecting them. p. 111. Sect. XX. Unfruitfulnesse under gracious means. p.
123.
CHAP. VI. An Enumeration of more sins and ways by which man offends God, and
contracts guilt to his soul, of which he must be reformed ere he dies. p. 132.
Sect. I. Evil motions of lust, the taint and corruption of nature. p. 137.
Sect. II. Vain thoughts. p. 139. Sect. III. Idle words. page 143. Sect. IV.
Idle life. p. 146. Sect. V. Omissions. p. 149. Sect. VI. Dreams. p. 152. Sect.
VII. Worldly Joy and Sorrow. p. 155. Sect. VIII. Unthankfulness and murmuring.
p. 160. Sect. IX. Inconsiderateness and rash attempts. p. 161. Sect. X. Worldly
Confidence and trust. p. 161. Sect. XI. Vain and Erroneous opinions. p. 164.
Sect. XII. Recreations. p. 164.
CHAP. VII. Containing some reasons of specifying sins in the foregoing
catalogues. p. 168. I. Reason. That thou may examine thy heart and life by
them. p. 169. II. Reason. Of the quotations in the margent, that one may be
fully convinced of the infallibility of the execution of Gods decree. p. 170.
III. Reason. Of the persuasion that you may see there is no impossibility of
the thing persuaded unto, viz. Reformation. p. 171. IV. Reason. Of persuasion,
because impenitency is a cursed state, and that which all thy sins could do if
repented of and forsaken, that impenitency will do it will damn thee. page
172. V. A considerate sinners reasoning resolution to amend. p. 173, 174.
CHAP. VIII. Containing the main swasion and motion for a final resolution and
speedy practical repentance and reformation. p. 176. CHAP. IX. Of some
considerations about sin which may move a considerate person to loathe and leave
his own sins resolutely without dispute. p. 190. Sect. I. Consideration. p.
192. Sect. II. Consideration. p. 195. Sect. III. Consideration. p. 199. Sect.
IV. Consideration. p. 201. Sect. V. Consideration. p. 208. Sect. VI.
Consideration. p. 210. Sect. VII. Consideration. p. 212. Sect. VIII.
Consideration. p. 221. Sect. IX. Consideration. p. 226. Sect. X. Consideration.
p. 229.
CHAP. X. Of some more moving thoughts which may help, and draw a poor sinner
to speedy resolution without further delay. p. 236. I. Thought. p. 238. II.
Thought. p. 243. III. Thought. p. 246. IV. Thought. p. 250. V. Thought. p. 252.
VI. Thought. p. 254. VII. Thought. p. 255.
CHAP. XI. Of Temptations, with their Answers. I. Temptation. p. 256. II.
Temptation. p. 260. III. Temptation. p. 263. IV. Temptation. p. 269.
CHAP. XII. Of Queries. I. Querie. p. 273. II. Querie. p. 274. III. Querie.
ibid. IV. Querie. p. 275. V. Querie. ibid. VI. Querie. p. 276. VII. Querie.
ibid. VIII. Querie. p. 277.
CHAP. XIII. Of Directions. I. Direction. page 280. II. Direction. p. 281. III.
Direction. p. 282. IV. Direction. p. 284. V. Direction. p. 286. VI. Direction.
p. 288. VII. Direction. p. 289. VIII. Direction. p. 291. IX. Direction. p. 293.
X. Direction. p. 294.
CHAP. XIV. Of Motives. I. Motive. p. 297. II. Motive. p. 299. III. Motive. p.
300. IV. Motive. p. 301. V. Motive. p. 302. VI. Motive. p. 304.

AN EARNEST SWASION TO A Speedy and Practical Reformation, Carefully to be
heeded, and effectually performed by every particular person, as indispensably
necessary to his Salvation.
CHAP. I.
Persuading every Soul to heed his own Salvation, and endeavor it as his
chiefest concernment, and to consider it speedily, seriously, and wisely.

THE INTRODUCTION.
employment, and immediate enjoyment of thy Creator, to make thy full and
everlasting happiness which is yet to come; should I doubt thou carest not
whether thou be saved or damned, be for ever miserable, or for ever happy, when
thou go out of this world?







not so far gone, as desperately to throw away thy precious Soul at once; nor
yet so proud, so obstinate, or hardened, as to refuse, reject, and despise
these saving Counsels now put into thy hand; that may deliver thee from sin and
misery, and dispose thee for Holiness and happiness, if thou take them up
into thy mind, and considerest them seriously.

sinner thou art as surely as thy mothers child, thy judgment corruptly blind,
thy will perverted, thy affections disordered, thy whole nature polluted and
spoiled; thou have been, (and art thou not so still to this day?) one that has
brought forth an innumerable spawn of Actual sins, of vile and ugly shapes, in
several kinds.



carried thy self contemptuously toward all the means and persons that would
reclaim thee.











in soul and life, and turned from saving admonition as a detestable thing.





Romans 2, v. 4, 5, 6.
that by despising the riches of Gods goodness, forbearance and long-suffering;
not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee (not to sin, or continuance
in sin, but) to repentance; but by this thy hardness and impenitent heart
treasu est up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of
the righteous judgment of God, who will render to every one according to his
deeds.



Ps. 50.21. Hos. 7.2.
they are spiritual, and Christ rules the inward man as well as the outward:
do thou not know that all thy sins, where and when committed, are upon Record
before the Lord?



Adam, Grace and conversion declare thee a child of God, and an heir of a
glorious Eternity.



up thy heart as a judgment from God, I doubt not but, through the grace of
God, in the use of these spiritual means, thou may of a vile Barbarian become
a sound Christian, of a child of wrath an heir of glory, of a foul sinner a
fair Saint, if thou be not resolved against thine own happy reformation.







late? Now again it is offered thee, Christ is ready, and grace is ready, grace
to assist thee, Christ to receive thee, the Word of God to guide thee, and holy
Spirit to convert thee, and I thy hearty well-wisher to thy excellent soul, do
in the Name of Christ earnestly entreat thee. -- Now it is put to thy choice,
whether thou embrace it or no, now is the acceptable time, the day of grace: To
day therefore (O thou that carest for thy soul) after so long a time, while it
is to day; for if night come, if death come before thy work of conversion be
sinished, thou must lie down in sorrow, and possess an eternity of horrid
darkness and woeful misery.



thy Creator and mine has appointed us for more excellent work, and most
transcendent happiness.



no invincible Giants in the Kingdom of Christianity; put on the resolution of
a man and thou will be victorious, mean but as well to thy soul as I do, and
then to be sure thou will be as earnest with God for to reform thee, and as
careful to use the means and take the opportunity, as I am to persuade thee to
it.



John 5.6. Mar. 10.51
Will thou be made whole? And, what will thou that I should do unto thee? And
no sooner the poor sinner can find in his heart to be willing to be helped and
healed, and to seek unto Christ in good earnest, but immediately Christ says,
I will, be thou whole, Take up and walk, Mat. 8 3.
I will, be thou clean; and the Text says, And immediately his Leprosy was
cleansed.

and under the power of his sins, is because he will not, has no mind to be
altered, does not earnestly desire it. That this is so, Jer. 13.27
you may see Jeremiah 13.27. I have seen thy abomination, Woe unto thee, will thou not be made clean, when will it once be? Ezekiel. 18.31, 32.
and Ezekiel. 18.31, 32. I have no pleasure (says God) in the death (that is,
damnation) of a sinner, but rather he should turn and live; and that the cause
of men's ruin and destruction is from themselves, rather then they will turn
they will die. Why will ye die? turn you from all your transgressions, why will
ye die? So likewise our Savior Christ in John 5.40. tells us why men lose their
Souls and happiness, Joh. 5.40.
it is, They will not come unto me that they might have Life.

what must I do to be saved? Act. 16.30
as the Jailer did Acts 16.30. Which is the first quere to be made: and when a
sinner comes to this once, to be willing and seriously desirous from his very
Soul to be made whole and clean, and then earnestly to seek out how he may act
that he may be saved, then Christ takes him to cure, and then directs him by
his word, and helps him by his Spirit, first to Reformation here, and then to
Salvation hereafter.





without more ado, speedily without delay, if thou can thus pray from thy
heart, there is great hope of thy Reformation.

CHAP. II.
The hopeful sinners Prayer.

O Most glorious, holy, just and gracious Lord God, thou who art the knower of
hearts, and lover of souls, thou have said, Ezekiel. 33.11. 1 Timothy 2.4 1 Pet. 3.9.
Mat. 9.13.
Thou have no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but rather he should turn and
live, and art not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance; and to this end thou have sent thy dear Son Jesus Christ into the
world, to call sinners to repentance; who gave himself for us, that he might
redeem poor sinners from all their iniquities, and purify his redeemed ones: 2
Cor. 5.20. 1 Timothy 4.20. 2 Timothy 4.12.
thou have likewise given thy Spirit to sanctify our hearts, and with thy Word
to convince and convert such as shall be saved; and that poor sinners might be
converted and turned from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to God,
that they might receive the forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among the
sanctified. Thou have appointed thy Ministers to call sinners, to invite,
beseech, exhort, reprove, admonish, guide and direct poor sinners, to reclaim
them, to bring them off from their evil ways, and to show them the way to
Heaven; and have promised eternal life to those that obey thee to their lives
end, and have threatened eternal punishment to every impenitent unconverted
sinner.



and all to reclaim me; and long have thou waited for my return, that thou
might pardon and be gracious: But alas! alas! I have abused thy
long-sufferance, made light of thy invitations, and all thy sweet and kind
persuasions and fatherly corrections. I have heard thy Messengers speaking to
me time after time from the Lord, saying often with tears in their eyes to me,
Regardlesse, hard-hearted Wretch, Oh do not, do not the abominable things which
I hate, O why will thou die? But all in vain; my obstinate hard heart has
said, There is no hope, I will not change nor amend.



Mat. 18.3. John 3.3.
as it were from Heaven to me by name, that Except I be converted I shall never
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, and yet I have not seriously minded it, but
to this day I have continued to follow lustful desires and unchristian
practices, alas, to this day too long!

But dear Lord, will thou be entreated by me a vile sinner, as I am now, to
move my heart effectually, that I may set upon reformation to purpose? Lord, if
thou will thou can make me clean, holy, just, sober, and a sound convert;
thou have bid me (although a miserable sinner) to ask according to thy will,
and thou have promised to hear and grant.





Amen, Amen.

Now if thou can truly from thy heart bewail thy former neglect and
miscarriage, and beg heartily of God to assist thee in this thy so great
concernment, then art thou hopefully prepared, and in a fair way both to
receive further Instruction and Resolution for thy saving Reformation.

And accordingly I shall in the name of God proceed with thee after this
method:

In the first part of Reformation, which consists in forsaking of all thy sins
and evil practices.

To show what is meant in this design by SAVING REFORMATION, that you may
understand your business.

To prove the absolute necessity of such a reformation in order to salvation,
that you may believe it.

To discover those sins which are in every instance inconsistent with saving
reformation, which if not forsaken in heart and life, will infallibly bring
destruction to thy soul at last; that when you know them, and the dreadful
consequence of them, you may be induced to repent them, to renounce them all,
without any further delay or hesitancie.

To give you some special Directions about this thing, that it may prove
Effectual, that your labor may not be lost, but through the grace of God
successful.

To urge the duty upon you with undeniable arguments, to move you to be speedy
and practical in Reformation.

And this is done in this first part about Reformation, as it comprehends a
turning from all Evil in heart and life, a ceasing from sin in all its
instances and appearances.

I do in the Second part of Reformation, which consists of an holy Life, 1.
Propose the practicals of saving conversion in all Christian performances, and
right orderly heavenly Conversation.

And show likewise the absolute necessity of such a course of holy living, to
make our reformation complete, and our salvation sure.

Lay down some Directions for the holy ordering of you life; both fot Time and
Duties.

Lastly, I do conclude with earnest motions to perform all the requisits to
thy salvation constantly to the end.

And no man can set himself against, or refuse to yield to all that is here
moved for, nor delay his reformation, but he that has forfeited his reason,
and all his interest in Christ, and has sold himself to wickedness, and
resolves to be miserable in despite of God and good Counsel, and is grown
desperate, and means to cast away his precious soul for ever. But I hope thou
that have read so far as this art not such an one; and therefore I entreat you
would seriously consider what is said to thee in each particular about thy
speedy Reformation.

CHAP. III.
Of Reformation in the notion of it, as it is intended for practice.

Reformation, because it comprehends what I mean to exhort you to, and as it is
a Vulgar word best known to such as I am writing to; and you understand thus
much by it, that when a man has been vicious, vain, worldly, naught, and has
left off those wretched courses, and is become sober, just, serious, humble,
charitable and good, now (say they) he is a reformed man or a changed man,
another manner of man then he was before, he is now reclaimed, a man of an
other nature and life; I mean by it much the same thing as you understand it;
but in this latitude I mean no less by Reformation then a through Change of
disposition and life from that which is bad, displeasing to God, and
disadvantageous to thy own precious soul, to that which is good, and commanded
by God, and of necessity to be done by thee in order to thy salvation.

duty by these expressions, Conversion, Repentance, Regeneration, Renovation,
Sanctification, Returning, then whatever is comprehended under any or all these
terms I mean by Reformation, and so much I aim at by this persuasion to a
speedy Reformation.

first form or state wherein they should be, either by creation, or appointment
and Institution: now every sin, and Inclination to it is a great disorder, and
holiness is the Rectitude and right frame of soul. Therefore until I am
reformed I am out of order, and out of the way to eternal happiness, and in a
course leading to eternal misery; so that Reformation is a Reducement of the
heart and life of man, every man that means to be saved, to that state and
frame of soul and life as is meet for heaven, such as unto which God has
promised eternal life.

true repentance by reformation; when I entreat you to change your evil
disposition of heart, of your mind and disordered affections, and evil actings
of your life, to live unto God, to adhere unto him, to serve him in all things,
to lead a pure and holy life, then I mean sound conversion joined with
sanctification by reformation.



CHAP. IV.
Of man's state before Reformation, implying the necessity of amendment.

saved, be not reformed and thou shall assuredly be damned; and until
reformation come on thee, thou art no better than a child of wrath, a servant
of sin, and so in a state of enmity against God, and consequently under the
power of Satan, and a subject of his horrid Regiment, and a vessel fitted to
destruction.

perfection; God made man upright, holy and good, without sin, or any actual
disorder or deformity; and if man had stood to this, and continued in his
Primitive Integrity, there had not needed but adhesion to God to have secured
the eternal happiness on man, there wanted not Reformation, for there yet was
no deformation.

restoring grace comes, we are but (O sad to say!) the children of wrath, being
first enemies to God, God is become a God lothing (but justly lothing) us in
this state (as it is said) Zach. 11.8.
Their soul abhorred me, and my soul lothed them, Romans 3.9.10.
for there is none righteous (before restoring grace come) no not one; for all
are under sin, the power, guilt, and filth of sin, Ephesians. 2.2, 3.
And by nature the children of wrath.

motions and lustings of his own depraved heart, he is still under the power of
sin, and curse of the Law, and has nothing to do with God as a Father, nor
with heaven as an inheritance; sin cuts him off from those relations, and
continuance in sin debares him quite from any benefit of Christ's coming in the
flesh, only there is afforded possibillty to be saved, through the
Commiseration of God toward miserable man, and to repair in man what was
defaced, and to restore by Christ what was lost by Adam.

walking in the commandments of God constantly and sincerely, if thou art
thoroughly converted in heart and life, thou may be saved; but otherwise, if
thou continuest unregenerate, and abidest impenitent, and art not converted,
and wilt not be reformed, never hope to be saved, but in terror and trembling
of soul expect to enter into that horrid and black eternity of misery,
unavoidable, unrecoverable, when thou art taken by death (in thy sins) out of
this World.



Esai. 3.10.11.
Say unto the righteous, it shall go well with them, for they shall eat the
fruit of their doings. Woe unto the wicked, it shall go ill with him, for the
reward of his hand shall be given him. Ezekiel. 3.19.
If thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, nor from his
wicked way, he shall die in his Iniquities. Now this is said to thee, who ere
thou art, in thy sinful course, or in any one way which is sinful, and if
thou do not turn from that thy wickedness, thou art a dead man, a lost man;
this will not be repealed, thou must turn or die, slight it not, it is thy
particular caveat as much as any is in the world.

Ezekiel. 18. v. 20. to the end of the Chapter. The sum is this, Ezekiel. 18.20.
that though God takes no pleasure at all that the wicked should die, but that
he should turn and live, yet the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon
himself, and he that commits Iniquity, and dies in them, for the iniquity that
he has done shall he die; but if the wicked will turn from all his sins that
he has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and
right, he shall surely live. Then the counsel is this, v. 30. Repent and turn
your selves from all your transgressions, so Iniquity shall not be your ruin,
wherefore turn and live. Can there be any more just and plain dealing then
this? Which is fitternow, that thou should turn from thy wicked ways, or that
God should abrogate this Law of his after all this warning given thee? Consider
this, sinner, and turn, or expect to burn for ever.

I hope I may be saved for all this: for certainly as thou art alive thou must
be reformed or thou can not be saved. Will thou believe what Christ has
said? Mat. 18.3. Verily I say unto you, Mat. 18.3.
that except ye be converted, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven:
Jo. 3.3.
and John 3.3. Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.
What think you of this? do you believe this in good earnest? can you evade it?
If you think that God of his grace may save you wirhout such a reformation,
then see what Gods saving grace teaches all that may hope to be saved, Titus
2.11. Tit. 2.11.
The grace of God which brings salvation has appeared, teaching, that
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and
godly in this present world. And when this is done in sincerity, then the 13.
verse bids us, Look for that blessed hope of heaven: But until this
Reformation be wrought, a turning from evil, all ungodliness, and living holy,
there is no hope of salvation.

And if you hope Christ will pardon, and he will save thee without all this
ado, consider what he himself has said, that an unreformed man shall not be
saved. And Mat. 7.21. Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the kingdom of heaven, but he (and only he) that does the will of my father
which is in heaven. And it is the will of God thou should reform and become
holy, just and good.

per saltum immediately from their sinful and ungodly practices to heaven
without any more ado; No, see Titus 2.14. Who gave himself for us to redeem us
from all iniquity, and to purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of
good works.

Acts, 3.19.
Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out. No blotting out of
sins, no pardon without Repentance. Esai. 55.7.
So Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and
let him return to the Lord, (i. e.) by an hearty and practical Reformation; and
then see what follows, and not till then, he will have mercy, he will
abundantly pardon. You may likewise find that 2 Pet. 3.9.
God is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance; which does infallibly imply, that he that comes not to repentance,
and a reforming repentance too, must perish.

Psalm. 50.17.
To the wicked God says, what have thou to do with my covenant to mention it,
as though it belongs to thee? for it does not, seeing thou hate to be
reformed, thou hate instruction; until Reformation be wrought, no promise of
salvation to thee, Pro. 24.30, 31.
Because I have called and ye refused, and have set at naught all my counsels,
and would none of my reproof, nor leave off your folly, your wickedness,
therefore shall destruction and anguish come upon you, and you will cry and
call upon me, but I will not then hear you, you shall not find me, but shall be
Recompensed according to your ways. Pro. 29.1.
He that being often reproved hardneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed,
and that without remedy.





CHAP. V.
Containing a catalogue of sins which are altogether inconsistent with the
state of saving grace, and do most necessarily infer and procure damnation
to them that are guilty, and will not be reformed.

some particular sins, which to practice and continue in is death, and every
one, if an actual sinner in any of these does not speedily repent of and
reform; and also if thou love or likest any of them, though not brought forth
into act in the outward man, yet must be mortified, resisted, subdued, or else
there will be no hope for thee of salvation, being inconsistent with a gracious
frame of soul, and saving Christianity.

damnation, if thou heartily repent for, leave off, and in time, ere it be too
late, in this thy day of continued grace to thee, do reform, by renouncing
them all in heart and life, and withal do affectionately embrace, and
actually perform instead of them the contrary virtues, which are opposed to the
sins thou art guilty of.

Instance, both for avoiding evil, and doing good, this man is in a happy
estate for the present, and through Gods grace assisting him in such a course
to the end of his life, he shall undoubtedly be pardoned, and in Christ
accepted of, justified, that is, acquitted of the guilt of his former sins, and
saved eternally.

acts when temptation comes, and settling the habit of an irregular, inordinate
disposition and course of ungodliness, though mixed with some acts of seeming
religion, there remains no sacrifice effectual for such an one to expiate
his sins, or to make an atonement for him; nor men, nor angels, nor Christ
himself can do him any more good, no more then for him who has renounced
Christ and Christianity, and has proceeded to commit the unpardonable sin: but
he, such an one who ere he be, must remain hopeless for ever, either to escape
the horrors of hell, much more is he left without hope of being saved, except
he repent and change his course in time.



condemned for living in those sins; because he does not reform by a speedy,
hearty, and voluntary change of life: pray God thou be not he that resolves to
continue in them. If thou be guilty,

thy soul, until thou art rid of them by Reformation.

Wilful Ignorance.
child of darkness under the power of Satan, if when means of knowledge
afforded are neglected, when means offered are rejected by thee: And such is
thy state, if so it be, that after so long living with the means of knowledge,
so much hearing of the word of faith, and so many helps for instruction in the
knowledge of God, and ways of Godliness; if it be so I say, that after all this
thou art ignorant of the true God, and know not thy Savior Christ, and upon
what account he is thy Savior, and what he is, and did to redeem thee; and if
thou know not yet what thou art by nature, how hateful sin is to the Holy
God, how sin defiles, and will ruin the soul if permitted; if thou know not
what it cost Jesus Christ to purchase thy pardon and acceptance with God; If
thou understandest not the conditions, on thy part, to make thee capable of the
benefits of Christ's purchase:

to know the only true God, John 17.3.
and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, be life eternal, as Christ has said, then
not to know him as he is to be known, must needs be death eternal: and
consider well, that the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his
mighty Angels, in flaming fire, 2. These. 1. 7, 8, 9.
taking vengeance on them that KNOW NOT God, and that obey not the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ: and mark the dreadful allotment for such ignorant
persons in the 9. verse, Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction,
from the presence of the Lord, Prove. 5.12, 13, 23. Ephesians. 3.18. Hos. 4.6. Esaias
27.11. Psalm. 95.10, 11. 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.
and the glory of his power. Read also these Scriptures in the margent, if you
would have more proofs of the danger of wilful ignorance: If our Gospel be
hid, it is hid to them that are lost, they are lost who are ignorant of the
contents of the Gospel.

Infidelity.
death, for the Redemption of mankind, who were lost by sin, and under the
curse and power of Satan; if thou take him not for thy Savior and Lord; if
thou yeildest not up thy self, thy mind, Will, affections, and actions to be
sanctified, and ruled by him, thou art yet an Infidel.

Holy Ghost to be God, and proceeding from the Father and the Son; and yet
equal with the Father and the Son, and that the FATHER, SON, and HOLY GHOST,
are one only God in essence, nature, power, dignity, infiniteness, according
to the Scriptures, thou art an Infidel: Nay, if thou believe not the holy
Scriptures of the OLD and NEW TESTAMENT to be of God, given unto us for a full
Revelation of the mind of God concerning our faith, and life; If thou believe
not the promises and threats of the Gospel; If thou believe not reward for
the Godly, and punishment for the wicked; a day of Judgment, where and when all
mankind shall be Judged according to their works done in this present World,
in the Resurrection of all the dead at the last day, when men shall receive the
final sentence, from the mouth of Christ, either for the enjoyment of Heaven,
or the torments of Hell, from that time for ever.

Infidel, thou art yet an unbeliever; and if thou continuest so, this must be
thy doom, read it and tremble, Mar. 16.16.
He that believes not shall be damned. John 3.36.
He that believes not the Son, (which is Jesus Christ) shall not see life, but
the wrath of God abides on him. Rev. 21.8.
The unbelieving shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death.

Consider this, and see if thy case be unbelief, whether it does not concern
thee speedily to reform in this particular, and become a true believer.

Unrighteousness.
unrighteous person, injurious to man, a wronger of thine own soul, and highly
offensive to the Just and Righteous God, who loves righteousness, and hates
iniquity; and have sinfully transgressed that excellent Rule of thy blessed
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who has said, that whatsoever you would that
men should do unto you, Luke 6.21. Mat. 7.20.
do ye even so unto them.



Deuteronomy. 25.16. Romans 1.18. 1 Cor. 6.9.
All that do unrighteously are an abomination unto the Lord thy God; And then
know that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God.



convincing me of my sin, warning me and helping me to forsake it. Add this
consideration, to further thee in thy REFORMATION, what will it profit thee,
yea what is any man profited, if he shall gain the whole world by
unrighteousness, Mat. 16.26.
and lose his own soul? alas, what will all thy getting do thee good, when
thou shall pay so dear for it, even the unvaluable loss of thy precious soul
at last?

Idolatry.


Romans 1.21.
if thou in thy fancy do conceive of the eternal invisible GOD, who is a
pure spiritual being, as though he were like unto any thing thou ever saw,
and do worship him under that imaginary shape, thou wrongest God, and have
set up an Idol in thy imagination, and so art thou an imaginary Idolater,
though thou have no picture before thine eyes: yea further, if thy heart, mind,
will, affections, be laid out upon earthly things, and thou payest more true
love to, and devotest thy self to the pleasures, profits, and honors of this
world; If thou servest the creature more constantly, affectionately and
willingly then the great God, then art thou an Idolater; for what is Idolatry
else but the setting up the creature in the place of God, and to give the
creature the preeminence in our hearts and minds? and what is it to commit
Idolatry, but a serving the creature, and adoreing it Romans 1.25.
more then the Creator, who is blessed for ever? And therefore the covetous
worldling is branded with this abominable title of Idolatry, Ephesians. 5.5.
For this ye know, that no covetous man, who is an IDOLATER, has any
inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.

Idol for thy God, or the true God by an Idol; whether thou servest and prayest
to the eternal Spirit, framing to thy self any likeness of God in thy
imagination or fancy.

Whether thou servest the world, or any thing in the world, with thy dearest
affections and desires, delighting in them, and seeking more them then God: If
so, then art thou deeply tainted with this foul sin of Idolatry. Therefore now
(dear soul) be advised, if thou find thy self guilty, though but in the
least, to repent and reform, rid thy self of this damning sin, which God does
hate, and will not tolerate in any one but such as those are determined for
hell; for all Idolaters are abominable to God, 1 Pet. 4.3.
and God would have his children keep themselves from IDOLS, from the sight,
and from the service of Idols; n="John 5.21.
My little children keep your selves from Idols. And now if you will not come
off from all Idolatry, then see what will befall you, you shall be shut out of
heaven, and shall be shut up in hell, 1 Cor. 6.9.
Idolaters shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

Without are Sorcerers and Idolaters, Rev. 22.15.
which shall never be admitted into the kingdom of heaven.

Sorcerers and Idolaters shall have their part in the Lake that burns with
fire and brimstone, Rev. 21.8. Phil. 3.19.
which is the second death.

Now judge thee, friend, whether it does not nearly concern thee to try thy self
whether guilty, and then speedily to reform, and let fall all thine Idols, and
serve the living God in spirit, sincerity and truth, and believe in him, and
love him with all thy heart, mind, and strength of soul.

V. Adultery, Fornication, Effeminateness, Buggery, Beastiality.
Rev. 21.8.
The abominable shall burn in Hell, shall have their portion in the Lake which
burns with fire and brimstone.

adulterer or adulteress; yea if it be in thy heart to lust after another, and
desire it, and delightest in the thoughts of carnal fruition of the party
forbidden, then our Savior Christ says this is adultery; whosoever looks on
a woman to lust after her, Mat. 5.28.
has committed adultery with her in his heart. (2.) If thou in a single state
have before marriage known any one carnally, This is FORNICATION.

unchaste person, and EFFEMINATE.

so wicked, and by and by cast off far from thee all such thy thoughts, desires
and practices henceforth for ever? all these works of the fleshly appetite
abandon speedily, and keep thee chaste. Ephesians. 5.3.
Fornication and all uncleanness let it not be once named among you, much less
practiced by any of you.

take heed, continue not in it, under pain of the loss of HEAVEN, and
punishment of HELL; for if but once, yet thou art an adulterer or fornicator,
and without repentance, and that to a reformation, how can thou hope to
escape this sentence? for the truth of God speaks it; For this you know, Ephesians.
5.5.
that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, has any inheritance in the kingdom
of God: Nor fornicator, nor adulterer, 1 Cor. 6.9.
nor Effeminate nor abusers of themselves with mankind, shall inherit the
kingdom of God. But their portion lies deep in hell; Rev. 21.8.
Whoremongers, and the Abominable, shall have their part in the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone, which is the secoud death. Gal. 5.19.
Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, ADULTERY,
FORNICATION, UNCLEANNESS, LASCIVIOUSNESS, etc. of which I tell you, that they
which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of Heaven.

examine thy life and heart, and try if thou have been guilty any of these
ways, as that the terms of adulterer, or fornitator, or effeminate, belong to
thee, either in heart, or deliberate consent, or practice.

pardon from God, and to see him with comfort hereafter, speedily to betake thy
self to an hearty repentance, reformation, and a sincere amendment; and
henceforth keep thy vessel pure, be chaste in thoughs, words, and refrain
consenting to lustful motions this way, and abhor acting any more so
wickedly, (...). Isidor. Col. 3.5.6.
and either seeing lust not, or lusting look not; but do as Paul exhorts
Christians to: Mortify therefore the members which are upon the earth,
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affections, evil concupiscence: For which
things sake, the wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience.
Marriage is honorable in all, Heb: 13.4,
and the bed undefiled; but WHOREMONGERS and ADULTERERS God will judge.

Drunkenness.
for the most part then only to be guilty, when they have drunk to that
excess as to wallow in their vomit, and have lost both reason and senses; This
indeed is to forsake the manhood, and to be transformed into a beast and worse,
for a beast is not capable of sinning by excess; but a man sins woefully in so
doing, for he breaks a Law of God, and sobriety, abuses the creature,
dishonoreth and debaseth his own soul, exposes himself to shame and scorn, and
gives a foul invitation to the devil to drive him to many other sins, as
swearing, cursing, whoredom, murder, and the next wickedness is at hand; a
fit instrument for the devils service, Deu. 21.20, 21. Pro. ^23.21. Esaias 28.1,
3. 1 Cor. 6.10.
but in no wise fit for the service of God, nor works of his calling; a grief
to his relations, the reproach of Religion, the shame of mankind. And his doom
is dreadful, they shall come to poverty, woe to the drunkards, they shall be
trodden under foot, and drunkards shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

But will thou say, Obj.
for a man to drink himself into such a condition, is worthy to be deemed
drunken indeed; but there be that keep company, and maintain good fellowship,
and sit by it too, and yet are not so overcome as so to abuse themselves or
others, and is that any fault? I answer, That excess of drinking, Answ.
whether thou art quickly overcome by it, Vinum plus justo sumptum venenum.
Aug. Mal. 24.49.
or whether thou be strong to overcome much drink, or if thou sit long at
it, tipeling, and keep company with riotous persons, or forcest or
perswadest others to drink excessively, and delightest to see others through
drink stammering, reeling, fooling, or erring, thou can not defend thy self
from being faulty, thou must leave it off, and reform in these things also, and
have nothing to do with such practices, but avoid them. And that thou may see
I would not go about to abridg thy liberty, nor cross thy appetite as to these
circumstances, Luke 21.34. Romans 13.13.
or beg thy reformation in this, but upon unquestionable grounds from
Scripture, read seriously Esaias 5.11. Woe unto them that rise up early that they
may follow strong drink, that continue until night, till wine inflame them:
And Esaias 5.22. Woe to them that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to
mingle strong drink: And Habb. 2.15, 16. Woe unto him that gives his neighbor
drink, that put thy bottle to him, and make him drunken also, that thou
may look on their nakedness. Thou art filled with shame for glory; drink thou
also, the cup of the Lords right hand shall be given unto thee, and shameful
spewing shall be on thy glory,

reform about drinking; look therefore what have thou been, and how thou have
been guilty, and repent, and amend speedily, if thou would come to any thing
in Religion that may do thee any good for heaven, and say now you are warned,
and do no more so madly, so foolishly, so wickedly. I charge thee not as
guilty, but if thou have been guilty any of these ways, I charge thee in the
name of God, beware for the future, and repent for thy former exceedings about
drink.

Gluttony.
Gluttony is an excess about meats, as that is about drinks, and a sin that
carries guilt with it too, yet a sin little taken notice of, though often
committed: non cibus sed appetitus est in vitio.
It Is not eating or drinking that is sinful, meats and drinks in themselves
make us neither offensive nor acceptable to God, but yet abstinence is a
partner with Virtue, and excess in eating is a vice in morality and
Christianity too, and therefore not permitted to them whom God will own; we
find glottony condemned and the gluttonous in the number of those wretched ones
which are excluded heaven; eating too much and overmuch charging nature is
surfeiting, and our Savior gives special caution, Luke 21.34. Take heed lest
at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness: Luke
21.34.
Now gluttony is immeasurable eating, beyond the bounds of Christian moderation
and temperance in feasts or banquers; and those that frequent (with delight)
feastings and full tables, with studied varieties, are in danger, and
oftentimes feeding without fear are betrayed by their appetite to exceed the
boundaties of temperance. Jud. v. 12. 2 Pet. 2.13. Luke 16.19.
It was one of the rich man's sinful practices, whom we hear to be tormented in
Hell, that he fared sumptuously every day; when one lusts after and purveyeth
for the panch, and studieth and contrives meats for the belly, adding the
advantages of curiosity to tice the taste, to please the bestiall appetite, such
make their belly their God, whose end is destruction, Phil. 3.19.
so says S. Paul, Phil. 3.19. And certain it is that those that study to
pamper the flesh, and spend much cost and time this way, sacrificing to the
draught, may have fat bodies, but to be sure lean souls; they that are so much
for their guts, are but little for their souls; they look little after grace
that care so industriously for their palates and paunch; what an ugly, nasty
Idol does the glutton serve!

1. Cor. 6.13.
Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats, but God shall destroy both it
and them. Epicures sure are none of those that serve God (as all must) both in
soul and body, and therefore can have no expectation, until they reform, of
being made happy with the delicates of Heaven; they that take delight in, and
are so studious for bodily eatable dainties, or to exceed in ordinary and
common meats, are not innocent of gluttony, but must learn to renounce this sin
of gluttony also. And therefore my request is that you would bethink your self,
and examine your disposition and appetite, and usual practice as to eating,
feasting, banquetings, and the like; and if you have transgressed repent; if
you are liable to be enticed, or inclinable of thy self to exceed in eatings,
put a restraint upon thy appetite, and beware of falling into the sin of
gluttony. Solomon gives this advice, When thou sit to eat, Pro. 23.1, 2, 3.
consider diligently what is before thee, and put a knife to thy throat, if
thou be a man given to appetite, that is, if thou be wise put a restraint upon
thy appetite, bridle it, and satisfy it not in its lustings. And the reason is
in the 3. verse, be not desirous of his dainties, for they are deceitful meat;
there is a snare in dainties and varieties, and many are overtaken when they
consider it not. Well then, is gluttony (as is here described) thy sin? leave
it, be reformed in this, and learn temperance, abstinence and sobriety in thy
feedings, or else thou will never be accounted of for a true convert, but be
dealt withal as drunkards shall be, and they (you know) shall not inherit the
kingdom of God.

Covetousness.
Covetousness? have thou a craving eager desire of earthly riches and
abundance? do use arts and devices? whether thou gettest what thou so
desire, or gettest it not, yet the coveting is thy sin, and rendereth thee a
worldling, thou art a guilty person. This disposition is more easily discerned
in another then a man's self, men will not be persuaded they are so, though they
be so; it is a damning sin, yet he that is most guilty, will not believe it his
sin, or not a sin, there are so many reserves and excuses for covetous desires,
that now, Loving the world, and heaping up riches, or desirous to do so, are
adopted into the fellowship of good-husbandry, and honest providing for future
necessities and contingencies, which indeed is no better then one of the
artifices of Satan to make men call evil good. And I think I may appeal to the
consciences of men, when they examine themselves, and go about to repent them
of their sins, whether they ever bewail this cursed disposition, but rather
account it one of their perfections, when alas God abhors the covetous, Psalm.
10.3. Col. 3.5. 1 Cor. 6.10, 11. Ephesians. 5.5. Hab. 2.9.
and covetousness is no better then Idolatry in Gods account. And the covetous
shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven: nor covetous, nor extortioners, shall
inherit the kingdom of God. Woe to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to
his house, that he may build his nest on high, that he may be delivered from
the power of evil.

Take heed and beware of covetousness, Luke 12.16. etc.
for a man's life consists not in the abundance of the things which he
possesses; and then you shall find it in the parable following, which
expresses the thoughts of the rich man, v. 17. And he thought within himself,
what shall I do? And he said, this I will do, I will pull down my barns, and
build greater, and there will I lay up my goods: and then mark his repose, I
will say to my soul, thou have goods laid up for many years, take thine ease,
eat, drink, and be merry; here was his account; but then see what Gods account
is of such an one, v. 20. Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required of
thee; then whose shall those things be that thou have provided? Even so is he
that lays up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God; Therefore said
Christ to his disciples, Luke 21.34.
take no thought for these things of this present life, let not worldly cares
possess your souls.

prodigality, and can in their extravagances boast of this, that they are not
covetous, when alas they are deeply guilty of this sin also. The prodigal
mentioned in Luke 15th. he coveted and desired his fathers substance, Luke
15.12, 13.
and got it up together to spend it on his lusts; he coveted it to spend it,
not to feed the hungry, and relieve the poor, but to feed his lusts. Jam. 4.2.
So we find S. James says, they lust and desire to have, there is their
covetousness; that ye may consume it upon your lusts, this their prodigality:
and indeed it is easy to find many that spend lavishly upon their pleasures, in
gaming and rioting, revelling, clothing and feasting, do exercise covetous
practices, as the Apostle Peter expresses it, calling such cursed children to
feed their lusts, 2 Pet. 2.14.
but the poor or charitable uses, alas, but little do they care for, or give
to such; they are free to themselves, but penurious to others; all too little
they can get to themselves, and the least too much they lay out to the needy.

Mat. 9 21, 22, 23.
This is that which our Savior says, how hardly shall a rich man be saved? So
that if thou study, contrive, thirst after, with greedy desires, abundance of
the things of this life, and accountest of them as the things to make thee
happy, and love the having and keeping of these earthly riches, Mat. 7.21,
22, 23:
then art thou a covetous person.

man from the kingdom of God.

they that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish
and hurtful lusts which drown men in destruction and perdition; for the love
of money is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6.9, 10.
which while some coveted after they have erred from the faith. Love not the
world, neither the things that are in the world, 1 John 2.15, 16.
for he that loves the world, the love of the father is not in him.

Murder.
deliberation or sudden passion killed man, woman or child? then art thou
guilty of this sin, then have thou done that which thou can never repair; thy
repentance must be lasting and deep, or thou must burn in hell for it for ever.
Yea (2.) art thou a soldier, and take up killing weapons with resolution to
slay, and have not commission from thy lawful Sovereign, and a just cause? All
those thou killest are upon thy account as the murderer of them so killed, and
all thou command to be so slain. (3.) Yet further, 2 Samuel 12 9. compared
with 2 Samuel 11.14, 15.
have thou commanded, contrived, consented to the death of any? thou art
guilty, thou art a murderer.



a killing disease, I am not free of this sin, though the law of man take no
hold on me for it. (7.) Or if I provoke a person to kill or make away himself,
I am accessory to his self-murder. (8.) Furthermore, if I do not when it is in
my power rescue the innocent from violence, or if I suffer any one to famish or
starve, when I might, or have an opportunity to preserve life, I am no better
then a manslayer: yet again, Mat. 5.21, 22.
our Savior Christ, the best interpreter of the mind of God in this point and
all other commands, tells thee that within the compass of this sin of murder
come the beginnings of this sin in the heart, though it go no further then the
intention, as malice, hatred, causless and inordinate anger, revengefull
desires; and also if it proceed to violent railing, and reproachful language.

you become guilty of self-murder, or killing another; and if thou kill him in
the quarrel (though thou may escape the law of man) yet thou art a murderer,
and many years of deep repentance will not suffice for it; and if thou die in
the duel, thou go to hell without remedy.

anger and malicious words, read Mat. 5.21, 22. Thou shall not kill, and
whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment: But I say unto you,
whosoever is angry with his Brother without cause shall be in danger of the
judgment, and whosoever shall say Thou fool, shall be in danger of Hellfire.
Where you may see the same judgment is allotted for malicious, angry,
revengfull men, as to actual killing, (that is,) they are to be accounted
guilty of this sin, and judged as murderers.



anger, malice, revenge, hatred, railing, evil speaking are no small matters,
you shall find that all of them are both forbidden and condemned, and the
persons here guilty in this present life snall (without reformation) be
excluded heaven; Romans 1.29.
see Romans 1.29. wicked men of this kind are under Gods wrath in ver. 18. and
worthy of death, ver. 32. are such as verse 29. are described malicious, full
of envy, murder, debate, malignity, back-biters: and Galatians 5. are found
among the works of the flesh, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.
the which if men do and continue in them, they shall not inherit the
kingdom, are these, hated, variance, wrath, strife, envyings, murders: and in
Romans 12.19. Christians are entreated not to seek revenge, but leave it to God;
Avenge not your selves therefore, but allay your wrath. And in Ephesians. 4. Ephesians.
4.29, 30, 31.
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouths; let all bitterness,
and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be put away from you, James
3.14, 15, 16.
with all malice. For all these kinds are earthly, sensual and divelish.

murderers shall have their portion in the lake which burns with fire and
brimstone, Rev. 21.8.
which is the second death. A bloodyminded, a bloody-handed, and a
killing-tongued man, shall never to heaven. Take heed therefore if thou be
guilty in any of these lesser matters (which thou think not so severely to
be censured,) yet consider, if they be light and common, they are the more
easily forsaken, and if thou forsake them not, so slight as you make of them,
yet God will account thee disobedient, and lay a punishment as heavy as that of
hell upon thee one day, if thou repent not of them and forsake them in time,
and that very speedily; remember thou art now warned that not only he that
kills, but also he that hates his brother, (that is, any man) is a murderer,
1 John 3.15.
and no murderer has eternal life: mark that well.

X. False and vain swearing.
put an end to all strife, or for the determining of some weighty matter, which
without thy oath could not be ended? examine what oath thou have taken, before
whom, in what causes, to what end, and with what solemnity, and accordingly
shall thou know whether thou have sinned by solemn swearing; for an oath is a
sacred thing, and he that swears must swear by the name of God, in truth, in
judgment, and in righteousness; but he that swears deceitfully or falsely, Jer.
4.2.
or to maintain an unjust cause, or to do evil, or to be constant to conceal
or uphold the designs of wicked men in their wicked purposes; or that swears
inconsiderately, Hos. 10.4.
not knowing what an oath is, nor to what end, such an one is guilty of false
swearing, that is, every one that does so has sinned either in the manner, or
matter, or end of an oath, and is to repent for it heartily, and confess his
fault, and to sin no more in swearing. And indeed every true Christian (though
he be not absolutely against taking a lawful oath to a right end, for the
determining of a weighty controversy, which nothing but his oath can put an
end to,) yet one that truly fears God does fear to take an oath, Eccle. 9.2.
and shrinkes to lay his hand on the Bible, and trembles to take the name of
the glorious God into his mouth, knowing well the Lord will not hold* him
guiltless that takes his name in vain; Exo. 20.7.
how much more dreadful is the severity of God against false swearers and
perjured persons? read Zachariah 5.3, 4. Zech: 5.3, 4.
This is the curse that goes forth over the face of the whole earth, for every
one that swears shall be cut off: and this curse shall enter into the house
of him that swears falsely by my name, Ezekiel. 21.23.
etc. and Malachi 3.5. I will come near to you in judgment, and I will be a
swift witness against the sorcerers, and against FALSE SWEARERS. He that calls
God to witness in his vanity, falsehood and deceit, God will witness against
him, and judge him for it, and cast such out of his sight; and none shall pray
for false swearers, Jer. 23.10. with verse 15, 16. Jer. 23.10, 15, 16.
But besides this of solemn swearing, by which men become guilty of
dishonouring Gods name, and foul perjury, and breach of faith, there are too
many (and it may be thou art one of them,) that are given to vain swearing, and
oaths are become customary and a bravery; and ungodly wretches they are also
that use to swear in their common talk; and to do so, is as great an evidence
of base irreligiousness and a profane heart as possibly can be discovered; it is
to speak like a fool without reason, without pleasure, without honor: such a
custom of vain swearing renders a man detestable to God and all good men, and
all good men are offended at thee, and ashamed of thee, and all godly persons
pity thee and grieve for thee; considering that quickly such an Atheistical,
stupid, irreligious fool must be in the flames of insupportable, yet
everlasting torments for his swearing.

Mat. 12.36, 37.
how much more shall the idle swearer be censured in that day?

wounds, blood, cross, passion, or the like invented oaths of wretched and
ungodly persons; yet it is guilt enough to render thee for ever miserable,
without the mercy of God upon thy sincere repentance to pardon it. If thou
usest to swear at all by any thing, any creature, or any name of a thing real
or fained, as such inventions men have sometimes, or by heaven, earth, sun,
moon, stars, trees, herbs, stones, beasts, men, the names of men, body, or the
members of the body, as by the head, hand, foot or the like, or by my soul or
life, or faculties of the soul, judgment, will, affections, or by any of the
graces of God which he vouchsafes to man, as by my faith, or my charity, or by
my hope, by my conscience; all which when used in the form of an oath, and in
common discourse are utterly forbidden by our Savior, in his Sermon 35, 36, 37.
Mat. 5.33, 34. Ye have heard, that thou shall not forswear thy self; but I say
unto you (also,) swear not at all, neither by the heaven, nor the earth,
neither by Jerusalem, neither shall thou swear by thy head: James 5.12.
And S. James gives the same prohibition from our Lord Christ; Above all
things, my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven nor earth, neither by any
other oath, but let your communication be yea, yea: nay, nay. That is, either
affirmative or negative, I or no, without any oath, for whatsoever is more then
this comes from evil, 12. ult.
in the later end of the 12. verse, and let your Yea be Yea; let it be truth
which you affirm, lest you fall into condemnation.

God or his creatures, or any other oath, that speedily thou repent for thy sin
committed this way already, and reform immediately, or else thou will abide in
a deadly state, and under the guilt and curse of swearing falsely and vainly:
Remember thou art minded of this, do not slight the admonition, lest you fall
under the condemnation of hell.

. XI. Lying.
liar, an inventer of a falsehood, and uttered with thy tongue words contrary to
the truth, with an intention to deceive others, or to please others by thy
lying; if of fear, or for favor, or gain, thou have spoken that which thy
Conscience tells thee is not the truth, or have divulged that for truth which
thou have received, and yet know it to be false, and not so in it self what
you endeavor to persuade another to believe, then art thou guilty of lying. to
others what thou art not, either in word or deed, then art thou a dissembling
liar; and if thou would seem religious outwardly, and yet in heart thou
love and likest any sin, or dislikest the holy righteous ways of God, then
art thou an hypocritical liar; if thou have born false witness in any cause,
though never so trivial, or for whatsoever advantage to thy self or any secular
or religious interest, yet it is an heinous sin, and thy lie brings more
dishonor to God and Religion, Romans 3.8.
and damage to thy own soul, than any advantage can amount to, by thy lie.

all liars are said to be the children of the Devil, Who is a liar from the
beginning, and the father of lies. Joh. 8.44.
And that you may understand the odiousness of this sin, as no wise consistent
with saving grace in the soul, nor with true holiness. The Apostle Paul, in his
exhortation to Holiness, wishes the Ephesians (if they mean to be truly holy)
to put away lying, Ephesians. 4.25. Col. 3.9.
and commands every one to speak truth, and nothing but the truth, one to the
other, and one of the other.

David, when he thinks of reforming or constituting a religious family, He that
works deceit (says he) shall not dwell within my house, Ps. 101.7. Psalm.
119.163.
he that tells lies shall not stand in my sight. I hate and abhor lying, but
thy Law do I love.

Pro. 6.16, 17, 19.
abominable, and contrary to the God of Truth: These things does the Lord hate,
a proud look, a lying tongue, and a false witness that speaks lies; Pro. 12.32
for lying lips are an abomination to the Lord, but they that deal truly are
his delight. And the son of Syrach tells it, that though a thief be a vile
person, yet, says he, a thief is better than a man that is accustomed to lie,
and they both shall have destruction to heritage. Ecclus. 20.25.


Rev. 21.27.
There shall in no wise enter into it, (i. e. Heaven) any thing that defiles,
neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie. Rev. 22.15.
For without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and
Whosoever LOVES and MAKES A LIE.

all liars shall have their part in the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, Rev. 20.8.
which is the second death.

Is it not much better to leave thy lying here, while thou art warned now, than
to lie down in hell for evermore?

. XII. Theft.
Paul, Let him that stole, steal no more. Lev. 19.13 Ephesians. 4.28.


been a son or a servant, Pro. 28.24
and have filcht from or cheated thy Parents or Master of any thing, either in
thy custody committed to thy charge, or taken it to thy self, or conveyed it to
others; then repent and do so no more; make some satisfaction to the parties
wronged, either with confession of thy fault with a desire of pardon, or
restitution some way or other; ask God forgiveness and promise amendment, and
do no more so wickedly.

Esaias 10.1, 2, 3. Pro. 22.22
or with the proportions of Charity for to lay out upon the Poor, and have
turned that so received, or any part of it, unto thy own use and property, or
spent it upon thy lusts? thou art an unfaithful Trustee, a robber of the widow
and fatherless, and of the Poor; thy theft is highly criminous, a life's
repentance is very much too short for such a villain, and treble restitution
too little recompense for so great an injury.

Oh if thou that read this be guilty, consider of it and repent in time, or
else thy doom will be severest, and no sin will be forgiven thee, except thou
give again what thou have robbed. Eze. 33.15


like? then art thou not far from this transgression; thou art a cheat, and
what is that less than a thief, can you tell?

If thou art one that have coveted and taken things set apart and devoted for
the service and worship of God, for the propogation of the Gospel and Religion,
be it house, or lands, or moneys, or increase of lands, by Art or industry, or
what by devotion and piety of men has been bequeathed to the Church for the
maintenance of the Ministry of the Gospel; Mal. 3.8, 9
if thou have bereaved the Church of this, the curse of Achan attends thee;
Jos. 7.11, 12, 20, 21.
and if thou do deprive the Church of its dues, being consecrated to the
service of the true God, the sin of Ananias and Saphira is upon thee; thou art
a sacrilegious thief, Acts 5.1, 2, 3, 4.
thou have robbed God, and have an accursed thing with thee; and if thy outward
Estate prosper with it, it is a very rare thing, but be sure if it be not a
cancker to thy Estate, it will be to thy soul, and one day shall thou pay dear
for thy sacrilege and theft. You are cursed with a curse, Mal. 3.8, 9
for you have robbed me, says the Lord. Now if thou have practiced any of
these things, and art guilty of any of these things either to God or man,
secretly or openly, though man find it not out, yet God knows it, and that is
enough for thy woe.

life, and actions, and also what is with thee which thou have gotten any of
these ways, repent and make restitution, and sin no more this way, lest that
come upon thy body, estate and soul, the curse which thou will never be able to
claw off; Psa. 50.18
and if this, I say, will not be heeded by thee, see what the Truth says
concerning thieves and robbers, and all confederates with them; of which if any
one be good, there is none of them bad, but altogether they that are such shall
not be received into Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.10. Ex. 20.15.
Nor thieves, nor extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of heaven. If thou
have been so wicked as to steal and break the command of God, which says THOU
SHALL NOT STEAL, be now so wise as to repent for it, and if thou can by any
means make satisfaction to those thou have wronged, and for the future be thou
resolved never to steal, or rob, or cheat any more for ever; it is the holy
counsel of St. Paul, Let him that stole steal no more, Ephesians. 4.28,
and that no man go beyond or defraud his brother in any matter, because that
the Lord is the avenger of all such, as I have forewarned and testified, 1
These. 4.6.
1 These. 4.6.

. XIII. Disobedience and Rebellion.
are in great peril of being tainted with every wickedness, and that both
natural and religious ties and obligations are broken, to the wounding of men's
consciences and shipwreck of Faith, and it may be thou may be one of those
that art guilty of the sins of these perilous times, and amongst others these
are specified, 2 Timothy 3.1 to verse 6.
Disobedience to Parents, Truce Breakers, Treason or Rebellion.

Ephesians. 6.2.3 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15, 17. Ephesians. 6.5. 1 Timothy 6.1 Tit. 2.9, 10
which is that we should honor and obey our superiors: 1. Such as are our
natural parents from whom we descend. 2. Our superiors by Gods appointment, as
(1.) the King as supreme, or (2.) Governors appointed by him, for so is the
will of God, (3.) and also Masters and Heads of families must be obeyed by
their servants in all lawful, possible and just commands, or else servants
trangress the Gospel rule. (4.) And Ministers, such as have a power over the
people to rule and guide them in the business of their souls, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. 2
Cor. 5.20. 1 Pet. 4.19.
who are called Pastors, spiritual Guides, and Ambassadors of Christ, and
Ministers of the grace of God, for the good of souls, and to such we must give
obedience in the Lord, Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your
selves, Heb. 13.17.
for they watch for your souls.

child, as a subject, as a servant, or as under the Gospel Ministry: Examine
thy heart and actings, and see wherein thou have been faulty: And

Ex. 21.19. Lev. 20 9. Pro. 20.20 Deuteronomy. 27.17. Pro. 15.20
if thou have crossed and vexed them by thy looseness, vanity and wickedness to
the grief of their souls and undoing of thy self by thy naughty courses; if
thou have already engaged in any company, course and marriage, or intendest to
do any of these contrary to the counsel and consent of thy natural Parents, who
intend and seek thy good, then I advise thee to repent and leave off to be
disobedient, and learn obedience, and exercise love, reverence, respect, and
hearken to Parental admonitions, and follow their counsel, cease to displease
them; for, assuredly, as long as thou art in a state of disobedience to thy
Parents, thou can not be assured of the favor of God, not his blessing; nay,
thou art all this while under the displeasure of God, and a rebel to his
commands, and until reformation come, thy Case is sad, read the texts Deuteronomy.
21.18. Romans 1.30. 2 Timothy 3.2. 1 Samuel 2.25.

let every Soul be subject unto the higher powers (ordained of God. Romans 13.1,
2, 3, 4, 5.
) Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God; and
they that resist, shall receive to themselves DAMNATION: For he is the Minister
of God to thee for good; Therefore must ye needs be SUBJECT, not only for
wrath, but also for CONSCIENCE sake. And another command is, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14,
15.
submit your selves for the Lords sake to the KING AS SUPREME; or unto
Governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers,
and for the praise of them that do well; For so is the will of God, that you
Love the brotherhood, v. 17.
Fear God, Honor the King.

Now this being a clear duty, as thou art a Christian to submit to, and obey
the chief Christian Magistrate in all things lawful and honest, and to honor
him and love him: Therefore if thou have at any time resisted his person or
office, or have a rebellious disposition against him, seeking by secret and
treacherous conspiracy to subvert his rule, or mischief the life or safety of
thy Sovereign: If thou have spoken reprochfully of him, or cursed him with thy
mouth, or despised government: If thou have done these things, then art thou to
be accounted of as such who are condemned for presumptious, lewd sinners, and
have this mark on thee, who do boldly speak evil of dignity, Jude v. 8. 2
Pet. 2.10.
and despise dominions, and shall receive the reward of unrighteousness, ver.
13. And they that RESIST their lawful owned Prince and Sovereign, SHALL
RECEIVE DAMNATION, for so Resisting: If they repent not. Traitors and Rebels
shall not escape the revengefull hand of God, Romans 13.2.
his Justice will find them out; Zimri that slew his Master had not immunity, 2 Samuel 20.22.
nor Sheba that rebelled against his Sovereign, nor Absolon that rose up
against king David, 2 Samuel 18.9, 10. Number. 16.1.32.
nor Korah and his associates who appeared against Moses their Prince.

Repent thee speedily; lest thou come to ruin both body and soul.

actual fighting against his person and authority; and in pursuance of thy
Malicious design have shed the blood of others, or hazard thy own life, to
accomplish thy rebellious purpose; then have thou added murder to rebellion:
and if thou have violated a sacred oath, and perfidiously broken a Covenant;
then is thy sin yet the greater by perjury; And if thou have imbrued thy hands
in the blood of thy Sovereign, or contrived his death, or consented to it; then
have thou heightened thy guilt to an ABOMINABLE CRIME, such as nature and
nations, and all good men, and true Christians abhor, and such as the Scripture
condemns; and the righteous holy God will one day punish with, hell, except
thou repent speedily, severely, deeply; and unless this thy repentance be
accompanied with many prayers, and many tears, and great manifestation of thy
sorrow for this sin; I cannot think of any way imaginable, how thou may
escape the condemnation and damnation.

the reward of disobedience to Magistrates, treason and rebellion.

Judas who betrayed his Master fall upon thee.



1 Kings 22.8.
if thou continue and despise them, and their ministry; if thou mock or any
wise abuse, vilify, and resist them in their ministry: Luke 10.16. 2 Chronicles.
36.16. 2 Kings 2.23. Deuteronomy. 17.12. Hos. 4.4. Acts 5.39.
if thou make light of their serious exhortations, admonitions, and reproofs,
from the Lord by them, and refusest to conform thy heart and life, thy
judgment and actions, (so far as it concerns thy soul) to the doctrine of
Christ concerning faith in him, and imitation of Him faithfully and truly
preached by the minister of Christ; Then art thou guilty of the sin of
disobedience and rebellion against the Minister of Christ, and in him against
Christ, who has said, he that hears you hears me, and he that despises
you despises me, and he that despises me, despises him that sent me. Luke
10.16. 2 Cor. 5.20.
And as Paul speaks their office and work, We are Ambassadors for Christ, as
though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled
to God.

2 Chr. 36, 15, 16.
see in Chron. The Lord God sent to them by his messengers, because he had
compassion on his people; but they mocked the messengers of God, and despised
his words, and misused his prophets, until the wrath of the Lord rose against
the people, till there was no remedy: And thou mourn at the last, when thy
flesh and thy body is consumed; and say, how have I hated instruction, and my
heart despised reproof; and have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor
inclined my ear to them that instructed? Pro. 5.11, 12, 13.


despisest dominion, 2 Pet. 2. Jud. v. 8.
and speak evil of dignities, and art fallen under the temptation of wicked,
gainsaying, and reproachful men, whose mouths are full of cursing, and hearts
and hands full of violence and malice against the Lords Ordinances, Magistracy
and Ministry: And if thou art yet pure as to these sins; Bless God for it, and
be careful, and pray lest thou fall into this temptation of disobedience to
Parents, lawful Magistracy, Masters, and Ministry; and at last for thy sinful
disobedience fall under the condemnation of Hell, Romans 13.2.
for they that resist the Ordinance of God shall receive to themselves
damnation; therefore look to thy self in time.

XIV. Pride and Vainglory.
Jo. 2.16.
but of the world. Every one that is proud in heart is an abomination to the
Lord, and he shall not go unpunished: Prove. 16.18. Psalm. 119.21. Esa. 2.11, 12.
Jam. 4.6. Luke 1.51. Mal. 4.1. Prove. 8.13.
The proud are cursed, and the lofty, haughty, proud man (whoere he be) shall
be brought down and made low; for God resists the proud, etc. and will
scatter the proud in the imaginations of their heart, and they shall be as
stubble to the fire of Gods wrath that are proud, for God hates pride in any.
All this is against Pride, and all this is against thee, if thou be proud or
haughty in heart or life; therefore examine now thy self, see if this pride be
in thee, if thou art guilty of pride. Art thou lifted up with a conceit of thy
self, as more excellent then others? and despisest those whom thou undervaluest
to thy self, by thy supposed advantages of birth, Breeding, Beauty, Power,
Place, Parts, Gifts, Riches, Raiment, Gate, Arts, Tongues, Learning, Wisdom,
Policy, etc.





Spiritual pride spoils all Spiritual performances, when men think there is
a worth and merit in what they do, (though but their duty.) If a man be proud
of his humility and charity, and that he can pray much, and (as he thinks)
well, and when he looks contemptuously upon those beneath him in gifts of the
Spirit, knowledge, religious discourses, and ability of disputing for or
against the Truth, and thinks himself every way above instruction, and stands
in need of no farther direction from Gods word, but living in his pride as
above ordinances, and conceits himself perfect in all excellencies, free from
infirmities, and any the least spot of sin in thought, word or deed; this is
the height of pride, vain glory and arrogance; and all that have lifed up
themselves thus, Pro. 3.17.
are fallen at once from grace low into the sin of Pride, as the proud Angels
from heavenly excellencies to hellish shame and horror; and so will thou that
art guilty in this kind, except thou repent.



a damned catiffe, a devil incarnate.





heart, or life, or like unto it, bring it down, repent of it, hate it, forsake
it; for the proud man (had he no other sin,) yet his own sin of pride would
keep him out of Heaven, and throw him into Hell; and take heed when thou do
reprove pride in another, do not do it proudly, considering that so thou may
be guilty again of that thou have condemned in another: Leave off pride, and be
clothed with humility, for God resists the proud, and he gives grace to the
humble: Remember thou art warned to repent for, and speedily to forsake pride
and vainglory.

. XV. Schism and Heresy.
nullum schisma non sibi aliquam confingit Haeri sin. Hier. Com. in Tit.
and Schism is a less Heresy, growing and tending to it. He that is guilty of
Schism will not long be free of Heresy; a schismatic is but an heretic
concealed, and an heretic is a schismatic revealed.

Heresy is a perverse opinion contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of
Christ, and Schism is a peevish separation from the Communion of the Church of
Christ. The first is against the Truth of the Church, Schisma vin culum pacis
dirumpit, charitatem scilicet. Muse. lib. cap. de schismate. Gal. 5.19.
the other against the Peace and Charity of the Church of God: Both injurious
to Christ, and both destructive to thy own soul, if thou art either Heretic or
Schismatic, and continuest therein, both excluding Heaven, see Galat. 5.19.
Now the works of the flesh are manifest, sedition, (i. e.) The raising or
furthering divisions and disorders in the Church, and Heresies (i. e.) venting
strange opinions, cunningly devised fables, or teaching such for truths as were
thus invented, or yielding to them, 2 Pet. 1.16.
or maintaining of them contrary to the Scriptures, and received professions of
the holy true Catholic Church: They which do such things (says Paul,) (...).
2 Pet. 2.2.
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; and heresies are called damnable, and
bring swift destruction upon the inventors of such evil things, and the
teachers of them, and the followers of them too; the Apostle bids all good
Christians to avoid (as a pest,) all such as make rents and divisions in the
Church. Now I beseech you brethren, Romans 16.17.
mark them that cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye
have heard, and avoid them; for they that are such serve not the Lord Jesus
Christ, but by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple,
v. 18.

So likewise for SCHISM, if thou have divided and separated from the true
Catholic Church, and refusest Communion with the members of the true Church;
and out of pride, faction, interest, or conceited singularity, withdrawest thy
self, and drawest others after thee, setting up a Church against a Church, from
which thou have separated thy self: Art thou the head of such a faction, or the
member of such a distinct and opposite body? then art thou guilty of Schism;
thou art a troubler of the Peace and Unity of the Church of Christ.

And if thou repent not for this wrong done to Christ and his Church, the guilt
of causeless separation, and dividing things which God has put together; for
God would have no schism in his Church, and woe unto them by whom such offenses
come, for by one spirit are we baptized into one body; and Christ's Church which
is this his mystical body is but one, though it has many members, and those
members ought not to oppose one the other, or be independent one on the other,
or divide in a way of uncharitable subserviency and communion one from another;
and all this Christ forbids, lest there should be a schism in the body. Reader,
consider the 12. Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, from first to
last.

Faith and Charity, both for things to be believed, and duties to be performed;
and if thou think it but a small matter to be of any opinion, though never
so distant from, or opposite to the foundation-Doctrines, and Catholic faith,
and pure Primitive Church-practises; (so thou live otherwise soberly, and art
of a moral good life,) yet know, that filthy, unsound, false opinions defile
the soul, and make thee guilty of spiritual wickedness, and renders thee one
of a filthy spirit, and therefore detestable to the holy God, who would have
thee keep thy self from all filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit also. 1
Cor. 7.1.


in the same Church, is that with is utterly forbidden, as a note of a carnal
and unregenerate man of who ere does so; you may see how the Christian
Corinthians, (who had Paul, Apollo and Cephas, that is, Peter) for their
teachers, were accused as carnal because Schismatic, and Schismatical,
because they received the Gospel with respect of persons: Paul, Apollos and
Peter, were all three true Ministers of Christ, gracious and good spiritual
Preachers, and preached the same truths, and had the same end, and all agreed
as disciples of Christ; yet when men would divide into parties, and set up a
Paul, an Apollos, a Cephas, to head each faction, and in a way of distinction,
as though the ordinances received their worth and excellency from man, and not
from God; from the gifts of men, and not from the Spirit of God; or that the
Ministers of Christ should monopolize to every ones self. Now the people are
much in fault this way, when they cry up one in opposition to another, or in a
way of party; and glory in this, I am of such a man's way and Church; but I,
says another, like such a man better, I can walk in such a Communion; and I,
says another, can edify more under such a man. O, says one, he with whom I
walk, teaches very powerful and plainly, and I am for him; I, but says a
second, I am for such an one, for he preaches elegantly and powerfully too, he
pleases the ear, yet searches the heart too; I, but says a third, I am for
neither of those, but such a man he preaches movingly, he is all spiritual and
inward, he is not so strict-laced, nor so much for good works and duties; a
very Gospel-preacher indeed, he uses no terrible threats, but does deal by
love and promises, with privileges of believers; he is none of your legal
preachers, he does not take upon him to reprove and rebuke for sin as others
do; every body may please themselves, but for my part, I am neither for that,
nor the other you named, though they may be useful in their way; but I am for
this man I speak of: and if you would forsake your way, and follow this way,
you should quickly see a difference; come, be of our way, and join with us. And
thus men that seem to themselves wise, are carnal indeed, while they make
parties and divisions, fractions and factions in the Church.

see 1 Cor. 3.3, 4.
if thou art one that do not labor to preserve the peace of the Church of
Christ, and do not obey the truth without respect of persons, because it is
the doctrine of Christ, 1 Cor. 3.9.
then art thou guilty of this fault here condemned; and you must amend and
reform this fault also, and that without delay; remember you are told of the
sin and danger of Heresy and Schism, take heed of them both: Take with thee
the exhortation of Paul touching this thing, Now I beseech you, brethren, by
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1.10.
that you all speak the same things, that there be no divisions among you, but
that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment.

. XVI. Witchcraft.
witchcraft and sorcery become so frequent sins among those that bear the name
of Christians, but yet truly are of the devil, and confederate with evil
spirits, and hold commerce with them: there is much witchcraft and sorcery
exercised now adays, and many pretenders to Conjuration, and Judicial
Astrology, therefore many witches, and many that are bewitched by them; there
are some that pretend by their strength of Fancy, and help of Art, or familiar
spirit, to discover secrets, to determine of future contingencies, to tell of
things lost, and many such tricks (by which the ignorant people are befooled
and cheated;) yet all this shows what men would be at, some would be accounted
Wizards, and (as the vulgar sots call them) cunning-men; and others are so
impious as to seek unto such as an oracle, and in this their practice are no
better then those poor wretches of some parts of the world that worship the
Devil.

sorcerer, one that deals with and by the help of the evil spirit, and have a
familiar: And if thou have used spells and Charms, or any art or suggested
device, either for to bewitch any person, place or thing, thou art, or
pretendest to be a witch, thou art faulty; and if thou have invoked the name of
God to thy devilish art and practice, yet art thou not one jot to be esteemed
of the better, or feared the more, or believed at all; but rather the more to
be hated, abhorred and denied.

any occasion; and have sought or art minded to seek unto any such who are
esteemed either Conjurers, Judicial Astrologers, Witches, Fortune Tellers,
Cunning-men or women, either to know secrets from them, or to be revenged upon
others by help of their witchcrart, or to find things lost by help (as thou
think) of their casting a figure, and would know things to come (which
God has reserved to himself,) and thou believe in them and their Art, 1 Chronicles. 10.13.
and relyest upon them, then have thou forsaken the Oracles of Gods word, and
against them seek thou (as Saul did) unto witches, and as Pharaoh and
Manasses; Lev. 19.26. Deuteronomy. 18.10. Exo. 22.18.
which practice is expressly condemned in them, and all others are forbidden to
use it; Thou shall use no witchcraft, and thou shall not suffer a witch to live
upon the earth.

he may pardon thy crime, and restore thy soul, and reform thy heart, judgment
and practice.

Gal. 5.20.
For the works of the flesh are manifest, as, Idolatry, Witchcraft, etc. And
they that do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God; And, Rev. 21.8.
all Sorcerers shall have their portion in that lake which burns with fire and
brimstone: which is the second death. And elsewhere, Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11, 12.
there shall not be found among you any one that uses divination, or an
observer of times, (i. e.) (for fortunate or unlucky, good or bad, white or
black, cross or prosperous,) or an in chanter, or a witch, or a charmers, or a
consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a necromancer; for all that
do such things are an abomination to the Lord.

. XVII. Hypocrisy.
2 Timothy 3.5.
a seeming to be religious outwardly, but inwardly irreligious; a show of
godliness without the life, heart and power of Godliness; a profession without
practice, a fair tongue but foul heart and actions; it is a dissimulation, or
hiding of evil by similation or feigning ones self to be holy, just, good,
devout and godly, when he is nothing so; a representation of what a man should
be, Esa. 32.6.
but (God knows) he is not in reality such an one as he would seem to be;
Hypocrisy is a religious lie, a counterfeit golinesse: our Savior Christ sets
forth an Hypocrite (for he knows them well enough) under the likeness of a
painted, whited sepulcher; ye are like (says he) to whited sepulchers, Mat.
23.13, 14, 15. v. 23. v. 28. v. 33.
which indeed appear beautiful outward, but within full of uncleanness; who
appear righteous to men, but within are full of iniquity; and he pronounces a
woe unto them, and a greater damnation, calling them serpents; but for all
their craft they not escape the damnation of Hell.

(i. e.) if he rest in the outward performance, if his heart does not the same,
if his intentions be not really such as his professions are, if he does these
things only to appear to men Religious, or if he does any of these in
pretense, that so he may secretly bring about worldly ends, that he may deceive
others, and betray them into a good opinion of him, making Religion a cloak to
hide his wicked designs and practices from the cognizance and discovery of men;
that so under the pretense and appearance of Religion he may cheat, defraud,
beguile, oppress, and draw men to his party and defense, in his secular and
worldly interests, or erroneous principles, this man, I say, is an Hypocrite, a
damnable impostor, abominable to God, who judges of every man not by outward
appearance only, but by inward intentions and frame of the heart, in all
religious performances; which only then are well pleasing to God, Psalm. 51.6.
Jo. 1.47.
when there is truth and sincerity in the heart, without guile: Now one would
think that no man living that professes faith in Christ, or that believes
truly that God is the discerner of the hearts, thoughts, intentions, designs,
and all the actions, (with all their circumstances,) should be so mysteriously
wicked, profane and Atheistical; this is a wonder indeed, and such as the
charity of the sincere and upright Christian does not easily believe, which
hops and believes other things of professors of religion: yet that there
are, and have been such mountebanks, juglers and dissemblers in the Church, is
beyond doubt, the more the pity, and the greater their damnation; of all
sinners to be sure they shall not escape the damnation of Hell; for Hypocrites
are odious to God, and he best knows them, Mat. 23.33.
and will pay them fully.

of, or with, the guilty; and the godly man's charity has this property, to
think no evil, 1 Cor. 13.6, 7.
and to hope and believe well, where nothing appears to the contrary; yet
oftentimes it comes to pass, that some time or other, in some thing or other,
there is a discovery made of the Hypocrites Hypocrisy, and his vizor and mask
is plucked off, and his proper complexion apparent; that it may be said of him,
Lo, this is that man that made a show of religion; this is the Hypocrite, that
had only the form of Godliness; this is he by reason of whom Religion has
been evil spoken of; this wretch made the holy institutes to serve his fleshly,
worldly, devilish designs and interests; this Hypocrite must prove a woeful
subject of Gods wrath against Hypocrites in hellfire, prepared for Hypocrites,
Mat. 24.^1. Jam. 3.17.
if he repent not of this his sin, and turn from it to godly sincerity, real
religiousness, without partiality, and without Hypocrisy.





on set times, days and opportunties of public humiliations, fastings, and
hearing the word; and yet for all this thou neglectest thy private and secret
addresses to God in prayer, and other thy duties, then thou art not clean of
Hypocrisy.

Psalm. 50.16. to ult. Esaias 1.11, 12. v. 13, 14, 15, 16. Jer. 7.4, 9, 10. Ezekiel.
33.31.
oppression, swearing, drunkenness, unrighteous dealing, or any other sin,
wittingly and wilfully; then art thou (for all thy outward show or acts of
service) a gross and damnable Hypocrite: God hates all thy acts of service,
(which otherwise he would accept,) because thy heart and course of life is not
suitable to thy Profession, because thou seem to be devout, but really art
vicious; -- Again, if thou resolvest to keep thy sin, Psalm. 66.16.
and would not be reformed, although thou might, but love and likest thy
sinful practices, though thou do make many prayers and confessions, and
speak never so much against sin in others, yet art thou (for all this) no
better then an Hypocrite.

by men of such a shape and religious mode, as the times and persons in worldly
power do smile on, and are benevolent to, then if that religion be false and
erroneous, thou art a most profane Hypocrite; and if it be the true religion,
yet if thou becomest seemingly religious in that way for base low ends, as
worldly advantages, or favor of men, and seem for a while zealous in
religious duties, to the end thou may win the good opinion of the godly, and
gain something by it, and so make gain thy godliness, then art thou a
dissembler indeed, a foul Hypocrite.

Mat. 23.23.
and bond of peace, to a separation from the divine institutions of God in his
Church, hearing, praying, receiving, under a pretense of scruple about some
circumstances; then art thou an Hypocrite, thou seem tender about lesser and
lower matters, but make no scruple of sins that are sins indeed, nor of
neglect of spiritual and holy performances, which God requires at thy hands.

Mat. 7. v. 3, 4, 5.
while thou thy self justifiest, or suffer in thy self, thy familiars and
favorites, grosser faults, or although but as bad as those you accuse and
condemn in others; and wilt not reform thy self as well as seek (seemingly
zealous) to reclaim others, then art thou an Hypocrite, not because thou
find fault, and art severe against the least sins, but because thou art not
so against all sins and evil practices in thy self too; for if thy soul be
u^right, it must be s^t against all sin, it will not allow of any the least
irregularity in thee, though it could be hid from the eyes of others.



guilty in the least, and become plain-hearted in religion, consider, the many
cautions Christ gives to his, to beware of Hypocrisy, and those many woes
pronounced against Hypocrites; and if there be any torments in Hell severe, it
is for the Hypocrites, they shall have the greater damnation of Hell; and when
the Scripture would express an high degree of torments for the vilest sinners,
it says, they shall have their portion with Hypocrites. Take heed therefore of
this, and remember I have warned thee from the Lord.

. XVIII. Apostasy.
is in Jesus, according to strict holiness, inward and outward too, then
Hypocrisy will ease and empty it self into Apostasy, for Apostasy is but
Hypocrisy detected and brought forth: 1 Timothy 4.12.
The Apostle Paul to Timothy speaks of some that will fall away from the faith,
and give heed to seaucing spirits, and doctrine of devils, and they are such
as speak lies in Hypocrisy, having their consciences seered; first an
Hypocrite, and then a backsliding Apostate.

Mat. 13.21.
it may dure for a time, but because religion is not rooted and well grounded,
it dureth but for a while, Luke 8.13.
for they fall away when temptation comes; for a while they may believe and
make profession, but no longer will they then safely they may without prejudice
to their outward safety, worldly advantage and interest.

as thy Lord and example: Apostasy is signified by the terms of turning away
from the faith of the Gospel, by falling away from the profession and practice
of godliness, by backsliding and drawing back from a Christians former love
and zeal for it, and diligence in Religious performances after the rule and
manner of the Gospel; Isa. 1.4. Jude v. 19. 1 Timothy 1.19. 2 Timothy 2.18. Heb. 3.12.
by forsaking and going away backward, by separating from the Gospel, Truth,
Rule and Order; and making shipwreck of Faith and a good conscience, erring
from the Truth, and departing from the Living God.

Baal, quickly will such an one fall into that state of Apostasy as is
irrecoverable, and dreadful is that state (God knows. Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.
) It is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly gift, the good word of God, if they fall away, to renew them again to
repentance, seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God, and put him to
an open shame, (i. e.) put the greatest indignity upon Christ and his Gospel,
as though he himself were an Impostor, and his Gospel a lie.



2 These. 2. v. 10.11, 12.
God shall send such (as are declining from his Truth) strong delusions, that
they should believe a lie, because they received not the love of the Truth that
they might be saved; they shall be damned, who believe not the Truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness.

Laodicean temper, which was a decaying of zeal and fervor in Religion, and so
but a lesser degree of Apostasy; yet says Christ, I know thy works, that thou
have a name, that thou live, but art dead, and that thou art neither cold nor
hot; because thou art neither cold nor hot, Rev. 3. v. 1. cum v. 15, 16, 19.
I will spew thee out of my mouth; be zealous therefore and repent.

in the second Epistle of Peter, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21.
which sets forth the nature and danger of Apostasy, thus; If after they have
escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, (that is, when a man has embraced once the Truth of the
Gospel, and is in a way of reformation and amendment of Life, according to the
Rule of Faith and Life,) if such a man shall be entangled again and overcome,
(that is, look back and withdraw from Christ's profession and practice of
Religion, and yield to the temptation, to that cursed return to former
infidelity and worldliness, or any kind of vicious living again,) the latter
end of them is worse then the beginning; (that is, their sin is greater, and
their return by Repentance harder,) for it had been better for them not to have
known the way of righteousness, (though this had, been bad and damnable
enough,) then after they have known it to turn from the holy Commandment
delivered unto them: Pro. 14.14. Pro. 1.30, 31.
For the backslider in heart, he that is a fugitive from Wisdoms rules and
godly conversation, shall be filled with his own ways, (i. e.) shall be
required accordingly; they shall be answered in their own kind, God will turn
away his favor and love from them; for God takes no pleasure in those that
draw back from following after Truth, Righteousness and Holiness.

falling back, turn not from the right way to any bypath of error or loose
living as long as thou live: Let no body, nor any thing prevail with thee to
Apostatize, or make the least defection from the love of the Truth of the
Gospel, or to remit of thy care, diligence and zeal after Truth and Holiness to
thy dying day.

piety, love and zeal in thy heart; or if there be in thee a wavering
indifferency, and thou hangest loose to the Doctrine of Gospel Truths, and
Practicals of Godliness, and art weary of well-doing, as one uneasy and
unwilling in the service of God and pursuit of grace and heaven; if thou have a
mind to forsake the way of the GOSPEL OF CHRIST, to embrace and take up some
other new and strange opinions or course of Religion, either besides or
contrary to that in the SCRIPTURES; or if thou art already turned back, or
fallen from thy first love and Baptismall vow, and art in a state of offnesse
and separation from the Gospel Truths and practices, and fallen into another
hidden Apocryphal mysterious course of Religion, not warranted in its
principles and practicals by the word of God, or opposite to the Scriptures,
then in every of these cases I exhort thee (as thou tenderest thy souls safety
and Gods favor) to repent thee speedily, and endeavor a REFORMATION; get out
quickly of this cursed Apostatizing temper and backsliding disposition,
recover thy decaies in Religion, come out from among them that have erred from
the Truth, lest thou partake of their plagues, and fallest into a final
Apostasy, and find no place for repentance; (which is the case of very many
of the Apostates of these times we live in,) and thou with them must be left to
thy self, until thou come to Julians state, to die blaspheming, and fall
into eternal flames of endless torments, which will be the portion of
Apostatizing hypocrites and hypocritical Apostates. Take this warning, and
repent in time (that is,) speedily.

Object.
and a man may be in danger, if he engage in the true Religion, either by
Formality, Hypocrisy or Apostasy, is it not safer to be unfixt as to all
Religions, and to make no more ado about any way, but to account of all as
vanity and a needless thing, being as safe as easy to slight and neglect the
Gospel it self, and not account of it, or give it any entertainment, or consent
to it: nor look after salvation by it, nor regard it, or affect it, much less
to be tied to the conditions of it, etc. Seeing the case is so, is it not
better to be of no Religion at all, or of that which is easier and cheaper, and
not dangerous, though a man be but formal in it, or forsake it at pleasure,
and take another?

Answ.
many seem to be at this pass already, and stand off from the life of
Christianity, and close not with proposals, offers and rules of the Gospel, and
give it but slender entertainment in their hearts and practice; that value
abundantly more their earthly concernments then all the riches of grace in the
Gospel; yet such must know, that besides the loss of the benefits which come to
the soul which obeyes the Gospel, and closes with the offers of Christ and
Salvation upon Gods conditions, I affirm, that besides the loss of having the
privilege of having the Gospel with all its contents, he that neglects,
slights, refuses or despises those invitations to Salvation, (which God sends
to every one unto whom he has sent the Gospel) DOES SIN GRIEVOUSLY against
God, and wrong his own soul. It Is not a light sin to make light of Christ and
Salvation tendered in the Gospel: and although it be a foul fault to fall from
grace and obedience of the Gospel, and damnable to continue in that sin, yet
thy sin is not one jot the less if thou refuse to be a religious Christian. If
thou make light of Salvation, and all those conditions, promises, invitations,
and doctrines, and performances leading to it, it will become a damning sin to
thee, if thou make light of the means of Salvation, or be unfruitful under
them, as you may perceive in the following Sections.

. XIX. Making light of Gospel-mercies, and neglecting them; a great sin, never
to be pardoned without Repentance and Reformation.
which undoubtedly must seize all without exception, if a remedy be not granted
by the same God that is offended with sin, and that remedy as sincerely
accepted by man, as it is seriously proffered of God to man.

miraculous mercy and favor that was ever shown to a sinful world, Romans 5.6,
8. 1 Timothy 1.15. Jo. 3.16.
was Gods sending Christ into the world to save sinners, and the Gospel or
Message Revealing him, and offering him to a soul with most earnest entreaties
and calls of God to every one to accept of him, and with him pardon of sin, and
reconciliation with God and Salvation for their precious souls: And the better
to effect this mercy, and to persuade men to accept of it heartily, cheerfully
and chiefly, Romans 10.15.
he has appointed the Publication of this (as the gladdest tidings to poor
souls) by his Ministers, Esa. 52.7.
whom he has commanded to wait on this business, and as his Ambassadors to
sinners with Articles of peace, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. 2 Cor. 4.6, 7.
reconciliation and salvation; committing this so excellent and heavenly
treasure to Earthen Vessels, that the power and mercy might appear to come from
God: for it is the glory of Gods grace in Christ which we are to discover to a
company of poor souls; to help, under Christ, to the Reformation and Salvation
of such souls as are by the Word and Spirit of the Gospel brought to believe,
to love and follow the Lord Jesus.

refuse, neglect, despise or make light of this grace of God in Christ bringing
Salvation to thee a poor wretch, Tit 2.11.
which have forfeited all thy interest in happiness, and art utterly undone
without Christ and Salvation:

slight this high favor and grace of God, this GREAT SALVATION, and those
means which bring Christ, and his salvation, and thy soul together, thou
committest a sin of the highest nature, a sin against the greatest mercy, it is
an undervaluings of CHRIST and HEAVEN, it is all one as if thou should say of
God, Christ, and holy Spirit, grace and salvation, depart from us, we desire
not the knowledge of thy ways, and that we will not have Christ to reign over
us, but reject him and all his benefits, Job 21.14. Luke 19.14.
and refuse to give him any entertainment or hearty acception; and is not this
a great sin?

trampling under foot the Son of God, and accounting the blood of the Covenant
wherewith he was sanctified, Heb. 10.27, 28, v. 29, 30, 31.
as an unholy thing, and doing despite to the spirit of Grace? Is there any one
sin marked with a more terrible character and severity then this? If he that
despised Moses law died without mercy, of how much sorer punishment shall he be
thought worthy of that despises and slighteth this grace? why, no less then a
certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall
devour; for God has said, Vengeance belongs unto me, I will recompense; and
it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, whose mercy,
love, favor, grace, Christ, Salvation and Gospel is despised and slighted.

making light of Christ and Salvation offered in the Gospel to thee, for the
eternal welfare of thy precious soul, is as much as to say to God and Christ,
You may keep your grace and salvation to your self, I have no such need of it,
I esteem not of grace and salvation so highly, I can be without it, I will have
none of your favors on such terms, I will not part with my present pleasure,
ease, profit and enjoyments, for your rich grace, and glory hereafter; let me
alone with my own matters and concernments; I have other business to look
after, which to me are of greater weight, then the things you would press upon
me, etc. Now can you think that God can take this kind of dealing from any one
well? or do you imagine that God will be pleased with one that values or sets
more by an Ox, or piece of metal, a field, barn, tottering house, or a moment
of fleshly pleasure, then by Christ and salvation?

great concernment to them, and make light of Christ and glory, which are ten
thousand times ten thousand times more worth to thee then all things else, put
them all together; and yet to hear of these things but as a tale, which may or
may not be true, and to account of these rich mercies proposed but as a strange
thing, or of no value, or of very little advantage to one; is it imaginable
that God should not be highly displeased with that soul that despises, Hosea 8.
and slights and neglects that God sets so much by, and so highly esteems, and
by which he sets up and declares the honor and excellency of his free grace
to poor sinners? Yes, sure enough, God is so much displeased at such, that they
that despise him shall be lightly esteemed by him; and those that make light of
his invitations to mercy, he is always wroth with till destruction come full
home upon your souls; and those that by excuses put off Christ and grace, as of
a lesser concernment to them, 1 Samuel, 2.30.
and pretend secular business and interests as an answer to those sent from God
to invite them to mercy and salvation, Mar. 22. v. 5, 7.
upon the terms of the Gospel to close with Christ, and do actually refuse to
come; but either turn away their ear from hearing the message, or shut up their
heart from receiving of Christ, or take no great heed to live according to the
Gospel of Christ, of such God has determined, that they shall never reap the
benefit of grace, Gospel and glory. Read Christ's own words, For I say unto you,
Luke 14. v. 16.10 25.
that none of those men which were bidden, shall taste of my supper, no though
it were provided for them, and intended for them; yet because they made light
of the invitation, and used excuses, and undervalued the great things of their
souls to base, worldly, bodily, beggarly things and employments, therefore is
the Lord angry, to this conclusion, SUCH SHALL NEVER TASTE OF MY SUPPER.

who so despises the word shall be destroyed; Pro. 13.13. Heb. 2.3.
and, how shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation?

Esaias makes mention of an intolerable wicked people by this, that they will not
hear the Law of the Lord, but say unto the Seers, See not, and to the prophets,
Prophecy not unto us right things, but get you out of the way, turn aside,
cause the holy one to cease before us; Wherefore thus says the Lord, because
ye despise the word, therefore this iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready
to fall, whose breaking comes suddenly as an instant, as the breaking of a
potters vessel that is broken in pieces, etc. Romans 2.4, v. 5.
So also* see the aggravation of such men's sinfulness in that of St. Paul's
correction to the Romans, Despisest thou the riches of his goodness and
forbearance, not considering that the goodness of God leads to repentance?
but after thy hardness, and impenitent heart, treasurest up wrath against the
day of wrath, etc.

commonest sins under the Gospel, and one of the most dangerous that can be
named, and yet men make light of it, and scarcely will men be brought to be
sensible of the neglects and slightings they show toward Christ and salvation,
and therefore are seldom brought to repentance for it; and yet may they not
read that place of the Proverbs? Because I have called, and ye refused, I
stretched out my hand, Prove. 1. v. 24. to the end.
and no man regarded, but ye have set at naught all my Counsel, and would none
of my reproof: -- and for this, because they refused, and would not take
counsel, but despised, God shall make as light at your calamity when it comes
as they did of his counsel, and will no more hear them in their misery to help
them, then they would hear God when he would offer them means for prevention of
their misery.

freely purchased by Christ, and so fully offered in the Gospel to thee, be
persuaded, (1.) to consider seriously whether thou art one of those who is
guilty of this sin, whom God may charge with this sin of making light of
Christ, and Gospel, and grace, and salvation; (2.) And if thou art guilty, that
forthwith thou would repent, and henceforth to thy dying day take heed thou
never make light of the matters of thy salvation again any more.

self, look into thy soul, consider, whether art thou not he that have had a
mean, low, cheap estimation of Christ and salvation? I mean, whether the things
and business of religion, and about sawing thy soul, have not been more
neglected by thee and slighted, and less care, cost and time spent about these
then about earthly, worldy things, that concern but the body and fleshly part;
and so it is, and thou are guilty of this great sin:

concernment to thee, then do thou undervalue and slight the rich, excellent,
and chief favor of God to thy soul, and sinnest against the mercy of God.

careless, negligent or slothful about the great things of salvation, then
have thou made light of it, thou art guilty, and a grievous sinner this way. --

Gospel in the ministry of it, and thou heedest not the things that are spoken
to thee, not receivest them with delight and much affection, but art careless
and vainly-minded, drowsy and dead-hearted, weary and impatient while the
Ministers of Christ are seriously treating of the doctrines of man's salvation,
and applying them to thy soul, and do either dislike or loath the heavenly
Manna falling upon thee, then art thou one that lie under this great guilt.

improvement of Gospel Truths, by meditation and serious consideration by thy
self, or with others, and refusest to order thy life according to those
heavenly directions, then do thou render thy self a man which indeed has no
great mind to, nor belief of them, but one that regardest little or nothing the
things that are spoken unto thee from the Lord.

time, strength, thoughts, industry, to gain worldly and fleshly pleasures,
wealth, and honors for thy body, then to gain the riches of Christ, grace and
heaven, for thy precious and immortal soul, and seek after earthly things
more then heavenly, then it is evident thou art one that make light of thy
salvation; for thou valuest and esteemest more of the body then the soul, earth
then heaven; thou studiest much more how thou may be rich then holy, to be
great then good, and gloriest rather to be a wanderer in the broad way which
leads to Hell, then to enter in at the strait gate of holiness, and that narrow
way of sincere devotion which leads to immortal life and endless happiness.

Jesus can take this well at thy hand? can you imagine you shall be accounted
wise at last in so doing, or that you shall ever have this rich pearl of the
Gospel to make thee rich, that wilt not part with all thy other treasure to
purchase this pearl of grace, so much more worth then all things in the world
else, Mat. 13.14.
as heaven is more worth then earth? Heb. 2.3.
Oh how will thou escape the greatest damnation that neglectest so great
salvation?

persuaded then, dear soul, to look into thy self, consider what thy carriage
has been toward the Gospel-invitations, truths, promises, and the entreaties
of Christ and grace brought unto thee for the eternal good of thy poor soul.

slighting and making light of the mercies and means of grace, and motions of
Gods Spirit, then repent thee heartily and speedily, and for time to come give
better heed to the things of the Gospel; be more industrious about the business
of thy soul, do not, O do not as long as thou live make light of the
concernments of thy salvation; neither do thou henceforth value any earthly,
temporary, bodily advantage, like to this of grace and heaven; rather forsake
Father, Mother, Children, Houses, and honors, and all that may be named, Mat.
19.28, 29.
then forgo Christ, God, and thy interest in heaven; for, alas! what will it
profit a man to gain the whole world and lose his own soul? Mat. 16.26.


sloth, fleshly indulgence, an Ox, or a Farm, a little pleasure, and a little
profit, which the men of the world value to a scorning, deriding, slighting,
neglecting the ways of God and true practical Religion.





. XX. Unfruitfulness under gracious means.
great things for us, and laid out rich mercies on us, so does he require of
every one a suitable return of love and obedience; he would not have any one to
slight his favors, nor be idle and unfruitful with the talent he gives thee,
nor disobedient to his positive commands, by neglecting to answer his will and
demands; seeing God commands not things impossible, nor beyond thy strength,
affording thee with his commands his gracious aid, help and direction; and
likewise has instituted such means as are (if improved) fit to bring forth
those effects through the assistance of grace, such as he will be well pleased
with in Christ.

Hypocrites, Mat. 24.51. Mat. 25.30.
and the workers of iniquity; Cast ye the unprofitable servant (that is, he
that hid his talent, and improved it not) into outer darkness, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

none of these forementioned crimes, those cursed fruits of the flesh, could be
charged upon thee, as actually guilty of them, yet for all this, if thou
remainest fruitless as to those holy performances which are the necessary
effects of the holy Spirit of God in the truly regenerate, thou art so much too
farte from the kingdom of God, that thou will never come up to it, nor the
enjoyment of it; thy unfruitfulness will render thee for ever miserable.

fruit of those trees which he has planted, dressed, manured, nourished and
preserved: art thou not one of those whom the Lord has gathered from the
heathen world, and now (through the mercy of God) art within the pale of his
Church, under the daily influence of most gracious dispensations, watered with
the dews of Heaven, breathed from the Spirit in all Gospel Ordinances?

world? have thou not the best example, even the Lord Jesus Christ, whom thou
art commanded to imitate, 1 John 2.6.
and to walk as he walked? are there not most full commands and most clear
directions to be fruitful, and how to be fruitful in good works and holy
duties?

freely made, great reward richly prepared for all that are fruitful in
well-doing, and as severe threats and menaces of severe punishments for all
that are unfruitful, Esaias. 5.12.3, 4, 5, 6.
negligent and barren of good works? so that it may be truly said of thee as of
the vine in the Lords vineyard, Now judge, I pray you, betwixt me and my
vineyard; what could have been done more to my vineyard that I have not done?
wherefore when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, it brought forth
wild grapes. Therefore now will I lay it wast, it shall be trodden down, it
shall be PRUNED no more, nor dug more, but there shall come up briars and
thorns; I will also command the clouds that they shall rain no more upon it.

fruitfulness, and if thou have not, or meanest not, to do it in it is season,
then must you expect that God will be angry with thee to a severity, cut thee
up by the root, and commit thee to the fire. You have this determination in
several Scriptures from Christ's own mouth recorded; Mat. 7.19.
Every tree that brings not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the
fire; and in the Parable he says unto the dresser of the vineyard, Luke 13.7.
behold, these three years I come seeking fruit on this tree, and find none;
cut it down, why cumbreth it the ground? and Joh. 15.2, 8. Every branch in me
that bears not fruit he takes away, John 15.2, 8.
and every branch that bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth
more fruit: Herein is my Father glorified, (says Christ) that ye bear much
fruit, so shall ye be my disciples.

Omission of what we should do is as much against Gods will as the commission
of what we should forbear; we are to be judged at last, and sentenced to
eternal pain or pleasure, according to our works, good or bad: 2 Cor. 5.10.
God will render to every man according to his deeds; to them who by patient
continuance in well-doing, eternal life; but unto those that obey not the
truth, indignation and wrath. Romans 2.6. v. 7, 8. Heb. 6.7, 8.
There is a severity pronounced to the unfruitful, as there is a blessing to
the doers of his will: For the earth that drinks in the rain that comes often
upon it, and brings forth herbs meet for him that dresseth it, receives
blessing from God; But that which bears thorns and briars is rejected, and
nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. So it is with every man
accordingly as he does or does not answer the provision, care, love, guidance
and mercy of God, in an holy fruitfulness.

determination of our Lord Christ at the last day concerning all men, as to
their everlasting condition, he will then judge them, and those that are
sentenced to that horrid eternity of woe and misery, are thus condemned for, not
doing, but neglecting the works of charity, pity and compassion, which was
required of them; they omitted to show charity to the distressed, and therefore
are excluded Heaven, and sent down to hell, Mat. 25.41, 42.
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. Why? what have these poor wretches done, that they must undergo this
dreadful punishment? why, in the next words you shall see that there is no
mention made of what evil they had done, but what good they had omitted, which
they might and should have done; For I was an hungry, and ye gave me no meat;
thirsty, and ye gave me no drink; naked, and ye clothed me not; a stranger, and
ye took me not in, etc. that is, you had many objects of charity before you,
which if you had relieved, I would have taken it as done to me my self; and
seeing you have not exercised that good work of charity, you have merited the
condemnation, and have lost your reward; and seeing you have omitted to do
good, I Will omit to give the possession of heaven, and where will you obtain
heaven if not from me? And by this may thou see it is evil enough to damn thee
that thou have omitted to do the will of God, suitable to the means and
opportunities afforded thee to be fruitful and abundant in the service of God;
For he that knows, or may kow Gods will, and to do good, and does it not, to
him it is sin, and he shall be severely punished with many stripes.

barren and unfruitful as to faith, James 4.17. Luke 12.47, 48.
piety, righteousness, charity and sobriety under the Gospel-teachings in the
Church of God,) that thou would no longer continue loitering, lazy, idle and
unfruitful, but henceforth walk worthy of the Lord unto all well-pleasing,
Col. 1.10.
which you can never do until you be fruitful in every good work.

of faith, and love, and charity, and patience, and meekness, humility, and God
does expect some fruits of that word; Have thou exercised these graces, and
brought them forth in action? do thou believe and act according to that word
of grace? do the fruits of the Spirit appear in thy conversation yet? if not,
hitherto have thou been unprofitable, it is all cast away upon thee what God
has done to thee, then have thou received the grace of God in vain.

barrenness, and lay thy heart, and set thy self to the practice of all good
duties; be much in prayer, self-denial, and frequent acts of piety and
devotion, and show thy charity and goodness to those that are in distress, what
thou art able, and have opportunity.

beneficence of his toward thee; and now at last coming to thee, and finds no
fruit on thee, only a few leaves of profession, may he not say in high
displeasure, never fruit grow on thee more henceforth; by this time thou
might have been strong and well rooted in faith, abundant in charity, and
well knowing in the things of God and of thy own soul, able by thine own
experience and example to instruct the younger; by this time thou might have
been able to resist the strongest temptations, and have understood the wiles of
Satan, and decei fullness of sin, and have been sufficiently guarded from their
prevalencies; by this time thou might have overcome the world, and have been
crucified to all the worldly pleasures, honors, riches, and have had thy love,
delight and happiness placed on God and Heaven; long ere this hour of the day
of thy life, (had thou not been unfaithful to thy Lord and Master, Christ,
and unfruitful under the means of grace,) might thou have been one prompt
and ready to, and zealous of good works, and thy life might have been an
ornament to the Gospel, and the doctrine of our Savior in all things of piety
and charity, Titus 2.10.
and thou thy self a shining light, Phil. 2.16. Mat. 5.16.
holding forth the word of life and faith in all manner of good works, as
becomes Christianity, to the glory and praise of Gods free grace toward thee;
but is it so with thee or not? have thou continued all this while, as at first,
unfruitful?

being never weary of well-doing, abounding always in the work of the Lord,
Gal. 6.9. 1 Cor. 15.58. 2 Cor. 7.1. Heb. 13.1, 2.
perfecting holiness in the fear of God, lay aside every weight, and run the
rest of your race before you with patience, looking to Jesus, the author and
finisher of your raith, believing that your labor shall not be in vain in the
Lord. But if hitherto thou have been unfruitful, then let the consideration of
it prick thee to the heart, repent, repent thee speedily for all thy
unfruitfulness and barrenness, and redeem thy time; for all is lost, and thy
soul will be lost for ever if thou repent not of this sin, even this of
unfruitfulness, and henceforth learn to do well, and apply thy heart withal
to bring fruit unto the Lord, even the fruit of his care and Gospel-mercies in
Christ unto thy soul. Do not slight this admonition and warning, it is from the
Lord for thy good, therefore see to it in time.

CHAP. VI.
An Enumeration of more sins and ways by which man offends God, and contracts
guilt to his soul, of which he must be reformed.



heart, thoughts, words or actions; for Gods Spirit would conduct thee also.

lawful to be done, may through circumstances, time and place become
unlawful, and a sin to thee if thou do them; and there are some things some
persons may do at some times, and in some cases, which another may not do
without a sin, nor the same person at another time, or under another relation,
but it will be a fault. It were easy to instance in examples of this kind, but
they would be a subject fit for determination of cases of Conscience, which now
I am not about; yet this I would advise thee (if thou meanest to walk
circumspectly, and exercise a good conscience always,) that in things doubtful
and disputable take the surest part, that part of the question which is surely
no sin: for instance, is dicing or carding lawful? or to wear black spots, as
the manner of some is? or to put money to usury? With some this may be a
question, but for my part I would thus resolve it; that it may be unlawful and
a sin to play at cards or dice, or to put on those strange fashions, or to
practice usury, etc. but not to play at either, or with either, at any time at
all, nor to lend upon usury, nor to conform to the fantastical fashions of
dressing, is doubtless no sin; and a wise soul would take the safest course,
and walk in the surest way, and avoid all appearance of sin as well as all
sins; and he that does not do that, that is, shun as much as possible all
appearance of evil, transgresses a Gospel-rule, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
Abstain from all appearance of evil.

noise, nor so suddenly wast the conscience, yet the amount of them may prove
an eternal guilt, and men may often flatter themselves into hell with them,
under pretense that they are but little ones, and sins of infirmity only,
which (as men are apt to think) have a certain divine indulgence waiting on
them of course.



of God, or thy backwardness to every good work, thy want of proportionable
zeal for Gods glory and the Church.

sudden eruption of passion into anger and shrewd words, or desires after
forbidden and unlawful objects, or immoderate desires after things lawful in
themselves, yet all these, and all other infirmities (to speak the most
favorably of them) are the disease, sickness and disorders of the soul, and
ought to be the matter of our sorrow and humiliation, and must be confessed to
God in the enumeration of our sins, and pardon must be begged in Christ's name
and for his sake for them; and except thy soul be humbled for all thy secret
sins, and all thy infirmities, if not in every instance, yet in the whole
sum, and thy labor and watchfulness be for the suppressing of their rise,
and preventing their reign as much as possible, yea even they (so little as
they seem to thee) they will prove mortal at the last; and thy plea of
Infirmity will not serve thy turn except thy sins of infirmities be pardoned,
and they will not be pardoned any more then greater sins but upon thy
repentance; and that which far greater offenses could not do, if repented of
in time, and forsaken in heart and practice, that these sins of infirmities
will do, if not repented of in time and amended (to what degree is possible
for thee,) even these will procure thy damnation at the last.

Christianity account either no sins at all, or very lightly of them, as small
and inconsiderable, yet by a long custom and frequent repetition are become
habitual, and so very sinful, and so very destructive; and besides, men that
think them so small and innocent, seldom (if ever) charge them upon their
souls as sins to be grieved at, repented of and amended; when they examine
their lives and actions as to other sins which are noted with a blacker
character; by reason of which neglect those smaller sins are let alone
unmortified, and men go to their graves with impenitency as to those sins,
which will sink a man as deep into the gulf of misery, and drown the soul in
destruction and perdition; and if they be but foolish lusts, yet they are thus
hurtful to the soul. 1 Timothy 6.9.


To instance in some things of this kind for thy fuller conviction.

I. Evil motions of lust the taint and corruption in nature.
Genesis 6.5. Mat. 15.19, 20. Jam. 1.14, 15. Col. 3.5.
which are the beginnings of all actual sins; man's nature is tainted and
corrupted, naughty Concupiscences and lusts are born with us, which are
defiling and corrupting the whole man; the heart of man is full of them, and in
their first motions they are sins, even that proneness and inclination to evil,
and aversness and indisposedness to good which is in thee, which thou may and
must take notice of as a matter of sorrow and complaint against thy self; as it
is thy unhappiness and misery, so it is thy sin and thy death, and such a
disease it is, Gal. 3.22. Romans 5: 12. Psam. 51: 5. Romans 7.5.
that (if not healed and pardoned in thee by regeneration) will leave thee
under wrath and the curse: This that I mean is that which is understood by the
name of Original sin, that is, the corruption of humane nature by the sin of
our first parents, propagated to the whole kind of Adams race and posterity,
which is every man and woman as they receive life and birth; these motions of
sins do work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death.

make light of it, and are so far from watching over and resisting the first
motions and lustings after evil things, and mortifying these corruptions, that
they are most apt to plead it by way of excuse for their faults and actual
transgressions, which are the issues and effects of this corruption and lust
from within.

old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, must be put off,
that is, must not be served nor yielded unto, but resisted and prayed against;
and indeed for my part had I no other sin that might be laid to my charge, yet
I find this inbred wickedness, this natural proneness to evil so exceeding
sinful, that I should account it a choice mercy to be quite rid of it; and
it is for this I have cause to hang the head and mourn; and it is that the moving
corruptions may be quite destroyed and mortified in me, is the prayer and care
of my poor soul, for my joy cannot be full until my enemies, that is, my sins,
both root and branch, seed and fruit, be plucked up and withered, and until
Christ alone, his grace and virtues, be formed in my soul, and triumph in my
conversation.

wrath of God and power of Satan; that may not be slighted by thee which is in
thee, the cause and original of all sins, that set the whole man upon evil,
the cause of all disorder and confusion every where in thee, and every where in
the world: in a word, it is exceeding sinful, all evils lie folded up in thy
original concupiscence.

sinful motions, then be thou never weary nor give over resisting these lusts
in thy self, and weakening this body of sin, and hinder the progress of it, and
if thou can not get it quite discharged, suffer it not, what ere it cost
thee, to reign in thee, or prevail over thee; listen not to lusts
solicitations, entertain no treaty with lust, believe not its promises, fear
not its threats; when God has said and commanded one thing, let no arguments
make thee believe the contrary.

. II. Vain thoughts.
laws and censures of men, yet to God are they known, who discerns the inward
counsels of the heart, and are judged by him according to the agreement they
have with, or dissonancie from, or repugnancie to, the laws of sobriety,
righteousness and holiness. And what ever is uncomely or undecent to speak or
act, is as much to think, and as much a sin as the word or act would be, though
not so apparent; and if it be an evil to speak or practice evil, so is it to
think evil, and a man that would search and try himself for discovery, may
know what he is for grace or sin by his thoughts; one may know another by words
or actions, thy own thoughts to thee are the Signatures of thy own heart,
whether sanctified or unholy; by these fruits may thou know the tree, by
these streams the fountain, by these sparks the fire, by the sent of this smoke
the fuel. Mat. 15.19.
Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts; which expression of Christ shows that
some thoughts are evil; and the great wickedness of man is thus resolved, Genesis
6.5.
that the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart were evil, and that
continually; and Solomon knew the malignity of thoughts when he entitles vain
thoughts to sin, he that devises to do evil shall be called a mischeivous
person, Pro. 24.8.
the Psalmist speaks of vain thoughts as matter of his detestation, Psalm.
119.113.
saying, I hate vain thoughts, but thy law do I love. God calls upon us to
banish all vain and evil thoughts, and to give them no lodging within us, but
calls every one to repentance even for the sins of their thoughts, saying, Jer.
4.14.
Wash thine heart from wickedness that thou may be saved; how long shall thy
vain thoughts lodge within thee? And for our reformation, if we intend it to be
according to the design of it, it reaches to the very thoughts, and the evil
of them must be banished, and our thoughts, yea every thought, 2 Cor. 10.5.
brought over to the obedience of Christ.

mischievous, Pro. 24.9.
envious, ambitious, wordly, luxurious and lascivious; and thy thought-sins are
liable to the same condemnation (and therefore call for like reformation,) with
the sins of those thoughts which are brought to light and practiced; for sure
if Adultery, or fornication, or murder, or theft, or covetousness, or any other
abomination be sin, the thoughts and desires of the nature of either of them is
a sin also; and if there be any indulgence for either, (which I think there is
none without repentance,) it rather looks toward those that slip suddenly into
a fault, without fore-thoughts of pleasure or advantage in the sin, and so
foiled at unawares without full consent, then toward those evil thoughts which
are delighting and abiding, though they keep within the limits of thoughts and
imaginations; for the abatement of the guilt (if, I say, there be any such
allowance) will be to him that sins and would not, rather then to him that
would act sin though actually he does it not; for he that wills and does not is
worse then him that does a sin and wills not, that is, it is against the bent,
resolution and intentions of his mind.

2 Cor. 10.5.
and every imagination and thought be brought under the obedience of Christ,
which now is the main work I have to do within my own soul, to wit, to get my
spirit cleansed from the filthiness of vanity and evil, 2 Cor. 7.1.
that so perfecting holiness every day as long as I live, I may at length get
my reformation completed, and my soul saved.

vain, wanton, worldly, proud, malicious or revengeful mind, then repent thee
of all thy thoughts of any of these kinds, and labor to reform thy thoughts,
Jer. 4.14.
if thou mean to be holy indeed, and saved at the last.

. III. Idle words.
Jam. 3.6.
yet very apt to transgress, and very full of evil; a little world of iniquity
which hardly can be kept in or tamed, yet it must be redured to limits and
rules, or else thou sinnest. Men think that to talk much, to talk vainly, to
speak foolishly, is no great hurt, except there be poison and venom in every
word; yea men are apt to think there is no sin in words, and therefore do most
men make light of words as wind, not considering that all good men and prudent,
ponder well and consider what is fit to be spoken ere they speak, lest they
offend God, themselves, or others by their speech. Psalm. 39.1. Pro. 17.27. Pro.
10.19. Eccle. 5.3.
I will take heed (says David,) lest I sin with my tongue: And Solomon says,
he that has knowledge is sparing of his words, for in the multitude of words
there wants not sin, but he that refraineth his lips is wise. So that I
conceive many words that men speak may well be spared, for I am sure many words
that men speak are sinful, for they are unseemly, foolish, empty, vain, to no
good purpose, but very often of very evil consequence: there are many unruly
and vain talkers (says Paul to Titus) whose mouths must be stopped, Titus
10.11. Ephesians. 5.4.
which subvert whole houses, etc. And foolish talking is numbered for sin with
fornication and uncleanness.

much and any thing comes first into thy mind, either to vent a folly or a
passion, to speak unseemly or unwisely, gibing or scaffing, tatling or talking,
frothy complements without reality, and lying jests to provoke mirth, tedious
stories to no purpose of good to edification; if thy tongue walk in this road,
and thy speech be but after this rate of vanity, though free from blasphemy,
oaths, reproaches, rottenness, railing, etc. yet is it not free from sin, for
thy words are vain and idle; and when reformation comes, it will reduce thy
tongue to, and bring it into the obedience of the laws of wisdom, of sobriety
and piety. And lest you should think this a vain monition concerning words,
consider what Christ our Lord says of idle words; I say unto you, that every
idle word that men shall speak, Mar. 12.36.
they shall give an account thereof at the day of judgment; for by thy words
thou shall be justified or condemned. For there is not a word in my tongue O
Lord, Psalm. 139 4.
but thou know it altogether. Therefore though thou art but apt to
transgress with thy tongue, either by speaking wickedly or vainly, idly and
foolishly, repent thee of thy former folly, and for time to come out a watch
and a guard on that little member of unruliness, and a restraint, lest thou
offend again, and so be put to a sad repentance for thy little folly; for if
the instance be but little in which we offend, yet the sin is great, because we
continue in that folly which is more easily reformed, the temptation to it
less, the profit and pleasure small; but sound words or prudent silence, are
far more advantageous to the esteem of wisdom and godliness, then vain,
frothy, idle talkativeness.

Jam. 1.26.
sober and good; For if any among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not
his tongue, this man's religion is vain.

If you say your words are out before you are aware, and it is your infirmity,
then be persuaded to repent it and amend it as it is an infirmity; for this can
be no excuse for thy sin, because it is but (as you suppose) a little one, when
ye see how much and strictly we are warned to take heed of our tongues, that we
sin not with them in any case, not so much as by idle talking.

IV. Idle life.
for which he has received his life, time and talent.

pleasing to God, nor innocent in it self: God made nothing in vain, it is a sin
confessed to do evil, and so it is not to do some good or other. The servant
that had a talent, and hid it, is condemned by our Lord Christ, Cast ye the
unprofitable servant into outer darkness, Mat. 25.30.
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. And the fig tree which bears
no fruit is cursed.

Acts 17.11.
and complements, to tell or hear some new thing; to spend their time and
invention in the vanities and trifles of sports, and deckings, and dressings?
Their tailors and sempsters, their glass and their combs, their beds and
boards, their Plays and Romances, their visits and vain discourses, consuming
all their study, time, wealth, strength, so as nothing of all is left them for
the greater concernments of their precious souls and countries good.



that which thou would be found doing when thy Lord Christ comes, that you
so may expect that blessing from Christ your Lord and Master which he has
promised to his faithful doing servants, Mat. 24.46. Mat. 25.21.
Blessed is that servant that when his Lord shall come shall find so doing:
Well done, good and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

. V. Omissions.
Luke 12.47. Jam. 4.17.
He that knows his Masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes: And to him that knows to do good and does it not, to him it is sin.

wilfully, carelessly or slothfully omits any of those acts of piety, devotion
and Charity which are enjoined Christians as Christians, and leave undone such
things as they should perform in Religion, either in private, secret and
public, to him it is sin; if thou omit the hearing the Word, receiving the
Sacraments, prayers in and with the congregation, reading, praying in thy
family, and in secret; If thou neglect the instruction, correction and
admonition of thy Children and Servants in matters of religion, and practice of
godliness; if thou omit acts of charity to the souls and bodies of the
necessitous in sickness or in health, thou art far from the kingdom of heaven,
and the state of true Christianity: If thou neglect to uphold and maintain the
truth and cause of Gods Church, as much as lies in thee, both by word, prayer
and deeds, it will become thy sin: And thou may conceive how much thy
omissions are sinful, offensive to God, and prejudicial to thy salvation, by
what sentence and judgment at last will pass upon men for their omission of
acts of piety and charity, namely, Depart from me (Christ will say one day) ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his Angels: For I was
an hungered, and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink;
naked, and ye clothed me not; sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not. Mat.
25.41, 42. etc.
Then shall they say, Lord, when saw we thee an hungry, athirst, or a stranger,
or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee? Then shall he
answer them saying, Verily, I say unto you, in as much as ye did it not unto
one of the least of these, ye did it not unto me. And for your neglect of good
family duties and service of God, there is a sad imprecation of the Prophet
Jeremiah, Jer. 10.25.
Pour out thy fury upon the heathen that fear thee not, and upon the families
that call not on thy name.



Mat. 7.21.
for not he that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but
he that does (says Christ) the will of my father which is in heaven: And
surely he that omits to do does not do the will of God.



. VI. Dreams.
Eccle. 5.3.
for, as Solomon writes, That a dream comes through a multitude of business,
commonly they are the remainers of many such thoughts and inclination of men,
and temper of body; sometime they are less harmfull, but for the most part
vain, and sometime very sinful; they are not voluntary indeed, yet as a fools
voice is known by multitude of words (as the wise man says,) so a man may
guess very much of what passes his thoughts while waking, by his night-visions
in dreams. I have heard of some that they never dreamed, or very rarely; how
true it is I cannot affirm, but I wish I could have said so truly, or that any
dreams had always been (but as sometimes they have) good and edifying: I have
been disciplined by dreams, some of them have been the occasion of comfort,
some of sorrow and much affliction to my soul, since I knew from whence they
sprang; bad, from an ill principle, vain, ambitious, worldly, filthy, fleshly
mindings and thinkings in the daytime; the good from God: and look what a man's
intentions, and discoursings, and companyings, and thinkings have mostly been
when awake, commonly the man dreams about when a sleep, though in much
confusion; and as the nature of those things acted or minded, and the desires
and end are about them, either honest and holy, or sinful and wicked, so are
thy dreams to be accounted of either good or bad; and as you would repent for
an ill act waking, so must you repent and be humbled for your dreams of the
acts thereof, if with delight and complacency in the same; and as you would be
sorry to be found doing or minding with delight those vanities or wickednesses
you dream about, so must you be humbled in your selves for dreaming such
things.

thou offend,) yet (I say) if that after all thy circumspection thou be haunted
and acted with vain, filthy, worldly, and any impure visions in thy dreams,
that then in the morning, every morning in thy addresses to God in private
devotions, after such defilements, thou humble thy self before the Lord, and
repent thee heartily, and bewail that infirmity, and beg thy pardon for what
is past, and entreat the Lord for Christ sake to heal thy naughty nature, and
that God would by his grace prevent the evil spirit suggesting, and thy fancies
acting, or awaken thee as soon as ere it seiseth upon thee.

Jude the 8th. verse speaks of Filthy dreamers who defile the flesh, etc.

. VII. Worldly Joy and Sorrow.
joys and griefs, for as they are more or less about worldly concernments, so
are they more or less sinful: It Is true, we, the best of us, are but men at
the best, and easily are we surprised; we have these passions in our nature,
and of themselves are not sinful, but our failings are about their measures
and their objects; and the more our delights are in the fruition of the object,
according to the value and esteem we have of the thing, so the more is our
sorrow arising from the want of or parting with our beloved, whatever it be.

joy, and godly sorrow, and needs not to be repented of: but commonly this is
not the kind of that joy, delight, sorrow, and perplexity which men and women
are so much in; alas, it is otherwise, indeed it is sinful too much, for it is
worldly too much, and yet how few take notice of their joys and griefs, whether
they be sinful or holy, hurtful or profitable to their souls!

Godly sorrow works Repentance to salvation not be repented of, 2 Cor. 7.10.
but the sorrow of the world works death: So to delight, rejoice, and glory
in the Lord, is good and pleasing to God; but to set ones heart upon riches,
honors and pleasures, and to rejoice in any of these is a sin, and such a joy
should be turned into heaviness, and such laughter into mourning. Jam. 4.9.


joy and grief lie about worldly things and trifles, if thou have more comfort
in a good bargain, or a friends legacy, or some worldly emoluments, then in the
favor of God, then in the pardon of thy sins, then in the means of salvation,
then art thou yet in fault: And if thou can grieve and lament with tears the
loss or disappointment of some benefit, or the unkindness of a friend, or the
crossness of an enemy, or chains of a tyrant, etc. and yet can not sorrow
for thy sins, the loss of Gods favor, nor of missing an opportunity of grace
and communion with God, then thy joys and sorrows are worldly and sinful, and
you must not permit such worldly joys and sorrows to prevail, but you must
repent for them, and leave off to spend your comforts and your griefs this way,
and look to that you should rejoice in, and lament for, as before has been
showed.



much hinder the progress and increase of grace and heavenly conversation; and
all our affections about earthly things regulated so, that it may be with us
(as to our taking pleasure in worldly vanities, or confidence and relying as
our happiness or chief support,) that once we may be able to say truly with St.
Paul, I account of all things as dung and dross in comparison of the things of
Christ and heaven. And to this must we come ere we be complete in Christ, and
thoroughly changed in all our affections, to a state wherein we may truly and
freely say, without dissimulation or constraint say, Truly the world is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world, these worldly concernments move me not
much any way, I see nothing here below (as things below) that deserve either my
joy in their possession, or grief for their absence, nothing that I need be
troubled much about, or that I should rely upon, or put any trust at all in,
for all are flying and lying vanities; therefore do I labor for and seek the
things above, and my treasures are with Christ in heaven, there also is my
heart, and thither will I go for my comforts; and my grief is that I am not
more in love with them, and less in love with the world, and troubles of spirit
about them.

to that command, 1 John 2.15. I love not the world, neither the things that
are in the world, because I would not lose the love of my heavenly Father; For
all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lusts of the eyes, and the
pride of life, (i. e.) worldly pleasures, or pelf, or pomp, which are not of
God, nor for his children and servants to look after; for they and this world
pass away, 1 Jo. 2: 15, 16, 17.
but he that does the will of God abides for ever. And as I do urge and press
thee to be careful and watchful over your spirits in those forementioned
qualities and actings of your souls about those things, which although they may
seem frivolous niceties to men that judge not of things spiritually, but
according to sense and common apprehensions, yet I earnestly entreat thee, as
thou hopest for pardon, grace and heaven at last, that thou would reform them
all, in every instance; for until you do you are not a true sincere reformed
convert; for though they be esteemed but small things, and inevitable
infirmities, yet their account will be numerous at last, and their burden
intolerable; they will, if not pardoned, sink thy soul as low as hell; and
pardoned they will not be, except thou repent of them, and labor against them,
to a reformation of them all: for, Eccles. 19.1.
as the son of Syrach says, he that despises little things shall fall by
little and little; and experience tells us, that many small leakes will in time
sink the stoutest ship, even so will these smaller sins (if let alone) make
shipwreck of faith and a good conscience, Titus 1.19.
and cast away thy soul at last.

. VIII. Unthankfulness, murmuring, inconsiderateness, worldly confidence, vain
opinions, and recreations.
unthankfulness to God for those daily favors he shows to thee a worthless
wretch; how many blessings have thou received already, and how many more laid
up for thee, and yet how seldom have thou returned thanks to God for all? how
many thy mercies, and how few thy acknowledgments? O! ingratitude is a very
high offense both to God and good men.

murmuring against Gods providence, and distrust of his fidelity and truth of
performance of things promised to thee and for thee, whilst thou seek him in
his way of upright walking, and yet how art thou ever and anon complaining, and
uttering thy discontents and hard thoughts of thy gracious good God? O this
must be left, I pray thee leave off murmuring, and learn submission and
resignation to divine providence in all his dispensations, and if thou have
thought or spoke foolishly, lay thy hand upon thy mouth, do so no more: God
cannot endure murmuring nor murmurers, leave it quickly, if thou mean not to
provoke God, as the Israelites did, 1 Cor. 6.10.
and were punished severely for it.

rash attempts and inconsiderateness; be no more heady, but heedfull, consider
seriously both the nature of thy actions, and the end of them all; for God
accounts all men sinful that are not considerate and serious, because
inconsiderate and rash: Isai. 1.3.
The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters crib, but Israel does not
know, my people does not consider: For as consideration is the beginning of
reformation, Jer. 8.6.7.
so is inconsideratness an inlet to all vice and villainy.

worldly confidence and trust on vain things must be altered to a trust and
dependence on God only, if thou aim at saving reformation; for he that relieth
on any thing under heaven, men or money, arm of strength, or armies of men;
wit, policy, friends, health, greatness, or his own goodness, does much
derogate from God, and become sinful, because he sets his heart upon that
which is not to be confided in, nor set up, as any way able to support,
satisfy, deliver or to make one happy. Man's trust is always to be in God
only, and all his hopes and expectation from him; Isai. 26.4.
Trust ye in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting
strength. But when I lay out my first thoughts and chief hopes upon worldly
things, I put them up in stead of God, and commit idolatry, and go quite
contrary to the will of God; Trust not in man, nor riches, nor Princes, says
David; If riches increase, set not your heart upon them, for you will find a
disappointment in all without God, Jer. 17.5, 7.
and a curse too: Cursed is the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his
arm, and whose heart departs from the living God: But blessed is the man that
trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is. Job (being once very rich,
and always very good, which was his best riches, and abided with him when all
outward things were flown away and gone,) says in his most serious examination
and pleading with God, If I have made gold my hope, Job 31.24, 25, 28.
or have said to fine gold, Thou art my confidence; If I rejoiced because my
wealth was great, and because my hand had gotten it: This were iniquity to be
punished by the judge, for I should have denied the God that is above. You see
what apprehension godly men have had of the trusting worldly things, concluding
it to be sin and iniquity, folly and idolatry; and what is the hope of an
Hypocrite, (what will his worldly confidence come to?) though he has gained
much, Job 27.8, 9.
when God takes away his soul? Will God hear his cry when trouble comes upon
him? So that it is not enjoined as a prudentiall thing only not to put
confidence in these worldly things, not depend upon them, because of their
vanity, inconstancy, insufficiency, but it is a sin if we do, and a great
iniquity too, which every gracious man should avoid, and every convert should
repent of, and be ashamed that he has put confidence in pitiful worldly
things, and made them his rock, shelter and comfort, and resolves he will do so
no more, while he has a God, the rock of ages and time, to fly unto, who will
never fail nor forsake them that put their trust in him, because they trust in
him.

holding no conformity to the Saints, who have said within themselves and
declared to the world too, that nothing in heaven or earth, within them or
without them, should be the object of their trust, saving God only; a guess of
this their frame we may take from Psalm. 73.25. Psalm. 73.25, 26.
Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire
besides thee. My strength and my heart fails: but God is the strength of my
heart, and my portion for ever. O then, beware what thou make thy rock, thy
tower, thy defense and portion; be sure it be God only, and repent if thou
have done other.

opinions in matters about religion must be regulated by the Word of Truth, and
reduced to the obedience of Christ and his doctrine, 1 Timothy 6.5.
and that without prevatication or strife of words, or perverse disputings and
vain bablings to no profit or edification toward charity and holiness. 2 Timothy
2.14, 16. Pro. 19.27.
Cease, my Son (says Wisdom) to hear the instruction that causes to err from
the words of knowledge; for it is a dangerous thing to be of a corrupt judgment.

recreations, and those little indulgencies to thy flesh, which men are pleased
to call refreshments and pastimes, not considering what sin and hurt may be in
them, and how too too often they become fuel to lust, and a temptation to sin,
consumption of time, and exhausting of spirit, and effeminating men, rendering
them soft and unfit for exercise of religious duties, and many other
inconveniences which experience has instructed those that have been much and
often in the service of pleasures, which now they see, but then they could not
perceive, being blinded and beguiled with them: Now concerning such, if thou
(who read) art a man given to satisfy thy lusts with worldly pleasures
under the pretense of recreation, know, that though some recreations and
diversions from our more serious and laborious employments, either of body or
mind, may be tolerable and allowable for refreshment, yet when thou exceedest
in pleasure to unrighteousness, by letting out too great a proportion of thy
soul on them, then the most innocent recreation becomes a snare unto thee, and
thou sinnest in it; when thou usest it as a calling, and do nothing else but
spend thy days, times, strength, talents, study, and passions, as though thou
wast born into this world only to spend thy time in worldly, fleshly and carnal
delights; surely such a state of living (and such is only the employment of
some men) cannot be pleasing to God, but calls for reformation. And therefore I
would entreat thee to be sparing in recreations, and careful in them, lest
that which is allowed thee for the relief of thine infirmities may prove thy
hurt, more dangerous to thy soul then that bodily infirmities (which want
something for its refreshment,) could have brought to thy body without such
recreation.

eat up thy time, and raise thy passions, are incentives to quarrels, and such
as indispose thee for holy duties, are fuel for lust, and keep thee from
religious performances, are to be shunned; and if you will follow my counsel,
leave off dicing and carding, revelling and dancing; and I am sure you will
when you mean to be sober and wise, religious, and a sincere downright
Christian, and when you intend to make religion your chief employment, heaven
your aim, and holy performances your delight; then you will see that all
business and avocations from the business of religion are nothing at all
profitable for thee, you will then admit of nothing that shall hinder the work
of salvation, nor do any thing deliberately which shall frustrate your hopes of
heaven. But what ere is good in its self, or may advance this great work of
saving reformation, that thou will do, and no body shall be able to tempt thee
to folly, nor fright thee from thy duty; but thou will then make a conscience
of thy time and employment how thou spendest it; and how much of it, and about
what businesses, that so thou may be able at last to make a fair and clear
account of thy actions to God, when thou shall be called to it; and that will
be very shortly, and for every thing done in the body, according to that he
has done whether it he good or bad. 2 Cor. 5.10.


recreated and pleased himself with sports and pastimes, eating and drinking,
in hunting and hawking, and such like employments; and many men have no other
calling: and God knows, that for a man to study and contrive how he may spend
his days in pleasure, and to take his pleasure in several instances as he has
purposed, is but to study and contrive how he may live to die like a fool, and
prepare his back for many stripes at the last, which such a man must be beaten
withal, and thou cast forth as a vessel of dishonor wherein is no pleasure,
for that it had never been employed to any good use or purpose.

sin, and also to sin in thy sports and recreations; and this I would entreat
thee, never more choose that for thy recreation which is unlawful or
doubtful, or that wherein you have offended already, or in which you may be in
danger to transgress again, when you may as easily forbear, and in forbearing
be most assuredly certain you shall not sin; and resolve on this, rather to
renounce all sports and recreations then to commit the least sin, or expose thy
self to the danger of a transgression. How much deplorable will the loss be to
thee, when for the pleasure of sin for a season thou must lose thy soul for
ever?

CHAP. VII.
Containing some reasons of specifying sins in the foregoing catalo.

prone to, but also miserably fruitful in: And all of them, both great and
small, are contrary to the nature of the most holy God, and each of them a
violation of the righteous and holy commands of God, and destructive to the
happiness of thy own soul, meriting everlasting damnation; and which no man
that does them, and lives and dies in any of them can escape; For the wrath of
God is revealed against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men; and it will
be executed one day upon them that do evil, and continue so doing, for God will
render to every one according to his deeds: Yet none of these shall hurt thy
soul if thou commit them not, Romans 2.5, 6.
and art not some way guilty of them; and although thou have been faulty any of
those ways, or in many of them, yet shall they not be thy destruction, if thou
repent thee heartily, and leave them speedily and absolutely. And therefore
have I been particular in the enumeration of sins, with their aggravations and
dismal dreadful consequence, to this end, and for these REASONS:

examine thy heart, life and actions, whether thou have been guilty of any of
them, how many of them, how often, and how long, and which of them all are thy
sins, with what consent of will and delight, and by what temptations thou have
acted them and lived in them, and against what light of knowledge, checks of
conscience, reproves, admonitions, exhortations, convictions and resolutions
thou have committed them, -- Which considerations will make thy sin appear to
thee more odious and exceeding sinful: And so it will serve as an excellent
instrument of thy recovery; for the consideration of the guilt, filth,
defilement and miserable consequence of sin, every sin (the least sin, every
sin being against God, and the eternal good of thy own precious soul) this (I
hope) may bring thee to sound repentance for, and a lothing of all sin, in the
whole kind of it, speedily, resolutely and heartily, without either farther
delay or dispute.

time of your ignorance God did wink at, and did bear with your follies then,
yet now he commands thee and all men every where to repent, Acts 17.30, 31.
because he has appointed a day wherein he will judge the world in
righteousness.

infallibility of the execution of Gods decree of reprobation and damnation on
thee and every man and woman living in such a state without repentance and
reformation; that so neither thou nor any sinner may presume of salvation at
the end of a sinful, impenitent and unreformed life, but that thou may
utterly despair of salvation without sound and timely reformation: and this
consideration also may serve to hasten thy resolution, and to use all means
appointed of God to rid thee of thy sins, and become a new man; which is
absolutely necessary for thee if thou meanest to be saved eternally.

impossibility, but that you may of a sinner (if you look to it in time) become
a true convert, and be turned from darkness to light, and be brought from the
dominion of sin and Satan, to be under the rule and guidance of Christ and
grace, and so be sanctified, pardoned, justified, and at last glorified; this I
say I persuade thee to by such discoveries as the glorious good God has made
concerning his acceptance of true penitents and converts, Because thou
might been couraged to this reformation without delay; and to keep thee from
sinking into a despair of Gods mercy in Christ pardoning thy sins past upon thy
sound repentance and sincere reformation: and this consideration also may raise
thy hopes and expectation that thou shall yet find grace and mercy from the
Lord to relieve thee, and help thee in thy misery, and give thee a full
conquest over thy spiritual enemies through Christ, and deliver thee from all
thy sins into the hand and protection of JESUS CHRIST, who will keep thee safe
and bring thee to heaven, if thou apply thy heart in good earnest to this work
of self-reformation, and perseverest in the same unto the end. For if there
were no hope, but he that has been vicious must of necessity be always so, why
then should there be given any means for thy recovery? why should God send to
thee, invite thee, entreat thee, rebuke thee, expostulate with thee, as he does
by his Ministry, word and Spirit? if God did not mean to reclaim thee, that he
might pardon thee and save thee, why has he appointed repentance for thy work,
and space for thy repentance, but that thou might finish thy reformation?
And why so many promises (for thy support) of mercy, for guidance, victory,
acceptance and pardon, if God meant not to deal graciously with thee this way
upon thy endeavors at reformation?



impenitency is a cursed estate in it self; though thy sin of which thou art
guilty be pardonable upon thy repentance, yet thy impenitency for the least sin
thou know in thy self is unpardonable; and that which all the sins specified
could not effect, if they had been repented of in time and forsaken, this one
sin of wilful impenitency will undoubtedly effect (viz. thy damnation,) for
damnation though it be not to sins absolutely, the smallest of them, yet
absolutely to all impenitent sinners.

faith in him, and repentance from dead works by his life, death, resurrection
and intercession: But he did not die, nor does he intercede, nor is he a
propitiation for to save impenitents and unbelievers as such, they living and
dying impenitent and unconverted. And therefore the earnestness of thy Monitor
with thee to be speedy in this work is such, for that thy continuance in any
sin argues thy unwillingness to forsake it, and thy delaying and deferring
repentance is nothing less then a flat denial to reform and amend, until thou
can sin no longer, nor live any longer to sin; and then thou will either miss
of the will to repent thee, or of sufficient time, or because forced from the
apprehensions of terror it will not be accepted: and then alas where art thou?

I will put off no longer, I Will not defer till to morrow, for if I die, ere
my conversion be wrought, and if sickness and death seize on me in an
impenitent state, what will become of me? I am resolved to begin now, and to
renew again what once I began, and will not sleep, eat, drink, or take any
comfort in any thing, until I am in a mending case, until my soul and sin be
at odds; I Will stay no longer here with this and that sin, nor will I consent
that any sin shall lodge with me henceforth for ever, lest mischief and a
snare, death and destruction overtake me, and I lie down in sorrow.

For I have been and am a great sinner, perverse and obstinate in my courses,
and too long already have I been so; and I despair of mercy, pardon and heaven,
while I continue in a state of voluntary sinning, unconverted and unreformed in
heart and life: But I see there is hope, how bad so ever I have been yet I may
be reclaimed; and if in time I do repent heartily, and renounce all my wicked
ways, and lay hold on Christ, and live the rest of my days soberly, righteously
and holily, I may find mercy and partake of an happy eternity of glory. I am
resolved therefore now, even this moment, to put in practice that which I have
been long a purposing, even to bid farewell to all my sinful pleasures and
profits, to all my vanity and folly; and do now forsake the sinful world, the
flesh and the devil, and will no longer be befooled by my lusts, the world, nor
Satan, to the loss of my soul, for all the present seeming content and
advantage may come to me by living in sin, or complying with sinners: Mat.
16.26.
For what will it profit me though I gain the world by sinning, and lose my
soul for sinning? What shall a man do for another soul to save when he has
damand (or lost) this one by sinning? What shall I do to be saved then at last,
if now I refuse to do that which God is pleased to demand of me as a
condition, and in my power through grace, which is to repent and to turn from
all my iniquities, so sin shall not be my ruin? Alas, then I shall have no
grace to repent, nor space, nor acceptance, nor pardon, nor heaven; I can then
do nothing that can be acceptable, neither will God accept any thing I do; if I
will not hear him to day, he may refuse me to morrow, although I call upon him;
but to be sure if I put off the Lords requests and admonitions, refusing them
now in my health, strength, life, and do not yield, obey, repent and reform, as
(I know) it is my duty, then at last God will refuse and reject me, yea laugh
at my calamity, and empty the vials of his just wrath and indignation upon me,
Pro. 11.12. to the end.
and leave me in misery to all eternity.

sin, or to defer repentance one day longer, and would bless God he was not
cut off in the last act of sin, or in a state impenitent, yesterday, or the
last week, and resolves to venture no more so presumptuously on the morrow,
while to day is put into his hand for an opportunity. Let this be thy
resolution (O sinner that read,) and be happy in it.

CHAP. VIII.
Containing the main swasion and motion for a final resolution, and speedy
practical repentance, and real reformation.

charity to your own soul, or any care or desire for pardon and heaven, you
will be free to acknowledge them, confess them, own shame for them, and be as
ready and willing to beg forgiveness of God for thy faults, as you were to
commit your sins: and speedily to forsake them all, and with full resolution of
soul never to venture on any of them again, or come near the appearance of sin
any more, lest thou be caught in sins snare, and be defiled with sins filth.

expulsion of it from the borders of thy soul; and withstand all temptations
whatsoever from world, flesh, and Satan, to thy dying day, that would engage
thee again in sinful courses, and when this is done thou will finish this
first part of reformation in thy self, which consists in forsaking all sin, and
resolving against it, in the whole kind of it.

it is a hard matter to be persuaded out of an habit of such vices wherein men
have been long exercised, and in which fleshly-minded men have taken such
delight and complacencie.

fervent prayers and cries, Christ and grace to thy help in time (who is not
wanting to such;) and thou diligently use all those spiritual instruments and
weapons God has appointed for this spiritual warfare carefully, it will be so
far from impossible, that it will be most succesfull, and you shall find a most
happy conquest, and a glorious deliverance, from both the guilt and powerful
dominion of sin.

be happy in it, and (I say) I am fully satisfied if that be done, so thou be
reformed soundly, whether by these or any other motives.

honorable employment, and a rich reward, and a certain conquest, if thou stand
to it, and do persevere to the end, in the use and exercise of those means
thy God has appointed thee for thy help this way, both to banish sin from thy
heart and life, and to keep thy self from being polluted again with sins
impurity, and from being imprisoned any more under its insolences, and
cheating traps, and crafty solicitations and devices.



instance, and with what complacencie and delight, with whom, and in what
place, and at what time, with what temptation, and beg heartily of Almighty God
to help thee to the veiw and discovery of all thy open and hidden sins.

Lamen. 3.40.
Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord; and that same
convert David tells what way he took at the beginning of his reformation, (to
wit) I thought on my ways, Psalm. 119.59, 60.
and turned my feet unto thy testimonies: And tells us further, that so soon as
ever he was convinced of the necessity of reformation, and the danger of living
longer in his sins, I made have and delayed not to keep thy commandments; and
this true penitent gives thee what he desired of God, it was this, Search me, O
Lord, Psalm. 139.23, 24.
and know my heart; try me, and know my thoughts, and see if there be any
wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. He knew the danger of
sin, and in some good measure the deceitfulness of man's own heart, and the
secret hidings of sin within; and because he would keep none of his sins, nor
favor any of them; he would have them discovered to himself, that he himself
might not conceal them, and this was an argument he meant to be sincere, and
resolved to be reformed to purpose: and the same convert David gives in the 4th
Psalm first a reproof to the wicked, saying, Psalm. 4.2* 4.
How long will ye love vanity, how long will ye continue wicked? and in the
4th. verse he gives a direction and counsel, saying, Stand in awe and sin not:
stop here, go no further in sin, sin is a dreadful thing; but commune with
your own heart upon your bed, (i. e.) discourse and reason the case with your
self in private, consider your heart and ways, what has been the course of
your life? what is now the frame of my heart? Say to thy self, what have I
done? what am I doing? how long shall I go on in these sad courses? when shall
I determine and resolve on amendment? why not now, is it not yet time? have I
not yet long enough been an enemy to God, a rebel against his Laws, a drudge
to my lust, a slave to Satan, a companion of fools and mad folk, and a wanderer
in the broad way which at last will lead me to endless woe and destruction?
shall I any longer consume any the rest of my time in fulfilling the lusts of
the flesh, as I have done too too much already? 1 Pet. 4.2, 3.
or shall I now, even now, cease my folly and cast off my sins? oh it is
(doubtless) high time.

roundly and particularly with your self, do not go about to lessen and excuse
thy faults, spare not thy sins, (for thy sins will not spare thee) give them no
quarter, believe none of their promises, for to be sure if thou let any of them
live with thee, they will kill and destroy thy soul; if it be a beloved sin
with which thou have taken pleasure, or by which thou have gotten somewhat, yet
trust it not, keep it not, for every sin (let it promise never so fairly) is
thy mortal enemy, there is a venom and deadly poison in it, which will infect
all thy other performances, and eat out thy comforts, and cause thee at last to
lie down in sorrow and despair.

remember so was Delilah to Sampson, Judge. 16. to the end.
who notwithstanding betrayed him to affronts, bindings, woundings and death,
and so will this to thee; if it come with pretended kindness to salute or
delight thee, or to remain with thee in quietness, yet remember so did Joab to
Abner, 2 Samuel 3.27.
yet smote him there; and then, under the fifth rib, so that he died. And so
was the pretended sacrifice of the harlot in the Proverbs, Pro. 7.13, 23.
With much fair speech she caused him to yield, with the flattering of her lips
she forced him: and he goes straitway after her as an ox to the slaughter, or
as a fool to the correction, etc. Till a dart strike through his liver, and as
a bird hastes to the snare, not knowing that it is for his life: Even so will
it do with thee, if thou trust it as Joab did Amasa; And Joab said to Amasa, 2 Samuel 20.9, 10.
art thou in health, my brother? And Joab took Amasa by the beard with the that
hand to kiss him; But Amasa took no heed to the sword that was in Joabs hand,
so he smote him therewith, and shed out his bowels to the ground, and he died.
So will every sin that speaks fair to thee, (if thou be led aside by it) do
with thee, for it still has with it an instrument of woundings and death, and
will not spare thee when thou come within its reach and power, whatever hopes
thou have to the contrary; for how true is that of the Apostle Romans 6th after
this question is put to every sinner, what fruit had ye then in these things
whereof you are now ashamed? does he not challenge your answer? and can you
answer any other thing to it but what he concludes? Romans 6.21.22.
the end of those things is death, for the wages of sin, every sin, is death;
and will any event be found other then what St. James speaks of the progress
of sin? Jam. 1.14, 15.
that every man that brings forth sin, being enticed by his own lust, and
finisheth it, must die eternally for it, as certainly as every one that is born
of a woman must taste of natural death; with this only difference, that both
righteous and wicked, penitent and impenitent, must die a like death in nature,
but the wicked unregerate only shall die eternally, that is, be for ever
separate from God, and be forever miserable.

dally, or be familiar with that, or keep it under the roof of my tabernacle,
that will cut my throat, and then set all my house on fire, and put my soul
into flames of everlasting burnings? Oh how can I do this, and act the other
sin which does put me under the wrath of my Lords displeasure at present; and
if I continue in it, will procure that final displeasure which will never be
removed? and this is an hell of misery to be banished from the face and favor
of God, and to lie under his wrath for ever.

Esau, who for one sweet morsel of meat sold his birthright, who after when he
would have inherited the blessing he was rejected? Heb. 12.16, 17.
For he found no place for repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears.

or lose heaven and part from God? Ah poor soul, lets be wise, and say we would
not lose heaven, nor our happiness in God for ten thousand worlds: what shall
we keep a sin which is worse then nothing, to the hazard of that which is more
worth then all things, even Christ and glory? no, God forbid we should cast
away our precious souls so for a trifle, which cost Christ so much pain and
blood to redeem from hell, and from all iniquity, to serve the living God only
here, and to be happy with him in everlasting mansions of glory hereafter: Ah
me, methinks I should not be so foolish, nor such an enemy to my own happiness.
Must I take my farewell of all my sins, or bid farewell to all my hoped for
joys in heaven? then depart from me all iniquity, and all ye workers of
iniquity, for I am resolved against you all; and welcome Christ and grace, come
repentance, come reformation, let us be acquainted and live together; I would
not lose one moments enjoyment of vision, and favor of Christ in heaven, for
all the pleasure and gain by sinning that might be had, were it always to be
had, and ten thousand times ten thousand more then ever I got by sin, or any
other that has gotten most; for all is but little and short, poor, mean, base,
dishonorable and destructive, the pleasures of sin are but for a season,
Momentaneum est quod delectat, aeternum est quod cruciat. Greg. Mag.
if any there be in sin, but the torments of sin are eternal; and this I am
sure is real, and will follow sin, as the tail of a scorpion which has the
venom and poison therein.

O my soul, hasten away, consider now and be gone, take thy last leave of sin
and see it no more, keep it no longer lest it slay thee; S. 14. Ezekiel. 18.30.
Repent and turn from all thy transgressions, so iniquity shall not be thy
ruin: Shall I live in sin whose pleasures are not any, or last but as long as
I live, seeing when they are ended, the torment for sin is real, and lasts as
long as eternity? shall I live any longer in sin? not I, if I keep one lust I
lose one soul; and what lust so sweet and profitable that is worth burning in
hell for? oh how dear will one sin cost me if I live in it!

Now, if ever you, or anyother, lusts, our own proper lusts, I mean those
evils to which we are most inclined, and such as we are most often solicited,
and tempted to, or else no man is reformed; for I must amend my own ways,
subdue my own lusts, leave off to do my own sins, in which I have been
engaged, and by which I have fallen so often.

Some men do say they are no sectaries, drunkards, nor swearers, nor
adulterers, nor sorcerers; why, heresy it may be is not your sin, and so for
the rest; but something else it may be, he that is not a drunkard may be a
covetous, person, may be a liar, proud, envious, or the like; for every man's
lust does not lie the same way, nor acts it self in every instance, nor runs in
the same channel, yet every unregenerate man has a way of his own, and enough
of that to ruin him: thou art not an open sinner, but art thou not a secret
one? thou art not guilty as another man is in his way, but are not you (even
you) a man that have a corrupt nature, and a way peculiar in sin? Thine own sin
will slay thee, not another man's, and therefore thy reformation must be of
thine own faults whatever they are; Psalm. 34.21. Romans 2.22. Romans 14.12. 2 Cor.
5.10.
Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacriledg? Must not every man give
an account of himself to God? shall not you and every one be judged according
to his own doings?

In the next place, as thou art advised to look into thy frame and actions, S.
17.3.
thy heart and ways, to search diligently which way thy lust works, and what it
brings forth in thy life, and likewise not to spare thy sins, nor deal kindly
with them in the least; so now do I earnestly exhort thee to consider
seriously the tendency of every one of thy sins, the venom, and malignity of
every particular sin; And this consideration, if it be sober and serious, will
bring thee into a dislike and lothing of all and every sin; for the same poison
and destructiveness which is in the whole kind of sin is in every one, in every
specifical sinful motion and act; and no sin, if it be well examined, will be
by thee thought little or venial, seeing it has the same nature and quality as
those hideous sins that are cursed with a curse, though not in the same degree:
you know that one spark of fire is fire, and will blow up as much gunpowder (if
it fall into it) as a torch or live coal of a greater bigness; and one drop of
the salt sea has saltness in it as truly as the whole Ocean, though not so
much: and so it is with the least sin, and it is enough to make thee loathe and
leave it, if you will wisely judge of it, because it is a sin; the very name
shows that it is to be abhorred in every instance and appearance.

that this consideration may help thee to abhor, renounce, and forthwith to
cast away thy sin from thee, as a loathsome and detestable thing, weigh well
these considerations in the ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. IX.
Of some coasiderations which may move a consider are person, to lot he and
leave his own sin resolutely without dispute.

check to his corruptions, and first motions of lust, must make his sins as
heinous to his own view as they are in their own nature, if he can; for a man
accustomed to sin, will not be soon taken off, nor daunted with it, neither
will he be brought to dislike (much less to detest) that way and practice
wherein he has found any thing of fleshly content, or in which he is engaged,
unless he sees something that may change his mind and alter his course from
evil to good. There is a close confederacy between a natural man's heart and
his sin, that the league and cursed amity is not interrupted but by violence,
and that but for a season neither; sin, though it be banished, will return
again with its solicitations and promises; the heart of man unregenerate, is as
ready open to receive and embrace those former motions, and does as easily do
those acts of folly again, and does more greedily pursue the satisfaction of
lusts, desires, (if not hindered) then ever; and the reason that there are so
few true converts, and so many notorious sinners, is, because men either
content themselves with a cessation for some little time, (that is) while the
temptation is at a distance, and their opportunities not so frequent, or some
humane restraint, either their laws, their fear, or their favors do awe them;
or because men do not soberly consider why they should loathe their sin and
detest it, no man will be dissuaded from that which is evil, except he see evil
in that thing he is dissuaded from.

sin thou art guilty of there is so much evil, that a serious considerate soul
would choose to lie under the greatest affliction without sin, rather then to
commit the least sin, to escape that temporary affliction, or to gain by
sinning all the advantages this world can procure to the flesh.

The want of the consideration of the heinousness of sin, S. 21. Plas. 51.
was the occasion that let that good man David loose to a sin which afterward
cost him many a salt teat; and it was well for him he found place for
repentance, a melting heart, and a weeping eye, or else his sin had cost him
dear, had it not been pardoned upon his repentance; Against thee only have I
sinned, and done this evil in thy sight; which if he had considered before as
afterward he did, he had not fallen into that which was so hard for him to get
out of. And on the other side, the consideration of sin as sin, notwithstanding
the advantage might have accrued thereby, was the occasion that Joseph
withstood the solicitation of his Mistress to an experiment of folly, namely
with this, Genesis 39.9.
How can I do this great wickedness and sin against God? and this
consideration kept him from that act of folly, which otherwise he might have
committed to his wounding and endangering.

Now that you may no longer retain any the least love and liking of your sin
whatever it be, S. 22. Job 11.14.
but forthwith tenounce and cast it far from thee, And if iniquity be in thine
hand, to put it away, and never more let wickedness dwell in thy tabernacle,
then enter on these following considerations:

First, S. 23.1.
I consider, (and so likewise do you,) that sin in its self, when it was first
known by the creatures, angels, and men, and by any of either of those two
kinds of creatures committed and acted, became the greatest downfall of each of
those Actors, as ever since (and never before they became sinners) was heard
of. Sin at the first made the first and great breach between God and sinning
Angels, God and sinning men: Man had not known misery but for sin, and the
miseries, and calamities, and natural death of mankind are not half so
dreadful as sin is, nor half so much evil as sin is; and the devils had not
felt torment, and now their unspeakable misery, but for their sin; nay hell had
not been hell, a place of torment, had it not been for sinners, which was
prepared, and prepared only for sinning angels and sinning men; and all the
Miseries that have befallen any since the creation, or that ever shall be
inflicted upon any, are but the woeful consequences of sin, the first and
single transgression of a law of God, and that by the most choice of the
creation, and by their single act; and being but once committed there fell on
them the immediate curse and misery, which to this day, and to the end of the
world, and will for ever continue as long as sin is sin, and that will be for
ever: For Christ himself never undertook to abrogate the law of God, nor to
make it a law that transgression of those laws should be no sin, nor that
transgressors should be accounted innocent, when they sin by disobedience and
transgression, nor that they should be approved of by God, and saved eternally
in a way of disobedience, that is, in a way of habitual and actual rebellion
against God.

venom and perniciousness of sin in its first infection, and in one single
act, that it defiled and destroyed by rendering them for ever most miserable,
so great a number of once most glorious and happy angels that sinned but once
before their fall, and the first sin that ever was committed, yet for that once
sinning were cast down in disgrace presently from heaven, and of glorious
angels made wretched devils, and reserved in chains of darkness, 2 Pet. 2.4.
Jude v. 6.
never to be restored upon any terms to the least hope of recovery and
reconciliation with God.

Adam and Eve, which came upon them by the instigation and cheat of Satan in
the time of their pure innocence and integrity, what an hereditary misery it
brought with it, yea such an infection and pollution, that not only they which
transgressed became miserable slaves, wretched persons, deprived of their
excellency and paradise, but even all the whole race of mankind are fallen
under the misery of pollution in our very nature, and thereby in a state of
wrath, and liable to eternal misery; can I, when I consider this, (the woeful
consequences of one sin in such as those once glorious angels, and these once
most happy men,) choose but I must entertain most dreadful apprehensions of the
nature of sin, and flee from it, and lotheit as a poisonous serpent, and fiery
dragon issuing out of the bottomless pit of hell, pursuing thy soul to the
death and destruction?

sinfulness of sin, and I think with Abhorrency of soul on that venom in it
and detestableness, that when the immaculate, most innocent sinlesse lamb, the
holy and ever-blessed JESUS took man's nature, and undertook to expiate the
guilt, and to satisfy the justice of God, and to intercept the wrath of the
offended God, pouring out upon the whole race of mankind for the first and
after-transgressions; see although he did but bear our sins (for he had not
one sin of his own to answer for, not the least, sinless he ever was, and
sinless he will for ever be;) yet consider what expense he was at, and what
chastisements he bare, what agonies of soul he labored under, what woundings
he suffered, what blood he shed, what death he died, and all ignominy, and ten
thousand times more then I can express, did he pass through, and all because
he (in infinite love to mankind) would interpose, and was content to be reputed
as a sinner, that he might satisfy for sin committed, and repair the ruins
sin had made, and restore the loss sin had procured; yet when I consider what
woeful work sin made on the humanity of the ETERNAL JESUS, while on earth,
though being but laid on him, not found in him, how can I keep my blood from
rising up against sin, my sin that fetched the heart-blood of Christ my Lord,
and crucified the Lord of Life, the Lord of my Life too, and caused his death
for a season? But had he been tainted in himself with the least sin of his own,
or been gui^ty of the least transgression, or had he made the least failer in
any of those many transactions enjoined him by his Eternal Father for the
redemption of mankind fallen, or had he admitted of the least irregularity in
all his life, in thought, word or action, the nature of sin is such, where ever
it cleaves and sticks, that the leas^ s^ruple and mote would have infected a
world of men, and an heaven of angels, and if Christ himself had been tainted
with the lest sin imaginable, he must have ceased from being a Savior and
Redeemer of others, and from being God who is glorious in h^liness, and have
sought for himself a Savior and Redeemer, or have lain under that guilt and
pollution that his own sin had brought upon him: and this the devil knew well
enough when he attempted our blessed Lord Jesus with temptations of diverse
sorts, that he might bring him to commit a sin which would have frustrated the
merit of his redemption, and undone both him and us, if such a thing had been
possible that Christ could have committed a sin So g^e^t an evil, and so
poisonous a plague is ^^n, that it will do that by it is own maglignity which
all the devils in hell cannot do to me, except I commit sin, and yield to the
solicitations and motions of mine own lust.

love to Christ) after such a consideration as this, think sin to be no evil,
and that there is no great hurt in it, much less think it lovely? should I not
rather think sin to be the greatest evil in the world, more terrible then all
the most astonishing and loathsome diseases that are incident to humanity? is it
not far better for one to undergo all the afflictions and bodily punishments
in this life, then to have his soul infected with sin, or to lie under the
guilt or burden of one sin alone? is it not much better to be a poor Saint then
a rich sinner, an humble penitent then an honorable reprobate? would I not a
thousand times rather have my whole life accompanied with variety of troubles
without sin, then to be quite freed from all afflictions, with the being and
adhesion of one sin, though but one, and that the least? Oh my soul, God may
love thee though never so sorely afflicted, (as sometime Job was;) and his love
is life and riches, and far better then all; but if thou be never so rich, and
great, and healthy, and be hated of God, Oh how miserable art thou!

perfectly hates, and will as certainly punish, first or last, where ever he
finds it, and him with whom he finds it; and who can hide himself or his sin,
from the all-seeing God, or withstand his power punishing? alas not one in the
world.

unpardoned sins, thine own wickedness shall be laid on thee, and together with
them the insupportable wrath of the Almighty? Ah sin! thou have undone millions
already, and wilt ruin me also if I keep thee: I am sorry I have been so well
acquainted with thee so long, that I have been deceived by thee so often; it is
too much I have served thee and the devil by sinning. O Lord that I may
henceforth renounce all my wickedness, and lothee very one of my sins, and the
womb that bears them, even my lusts; it will never be well with thee, Jam.
1.14, 15.
O my soul, until I am delivered from the power, guilt, and filthiness of my
sins.

malevolent aspect, working the destruction of the subject where ere it fastens
and remains, then must I expect the same dealing from my own lusts and sinful
acts if I continue in my sin, nourish and feed my lusts, as others have by sad
experience found from their sins; and it is past dispute that every sin in
particular, every transgression of mine, every evil motion within me, every act
of sin is of the very same nature and tendencie, and has the same poisonous
quality, and the same contrariety, enmity and malignity against God and
goodness, as the whole kind of sin in the mass; it is bone of his bone, and
flesh of his flesh, and of the same father the devil, and bears his very
image, and does the same thing, it fights against heaven and my own souls
happiness; it will destroy infallibly if I keep it and cherish it with me.

theft, or covetousness, or whoredom, or drunkenness, or lying, or swearing,
or any other sin frequently, or but once, am I not a sinner? have I not
transgressed the whole law? St. James tells me, Jam. 2.10.
that if I offend in one point I am guilty of all, that is, I have broken the
Law of God, and am guilty of the breach of the whole law by so doing; not that
I have committed every individual sin forbidden, but I have contracted
(transgressing in one point) the guilt of high treason against my Sovereign
Lord the supreme lawgiver.

littleness of my sin should lessen the transgression? My Lord Christ says,
That whosoever shall break one (but one) of these least commandments, Mat.
5.19.
(the least of them,) he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven,
that is, he shall be despised and rejected by God in the day of judgment, and
cast out as an offender and rebel; be it but rash anger of malicious design,
or looking on a woman lustfully, though it proceed not to actual murder or
adultery, though it seem but small while in the first motions of lust, yet it is
a breach of the spiritual law of God, and I am a sinner and a rebel; and if I
so continue in these seeming little faults, I am exempted from pardon; for in
every single sin there is a complicated viciousness, and an accumulated
treason, and that is enough to bring me to condign punishment; and if one of my
sins will be strong enough to wound me and slay me, and has malice enough to
attempt it, how then can I be safe? how can I think to escape and deliver my
soul, while I keep my sin, and act my folly?

add more to the measure and heap of wrath, and in each act of the same sin,
or addition of a new sin, the more rods and scourges are treasuring up for my
final chastisement and eternal punishment.

I consider, that the least sin that can be named, be it but the sin of a vain
word, an irregular thought, an impertinent and unprofitable action, is able to
undo and overthrow millions of angels, and a world of men, if laid and charged
on them; and the reason is, because of that poison that is in it, and it is
enough that it is sin, and whatever has the nature thereof, is insupportable
by any or all the concurrent strength of angels and men.

reason or religion, how can I contentedly keep my sin? how can I but I must
forthwith renounce, suppress and cast quite away my sins, be they great or
small, many or few? For first, when I shall seriously consider these following
things;

1. I consider that every sin is against God, and every time I sin I fight
against God, and use it as my weapon with which I oppose, resist, offend,
contradict the GLORIOUS Majesty of my gracious God; that it is a contrariety
against him,

holy nature of God; sin is set forth in Scripture, and that does show the
maliciousness and exceeding desperateness of it, where sin is termed Romans 8.7.
enmity against God, Act. 7.51.
resisting the holy Ghost, Act. 5.39.
fighting against God; and sinners are said (while in their sins) to walk
Levit. 26.21, 28.
contrary to God, and Isai 45.9.
striving against God, yea rising up in Micah 2.8.
rebellion against God: And all these are expressions which demonstrate the
nature of sin in the root, and every branch and spring of the tree is of the
same venomous quality in its measure and proportion; and can any man think well
of that which sets him against the glorious God, and renders me an enemy to
God, and provokes Gods displeasure against me? Woe unto that soul that striveth
with his maker; Isai. 45.9.
how can the pot-sheard prevail against his maker? how can chafe stand before
the wind? how can a bramble withstand the fire?

righteous laws of God, and by my sin I go about to evacuate and null the just
and holy laws of God made to rule us by; and when I sin I do in effect say, I
will not be ruled by those laws of God, nor obey the will of God, but I will
resist his will, and break his commands, and will not have God for my God to
reign over me, but follow my own will, the will of the flesh, and obey the
devil, and his commands will I follow whatever the issue may be; and what a
damnable resolution is this, yea what a desperate conclusion? what woeful and
dreadful consequences will my sinning bring upon my soul, if thus I set my
self, act against the commands of God, which one day will be justified against
me vile sinner?

My continuance in sin, in any sin, is contrary to that most gracious design
and purpose of God by which he wills my freedom from the dominion, filth and
guilt of my sin, and to put me in a state of holiness and happiness.

1. God sent Christ his dear Son into the world on this design, and on this
errand he came, and for this he spent his precious blood, and laid down his
life, to redeem me from my sins to be a sacrifice for me, to destroy the work
of the devil in me (to wit) my sin, to slay that enmity in my cursed nature, to
abolish sin, to rid me of my sin, to make me a new creature, to purge out the
old leaven, to separate me and my sin; he gave himself for me, to redeem me
from all iniquity, Tit. 2.12, 14.
and to purify me, and make me holy, to teach me this lesson by his holy life
and holy doctrine to avoid sin, to resist temptations, to live spotless in the
world, to renounce all ungodliness, to call me to repentance for all my sins
past, and to lead a sober, righteous and godly life in this present world; and
by his meritorious life and death has procured this grace for me, that through
him I might be able to crucify all my corruptions, overcome all my sins, and
free me from every damning practice, and so reconciling me to God, and to turn
my enmity against God to a harred of every false, unholy, disobedient way and
practice, and to be at peace with God: And do I not by my continuing in my sin
frustrate this merciful design, and render my blessed Savior undertaking, and
his great expense, of no such great effect to me? do not I while I keep my sin,
and act my shame and misery, put a scorn upon Christ's undertakings, and trample
his precious blood (one drop of it being more worth then mountains of gold and
precious stones, 1 Pet. 1.19. Heb. 10.27.
) under foot as an unholy thing, as a thing not effectual to redeem me from my
vain conversation? do I not by my continuance after all this in my sin, render
my self in such a state, in which there is nothing can be expected less then a
certain fearful looking for of judgment? see it plain, Heb. 10.26. If we sin
wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no
more sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment and
fiery indignation which shall devour the adversary, etc.

gracious design of the Gospel, and ministry of it, which is appointed of mercy
to my soul, and to this end published to thee, Act. 26.20.
that it might be the happy instrument of thy conversion, and to work thee off
from thy sin, and to persuade thee to let thy sins go, Act. 20.21.
and to build thee up in a most holy faith and life; to turn me from sin to
God, from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to God.

calls, entreaties, invitations, wooings, complainings, menaces, promises in
the Gospel-administrations, and all the labors, watchings, prayings and
preachings, and studies and tears, and admonitions and warnings? and to what
end are sermons, and sabbaths, and sacraments for me? why does God rebuke, and
correct, and inflict punishments upon sinners? what are all these from the
gracious God to me, but so many varieties of arguments, and so many
importunities and instruments for this very end, that I might leave off and
cease to do evil, and learn to do well? to what purpose is all this cost, but
to bring my soul, (my life) and sin asunder? what is it for but this, to cause
me to leave and forsake that which God hates perfectly, and that will undo me
certainly (if ^^ept?) it is to persuade me to yield to do no more any such act
as God hates; O do not the thing that I hate (says God,) by all these his
dispensations; and that is the upshot of all.

cross the design of God by these means, and so render my self inexcusable, and
oppose God in Christ, and resist the Spirit of God in his word, working and
endeavoring by all means my conversion? what am I less injurious to Gods grace
and Christ's love by my obstinacy and wilfullness then they of this sort which
our Savior speaks to in tears, How often would I have gathered thee, Luke
13.34. Luke 19.42.
as a hen does her chickens under her wings, but ye would not? O that thou
had known, even thou in this thy day, (and by these thy means) the things
that belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes: thou knew
not the time of mercies visitation, but crossest the gracious design of thy
invitation, thou will not leave thy sins, and now mercy is hid from thee; and
so my continuance in sin is a mere contradiction to my pardon and forgiveness
you see.

cut me to the bone, and pierce me to the heart, when my continuing in sin is
no less then the opposing the grace of God, Its design is to bring me to
repentance and forsaking sin, that I might find mercy and favor from him; who
(but a mad man or a fool) would continue in his sin against such grace, and so
cross that design of God to bring thee (poor wretch) to happiness?

holy nature, which has no defilement, and it is against his holy laws, his
good will, purpose, and gracious designs, and makes the sinner and God at great
dispute and controversy, which is a state bad enough for a poor wicked wretch
to be in, yet I may further consider, that my sin is against God, and so bad
enough, though God notwithstanding my enmity and contrariety, can well enough
secure his own honor, holiness and eternal happiness, without impeachment, or
the least interruption or diminution, yet it is bad enough to me, that I by my
sin am become an enemy to God, and God an enemy to me, which is death and
misery sure enough to the sinner.

offer violence to my own soul, my sin is against my own self, it is the
greatest wrong and injury I can do to my self, and if I had any true love to my
self, that is, to the eternal welfare of my best self, my soul, Pro. 8.36.
I should forbear sinning. He that sins against me, that is, against Christ,
wrongeth his own soul, all they that hate me love death: If I live in sin, and
will not repent of it and forbear it, I work the greatest mischief I can
against my self: sinning is self-murthering, I lay violent hands on my self, if
I would study to ruin my self for ever, there is no way imaginable like this
now mentioned, of sinning and repeating the acts, and continuing in any sinful
course, to effect my utter destruction: every sin is a deaths-wound, and
although it kill me not outright, yet it leaves me for dead, I am a condemned
man, I am dead in law, and dead as to the acting any life of grace; it may be I
may have for a little while a name to live, but indeed I am dead, dead while I
live in the world. Such an one a sinner is, as the Angel of the Church of
Sardis reproves, Rev. 3: 1.
I know thy works, that thou have a name that thou live, and art dead.

grace nor the space to repent of, I may forget it, I may make light of it, or
I may excuse it, or defend it, or maintain it; I may be hardened in it, and
add more to it, and draw others to countenance and practice my sin, and so
still infect another with my plague, and become an exemplar and promoter of
wickedness, and teach others to sin too, and propagate iniquity, and bring
subjects to the devil, and enlarge his kingdom; O what an innumerable many of
mischiefs do I bring upon my self and others, when I sin! And after all this,
if I do seem to be sorry for my so doing, at the end of a vicious life, I can
have none assurance that I shall be pardoned; but on the contrary, most certain
it is, if I continue in my sin until death, I must be damned for all my
repentance; for Judas sinned, and repented, and despaired, and was damned for
all his repentance; his sin for which he was accused, and for which he hanged
himself, was but a sin, and my transgression is a sin too: and if Judas, or
Cain, or a Simon Magus, or a Julian be damned for their sins, what advantage
will it be for me if my sin be not so deep a dye, so grim a complexion, so
horrid a sound as treasons and murder, a betraying my Master, and killing my
Brother, if I be cast into hell for my omissions of Gods commands, and doing
such things, though but in the least instance, which God has absolutely
forbidden? When I consider this, methinks I should dread sin as an ugly fiend,
as a devil of hell, and shun it as a pest and a killing plague, and repent me
heartily that ever I committed any, and resolve to commit it no more; and the
more I consider, the more I should detest, loathe, shun, renounce all and every
wickedness, and the more should I raise my resolution to sin no more as I have
done, lest as bad a thing befall me as has befallen any of those whose
destruction was most dreadful: God grant I may, I hope I shall.

injure my own soul; (1.) I wrong my knowledge, I know I should not commit the
sin I commit, and yet I do it against my knowledge. (2.) I wrong my reason and
judgment: my reason and my judgment (if it act clear) tell me that there is no
reason why I should serve sin, but all the reason in the world why I should not
sin thus; and if I would yield to reason I should not yield to sin, and yet I
sin against my reason and judgment, and wrong both. (3.) I wrong and offer
violence to my conscience when I sin; my conscience minds me that I must not
commit this and that sin, and it smites me when I do, and it accuses for my
sinning when I have done it, and yet I sin, I do act against my conscience when
I sin at all, and how will my conscience endure this? will not my conscience
one day complain to God of me that I wronged it, and did things contrary to it
in despite of it? and do I not wound, and gash, and tear my bosom friend, when
I sin? do I not make conscience my enemy too, as well as God my enemy every
time I commit a sin?

wilfully, with consent, deliberately, I break my baptismal vow, and my
rational Christian conscientious resolution; I ^m engaged by vow and promise to
forsake the devil, to resist his temptations, to renounce worldly lusts and
fleshly lusts, and every way that is contrary to Christ and holiness, and I
have or should peremptorily resolve against all manner of sin; and yet when I
sin voluntarily I violate my vow, and break my promise, and contradict my
resolutions, and render my self a covenant-breaker, a perjured person, an
unfaithful and unconstant, a fickle and vain fool, and bring guilt and
disgrace; sin and ignominy together upon my own soul; and do I not wrong my
self extremely in so doing? can I do a greater mischief to my self then I do
when I sin after all this? can any thing disgrace me more, debase me lower,
revile me more deservedly then this, when I commit a sin and live in it? is
there any thing can deface the image of God in me, (which is my glory and
honor, my beauty and perfection,) then sin? If I be poor and holy, yet am I
rich in grace, and so am I honorable too, though I want both worldly riches
and honors; but if I am a sinful wretch, though never so rich and great in
the worlds account, yet am I but a vile and deformed person, a scorn, and
contemptible before God and Angels: O there is nothing makes me ugly and
deformed, vile and contemptible but my sin; do I not then wrong my self by
sinning? or is there any way imaginable whereby a man can do a greater or so
great a mischief to himself then by acting and repeating his sins? sure there
is not any.

damage and irreparable loss I procure to my precious soul by my own sin, I
must conclude within my self, that when I sin I wrong my own soul, and fight
against my own and contend for my own undoing. 1. When I commit sin I make a
breach between God and my own soul, my sin is the makebate; not poverty, nor
affliction, not sickness, nor meanness of birth, nor deformity of body, nor any
thing but sin does make God at a distance from my soul; but by sin I lose my
innocence, and sin away that which nothing can procure me, which is much more
worth then gold, that which gold cannot purchase again, the peace of
conscience; Isa. 57.21.
There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked; I provoke Gods anger and
displeasure, and tempt him to withdraw his favor from me, and to bring forth
treasures of wrath against me; all the while I live in a sinning state I lose
the benefit of repentance, the benefit of Christ's sufferings and intercession,
I bereave my soul of the indwelling of the spirit of comfort, and banish by my
sining Christ from my soul, and grieve the holy Spirit of God so, that he
withdraws himself and leaves me desolate; and alas, what a sad loss has the
soul that has lost Christ and the Spirit! what a miserable condition is it to
be without Christ and the Holy Ghost? to be one that has banished Christ and
the Holy Spirit from his soul? O how deplorable is that man's estate! and yet
such is the state of a wilful sinner, every man and woman that lives in the
love, liking and practice of sin, and does not repent and reform, he does not
only lose his best friends and best friendship, but provokes them to be his
very enemies, Christ who loved thee, and pitied thee, and laid down his life
for thee, and weeps over thee, and bled for thee, and spared not his life to
redeem thee from thy sins, that he might have thee; and yet for all this his
unparallelled and unspeakable love, and tender compassion, will thou offer him
all affronts, and pierce and wound him with thy sins, and trample upon all his
worth, and banish him quite away with thy unkind dealing? what way could thou
ever have thought on more ready and certain to deprive thy self of all the
benefits of Christ's transactions for sinners, then by sinning still as thou
do? Nay what way could a wicked heart have chosen (that would study his own
eternal loss and misery) like this of sinning still and going on in his
wickedness? can thou contrive any thing that will make Christ (the best
friend that ever poor sinner had,) thy mortal enemy, then by continuing still
to do wickedly? Those mine enemies (says Christ of impenitent, implacable, and
unruly rebels and sinners, Luke 19.27.
) that would not that I should reign over them, bring hither and stay them
before me. Where I see it is possible that Christ may become a revenger; Psalm.
2.12.
and oh, when his wrath is kindled, yea but a little, how dreadful will be the
appearance of this Lamb of God! how will all such sinners be forced to cry, O
mountains and rocks fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits
on the throne, Rev. 6.16, 17.
and from the wrath of the lamb: For the great day of his wrath is come, and
who shall be able to stand?

best friends, and make them my enemies, (which yet is bad enough God knows for
me,) but I also sin away and lose by sinning my felicity, my comforts, my
peace, my happiness, all my heaven on earth: Alas what a poor miserable,
uncomfortable creature is a resolved sinner! what is a man worth that has lost
the rich enjoyment of Gods favor, and his own good conscience? what an hell of
darkness and horror is that soul in, who has lost the light of Gods
countenance, and peace of his own conscience? Many sorrows shall be to the
wicked, but he that trusts in the Lord, mercy shall compass him about; so
that the righteous and upright of heart, the holy penitent may be glad in the
Lord, and take joy, and delight themselves in the Lord; he, and he only, that
is reformed, has those comforts and delights which wicked men know not, nor
can ever attain unto as long as they continue wicked.

David, though a great and potent Monarch, found not that happiness in his
crown which the world may think to be a felicity: He does not say, I am a King,
and have many subjects at my command, and a large dominion, and much revenue,
Psalm. 4.6, 7, 8.
and therefore am happy; no, but when he would comfort his soul, and recount
his worth and treasures, says, Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance
upon us: give David but Gods favor and love, and he will single out him from
all to make his joy full and his happiness complete; Lord, thou have put
gladness in my heart, more then in he time when their corn and wine was
increased; I will lay me down in peace, etc. how comfortably does he take to
his rest, when he lies down in Gods favor! And had he kept his sin he had lost
his peace and happiness, for you may see a glimpse of the sadness of his
soul, and unquietness, in that 51. Psalm, when he cries out, O his sin, his
sin! Why David? what have thou done by sining? what damage has fallen on thee
by thy sin? why you shall see, he lost his peace, he lost the presence of Gods
favor; and by this his only comfort and felicity he had lost: The best Jewel
in his Crown was dropped out when he lost Gods favor; he cries heartily for
mercy, the mercy of pardon, the mercy of purification and cleaning from the
filth of his sin, and the mercy of his restoration to those joys, comforts and
happiness he had in Gods favor, which then were hid from him, which was his
misery; Purge me, and I shall be clean, cleanse me from my sin, and I shall
have joy and gladness again; Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation once
more. See how he mourns and prays, and for what is it? why it is that his sins
may be abolished, his guilt pardoned, and his comforts restored, which he had
lost by his folly, and which could never be restored but by repentance and
leaving off his sin; and until this was gotten, he knew he could never see
happy day, nor enjoy a minute of true comfort in all the world, though it had
been one paradise of pleasure. And thus it will be with every one that goes on
in his sin. Ah! at what a loss does a sinner act and keep his sin? And this is
my case already, and shortly it will be worse with me; I know God and my
Conscience will not long hold peace and be silent, I am sure I must leave my
sin or lose my comforts, lose my quiet, lose my felicity, and espouse a quarrel
that will admit of no reconciliation; if I keep my sins I must never look God
in the face more, or expect to have the least good look of favor from his
grace, nor any friendly dealing from my own conscience, but must be under
perpetual rebukes and accusations of a wronged conscience; and when this comes
to pass, then farewell happy day, no more comfort when God and my own
conscience are against me: As my sins increase true felicity cease, and my
comforts wither and decay; and alas how sadly does that poor wretch think on
death, when it will prove but the execution of a rebel, and a changing of this
miserable life for an eternity of horror and reproach? Ah! let me now consider,
whether my gain by sin any way will countervail this loss; is it not more
eligible, and should it not be a matter of my choice infinitely rather to enjoy
the favor of God, and peace and tranquillity of my own conscience, then
whatever pleasure, gain, or other emolument might come to my flesh by sinning,
with the loss of my innocence, integrity, my happiness in Gods favor, and that
inward peace which is a continual feast, passing all outward delights
whatsoever?

banish God and happiness from my soul here for a season, but the loss goes
higher still by my sin and continuance in it, it loses me the hopes of heaven,
it disappointeth my expectation of heaven; how can I once hope to be saved
while I practice those things which would throw me out of Heaven, if it were
possible for one to think on with delight in heaven? how can I with reason
conclude I shall be saved, and yet live in a course contrary to the promises of
salvation? Heaven is a place of holiness as well as of happiness, and no
unclean thing shall enter into it; there is not one there, nor ever shall be,
that lived in actual sin, and died out of this world impenitent and
unreformed: how then can I with any face expect to be saved with my sin, when
God says I shall not? is heaven at my dispose, or at Gods? is it not his to
give to whom he please? can I force in against his will? has he not passed his
word, that no wicked man, nor unrighteous, nor adulterers, nor whoremonger, nor
theif, nor drunkard, nor liar, nor any impenitent sinner of any kind, shall
inherit the kingdom of heaven. And shall I think God will revoke his decree,
and comply with the expectation of any vile sinner against his own truth,
honor and holiness? may I hope to get to heaven whether God will or no? no,
certainly I must leave my sin, or leave off to hope any more that I shall be
saved; I must despair of salvation, or I must depart from mine iniquity, and
get my sins pardoned, and soul sanctified by a timely repentance and sound
reformation, or quit my claim to salvation, and let fall my suit and
expectation though I seek it, beg for it, desire it, cry for it in my settled
course of sinning: I shall not find it nor attain it; nay though I had to give,
and would freely give all I have, Micah 6.7, 8.
and ten thousand times more then the whole world is worth to purchase heaven
at the end of a vicious life, it would not be accounted of, it would not open
heaven-gate to me, it could not procure for me one glimpse of that glory which
the Saints enjoy, much less that full enjoyment which is laid up for those that
repent and believe, and live holily here, and so persevere to the end of their
days. And now let me consider, had I best leave my sin, or my claim and hopes
of heaven? I may not keep both, I must forgo one, either my sin here, or my
happiness hereafter; will my sin be a sufficient compensation for the loss of
heaven, or heaven for the parting with my lusts? will a base lust be of greater
advantage to thy soul then heaven, that thou make so much of it, and so
little of salvation? can not brook the thoughts of parting with thy sin, and
yet can well enough endure the thoughts of the loss of heaven? is sin so
pleasing a thing, and holiness and heaven so uncomfortable, that thou should
take such pleasure in unrighteousness, and account grace and salvation such a
burden and loss? can thou not sustain with patience the loss of a child, a
friend, the disappointment of a little carnal contentment, or to be crossed in
thy gratifying a vile lust? and can bear with contentedness the loss of thy
God and Savior, thy joy and felicity for ever? O sordid stupidity! O stupid
folly! O desperate madness! is it imaginable that such a thing as this should
ever enter into the heart of any man that has not forfeited his reason, and
sold himself to work wickedness, or resolved to throw away his soul, and undo
himself for ever, and resolves to continue in his sin, though it be with the
loss of his salvation.

loss of heaven nothing? is it no great matter that thy sin deprives thee of
when it shuts fast the gate of heaven against thee? can I think those five
foolish virgins, mentioned in the parable, sustained no loss when they lost
that opportunity of going in with the Bridegroom? did they think their
condition as happy as that of the other five that passed into heaven? seeing
they knocked so earnestly, but too late and in vain, the door was shut, was it
no trouble think you to them that they had lost their opportunity, that now
they could not enter into those joys? will it be no trouble to a sinner at
last, when he shall see the Saints in glory in the kingdom of heaven, and the
vile hard-hearted, impenitent, unconverted wretch shut out for ever? Alas! who
can brook or bear the dreadful apprehensions of the loss of heaven, that has
but the least regard to his own precious soul, and the worth of heavens
happiness? Can a man think of any loss so great as the loss of heaven is, or is
there any such a loss again, that which comprehends so fully a misery for a
man to think on as this? May I not safely guess that the greater part of horror
and misery of the damned is their reflecting thoughts of their not improving
their opportunities in their day of grace in this world for the attainment of
heaven, and their poor afflicted souls lying under those deep and endless
agonies of their loss, their loss, their loss! Once I had a fair offer of
heaven, but I would not, now I would, but may not, that opportunity is lost,
heaven is lost, and I am lost, and lost for ever; O happy souls that are in
heaven! O miserable we that are excluded thence! Think and think again (sinner)
on this, and then know, that if thou continue in thy sin as they did, that thou
must be as they are, even as they were once deluded with sin, and are now
banished from all hopes of happiness for ever; think seriously on this, and
then continue in thy sin if thou can; thou can not think of living any
longer in thy wickedness, unless thou meanest to take thy lot with them that
have passed to those regions of misery, and there with them to abide, with
weeping and gnashing of teeth to all eternity. Mat. 8.12.


lose heaven, that I put it every day to the hazard by my complying with sin,
and venture my interest there, purchased with the blood of Christ for penitent,
believing, holy men, and to be conferred on such when they go out of this
stage of the world as the crown of all happiness to their immortal souls? is
it a trifle I lay at stake, when by the next act of sin I put it to a doubt
whether I shall be saved or no? shall I commit this sin, and take the pleasure
and the profit of it, and forgo my hopes of heaven, or shall I not? Men do not
well consider that every time they consent to and obey a lust, and execute its
command, they put their salvation to the hazard; and do I do well or wisely in
so doing? are the joys of heaven no more to be accounted of, then to be so
prodigal of them, and all thy happiness with them? do thou know what thou
losest when thou have lost salvation? or can thou be any where else so well,
or well at all any where else, but in heaven when thou go hence?

nothing to miss of heaven, or to come short of salvation, where only my soul
can be fully and completely happy, where there is only and nothing else but
soul-satisfying joys and contentments; where only I can neither sin nor die any
more, where I can neither fear nor feel pain, sickness, sorrow, want, reproach,
nor any thing that can in the least interrupt, diminish or suspend my
happiness, much less put an end to my full and perfect bliss? There is more
fullness of joy then can be expressed, Psalm. 16.11.
and more pleasures then can be numbered, and these joys at Gods right hand are
for evermore, more and for ever. And is it a small matter to miss of all these?
Oh who would live in sin that must suffer such loss for it? Surely he loves
his lusts too well that will part with heaven and happiness to gratify the
devil, and satisfy the lusts of his flesh, as every wilful finner does: But
shall I continue in my sin and lose this happiness? God forbid. Shall I deprive
my self, and rob my soul of that unspeakable comfort, rich enjoyment, and real
filling contentment and endless happiness I may have above in heaven, rather
then cross my lusts, and part with my folly, my shame, my sin? no, no, let all
go, let my sinful pleasures go, let the world go, let my life go, let all go,
rather then those joys which are in prospect in heaven pass by me, and go
beside me; Lord what shall I do if I miss of heaven? I am undone for ever if I
do go without it; shall I keep a sin which is worse then nothing, and lose the
bliss of Angels, the vision of the All-glorious God, whose presence, favor,
and everlasting love fills the soul with most admirable delights, and ravishing
pleasures? shall I lose the portion of Christ's redeemed ones, Heb. 12.22, 23,
24.
and never come to that heavenly Mount Sion, the City of the living God, to
that innumerable company of Angels, to the general assembly of the firstborn
which are written in heaven? shall I hinder my self of the happy condition of
the spirits of just men made perfect? Oh shall I disappoint my soul of the
sight, fruition and eternal enjoyment of my Jesus, my Lord, my redeemer, who
loved me and died for me, and is in heaven preparing a place for his followers,
all true believers? shall I miss him whom my soul loves? can I endure to be
any where but where he is? will any place content me for my rest and happiness
but his arms and eternal embracements? Oh Jesus! how can I now without
breaking my heart once think of being separated from thee one moment? it would
be an hell upon earth, to think that it should be a separation for ever from
that lovely, loving, melting heart and bosom of my Lord and Savior: Yea
cursed be that tempter and temptation, that would make me do that again that
might deprive my poor soul of the enjoyment of my Lord Christ, which is all the
heaven and happiness I desire, so I may be with him for ever, with thee dear
Jesus for ever: And this is enough, I crave no more, and with less then this
enough I cannot be satisfied; I must have Christ for my heaven, and my heaven
where Christ is, or I am undone; give me (says my soul) Christ or I die: let
me have him, let my portion be Christ, and then I shall be richly satisfied;
dear Lord, bring me home to thy kingdom where thou dwell, where thou
reignest, that I may be where thou art for ever; I desire (I say) no more, and
thus much I cannot be without.

Now sin will not only deprive me of this happiness, S. 64.4.
and put me under this irreparable loss, but it will (if I continue in a state
of sinning) bring me into, and leave me for ever under INSUPPORTABLE TORMENTS,
my sin will infallibly bring me to HELL, I must be damned for it; it is a quick
word, a severe word, and a terrible word DAMNATION is, and yet the expression
is not so significantly dreadful as the thing, the term pincheth not the
sinner, but the thing will; hell is a place of torment as well as darkness, not
one drop of water to cool the inflamed tongue, or to quench those everlasting
flames; not one accent of comfort shall ever be heard spoken to a damned
sinner, nor one moment of ease shall ever be had. After Christ has once said,
Mat. 25.41.
Depart from me thou cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and
his Angels, then immediately is the miserable sinner clapped into prison, and put
into the same state with devils: how does every word of that sentenc^ pierce
the heart of a condemned sinner, DEPART? alas! whither shall I go? must I
depart whether I will or no? is there no remedy for me, alas? from thee Lord?
why, to whom should I go then? if I must depart from thee, I am lost and
undone; what from my Lord, in whose presence is joy, in whose favor is life
only? no happiness but with thee, and must I depart from THEE, may I not be
admitted to stay so much as in thy sight, where I may have a glimpse of THEE,
and be blessed sometimes with a crumb of thy favor among thy meanest servants?
No! depart from me ye CURSED: oh killing accent! what must I depart, and from
thee, and not have thy blessing? not so much as I bless thee in the name of
the Lord, and go in peace? what not a kind word from thee to comfort me in my
distresses? must I have thy curse with me too? oh this is wounding! my Lord can
say no more to the very devils then to call them ACCURSED: and must I fare no
better? Oh cursed the day that I was born! why did I ever see a day to come to
this dark and dismal day, to be CURSED, and banished with a CURSE? why if it
must be so that I must depart from thee, and with a curse at my back, let me be
banished into some corner of the earth, let me be buried under some mountain,
let me lie as one forgotten, let me hear no more of my faults, nor feel my
misery: No, no, depart from me ye cursed into EVERLASTING FIRE. Oh terrible!
what into fire? must I burn and be tormented? why who can endure to be burnt?
must I lie down in flames? oh that I might be quickly consumed then and cease
to be, that I might feel no pain then; it is a thousand times better not to be,
then to be thus miserable; may I not have the favor to be turned into nothing
rather then into burnings? or let me be tormented but for ten thousand years,
and then gain at length thy favor; No, it is too easy a punishment for such a
sinner, Voluisset reprobus si petuisset sine fine viv^re, ut posset sine fine
peccare, Greg.
who would sin eternally if thou had been to live eternally on the earth;
thou did continue in sin all thy life-tim, which was all the eternity thou
had, and would do so always if thou had been to live always; therefore
now thy lot is an eternal curse, an everlasting fire, without mitigation,
without limitation; no ease there, no redemption thence, no end of that
torment, it is everlasting fire.

But will not the Lord abate somewhat of the heat and fierceness of that fire?
prepared for Gods greatest enemies; it is such, and altogether such as is
prepared for the torments of devils: Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting
fire, PREPARED for the DEVIL and his ANGELS: what must a vile sinner have no
better company in his misery then the cursed devils and his cursed crew to all
eternity? No! no other; they that were thy companions in evil will be thy
tormentors, thou will curse them, and they will curse thee, and all will curse
themselves, and Jesus Christ will curse them all; and to all eternity shall
those wretches that live in their sin, and will not be in time reformed, be
cursed, and shut up into that condition with final despair, for the reprobate
wretch shall be tormented to all eternity, and they shall know so much, and
despair shall seize upon them as a part of their torment.

reflect on thy self now, and seriously consider what it is to live in sin here,
and to refuse amendment, and to despise admonition, and not to reform thy life,
and get thy sins pardoned, and soul sanctified, and thy self thoroughly
converted ere it be too late.

bring thee to hell torments, to the region of horror, to flames unquenchable,
to Legions of devils, to the spirits of wicked men made most miserable, to an
innumerable company of cursed, damned wretches like thy self, and to
insupportable, yet endless, misery: And is it nothing to lie under effectual
wrath, and that for ever? is it a thing to be made light of by thee sinner, is
to inherit the curse, and hell for thy portion? can thou endure the
everlasting burnings, and laugh at thine own calamities? shall not the thought
of I SHALL NEVER BE RELEASED NOR EASED be pleasing to thee then? Will not this
be thy hopeless wish, Oh that I might die and be no more for ever? fain the
poor wretch would die, but die he shall not, and yet live he cannot be said to
do, ever dying and never dead, ever breaking and never be broken, ever burning
and never be consumed? oh what woeful pass is the sinner brought to! oh dungeon
of darkness, horror, pain and sorrow! oh wretch that I was, oh miserable that I
am, oh that I had never been born to this, or that I had been a dog, a toad in
the ditch, any thing, nothing rather then a sinner to come to this, to suffer
thus as I now do! are all my sweet morsels of sin and sinful pleasures come to
this at last? is this that which I sinned so vilely against God for? is this
the recompense of my rebellion, my scorning and hardening my heart, and
shutting my ears against counsels, admonitions, warnings, menaces and rebukes,
while I lived in the world? oh how dear do I pay for all my folly, wilfulness
and madness! I would not be reformed time was, and now I may not though I
would, and now I cannot deliver my own soul, and Christ will not deliver me, I
am tormented, tormented, tormented in this flame; Oh what an hell is this! what
company is here! what horror is here! what anguish do I feel within me! what a
rack of torture am I upon! what trembling of joints, what gnawing of
conscience, what hellish groans and moaning accents, what harsh affrighting,
afflicting gnashings within, and round about the poor damned sinner! what
ghastly looks, what hideous out-crys! alas, alas, who can express the misery of
the damned? oh to what a woeful pass is an impenitent now brought to! where are
now his carnal delights? where is his worldly greatness and riches gotten by
sin, and enjoyed in sin? what is become of his joviall company? where* (wretch)
now is thy presumption and vain hope, and foolish confidence, and dull
security? what would give for one minutes ease now, which thou would not
believe was not to be found in hell, or that thou should ever be brought to
this case by thy continuance in sin? you put then the thoughts of this evil day
far from you, while the seasonable thoughts thereof in time might have
prevented it, and now (poor wretch) thou can not remove thy thoughts from thy
misery, now thou would do any thing to release thee, but then thou would
not hearken ^o do the least matter toward the preventing of this thy misery;
who can pity thee? who will pity thee? no, the time of pity and mercy from
the Lord is gone, Qui voluntatem D^^ sp^^ve^^nt invitantem, voluntatem D^i
s^ntient vindi^^n^em. Aug. Isai. 66.4, 24.
and gone for ever, and thou art lost and lost for ever: I will bring their
fears upon them, (says the Lord) Isai. 66.4. because when I called none did
answer, when I spoke they did not hear; but they did evil before mine eyes, and
chose that in which I delighted not. And they shall go forth and look upon the
carkesses of the men that have transgressed against me; for their worm shall
not die, neither shall their fire be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring
to all flesh. Oh who would live in sin to pay so dear for sinning? would any
but a profane E^^^ sell away his happiness, the blessing of heaven, to
purchase the curse and hell? and yet every sinner that goes on in his
wickedness does so, he takes up the pleasures of sin for a season, and
exchangeth for it h^aven, and undergoes for his short mirth an ETERNAL MISERY.

Now consider this ye that forget God, Psalm. 50.2^.
lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you: Will thou rather
die eternally, then take some pains to turn from thy sinful courses and live?
shall it be all in vain that thou art forewarned? will it not be one day all
in vain that thou wishest thou had been reformed, if thou refuse it now? O
poor soul if thou have any regard to thy self, if thou will ever escape the
damnation of hell, think on it now, and sin no more, do no more so foolishly;
it is enough thou have done already, and too much; let it suffice thee, and
repent thee that thou have lived so long in that state which will bring thee to
thy misery, if not speedily reformed; let hell, the portion of impenitent
sinners, and its everlasting torments, the punishment for such sinners, be
thought on by thee, and quickly, quickly, without delay come out of that way
which leads to this destruction, which will infallibly be met withal at the
end of a vicious sinful course.

speedy, effectual, and practical resolution, forthwith to leave off every
sinful way that thou have gone on in sinning, which is so odious to God, so
much against him, and so much against thy soul, so much against thy happiness,
and so much to thy loss and damage; how should the consideration of all these
things work upon thine heart, and hasten this resolution, and without more ado
bring thee to this conclusion, Therefore will I now return, now will I no
longer abide in my sins, I have done too much already, if God will accept of
me, yet I will provoke him no more, I would not lose my God, my soul, my
happiness; but I will part with my sins, all my sins, and return no more to
folly; by the grace of God this will I do, I see there is reason I should, I
see there is a necessity for it if I mean to be happy, and I would not be
damned, but with all my heart I desire to be saved eternally. O spara a little
good Lord, that I may have some space yet to repent, Psalm. 39.13.
that I may have some space yet to repent, to amend, and that I may recover
some strength ere go I hence and be no more.

resolution, which is but the beginning of reformation, and will not be
accepted without actual performance and perseverance in the duty, I do now in
the next place exhort thee to be speedy and resolute in forsaking and casting
off all thy transgressions without any further delay; To day, Heb. 4.7.
while it is said to day, after so long a time if you will hear his voice
harden not your hearts: For be the work hard, or be it easy, done it must be,
there is a necessity for it, sin must be left, corruption must be mortified,
and your life must be reformed ere you die, and the present opportunity is the
fittest opportunity, if not the only acceptable day; And if you are still
about to amend, and intending to reform, and yet do it not, but rest in thy
almost being resolved, and about being resolved, you do but flatter your self,
and lose your time, and give sin the head, and suffer corruption to take deep
root, and every days defetting gives God the denial (who calls to day,) and
renders the duty more difficult, and thy self more sinful, and religion more
unpleasing, and makes grace more feeble and ineffectual; and so putting off
from day to day, shortly death will come (which will not be put off) and thy
work undone, thy sins not left, thy lusts unsubdued, thy God offended, thy soul
wronged, thy sorrows drawing near, thy appearance in judgment at hand, and thou
all this while a guilty, unholy, impure soul, summoned to answer for all thy
delays, and thou then sentenced to misery for thy neglecting thy day of grace,
and putting away far from thee thy reformation, which a long time thou had
been convinced to be necessary, and it may be have been about it, and about it,
but have not endeavored it effectually: This is the case of too many, and if
it be thy case, then my earnest request is that you would speed your
reformation that it may be effected before you die: -- I am sure it will do
you no harm to leave off your sensual devil^ish courses, and that speedily
too, unless it hurt you to be pardoned, cleansed, and eternally saved; and
certainly this can be no wrong unto thee to persuade thee to desist from doing
such things, which to do and continue in, is not only thy shame and loss, but
thy undoing for ever; be serious then in what further is offered in the
following chapter for thy consideration, to hasten thy reformation, and to
silence all objections to the contrary.

CHAP. X.
Of some more moving thoughts which may help, and draw a poor sinner to speedy
resolution without further delay.

ediousness and miserable consequences of sin, and dreadful expectation of a
man going on in his wickedness, I would now in this Chapter mind the sinner of
what behooves him to do in the case, in answer to the merciful forbearing,
long-suffering, and goodness of God which leads to repentance: that so Gods
lengthened-out patience toward thee a sinner to this time of thy life, may no
longer be abused by thy continuing any whit longer in thy sins, which mercy
will be wronged and affronted by thee, if after all this forbearance,
accompanied with so many testimonies against sin, and so many gracious calls
and invitations to return from thy evil doings, to serve the living God in new
obedience; if thou should persevere and go on still in thy evil ways any
further after such convictions, how would it aggravate thy sins, and heighten
thy misery? Therefore I would persuade thee to do that speedily (which all wise
men have done) even now thou know thy faults, to amend thy faults without
putting off, or objecting against, thy speedy reformation: Say, I have the
corruptions of my nature to be mortified, my diseases to be healed, the power
of my lusts to be conquered, the image of God to be repaired, my sinful
practices to be amended, many Acts of grace to be performed, many temptations
to be resisted and disappointed, this present world with all its blandishments
to be crucified, this heart of mine must be brought to love Christ above all,
and all this cannot be done in a moment, and then shall I put it off any
longer? have I any time to spend idly or vainly? any more that I can well
spare from such employments as these are, to squander away about other foolish
matters, having so much to do of my own work? yea say further, I though on my
ways, and I am resolved to turn from all my evil courses, and I will make have
and not delay to keep thy Commandments. Thus did that true penitent David,
recorded for thy imitation in this point, Psalm. 119.58, 60.
(who says) I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy commandments, I
made have and delayed not to keep thy commandments. Now let me consider,

First, and why should not I do so also? is not my soul as dear to me as his to
him? S. 72.1.
am not I as much engaged to Christ as he? will not my sins undo me as much as
his would him? do I not as much need reformation as any body, if I am not
already reformed? or can I turn too soon? may I fear of being too good a
Christian, too much a convert, too much holy?

space, Deus poenitentibus veniam promisit, sed omnibus paenitendi tempus non
concessit, Greg.
or if I have, I may not have the grace to repent; and may I not be jealous
(having so much to do in the business of my soul) that I shall not have time
enough to do all my work? There is no too much of that of which there can never
be enough; and I have heard that repentance may be too late, but never can it
be too soon: one would think it reason a man should repent the very next minute
after the committing of sin, and yet men commit many, sins and live long in
them, and think it yet too soon to leave them and repent of them; or that they
may do all the work of Reformation at once, in a very trice, as though there
were a kind of slight and dexterity to dispatch the great work of
through-saving reformation in a moment, when alas the whole life of the longest
sinner is but enough, scarce that, unless we husband and improve our
opportunities better then most in the world do this way, and is it not yet time
to look after thy souls reformation, since there is so much past of thy life
already, and so little behind to come, it may be not one week, and thou have
much to do? I am drawing near to my end, my sins increase, and my time
decreases; if I have time enough, yet it is but enough for the great work I have
to do, and I cannot command time as much as I please, for if it be not in my
power to prolong my days, and set me more limits to my life, if I cannot say I
will live till such an age and continue in perfect strength, judgment and
affections till that time, if I cannot command repentance at pleasure, and be
my own judge and carver as to proportion how much and so much will serve my
turn, if I may not limit God to my proportion, and allow him to accept as much
of it as I am willing to perform, and at what time, and in what degree, and
then that God shall seal me a pardon, and give me heaven upon my own conditions
whether he will or no: and fure this were high presumption, and an arrogancy
not to be born by a mortal, much less by the glorious supreme Majesty of
heaven, who is Lord of all men, their lives, their strength, their souls, and
all they have, who has the sole power and disposal of all things temporal,
spiritual and eternal, all graces and glories; and shall I dare think, much
less how can I hope that God will alter his decree, and deny his prerogative,
and cancel the conditions of salvation, and divest himself of that eternal
Sovereignty, and give it to me a base wretch, only that I may be wicked, and
continue as long in my sins as I will, and then to make God serve my ends, and
countenance my rebellion, and reward me for all the contempts of his offers,
and abusing his patience and longsufferance, with heavenly joys and a crown of
glory at the end of a life that has been spent in a direct contradiction to
his most holy will? Oh my soul, let never such profaneness enter into thy
secrets, let no such thoughts abide with thee, set me never prescribe, but let
me stand to and yield to Gods prescription, and let me repent and reform
speedily, even n^w let me turn from my evil ways and thoughts, and make no
dispute of it: this may be the acc^p^able day, this is the day of grace, if God
does now move thee, and thou art now under conviction that thou need
repentance, and that it is high time for thee to amend and to cast off all thy
transgressions; you must confess at least that it is very fit you should,
though it may be you will not see it so absolutely necessary, because of that
blindness that is in thee.

conviction, it is an hint from the Lord that this is the time you are to
resolve, and to stop, as to your former course of sinning in any kind any more,
and to set heartily about the work of reformation in your own soul and life,
and you may expect Gods grace will not be wanting to thee to assist thee in,
and carry thee through the work, and so will it prove the blessedst day thy
eyes ever yet beheld.

reformation, then think with thy self thus: would I take it well and as sober
counse! from any man, especially from one I think that loves me, and that knows
my danger, and sees me going on in a course absolutely destructive to me, and
that will inevitably procure my utter undoing, if he should not only let me
alone in it, but persuade me to continue in that way, which will certainly
bring me to ruin? saying, well friend, I perceive you are almost past
recovery, and the date of mercy is near expiration, and you are come to this
point, that except you turn speedily, even now, and alter your course, you must
perish eternally without remedy, yet seeing you have no mind to leave off your
sins, go on; and although God has said, except you repent and be converted you
cannot be saved, do no believe it, let not that trouble thee, thy sins and
wickedness, the devil and hell may prove better friends to thee, and be more
for thy advantage, and bring more content to thee and happiness, then timely
reformation or pardon, or the favor of God, Christ or Heaven; do not hearken
to any counsel that may reclaim thee, let no argument prevail to dissuade thee
from following thy own lewd and lustful practices, let no entreaties deter
thee: why should thou consider anything, or those ^reachers, the holy
messengers of the glorious God speaking unto thee, though they woe thee with
tears in their eyes, saying, Oh* do not these abominable things which God
hates; do not yield so timely, nor give back in the least, oppose thy self, thy
sins, to all they say or can do for thy eternal good; if you die you die, you
can be but damned at last, and is that so great a matter, that thou should
cross thy self in the least, or deny thy self any of those sweet damning
sinful actings? no do not, is it not much better to perish eternally, then to
undergo now for a moment such a loss as to part with thy beloved sins? or to
contract the reproach and scoff of a few of thy ungodly companions, whose favor
and friendship in a way of sinning is far rather to be priced then the love and
favor of God; why will you hazard your interest in the pleasures and profits
of the world, and sweet company of your lusts now here in the flesh for heaven
hereafter? is heaven so much to be valued? is the loss of that happiness, or
losing heaven so great a loss?

Sarcasme, most bitter taunt, scorn and jeer that any man in the world could
put upon or insult over thee withal? would thou not account him either a
stark fool, or one quite out of his wits, distracted and mad, that would
counsel thee after this rate? could you ever think such an one thy friend, or
that he means thee well, or that he speaks what he thinks that would argue thee
out of thy happiness into thy misery thus?

new creature, are the very same when articulated as you have here read.

yield to that in my self, and do that by my own counsel which I should
dislike from another? why should I delay my reformation upon that account which
I should be ashamed to offer to another, and abhor any other should propose
to me? and yet for all this I do the same thing all the while I continue in my
sin, or wave, or delay my turning from all and every one of my transgressions
to serve the Lord Christ; have I all this while cheated and befooled my self,
and shall I continue to do so injuriously still? God forbid!

consider further, that all the while I defer and delay my repentance, I do
nothing less then give God the denial, who calls upon me now to break off my
sins by repentance; and every such denial is a provocation, and I sin as much
by refusing to do that presently which I should immediately perform: Therefore
turn ye even unto me NOW, says the Lord, with all your heart; (...)
And to day if ye will hear his voice harden not your heart: This NOW is to DAY
after so long a time, while it is called to day, -- and sure this is the
present time that God looks for my return; and if I put off by excuses or
delays, do I not declare that I will not obey God, and that I love my sins, in
that I will not part with them yet, although I lose Gods favor by keeping
them? Is it not a proof that I intend to gratify the devil and my lusts, and
do comply with him and my sin, who would that I should this day say to God, go
and come again to morrow, for I will keep my sins this day also, and so the
next day, and every day as well as this, for all that God says or can do? what
is this but a tempting of God to cut me off in the midst of my sin? can I do
any thing that savours more of contempt and gainsaying then this? Is it any
other then giving sin and Satan the preeminence in my will and affections, and
a setting light by God and grace? will my God endure this at my hand? can I
imagine he will take this well, that I should deal so unworthily with his
grace; and that I should give that to the devil and lust, which I should pay
unto God, that is, my ready and willing obedience? how wicked a thing is it
say, I Will serve the devil to day, and God to morrow? and yet does not he
resolve so that says, I will not heat thee O Lord to day as to this matter of
repentance and reformation, although I know it is thy will I should, but to
morrow or next week I may think ont'? and then -- and what then? why then thou will be as bad, yea worse then now, and more ready to stand off then now; for
then the work will be more difficult, thy sins increased, thy heart more
hardened, thy God more highly displeased, those cords of thy sins will be
twisted to a stronger bond; and that which this day a sinner might have broken
off (through grace assisting,) hereafter for thy wilful delay thou will not be
able to break; for how can he repent when grace has forsaken him, and his sins
have taken such fast hold on him?

put offs, let me never more gratify Satan and my lusts, and give God the
denial by any more or further delays and deferring reformation; why should I
make any more rods for my back? why should I add more weight to my burden?
why shall I by this days delay make much the more work for repentence, while I
have enough and too too much already, as many sins as I can bear, or am able to
repent of as long as I live? and surely if ever I become a true penitent I must
be grieved at the heart that I deferred so long, and of putting it off this day
also; if I be so foolish and presumptuous to adventure my soul upon continuance
in this days sins with me all night, which for ought I know may be the night my
soul may be taken out of my body, and then what will my loytering come to, or
what shall I be able to answer for my delays from day to day to the last day of
my life? we had sad examples of this in the parable of the rich man, promising
himself much time to sin in, and pleasure in his sin, Luke 12.16, 17, 18.
yet is cut off in a night for all his hopes. So we read of the vicious
servant, But if that evil servant say in his heart, Mat. 24.48.
my Lord delayeth his coming, and shall smite his fellow servants, and eat and
drink with the drunken; The Lord of that servant shall come in a day when he
looks not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut him
asunder, and appoint him his portion with hypocrites; there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth. O then let this be a warning to thee, and do not delay
thy reformation; God will not delay his coming (though fools abuse his
patience,) nor will he spare thee if he find thee in thy sins, in a state
unconverted.

repent and turn from my evil thoughts and doings, let me consider with what
face can I ask leave of God to sin any longer against him? may I entreat him
for Christ's sake to let me alone, and be well pleased with me that following
year, though I defy him to his face, and trample the blood of Christ under
foot, as I have done? shall I say, good Lord spare me, that I may follow the
flesh, world and devil, and fulfill the lusts of the flesh; let me be thine
enemy a little longer, let me spit in thy face, and abuse thy patience, mercy
and long-sufferance yet a while, that I may fill up the measure of my
wickedness, and after I have done what I am able to despise thy grace, and
grieve thy holy Spirit, then receive me into thy glory, and give me the largest
portion of the inheritance with thy Saints and faithful se^vants in heaven.

offend thy God, to dishonor religion, to contradict and violate his most holy
laws, and to murder thine own soul by sin, for whom Christ died to save it
from sin, that it might live for ever with God?

countenance his sinning, and approve of his sinful dealing, or that God will
smite him and cut him off in his high displeasure; and which of these two is it
likely the most holy and just God will do? must you not then conclude, either
to leave off your sins speedily, and by so doing to procure a pardon and mercy
for Christ's sake for what is past, and do so wickedly no more for after-time;
or to dare God to his face, and bid him do his worst, for you mean not to turn
nor amend yet, nor to go back from your purpose of staying a little longer in
the old track of sinful walking? But methinks a man that has but the lest
right, sound reason left him, or counsel, would not long be deliberating what
to do in this case, seeing it is so evident that he dare not pray or ask leave
of God to continue life, that he may live to sin, or that God would accept of
his sinful disobedience for an holy service; but at last should he resolve to
go no further in sins way, but now with speed immediately turn from his sins,
ere he close his eyes to sleep, lest it may prove his la^t nights repose on
this side hell.

converted, and cease to do evil, and to take off my heart from the love and
consent to lusts motions, and lead an holy, harmless and heavenly life? if it
be necessary, as no question it is, then why is it not as necessary to me now
as at another time, as much my duty to day as to morrow? Before I committed any
sin actually, it was my duty to abstain and forbear; but after the first act of
folly and evil immediately it is my duty to repent, leave it off, and cease
from doing any more of it; and if it had been good for me that I had never
sinned, sure it must be my next advantage to leave it as soon as possibly: For
next to that of committing no evil, the best course I can take is to repent
betimes: and if it seem to any one that hereafter will be a fitter time then
this present, then it will fall out when hereafter comes to be thy present, it
will be as much against thy will then as now it is: and therefore unless I
intend to put off my repentance and amendment, my conversion and reformation
for altogether, and never to think ont' more, otherwise let me do that which I
think to do this year or seven years hence NOW FORTHWITH, and that is to
forsake all that God dislikes in me, and all that his holy word has witnessed
against, and my conscience reproves me of without any more ado: For I must not
befool my self any longer with this opinion that sin will cease of it self, and
if it does, then sin leaves me, I leave not sin; Si autem vis agere
poenitentiam quando jam peccare non potes, peccata te dimiserunt, non tu illa.
Aug.
or that pardon will be more easily obtained when I have sinned as much and as
long as I can, or that repentance will be more acceptable to God, when I am
forced to it, and then too when my age and strength, my understanding, memory
and affections fail me; or that God will be pleased well enough with the refuse
of my service after I have served the world, the flesh and the devil with my
prime and full strength, and best affections; as though God which deserves
infinitely more then I can perform, Irrisor est, non poenitens, qui adhuc agit
quod paeniteat, and non minuit peccata sua, sed multiplicat. Aug.
would be put off with any thing, or pleased and contented to be mocked by me a
most vile wretch, while I seem to offer that fag-end of my life which is fit
neither for time nor ability to perform that service which God will account of
for true repenoance and thorough-reformation.



reformation, but speedily set my heart upon it, and endeavor it to purpose,
considering that I would not for any worldly good miss the day of grace, or
that death should meet with me in my unregenerate state; and for any thing I
know to the contrary this may be the last day of my life, or the last day of
grace, beyond which God will not wait any longer, or give me any motion or help
toward my conversion, but he may in judgment seal up my heart, harden it, and
sear my conscience, that I may never so much as think on my condition any more,
or desire him heartily to heal me and convert me; many men have come to this
pass, even to outlive the date of that mercy intended for them, which if they
had in time accepted would have brought a saving pardon and reformation to
their souls; and why should I adventure my salvation on an uncertainty, while I
may be sure of it, if I take the offer while I may have it? Besides, why should
I provoke God to withdraw his grace, and cut me off in his displeasure? for all
the while, every moment I live in sinful impenitency and unconverted state, I
have nothing to do with any promise of mercy, pardon or heaven; I am under the
curse of the law and power of Satan, and go in danger of death and damnation;
and if death overtake me in my sins I am a lost soul, and who can tell how near
he is to his last hour? are you not hastening on to your end? will time stay
for you? or can you call back yesterday? whether I eat, drink, sleep, play or
work, yet my time consumes, and I am drawing toward my long home of eternity.
Oh that I may think still on this, and make this concluding resolution of it,
even to speed my work, the great business of my sound reformation, and put it
off for nobodies pleasure, no not for any objection to the contrary, nor any
worldly advantage might be had upon the account of continuance in my sin; if I
rest in an unconverted state I am in a lamentable condition.

objections that have ever been made against speedy reformation, and all the
excuses and pretenses for delaying this necessary work, are both frivolous and
of no weight, and treacherous and pernicious; how fully have they all been
answered? and how easy is it for a man of the meanest capacity to satisfy
himself of the unreasonableness of all arguments may be produced by the most
cunning Sophister against reformation, and for procrastination, and continuing
in sinful practices from day to day, or but for one day longer? And why then
should I hearken to any thing that may he further insinuated to me from Satan,
or any of those his instruments which would cause my delay, to the wrong of my
poor soul?

CHAP. XI.
Of Temptations, with their Answers.

. I. Temptations answered.
MY sins are not so great, or not so many, nor have I lived in them so long,
that I need make such have out of them, that I ought to be so much troubled for
them, or that I should despair of salvation though I never leave them.

undoing, Answ.
and men that have no mind to change their course have a mind to lessen their
faults, and to reduce them to a narrow compass and minute instance; how easy
it is with men to do wonders in this kind when they have a mind to it, but how
difficult are far more easy matters when they are actions to be done? with what
facility does a wicked man make his great sins little, his many sins few, and
his little sins and few none at all, or nothing? but God will not be so
indulgent to thy sins, although thou art.

Thus; my sins they are not great, but are they not great? nor many, nor great?
But are they any at all? though they are not many, nor great, yet they are more
then I can reckon, and greater then I can bear; if I am guilty but of one kind
of sin, yet that is too much by one; if I have acted that sin but once, yet
that is by once too often; if I have lived but one day without repentance, it is
a day too long; I should not have sinned at all, there was no necessity for it,
I had no command from God to sin, neither did any decree of his enforce me to
commit a sin; but since I have been so unhappy to fall, though but once, there
is now a necessity I rise again by repentance, and recover my loss by
reformation; and if I have lived a year, a week, or day in that sin, and have
repeated the act, or have rested without repentance, I am guilty.

multiplied in the act, and he that commits one sin commits more then one
fault, Jam. 2.10:
he breaks all the whole Law of God; and he that transgresses the whole Law of
God is not without much guilt, nor many sins; and shall I defer my repentance
upon the account of little or few sins, if it were true that my sins were small,
and of them but a few? nay should not this be an argument to hasten my
repentance, and to cease from my sins, because but few and small, for that they
are more easily forsaken, and more readily pardoned upon my true repentance,
and by leaving them speedily I shall prevent the growth, both for number and
bigness, and accomplish with far less difficulty that desired and necessary
repentance?

heinous nor hurtful, that they will not at all hinder his salvation, nor very
much offend God, seeing his sins are not many or great, but the common
frailties and infirmities of humanity; Oh, how many has this fond favorable
opinion lullabied in fast security, and made them proof against all reproof and
counsel, to the ruin of their souls!

refrain to do evil, and forsake my evil doings, which as you say are but few,
or small? it is little a man would do either for God's sake, or his own soul, if
he will not forsake a few and small sins, a trifle and a folly.

violation of his Law by a direct opposition to his Sovereignty, it is a wound
and a poison, a spot and defilement to any man's soul that does the least of
sin, that keeps and loves it, that would excuse it and make easy of his sin,
as though it were innocent and harmless; and though the instance be but small
by which I offend, yet my offense is great, because for so small a matter I
offend so great a God.

Luke 16.10.
) He that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much; and
he that is unjust in that which is least, is unjust also in much: and surely
the least sin I commit is a great injustice, and a very unfaithfulness; O let
me not then be betrayed into a putting off my repenance and deferring my
reformation. with this temptation, that my sins are not great or but few, or if
many not great ones, seeing the least are too great, the fewest too many, and
the time too long already I have been familiar with my sins, though but from
yesterday I have continued in them, why should I listen to any arguments to
make me linger it off, that might in the least hinder my speedy reformation? I
pray God I may never think my sins so little as to need no sorrow or
repentance, or this present hour too soon to forsake and leave them all.

. II. Temptation answered.
The best Men sin, they have their failings and infirmities, and why should I
think to be better then good men, or judge my self worse then them, while I am
but as they were?

Answer.
man makes between himself, and which is the worst in good men, has betrayed
many an unwise soul, to like well of himself, while in a sad condition and
sinful; but should I not withal consider that the best men's infirmities were
those best men's faults, their blemishes and their shame? did not those good men
bewail them and repent them, and could never be at quiet nor at peace within
themselves, until their sins were pardoned and they reformed? were the sins of
those saints and servants of God the best of them, or the worst? and shall I
imitate them in that which they abhorred in themselves? but if I have followed
them in their sins, and acted folly as any of them did, should I not follow
them also in their repentance? their faults were not recorded for my imitation;
and if I would be pardoned as they were upon their repentance, I must repent as
they did, or I shall never be pardoned.

others have had their faults and faylings, as though the very worst of godly
men (even those things which if they had lived and died in, without repentance,
had made their religion of none effect for salvation to them,) should be a
sufficient warrant for my evil practice? would it not better become a Christian
to cease from evil speedily and amend his faults, not only because it is my
duty so to do, but also because I should not follow the best man in the world,
where he fails in his duty, and I am sure God did never allow any man (how
dear soever to him) to commit a sin, much less to live in any sin without
repentance.

excuse which all good men complain of as their misery and their spoil? let me
rather imitate the worst men in their best actions, then the best men in their
worst miscarriages; let me be sorry I have done any thing unseemly and
unholily, though it has been no other then some Saints have been overtaken
with heretofore, and let me ever think that if I continue in my sins I shall be
damned for them, though some dear Saints have been pardoned for the like after
they had repented and been converted. A Christian must follow the best examples
of others, and in the best things, and not the example of the best men sinning;
I would follow no man where he follows not Christ, nor plead any man's faults
for my security; for if I do I am sure I have no warrant for so doing; nor
shall I deliver my soul from the guilt, until I deliver my self of the sin,
and become a true penitent, for how can I think to be guiltless when I continue
to do that which made Adam the first good man (and every man since) guilty: why
should I imagine that God will like me well enough, though I continue in my
sins, seeing he never liked them in any since the world began, nor will he ever
approve of the least as long as the world lasts, nor for ever?

III. Temptation answered.
temptation which too much prevails with poor sinners to their hurt, 3. Tempt.
keeping men in a carnal security and dangerous delay; a sinner is convinced
that he must repent and leave off his sins some time or other ere he die, yet
still puts it off, and thinks within himself (being deluded by a deceitful
heart,) That the time is not yet come, I may as well reform hereafter, many
have lived I hope longer in their sins then I have done, and yet have proved
true penitents, and I have heard of one theif that at the hour of his death
upon the cross repented, and was accepted, and therefore I need not be so holy
yet, I hope I have time enough, and God has as much mercy in store for me as
for (...) and why may not I be as well accepted (...) the thief on the cross
at last?

thus, Answ.
that besides the unmannerliness of giving GOD the denial when he calls thee
to repentance, and that impudency and madness which is in every plea and
suggestion for countenance of and continuance in sinful practices, against all
reason, conscience and religion, there is (I say) besides that a great deal of
folly and presumption in this temptation.

may be past, then that the time of reformation should not yet be? has not God
long enough born with thee already? have thou not put his entreaties off long
enough? am I sure of an other day after this? or of acceptance when I please?
are the days and times of grace in thy power? would a man that has drunk
poison, say to his Physician, I am poisoned, and begin to swell, and I fear my
death, and you have only that which may help and recover me, yet I desire you
to forbear a day or two and let me alone, I Will try whether I may not do well
enough without your physic, and that only remedy which is proper for one in
my case; do you think such a one did much regard his life, that would deal so
imprudently? certainly every sinner that does put off repentance and
reformation deals worse and more foolishly with his soul though he means to
be saved: for sin is a poison which has seized on the vitals, and nothing but
true repentance can help a sinner; and yet will thou put this off? Oh how has
sin bewitched thee! is not the time come yet for remedy? and yet now this
present time, even this moment thou art infected, and even drawing on and
expiring thy last.

You think you may reform as well hereafter as now, and you hope many that have
lived longer then you, and have resisted as many calls as you, and given as
many denialls as you, and have sinned against as much knowledge as you, have
proved true penitents for all at last.

Answ.
As WELL HEREAFTER? and why not as well now as then? now thou may do it,
hereafter thou may not do it: the present opportunity is safer, if not
better, and would not a wise man choose the safest and the best? nay this
present is the time thou once resolvest on, when formerly thou did resolve
upon hereafter. O how many hereafters are come and past already with thee
sinner! and yet have thou still an hereafter to count upon? shortly, thou will
not have a hereafter to reckon upon, unless you mean to reform and repent in
hell, which is indeed the hereafter for a now delaying and lingering sinner;
but be persuaded to cast out that foolish thought, and let not God and the
necessities of thy soul have any more of that go and come again to morrow,
there has been too much of that already.

sinners that have delayed longer then you have found true repentance at last;

supposition, how can you tell that they have? O it is a question, and a
thousand to one whether any such presumptuous sinner (that gave Gods grace and
reformation the denial so often) ever found true repentance or acceptance: If
repentance and reformation were finishable in a day or hour, or in a few sad
words, and sorrowing expressions, then there were some more probability, but
until that can be made clear (which I am sure never yet could be to me,) that
a late and deathbed repentance, and wish of conversion, was ever sound and
saving after a vicious life, I shall never hope it will avail for my self, if
I put off purposely my amendment until then. God forbid I should.

thief upon the cross, I am sure that is not my case nor any man's case that
lives in sin, impenitent after all the Gospel-calls, discoveries, rebukes and
admonitions. (1.) For who can tell whether he was not converted and brought to
repentance while in pri^on, as soon as he heard of Christ, and was moved to it
by the spirit of God, and on the cross only made a confession and declaration
of his faith in Christ and sorrow for sin? or (2.) can I tell whether that were
not the first call and opportunity ever was offered unto him, and he took it?
this is not the first to thee and me by many: and shall I think to fare as he
did at the last, that every day despise that which he accepted when first
offered? or (3.) How can I tell whether ever I shall ever have so long a time,
and Christ so near me as he had while on the tree? I may be taken away
suddenly, and I am sure Christ will not again die on the cross, or come in the
flesh to do such a miracle at his death as to convert and save a sinner in the
same day; or if it were possible to be imagined, yet would it not be a hopeless
expectation, to think that Christ should come again to save any more sinners
with a miracle, seeing he has appointed (with no less then a miracle of
mercy) salvation now upon the account of true faith in him, and sound
repentance from sin, and an holy reformation, and by no other devise nor by any
other means to be expected?

me to delay my duty, seeing this example you bring is no example for thee, nor
me, or if it be, 'its but one of a thousand millions, and I think the first and
the last of that kind, and shall I hazard my salvation upon that which I am not
sure was ever paralleled, nor ever can in all circumstances? And if you say God
has as much mercy in reserve for you, as for another; to this I answer, it is
true if you do not abuse his mercy no more then any has which did partake of
that mercy: suppose it possible that the mercy of God may come on a sudden,
and that repentance may be suggested in a moment, it is but a peradventure,
there is no promise that it shall, many threats against that man that presumes
on it, there is very little likelihood of it, and is it not madness for any
man to break his neck wilfully upon a presumption that there is skill enough,
and to make experiment of the art of a bone-setter? but God has no saving
mercy for thee, nor me, nor any other, except we answer the ends of his mercy;
that is, to convert and reform, to repent and obey in time: But if I by
continuing wicked abuse his mercy, God in justice will punish me, for my so
abusing, as well as for any other sinning, otherwise there is mercy and
forgiveness with God that he may be feared, not that he may be abused and
resisted. He that fears not to continue in his sin, abuses the grace and
mercy of God, and resists him.

. IV. Temptation answered.
easy a thing to become a true penitent and a sound convert, that it may be
done in a trice, and at any time, with great facility and in any condition, in
old age, sickness, languishing, dying, with a few half words and two or three
good wishes faint and feeble. ^o on the other hand, men are apt to believe to
their damage, (and therefore set not about soul-reformation) that it is a
business of exceeding difficulty, trouble and vexation, and a man may go a
great way in it, and yet come short of what is required, it is but in vain to
set upon it, as good never a whit as never the better, it is an imposition and
task next to an impossibility, I cannot endure the severity of repentance nor
strict and holy living, alas what a burden? farewell all my comforts, when
once I begin to reform, and to be religious.

repelled and easily overcome, Answ.
if a man would consider the absolute necessity of conversion, and the
possibility of it, and also the helps God has afforded for the perfecting of
this which is so necessary: It Is true, the work is hard and difficult, but not
impossible, and it must be performed and completed in its time, parts and
degrees, or else it will not avail for justification except it be complete, and
to flesh and blood it will prove a task very unwelcome, cross and burdensome:
But then let me consider, I have a soul to save, and directions of Gods word,
and absolute commands, and if I set upon the duty I have the promises to
encourage me, and the grace of God to help me, and the examples of the Saints
gone before me in this work: I have no sins nor corruptions but may be
mortified, nor any grace or virtue enjoined me as my duty but I may through
grace perform acceptably, the fear being more then the task, the apprehension
of the difficulty greater then the difficulty it self.

severity of repentance, the injunctions of self denial, the duties of
sobriety, righteousness and piety? why how then can you endure damnation? How
wilt endure the wrath of God, the pains of hell, the loss of heaven? had I
rather burn in hell for ever then forgo the pleasures of sin for a season?
will it be a sadder condition to live an holy life here, then to live for ever
in misery when this life is ended? if it were true, (what unregenerate men
imagine of holy living) that it is a life of sadness, melancholy, and void of
comfort, which is most false, and as great a reproach as the devil can cast upon
religion, yet seeing it is the way to bliss, eternal joy and endless
happiness, what if I went mourning to my grave, what though I lose all my
carnal pleasures and worldly contentments for it? should I be any loser by so
doing? would not heaven at last answer all my pains and travail, all my
watching and praying, and all duties of Christianity? will not the enjoying of
Christ and favor of God be a sufficient recompense for all my labor? would
not this one sentence fill my heart with joy at the last, Well done thou good
and faithful servant, enter into the joy of thy Master? But if you hold off
with this, that you cannot do this as you should, it is indeed because you will
not do it as you may; you say you cannot, but indeed you will not. If you would
but set about mortification, and self-denial, and resisting temptations, and
devote thy self to holy living, thou would be able to do one hundred times
more in it toward reformation then now you do, if you would not yield to flesh
and blood, nor make provision for your lusts, if you would not make use of
excuses to keep you from your duty, if you would not by delays and
procrostinations put off the demands of God and thy poor soul, repentance and
reformation would not be so difficult not terrible to thee.

hard or be it easy, be it a matter of joy or grief, be it a burden or be it a
pleasure, and what ever can be said against it, it must be performed both by
me, and every one, while the time of grace lasts, while I am in this present
world, or else I must never look to be saved, this is the short and the long of
it, and after all disputes, excuses, lingerings, delays, it must come to this
conclusion, I must return, repent, and be converted, or else I must never hope
to see the face of God with comfort; when all is said that the wit of man, or
the craft of the devil can invent against SPEEDY REFORMATION and sound
conversion, yet this word must stand, that except I be converted (as Christ
has said) I shall never enter into the kingdom of Heaven: Mat. 18.3. Joh. 3.3.
and why should any body think that this plain and positive decree of Christ
concerning us, should either be baffled or abrogated? O why should I listen*
any longer to any plea or excuse can be brought, that might cause me either to
put off quite or delay my REFORMATION? O that I may never more decline my
necessary duty by excuses, nor gratify satan and wrong mine own soul by delays!

CHAP. XII.
Of some Queries.

saving reformation, I would entreat thee sinner in the Name of God to weigh
seriously what is here offered unto thee, and resolve to give an effectual
answer, as you shall see cause, and no more do I desire thee to do in this
point, then what in conscience you shall judge fit to be done in this case of
speedy practical Reformation, and if you cannot rationally except against what
I propose, that you would forthwith yield and be persuaded to the thing, and
without more ado set about this thy own work.

whether the things which I have been persuading thee to all along be thy duty,
and of absolute indispensible necessity in order to thy eternal salvation? Or
whether you think it an indifferent thing, whether you be a true penitent and
sound convert or no? if you you do -- if it be of absolute necessity, how can
you in reason and conscience neglect it, if you mean to be saved? if it be
thought but a matter of lesser moment and a thing indifferent, then why Is
CHRIST, and why are all his ministers, and the Scriptures so earnest with thee
to reform? and why is Satan, the world and all the enemies to thy souls
happiness so industrious to keep thee in thy sins, and in an unreformed and
unconverted estate? you cannot conclude it a thing indifferent, except you make
it a thing indifferent whether you be eternally saved or damned eternally: O
then art thou persuaded of the necessity of reformation? set about it speedily,
neglect it not.

offended, and his grace and favor exceedingly abused, and the worth of his
blood extremely vilified by thee all the while thou continuest in thy wilful
sinning, and in despite to his holiness, and all he has done and suffered to
redeem thee from all iniquity to serve him in new obedience all the days of
thy life?

refuse to amend and to cast away all your iniquities, and become a sincere
convert, can you have any ground or reason to hope you shall be saved by
Christ, seeing he himself has said, Except you be converted, Mat. 18.3.
you cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven?

thy self art guilty of either in thought, word or actions, those thy omissions
and commissions, if not repented of and pardoned, will be any hinderance to thy
salvation? or do think that GOD does esteem of thee never the worse for all
thy evil practices, but gives thee leave to be as bad as you will, and will
never call you to an account for all your misbehaviours? have you any reason to
be persuaded of this? or of the contrary? you cannot sure be so desperately
wicked as to think so wickedly of God and Christ, that he should be either
pattern or patron of wickedness in any one living.

judgment account happier, he that continues still in his sins and vicious
course of living, and dies in that estate, or he that does repent betime, and
lead a godly, sober and righteous life, and dies in that state? which of these
would thou be? and in which of these conditions would thou be found when
God shall call thee hence to appear at the judgment of the great day? surely
you cannot but wish you might dye the death of the righteous, and fare as a
godly man fares at last! Oh then why will you not conclude to live as the
godly man lives now?

1 Pet. 4.2, 3.
Whether do thou not think that the time past of thy life is not enough and
too much that thou have served thy lusts, and followed the devices and desires
of thy naughty heart? is it not now high time forthwith to forsake all sin, and
to betake thee to an holy life? have not Satan, sin, the world and vanity, had
too much of thy hearts delight and affections, but will thou give them yet
more, and serve them yet longer? Alas how long! can thou do better then to
rid thy self of those sins, and get clear of them that will slay thee, and are
ready every moment to make an end of thy days and happiness together, if thou
nourish them, or spare them, or give but way to them?

blemish or disgrace to thy birth, breeding, place, relations and parts, to
become a true hearty penitent, and holy person, a disciple of Christ, a child
of God, and an inheritor of immortal glory, and of a vile person made an
honorable Saint? or is it not much more a blemish, disgrace and dishonor to be
a servant of sin, a slave to Satan, an enemy to Christ, and a firebrand of
hell, as every wicked, unregenerate, unholy man is? is there any honor or
credit like that of a Saint, or any shame or ignomy like that of a wilful
beastly sinner? sure there is not.

judge that man hard hearted and obstinate, foolish and mad, (were it not thy
own case) who does wilfully continue in sin and impenitency after all those
gracious invitations and beseechings from the Lord to return, after all those
menaces and rebukes for sin, after all those cheeks of thine own conscience,
and convictions of the necessity of reformation? would you not deem that man
worthy of damnation that in despite of grace and all saving means will make
away his soul, and murder himself wilfully? does not he deserve to die
eternally that will not receive a pardon upon such conditions as God does
promise a pardon? which is, that thou should repent and lay down all
rebellious thoughts and actions, and return to thy obedience to God and his
most holy just laws and government.

against mercy, and that perseveres in wickedness: Oh then dear soul let it
never be said of thee that thou art the man that do do so, that it never be
reported of thee that all the favors, mercies, and motions of Gods holy Spirit
have been cast away upon thee; Let it never be said of thee that God would have
reformed thee and saved thee, but thou would not be reformed nor saved this
way, by ceasing to do evil: Let it not be upon record against thee, that all
the means, as preaching to thee, praying for thee, reproofs, exhortations,
admonitions, counsels, calls, directions from all the holy messengers of
Christ, beseeching thee, and weeping to thee, could never prevail with thee
vile sinner (with all the pains they have taken for thy poor souls good and
safety) to turn from thy sinful courses and evil practices, but as they found
thee so they must leave thee, a wretched soul and hardened rebel, and instead
of giving up their account of thy conversion, must give in witness against
thee, that thou would not obey the word of the Lord, nor believe their
report, nor leave thy sins: Let it never be told of thee, that thou had thy
day of grace, but have lost it, once as fair an opportunity as any, but now
it is gone; Oh let it not be objected henceforth against thee, that either thou
refusest to reform at all, or that thou do put off and delay from day to day
that so necessary and so happy a duty: why should God wait on thee any longer?
why should God spare thee any longer? is it not long enough I have sinned
already? have not I abused Gods patience too much already? Oh that thou wast
once brought to this point of resolution, I have done foolishly (and wickedly,)
I will do so no more, now, even now will I return to my God, and my obedience;
shall a little fleshly pleasure, worldly profit, or any thing hinder me of my
eternal happiness? God forbid: No, I am resolved by the grace of God to stop
here, and go no further in sins road; but will now turn into the strait gate
and narrow way of holy living, which leads to that eternal glory which none
can come at but such as do lead a godly life, and follow the Lord Jesus fully,
and deny themselves wholly.



CHAP. XIII.
Of some directions to facilitate this work of real reformation.



I. Direction.
enter forthwith upon serious consideration of thy past life, what it has
been, and likewise thy present state and habitual frame, what it is; examine
wisely and strictly thy self wherein thou art apt to offend, and what
temptations haunt thee most, what thy heart hankers after, what is thy beloved
sin, where thou lie most open to be betrayed and overcome; examine and search
thy self, that thou know where thy disease is, and the nature of it; the cure
is half done if thou understand thy grief, it is but applying the remedy
carefully, and thou will quickly be cured: try if thy sins be inward, and keep
residence in thy mind, thoughts, will or affections, be watchful what guests
haunt these rooms; if vanity be in thy mind, sin in thy thoughts, worldliness
in thy affections, if thou have a proud or envious Atheistical mind, if thou
have a stubborn rebellious will, if thou have covetous or fleshly, unchaste
desires and speculations; if thou have inordinate affections, if thou art one
of a vain, vicious, worldly, filthy tongue; if thy actions be any way sinful,
the issue and product of a naughty evil heart, try whether thy thoughts, words,
actions, or any thing of them, think, speak or do, contrary to the laws of
sobriety, charity, chastity, justice or piety, and which of all thy sins are
more frequent and habitual, and that which thou have lived longest in, and art
ready to break out into act on the least touch of a temptation, from within or
from without thee, that so by diligent inquiry and strict scrutiny, you may
come to the knowledge of your state and condition; and do not give over this
work until you have found out your sins, and which way they act.

II. Direction.
to aggravate your sins by all circumstances, by bringing them to the test of
Gods word, and see what account God makes of them, how he dislikes thy sin, and
every man's sins that are like thine, and see what commands of God thou breakest
by thy sinning, thus and thus, and what little cause thou have to provoke God,
and break his most holy and righteous laws; and remember that by continuing in
sin thou do no less then oppose Gods mercies, and Christ's merits, and slight
his redeeming blood; which he shed to deliver thee from thy sins, and to
cleanse thee from thy filthiness; which is all cast away upon thee, if thou
continue in thy sins, and will prove an aggravation of thy guilt and damnation.

lessen, extenuate or excuse thy faults, but say of every sin as David of his,
Against thee Lord have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight; have mercy
upon me, and cleanse me from, and pardon me this my great transgression.

III. Direction.
by Confession, and spread them with all their aggravations, and set them in
order before thine ^wn eyes, and take up a lamentation, weep and mourn, beat
thy breast, and wring thy hands, and spend thy tears and groans, and bemoan thy
hard case, thy sad condition, and never think thou have sorrowed, complained,
confessed and despaired enough, until thy heart be broken for, and broken from
thy sins; and know this, that no man has sorrowed to repentance sufficiently
until he does loathe and leave heartily and willingly all and every one of his
abominations; no man has repented savingly of his sins until he has attained
a perfect hatred of his sins, and remembers them with lothing and detestation:
When conversion comes, that is, when a man is on sound reformation, and God
has touched his heart, and is giving a new heart and nature, Ezekiel. 36.31.
Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings that have not been
good, and shall loathe your selves in your own sight, for your iniquities and
for your abominations.

How long, and how much, must a man grieve and sorrow, and mourn, and be sad?
Answer, why so long, and so much, until thy sins become odious and grievous to
thee, and thou leave off to do them any more; and when this is done, then have
thou performed that part of repentance thoroughly which consists of sorrow and
mourning, and not till then: Be therefore humbled thoroughly, bring your soul
low, and have a deep sense of misery because of sin; and do not in this matter
as most do, only believe your duty as an article of your faith, but let who
will do it for you, only believe it your duty and that is all: Oh this will
undo you, therefore do it as truly as you believe it truly to be your duty.

IV. Direction.
work of mortification and self-denial, you must now take up your cross, that
is, cross and deny thy sinful appetites, and lustful desires, be sure you be
careful to avoid every new sin, and never sin actually again in any instance if
it be possible; and take up a firm resolution, with earnest prayer, that you
will never willingly or wilfully consent to, or act again your former follies,
or any other which you your self have committed, or any body else has or may
do; for notwithstanding former repentances, yet if you live henceforth after
the flesh you shall die, Romans 8.13.
but if through the spirit you mortify the deeds of the body you shall live;
therefore if you would be successful in this great concernment of reformation,
you must crucify and crush the first motions and risings of lust, and all
inclinations to this or that sin: look to this first, that the fountain of all
must be stopped, for all thy sins have a root, and before they be acted have a
kind of being in lusts; as the fruit virtually is in the root, and a cockatrice
is in the egg, and as the streams are from the fountain, so thy actual sins
are of the same smack and nature with their original from whence they are
derived: Therefore nip the bud, Ibi maxim oportet observare peccatum ubi nasci
solet. Hier. in Ep. ad Demet.
crush the egg, dry up the fountain, take away the cause, and the effect will
cease, and so will your work be more short and easy; suppress the beginnings,
suffer not lust to rise, or if it move check it presently, entertain no
parlying with Satan, nor thine own naughty reasoning heart, that will plead for
consent or connivance, for thou art in danger when you treat, and undone if you
yield; Mortify therefore your members that are upon the earth, fornication,
uncleanness, etc. that you may be able to do this, the Apostle adds by way of
counsel and direction in the same verse, (viz.) inordinate affections, evil
concupiscence, Col. 3.5.
and covetousness, which is idolatry. And take heed you stop from going any
further or acting any more sin, with consent, delight, or in compliance with
thy former custom, or as the manner of the world is; for every new sin is a
great disadvantage, because it brings in question all thy hopes, and undoes thy
former labor in repentance, and makes all as done to no purpose, and after a
new sin you must begin: again as though you had done nothing toward repentance
ever before; good therefore is the advice of the Son of Sirach, Ecclus. 7.8.
Io. 5.14.
Have thou sinned? do so no more, but ask pardon for thy former faults; add
not sin to sin, for in one a man shall not be unpunished; and that of our
Savior to one whom he had pardoned, Go and sin no more, lest a worse thing
come unto thee.

V. Direction.
occasions to sin, Nemo diu tutus periculo proximus; vigilandum est ergo maxim
tentationis initio. Greg.
and avoid them wisely; where there are many baits there is much danger, and
there lies a snare in almost every thing, in enjoyments, in company, in
riches, in gifts, in recreations, and it is hard for an ordinary Christian (that
is not acquainted with the deceitfulness of sin, and treachery of a man's own
heart, and the measures of things lawful in themselves,) to escape the sin
while they enjoy the liberty in the use of things allowable and tolerable;
Licitis perimus omnes.
and when it is hard to be discerned between sin in appearance, and the
appearance of sin, it is hard to keep a man's self without fault, for he that
does all he may will soon lose his innocence, and do that which he should not.

beware of every occasion which might but peradventure seduce thee to commit
folly, and then as thou shall have no excuse for thy sin by reason of the
temptation, so shall thou prevent the sin by avoiding the occasion: a man shall
never be drunk in an alehouse with lewd companions if he enter not in, and sit
not with such vain persons; a man shall never commit murder except he enter the
list and quarrel; nor can a man commit actual adultery and fornication, except
he keep company with lewd women, and frequent them by his, or yield to their
whorish solicitations; neither can a woman betray her chastity, except she
admit of courtship; dalliance, gifts and privacie with men of unchaste desires,
and soft and smooth persuasions. If I attempt not a temptation, and seek it, or
stay not with it when I am overtaken or surprised, but resist or flee it, I may
be safe and keep my innocence through grace; but if I seek an occasion to be
foolish, or embrace the several offers and occasions of sinning, I shall easily
and quickly fall, but not so soon, or with that facility rise again; and how
much safer and better is it to decline all engagements wherein I may sin, then
get loose and come off without a scar and a wound, a reproach and a shame, when
once engaged? therefore shun the occasions and companying with sin, so shall
thou keep thy soul from many inconveniences which otherwise will render thy
hopes of heaven more uncertain, and thy sincerity of grace more suspected, and
pardon of former failings more doubtful.

VI. Direction.
lusts and sinful desires stir within thee, and move toward any sinful act,
or any temptation from the devil, the world, or naughty men, consent not to
it, flee from it, to Christ, the sanctuary of thy safety, and withstand the
temptation, as a Christian should remember always thy baptismall vow, and that
thou art not free to do the will of the flesh, thou art under covenant, and the
government of Christ, co serve him and to exercise thy Christian warfare
against all manner of sin, to destroy (as thou art able) the kingdom of sin
and Satan; thou know not, nor ownest any ruler, nor foreign power or
jurisdiction but Christ's; I may not, I must not suffer sin to reign over me
while I live, Ephesians. 5.11.
I must have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but must
shun and reprove them all; I am not my own, I am bought with a price, 1 Cor.
6.20.
Christ has bought me and redeemed me from a vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1.18.
that I might serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of my life:
Luke 1.74, 75.
I dare not, nor cannot, with any color of reason or conscience break my vow,
my covenant, my trust and fidelity, to comply with any temptation to sin,
though I might get any pleasure or emolument by sinning, no not for the whole
worlds riches or honors, I must not deny my Master Christ to whom I am a sworn
servant, he is one that will maintain me, and keep me, and stick by me, and
give me heaven at last, if I forsake him not, and cast not off his yoke, nor go
back from my engagement, he will never leave me nor cast me out, if I never
leave him, nor turn Apostate, as I shall do if I yield to sins motions, and
consent to sins temptations, and return to that filthy vomit of former sinful
practices: remember always thy vow, forget not thy obligations, thy duty, and
thy Master Christ, thy Savior, Lord, Redeemer, thy own soul, and the last
judgment, and then this will both take thee off from thy sinful course, and
preserve thee from falling again into the hand of temptation, and practice of
sin any more.

VII. Direction.
Call thy self every day to an account for what every day you do, whether you
have omitted your duty, or committed a sin, and repent every day; this is a
work will prove advantageous if well performed, for by his practice you will
learn to know your self still better and better, and amend more and more, and
you will be happy if Christ find you so doing when he calls you to account.

constantly and sincerely every day, you shall have but a days sins to repent
of, and the same day you are a dying, and then the last act of your repentance
will be the completing of all the former acts of penitence, and then only will
deathbed repentance be accounted of when it is the conclusion of a watchful,
serious, holy, penitent life, and the last act of that habitual grace: but if
all be left to the last day or minute, and that which should have been done
every day has been put off to the last, O what a burden of foul sins will lie
then upon thee poor weak wretch, if all be let alone till then! Oh how can
thou think that God will pardon all thy sins upon the last minutes repentance,
when that last is thy first and last? a sorry repentance it is indeed, if it be
but a little sorrow, an expiring sigh and groan after an ages sinning and a
vicious life: Therefore now begin, and continue till thy dying day, to reckon
with thy self every evening for what thou have done the day, and every morning
for what thou have acted in darkness of night, and what thou have done
foolishly repent; and for what thou have done well in the duties of sobriety,
chastity, charity and piety, rejoice and give God thanks, when thou have fallen
into or by a temptation, be sorry, and more watchful for afterward; and when
upon examination you have found you have resisted and overcome a temptation,
and avoided a sin, give God the praise of his assisting and preventing grace:
and likewife for thy conscientious tenderness, that would not let thee commit a
sin, nor omit a duty.

VIII. Direction.
That you take heed (in all the work of reformation) of a shifting and
deceitful heart. The heart is deceitful above all things, Jer. 4.9.
and desperately wicked, it will pretend one thing and do another; there is
much double-dealing, it will seek evasions, and find excuses to put off a duty,
but especially this of real reformation, thy heart will hold up fai^ shows
with foul practices, it will make many proffers and promises of repentance and
amendment, and if you trust your own heart you shall have nothing of it but
promises and good purposes for afterward; still I will repent hereafter, and
amend hereafter, next week, or next month, or next year, and yet delayeth
still, and will do so until death, and then it is too late; Oh how often has
thy heart deceived and betrayed thee already to defer until a more
convenient time? how long have thou been about to repent and reform, and yet
nothing done toward it but a company of promises and pretenses? and all this
while instead of doing your necessary work, you have added sin to sin, and day
unto day utters excuses, and this day the heart says to reformation, go and
come again to morrow; and what is this but heaping up wrath, and filling up the
measure, and adding more weight to the burden of sin, and binding my self
faster with the cords of my own twisting, and rendering my bands more
irrefragable, and my guilt more damnable? and yet thus it has been with every
man that trusts a deceitful heart, and will be so with thee if thou admit of
its excuses, and let it alone to shift, cog and deceive, and to play such
pranks as the heart of foolish inconsiderate man does delight in.

serious and do any thing to purpose in the necessary business of thy eternal
concernment, never give way to delay thy reformation, let the pleasures be
never so fair or ever so many; be not deceived by thy self, but be thou a doer
of the work, and not a pretender to it only; it is a deceiving and a deceived
heart that makes thee hitherto either defer the duty, or do it slightly.

IX. Direction.
then forthwith give up thy self to Jesus Christ, and to the word of his grace;
let Christ be thy Physician go to him which is the fountain opened for sin and
for uncleanness, Zac. 13.1. 1 Jo. 1.7.
it is the blood of Christ that cleanses from all sin, flee unto him, and yield
up thy self unto him, show thy wounds, and beg his healing, carry thy burden
and let him ease thee; Come unto me, says Christ, all ye that are heavy laden,
and I will give you rest: Mat. 11.28, 29.
take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, and ye shall find rest for your souls.
Let the word of Gods grace teach thee and rule thee, be often at those
ordinances where Christ is applied to thy soul, and the Spirit of Christ is
working conversion, give up and resign thy self to the teachings of the spirit
by the word, hear that word, and obey it which discovers and debaseth sin,
and searches the heart; and frequent that preaching that advances Christ, and
holiness, that wooes thee off thy sins unto Christ and holy walking.

those means that God has appointed to convert souls, and bring them to saving
faith and repentance; all true converts can say that God of his own will begat
them with the word of truth; Wherefore lay apart all filthiness, Jam. 1.18.21,
22.
and receive with meekness the engrafted word, which is able to save your
souls; But he ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own
selves: and every one that is made a new creature must say, 1 Pet. 1.23, 25.
being born again not of corruptible, but of incorruptible seed, by the word of
God which lives and abides for ever, and this is the word which by the Gospel
is preached unto you.



X. Direction.
be fervent and frequent in prayer to the God of heaven for this very thing,
pray (I say) mightily, fervently and frequently; if ever thy reformation be
wrought it must come from God, and he will be sought unto by prayer, and the
desire of thy soul must be with earnestness, that God would pardon thee and
heal thee, and separate sin and thy soul, sin from thy conversation, and
instead thereof implant grace, and nourish holiness, and make thee a new man,
by renewing thy judgment, will and affection, and introducing the image of the
holy Jesus in thy soul and conversation.

give grace to convert and change the heart from evil to good, that he will
cleanse and purisie by his Spirit, saying, I will give grace, I will pardon, I
will heal, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 37.
I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and you shall be clean from all your
filthiness; A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put
within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and give
you an heart of flesh, and I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to
walk in my statutes: -- God will do all this for and to a poor sinner, and
except God give it and work it, no man living can get it; yet, says the Lord,
I will yet for all this be inquired of the house of Israel to do this thing for
them. God gave David a aew heart, and pardoned his sins, Psalm. 51.10.
yet see that 51. Psalm David prays heartily, Create in me a clean heart O
God, and renew a right spirit within me: Our Savior Christ bids us, ask, Mat
7.6, 7.
and you shall have; seek, and you shall find; knock, and it shall be opened;
for every one that asks, receives, and he that seeks finds, and to him
that knocks, it shall be opened. -- Therefore if ever thou will be savingly
converted, seek it earnestly of God, cry incessantly and mightily to the Lord,
and give him no rest until he give thee conversion and pardon; pray that thou
may get it, and pray that thou may keep it, pray for this spirit, and pray
with it, and never leave off praying as long as thou live: And I am persuaded
that no man shall attain unto saving reformation, but he that begs it of God,
and seeks earnestly after it; and I am also persuaded that he that begs it
earnestly and constantly shall not be denied it, if he neglect not to endeavor
to practice what God commands.

directions, which if you will speedily and carefully follow and put in
practice, will prove very succesfull toward your reformation, those means God
has appointed to bring about this so great and necessary a work of
reformation, if conscientiously and diligently used.



CHAP. XIV.
Some Motives to provoke men to be speedy and in good earnest about the one
thing necessary, which is sound Reformation.

I. Motive.
REmember that all thy weal and happiness depends upon this very thing, even
that thou art worth in an other world; If thou art converted in time thou art
made for ever, but if thou put off thy reformation, and wilt not yield to
become a penitent, and thoroughly reformed, it will be thy marring for ever;
this must be done, and done perfectly, or else thy poor soul will be quite
undone, and a lost man for ever thou will be; it is as impossible for a man
that lives and dies in an unregenerate estate to be happy in another world, as
it is for one damned in hell already to come thence, or to be there happy where
he is: Now or never is the time to provide for heaven by timely reformation,
here or no where must every one that means to be saved look to it, for when
death shall part soul and body, there is no more working nor reforming; here
and now is the time and place in this present world, to do all we have to do in
reformation, in the other world every one must be rewarded according to what he
has done in this world, and receive a final unalterable sentence, and the
decree of the Almighty will be executed on thee, and for ever must thou lie
under it, whether it be unto life or death, salvation or damnation, nor will
there be any revocation or alteration of that unalterable decree; Oh then how
much does it concern thee and every one that thou be sincerely and wholly
reformed in this world, seeing thy everlasting making or marring depends upon
it, forasmuch as thy eternal weal or woe is determined and fixed according as
thy heart and life is reformed or not reformed.

doubt, and give thee a comfortable assurance that heaven shall be thy portion
which thou may depend upon, if thy heart be converted and thy ways amended;
and as sadly may thou sink in thy hopes of heaven, if this be not fully
wrought in thee: O then let not any thing in the world make thee put off thy
reformation, or baffle thee out of thy duty, or betray thee into vain hopes, to
be happy without it.

II. Motive.
that all the while you defer it you lose your time, and are doing that you
must undo again; for the best of all that you do else are but trifles and
toies, and nothing at all to the purpose of true happiness, and all this while
you are making more work for tears, lamentation and repentance; and if ever you
come to the happy state of conversion, hereafter you will be much afflicted and
troubled that you continued so long a fool and a wretch, as you are all the
while you put off and delay your amendment: how bitter will it be to a devout
soul to remember how long he continued at a distance from Christ, how long he
did live after the flesh and the world, how many days and how much strength he
spent in the service of sin, how many excuses and delays he used? Oh! he will
beshrew himself to think how often he put off the kind entreaties of Christ,
and those many invications to holiness; it will trouble thee if ever thou come
to be converted that thou were not converted sooner, that God and religion had
not thy heart and service long ago, that thou did not yield and resign up
thy self when first thou wast moved to it, that sin had so much, and Christ so
little of thy will and affections; O then, dear soul, defer not any longer,
but do that with all speed which you have now a fair opportunity to perform,
that is, forthwith to leave off your known sins, and betake your selves to a
sober, serious, holy life; so will you prevent your own molestation and your
own misery.

III. Motive.
danger and dreadfulness of an unconverted state move thee speedily to get out
of it by all possible means; alas! all the while I live unreformed I am under
the curse of the Law, and power of Satan, a slave to lust, and a son of
perdition; and if I chance to die in this estate, my case and the already
damned in hell will be the same, they who died in their sins are miserable
wretches, and so shall I be as they are, there is but a step between me and
their sad condition; and while I am on this side the grave, in a sinning
course, following the motions of my lusts, I am in a worse condition then the
worst of creatures, a toad in my ditch is better by much then a man in his
sins, unconverted, unreformed: And all the while I live in my sins I am
unpardoned, and am hastening to an eternity of misery, I am in that broad way
which leads straight on to destruction; Oh then let my soul get quickly out
of that way, and from that state in which I walk in so much danger, and which
will most certainly carry me to the chambers of death, and bring me under the
eternal wrath of God.

IV. Motive.
brevity and uncertainty of thy life move thee to hasten thy reformation, this
night thy soul may be taken from thy body, if not then, within a very short
time it must and it will be called to an account, and oh what a sad day will it
prove then, when death opens the passage from a sinful life to an endless
misery, when death puts an end to the pleasures of sin, and gives a beginning
to the pains of hell never to end!

would be wise concerning your later end, and leave not that to do at the last,
which can neither be well done nor accepted if it be put off till the last.

V. Motive.
that none of thy most pleasurable sinful practices are half so pleasing to
thee a sinner as the ways of godliness and exercise of virtues are to the true
convert; reformation, if it be sound and universal, will prove the rarest
delight and content in the world, and be of excellent satisfaction to thee;
Pro: 3.15. 1 Timothy 4.8. 1 Timothy 6.6.
Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace; and godliness
with contentment is great gain, profitable to all things, having the promise
of this life and that which is to come: No life can be compared to a godly life
for pleasure, profit and contentment; how quiet is the conscience of a devout
holy Christian! how sweet his sleep! how calm and serene is his spirit that is
at peace with God! how does he rejoice in the Lord! what a merry life does he
lead, and goes on his way cheerfully to his home, to his inheritance, to his
joys in heaven which he has in prospect, and is at the end of his race! how
does that soul triumph in his victories that is daily resisting temptations,
and slaying his corruption! how sweetly does he pass his time that spends it
in communion with God, and delights of heaven! But it is far otherwise with a
wicked man that serves the interest of sin, and studies to gratify and serve
his lusts in sinful actings; Oh what a many plots does he lay, and pains does
he take to bring about his sin, and then what shifts must be make to hide, to
excuse, to maintain his sin! what a many perplexing gripes of conscience, and
often terrors has a wicked man within himself! and besides the bitterness in
the end of sinful actions, what a toil and weariness it is in the exercise of
it, so that truly a man may say of sin, WHAT A WEARINESS IT IS! to what purpose
is all this cost and loss of time, and exhausting the spirits? and after all,
what pleasure has a man, or what content can accrue to any man upon the
remembrance of his evil actings? is not a holy harmless life spent in the
exercise of purity and charity infinitely more to be desired, for content and
satisfaction (were there nothing else to be found in the practice of godliness
and virtues then what we find in themselves) then in all the forms and modes,
in all or any the ways of vitiousness that can be named, (were there nothing
else to be expected by way of punishment for my sinning) then the enjoyment of
the pleasures supposed to be in sin? O then, dear Christian, let nothing keep
thee back from leaving off every sinful course, nor from taking up the
practice of holy living, seeing nothing can bring true pleasure not content
unto thy soul until thou be habitually employed in the duties of religion and
practice of godliness.

VI. Motive.
forasmuch as God has born long enough with thee already, and thou have lived
long enough in thy sins already; Oh do not live any longer, or spend any more
of thy time to the will of the stesh, but to the will of God, for the time past
of our life may suffice to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we
walked in lasciviousness, excess of wine, and other sins; it is enough, dear
soul, it is enough, and too much that we have done foolishly, it is high time to
cease to do evil, and to learn to do well: and likewise consider what an
honest, how honorable, how pleasant, how profitable, and how comely a thing it
is, to live a godly, holy, and heavenly life; Oh let it never be said of thee
that thou chusest thine own undoing by refusing to do what God requires of
thee, seeing all that God does ask of thee, and what ever is here exhorted to,
is for thine own eternal good, glory, and endless happiness.

to be mindful of thine own concernments, and if there be any thing herein,
which if you follow to do would prejudice thy salvation, then do it not, but if
the things here exhorted to, (that is,) a speedy through reformation in heart
and life) be of absolute necessity, (if thou meanest to be saved eternally)
then upon pain of damnation, and as thou hopest to see Christ in glory, and to
be glorified with him, do not forget to put it into speedy execution, lest when
you would (if now you refuse) you may not, it may be too late, or not accepted.

any hope of consolation from God, if any love to Christ and thine own soul,
Romans 12.3.
if any mercy or tenderness of compassion toward thine own soul, ready to be
undone by reason of sin, then think on these things, and accordingly I beseech
thee therefore by the mercies of God, Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24.
that you be no more conformed to this world, but be transformed by the
renewing of your mind, that you put off concerning your former conversation the
old man which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, and be renewed in
the spirit of your minds; And that you put on the new man, which after God is
created in righteousness and true holiness; so shall you prevent eternal
damnation, and through the mercies of God in Christ obtain everlasting
salvation; which damnation cannot be avoided, nor this salvation ever attained
without a sound, entire, timely, holy reformation, which is the sum and
final conclusion of this my earnest persuasion, by all those foregoing
arguments in this first part; the rest shall be set in order for thee in due
time, when this shall be so well proved, as that by renouncing all thy sins
thou will be in that blessed frame and serious Resolution to devote thy self to
a godly course of holy living, and therein to abide with God, to

THE END.

