The Fruitful Wonder: OR, A Strange Relation from Kingston upon Thames.

OF A Woman, who on Thursday and Friday, being the 5th. and 6th. days of this
Instant March, 1673/4.

WAS Delivered of Four Children at one Birth, Viz. Three Sons and one
Daughter, all born alive, lusty Children, and Perfect in every Part; which
lived 24 Hours, and then dyed all much about the same time.

WITH Several Other Examples of Numerous Births From Credible Historians.

WITH THE PHYSICAL and ASTROLOGICAL Reasons for the same.

Published by J. P. Student in Physic.

Printed for Rich. Roffe, 1674.

THE Fruitful Wonder: OR, A Strange Relation from Kingston, etc.
THat the first Riches of a Kingdom or Nation, is the Multitude of its
Inhabitants, is a known Maxim in Politiques: whence several of the VVisest
Legislators that Antiquity can boast of, have made it a principal business in
their Edicts, to endeavor the propagation and increase of humane kind:
Inflicting several Mulcts and penalties on those wanton Libertines, who
neglecting to Inroll themselves at a convenient age under Hymans Banner, seemed
to take no care at all for posterity: and on the other side, Encouraged with
Rewards and privileges, those Laborious Husbandmen in Natures Vineyard, who
Enriched their Country with a Numerous Offspring.

Nascitur Indigne, per quem non nascitur alter,
Indigne vivit, per quem non vivit and alter.
Useless his life, and to no purpose spent,
By whom no have to the World is lent.
Upon this Account Sterility or Barenness has in all Ages and Countries been
esteemed a Reproach, and Fruitfulness an Happiness and Honor: Of which latter
kind, Nature to show that she is not yet grown so weak and decripit, as some
sneaking Doe-littles to excuse their own Impotency, would represent her, has
just now given a very Pregnant Instance, in a person of very good Credit and
Reputation, of Kingstone upon Thames, in the County of Surry.

This Good Woman being lately with Child, found her self exceeding heavy and
cumbersom, and appeared bigger then ordinary, especially when her Reckoning
began to grow near expiring: so that Neighbors began generally to imagine she
would bring Twins ^^or were their Expectations herein frustrated, but surpas^^.

For behold! On Thursday the fifth of this Instant March, her appointed time
approaching, she is seized with those terrible Child-bed-pangs, which Eves
Transgression has unhappily entailed on all her Daughters. In which tormenting
Throws she continued all that day, and the next: In which space of time, she
was [to the great admiration of all the Women present] delivered of no less
than four Children, [to wit) three Sons and one Daughter, they being all born
alive, of a handsome large size and proportion, and had all their Limbs
complete and perfect, nor was there any apparent cause to despair of their
Living, but they continued not long, for within four and twenty hours after
such their respective births they were all snatched away by Death, like early
Flowers nipt in the Budd: passing, as it were, Post through this troublesome
Stage of Mortality, from the Womb of their particular Parent, to that of our
common Mother, the Earth.

The Woman, though much weakened with so hard and tedious a Labor, is like to
do very well, but is much afflicted for the loss of her Children.

Aristotle (heretofore accounted the Philosophers Pope) whose Dictates passed
for Infallible) tells us of Women in Egypt, that usually brought five
Children at a time, which both he and Solinus attribute to the fecundity of the
River Nilus, whereof they used to Drink. And says, that it was never known,
that ever any was brought to Bed of more at once.

But herein we must crave leave to dissent from this great Secretary of Nature,
Experience Evidencing the contrary, that some Women have had Seven at a Birth.

And the Learned Enstathius (an Author of sufficient judgment and credit) in
his Notes upon Homer, asserts on his Veracity, That he knew a Noble Matron, who
was at one birth Delivered of Nine Children in the absence of her Husband: but
being a Person of Quality, and One in whom it seems Pride had overpowred
Nature, and cruel fancy swayed more than religious duty, she took a conceit
that her Husband would slight her henceforwards, and that she should loose
something of her Interest in his Affections by bringing forth such a Litter of
Children; Hereupon she resolves to drown seven of them, and having given the
Midwife a Bribe to look up her Tongue, she chooses out two of her nine Children
which she fancied best, and gave the rest to the Nurse to go drown them in a
River in the Evening, who most barborously consented to do its but just when
she was come down to the River and was standing upon the Bride, ready to put
the S^^^ge design in Execution; Her Master the Father of t^^ ^^^ldren returning
homewards from a journey hapened to Ride by, who knowing the Nurse and being
much co^cerned to hear the cries of so many Children (for she had all the seven
Children in a Hand basket) she at first endeavored to put him off by pretending
they were only a parcel of Kitlings which she was going to destroy, but he
being a great lover of Cats, would needs see them to save the prettyest, which
she seeming strongly loath to admit, he at last by force compelled her to show
him, when to his amazement falling on her knees and begging his pardon, she
produced seven of his own Children devoted for death by her wicked hands, if
she had not been thus miraculously prevented, and withal told him the whole
story, and the reasons that prompted his Wife to this unnatural intention.
vvhereupon making her haste home, he put them out severally to Nurse
immediately, and they all lived till they were grown to Maturity; but the
Gentleman would never afterward live or associate with his bloody inhumane
Wife.

To this we might add a thousand the like strange Relations, if we had the
unity to make ostentation of Reading, such as that Erasmus mentions in Chiliade
of a Woman named Comb that dwelt in Euboeia that had a hundred children by one
Husband.

Or that which Ludovicas Vives asserts himself to have seen, viz. A
Countryman in Spain (a place and people none of the fruitfullest) whose
Children whilst he was living had peopled a Town of above one hundred dwelling
houses, and were spread so far that they had left off the Name of Relations,
nor need this seem incredible, since there was (within this twelve months if
not still) a Woman living in Lancashire, that has often been heard truly and
properly to say, Do you hear daughter, run and tell your Granddaughter that
her Daughters Child cries.

What shall we say of Hieorom King of Arabia whom Justin tells us had above six
hundred natural Sons by several Concubines, of Artaxerxes who had a hundred and
fifteen, or that lusty Roman Bellswagger, Proculus Caesar, who (as Mizeldus an
eminent Physician assures us) got more than one hundred Virgins with-child in
the space of fifteen days.

This is certain, Augustus Caesar saw his Grand-daughters Grandson, M.
Sillanus, and one Stetini an Italian Lady, dying in the 87th. year of her age,
beheld with her own eyes sprung from her own body of Children and
Grandchildren, etc. To the number of one hundred twenty and five. And the
Illustrous John Count Nassaw in the last age in like manner eighty and five
persons of his own and his Childrens begetting all alive at once before his
death.

We might be tedious in such instances since every Postiler and Breivary can
furnish us with such pocket Learning: These are more than enough to prove the
matter of fact, and it might now perhaps be no more grateful and divertising to
the Reader if we would leave the steril road of History to take a walk or two
in the more pleasing Gardens of Philosophy, inquiring how it comes to pass that
such numerous births are produced; But these are Arcana Nature, not fit to be
prostituted in a Pamphlet, some Anatomists, and not a few Physicians have done
it too much to our Hand, we shall conclude with an Aphorism of Astrology on
this Theme, from Guido Bonatus, part. 2. Cap. 5. Which we conceive very
pertinent to our present Subject. Vide si fuerit ascendens Gemini, aut Virgo,
Pisces, vel Sagitarius, aut si duo boni planetae fuerint in ascendente vel
quinta, Concepit hinos; si autem fuerit ibi cum eis Caput Draconis, dic quod
partet (...) utero plus quam duobus, and possibile est quod portet quatuor
(...); When it is enquired how many children a Woman goes with, see if Gemini,
Virgo, Pisces, or Sagitary ascend, or if there be two good planets in the
ascendant or 5th. house, then has she conceived two, but if the Dragons head
be there with them, say, she carries more than two, and that it is possible she
may have Four.

FINIS.

