SIR WILLIAM PARKINS SPEECH TO THE HOUSE OF COMMONS in PARLIAMENT, Concerning
the Present Establishment of Church Government, July 5th. 1641.

SIR WILLIAM PARKINS SPEECH to the House of COMMONS, CONCERNING The
establishment of Church Government, July the 5th. 1641.
Mr. Speaker,
I Stand not up in my own particular behalf, but in the universal and
general name of the whole Kingdom; Alas, Mr. Speaker, they depend all upon
our exemplary Justice, which if we do fully execute, will not only give great
and plenary satisfaction to our Nation, but will likewise cause the Land to
smile hereafter with the blessed beams of prosperous felicity: but if the
least error and smalest deliration be over-seene by us (oh! it strikes my
trembling mind with horror to think on it) how will all things precipitate
themselves into ruin most irrevocable, but I speak not this as if any here
would omit or extenuate the supremacy of Justice in the least thought: to
admonish you of that point, were to bid the Moon keep her monthly course,
the Spheres to reduce themselves in their circumference, Or the Sun to shine
upon the earth: but I speak this only to add a spur unto you, least we
should at any time languish in our heav'n-proceeding Iurney. The cries of the
people have come up unto me, the voice of the whole Nation tingles in my ears;
and me thinks I hear each subject wish that we would briefly establish the
Church Covernment with all expidition. Let us first begin to confirm our
Religion, and God will bless our other proceedings the better: that was
always my opinion, and I am sure the expectation of the whole kingdom; How
long have we set here, and how little have we effected? How much time have we
consumed, and what little have we performed herein: How long have we labored
in this our daily travel, and as yet have brought forth but an Embryo, in what
we did intend? It Is true, I confess, we have fomented our selves with daily
troubles and vexations, and bin very solicitous for the welfare of the
Commonwealth, but what have we performed? or what have we perfected. I will
once more relate what my former opinion was, let us (I say) begin in the real
establishment of our Religion, and (as I said) all our other determinations
will succeed with a better Omen; for indeed most of our Delinquents are linkt
to this chain, they depend most on this point, therefore we should do well to
enter speedily upon the Work. Mr. Speaker, excuse my zeal in this case; for my
mouth cannot imprison what my mind intends to let out, neether can my tongue
conceal that which my heart desires to promulge. Behold, the Archbishop (that
great Incendiary, of this Kingdom) lies now like a firebrand raked up in the
Embers, but if he ever chance to blaze again, I am afraid, what heretofore he
had but in a spark, he will ^ully burn down to the ground in a full flame.
Wherefore Mr. Sheaker, let us begin, for the Kingdom is pregnant with
expectation in this point. I confess there are many more Delinquents, for the
Judges and other Knights walk in Quirpo, but they, are but thunderbolts forged
in Canterburies fire: Look upon them all with an impartial eye, and you will
find them all but as poluted rivers flowing from that corrupt fountain. Well?
is it so then, that all depend on Religion? why are we then so backward in not
Reforming the Church? why do we stike in this point, and not rather proceed in
it with all expedition? For indeed, according to the Laws of this Kingdom,
as it has the dignity of preeminence, so let us give it the priority in our
determinations.

Mr. Speaker, think with your self, I pray, in what faction the Church is
now, in what Schism, in what confusion of distracted Sectaries it is
promiscuously shaken: Behold the Papists will have their way the Brownists will
have their way, the Anabaptists their way, the Puritan (as some call them)
their way, the Jesuitical Priests their way; and in these various ways they
make such a labarynth of Religion, that few or none scarce can find out the
right way. It behooves us therefore, and is expedient that we should add a
period to these irregular ways, that the vulgar may no longer wander ill in
these destracted parts. Mr. Speaker, I have now unloaded my mind of her weary
burden, and I beseech you digest my words with your serious considerations in
this respect of establishing the Church Government, in true, sinceere, perfect,
and unpoluted Religion; which if we do perform, and fully effect, we shall
do great Honor to God, get great credit to our selves, and give great
satisfaction to the whole Kingdom.

This is my Opinion, this is my Expectation, this is my Prayer; and lastly,
this is my Hope.

FINIS.

