A PARTICULAR RELATION of the Action before Cyrencester (or Cycester) in
GLOUCESTER shire.

Taken in on Candlemas day 1642.

by part of His MAJESTY'S Army under the Conduct of HIS HIGHNESS PRINCE
RVPERT, PRINCE PALATINE OF the RHINE, Duke of BAVARIA, etc. and General of His
MAJESTY'S Cavallery in this present expedition.

Written by an Eyewitness.

Printed in the Year, 1642.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE ACTION BEFORE Cyrencester or Cicester in Glocestershire.
REBELLION, how ever it comes off, yet it ever begins with Conquest. That, I
mean, of the Rebels over their own consciences. The design will never advance
kindly, till That beforehand be subdued to so stupid and tame a temper, as to
boggle or take check at the horror of no scruples; but to accept of whatever
desperate or wild scruples. The Scripture calls it Witchcraft: for with such
murmurs and whispers as witches use, (murmurs against the present government,
and whispers of unreasonable and inconsistent hopes in the projected
Reformation) it becharmes and besots their understanding. And that so
universally and so deeply, as seldom can any other reason undeceive them, but
the affliction of another conquest. The experience of Cyrencester, has proved
this observation true: who blinded and confident in the beginning of the
battle saw not it is own error, till it is own flames showed it.

So God disposed it, that on Saturday January 21. 1642. Prince RUPERT'S
Highness, with a faier part of His Majesty's Army, began His march from
Oxford. Of Horse he led along five Regiments, besides his own Troop of
Life-guards: the rest being Footmen and Dragooners. Four small Drakes or
Field-peeces were drawn along, for securing of the March. The design was, to
relieve Colonel Hastings, besieged at his own house at Ashby de la Zouch in
Leicestershire. For this purpose, the March was directed through
Northamptonshire: but hearing by the way, how the valiant Colonel had made the
Lord Gray to forsake the siege: the Prince then altogether diverted His
thoughts and March, toward Cyrencester. His Majesty was then sent unto for
more Forces, and some Pieces of Battery; and till those could be brought up,
His Highness by easy marches, passed through Warwick shire, into
Glocestershire upon Monday, January 30. passing along by Sudlye Castle
belonging to the Lord Chandois. This being the Satterday night before,
possessed by some part of the Rebels of Cyrencester; the Prince well knowing
the fortune of that Castle to depend upon that Town, resolved to pursue His
first purpose, and to leave the Castle to come in afterward. Therefore on
Monday morning, having only sent His own Regiment with Lieutenant Colonel O
Neale, and a strong party of Dragooners to keep watch on the Cyrencester side;
at night when the gross of the Army was marched up, the Parties were all drawn
off, and altogether for that night inquartered in the open fields by Halling,
some two miles from the Castle.

Upon Thursday morning February the second, came in more Dragooners, with
another Regiment of Horse, under Colonel Slater: as also two demi-canons for
battery, shooting 18. pound bullet, and a Mortar-piece to shoot Grenades; All
these at the Rendezvous short of Cyrencester, were presented unto the Prince,
by Colonel Henry Wentworth: and the men in the following fight, divided among
the other Regiments. Hereupon, His Highness riding before to take view of the
nearer part of the Town, left Lieutenant Colonel Lunsford with his Dragooners,
to attack it on that North quarter. His Seconds was my Lord of Carnarvans
Regiment of Horse and within 150. paces of the Spittle-gate, did Mounsier la
Roche plant his Mortar-piece.

The Prince (after some shots of Cannon made at Him) now returning to His
Troops, and Prayers now ended through all the Regiments, led on beyond the
Town, arranging His Battaglions in the Barton-field at the West end of
Cyrencester. Upon which, before we fall on, it is necessary to describe the
Posts and Works in sight, that were to be first fallen upon.

It Is a Town of many streets; and 2000. Communicants: and (as seems) by that
party, esteemed the very key of Glocestershire on that quarter^ so that much of
their Rest being set upon it, they had used all industry for the fortifying it:
which also (for a Village) was very strong in it is natural situation. It Is
more then half encompassed with water, a great part with a high wall; the rest
by strong works secured. The Gardens and backsides, be divided by many low dry
stone walls, as good as Brestworkes; and one so serving for retreats unto the
other, that had the defendants courage to maintain a second, after they were
put to retreat out of the first, we must have disputed every wall and garden
with them. The streets were barricadoed up with chains, harrowes, and wagons
of bavins or Risebushes. Each end of the high street leading through the Town,
was secured against Horse with strong Slaght-boomes, which our men call
Turnepikes. Two Cavalliers or Batteries they had, one at the South-west corner,
on Mr Pooles garden mount, and on it two iron Sakers to command the field, the
Prince drew up in, and to scowre the entrance into the Town. An other in
Georges backside at the South-east corner, upon Crekelade way, and on it an
Iron Minion piece. In Sir William Masters garden a brass Saker, opposed
against our Mortar, and L. Colonel Lunsfords quarter. In the Market place, an
Iron Saker. and these five were all their Ordnance. The Sakers shot six pound
ball, and the Minion four. The chief Commanders, were Mr John Fettiplace a
Country Gentleman, Colonel and Governor; and Carre a Scotchman
Lieutenant-Colonell; the man they most relied upon; and who assured them the
day before, He would keep the Town against 20000. men. Captain Buck (a busy
Mercer of Hampton-rode) had a cowards wit with him: and that morning shifted
himself out of the Town; under pretense to fetch in more forces. The Town
(as appears by the Slain and Prisoners) had some 2000. men in it. namely of
Townsmen, Train-bands, and Blew-Coats of my Lord Stamfords Regiment: half of
which Regiment were gone to Sudlye Castle before, with most of their Horse and
Dragooners.

The chief Posts or Works (in sight) our men were to give on upon; were Mr
Pooles mount, with the high garden wall, reaching from the Lane to the Mount
Southward. Then on the other side the Lane, was Giffards house (the Barton
house) and a square high Garden wall lyned with Musketeers, with other works.

Lastly, on the left hand of this by Gloucester street end, over a void ground,
some six or eight score between, were two water Milles, with great and many
works and walls among. By this runns the River and other Waters. There stood a
Colors. On the other side the Town and River, my Lord of Carnarvan and L.
Colonel Lunsford, had the Spittle-gate to attack, defended by high walls and
works, and houses, whose Eaves were lined with Musketeers, and the brass
Saker to play upon them. On Georges mount, was Captain Seimor, with his
Company. Thus was Cyrencester fortified: now see how (Maugre all this) by Gods
blessing, it was taken.

The Prince in the Barton-field aforesaid, drawing up His Battaglions,
commended the Right side or wing, to my Lord Wentworth, Sergeant Major general
of the Dragooners. The Left wing the Prince himself took, committing the
Battle or Middle-ward to Lieutenant general Wilmot. Under my Lord Wentworth,
were his own Dragooners, my Lord of Northamptons, Sir Edmund Duncombs, and
Lieutenant-Colonell Druryes. These were seconded by Sir Thomas Byron, with the
Prince of Wales His Horse Regiment. In the Left wing was Colonel Vsser with
his own, and some 400. of those commanded men, that morning brought in by
Colonel Henry Wentworth. He was seconded by Prince RUPERTS own Regiment,
commanded by Lieutenant Colonel O neale; and the fair and strong Troop of His
Highness Lifeguards, commanded by Sir Richard Crane. In the Battle was
Colonel Lewis Kirk, with five hundred commanded men: being seconded by His
Highness Prince Maurice Regiment. The Reserve, was committed to Sir John
Byron: who with his Horse Regiment was to guard the Reere, and to send out
Scoutes and Patroles, that none in time or fight might fall upon us.

The Word was Queen Mary: which given, the order of the assault was thus. First
were thirty Musketeers drawn out of Colonel Kirks men, for a Forlorn hope:
led by Lieutenant St John's, who performed his part bravely. These were
commanded by Lieutenant General Wilmot, who marched along by them, to direct
them where and how to fall on. Being almost at the first hedge and Close,
before and betwixt Giffards and Pooles garden walls, the Lieutenant General
sent a Minister back to the Prince to advance the Cannon, for (says he) we are
already almost in the hedge. At that hedge and the low wall beyond it, was the
skirmish began: St John's giving fair fire, to beat the enemies out of it.
There was he shot in the Leg with a Slug bullet, and not able to advance
farther, bad his men go on courageously. To second these thirty, Colonel
Kirk by and by sent Captain Min and sixty Musketeers more; with a Lieutenant
and Sergeant. After this, the whole Regiment came down the hill, to attack
their designed Post: which was Giffords Barton house and Garden wall. This
Battle was led by Lieutenant General Wilmot: who (by all men's confession)
behaved himself so gallantly; with such judgment commanding, and by so much
valor leading through the thickest of the danger; that the victory is much
beholding to him. Now the rest of Kirkes Regiment, under Lieutenant Colonel
Layton, Sergeant Major Windehank, Captain Wivell, Captain Gerard, Captain
Radcliffe, and others, coming forwards, after some hot volleyes beat the enemy
from the hedge, to the garden wall aforesaid. Upon which our men running under
the wall, and some setting their backs close to it, flung stones over their
heads into it. By this time were Colonel Vsser and my Lord Wentworth comne in
to this work from their several Posts (as in their order we shall see) so that
the enemy beaten out of the House, Works, and Wall, retired, with more have
then order, through Cicely hill to their first Turnepike; ours pursuing the
retreat upon them, in blood and execution. In this service, Lieutenant Colonel
Layton, Sergeant Major Windebank, Captain Radcliff, and Captain Gerard, were
taken good notice of: both before the enemies retreat, and after it. Lieutenant
Colonel Laytons horse, was shot through the neck, and Major Windebanks horse
killd under him within the Town. Captain Gerar'd brought up a stand of Pikes:
and Captain Radcliff, the Reere, with good courage. Other Captains wonn their
due honors, though I have no particular, but only general relations of them.

Colonel Vsser by the Prince commanded to second Colonel Kirk, had 400.
commanded men with him, besides those of his own Regiment. He drawing his Pikes
into a body, in the middle; flanckt them on both hands with the two divisions
of Musketeers of his own Regiment. The commanded Musketeers, he in several
divisions sent down for the seconding of those that were already skirmishing in
the hedges. After which, with his Body of Pikes, and the two divisions of his
own Regiment, he fell on both sides of Giffards house; which (indeed) his order
was to fire. The Pikes marching forwards to the lane, by turning aside a wagon
of Rise-Bushes, cleared the avenue, and so entered; But the Colonel perceiving
the garden wall (within which the enemies musketeers stood) too high to be
entered on the foreside, found a way to get into it on the back side. There were
the enemies still shooting at Colonel Kirks men, both from the Works and
windows: but diverse of them, now running, some fourteen were hereabouts
killed. He thus gotten to the house, with a Fire-pike in his hand, both
troubled their shooting from the windows; and by and by see fire to the house,
and some Stacks and Ricks by it. So did the Soldiers to other stacks: which
made the place too hot and smoaky for the enemy. This done, he thinking by
turning back through the garden and lane to get into the Town; was hindered by
the river: so that facing about to the Right, he there fell into the Reere of
his own Right Hand Division. This, (since Major Hutchinson was shot) was led
by Captain Morrison, Captain Vavasor, and Sir William Neale, Skout-maister
general: who being a Voluntier, behaved himself with his sword right manfully.

By this time, Colonel Kirks, my Ld Wentworths, with Morrisons and Vavasors
men, being seas'd upon the Turne-pike that opens into the Town: He seeing no
need of help there, marched with his own Division up to the Bridge beyond the
Turne-pike: where leaving a guard, he turned on the left hand through lanes, to
come at the enemy now gathering to a head at another Work. But they flying,
left him their forsaken Colors. Turning thence back to advertise the Prince,
he met his L. Colonel Washington: who then coming from his sick bed, would
yet needs be one in the action: and so with a Body of Musketeers, advanced into
the Town.

All this while, was my Ld Wentworth and his. Wing, in as hot skirmish. His
Post, by order from the Prince, was to have fallen to the Southward, on the
right hand of Pooles-mount: being, indeed, the easiest entrance into the Town.
But misled by their guide, they fell into the Close to the left hand of the
mount: where they were both flanked from the Battery, and faced with shot from
the high wall before them. This wall the Officers finding impossible to force,
drew to the left hand into the lane with Colonel Kirkes men: and entered the
Turne-pike together with them. For now the enemy being beaten from the side-
Work that guarded it, Captain Alford, Lieutenant Wharton, with some others of
Sir Ed: Duncombs Regiment, brake over the walls on both sides, and entered among
the foremost.

But here find I some difference, who should first break open this Turne-pike.
Some say, a Sergeant of Colonel Duncombs brake off the horse-lock: others,
that a Soldier of Colonel Vssers, filld it with powder, and blew it open.
But, doubtless, many valiantmen at once assisting, may equally share the glory
of it. Some difference there also is, who first entered the Turne-pike. But
surely, the way being broad, so many might enter it in rank at once; that many
may be said to have first entered it. But being opened, Lieutenant Colonel
Russell riding foremost, cried, the Town is ours, follow, follow. Sergeant
Major Compton, likewise, on foot led on bravely: both which Earls sons by
their forwardness and gallant courages; gained a great access of honor in
the eyes of the Prince, and the whole Army.

The Footmen thus engaged, the Horse Regiments kept their Stations at the
Towns end: the Princes Life-guards being by him drawn up to the very lane, and
within it. Even under the command of Pooles Battery: which with two pieces
incessantly played upon them. The Prince in his own Person did like himself:
being still in the fire, and hotest vollies both of small and great shot.
still riding up and down to give commands and encouragements. Now to the
Ordinance, to direct them: then to the Foot; even to the very head of the
foremost. oftimes ready to alight, and lead up the Foot: yea his valiant self
first brought up those, that first entered the Turne-pike: His presence infused
spirit into the Soldiers. O, there is the Prince (were some heard say) courage,
lets onbravely. So heartily did the Army confide in him; and so gladly do they
all ascribe the glory of the day to him. My Ld Digby, was near the Prince,
most of that day.

His Highness having notice by Col. Innes generall-Adjutant of the Foot, that
the Turne-pike was won; presently commanded a For lorne hope of five and
twenty of his own Life-guards, to fall into the Town, and by skowring the
streets to make way for the Foot. But the time not suffering to draw them out
orderly, about eight Gentlemen only of the former Rancks, with Col. Scrimsour
General Adjutant of the Horse, advancing foremost; pursued some of the enemies
through the street and into by-lanes: Of them, the Earl of Cleveland (riding up
to him) Pistold one: and another Gentleman then shot another, who in his
reeling, cried Dogs, Dogs, Dogs; till the mudd stopped up both his mouth
and charity. Immediately after this Forlorn hope, Sir Richard Crane with the
Earl of Denbigh, my Lord Taff, and His Highness whole Troop fell in; putting
himself before the Foot forces: where killing many, and driving all before
him, he advanced into the Marketplace. There were some three hundred Foot
discovered: and, at a corner, about forty or fifty Horse. These fled upon the
spur: and the Foot getting into the houses, shot out at the windows. The
Marketplace thus cleared, and Sir Richard Crane advancing Eastward up Diars
street, the enemies Cannonier (a Spaniard) came running out of the King's Head,
to have fired a piece of Ordinance laden with Case-shot, full upon the croopes
of the Princes troop. He was slain by a Gentleman that rode in betwixt the
Spaniard and his piece, and Pistol'd him. The Life-guards then passing on to
another Turnpike at Diars streets end; spyed a body of two or three hundred
enemies, in a Green or walled Close on the left hand. But the wall not
suffering ours to come at them, Sir Richard Crane, (an old Soldier himself)
suspecting his enemy might have so much wit and courage yet left, as (perhaps)
some nearer way to chop into the Marketplace, and so cut off his retreat:
retired himself thither, and made that good, till the Foot came up. In the way
he cut down diverse, that again appeared in the street: and the Foot coming in,
the houses were sercht; some killed; and the rest made prisoners. Colonel
Fettiplace and Captain Warnford, were now taken by Captain Alford, in the Lady
Iordans house; over which Colonel Kirk (now coming in) set a guard; and that
Captain to command it. Mr George a Parliment man was taken otherwhere. And now
was the Town wholly taken on that part.

Hitherto that strong Post at the Water-Milles on the left hand of Giffards
house, where the white and red Colors stood, was not attempted: but the enemy
there seeing the Town taken another way, took down their Colors, and retreated
inwards to a bridge and chain. These were pursued thither by Ser. Major Leg;
where his Lieutenant Noland making a stand, was shot out at a window. The enemy
now perceiving our Horse could not pass the chain, faced about and gave them
a full volley: keeping their ground, till our Foot came up and beat them from
it. Then was Pain (a Clothier) killed, with a Colors in his hand. My Lord
Dillon (who was to have seconded Major Leg) was by the Prince commanded, to
march up and make good the Marketplace: whither he came with his Troop,
whilst Sr Richard Crane was gone thence to the second Turne-pike.

In the mean time, the enemy at the Spittle-gate, continued skirmishing with
Leiut. Colonel Lunsford, and my Lord Carnarvan; but hearing the Town was
taken; they slung down their Arms and ran away in company of those whom Sir
Richard Crane left in the walled Close: all, after his retreat, escaping by the
Streets end behind him. These were light upon by my Lord Carnarvan: who whilst
Leiut. Colonel Lunsford forced the Spittle-gate; and Sir Charles Lucas with
part of the Regiment fell in by the Turnpike: made down the high way without
the Town to the Southward; and had the chase and execution of them. But his
mercy brought them almost all in Prisoners. Perhaps too, Captain Seymor with
his Company fled this way: who when Sir Richard Crane scoured up Diars street
by them; forsook their guard and Colors at Georges Battery, before ever they
saw an enemy.

Now were the enemy all in fight; and ours in chase. Those that fled toward
Crekelade, were by the Princes command pursued by Sir John Byron: whose men
remembering Burford; killed above one hundred, and took as many Prisoners. Among
the rest, two Ministers, one Mr Stanfeild armed back and breast, with Sword and
Pistolls. The other Mr Gregory of Cyrencester; who lately assured his people,
That he had begged that Town of the Lord. At first entering the Town, both
Cannoniers and Musketeers fled from Pooles battery, leaving their Colors
standing: which the Prince sent to take down, and to make good the place.
These, His Highness Prince Maurice pursued; and some first overtaken, were
there killed: but it being enough to prostrate ones self to a Lion, about
three hundred of them falling on heaps before the Princes feet; His
mercifulness pleased it self in making them all Prisoners. Thus were all the
Posts of the Town taken.

Our greater Firemen, 'twere injustice to forget: for the terror and fury of
the Cannon, much eased the victory. On one side, the Grenades were terrible:
especially after they had fired one house. At the other end, the Ordinance were
thus disposed. One of the Demi*cannons, was bent against Pooles mount and
Battery: and shooting through the Parapet; forced away the Defendants. The other
great piece, at random ranged her bullets into the Town: killed one Cannonier
in the Marketplace, and made a terrible rufling among the houses. Of the four
lesser pieces, two were bent upon the first hedge: and two upon the corner of
the wall. At first entering the Town, the Prince hearing some enemies to be
still in Pooles house, sent for one small piece, and two Petards to force the
gate: but finding no opposition, either there or elsewhere; the Ordinance all
marched into the Marketplace.

Thus have you here related, what was acted by all the parts of the Kings Army,
upon every part of the Town. And thus was the confident Cyrencester in an hour
and halfes fight, and with the loss of less then twenty men, on our side,
fully taken in on all parts: (though diverse of them be since dead of poisoned
bullets.) By the Monday after, but nine of ours had been buried in the Church
and Churchyard: and some five or six elsewhere, which were all I heard of.
Slain of theirs, those that think fewest, judge three hundred, others think
more. The truth is, we could see but few men left at all in the Town* plainly
they hid their dead and wounded men in their houses; whereof we heard many
since buried in one night: but the most falling in the fields in chase, we
could get no precise notice of their numbers. Prisoners we brought away about
twelve hundred: which shows the Princes and the Cavaliers mercy, as the
Captives themselves acknowledge. Of Colors taken, one Horse Cornet, two of
Dragooners, and fourteen Foot Ensigns. Of Arms, abundance were drawn out of
the waters: besides those taken in the houses. All their five pieces of
Ordinance, we found standing in their places: Among the Prisoners were some
160. wounded: whom the Prince next day sent His Surgeon and Doctor, and
Chaplains to dress and visit. Since His Highness coming thence, diverse
concealed wounded men have crept abroad* of which some dyed.

Three things would not be forgotten. One, how the dying men in the very fight
cried out; that Sir Robert Cook, Mr Stevens, Mr George, and their Preachers,
had undone them. Whereby you see, that when God by affliction gives
understanding, the justness of that cause cannot satisfy the conscience of the
dying. The second note is, concerning the means used by that side, for getting
the poor Country people to serve under them in the Town. Some of the
Prisoners confessed (and others have made it good) how that the Gentlemen and
Clothiers threatened them they should have no work. Others that they should be
plundered. Others were violently fetched from their houses by Dragooners, and
made get up behind them. Others were dragged from their Ploughs, and others
coming into the Town about business, were there detained, and threatened to
be shot, if they offered to get out. This is the liberty of the Subject. And
the third observation is concerning the subtilty used to make this poor people
fight: which was by telling them, the King had none but a rabble of poor
ragged fellows. But the Prisoners amazed to see such numbers of gallant Gentry
to come upon them, their hearts sunk within them. And when they saw again how
merciful these Gentry were in granting Quarter to them at the first begging:
they acknowledged themselves twice conquered, both by Courage, and by Curtesy.

For Governor of the Town, the Prince left his dear brother Prince Maurice His
Highness, with His Regiment of Horse: and under Him Colonel Kirk, with one
thousand Foot and Dragooners: who I believe, will not so cheaply part with it.

Nor was Cyrencester only conquered by this Victory, but the Castles of Sudlye
and Berckley, were upon the fame of it forsaken by the enemies. So were
Tewksbury and the Vies. Malmsbury likewise, the next morning sent their
submission, subscribed with their chief hands: and has received Lieu: Colonel
Lunsford for Governor, with four hundred Foot: and Captain Cursons Troop of
Horse. On the Monday after, the Country Gentlemen invited by the Princes
Letters to Cyrencester; in the name of the County assented to a Contribution of
4000^ Month: and to advance 3000l presently for raising (...) Regiment for His
Majesty's service, and safeguard of (...) County; with promise of doing more,
when their Quarters should be enlarged by the coming in of more of the County.

God be blessed for his Victory. He grant the example may take such impression
among the deceived people, that our Jerusalem may see in the day of her
visitation, the things that belong unto her Peace.

FINIS.

