A Particular ACCOUNT Of the Late and Present Great Sufferings AND OPPRESSIONS
Of the People called QUAKERS Upon Prosecutions against them in the Bishops
Courts. Humbly presented to the serious Consideration OF THE King, Lords and
Commons IN PARLIAMENT Assembled.

LONDON, Printed by Andrew Soul, and sold at his shop in Devonshire
New-buildings, without Bishops-Gate, 1680.

A Particular Account Of the Late and Present Great Sufferings and Oppressions
Of the People called QUAKERS, Humbly Presented to the serious Consideration OF
THE KING Lords and Commons.
EVER since we have been a People dissenting from the Public Worship of this
Kingdom, we have greatly sought and desired to live Peaceably in the Exercise
of our Tender Consciences toward God and Man: And we can call God Almighty to
Witness, That such our Dissent from the Practice and Ceremonies of the Church
of England, has not been (as some have judged) the Effects of a singular or
wilful Spirit, but our sincerity to God and true Religion, many People of
England have good Experience of it. Nevertheless, we have been for near Twenty
Years last past severely prosecuted by some of the Clergy, and by Writs of
Excommunicato Capiendo thrown into nasty Goals and Holes, where some have lost
their Lives, others have been kept in a Lingering Imprisonment from their Wives
and Families, some Four, some Five, and some Six Years, till they have spent
most of what they had, and have had little left to help themselves and
Families; A Punishment not much inferior to Death it self! And these
Troublesome Suits and Proceedings against them, have been chiefly for Not going
to the Church (so called) and Not paying to the Repair of the same, and some
for small Tithes, to the value of Eighteen Pence, Two Shillings, and sometimes
less, as in the Relation following will more particularly appear.

Now we desire you to judge, whether these cruel and uncharitable Proceedings
of these Clergymen toward us are consonant with the practice of the Ministers
of Christ in the primitive Times, or answer that Meekness and Christian Spirit
manifested by them, in Instructing those that Opposed, and not seeking to
Destroy and Ruin them and their Families, because they could not receive their
Doctrine.

And further, We desire you to consider, when we are first cited to the Bishops
Courts, although we do appear and are willing to manifest our Innocence, yet
because we do not Fee a Proctor, or refuse to Swear to our Answer, no notice is
taken of our Appearance, but we are soon after Excommunicated, and then thrown
into a Noisome Goal, and there we must lie Vnbailable (how long the Lord God
that is Holy and True only knows) and in the mean time what a Condition the
Poor Family is in at Home, you may well consider. And whether these Actions do
not greatly tend to Grind the Face of the Poor, which was an Evil Complained
against by the Righteous in all Ages, and we hope will be Considered and
Redressed by You.

And we Pray, That the Lord may Incline your Hearts with Patience, to Read and
Consider the following Accounts, and to Afford the Sufferers some Speedy
Relief, that they and their Families may not be utterly Destroyed.

Presented to you on the Behalf of the Sufferers, by Us, William Mead George
Whitehead William Gibson Jasper Batt John Osgood George Watts Clement Plumsted
Ezekiell Wooley William Macket Rawland Vaughan Richard VVhitpane William Penn
Thomas Rudyard Ellis Hooks William Shown James Claypoole John Dew James
Brains John Etheridge John Vaughton Gilbert Latie.

London, the 15th of the 9th Month, 1680.
A TABLE OF THE COUNTIES.
Berkshire, fol. 1. Bedfordshire, 2. Bucks, 2. Bristol, 3, and 34. Cumberland,
3. Cambridgshire, 4. Cornwall, 41. Dorset, 5. Devonshire, 6, and 36. Durham, 6.
Ely, 5. Essex, 7. Gloucestershire, 7. Hartford, 8. Hampshire, 8, and 37.
Huntington, 8. Kent, 10. Leicester, 11, and 35. Lincoln, 12. Lancashire, 14.
Nottingham, 14. Norfolk, 14, and 38. Oxford, 38. Sussex, 15. Surrey, 15, and
39. Suffolk, 17. Sumerset, 19, and 38. Stafford, 22. Sallop, 23. Warwick, 23,
and 40. Wiltshire, 24. Westmorland, 26. Worcester, 26, and 39. Yorkshire, 27,
and 40. Pembrookshire, 34.
Berkshire.
Reading Goal, the 26th of the 3d Month, 1680.
THomas Davie, George Ball, Richard Nash, Thomas Pretty, Thomas Draper, William
Ward and John Wyron, all of New Windsor, Arrested by Walter Cowdry, under
Jailer, the 13th of the 11th Month, 1675. by Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo,
for not going to the Church (so called) and not paying to the Repair of the
same, and not receiving the Sacrament, were rated as follows, viz.

S. D. Thomas Davie 3 0 George Ball 2 3 Richard Nash 0 4 Thomas Pretty 0 3
Thomas Draper 2 7 William Ward 0 4 John Wyron 3 4

All carried Prisoners to Reading Goal, and have remained Prisoners almost Five
Years.

Thomas Marsh of Newbery Imprisoned upon a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo (for
not going to the Church (so called) and not receiving the Sacrament) the 10th
of the 8th Month, 1678. and still remains a Prisoner.

Bedfordshire.
The 1st Month, 1678.
John Barton of Studam, in the County of Hartford, Tailor, for not paying 2 s.
2 d. toward the Repair of the Church, so called, was taken by a Writ of
Excommunicato Capiendo, and kept Prisoner for some time in his own House in
Hartfordshire, and about two Months after was by special Bailiffs taken and
carried to Bedford Goal; Nathaniel Fisher, called Churchwarden, being the
Prosecutor; and has remained a Prisoner about Three Years and a half.

Henry Newman of Seawell, in the Parish of Kingshoughton, for denying to pay 13
d. toward the Repair of the Church (so called) was prosecuted by William
Foster, Commissary of the Bishops Court, who obtained a Writ of Excommunicato
Capiendo against him, and threw him into Goal, where he has been a Prisoner
above two Years and a half.

Bucks.
The 3d Month, 1680.
ABout the beginning of the 6th Month (called August) 1678. John Stratton of
Ivingoe, in the said County, Husbandman (having a Wife and eight Children) was
taken Prisoner by a Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo, upon the Information and
Prosecution of Francis Duncomb, Priest of Ivingoe, whose Son, Henry Duncomb was
made Bailiff for that purpose, and did take and convey the said John Stratton
to the common Goal of the said County at Ailsbury, where he has continued
Prisoner ever since, to the great Discomfort of his Family and Damage of his
Estate. The Cause of his Imprisonment, as signified in the Writ, is, For not
appearing before the Surogates of the late Bishop of Lincoln, to answer his
absenting from the Parish Church (as they call it) of Ivingoe, and not
receiving the Sacrament there.

Bristol.
The 17th of the 12th Month, 1678.
WIlliam Ithell of Bristol, Imprisoned upon a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo,
at the Suit of the Bishop of Bristol, for not being Married by the Parson of
the Parish, Imprisoned the 4th day of the 9th Month, 1678.

James Pounset Imprisoned the 23d day of the 11th Month, 1678. by a Writ of
Excommunicato Capiendo, at the suit of the same Bishop, for the same Cause.

Cumberland.
Carlisle, the 23d of the 12th Month, 1678.
JOhn Jackson of Kirklinton Imprisoned by a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, the
30th day of the 7th Month, 1677. at the Suit of Robert Preistman, for predial
Tithes.

Cambridshire.
The 5th Month, 1680.
THomas Amey of Great Abington, Imprisoned in Cambridge Castle, the 25th of the
11th Month, 1678. upon a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, by John Burgin,
Bailiff, at the Suit of John Boulton, Vicar of Abington, for Offerings and for
Wild Pigeons, as the Vicar says himself, and is still kept a close Prisoner,
having been a Prisoner a year and a half.

Gabriel Walker of Swaffham Bulbeck, Imprisoned in Cambridge Castle the 2d of
the 6th Month, 1676. by a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, at the Suit of Malin
Sawerby. Priest of Swaffham, for not paying Offerings, and for the Tithes of
half a Rodd of Saffron Ground. The said Gabriel being put into the Dungeon, and
there kept in the heat of Summer without Air, and in the cold of Winter without
Fire, which endangered his Life, and is kept a close Prisoner to this day,
having been a Prisoner Four Years.

Henry Harlow, Nicholas Frost, Thomas Edmundson and Stephen Sumes have been all
Prisoners in Cambridge above Six Years, for not paying 3 s. 6 d. a piece to the
Repair of the Church (so called.)

James Howton of Downham* Imprisoned in the Isle of Ely, the 8th day of the 2d
Month, 1676. for not paying 1 s. 4 d. toward the Repair of the Church (so
called) prosecuted in the Bishops Court at Ely, and apprehended by a Writ, de
Excommunicato Capiendo.

Ely, the 22d of the 5th Month, 1680.
Samuel Cater of Littleport in the said Isle of Ely, prosecuted in the Bishops
Court of Ely for not Conforming, and Excommunicated; and because they could not
suddenly obtain the Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo, his Adversaries caused him
to be taken up, and being brought before a Justice, he tendered him the Oath of
Allegiance; a Snare they well knew never fails to hold a Quaker: So to Prison
he was sent, for refusing for Conscience sake to Swear at all; and brought from
one Sessions to another, and the Oath again tendered to him, till at last they
brought the Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo from London, and delivered it to the
Sheriff, with which he stands charged.

Dorsetshire.
REbecca Hill of the Parish of Ryme in the said County, Excommunicated for not
paying to the Repair of the Church (so called) and Imprisoned upon a Writ, De
Excommunicato Capiendo, dated the 13th day of July, 1678.

Devonshire.
The 7th of the 1st Month, 1679.
MAnasses Orchard of Tiverton cited to the Bishops Court at Exon, where he
appeared; nevertheless, he was shortly after Excommunicated, and the 7th day of
the 11th Month, 1678. was cast into Prison upon a Writ De Excommunicato
Capiendo, for opening his Shop on the day called Christmass-day.

Robert Welsh Imprisoned upon the same Writ, De Excommunicato Capiendo, for not
paying small Tithes, and has remained a Prisoner several Years.

George Croker of Plymouth, for not going to the Public Worship, Imprisoned by
a Writ, De Excommunicato Capiendo, in the Sheriffs Ward, the 21st day of the
6th Month, 1677. and is still kept a Prisoner.

Durham.
ROger Hulson of Northton, Imprisoned the 8th day of the 2d Month, 1678. by a
Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, at the Suit of Thomas Davison, Priest of
Northton, for Easter-Reckonings, Reek-Penny and Tythe-Hen.

Essex.
Chelmsford, the 2d of the 2d Month, 1679.
ZAchariah Child Abraham Bell and Mary Bell, widow for not paying to the
Repair of the Church (so called) of Felsted in the said County, were, at the
Suit of William Surrey, Warden, Imprisoned by a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo,
and still remain Prisoners.

Note, There were Ten more in this County Prisoners at Chelmsford, upon the
same Writ, De Excommunicato Capiendo; but through the Moderation of the Bishop
of London (Application being made to him on their behalf) they were discharged
of their Imprisonment.

Gloucestershire.
MAtthew Andrews Imprisoned the 16th of the 1st Month, All imprisoned on
Writs, De Excommunicato capiendo sued out by the Chancellor of the Bishops
Court at Gloucester, for not going to the public Worship.
1677.

Nathaniel Cripps and John Mason Imprisoned the 4th of the 10th Month, 1678.

John Wickham, John Parker and Robert Tilley Imprisoned the 4th of the 10th
Mon. 1678.

Robert Neal and Nathaniel Ogburn Imprisoned the 20th of the 8th Month, 1678.

Jenkin Hopkin Imprisoned the 6th of the 12th Month, 1678.

Hartfordshire.
The 4th Month, 1679.
James Brown, William Bunkee and Robert Cooper, all Imprisoned in the
County-Goal in Hartford, for not going to the public Worship, and still remain
Prisoners.

Hampshire.
WIlliam Baldwin of Porchester in the said County, Imprisoned in the
County-Goal at Winchester, by a Writ, De Excommunicato Capiendo, the 29th day
of June, 1680. (for not paying Tithes) and still remains a Prisoner.

Huntingtonshire.
The 6th of the 1st Month, called March, 1678.
GEorge Clapham cast into Prison the 7th day of the 12th Month, 1676. by a
Writ, De Excommunicato Capiendo, for not going to the Parish Church (so eailed)
and not receiving the Sacrament, and still continues a a Prisoner; prosecuted
by Doctor Pocklington.

William Poole Imprisoned the 22d day of the 1st Month, called March, 1677.
for not going to the Parish Church, and not receiving the Sacrament; prosecuted
by Duellin Salmon, Register of the Commissary Court of the Bishop of Lincoln.

John Purkis Imprisoned the 22d of the 2d Month, called April, 1678. by a
Writ, De Excommunicato Capiendo, for 16 d. small Tithes; prosecuted by one
Drury.

James Paris Imprisoned the 15th of the 5th Month, 1678. by a Writ, De
Excommunicato Capiendo, for not going to the Parish Church, and not receiving
the Sacrament; the Bailiff that served it being employed by Duellin Salmon,
Register of the Commissary Court aforesaid.

Roger Chamberlain Imprisoned the 18th of the Month called October, 1678. upon
a Writ, De Excommunicato Capiendo, for not going to Church, and not receiving
the Sacrament. The Bailiff that made Service thereof being employed by Duellin
Salmon aforesaid.

Benjamin Bennell Imprisoned the 15th of the 12th Month, 1678. by a Writ, De
Excommunicato Capiendo, for not going to Church (so called) and not receiving
the Sacrament. And being a Lame man, t^a can neither stand nor go, he was
ordered to be carried on Horseback, by Duellin Salmon, the Bailiff riding behind
^im.

Nathaniel Cowthorne Imprisoned the 21st of the 12th Month, 1678. by a Writ,
De Excommunicato Capiendo; Arrested by one William Clay, at the Suit of Duellin
Salmon aforesaid.

Note, The Cause^ of the aforesaid Persons Imprisonment, as expressed in the
Writ, was for Contempt of the Court, in not appearing.

William Wright of Godmanchesber, for not paying small Tithes, was cited to the
Bishops Court, where he gave his Appearance, and took a Copy of the Libel
against him, Qu. Whether they have Power to administer an Oath by Law, except
in cases of Matrimony and Testaments?
and tendered his Answer in Writing, under his Hand and Seal; but because he
could not Swear to it, they would not receive it, but admonished him once,
twice and thrice, and then proceeded to Excommunication.

Kent.
The 1st Month, 1679.
THomas Clarenbole of Deal in the said County, Imprisoned the 6th of the 11th
Month, 1675. by a Writ, De Excommunicato Capiendo; prosecuted by John Marsh of
Okeham, Warden, for not paying 3 s. 3 d. toward the Repair of the Church, so
called.

William Gibbon cited to the Bishops Court, for not paying small Tithes; and
for a pretended Contempt in not appearing, he was Excommunicated; which being
certified to the Justice, a Warrant was granted to commit him to Prison, though
he was a poor Aged Man, and his Wife Blind: He has remained a Prisoner several
Years.

Richard Perry of Chartham in the said County, the 1st of the 12th Month*
1675. was taken at the Suit of Doctor Parker, Archdeacon, and Imprisoned by a
Writ, De Excommunicato Capiendo, for denying to pay 3 s. 4 d. toward Repair of
the Church (so called.)

Alice Smith and John Smith her Son, Imprisoned in the Goal in Dunstones near
Canterbury, about the 8th Month, 1678. upon a Writ, De Excommunicato Capiendo,
for not paying Tithes to Priest Allen of Crondall.

Liecestershire.
The 9th Month, 1680.
DAniel Fox of Thrussington, in the said County, Mercer, Imprisoned upon a
Writ, De Excommunicato Capiendo, for not going to Church, so called, and has
been a Prisoner four Years.

John Wilsford of Fenny Stanton in Huntingtonshire, Woolcomber, being taken two
Weeks before his Removal from Netherbroughton, now forty Miles from his Family,
having three Children, and imprisoned by a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, for
not going to the Parish Church (so called) and has remained a Prisoner four
Years.

Samuel Brown of Liecester, Apothecary, Imprisoned by a Writ of Excommunicato
Capiendo, for not going to the Parish Church (so called) and has remained a
Prisoner above four Years.

John Eliot of Norkilworth, Husbandman, Imprisoned by a Writ of Excommunicato
Capiendo, for not going to Church (so called) and has remained a Prisoner
above four Years, from his Family, having four small Children.

John Johnson of Norkilworth, Shepherd, Imprisoned by a Writ, De Excommunicato
Capiendo, for not going to the Parish Church (so called) and has been a
Prisoner near four Years, from his Family, having three small Children.

Thomas Dash of Hinckley, Labouring-man, Aged Sixty Three Years, and has an
Aged Wife and four Children to maintain, Imprisoned by the said Writ, De
Excommunicato Copiendo, for not going to Church (so called) and has been a
Prisoner above four Years.

The 1st Month, 1679.
William Parker of Long Clawson, in the said County, Carpenter, Excommunicated
for not paying Tithes to J. Ray Priest of Clawson, and certified to a Justice,
and by him committed by Mittimus, by the Statute of the 27 Hen. 8. and has
remained a Prisoner above Four Years.

John Marriot of Long Clawson aforesaid, Joyner, imprisoned at the Suit of the
said J. Ray, for Tithes, and being certified to a Justice that he was
Excommunicated, he was by Mittimus committed upon the Statute of the 27 Hen. 8.
and has remained a Prisoner above four Years.

Thomas Fellows of Whetstone in the said County, Husbandman, committed by
Mittimus on the same Statute, at the Suit of Thomas Robinson Priest of
Whetstone, for Non-payment of Tithes, and has remained a Prisoner about four
Years.

Lincolnshire.
The 22d of the 12th Month, 1978.
WIlliam Edlinton of Crayes Loon, in Hacksey Parish, Imprisoned in Lincoln
Castle, in the 3d Month, 1674. by a Writ, De Excommunicato Capiendo, for not
paying Tithes to Edward Coggin and Tho. Painter, Impropriators.

Robert Berryer of Cro^le Parish, Imprisoned in the same Goal, in the 5th
Month, 1674. by a Writ, De Excommunicato Capiendo, at the Suit of the said
Edward Coggin and Thomas Painter for Tithes.

James Dixon of Croole, Imprisoned the 4th day of the 9th Month, 1674. by a
Writ, De Excommunicato Capiendo, at the suit of Samuel Ashbourn, Priest of the
same Parish, for Non-payment of Tithe.

John Baldock of Wanefleet, imprisoned the 18 of the 11 Month, 1675. by a Writ
of Excommunicato Capiendo, for not paying to the Repair of the Church (so
called) prosecuted by Adlord Thorp and Adlord Sandome, John Chambers, Bailiff,
and Thomas Organner, Parritor.

William Brown of Belton, Imprisoned the 13th day of the 1st Month, 1676. by
a Writ, De Excommunicato Capiendo, for not paying to the Repair of the Church
(so called) prosecuted by Robert Barnard, James Turr, Wardens of the Parish.

Robert Maw of Belton, aforesaid, Imprisoned the 13th day of the 1st Month,
1676. for not paying to the Repair of the Church (so called) prosecuted by
Robert Barnard and James Turr aforesaid.

The 4th Month, 1679.
Thomas Cutforth of Epworth, in the Isle of Hacksey, in the County aforesaid,
was Imprisoned the 16th day of the 7th Month, 1679. by a Writ, De
Excommunicato Capiendo, at the Suit of Richard Herrin, Priest of Hacksay, for
Non-Payment Tithes.

John Hopkinson of Weston, sued by John Cock and George Woodriff, for not
paying to the Repair of the Church (so called) and imprisoned upon a Writ of
Excommunicato Capiendo, the 6th day of the 3d Month, 1680. and still remains a
Prisoner.

Jonah Titmus of Maulton, Imprisoned the 22d day of the 3d Month, 1680. by a
Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, for not paying to the Repair of the Church (so
called) prosecuted at the Suit of Cock and Woodriff, Wardens.

John Aystrope Imprisoned in the Castle of Lincoln upon a Writ of Excommunicato
Capiendo, and still remains a Prisoner, 1680. The Cause of his Imprisoment not
signified.

Lancashire.
The 5th Month, 1678.
THomas Skerray of Wrea, Husbandman, and Agnes Skerray, of the same place,
Widow, both Imprisoned upon a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, at the suit of
the Lord Morley of Hornby, for Tithes, and still reman Prisoners, 1680.

Nottinghamshire.
The 9th of the 3d Month, 1679.
LEonard Marshall and his Mother, and Hugh Mostin, all Imprisoned in the 8th
Month, 1678. upon Writs of Excommunicato Capiendo in the County Goal in
Nottingham; the cause, for not going to the Church, so called.

Jonathan Reckless of Nottingham Imprisoned (by a Writ of Excommunicato
Capiendo) in the County-Goal, because he refused to hire the Priest of the
Parish to Marry him for Money.

Norfolk.
The 1st Month, 1679.
JOhn Heart, Nathanial Bacon, Henry Pedd, John Norris and William Barber, all
Imprisoned upon Writs of Excommunicato Capiendo, for a Contempt (as is
signified in the Writ) for not appearing, etc. and still remain Prisoners.

Thomas Foster of Mulborton, Imprisoned the 15th day of the 1st Month, 1679.
at the Suit of Danial Scargill, Priest of the said Parish, and still remains a
Prisoner.

John Spoil of Mulborton aforesaid, Imprisoned the 15th day of the 1st Month,
1679. at the Suit of Daneil Scargill aforesaid, upon a Writ, De Excommunicato
Capiendo, and still remains a Prisoner.

Sussex.
The 20th of the 12th Month, 1678.
JOhn Ellis, Thomas Mosely and Mary Akehurst, a Widow that has five Children,
Imprisoned by the Writ, De Excommunicato Capiendo; prosecuted by William Snatt,
Priest of three Parishes, in and near Lewis, for not paying him small Tithes,
they were first committed to Horsham Goal, which was about the beginning of
Winter, 1677. and since were by William Peck, Merchant in Lewis, removed, in
favor to them, to the Kings Bench, where they still remain Prisoners.

Surrey.
The 15th of th 12th Month, 1678.
THomas Seaman of Shire Imprisoned upon a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, for
not going to hear Common Prayer, and has remained a Prisoner about two Years.

Francis Jones of Oakeing in the said County, Husbandman, for not paying small
Tithes, Imprisoned upon a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, and has been a
Prisoner two Years and upwards, about twenty Miles from his Family.

The 17th of the 9th Month, 1680.
John Otter of Magdalens Bermundsey, in the County of Surrey, Cordwinder,
Imprisoned in the County Goal, the 5th Month, 1677. by the Writ De
Excommunicato Capiendo, for not answering upon Oath, in the Court of the Bishop
of Winton, being Sued for not paying to the Repair of the Church (so called) by
George Nutkins, William Brown, John Arnold and Richard Bugin, Wardens and
Overseers of the Parish aforesaid, and still remains a Prisoner.

Griffith Jones of the same Parish, Wine-Cooper, Imprisoned the same time. by
the Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo, for the same Cause, at the same men's Suit,
and still remains a Prisoner.

John Tarmton of the same Parish, Cordwinder, Imprisoned at the same men's Suit,
about the same time, by a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, for the same cause,
and still remains a Prisoner.

John Potter of the same Parish, Cordwinder; Joseph Rawbones of the same
Parish, Bricklayer; Henry Day of the same Parish. Tailor; John Farmer of the
same Parish, Carpenter; Edmund Curle of the same Parish, Turner; Thomas Life of
the same Parish, Salter; Samuel Marting of the same Parish, Ceele-monger; all
Imprisoned about the 5th Month, 1677. upon Writs of Excommunicato Capiendo, at
the Suit of the said George Nutkins, William Brown, John Arnold and Richard
Burgin, Wardens of the Parish of Magdalens Bermondsey aforesaid, for not
putting in their Answer upon Oath; being also prosecuted for not paying to the
Repair of the Church (so called) still remain Prisoners, except two that are
Dead.

Samuel Jobson of Bermondsey Parish aforesaid, Fellmonger, Imprisoned the 30th
day of the 10th Month, 1679. upon a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, for the
same cause; prosecuted by William Brown, John Arnold, Richard Burgin and
George Nutkins, and still remains a Prisoner.

Suffolk.
The 25th of the 12th Month, 1678.
John Manning and William Falkner, both of Alborrough, committed to the County
Goal in Ipswich the 2d day of the 11th Month, 1675. prosecuted by the Wardens
of the same Town, and Imprisoned by the Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo, for not
going to divine Service (so called) and still remain Prisoners.

Samuel Freeman of Shottly, Imprisoned the 7th day of the 2d Month, 1676. by
the Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo, at the suit of William Marksey, Priest of
the same Town, for a small value of Tithes, and still remains a close Prisoner.

Note, Thomas Watson, Keeper of the Goal, has been very cruel to John Manning
and William Falkner, and cast them twice into the bottom amongst Fellons, where
they remained above Twenty Weeks; and the last time he caused one of the
Fellons to be chained Night and Day in a long Chain, which reached over the
Room, on purpose to annoy the Room with his Filthiness and Excrements, and
would not sufer them to have so much as a Stool, Chair or Stone to sit on; and
they have been kept several Years close Prisoners, Eighteen Miles distant from
their wives and Families.

Benjamin Reeve of Debenham committed to the same Goal the 9th day of the 2d
Month, 1677. by a Wri^ de Excommunicato Capiendo, for not paying Augustine
Colliar and Thomas Pells, Wardens, 4 s. 6 d. toward the the Repair of the
Church (so called) and is still kept close Prisoner.

Mariha Glanfield of Halksted, Widow, committed to the same Goal, the 26th day
of the 12th Month, 1678. by a Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo, for not going to
Church (so called) and is still kept close Prisoner.

George Deane of Arington committed to Prison the 15th day of the 11th Month.
1678. by a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo; prosecuted by Robert Man of the same
Town, Warden, for the same cause.

George Driver of Clopton, c^mmitted to Prison in Ipswich, the 21st day of the
11th Month, 1678. by a Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo; prosecuted by the
Wardens of the same Town, for the same cause, and still remains a Prisoner.

William Feddeman committed to the same Goal, the 7th day of the 12th Month,
1678. upon a Writ, de Excommunicato Capiendo; prosecuted in the Bishops Court
by Robert Cook, Warden of Ellens Parish in Ipswich, and still remains a
Prisoner.

In Bury Goal.
John Downham of Assington, Imprisoned by a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, for
not paying Tithes to Priest Garwood of Westington; has been a Prisoner almost
five Years.

William Scarce of Northam, Imprisoned the 28th day of the 6th Month, 1675.
by the Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo* being prosecuted for not being legally
married to his Wife; notwithstanding it has been made appear since to the
Chancellor of the Bishops Court, under the Hands of the Priest that married
them, and other Witnesses, and that before he was called a Quaker, That he was
Married according to the Manner of the Church of England: He has remained a
Prisoner more then three Years, and so still remains.

Edmund Howkings of Boxford, Imprisoned in the 1st Month, 1677. by a Writ de
Excommunicato Capiendo, for not paying Tithes to Priest Bromwell of Pons^ead.

Robert Pra^ck of Bury, Imprisoned by a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, for not
paying Easter-Reckonings, and a Rate toward Repair of the Church (so called)
He has been a Prisoner Forty Weeks, and still remains a Prisoner.

Somersetshire.
The 9th Month, 1680.
John Denny of Weston Zayland, a poor Labourer, was the 10th Month, 1674.
Imprisoned upon a Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo, for not paying small Tithes
to Sir William Powell, Impropriator, the value of Tithes being about 9 d. for
three Year.

Jeremiah Powell of Michael Creech, committed to Prison the 11th Month, 1674.
upon a Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo, for not paying Tithes.

John Wride, John Brice and Robert Tutton of Burnham, Imprisoned in the 2d
Month, 1675. by Mittimus upon the Statute of the 27 Hen. 8. C. 20. for a
contempt in the Bishops Court, as alleged, for not appearing upon a citation
at the suit of Robert Collier, Priest of Chard, who lives there, and yet
demands the Tithes of Burnham, also: It is for small Tithes.

Note, This was done upon a bare Citation, for not appearing, without any other
Proceedings, Decree or Sentence; and the words are Conjunctively in the
Statute; and John Wride one of the three, not cited at all.

John Parsons of Middle^oy, Imprisoned in the 9th Month, 1675. upon at Writ de
Excommunicato Capiendo, at the Suit of William Powell, Impropriator, in a case
of withholding Tithes; upon which he was removed to London, and remanded at
the Charge of the Sheriff.

John Chapel of World Imprisoned the 11th Month, 1675, upon a Writ de
Excommunicato Capiendo, at the Suit of Samuel Willan, Priest of Weston and
Cowstock, for not paying Tithes to the value of about fourteen Groats, at the
Priest's rate.

Edward Silcocks of Weston-super Mary, a poor man, and Labourer, brought to the
Goal in the second Month, 1675. upon a Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo for some
small Tithes of Fish, which came to about 10 s. for five Years, at the Suit of
Samuel Willan, Priest, who is an envious Persecuting Proud man.

Thomas Powell of Greenton Imprisoned the 5th Month 1676. upon a Writ de
Excommunicato Capiendo, for not answering upon Oath to the Articles and
Positions of William Powell Impropriator, in a Case of Tithes; the value at the
utmost, for six Years stint of Meadow, 6 s. 9 d. and for nine Cocks of Barley,
worth about 3 s. 4 d.

Henry Gundry of Streat imprisoned the 11th Day of the 7th Month, 1678. by
Warrant from Robert Hunt and Henry Bull, (two called Justices) upon Letters
Testimonial from Peter Bishop of Bathe and Wells, as alleged for not appearing
before his Lordship, or his Official; the Mittimus expresses in a case of
withholding Tithes from Joseph Glanvile Priest of Streat and Walton, who
prosecutes the Suit, and yet by Violence, without Law, takes what he or his
Servants pleases for Tithes; and now Imprisons the said Henry Gundry also,
under pretense of Contumacy in not appearing; when in truth he did appear, and
on the day whereon the Contempt was returned, was ready to appear again, but
was hindered by an accident of Fire about half an Hour, the which they strickly
took the advantage of.

Edmund Chapel the younger of World, Imprisoned the 27th of the 7th Month,
1678. upon a Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo, for not answering upon Oath in the
Bishops Court of Bathe and Wells to certain Articles, exhibited by Samuel
Willan Priest of Kewstock and Weston, for the Tithes of Pasture-Ground, to the
value of Ten Groats, after the Priests rate.

And to add to the Bonds of John Wriden, John Brice, Robert Tutton, John
Chapel and Edward Silcocks, Five of the aforesaid Prisoners, Peter Bishop of
Bathe and Wells, by the promotion of some others of the Clergy, threatened the
Keepers of the Goal at the Assizes held at Wells, 1678. and there enforced the
said Keepers to give him a Bond in a Hundred Pounds penalty, to be Forfeited,
if they should let any or either of the said Prisoners have any Liberty; Such a
President as the like was never read or heard, and is without question contrary
to all Law, Justice, Religion and Reason.

William Beaton and John Allen Imprisoned the 26th Day of the 4th Month, 1679.
Imprisoned upon a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, for not receiving the
Eucharist, as alleged in the Warrant, and still remain Prisoners.

Stafford.
The 24th of the 1st Month, 1679.
PEter Littleton of Stafford committed to Prison the 17th Day of the 8th
Month, 1675. upon a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, at the Suit of Thomas
Fletther Priest of Haughton, for Non-payment of Tithes, and remained a Prisoner
till Summer Assizes, and then was set at Liberty by the Act of Pardon and
Indemnity; but in the latter end of the same Month he was again committed by
Mittimus (upon the Statute of the 27 Hen. 8.) under the Hands and Seals of John
Martin, Mayor of Stafford, and Francis Moss Justice, at the Suit of the said
Tho. Fletcher, who granted their Warrant upon a Significavit or Certificate
from the Bishop of Lichfield, that the said Peter Littleton was Excommunicated,
etc. And this Priest has been so Cruel to him, that though the said Peter was
very Sick of a Fever, and more likely to dye then to live, (four Men dying out
of the same Room in about two Weeks time) yet he would let him have no Liberty:
But through God's Mercy (who is good to all that depend upon him) his Life was
preserved.

Sallop.
The 9th Month, 1680.
THomas Palmer of the Parish of Stoteston, in the said County, for not going to
Church (so called) Imprisoned upon a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, the 20th
Day of the 6th Month, 1677. by John Osland and Owen Roberts Bailiffs,
prosecuted in the Bishops Court at Ludlow; To which Court most of his Servants
and Laborers were also cited, who being poor, and to avoid Expense, gave no
appearance, for which they were Excommunicated, which brought such Fear and
Disturbance upon them, that the aforesaid Thomas Palmer lost his Harvest for
want of Workmen; he being himself in Goal and absent.

Warwickshire.
JOhn Marshall of Ipssley, in the said County, in the Year 1678. dyed, and
having one Child he made a Will, and made John Marshall of Southwark, in the
County of Surry, Executor; the aforesaid John Marshall of Ipssley being in his
Lifetime Excommunicated in the Bishop of Worcesters Court, for not paying
three Shillings and six Pence toward the Repair of the Church (so called)
after his Death, John Moore and William Miles Wardens of the Parish of Ipssley
aforesaid, at whose Suit the said John Marshall was Excommunicated, got an
Administration out of the Bishop's Court for their pretended due of 3 s. 6 d.
and charge of Court in Excommunicating of him, and taking advantage at the
Executors being at such a distance, they seized and took into their Possession,
and carried away a Mare worth four Pounds, and two two Years old Calves, and
seized as much Hay as was worth 10 l. All for their pretended Debt of 3 s. 6 d.
and Court charges.

Wiltshire.
Fisherton Anger, the 2d Day of the 8th Month, 1680.
WIlliam Moxham of Marden in the said County, Imprisoned in Fisherton Anger, at
the Suit of William Gum, Priest of Marden, for small Tithes, viz. of Apples,
Eggs, Calves and Piggs, as in the Libel was expressed, to which he would have
put in his Answer, but it would not be received, because he could not Swear to
it, and thereupon was Excommunicated and Imprisoned, where he has remained
several Years, and still remains a Prisoner: And though the said William Gum
has had his Body in Prison, he has also taken his Goods away for his Tithes
at the same time, at his will and pleasure.

Richard Hilliard of Alderbury, in the said County, Imprisoned upon a Writ of
Excommunicato Capiendo, for not going to Church (so called) prosecuted by the
Envy and Instigation of John Foot Priest of Alderbury aforesaid, and some of
the Officers of the Bishop's Court, and has remained in Prison several Years,
and still continues a Prisoner.

George Harris of New Sarum, Imprisoned by a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo,
for not going to the Parish Worship, prosecuted in the Bishops Court, and has
been a Prisoner several Years, and still remains in Prison.

Roger Wheeler of Pottern, a very poor Man, having little for himself, Wife and
four Children, but what he labored for with his Hands; because he refused to
receive the Sacrament, at the Instigation of Richard Bowman Priest of the
Parish, and others, was presented and cited to the Bishop's Court, where he
appeared, and was willing and ready to give a Reason of his Faith; nevertheless
they pretended a Contempt against him for not appearing, and cast his Body into
Prison, where he has been a Sufferer several Years, and so still remains.

Ralph Wythers of Bishops Comings, in the County aforesaid, Imprisoned upon a
Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, prosecuted by some of the Officers of the
Bishop's Court, concerning his manner of Marriage, it being not according to
the Ceremonies of the Church of England; the Priest of the Parish loosing the
Money he usually has in such cases, which was the reason of the procedure
against him, after he had remained in Prison several Months, at the Request of
some of his Friends, a Release was obtained; but the Envy of the Spiritual
Court (so called) was so great against him, that they prosecuted him a fresh,
and renewed their Capias and for the same cause cast him into Prison again, his
Wife bring great with Child, was in a short time delivered; but her Husband's
Sufferings caused such great Grief and Trouble to her, that she could not quit
her self of it until she died: And the said Ralph Wythers still remains a
close Prisoner.

Westmoreland.
The 12th Month, 1678.
THomas Moore of Newbiggin, and Dorothy Middleton of Lupton, Imprisoned in
Appleby Goal, upon Writs of Excommunicato Capiendo, for not paying
Easter-Reckonings and Midsummer-Dues, etc. at the Suit of Henry Hoyle Priest of
Kirby Lambsdale; and have been Prisoners two Years, though the Prosecutor is
dead.

Worcestershire.
The 20th of the 8th Month, 1680.
WIlliam Parr of Shipston in the said County, for not going to Church (so
called) and not appearing at Doctor Crouches Court at Treddington, Imprisoned
upon a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, and has remained a Prisoner two Years
and a half; and so still remains.

Yorkshire.
The 1st of the 3d Month, 1678.
Joshua Smith for refusing to take the Oath of Churchwarden (so called)
Imprisoned upon the Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo, where he yet remains,
having been a Prisoner ever since the 13th of the 9th Month, 1673.

John Moreley presented as Warden, and for not appearing in the Bishops Court
to Citation, was imprisoned upon a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, the 18th Day
of the 10th Month, 1677. and still remains.

Nicholas Row sued for small Tithes in the Bishop's Court, and Excommunicated;
and upon Certificate thereof committed by a Justices Warrant, upon the 27 Hen.
8. the 8th Month, 1674.

Christopher Walkington committed to Prison, upon Writ of Excommunicato
Capiendo, the 8th of the 11th Month, 1674. for not appearing, etc. to answer
for not paying to the Repair of the Church (so called.)

Joseph Travis Imprisoned by a Writ, De Excommunicato Capiendo, for not
appearing, and not paying to the Repair of the Church (so called) committed the
20th of the 11th Month, 1674.

Peter Simpson Imprisoned upon the Writ, De Excommunicato Capiendo, in the 12th
Month, 1674. for not giving his answer to a Libel upon Oath.

Matthew Wildman, for not appearing to Citation sued for small Tithes, was by
the same Writ committed the 11th day of the 3d Month, 1675. where he still
remains.

Thomas Appleton Imprisoned the 4th day of the 5th Month, 1675. by a Writ, De
Excommunicato Capiendo, for not going to Church (so called) where he still
Remains.

Richard Carr committed to Prison, the 21st day of the 6th Month, 1675. by the
Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo, for the same cause.

Honora Skipwith committed the 28th day of the 7th Month, 1675. by the Writ De
Excommunicato Capiendo, for the same cause, and not appearing at the Bishops
Court.

John Lightfoot committed to Prison, the 28th day of the 7th Month, 1675. for
not going to Church (so called) by a Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo, and still
remains a Prisoner.

Edward Evans committed to Prison the 28th day of the 6th Month, 1675. by a
Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, for not appearing in the Bishops Court, where
he yet remains.

Thomas Milton committed to Prison the 26th of the 8th Month, 1675. by an
Excommunicato Capiendo Writ, for not going to Church (so called) where he yet
Remains.

Edward Gower* Aged about sixty Years, for the same cause was committed, the
11th day of the 5th Month, 1675. by Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, and still
Remains a Prisoner.

John Lickas for the same cause committed to Prison, the 21st of the 10th
Month, 1675. by Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, where he yet remains.

William Keddy for the same Cause committed to Prison, the 2d day of the 11th
Month, 1675. by Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, where he yet remains.

Richard Hancock presented for not paying to the Repair of the Church (so
called) and for not appearing, committed to Prison, the 5th of the 11th Month,
1675. by Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, and still remains a Prisoner.

William Blassom presented for the same cause, and for not appearing,
prosecuted and imprisoned upon a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, the 5th of the
11th Month, 1675. and still remains a Prisoner.

Thomas Bellamy for the same cause, Imprisoned upon a Wit of Excommunicato
Capiendo, the 5th of the 11th Month, 1675. and still remains a Prisoner.

Thomas Jarret for not going to Church (so called) was committed the 26th of
the 12th Month, 1675. by Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, and yet remains a
Prisoner.

Thomas Wilkinson Imprisoned by Writ, De Excommunicato Capiendo, the 8th day of
the 2d Month, 1676. at the Suit of Leonard Burton for small Tithes, and still
remains a Prisoner.

Thomas Salkell and Francis Lund, committed at the same Persons Suit, for the
same cause, at the same time, by the Writ aforesaid.

Isabel Milner committed to Prison, for not conforming and not going to Church
(so called) by Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, the 6th of the 10th Month
1676. and still remains a Prisoner.

Joseph Denton for the same cause committed to Prison, the 15th of the 11th
Month, 1676. where he yet remains.

Thomas Thompson for not paying to the Repair of the Church (so called)
imprisoned by Writ, De Excommunicato Capiendo, the 23d of the 3d Month, 1677.
where he still remains.

Michael Simpson committed by a Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo, the 23d of the
3d Month, 1677. for not appearing at the Bishops Court, where he still remains.

Thomas Gargil for the same cause Imprisoned the 24th of the 3d Month, 1677.
by a Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo, where he still remains.

David Nutbrown for the same cause was committed by Writ De Excommunicato
Capiendo, the 18th day of the 12th month, 1676.

James Conyers for the same cause imprisoned by the same Writ, the 21st of the
1st month, 1676. where he still remains.

Michael Todd for the same cause, imprisoned by Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo,
where he still remains.

John Hunter, a poor decreped Man, that taught Children for a livelihood;
because he could not conform to take License to teach School, was
Excommunicated by the Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo, committed to Prison the
2d of the 6th Month, 1677. since dead.

Christopher Stockton sued in the Bishop's Court at York, 1674. by one Thomas
Flathar Priest; and for not giving in an Answer to the Priest's Libel* was
Excommunicated, which was certified to a Justice, who upon the Statute of the
27 Hen. 8. was committed to Prison the 31st of the 9th Month, 1674. and the
next Assizes upon a motion of the Illegality of the said Warrant or Mittimus
was released, but was shortly after again committed upon the Writ De
Excommunicato Capiendo, at the Suit of the same man, for the same cause, the
31st of the 11th month, 1677. and still remains a Prisoner.

Jarvaice Key sued in the Bishops Court at York, in the Year 1675. by Joseph
Briggs, Priest, and by Mittimus committed to Prison the 8th day of the 5th
month, 1675. upon the Statute of the 27 Hen. 8. And there continued till the
Assizes in 1677. and upon motion before the Judge of Assize, of the Illegallity
of the Warrant, by which he was committed, he was released: Nevertheless the
Priest began again with him in the Bishops Court, and he was again committed,
the 28th day of the 9th month, 1677. where he still remains.

Robert Trot prosecuted in the Bishops Court, for non-payment of Tithes, and
for not appearing, was Excommunicated and committed by Mittimus upon the
Statute aforesaid, the 6th day of the 8th month, 1677. where he yet remains.

John Dickenson committed by the same Warrant, at the same time, and for the
same cause, where he still remains.

John Loggins, for not giving his answer to the Libel upon Oath, was by
Justices Warrant committed the 29th of the 8th month, 1677. and yet remains
Prisoner.

John Todd sued for Tithes of Bees and Honey, and nothing else declared against
him in the Libel; yet because he could not Swear to his Answer was
Excommunicated, though he had neither Bees, Honey nor Wax, and was committed to
Prison by a Justices Warrant, the 22d day of the 2d month, 1678. where he now
lies prosecuted by John Burton Priest.

William Hudson committed to Prison by Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo, to the
City Goal in York, for not paying to the Repair of the Church (so called) the
8th day of the 11th month, 1673. where he yet remains.

Anthony Wells of Hull committed to Hull Goal, upon a Writ De Excommunicato
Capiendo, for Nonconformity, where he has long lain in Prison, and still
remains a Prisoner.

In Richmond Goal, 1678.
Richard Robinson of Countersett, in the said County, imprisoned upon a Writ De
Excommunicato Capiendo, the 4th of the 11th Month, 1678. for not paying to the
Repair of the Church (so called) and still remains.

John Fothergill of the same place, for the same cause, committed also the 4th
day of the 11th Month, 1678. and still remains a Prisoner.

Christopher Routh of Hawes committed the same time, by the same Writ, for
pretended Fornication with her that is (...) his Wife, before (...), and still
remains a Prisoner.

Stephen Winn and Robert Gildart, both of Carlton in Coverdale, both imprisoned
in Richmond, upon Writs of Excommunicato Capiendo, the 15th day of the 1st
month, 1679. for not going to the Church (so called) and not receiving the
Sacrament, and still remain Prisoners.

George Wilson of Relnbald Kirk, Imprisoned in Richmond, by a Writ, De
Excommunicato Capiendo, the 10th day of the 11th month, 1679. for a contempt
to the Bishop's Court in not appearing, etc.

Robert Cutter of Kerby Ravensworth, Yeamon, Excommunicated for a contempt, in
not appearing at the Bishops Court, etc. and committed by the Writ De
Excommunicato Capiendo, the 3d day of the month, called March, 1679. and still
remains a Prisoner.

William Harlin Sledman, Edward Mounder Joyner, Judith Bond Widow; all of
Kingston upon Hull Imprisoned in the said Town, by a Justices Warrant, it being
certified by the Bishop of York, that they were Excommunicated, for not paying
Tithes to Nicholas Anderson, Priest; the Warrant dated the 1st day of April,
1678. and they still remain Prisoners.

John Normable of Lockington, for not paying small Tithes to John Willy, was
Excommunicated, and upon certificate thereof to the Justices, he was sent to
the Goal at York, the 5th Month, 1678. by Warrant under the Hands and Seals of
two of them, and there still remains.

Christopher Hutton committed to Prison by Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, the
23d of the 5th Month, called July, 1678. for a Contempt in not appearing (as
alleged in the Warrant) at the Bishops Court, and still remains a Prisoner.

Joseph Wytherill Imprisoned the 27th day of the Month called July, 1678. for
not paying to the Repair of the Church (so called) committed by Writ of
Excommunicato Capiendo, and still remains a Prisoner.

Leonard Petfield Imprisoned by Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo, the 20th day of
September, 1678. for not receiving the Sacrament, and still remains a Prisoner.

Anthony Carr and Richard Woodmansey, prosecuted and imprisoned by Writs of
Excommunicato Capiendo, 1678. for pretended Clandestine Marriages.

Benjamin Brook of Aughton, for not paying Tithes to William Richardson, was
imprisoned in the 8th Month, 1678. by a Mittimus under two Justices Hands and
Seals, and still remains a Prisoner.

Peter Scaife of Pontefract in the said County, for not paying Tithes to Jane
Drake, Widow, Imprisoned about the 1st Month, called March, 1679. by Warrant
from two Justices, being first certified to them, that he was Excommunicated,
and still remains a Prisoner.

William Harland Imprisoned upon a Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo, for a
contempt, as signified in the Warrant, by which he was committed the 22th day
of the 6th Month, called August, 1679. and still remains a Prisoner

William Padley of Northcave, prosecuted and imprisoned for not appearing in
the Bishops Court, at the suit of Thomas Forger, Priest of Northcave aforesaid,
being for the same Excommunicated and certified to two Justices, who committed
him upon the Statute of the 27 Hen. 8. and still remains a Prisoner.

Richard Pursglove, Imprisoned upon a Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo, for not
going to Church, so called, 1678. and still remains a Prisoner.

Bristol.
The 8th Month, 1680.
RIchard Vickris, Edward Erbery, William Hill and Paul Moon, now imprisoned in
Bristol, committed upon Writs of Excommunicato Capiendo. Also, there are above
20 more in the said City, Men of considerable Trade and Business, that stand
Excommunicated, and threatened to have process taken out against them this
Michaelmas Term.

Pembrookeshire.
The 23d of the 3d Month, 1678.
EDward Lord, John Burge and Thomas Kent, all Imprisoned upon Writs of
Excommunicato Capiendo; the Crime pretended, for not paying a small Rate
toward the Repair of the Church (so called) and have been Prisoners two Years,
and so still remain.

Leicestershire.
HEnry Brown of Nether Broughton in the said County, Yeoman, prosecuted in the
Bishops Court, and a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo being obtained against him,
although he did not keep from Home, or keep House to prevent his being
apprehended, yet the Sheriff returned a Non est inventus, upon which he was
fined 10 l. and had his Goods distrained by George Parker and Henry Bumns,
Bailiffs.

Richard Chamberlain of Kilby in the same County, upon the same account, had
three Horses taken from him, worth 10 l.

These Accounts before given of the Sufferer's, are but a few in Comparison to
the many that have been prosecuted and imprisoned upon the aforesaid Writs of
Excommunicato Capiendo, within the last twenty Years.

And further note, That most of the aforesaid Accounts were drawn up and
intended to be delivered to the last Parliament (had they not been suddenly
Dissolved) so that it being some time since, there may be some Alteration, some
may be Released by Death, and some otherwise; and others may be imprisoned upon
the same Account: But at the time of the Date placed on the top of the County,
they continued all Prisoners. And the Prosecutions against us in the Bishops
Courts have been more eagerly carried on for these two or three Years last
past, than heretofore. In some Counties there are very few of our Friends, but
what are Excommunicated, whereby they are debarred from receiving the Benefit
of the Law, in Suing for their just Rights, or being Evidence for others, to
recover theirs.

An Account of such of the People called QUAKERS, who have Dyed Prisoners,
being committed by Writs of Excommunicato Capiendo: Also, the Cause of their
Commitment; and Time how long they suffered before they Dyed, briefly signified
as follows.
Devonshire.
JOnathan Collier of Culleton Rawleigh in the said County, Imprisoned in Stoak
Cannon, the 30th day of the 5th Month, 1669. by the Writ, De Excommunicato
Capiendo prosecuted by John Pope and William Tricky, Wardens of Culleton, for
not going to Church (so called) and for not paying to the Repair of the same;
he remained a Prisoner until the 15th Day of the 1st Month, 1670. and then
finished his Testimony by Death.

Thomas Burgan of Artacton, Tailor, was Imprisoned by a Writ De Excommunicato
Capiendo, for not going to the Church (so called) and for a Contempt of the
Bishops Court, in not appearing, prosecuted by Richard Crossen, Priest, and
Andrew Slathen, Warden of Artacton; the said Thomas Burgan was brought to
Prison, to the Sheriffs Ward in Thomas Parish in Exon, the 9th day of the 2d
Month, 1676. and was continued a Prisoner until he dyed, which was on the 19th
day of the 4th Month following.

William Woolcott of Bridford Parish, Weaver, a Laboring man, having a Wife
and two small Children, and their Dependencies was on the Labor of his Hands,
was presented to the Bishops Court, through the Instigation of Bernard Gillard,
Priest of the said Parish, stirring up his Parishioners, and gathering Money to
pay the Charge of a Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo, to imprison him for having
Meetings at his House, and for not conforming, by which Writ he was apprehended
and sent to Prison; and after a long time lying in Prison, being a very poor
man, the Keeper took pity on him, and let him have liberty to go forth to Work;
but the Bishops Officers hearing of it, threatened the Keeper to have him fined
and put out of his place: whereupon this poor man was kept from working, and
was forced to be Relieved by his Friends, his Wife being a sikly Woman, and in
a Distressed Condition; he was continued a Prisoner till the 27th day of the 3d
month, 1676. and then departed this Life.

Witness, John Gannicliffe and Robert Welsh.

Hampshire.
THomas Penford a poor Blacksmith, having a Wife and three Children, Imprisoned
in the common Goal in Winton the 3d day of the 8th Month, 1664. by a Writ de
Excommunicato Capiendo, for not paying 3 d. toward the Repair of the Church
(so called) and for no other cause; after he had remained in Prison three Years
and a half, he dyed a faithful Witness for the Lord, against such Oppression.

Norfolk.
John Norris Imprisoned in Norwich Castle upon the Writ de Excommunicato
Capiendo, and there detained until he dyed.

Mary Mawley of Nortwell, Widow, committed Prisoner to Norwich Castle for the
Tithe of a Goose, by Priest Mingly, then Priest of the said Town, who kept her
a Prisoner in Norwich Castle until she dyed there.

Oxfordshire.
THomas Reins of Great Tue, Imprisoned upon a Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo,
being prosecuted in the Bishops Court at Oxford, in the 12th Month, 1664. And
after he had remained six Years and a half in Prison, he laid down the Body:
And notwithstanding he was in Prison, the Priest of the Parish still prosecuted
him for Tithes, and took away two Horses from him for the same, worth six
Pounds.

Somersetshire.
WIlliam Kent of Purlock, for Conscientiously refusing to go to Church (so
called) and conform to hear Common Prayer, was Excommunicated at the Bishop's
Court at Wells, at the Suit, and by the promotion of Hamnet Ward, Priest of
Purlock, called Doctor in Divinity, and by a Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo was
taken upon the First day of the Week, by Edward Stout and Robert Helbourn
Deputy Bailiffs; And on the 26th day of the 1st month, 1667. was had to
Ilchester Goal, where he continued until the 1st day of the 11th month, 1670.
and then finished his Testimony by Death.

Lucy Travers an ancient Widow, the 25th day of the 1st month, 1674. dyed,
being prosecuted to Death, for 2 d. offering Money, by Priest Kittley of Queen
Camel.

Surrey.
HEnry Day, of the Parish of Magdalens Berm^ndsey, in the County aforesaid,
Tailor, imprisoned in the County Goal upon a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo,
prosecuted by George Nuttkins, William Brown, John Arnold and Richard Burgin,
Wardens and Overseers of the said Parish, for not paying toward the Repair of
the Church (so called) after he had lain some time in Prison, fell Sick and
dyed, the 20th day of the 7th Month, 1677. a Prisoner for the Testimony of a
good Conscience.

John Farmer of the same Parish, Carpenter, Imprisoned by the same Writ, at the
same time, and for the same cause, prosecuted at the same men's Suit, remained a
Prisoner until he died, which was the 12th Day of the 9th Month, 1680.

Worcestershire.
JOhn Jenkins of Clifton in the said County, Imprisoned upon a Writ de
Excommunicato Capiendo, dyed a Prisoner about nine Years since.

Warwickshire.
PEter Buckston committed Prisoner to the County Goal, by a Writ of
Excommunicato Capiendo; after two Years Imprisonment died a Prisoner.

Yorkshire.
JOhn Green Imprisoned upon a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, for not going to
Church (so called) and not receiving the Sacrament, dyed a Prisoner the 12th
day of the 5th Month, 1676.

Nicholas Raw sued in the Bishops Court for not paying Tithes, and
Excommunicated, and upon Certificate thereof to two Justices, was by Mittimus
committed to prison in the 8th month, 1674. and there continued a Prisoner
until he dyed, which was the 11th of the 12th month, 1678.

Besides these before expressed, many more have dyed Prisoners, committed by
Process out of the Bishops Courts, which we have not received an Account of.

Cornwall.
Dyed Prisoners, prosecuted upon Writs of Excommunicato Capiendo, 1680.
EDward Anger of Minster Parish, Imprisoned the 17th of the 3d Month, 1675.
(by John Austis prosecuted, being Register of the Arch Deacons Court) because
for Conscience sake he could not pay toward the Repair of the Church (so
called) and dyed a Prisoner the 9th day of the 4th Month, 1676.

Thomas Deeble Imprisoned for the same cause, by a Writ De Excommunicato
Capiendo, at the Suit of the said John Austis, the 7th Month, 1676. and dyed a
Prisoner in the 11th Month, 1677.

Remain Prisoners in Cornwall.
Nicholas Emett, of the Parish of E^dellian, for not going to Church (so
called) Imprisoned, being prosecuted by the said John Austis; committed to the
Sheriffs Prison, the 27th of the 5th Month, 1676. and remains a Prisoner.

William Oliver, of the Parish of Hillary, Imprisoned by the said John Austis
for not going to the Church (so called) the 2d day of the 2d Month, 1677. and
remains a Prisoner.

William Way, of the Parish of Breage, Imprisoned upon a Writ of Excommunicato
Capiendo, for not receiving the Sacrament, prosecuted by the said John Austis,
the 18th of the 11th Month, 1678. and remains a Prisoner.

Lancashire.
1680.
THomas Crosbie and Joshua Crosbie of Ormskirk, were both taken the 13th day of
the 1st Month, 167^/^. by William Leadbeater Parrator, and Daniel Travis
Bailiff, both of Ormskirk, who brought them, the said Thomas and Joshua, to
Lancaster the day following, where they both still remain Prisoners upon a Writ
of Excommunicato Capiendo; prosecuted by John Chorley Attorney at Law, and now
Mayor of Liverpoole.

Now you that are Wise and Vnbyassed Men in Authority, who are not destitute of
Humanity, judge how these Coercive and Distructive proceedings of the Clergy,
can consist with a Christian Spirit or Gospel Persuasion.
THE END.

