THE PARLIAMENTS Thanks to The City: For their kind compliance with them in
all their Treasons from time to time committed against His Majesty's Honor,
Crown and Dignity.
DEDICATED. To the Loyal and treacherous Citizens; the valiant and cowardly
Citizens; the wise and foolish Citizens; the wealthy and poor Citizens; the
square and Round-headed Citizens; the honored, and the Horned Citizens.
BY Mercurius Melancholicus:
YOu Loyal Citizens,
J call you as you were,
Jn times of old till now,
For many a hundred year.
What is the reason now
you are Disloyal grown,
And have forsaken quite
The Royal English Crown?
You Treacherous Citizens,
J call you, as you are,
How comes it so to pass
that you with Indas share?
Blot out your Dagger now
your Arms their chiefest grace;
Jack Straw in stead shall put
his Thatching- Knife in place.
You Valiant Citizens,
I call you, as you were,
Time out of mind, until
this present Conquering year:
It pities me to see
how hartless you are grown,
That dare not budge nor stir
for to preserve your own.
You cowardly Citizens,
I call you a^ you are,
Our miseries they increase,
be sure you shall have share:
How beardless boys do tread,
(the world will laugh to see)
Your honor in the dust,
with shame and Obloquie.
You wise grave Citizens,
J call you as you were,
Whilst you your selves maintained
your Privileges clear:
My heart does burst to see
your King, your Laws, your Rights,
Abused, infringed, o'rethrowne
all by your oversights.
You foolish Citizens,
J call you, as you are,
Of Goods, of Rights, of Lives,
you shall be stripped bare;
Where are your eyes become?
you cannot see at all
How near you are unto
a lamentable fall.
You wealthy Citizens,
I call you as you were,
Whilst in protection you
were of your Sovereign dear:
But now the case is altered
the clean contrary way,
Your Riches are become
the plundring Soldiers prey.
You poor base Citizens,
I call you as you are,
Jn what a case are you?
how mean, how vile, how bare?
What you your selves have got,
nor you, nor yours enjoy.
Dam-me it is mine will swear
some upstart Soldiers boy.
The second Part.
To the same Tune.
Square-headed Citizen^,
J call you as you were,
Whilst you the helm of Justice
most equally did steer,
But now your giddy heads
have turned you all so round,
Of Law, or of R^lig^on
we can have nothing found.
Round-headed Citizens,
I call you as you are,
For by your orbed forms,
You put all out of square:
The Kingdom quite undone,
your selves shall not escape,
Expect no further bliss,
but Murder, Theft and Rape.
You honored Citizens.
I call you as you were,
Whilst you reserved a strength,
to keep your selves from fear;
But all your Hold's are lost,
by your grave wisdoms pates,
If you your Houses keep,
It Is more then is your fates.
You horned Citizens,
I call you as you are,
What cockolds could endure
Corrivalls thus to share?
Content I do confess,
It is a Wittalls part,
Let nothing J have said,
pray strike you to the heart.
Farewell kind Citizens,
all things but Horns are dear,
And no one may we thank
but you, for this same gear.
A Challenge From KENT, And the Counties of Surrey, Sussex, Essex and
Hertford-shire; TO The City of LONDON, for her treachery ready to be undone.
TAme, cowardly, Kuckoldly Citizens; that for your Treachery and Disloyalty are
grown shameless before men; perjured before God, Traitors to your King; Robbers
and murderers to your Country; a Reproach to your Religion, a dishonor to your
Nation, and a hissing to the whole World; the chief Protectors, upholders, and
Abbetors of Traitors, Murderers, Thieves, and Schismatics; and a Play Master
unto them that are over head and ears in Blood, Tyranny Rapine and Oppression;
That have made London (once the Phaenix of the world, that burned in Loyal
flames to Soveraignity, till it renewed it is Honor with it is Age, and its
Prosperity with its Peace; a City at unity with it self, that feared God,
honored the King, were obediently governed by his Laws, and became Rich and
happy in all blessings whatsoever;) Till you with the superfluity of your
Moneybagges have waged Traitors in Rebellion against your lawful King, to the
undoing of all the Kingdom; turned your City (once the Paragon of Beaut^,)
into the Pa^tern of Deformity; your Phaenix into an Owl, to be whooted at by
all Nations, and made the crown and Pride of England, (by your treachery) to
be the Scarecrow, and scorn of the world.

WE the long abused People of England, that now justly take up Arms to redeem
our King, Religion, Laws and Liberties of the Subject from the Tyranny and
Arbytrary cruelties of a Factious and over-awing Prvalent Party; Will and
require you the Citizens of London (as you will recover your cracked credits)
to do the like with all convenient speed; Else we shall do our utmost to stop
all Provisions from coming to your City; and use the uttermost of our
endeavors to reduce both you and your City to the Obedience of his Majesty,
and all criminaries whatsoever to the trial of the known Laws of the Land.

God save the King.

FINIS.
Printed in the Year,
when the city stincks for fear.
1648.


