CHRIST'S GRACIOUS INTENTIONS OF Peace and Mercy toward sinners, freely tendered.

TOGETHER With the necessity of observing the season, and accepting the offer
of Peace and Reconciliation, while it may be attained.

Evidenced in a Sermon at St. Paul's, London. Martii 3. 1661. From Luke 19.
verse 41, 42.

By Rich. Parr. D. D. Pastor of Camerwell.

Heb. 2, 3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation!

2 Cor. 6.2 Behold, now is the accepted time, Behold; now is the day of
Salvation..

Qui voluntatem Dei spreverunt invitantem, Voluntatem Dei sentient vindicantem.

Aug. London, Printed for Nathanael Brook, and are to be sold at his Shop, at
the Sign of the Angel in Cornhill, 1661.

TO THE READER.
I Have no Design in publishing this Sermon, but Thy good that read it. When
I preached at Saint Paul's, the Text put me in mind of Jerusalem; and the sad
aspect it had on London, made me the more earnest and particular in the
application. It had hen the Lot (as all public Discourses have) to be
censured as men's humors and apprehensions are, which are various; and they
judge of things for the most part as they affect: But with some among those
many present then, this Sermon had success and acceptance. To the Truths in
the Doctrines; some bore Testimony, and others were convinced; And I am sure it
concerned every one, as well as any one.

And now, Reader, you see I make the Dedication to none but thee, because none
but he that will vouchsafe the serious perusal, is capable of it. I beg not
Patronage from any body; but if the Truths therein, and the Cause in hand, and
honest Intentions cannot secure it, and justify its walk abroad, let it fall;
and if it fall into thy hand, heart, and practice, it cannot be lost.

The Design of this Sermon was, at preaching, and now is in publishing, To let
every one know as well as London,

1. How gracious the Lord Jesus is toward poor sinners, And how ill he takes
it, to be slighted in his offers of grace, and Terms of peace and
reconciliation, when sinners most need it --. And

2. To give warning from the Lord, That you let not slip your season and day of
grace, and saving mercy, while you may have it; Alas, how ill must it go with
that soul, when the day is lost as to it, and the merciful offer withdrawn!
And truly, were it not a matter of the highest concernment in the whole world,
that herein is treated of; I would not have let it gone beyond that Numerous
Congregation, where 'twas preached.

But considering that deliberate Reading, and serious Consideration may much
improve the use more then hasty Preaching; I am at length prevailed withal by
some devout souls importunity, to let it come forth without any more or less
than what was delivered, except what it got or lost in the press, which I must
not own.

And now if the opening and applying these two dostrines may he acceptable to
the Reader:

The first manifesting Christ's real, free, and most gracious intentions toward
sinners, in designing their conversion and eternal salvation, most heartily,
most passionately, most powerfully, and fully, on his part.

This is clearly proved: And then the second which evidenceth the necessity of
improving the mercy in due time, by accepting the offer, and complying with
Christ's demands on his own terms, in the day of grace, as it is the greatest
concernment in the world to every one that makes any reckoning, whether he be
saved or damned eternally.

If those Two Points which are here discussed, will draw the Reader on to the
perusal with an honest heart, and that he thinks them of any moment, let him
read on, and consider; If not, then lay the Sermon by, and despise thy mercies,
lose thy day, cast away thy soul, lie down in sorrow, and lament thy
irreparable and unrecoverable loss. But if Thou have a mind to be happy
indeed, and saved eternally; Then, whether thou read any more of this or not,
let me prevail with thee, as thou valuest thy eternal State, delay no longer;
put not off again any more the entreaties of Christ, and the offers made thee
in the Gospel, and brought to thee in the name of the Lord Jesus, by them who
are entrusted with the conditions of Reconciliation, and are treating with you
in the Ministry to this end, and calling upon you to accept in time, what may
do you good for ever; And do not (ah, do not) put Christ and his Ministers to
say of thee, and mourn over thee, with an O that thou had known, even thou,
at least in this thy day, the things which belong to thy peace! But now they
are hid from thine eyes.

Know therefore thy day, embrace Grace while tendered, make up thy peace with
God while it may be made, lay in for thy interest by Christ, lay up treasure in
Heaven; Let not Christ go, force him not away from thy Soul, as the Jews did
from their City, but close with him, cleave to him steadfastly; take him for thy
Savior, and for thy Lord, leave him not, and he will never leave thee
comfortless; let thy sins go, cast them all away this day, let not one day
pass away again without thy hearty closing with Christ; let him rule in thee,
and over thee; improve the day of visitation, and be happy; resolve upon a
godly life, make Religion thy chiefest care, and the glory of God and his free
grace, in the salvation of thy precious soul, thy aim and ultimate end; and
lay to heart the things belonging to thy peace: Read the rest, and consider
all, and God bless it to thee.

Thy friend and Servant, in the faith of Jesus. R. P.

Luke 19.41, 42. And when he was come near, he beheld the City, and wept over
it.

Sayings, If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy. day, the
things that belong unto thy peace! But now, they are hid from thine eyes.


THis Scripture readd is a narrative, about our blessed Lord Christ: both of
what He did, and what He said, in the day of his flesh, a little before his
departure hence to his Glory again. And I hope the reading of the Text has
already prepared your attention; and, may the opening of it, and Application,
affect your hearts!

The story is Sad in the Letter, weeping and lamentation; but more Doleful in
the Event. It ends with a deplorable reflection of misery upon the Jews, for
refusing their mercy, together with their King and Savior. Christ meant them
all good, but they would not have it; they would have none of his good things.

Christ wept over them, and sought them, with tears: they cared not, they
regarded not. He entreated them, again and again; but no Importunity, nor love,
nor mercy, could win them, all is cast away upon them. They refused and by
refusing, grieved the heart of Christ, and undid themselves for ever; they lost
their day, and lost their peace, and lost their souls. God had sent unto them,
his Servants the Prophets, formerly to treat with them about the things of
their Peace and Eternal happiness, things of the greatest concernment
imaginable; but all is one to them, they were taken up with other employments:
And because the servants of the high God, were so Importunate, these were
violent; they did not only slight the message, but they beat the Prophets, and
abused them, and killed them. It Is often the lot of those who come in the name
of the Lord, on Heavenly Errands; to be most slighted, and most abused: so
then; so now.

Now Christ himself appears, the Savior of the World, in Person, from the
bosom of Glory; and He comes with tenders of the riche'st mercies, and
dearest love that ever was heard of; draws near, bespeaks their acceptance: but
alas, the saddest story that ever was told, He, the King of Glory, is rejected
too; His offers slighted, as well as his servants: The Jews will be Jews still,
they will have none of Christ neither; no peace from him, no redemption nor
reconciliation by him; We will not (say they) have this man to reign over us,
Verse. 14. Poor wretches! Did you know whom, did you know what ye refused? You
will not have Christ, and with him Grace and Salvation: Why, you shall not
then. Heaven shall not be forced upon you against your wills; remember that I
would, but you would not: Here is the price of your Redemption, and Salvation
brought home, and laid at your doors freely and fully; but if you will not
open, and stretch forth your hand to lay hold on it, while it is here at hand,
some others will hereafter be glad of what you refuse; you shall go without it:
and when I am gone, and the door of mercy and grace is shut against you, you
may knock but in vain. You will then wish (Oh) that we could but see one of the
days of the Son of man, Luke 17.22.
and ye shall not see it: For, now they are hid from thine eyes.

This is the cutting Sentence, this is the saddest part of the story: for the
hardness of their hearts Christ was grieved, knowing well enough, what would
come of it. And when he saw them so indeed, He wept and said: If thou had
known, even thou, in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace; but
now they are hid.

Now, though there be a winning oratory in every accent of this Text, in every
motion, and in every expression, and Oh, how powerful was it, and lively when
Christ himself acted, and said it; who did, as never man did; and spoke, as
never man spoke; Yet because these things were done, and spoken at a distance
from us, a good while ago in the Letter of the Text: Dum narrat Scriptura
gestum prodit Mysteriu^, etc.
I shall let that alone, and consider it in the mystery of this Text, and so
much as belongs to us, I shall apply.

These outward actions of Christ's Body, and words of his mouth, are but so many
expressions, and notices, by which men might perceive the heart of Christ
toward sinners; all, as well as those; us, as well as them: for Christ has
the same heart still in Heaven, that he had on Earth; He is brim-full of love,
pity, and compassion; and men on earth, have the same disposition still as
they had, always sinning, always resisting; and except the Lord prevail with
us by his Word and Spirit, in the day of his mercy, we shall miss our happiness
as they did theirs.

Do not say or think, that then was then, and now is now; as though there were,
and are, several Dispensations and several Administrations, touching the
means and manner of Conversion. No, Christ was then, and Christ is now; then in
in the flesh, now in the Spirit, and Ministry; Christ spoke to them himself:
He speaks to you, by us: See 2 Cor. 5.20. Now then we are Ambassadors for
Christ: as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be
yereconciled unto God: Which is the very same thing the Text imports; that, as
Christ did treat with them about their Reconciliation and Salvation: So we with
you, in his Name, beseech and entreat you, in this your day, to lay to heart,
to know the things of your peace; And if you do not hear us and yield, but do
as they did, Slight, Resist, and Disobey: it will be your sad case as it was
theirs; Mercy will be hid from your eyes, and Salvation from your souls, as
much as if Christ himself were now speaking to you, and weeping over you, and
bleeding before your eyes, Luke 10.16. He that hears you hears me, he that
despises you despises me.

By this time (Sirs) you easily perceive what the design of your Monitor is
this day with you, from this deportment, and this saying of our Savior
recorded in the Text.



loosers: Christ may loose the Honor of your Conversion, but you will loose the
happiness of Reconciliation and Salvation.

The business we have in hand is of highest concernment; life and death are
laid before us this day; Oh that you would in this your day consider the things
which belong unto your peace, before they be hid from your eyes.

I have two Doctrines ready from this Text, to serve up this design unto you.





Then next, and what we have else to do, is, to comply with grace and mercy,
and reduce all to practice this very day, without any more delay or
Procrastination, and this will be urged in the Application.

And that we may with less difficulty believe th truths propounded, and
without haesitation consent, and embrace the mercy offered, Let us together
review the expressions in the text, and then we may perceive the mind and
meaning of our blessed Lord, by what he has done, and by what he has said; to
evidence to us what desire he has that poor sinners should partake of that he
graciously offers, and so make peace, and so make happy.

And while we descant upon the words, think with your selves they are as much
to you, as any others; Jerusalem the City then, London now, as great, as rich,
as sinful, as wicked; Christ in person there, in Spirit here; Christ was near
to them, as near to us; he beheld that City, and beholds this; he sought them,
and entreated them; and he seeks us, and beseeches us; They had an opportunity
to be happy, so have we. And surely if there can be any thing, or way to
express an infinite love, a tender care, a most hearty longing desire of the
salvation of sinners, it is here employed.

He drew near, and beheld and wept.

He] the Lord of life, full of grace, and full of pity, and full of power, to
help poor sinners to pardon, to redeem, to sanctify to save.

Near] he was ready for it, they come not out to him, he comes up to them,
brings salvation to their door; 'twas Christ's love, and sinners misery that
brought him so near.

Beheld] looked wistly on the City, he saw the stately structures, the rich
ornaments, the soft rayments, the numerous multitudes, their outward flourish
and gaiety of Religious professions; and withal, he saw their manners too, and
theirinside (...) as in a mirror; what they had been, what they were then for
frame of Spirit, and what would come to pass, if not prevented in time?

Wept] (...), he was broken with grief; he shed tears, he wept:

Quest. But why did Christ sorrow, and grieve, and weep.

Answ. Not that the City was so richly laden with outward blessings, Christ
grudged not their plenty, nor their peace; if they would have been good, they
might have been great, and rich, without offense: but he was grieved for them,
that they were so poor, so blind, so naked in spiritual things; they had
prosperous bodies, but starved souls: very politic, and very proud; but very
fools and unwise about the unum necessarium. He shed his tears over them,
because they shed none for themselves; they remembered not their past sins, nor
heeded their present opportunity, nor foresaw, nor believed their future
miseries; they laid none of these things to heart, but wilfully refused their
recovery, they cared not for all these things, nor for Reconciliation, nor
pardon, nor deliverance, nor Christ, nor grace; they trusted in their own
strength, riches, wisdom, privileges, with the form of godliness; but as for
reconciliation by Christ, inward holiness, conversion, and the power of
christianity, these things they looked not after. Hence it was that Christ
wept, for the hardness of their hearts, and inconsiderateness: Alas! how too
too like those, are the men of this present world after all the care and pains
with them: so they may be, and so they may have what they would for outward,
what care they? How little are they concerned, for soul-saving things? and is
not this for a lamentation and weeping?

Again, Christ beheld the City and wept over it.

Christ had them in present view, together with their present prosperity, their
intolerable blindness, hardness, unbelief, and stupendous supine neglect of
the means of their recovery, on this very day which was their last day of
grace: And this was matter of sadness.

Secondly, And he had in prospect their future ruin and destruction, and this
drew tears from the Lord of life; he would, but they would not; he would have
given them grace and pardon, and prevented their ruin, but they would not; he
would have healed and saved them from that day, but they would not. Hence it is
that Christ wept, both for their present hardness, and future destruction.

Alas! Christ wept not so much for the destruction and downfall of those
stately Buildings; he could have raised such ones and better, God could quickly
have made them as rich again, though they had lost all by fire, and pillage:
but alas, alas they refused and rejected such a Lord and Savior, such grace
and rich salvation, which God had not the like to give them again; they might
have lived as happily any where else, where Christ and salvation were to be
had; but where could they find another Savior, and another such day, when
these were finally lost?

Wept over it, saying] His love to them would not let him depart so, but pleads
again with them; he will try again whether his language can yet prevail, seeing
his tears cannot: for this once he bespeaks them pathetically; why poor souls,
you are now upon the point of making or marring, you may be happy this day, and
for ever after; oh how happy may you be, and blessed!

And, if you mark it, his speech is like that of a most tender parent,
beholding a beloved child wounded to death by his own hand, and wallowing in
his blood, and would not be helped, but rejects the means of recovery; grief
gives not passage to words; oh how does Christ grieve over these wilful
miserable sinners, and weeping says, scarce can he speak for sorrow, bemoanes
them perishing, with broken words, interrupted with sighs and groans.

Had thou but known, even thou] So bad as thou have been, yet (even thou)
after all thy unkindnesse to me, thy contempt, thy stubbornness, thy sin, and
thy folly, thy insolent carriage toward my Ministers and messengers; yet after
all this thy wickedesse, and abuse of my patience, and long-sufferance. O yet,
yet, after all, if thou have in this thy day laid all these things to heart,
and considered who it is that now weeps over thee, that now speaks to thee; who
it is, and what, this day, is freely offered thee; if thou would lay to heart
and embrace yet the things belonging to thy peace, while I am now speaking in
this last hour of this thy day; this is thy day (Hic dies est tuus) wherein yet
thou may lay the foundation of happiness, and partake of those things which
are matters of the highest concernment, ten thousand times more worth then all
the pleasures, the honors, the riches of this world, put all together.

And if thou come in before this day be closed up with night, ere this Sun be
set upon thee, and this light withdrawn from thine eyes; O happy may thou be:
But if thou will not, Acts 17.31
in this thy day accept of thy recovery, but put it off and refuse it still as
thou have done, O then, another day will come (non tuus) not thine for mercy,
but a day of vengeance, Gods day of punishment, wherein thou shall pay most
dearly for all thy folly; a long day of Eternity, of Lamentation, of mourning,
of anguish and torment, without remedy, for that thou have lost thy day, and
that mercy intended, and most seriously offered to thee.

So much for explanation of so much of this text, which we are sure belongs
unto us. Pray God, the latter clause, that killing parting blow, which doomed
that people to their deserved loss, -- But now are they hid from thine eyes,
may never pass on any soul here present. Whose ears can hear that sentence
without Tingling; whose heart can consider this and not tremble? But now are
they hid from thine eyes. This was long a coming on them, but it came surely at
last; mercy removed from them, misery came upon them.

From this carriage of our blessed Lord Jesus toward those sinful people,
wherein he expressed so much care, so much love toward them while recoverable,
and so much pity and commiseration, when lost and undone;

This first OBSERVATION is most evident, and shall be resolved into this
infallible doctrine of saving truth, most certain and most acceptable,

That God, who is the lover of souls, and the giver of grace, does really, in
and by Christ, wish the conversion and salvation of sinful men; and does not
design, nor delight in their sinning nor destruction.

This truth is a genuine deduction from the text, and needs no further proof,
then its own Evidence, it is as certain as good, and as true as the goodness,
faithfulness, and gracious nature of God can make it; and that is, Eternally
true; no man need doubt of this, who will believe any thing worthy of God.

Yet for further Evidence, that no poor soul among you, may retain any hard or
unkind thoughts of God, or reserve your sins, and neglect your endeavors upon
any suspicion of an Invincible necessity, of continuing in a state of sinning
by a secret decree, Inferring an inevitable obligation to Sin and Damnation,
but rather conclude, not against the holy and gracious God, but your selves;
that if you continue in your Rebellion, and Sin, and be at last cast into hell;
that it is long of your selves, your own wilfulness does procure it. Because
you refuse the grace offered, and to obey when called, and denied subjection
unto the Lord Jesus, and resisted the motions of Gods Spirit, and despised
admonition, and slighted the means God has appointed for thy Instruction,
Conviction, and Conversion: Hence conclude, a sinners destruction is from
Himself, God disclaimes it; he is full of mercy, and he is ready to show his
good will, to pardon poor sinners when penitent; and to receive them when they
come; and to go forth to meet the vilest prodigal at the first step homeward.

See how God has declared himself this way, so plainly, and so freely, and so
fully to guard this truth in the doctrine from the least Imputation; and to
open a Door of hope for poor sinking despondent penitents, to relieve them, and
encourage them, in their returning to him homeward, Ezekiel. 33.11. say unto them,
As I live says the Lord, I have, no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but
that the wicked turn from his way and live; turn ye, turn ye from your evil
ways, why will ye dye? and if God does not mean in good earnest, and design
the conversion and salvation of poor sinners.

What mean those so often and serious invitations, Matthew. 11.28. why does
Christ say, he that comes to me I will in no wise cast out, John 6.37. and why
does he upbraid them, Ye will not come to me that ye might have life; Joh.
5.40. and Jerusalem, Matthew. 23.37.
How often would I have gathered you, and Isai 1.2, 3. why does he wish sinners
had harkned to his voice, Psalm. 81.13, 14. If God did not desire it, why does
he lay such strict commands upon pain of his high displeasure; To believe and
Repent, and turn that they may live?

What means Gods pleading and arguing with sinners, but to convince them? What
was the end of hrists undertaking for the world, but that by him men might be
saved? he tasted death for every man, Jo. 3.16, 17.
Heb. 2.9. and to convince all men thoroughly of Gods good will and pleasure,
and that there is no dissimulation in the Lord as touching this matter. He has
converted and saved some of every nation, of every sort, of every degree; as
great sinners, as was; to show that he excludes none from mercy, that come unto
Christ and believe, and turn from sinning to holy living.

And consider how the Lord fits all means and uses all expressions to effect
what he really intends, trying with their hearts, informing their minds,
inclineing their wills, stirring up their affections, to reform their lives,
that they may be saved. And if God did not in good earnest intend that men
should be left without excuse, why did he send his Son into the world, but to
save sinners, to call them to repentance, and to save them that were lost? and
his Spirit to raise those fallen? and his word to guide unto Salvation? why
does he continue the Means? why does he send forth his Ministers, and servants,
to Invite to the supper of the Lamb? why does he furnish them with several
gifts, and put such arguments into their mouths, to convince and perswarde;
and such zeal and fervency into their Prayers, and power and life into their
Sermons and Indefatigablenesse into their studies, and Labors, and such
Courage into their Spirits; that no reproaches, nor menaces, nor denials, makes
them give out? Line upon Line, Sermon on Sermon; and though they often times
see little success in all their labors and pains with sinners, yet again and
again cast their net, and sow their good seed; does not all this show that God
would lose none of your precious souls, but that you should all come to the
knowledge, of the truth, that you might be saved.

Why does he in his gracious providence open the doors of the Sanctuary, for
all comers, and send laborers into his harvest, and gives us days of meeting,
to consult with God, and treat about the great affairs of our souls, and here
to woo us with the cords of a man, the bands of love, if he did not love us?
what need all this ado to prevail with men, even by dispensations so suitable
to Rational souls, were it not that God does delight in, and desire the
conversion of poor sinners, and would not have us miss our Day of acceptance
with the Lord?

Again, can you tell what is the meaning of all those secret convictions and
touches of conscience, all those crosses and afflictions, and a thousand divine
Arts God uses, but that God does leave no way untryed, to weane and to tame
worldlings, and refractory sinners, to bring them home? what could I have done
for my vineyard, Isai. 5. So that it is beyond all dispute, that God is serious
and willing. and that he is not the cause of any man's sin or perdition? or does
he desire it, either through want of love, pity, or supply of grace, or that
any secret Decree does put any bar to man's Conversion primarily, and of
absolute Determination, until all means and mercies be contemned, and all
motions and touches of heart be stifled and resisted: surely if God meant to
damn men within the call and line of the Gospel, upon the account merely of
absolute Dominion, he need not, he would not, deal as he does in this gracious
manner; no, God has determined in his word, that if sinners will stand out,
and go on in a way of contradiction to his Laws and will; they shall fall upon
the edge, and be cut asunder with their own weapon, and perish by their own
iniquity: and after all, God will be justified in their destruction: and
sinners that will not lay to heart the things of their peace, in the day
wherein God is stretching out his hands in mercy, then the in day of
Retribution, and account, they shall not have one word to say, either by way of
excuse for themselves, or blame on God; they shall not be able to say they
would, but God would not; but this they shall be forced to confess; God would,
Christ would, his Ministers would, but alas, I would not.

Quest. And hence you have an answer ready to that question, Quest.
How comes it to pass (if God be so desirous of man's conversion, and
salvation) that so many are damned?

It Is easily resolved, that is, Answ.
it is long of themselves they do not come unto Christ, they will not come to
me, Jo. 5.40. they did not, they do not, they will not believe, repent, and
obey the Gospel in time, they either refuse the offer, lose their day, or
perform not the conditions in the Covenant of mercy and grace, indispenfibly
required to salvation; the means are comprehended, and conditions on man's part
established by Gods will, as the end is. If sinners will decline the way, or go
contrary to the rule, they may not in reason expect the end.

Men would be saved by grace, but men will not be ruled by graces, Tit. 2.11,
12. there is the sum of all. Gods free grace, and man's whole duty must go
together.

It Is true; works perfect, in defective, and entire (as under the first demands
of God) are not now our conditions, here is our cannot Indeed: but what the
Gospel requires and grace effects, this is your Condition. And if we believe
not, repent not effectually, and live not a sanctified life, holy, just, sober,
chaste, charitable, we act against Gods will; and forfeit our interest in Christ
purchase and redemption: and wilfully and foolishly throw away our souls, and
so perish eternally; for God has said, Ezekiel. 18.21. Ezekiel. 18.21.30.32.
But if the wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed, and keep
all my statutes, he shall surely live; he shall not dye; he shall save his soul
alive: because he considers, ver. 30. Repent, and turn your selves, so
iniquity shall not be your ruin, for ver. 32. I have no pleasure in the death
of him that Dies, that is damned, says the Lord God, wherefore turn ye and
live.

There is a quaint distinction found out by some body, I cannot well tell any
use there is of it, unless it be to reconcile some men's Doctrines and their
Applications, while they tell them in Thesi one thing, and in Hypothesi
another: and if the distinction had never been, it had never been wanted. ('it is
this) That according to Gods declared will, God would have sinners come to
repentance, and faith, and holiness, and be saved: but he has a secret will,
by which he would not have them either do so, or be saved. Though he speaks
sinners fairly, and presses them earnestly, yet he wills no such matter, but
their damnation; and decreed this without respect to sin, ere the men had
sinned.

Alas, what a fine representation does this make of the true God? How much is
God and man beholding to this distinction; Why? what is it less then to render
the glorious God so to be, as no honest fair dealing man would be accounted (i.
e.) to speak one thing and mean another, to show much love, yet intend much
hatred. No certainly, God means what he speaks, and if any man perish, (as
thousands do) ^is not because they were forced to damnation, but because they
chose it; that is, they will not be saved in Gods own way; and God has
decreed, (for he has declared) that no man shall be saved, but he that
believes in his Son, and obeys him in his heart and life, 1 Jo. 5.11. Mark
16.16.
Jo. 3. ult. Mark 16.16. And methinks this plain dealing with men, answers best
the glory of Gods power and justice, grace and mercy; And if any will say that
the glory of Gods justice is seen in the damnation of sinners, I say so too,
and of that glory God will have a great deal: for there are but a few will be
saved, and what will become of the rest then?

Well let alone, let secret things belong to God, it is his Prerogative to
reserve that to Himself, Deuteronomy. 29.
which we are not fit to know: but those things that are revealed belong to us,
and this that we speak of is such; and then we may safely conclude what we have
in the doctrine delivered.

But would you know the REASONS why God is so abundantly gracious to poor
sinners, that deserve no such things from him?

The Reason of this a founded in Gods own nature and will, Reason.
the foundation is in Himself, the motive from himself, his free and liberal
grace; we are only the subjects of misery, and objects of pity, no worth or
comeliness in us, that wallow in our blood and filth: Ezekiel: 16. Ps. 145.8, 9
he will show himself first th^s way in mercy, because he will show mercy; he
is good to all, his mercy is over all his works; and you may spell the reason
from the Text-Letters of his name, Exodus 34.6. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful
and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping
mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin.

And now, who shall ask again, why does God do thus? seeing God is not bound to
give a reason of his doings? is it not enough for us poor worthless dust, that
God has revealed himself to be thus?

Yet secondly, 2. Reas.
you shall find the fountain of this stream of love pity, and mercy in Christ
Jesus, Ephesians. 3.11, 12. 2 Tit. 1.15 Heb. 2.9. Jo. 3.16.
Ephesians. 3.11, 12. according to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ
Jesus our Lord, and 2 Timothy 1.9, 10. according to his own purpose, and grace,
which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began; and his coming into
the world was to execute this purpose, 1 Timothy 2.15. he tasted death for every
man, Heb. 2.9. God so loved the world, that he sent his own Son into the world,
that whosoever believes on him, should not perish but have everlasting life,
Jo. 3.10.

Christ the foundation of this love and grace, and the executioner of this
purpose and decree; For the Son of man is come to save that which was lost,
that is, Mankind: Matthew. 18.11. Matthew. 18.11.
And he is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9. 2 Pet. 3.9.
this is reason enough, ask no farther.

So that now, Sirs, you have the first point proved, make no question of it,
but believe it assuredly, and give God the praise of his free grace, and admire
the greatness of his goodness toward the children of men. And consider
withal, the great patience, and long-sufferance, and forbearance of our
gracious God, flowing from this, his rich goodesse to thee poor sinner in
Christ, as the Emanations from that fountain: Rom: 2.4.
which on purpose is lengthened out unto thee, to lead to Repentance, and
Reformation, as a testimony of that reality in Gods heart, that he wills our
salvation, and not our destruction.

Therefore, sinners, oh, let not this grace and favor be abused, despise it
not, accept it with all readiness, put not off the entreaties of the Lord, do
not say of grace, reconciliation, reformation; go for this time and come again,
lest you never hear more of it; but it be hid quite from your eyes: but while a
prize is put into your hand, but your heart to it, why should you be fools?

And this brings us to a second OBSERVATION.

Now in the next place, as this doctrine from the Text has opened a door of
hope to poor sinners, upon their thoughts of returning to God, so as the
Smoking flax may not be quenched, nor the bruised reed be quite broken; but
may receive flame and strength from the breath of mercy, and power of God:

So I must shut the door of presumption upon loose and careless livers, for
such there are, that make no other use of Gods grace and favor, but to abuse
it, by making it serve their continuance in sin, (i. e.) No man may rest in
Gods mercy in a way of sinning, no more then despair in a way of repenting.



That if sinners would be partakers of the mercy so really intended, 2. Doct.
and things which belong unto their peace mercifully offered, they must in due
time lay to heart in the day of visitation, embrace the offers, close with
Christ, Repent and turn from their sins, and serve and love the Lord Jesus
heartily, or else they shall have none uf it; you lose your day, you lose your
mercy, you lose your souls.

Had thou known in this thy day, etc. but now --

They are hid from thine eyes. --

This Item and Caution in the Text, is as clear and evident as the other;
Christ wept for the hardness of their hearts, while recoverable, and our Lord
bemoaned them for their misery, when past recovery; they had their day once,
and lost that day, and 'twas hid from their eyes for ever after.

God has, and does really intend mercy, and as seriously does he tender it
some time or other, and to all without exception; if sinners had eyes to see
it, and hearts to consider it when offered: but God has set boundaries and
limits to the time, so long will I wait to be gracious; All the day long have I
stretched out my hands to a gainsaying people: God will visit thy soul; man
must wait and observe; our times are in Gods hand, we have not the command of
our time nor grace; God disposes of both: when therefore it is called, Thy day,
it is meant of a certain time, which God has appointed thee, to come in and
receive the mercy, and to improve the talent; but no man must hence
peremptorily conclude, that he may choose his time when he pleases, and set his
day, and limit God to such periods of his life. though he were sure to live so
long; alas, if men could command grace and salvation when they please, what
fine doings would there be in the world? how would sinners make God serve with
their sins, and wait on them even to their deathbed, and then to serve their
turn at last with salvation, per saltum? Therefore God has given us a day to
manifest his goodness and love, and has limited this to Hic and Nunc, to show
his wisdom and prerogative. God limits us, we must not limit him; if while God
gives us a day, we come in, then it is ours; but if we come not to the dole that
day, and close with the offer, then it is lost to us: yesterday was, but is not
now ours; and to morrow may be again, but not certain. Before we were born, we
were not; a day we had not: And when we are dead, and the talent of lead seals
up our grave, we have no more day for this work, Eccles. 9.10.
see Eccles. 9.10. So, Joh. walk while you have the light, that is, as the holy
Ghost says, to day while it is day, if you will hear his voice, harden not
your hearts. Heb. 3.
And Saint Paul preaching to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 6.1, 2. beseeches them, 2
Cor. 6.1, 2.
that they receive not the grace of God in vain, that is, that they put not off
the offer, or delay the receiving, but presses them to close with the mercy;
now, for now is the accepted time, behold now is the day of salvation. And to
this does well agree that passage in Romans 12.11. and with the first and second
verses of the same Chapter, Be not slothful, but fervent in spirit, (...),
serving the Lord (as our Translation renders it); but Origin says, that some
copies have it, (...), serving the time, that is, taking the opportunity; miss
not your day: there is a time when God may be found by sinners, and there is a
day when God will not be found, Isai 55.6. Seek the Lord while he may be found,
call upon him while he is near.

Though God in mercy strives with men in this Iife, yet he says, My Spirit
shall not always strive with man, Genesis 6.3. no, not always in this life; the
day of grace may be lost, before thy life be lost; yea long before a man comes
on his deathbed. There are some sort of sinners with whom the Lord will have no
more to do in a way of mercy; will move them no more; the means, nor any
Sermon shall work upon them: it may be they have slighted and resisted so long,
that now in judgment they are hardened, and given up as the Israelites, after
forty years, so long was their day; and when they had provoked so long, it is
said, Psalm. 81.11, 12.
My people would not harken, my people would none of me, so I gave them up unto
their hearts lusts; and leaves them it with an (oh) Oh that my people had
harkned to me, and the next we hear of, was, that God swear they should not
enter into his rest, Psalm. 95.11.

You have heard of Esau, Heb. 12.16, 17.
whose sir name (to this day) is, The profane, he had a fair opportunity for
his fathers blessing, but either his little esteem of it, and neglect while it
might have been gotten, or his presumption, that any time he might have had it,
the blessing was lost to him, and totally lost; for afterward, when he would
have inherited the blessing; he was rejected; though he sought it (when too
late) with tears.

There is a sad Instance of the case, though no person named, in Prove. 1.13.
Turn you at my Reproof. behold, I will pour out my Spirit upon you, and this be
it known unto you, Because I have called and ye have refused, I have stretched
out my hands, and no man regarded; but ye have set at naught all my counsel: I
will also mock at your calamity, for then shall they call upon me, and I will
not answer; they shall seek me, but shall not find me: and so they are served
in their own kind.

The like to this for event, you have in the instance of the five foolish
virgins; Careless they were, and waited not their opportunity, they lost their
happiness, they came too late, the door was shut, they cried for entrance, but
none granted; Watch therefore, Ma. 23.1
for the know neither the day nor hour wherein the Son of man comes; And so
here in the Text, Jerusalem had a day, as fair an opportunity for their peace
and mercy, as could be desired; but lost it, and with it their mercy, and their
souls.

And the amount is this, Note.
that if men will consume their days in sinning, they shall lose their day of
saving. It may be now at a Sermon, God is treating with thy soul, and he has
been formerly speaking to thee, this is not the first time, but who knows but
this may be the last time; after so many past, God may hold his peace, and stay
his hand, and withhold his grace, and you may hear an hundred Sermons more, yet
never feel one touch of the Spirit more. Preachers may not be hid from your
eyes, yet grace may be hid from thine heart.

And to be sure, if not till then, yet when this life is at an end, Note.
thou shall live no more to hear, nor see this day; and alas, how many men are
dead while they live, dead in sins* and dead, and stiff, and cold to grace,
and the entreaties of Christ.

Therefore let every soul that prizeth his peace and salvation, take heed and
lay to heart the offers of mercy in the day of Gods gracious visitation; look
to it, Sirs, and trifle no longer: to day if you will hear his voice, harden
not your hearts.

Now as all those hints and instances do bespeak your care and watchfulness,
lest you should miss your opportunities; So in the next, you shall do well
seriously to consider, for your imitation, while we instance in some recorded
in Scripture, which took the season, obeyed in due time, and were*
successful, and became happy in this, that in that their day they knew, and
accepted the things that belonged to their peace.

And mark as you hear, How they took the first opportunity was offered them,
though some came in later than others.

Matthew. 20.1. to 8. Some were called in the morning early, obeyed presently,
and were entertained, they put not off, nor made excuse.

You have likewise to remember the good success the five wise Virgins had,
Mar. 25.
They were ready at the first approach of Christ, and went in with him to the
marriage.

So the Prodigal; so far as he went, and so idle as he had been; yet as soon
as he was touched, and had his eyes open, and came unto himself, to his wits
again; he no sooner thinks of his Father's house and love, but leaves his swine
and husks, and makes homeward, and he was met with joy, embraces, pardon, and
mercy.

And one instance more in this Chapter where the Text is, Luke 19.5, 6.
Zacheus, Oh how happy 'twas for him that Christ called him on a day, and that
same day he answered, and accepted and was converted; for he made haste and
received Christ joyfully into his heart as well as his house, and that was the
happiest day he ever had seen; and Jesus said unto him, Verse 9.
This day is salvation come to this house.

Thus you have this point demonstrated by Scripture, proof, and example: and by
this you may perceive, that though God in mercy has appointed poor sinners a
certain time, as well as means for their conversion, and reconciliation, and
some have been so happy and blessed, as to take their opportunity, yet it is
possible, and it is proved, that many have had their day for the like mercies,
but have lost it; for they did not lay to heart the things belonging to their
peace in that their day, and afterward were hid from their eyes. This has been
the case of very many, and still is; Pray God no man here present, put off
this day's entreaties again as formerly, lest he hazard his peace and
reconciliation again, and so lose this day, and never live to see another, for
the purpose of salvation for himself.

Quest. If any man ask me when is this day? Quest.
How shall I know it? which is mine, and which is thine, when is it gone and
lost?

Answ. When and wheresoever Christ is preached, Answ.
and the Gospel is published, then and there to that people Christ is near, and
grace is offered, and this has been many years in England, and in London, and
all this while, have been continued these glad tidings of peace and
reconciliation to souls: but when this shall be removed out of this place,
then it will be hid from your eyes; Christ is gone, grace is gone, light is
gone, darkness comes, and the day is lost, and God only knows, how long it
will continue, or how quickly it will be removed out of our sight.

Would to God men would not deal unkindly with it and drive it away, but repent
and believe, Note.
yield and obey, accept and love it, that Christ and his Gospel of grace, might
stay with us.

Quest. But secondly, 2. Quest.
If you would know what time God has set for thy coming in, beyond which he
will not wait to be gracious any longer; in which, if thou despisest the Call,
or refusest the Offer, God will put a bolt, and grace shall strive no more with
thee:

Answ. This no man knows, Answ.
whether this or the next be the time, but surely it must be before the day of
death; every man must be reconciled to God, ere he die, by faith in Christ,
Repentance from dead works, Eccles. 9.10.
and holy living, or else he shall never: now or never, while grace and the man
live together in this present world, so long there is hope; but when grace is
gone, and thou art driven hence to thy long home, thy day is lost, and the poor
sinner irrecoverable.

You had best consider in time what hour of the day it is with you, Note.
what is the date of thy life, how many days and years can each of you reckon;
you can tell how long you have lived, and enjoied the means of grace; but can
you tell how long you shall live in this world, or under the discipline of
grace with a win-able heart? You can neither command time or grace, but you may
in time accept the grace offered.

the Angel moved and they stepped in, their hearts were touched, and they
yielded; the offer was made and they accepted, Christ was near and they
embraced him, they stood not out, but closed with him; in the day of his power
they were made willing, and now Christ is theirs, Psalm. 110.3
and they are Christ's; they love him heartily, and hate sin perfectly, and
live holilie: lift up your heads, precious souls, and be thankful; you have
not lost your day, you are happy now, and in a fair way to heaven, and if you
continue in faith and love of Jesus, and grow in grace, you shall be for ever
happy in glory, when you have finished your course:

be to them the acceptable time, a day of reconciliation and peace: a day you
have now, which thousands who now lay under wrath and final despair, would
prize above Mountains of gold, and Rocks of Rubies, if they had once again such
an opportunity as this; it may be God has determined, that hitherto to this
day thou shall come, and grace and mercy shall wait on thee now; but no
farther. Christ may be passing on by thee now, Note.
and looks on thee, and gives a secret touch, and bids thee, Come away after
him, and leave thy sins and follow him, and says as to Zacheus, I will come to
thy house and bring salvation this day.

Oh if there be any such among you, who is touched at heart this minute, let
him not quench the spirit, nor reject the motion; let him take this
opportunity, and make up the match ( now, even now) in this place, ere he
stir hence, and then he may conclude, he has not lost his day, but whatever
he has been before, yet now he may be be a converted man, a pardoned man, an
happy man, in this his day of visitation, if he lay it now to heart, and
consider it.



Such there may be here now, who have had some impressions on them of good, but
now worn out again; those, who, it may be, were once almost persuaded, but now
again altogether as obstinate as ever; who can make a mock of sin, and scoff
of Religion: who can laugh or sleep at a Sermon of life and death, and scorn
reproof, and defy God to his face, and are growing worse and worse, filthy,
and more filthy; and what may be thought of such? Have they lost their day.

Alas, Answ.
for such, we know not what God will do with them yet, but those are sad
notices of men given over: and this we say, Many dais they have lost, many
mercies have they abused, many offers have they rejected, many motions have
they quenched, much patience have they wronged: and truly, if there be any day
yet for them left (but the day which they cannot avoid, the day wherein God
will judge the world, all obstinate impenitent sinners to eternal flames) they
had best look to it, that they may take it when it comes: lest if that pass
away too, and be hid from their eyes also, and they not converted in that day
neither; then must they lie down in sorrow, saying, Oh that I had but known!
but now it is hid from mine eyes: I shall never see the day of salvation, for I
would not know, nor lay to heart the day of visitation: oh sinners, think on
this, Note.
and try your tempers, and consider how long already you have refused, will
you not henceforth from this time cry unto the Lord, if peradventure he may
yet be gracious to thee, if thou return after thou have done all these things,
even then turn, turn unto the Lord; Jer. 3.4.
even now, and put all out of doubt, close now with Christ, cast away your
sins, and the question will be best resolved by your practice.

So much toward resolving the quaerie, as far as God has given us any hints
about particular times or seasons, of getting or losing a man's interest in
peace and reconciliation by Christ offered in a day, During a man's life.

Now, I know, there are some would make a quick answer to to this demand, and
enough to gratify the humors of many loose and vain persons, but not at all
to satisfy a sober soul that thinks of another world. Tush, say they, What
trouble you your self about these niceties, take your pleasure now while you
may, and take your time of repentance at leisure; a little time will do that
work: do you not remember? that, At what time soever; And, the Thief on the
Cross?

Answ. Indeed here is a rare Example, Answ.
and a short halfe-sentence, which men abuse to their undoing.

I could answer this at large, but this I only say now to you, that have not
debauched your Reason, and lost Consideration.

All of Faith and Repentance, and new Obedience, in a trice, and on your
deathbed, and can be assured withal, that you shall have then time enough,
and grace enough, and will enough, and strength enough to perform all; then you
may defer until your dying day: but until this be made sure to you, be not
so foolish as to cast away your souls, upon such desperate attempts and
impossibilities.

And for the Thief] when any of you, or any body else you know, can have the
like opportunity to die with such circumstances, to be put to death in the
same place on the same day, with the Savior of the world, our blessed Jesus,
and to be the happy instance of a great miracle; then, and not until all
these things be hoped for, let no man think, that (though it may be many a man's
case to die as great a Malefactor as he was) yet that any body in the world
should imagine, that one single instance should justify his presumption, when
'twas never intended, for to give any hopes to any rebellious sinner; seeing he
was the first and the last of that kind: And surely it is a desperate gamester
that does venture all he is worth, in this and another world; at one cast of
dice; and that, less then Ams-ace: Show me another like this, or else hold thy
peace, and leave off arguing the case, lest you make it desperate. How much
more safe is it, as well as Rational, to do that while we may, and have
opportunity, than to put it off, (to) while we cannot perform what of absolute
necessity is to be done, or the poor soul is lost for ever.

Having bin so large in the doctrines, I need be the shorter in the
Application, which comes now in the close: to persuade the practice of laying
to heart the things of our peace, while it is to day; that in this our day we
may know the things belonging to our peace, while we may, shortly: Else they
will be hid from our eyes and then we may no.

Application.
I shall reduce all I have to say now to you, about these two points (you have
heard raised from the Text) to these two Heads, to try what may be done with
you, in behalf of your own precious souls this day; which I would dispatch in
an an Essay of 1. Conviction, and Admonition. 2. Counsel, and Persuasion.


And first of all, I would (if I could) shame the Folly, and reprove the
Madness of men, such as neglect their salvation, by not timely laying to
heart, and slighting the Offer: and such as throw away their souls by resisting
grace, and continuance in their sin; would I could this day convince them of
the greatness of their sin and nearness of their danger, and dreadfulnesse of
their destruction, who have to this day stood out wilfully against the
entreaties of Christ, and still resolve to do as they have done.

Why sinners! be it known unto you, that this is the Great condemnation, this
is greater then all your sins ( Jo. 3.19.) that light is come into the world,
and men love darkness rather then light, (that is) men refuse and reject
Christ and Grace, and love their sins better; they may be saved, but they care
not; they choose those ways which will bring them to destruction. Who are to be
blamed, if such as they are not to be blamed? and are there none such here?
what! throw away your remedy.

Alas! that Christ who should be the Desire of all nations, should come with
tears in his eyes, and love in his heart, and salvation in his hand, to sinners
who are the shame of all nations? and yet be put off and rejected? He who is
every way lovely, does sue to thee sinner, who art every way uglie and
loathsome. Would he wedd thy soul; and wilt not thou be married to him? alas
for thee! how will thou escape the forest damnation; if thou neglect so great
salvation. Heb 2.3.
Will thou not lay down a lust, a sin for his sake, who laid down his life for
thy sake? alas! alas!

Why sinner, what hell does that soul deserve, that does despise heaven? and
what misery does he choose, that wilfully refuses mercy; woe unto thee
Bethsaida, woe unto thee Corazin, woe unto thee London, for mighty works have
been done in you, and powerful preaching has been among you; and if after
all, you will still remain impregnable, impenitent and unbelieving: it shall be
easier for Sodom, then for this City. Mark that, Luke 10.12, 13.

With what face can sinners cry out upon the cursed Jews, that rejected their
Savior, and put him to death, and yet do the same things themselves? they
chose a Barrabbas, and refused Christ: but what better art thou, that choosest
a lust to keep it alive, and refusest Christ, that would save thy live: It Is
possible at a distance, men will be Christians, that they will; and hear and
speak of grace and heaven very complyingly; but alas, when it comes to it, the
time and the offer, then no such matter: How do sinners draw back? then what
excuses do they make, and what delays do they use, The time is not yet come,
or a Farm, or Merchandise, a trifle, or a folly comes in between the Heart and
Christ, that they cannot close; and very often it is in downright terms, we
will not have Him to Reign over us. Is this the way to peace and
reconciliation? will this end well at last, friends?

Alas, (Sirs) what cares Christ for your fair words, if your actions be foul?
How little does he esteem a complement, a cringe, and a nod, if your hearts bow
not to his Scepter? will it serve our turn that we cry Hosanna to day in our
professions, and crucify him to morrow in our practices? what is it the
nearer, if we say we will from day to day, give up our hearts and lives to
Christ, and yet do not what we promise, but keep our hearts upon the world, and
sin every day; well Sirs, there is no dallying with Christ and grace, God is
serious, and ye must be serious too, or else you do but mock God, and destroy
your own souls: what do you do with the naming of Christ, if you depart not
from iniquity? what do you do with the outside, and form of godliness, if you
deny the power of godliness?

Is it not enough, that you have refused so long, will you still refuse; when
will you return, if you will not now return, when will you be reconciled to
God; if this day you refuse, when will you in good ear nest close with Christ
and make an end of sinning, by Repentance and new obedience; if not now? Is it
not enough yet, you have provoked God, and abused his long-sufferance: when
will it be enough then? has not Christ waited long enough for thee Sinner, but
thou will put him to wait longer: why? Christ can be without thee, but how
can thou be without Him: if thou be lost, Christ will be Christ still; but if
Christ be lost to thee, thou art lost and undone for ever.

Has not Christ done his part, and the Gospel its part, and Preachers their
part, by entreaties, reproves, instructions, counsels, prayers, and tears, but
when will you do your parts; namely to yield and obey, to come in and submit to
the Lord Jesus, for grace and salvation; O when will it once be? when will it
once be?

Oh sinners will you run on, and not look back, how far have you gone from
your God? and will you not yet consider how near you are to the last day? will
you quite forsake him, and never return? to whom will you go then for eternal
life?

Go thy way then proud Prodigal to the Swine, and to the husks, wallow there
and die; if that be better then thy fathers house. Ah sinner! stay, and
consider what thou leavest; look upon Christ, see how he wooes thee: see how
near he draws to thee, see how he bemoanes thee, see how grace,
reconciliation, and salvation courts thee; can thou find in thy heart to let
him go away from thy soul, and can thou not find in thy heart to close with
him this day, and that he may leave a blessing behind him: will nothing
prevail with thee? shall Christ entreat? and shall We entreat? and shall the
sinner remain still as he was? oh! can any Heart stand out against Christ, but
an heart of Adamant? can any Bowels not yearn, when Christ's bowels yearn, but
bowels of brass? O would to God it might be, that some poor wearied sinner
among you, would come and lay down his burden at Christ's feet, and change
Masters; the worst for the best, sin and Satan for Christ and grace; oh that
some one of you (among so many) that have gone so far, and stood out so long,
would stop here, and stand out no longer; what an happy day would this day
prove to thee poor soul, if it may prove a day of thy peace, and
reconciliation, a day of thy translation from the regions of sin and death, and
Consecration to the service of Christ; A day of thy new birth: O how much
better would this day be then the day of thy first birth, or if were a day of
advancement to all earthly honors and dignity? oh sinner will thou not yet
yield?

-- Oh that in this thy day thou would lay this to heart.

Use II. of Counsel and Persuasion.

Exhortation.
Must I part with you so without an earnest exhortation? I cannot, I may not;
why may I not hope to prevail with some one or other in this Numerous
Congregation this day: it may be I shall never see your faces more in this
place; and it is odds to lay, all you that now are here, may not live to see
another such day all together again; the thread may be cut; the life spilt as
water on the ground, which cannot be gathered up again; many of us may be ere
to morrow in another world.

How does it concern us all, this day to lay some foundation, on which we may
build our hopes of happiness in the other world?

Give me leave to try in the name of Christ, what I can do to persuade you that
I may leave something with you, that you may remember hereafter, that a poor
Minister of Christ did beseech you in his name, that you would know, and lay to
heart, the things, belonging to your peace, in this your day.

O would to God I might prevail with you for your own good.

I exhort you, I beseech you, I conjure you in the name of God, and if I had
tears at command, I would entreat you weeping; this.

day, would let all your sins go, but let not Christ go, let not grace go, let
not this day pass away without your hearty and real closing with Christ, as
ever you look for any good in and by Christ; give him leave to banish your
sins, and to bear rule in your hearts and lives: Note.
He must be thy Lord, or else he will never be thy Savior.

Improve this hour of visitation and be happy, throw away that with loathing
and indignation, which has kept thee so long from being fully persuaded to be
altogether a Christian, and be happy; and if any of you feel the door of your
hearts now opening to Christ, Psalm. 24, 7, 8.
lift them open wide, that the King of Glory may come in, that he may have full
possession; let him rule and reign there, and thou will be an happy man.

These three things I would counsel you to perform within your hearts, and
resolutions ere you stir hence.

this day ere you sleep, in an unfeigned repentance, and God will speak peace
to thee.





Oh Sirs, do this now, as you tender your life and eternal happiness; do not
put Christ off again with any excuse or denial, but take your opportunity this
hour of visitation, and bless God that you have it.

Is there never a poor lost sheep here will be fetched home to the Lord this
day? shall not this days light bring home one Prodigal? will you all go away,
and not any bodies soul be brought nearer to Christ, nor one jot the more
resolved then before? Why then the Sermon is lost, and the day is lost, and God
knows whether we shall see another Sabbath, or hear another Sermon with any
profit, to any purpose of good to our souls.

Oh that you, who have not hitherto been at all persuaded, would now you were
almost resolved; and you, who are almost resolved, would to God you were
altogether persuaded, to become the Lords.

Eccles. 12.1.



your hearts are of one make and temper.

How gladly would a servant that invites for Christ, hear of (though but) one
whose heart is opening, and yielding to Christ, that were but about to repent
and believe, how would he follow him with entreaties, until the match were
fully made and concluded, 'twixt Christ and his soul.

But I shall leave all with you, that I have to persuade withal, in these six
Considerations: for Conclusion.



when do you intend? Oh surely you will do worse, if you do not this; and if
you do this now, you cannot do better.



Alas, what will you do when you are undone?

you then slight, what now is offered?



Why then, precious souls, be persuaded now once for all, to lay to heart this
day the things that belong to your peace, before they be hid from your eyes;
The Lord set it home, that you may be wise and happy. Oh what will it profit
you, to gain the whole world, and lose your own souls?

FINIS.

