A Particular RELATION OF THE Great Victory obtained by the Protestants in
LONDONDERRY: And the taking of the Duke of Berwick Prisoner.
To which is added, An Account of the English Courage of Robert Caston, Master
of a small Vessel, that Engaged two French Privateers. With the Particular of
that ACTION.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.

Major General Kirk, with the Succors for Ireland under his Command, set Sail
from Liverpool for Londonderry the 21st. Instant, the Wind at E. N. E. but the
Wind vering more Northerly, they were upon the 24th. forced back to a place,
called High Lake, where they waited for a fair Wind.

On Friday Night arrived at Chester an Eminent Officer of the Garrison of
Londonderry, with an Express to His Majesty from the Protestants in that
place. In his Passage he went on Board Major General Kirk, to whom he gave a
full Account of the Condition of the Garrison, and of the latest Actions on
both sides, which according to the best and truest Relations, are as follow.

That the Irish and French Officers being extremely Zealous in the Service, and
the Emulation for Honor between both Parties being no less, they have during
the time of the Siege been hotly forward and valorous in exposing their
Persons; by which unlucky Contest of theirs, they have lost a considerable
Number of experienced and good Officers. So that it is certain the Flower of
their Army is in a manner quite destroyed.

As to Particulars, it is credibly Reported, That having for some days played
their Morters, charged with small Bombs, into the City, though with very little
damage to the Besieged, the Besiegers were drawn into a Fatal Inconvenience by
the Policy of the Commanders of the Garrison. For the Governors being informed
by their Spies, that the Enemy were assured of the great Mischief they had done
the Town, to confirm them in that belief, and to encourage them to make an
Assault, in pursuance of the Advantage which they thought they had got, ordered
all the Straw and combustible stuff that could be spared in the Town, to be
brought to the Walls, and so placed, as not to endanger the Houses when set on
fire. They also farther ordered all the Stones, which were before the Pavements
of the Streets, to be lodged upon the Walls, together with a sufficient
quantity of great and small Shot, and other Warlike Preparations proper to
repel a General Assault, and that all Persons should be in a readiness upon the
Approach of the Enemy.

In the mean time the Besiegers believing their Bombs had taken good Effect,
continued throwing them, in hopes of further Execution. On the other side, the
Protestants set all their Combustible Matter on fire, which raised a great
Flame, and not only heightened the Conceit of the Besiegers, as done by their
Bombs, but, as the Wind then sat, drove the Smoke into the Camp of the
Besiegers. However, notwithstanding that disadvantage, so confident they were
of the success of their Bombs, that they advanced to the Walls, and with as
great Fury as they were numerous, began the Assault. But to their Astonishment
and Confusion, they were received with such an unexpected Bravery, that several
hundreds of their best Men were killed in Scaling the Walls; which was such an
Encouragement to the Besieged, that at the same time Sallying out of the
Garrison, they took, as is Reported, the Duke of Berwick Prisoner, 27 Inferior
Officers, 5 Fieldpieces, and one Mortar, with several other Arms, and had the
Plunder of the Field for several Miles, with a very inconsiderable Loss to the
Besieged; who the two next days, that is to say, Tuesday and Wednesday, the
14th. and 15th. Instant, made two brisk Sallies upon the rallied Irish, whose
Out-Guards lay at the distance of more than twice Cannonshot from the City,
waiting for the last Reinforcement which was sent them from Dublin.

The Governors have sent the Besiegers a Message by one of their own Party,
who was taken Prisoner, That if they use any Violence or Cruelty to such of the
Protestants as may be under there Power or shoot any more Bombs into the Town,
they will not only hang up the Duke of Berwick, and such other Prisoners as
they have in their Custody, but all that they shall afterward take.

From Dublin we are informed, that there are strange Divisions in their
pretended Parliament there; for that the Irish Members, perceiving the late
King's Designs to subject them to the French, with all the Eloquence and
Speeches they can make, oppose the Designs of their pretended Sovereign. So
that it is hoped that in a short time the Eyes of the very Papists in Ireland
will be opened, to see the mischievous Designs of their pretended King to
enslave them to a Foreign and Tyrannick Power.

An ACCOUNT of the English Courage of Robert Caston. Master of a Small Vessel,
that Engaged Two French Privateers. With the Particular of that Action.
ON Thursday, May the 16th. 1689. Robert Caston of Ipswich, Master of the
Richard's Advice of Ipswich, Burden 400 Tuns, sailed from Newcastle in Company
of about 20 Sail more Laden Colliers for London; and on Saturday following,
off of Foulness, were met by two Dunkirk Pickeroons, one of 18 Guns, and 130
Men, the other of 4 Guns, and 55 Men, who, as the Prisoners confess, having
made the Fleet, resolved to attaque and carry this Caston's Ship, as being
Admiral, promising themselves all the rest easily, and accordingly came up with
her to Rights. Caston had but 6 Guns, his Son, 11 Men, one Gentleman, and three
Gentlewomen Passengers, and through fear deserted by his Consort, (who promised
to stand by him) all the rest having no Guns, stood away as fast as they could,
and were by his Fight saved. The Pickeroons poured in their great Shot, and
Boarded him three times with a great number of Men, and as often were beat off,
and the Decks cleared by the English Small-shot and Courage; insomuch, that the
French seeing their Men drop so fast, and very much disabled in their Hulls,
threw in two Grenades into the Round-house, where the Master and two Men more
were, but received little hurt, though they burnt and broke. The Engagement
continued from One a Clock in the Afternoon until Four, when the French seeing
no hopes of carrying her, sheered off, leaving behind them on board the
Collier, Swords, Cuttle-axes, Muskets, Pistols, etc. as also two of their Men
(now Prisoners) one a Dane, the other an Ostender, and diverse of their Men
dead, and hanging on the Stays and Sides of the Ship, and bore away for
Dunkirk, whence Advice is since come, that the biggest was so disabled, that
they had great difficulty to get her into Port, and presently to take out her
Guns, to keep her above Water; and that they lost in the Fight the
aforementioned two Prisoners, 20 killed outright, and 12 wounded, some
Mortally.

The Master received a slight Wound with a Splinter in his left Leg, and a
small Bruise on his Thigh, his Son a Wound in his Face, and two of his Men
hurt, but none of them dangerous.

The Passenger had the Misfortune from the very first Broadside, to have his
Leg sore broke and shattered, as not to be able to make any Defense; his Name
was Charles Rogers, and taken on Board at Newcastle. So soon as the Fight was
over, the Master in three hours got into Yarmouth, where he got the assistance
of three the most able Surgeons could be had, to dress Mr. Rogers of his
Wounds; but they were all of Opinion, the only means left in probability to
save his Life, was to cut off his Leg, which they did, but he dyed soon after
it, and was decently buried at Yarmouth at the Charge of the Master.

And the said Mr. Rogers being a Stranger to the Master, and all in the Ship,
it is thought fit to add to this Relation, as follows.

There was found in his Pocket a Certificate from one Thomas Creed, Dated the
30 of December, 1687. Testifying, That Charles Rogers served him Eight Years
very faithfully, etc. Also a Pass, in the words following.

THese are to Certify, That Charles Rogers, a Gentleman, Riding in my Troop,
in the Honorable Col. Edward Villers Regiment, at his own Request is
discharged the Service, in Order to his better Preferment. Given under my Hand
the 11th. of May, 1689.

FR. ROGERS.


On Saturday last the Master brought his Ship up the River to New Crane, where
she now lies, and the two Prisoners on Board him.

The Honor this brave Master has done to his Country and to his Profession,
will, no doubt, not only meet with a suitable Reward and Encouragement from the
Government, but a grateful Acknowledgment from those Owners and Freighters, who
by his, and his handful of Men's Courage, had their Properties rescued out of
the hands of the Cowardly Enemies.

London: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Black Bull in the Old Bailey.
MDCLXXXIX.


