portrait of James II JACOBUS SECUNDUS Dei Gratia. Angl. Scotiae Franciae et
Hiberniae Rex Fidei Defensor etc.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

Printed at Oxford for Thomas Guy and sold by him at ye

THE Second Nativity OF JESUS, The Accomplishment of the First: (VIZ.) The
Conversion of the Soul Framed by the Model of the WORD-INCARNATE.

My little Children of whom I travail in Birth again until Christ be Formed in
You. Gal. 4.19 Written in French by a Learned Capucine.

Translated into English, Augmented and Divided into 6 Parts BY JOHN WELDON of
Raffin, P. P. C.

ANTWERP, Printed by T. N. for the Author, 1686.

To the High and Mighty PRINCE JAMES II. By the Grace of GOD, of ENGLAND,
SCOTLAND, FRANCE and IRELAND, KING. Defender of the FAITH, etc.
SIR,
IF I were minded to Imitate the Ancient Writers, who (to be sure of a free
passage for the Works they were to present to the public View of the World,)
would Consecrate them to some special Divinity; To the end, that bearing the
Name and Marks of that supreme power, they might be out of the reach of all
Censures: If I were willing to follow the steps of our Modern Authors, who dare
not expose to light the verities of Salvation, if they be not seated near some
Throne, whose dreadful Authority might frighten such as would presume to
prosecute with Invectives, those that do openly Preach the Word of the Cross; I
should be in a safe Harbor, and sufficiently sheltered, both from the one and
the other. Having adorned the Front of this little Work, with the marks of Your
Grandeur: For though You are no Divinity, You do partake in a high degree the
Sacred Lineaments of one. The Antiquity as well as the Nobility of Your
Illustrious Family, which has Enriched all Histories with the Renowned Feats of
Your Ancestors, (the Rank wherein Your Birth, and Divine Providence has placed
You to be the Best of Kings, a Model of Piety for all Princes, the Virtuous and
Warlike Caesar of the most Flourishing Kingdoms of the World) are to Me a
sufficient Argument of Your Participated Divinity: Who then shall be able to
violate the Rights of Your Protection? Or where could I with more assurance
withdraw to shelter my Self from the Enemies of Innocence, than under the
shadow of so Great a Monarch, at whose Feet we have seen all the Venomous Darts
of Envy, Ill-wishes and Malice, that Your Private and Public Enemies could let
fly at You, drop down, to their own Confusion, and the greater Luster of Your
Glory: So that the World may learn hereafter, (by the tender Care which the
Heavens have, and always had of Your Sacred Person) how vain it is to strive
against Him, whom the Powerful Hand of God does Protect.

There is nothing of a Prodigy that appears to our Eyes, but has its Effects
soon or late, good or evil: The Prodigies which appeared in the Skies over the
City of Jerusalem, were the forerunners of the general Destruction of that
unfortunate place: The Blazing-Star which appeared to the three Western Kings,
brought the Happy News of a Newborn Savior to those poor Pagans who lived in
the Darkness of Idolatry for so many years: And this which appeared of late
days, did (as we may reasonably conclude) Prognosticate the Gracious and Happy
end of Charles II. Your dearly beloved Brother, as also Your Lawful and
Peaceable Possession of the Crown, a main Blessing which the Heavens were
pleased to confer on You for all Your Sufferings, both at Home and Abroad with
that unspeakable Patience, and full Resignation to God's Decrees.

Now Your Subjects may rejoice to see themselves Governed by a King whom God
has Adorned with all necessary Prerogatives to complete a Monarch: The Queen of
Sheba (if now living) might set forth with all her Attendance, and Accompany
the rest of the Princes and Potentates of the World, to Congratulate Your
Coronation, and admire the Virtuous and Prudent Economy of Your Court and
Government. These should be sufficient Motives to bring this little Work before
Your Throne, with all Humility to beg the Favor of Your Gracious Countenance;
But that Two other Powerful Considerations lays (by Duty) that Obligation on me
to crave it: The one, is, The general Resentment which I shall harbor in my
Heart for ever, (with all them of my Profession,) of the Good Will which You
have; and always had from Your Infancy for our Irish Nation, whose Foreign or
Domestic Enemies could never bring You to an undervaluing of their Service, no
more than their venomous Reflections to the least mistrust of their True and
constant Affection. Wherefore as nature does Print in the very Substance of
every particular a special feeling of what ever Favor is done to the whole
Body, I think it a Duty incumbent on me, as being a Member of that Your Loyal
and always Well-affected Nation, to resent and acknowledge Your Kindness, and
all Your Good Wishes for them, by offering up my most Humble and Earnest
Addresses to the Almighty for Your long Life, and Happy Reign.

The other, is the special Kindness I received at Your Hands in France by the
Mediation of Major Francis Pluncket, and Captain Michael Brett, both Your
Majesty's Loyal Subjects, and Well-beloved Officers; whose Love and Care of Me
was so great, as being their near Relation; that they procured me a Letter of
Recommendation from Your Majesty, which proved so Efficatious, as to get Me
into a College upon Sight, and without any further delay: All the
Thunderbolts of Heaven would be too too little to be poured down upon me for a
just Revenge, if I should not make a large Acknowledgment of those
Extraordinary Favors. The offer I make You of these first Fruits of my
Studies, may pass (I hope) for a sincere Act of my Acknowledgment; not that I
think my self acquitted of my Debt, (for I do esteem my self most Happy to live
in the Impossibilities of doing it;) But only to call the Public as Witnesses
of my Endeavors; to the end, that my Will (acknowledging the Power which is
wanting in Me,) may be freed from all blame on this Subject, wherein I shall
never suffer my self to be made Criminal.

Accept then most Gracious Prince of this Work, which I thought to be the more
conformable to Your Inclinations, since You have always endeavored to maintain
the Glory of God against all the sinful practices of the corrupt Age we live
in. Moreover, being that the Conversion of Souls, (the Hereditary Employment of
all Godly Princes) holds the first rank amongst the Honorable Spoils of our
Saviors Victories.

This first Part, (which discovers the wonderful beginning and Progress
thereof;) will supply (on one side) the Insufficiency of the Author in the
Merit of his Subject; And on the other, will be able to invite Your Majesty to
spare some Moments from the crowd of other Important Affairs, to consider the
Connection of it. It Is in that belief, that, (joining my particular wishes to
the common Vows of all Your Well-beloved Subjects of Ireland) I beg the Divine
Majesty, to Bless, Protect and Preserve many years Your Sacred Person, Your
Gracious Consort Queen Mary, the Happy Offspring of that most Virtuous and
Ancient Family of Modena; together with all your Royal Progeny, to which, I
Pray God grant a further Increase, that the Name of STVART may Rule over the
Lions, Regulate the Leopards, receive the Fragrant Scent of the Lillies, and
keep the Harp in a Pleasant Tune to the Worlds end: These are the Hearty Wishes
of

Your Majesty's Most Obedient, Most Constant and ever Faithful Subject. JONH
WELDON P. P. C.

The Division of the Work.
THe two first Parts will make appear the Inventions, Motives, Amorous
persuasions, that God makes use of to draw from us the Consent requisite to
receive the Grace of the Holy Ghost, which shall be as the Annunciation of the
Angel Ambassador of the Incarnation of the Word.

The two Second, will make appear the Actual Conception of Grace in a Heart;
after (that overcome by the persuasions of God,) he shall give his Consent to
the execution of this Mystery; Even as, that after the Ecce of the Virgin, the
Word was made Flesh in her Womb.

The two third, will make appear the means of conserving that Grace infused, as
well by the expulsion of Vices, as by the Establishment of Virtues; which in
their mutual assemblage, are to conduct us to the point of that final Grace of
perseverance, for to end in the consumatum est of the Cross.

Advice to the Reader.
Dear Reader,
I Will give you at present, but the First Part, not Ordered in the Eminency of
a well polished Discourse; persuading my self that the Excellency of the
Subject will make you delight enough in the Reading of it. It Is therefore I
reserve my self to give you the five other Parts, when I shall receive your
Charitable advice on the First; To the end, that by its Order, I may add,
diminish, or correct what may be wanting in the rest.

The most Reverend Father General's License.
NOs Frater Antonius a Mutina totius Ordinis Capucinorum licet immeritus
Minister Generalis: Venerabili P. Leoni Venetensi Concionatori Capucino
Provinciae Britanniae Licentiam Impartimur Imprimendi primam partem Libri, cui
Titulus est, The second Nativity of Jesus. Servatis quae de jure servari debent,

in quorum fidem praesentes dedimus manu nostra firmatas, and sigillo nostri
Officii munitas. Dat. Roblani die ult. December. 1635. Frater Antonius a Mutina
Minister Generalis. Locus Sigilli.

The Reverend Father Provincial of Britany's License.
EGo infra Scriptus, Provinciae Brittannicae F. F. Capucinorum Provincialis,
licet immeritus. Visa Licentia admodum R. P. Generalis, qua permittitur U. P.
Venetensi Sacerdoti, and Praedicatori ejusdem ordinis and Provinciae typis
mandare Libellum, cui Titulus est, The second Nativity of Jesus, Inhaerendo
supra dictae Licentiae consentio quantum in me est, ut executioni mandetur,
servatis in super omnibus aliis de jure servandis.

Datum in nostro Conventu Cenomanensi die 9. Martii 1637. F. Severinus
Provincialis.

The Approbation of Doctors.
STephen Lovytre, Priest, Doctor in Divinity, of the faculty of Paris, Dean of
Nants, and Vicar General to the most Illustrious Lord Bishop of the said City,
do certify, to have read a Book Entitled, The Second Nativity of JESUS.
Composed by Father Lion of Vennes, Preacher, Capucin, and to have found nothing
therein, but what is most conformable to the Faith and Authority of the
Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church. To have observed, that the principal
Articles of Christian Religion are therein highly and worthily expounded,
drawing sweetly and strongly to a solid Piety: As also a handsome and true
description of Hierarchick Prelates, couched in very good terms: That as many
Chapters as are in the first part, are so many pieces of Tapistry of a high
value, carried on in a most Rich Texture and Grateful Variety, having enough of
a resemblance to the Happy Labor of an Ancient Father of the Church. Per
mixtum nobis instar prati variata est stromatum descriptio: Nostra autem
cognitio and hortus Spiritualis, est ipse noster servator, in quem implantamur,
transpositi and transformati in terram bonam ex vita veteri.

At Nantes this 13th. of October. 1636 Lovytre.

JOhn English, Priest, Doctor in Divinity of the Faculty of Paris, and Rector
of the Holy Cross in Nantes. After having perused the Book Intitul'd. The
Second Nativity of Jesus. I find my self obliged to praise both the Author and
his Work, which contains a Doctrine most Catholic, and of singular Piety,
exciteing his Reader to conceive in the bottom of his Soul the Christian Life,
and to conspire with the Grace of Jesus Christ into the Designs of his own
Salvation: It Is therefore that I have found it most worthy to be given to the
Public.

John English.
At Nantes the 25th. of November. 1636.
NOs infra scripti Praedicatores Theologi ordinis Fratrum Minorum Sancti
Francisci Capucinorum de mandato admodum Reverendi Patris Antonii a Mutina
totius ordinis nostri Praepositi Generalis vidimus and qua potuimus attentione
legimus primam partem Libri cui Titulus est, The second Nativity of Jesus, Ab
admodum venerabili Patre Leone Venetensi ejusdem ordinis Concionatore
compositum, nihilque in ea Orthodoxae Fidei contrarium, nihil a veritate
alienum, nihil bonis moribus dissonum, imo potius omnia legentium, utilitati
accomodata invenimus: Ideoque dignam quae and praelo mandetur and omnium
manibus terratur, judicavimus.

Datum in Conventu nostro Turonensi die vigesima mensis Septembris, anno Domini
millesimo sexcentesimo trigesimo quinto. Frater Michael Angelus Burdegalensis.
Frater Michael Nivernensis Sacrae Theologiae Lector.


EGo Frater Theophilus Venetensis ordinis Fratrum Minorum Capucinorum
Provinciae Britanniae Sacerdos non pridem in Sacra Theologiaea Lector, legi
attentius hanc primam partem operis ab admodum Venerabili Patre Leone
Concionatore Capucino compositam, cui Titulus est, The second Nativity of
Jesus, Accomplishment of the First, etc. In qua nihil a bonis moribus, nihil a
veritate Christiana devium inveni: Sed cuncta Orthodoxae Fidei, cuncta
Catholicae, Apostolicae Romanaeque Ecclesiae consona quippe quae omnibus
Christianam vitam profitentibus eximiae pietatis instituta, Theologiaeque
secretioris Mysteria luculenter apperiat. Qua propter, Typis Praeloque dignam
censeo partem hanc primam operis; interim dum reliquis partibus absolutum
prodeat.

Dat. Lut. Parisiorum in Conventu Assumptionis die 4 Maii Anno salutis. 1637.
Frater Theophilus qui supra.

Ad Lectorem.
De lacero Samson rapuit sibi mella Leone:
Mella sed en vivus ructat ab ore Leo.
Non tua nascentem lactarunt, hybla Leonem,
Ubera? sed lambit de cruce mella Leo.
A. F.

Anagrammatismus. Leo Venetensis ELIAe onus tenes.
Thesbitem igni vomo tolli super aea curru
Vidit Elizaeus, nescit at ipse sequi.
Currus addest, sequere, and mitis blandire Leoni,
Ecce TENES ELIAe, dum Leo sistit, ONVS
A. F.

Anagrammatismus, En sine velis eo, Anapaesticon.
Tu quisquis vela daturus aquis
Per medias Syrtes: rapidisque
Mare vorticibus sulcare cupis,
Sequere impavidi plaustra Leonis?
Curvare scit Imperio Syrtes
Fluctusque vagos, talia fatus,
EN EO SINE VELIS Impavidus.
A. F.

THE PREFACE, AND Overture of the Design.
WHen God gave Commission to his Prophet to Announce unto King Ezechias the
hour of his Death: 4 Reg. c. 20. v. 1, 2, 3. and seqq.
Talis erat infirmitas Ezechiae via naturali, qua mortem non poterat evadere:
vertit se tamen ad orandum pro fanatione, quod non fecisset si Propheta sibi
mortem denunciasset secundum ordinem voluntatis divinae. Lyranus in hunc locum.
Doubtless it was sad news to a Young Prince, who was not as yet but beginning
to taste of the Pleasures of Life: As soon as he had heard it, he turns his
Face to the Wall, and lances toward Heaven most earnest Prayers, mixed with a
thousand Sighs for the recovering of his Health. God hears him, and fixing
presently at the feet of his Supplication, Ah be it so as you desire: He does
authorize it with a Prodigy, which did astonish the whole World. Because, that,
for to assure him of the verity of that Promise; though he had placed the Stars
in a firm settlement, he ruled their motions after an extraordinary way,
commanding the Sun to go back on his steps, and to retrograde ten Degrees.

The King of Babylon seeing the Universe startled and seized with admiration at
the novelty of this Prodigy, deputes soon after, Ambassadors, with orders to
Congratulate Ezechias, that Heaven and Earth did concur to the Happy recovering
of his Health. As they were arrived, they were Treated Royally; The Prince
Honors them with his Presence every where; gives them a sight of the Rarities
of his Palace, of the Magnificence of his Court, of the Grandeur of his
Riches: Opens the Cabinets where all shines with precious Stones, and pieces of
Remark; conducts them into the Hall of Perfume, and through that of the Vessels
of Price, and omits nothing that might cause them to have a high esteem of His
Majesty. But at the same time as this Prince was making a show of his Power,
God pronounces the Sentence of his Condemnation: Isaia, declares the contents
of it to him: Hear the word of the Lord, (says he unto him:) the day shall
come, that they will plunder your Palace: All the Treasures that your Ancestors
have left you, shall be as a booty to the Babylonians: Your Children shall be
the Eunuchs of their Kings Palace. Great God! what was the crime of Ezechias
to deserve such a punishment? Has he sinned by showing unto those Foreign
Ambassadors what Precious things he had in his Cabinets? Was Solomon Criminal
by showing the Queen of Sheba the brave Economy of his House?

Scripture in the second of Paralipomene, declares the Justice of that
Punishment in this, In legatione principum Babilonis quimissi fuerant ad eum ut
interrogarent eum de portento, quod acciderat super terram, dereliquit eum
Dominus. 2 Paralip. c. 32. v 35
that the Ambassadors of Babylon did not only come to Congratulate this Prince,
nor admire his Riches; but also to be particularly instructed in the subject of
this Prodigy, arrived in the retrogradation of the Sun, that they might have
occasion to praise the Author of it, and to admire his Power. A brave subject
of Glorifying God, which this ungrateful King suffers to escape. For he ought
at the first Audience he gave to those Ambassadors to have related with a great
deal of Sorrow, how he was the subject of this Prodigy, that he was Sick on his
Bed, already condemned to die, that the Sovereign Bounty accepting of his
Prayers, was pleased to restore him to his Health, Oravit. Dominum exaudivitque
eum, and dedit ei signum, sed non juxta beneficia quae acceperat retribuit,
quia elevatum est cor ejus, and facta est contra eum ira 2 Paralip. c 32 v. 24,
^5. and seqq.
and moreover to prolong his Life fifteen years; that for his consideration,
who was but a worm of the Earth, the King of Glory was pleased to stop the
course of the Stars, and that he had no other return of Thanks to be made to
the King their Master, only this that by the Honor of his Visit, he had
procured him the means to manifest the Glory of his Benefactor, whom he
resolved evermore to publish over all the Corners of the Earth. But because he
makes Ostentation of his Vanities, and that instead of Preaching the liberal
Bounties of his God, he glories in his Treasure; he is condemned to the
severity of a just Vengeance, at the same time that he blots out of his Spirit
the remembrance of his Obligations.

Ezechias Sick in his Bed, it is Adam plunged in his Sin: Isaie, who, in the
Name of God, does announce Death unto him, it is the same God who declares it
unto Adam, if he does eat of the forbidden Fruit. Ezechias turned toward the
wall, and who, (all overwhelmed with Tears,) demands a Cure; represents the
ardent Sighs of the Prophets and Patriarchs for the Cure of Man by the Messiah
coming to the World. The Promise of the cure made to this Prince; it is the
decree of the Redemption of Man concluded in the Conclave of the three Divine
persons. The Sun retrograded ten Degrees; it is Jesus humbled be^eath the nine
Quires of Angels, nay and beneath Man too; seeing that he does number himself
with the Prophet through an Abyss of Submission to the Category of the
Sensitives: not of the most perfect, but of the meanest worms, vile Excrements
of the Earth.

Those strange Ambassadors are the poor Infidels, or, as well the ignorant
Christians, who, after a confused manner, have heard something of a God born in
a Manger, Son of the Virgin, and Crucified for their Love; but, who (to be more
fully informed of the Motives, Causes and Consequences, of this so adorable a
Prodigy,) go either into the Churches, or have their recourse to Catholic
Books, to see whether they may give them further Intelligence. But if
Preachers, who, as Chancellours, ought to speak in the Name of their Prince;
will buisy themselves to unfould the Treasures of a Science altogether Humane,
Confundantur qui operantur linum, pectentes and extentes subtilia Isa. 19. v. 9.
the Riches of a politic Philosophy, and the subtle Inventions of their
Spirit. If the Catholic Writers, who, as Secretaries of State, ought to write
down the Wills of their Master, do fill up entire Volumes with Poetical
Fictions, with the Amadis of Gaul, Revelatur ira Dei de Caelo super, etc. Romans
c. 1. v. 18.
with Scandalous Invectives, shall they not fall into the same misfortune that
the King of Jerusalem did? and suffer the punishments which his Sentence did
bear.

The Apostle Saint Paul speaks of a certain anger of God revealed by the
Heavens, to chastise the Impiety of some Souls who do retain his Verities in
Injustice. I know well, that in the natural sense of the Letter, Vera Dei
cognitio quantum est de se inducit homines ad bonum. Sed ligatur quasi
captivitate detenta per injustitiae affectum per quam ut in Psalmo dicitur,
diminutae sunt veritates a filiis hominum. D. Tho. in hunc locum.
he would speak of them, who, before the Incarnation, though they had known the
necessary Being of a Divinity, highly established in the Principles of Nature,
dare not (nevertheless, whether for fear, or otherwise,) publish the belief of
it: But I am deceived, if he had not also a design to intimate unto Christians
the Chastisements of Heaven, ordained against them, who, in an unjust silence,
would detain captive the most adorable Mystery of the Incarnation. And in
effect, what is it otherwise, to hold the Verity of God in Injustice, (as St.
Augustine remarks,) but to shut up Jesus Christ and his Graces in a Prison,
under the locks of a perverse will.

It Is this consideration has moved me to choose among other Subjects which I
bethought of to furnish matter to my Pen, Spiritus Domini super me, propter
quod unxit me, evangelirare pauperibus misit me, sanare contritos cord. Luke
4. v. 18.
to treat of the Infirmities which are incident to our corrupt Nature, having
my self contracted a share of them in the Subterranean Mansion, where the late
Troubles have confined me for the space of two years. And as the sick Body can
have no sweeter thoughts than them of a Cure for his Distemper, I resolved to
treat of a Powerful Remedy for the Salvation of our Souls, whose Health is
infinitely more to be desired than that of the Body; (adoring always the
receipt of our Sovereign Doctor fixed on the Cross) I will discourse of this
Remedy with a methodical instruction of a singular application to each sinner
in particular. Contritis per penitentiam datur gratia sanans vulnera
peccatorum. Lyran in c. 4. Luck.


I may well give this little work the Title of the Second Nativity of Jesus
among men, being that it is the Accomplishment of his Adorable Incarnation. We
shall give it a further Light in our following Discourses. For the present it
will suffice, to say in short, that as it was necessary of a conditional
necessity, that the Son of God should Incarnate himself in the womb of the
Virgin to reestablish Humane Nature in general in the Rights of Heaven; Even so
it is necessary, of a like necessity, that the same Son, by the actual
application of his Graces, do descend into the Heart of each one in particular,
before they can pretend to the least Happiness of Paradise: It Is that actual
application of the Graces and infinite merits of Jesus to each sinner in
particular, which may be well called the Second Nativity of Jesus.

Holy Virgin pardon me, if you please: I do not doubt but that at this sole
word of Second Nativity your Heart, Saintly jealous of the Title of Divine
Maternity, will straightly oblige me to put it out of all apprehension of any
Ferreign Interest, being that to You alone, (and with exclusion to all others,)
does appertain to be the true Mother of Jesus, Multae mulieres beatificaverunt
Sanctam Virginem illam, and ejus uterum, and optaverunt tales fieri matres. D.
Chrysostom. hom. 450. in Matthew. refertur in cat. ad c. 12. Matthew.
and to Jesus to be your true Natural Son. Ah! Princess of Heaven, who would
ever dare to contest with You the Honor of that Quality, which is the Source
of all our Happiness, and the greatest of all your Titles? If St. Chrysostom
said heretofore, That many Women Sanctifying your Person, and Blessing the
Sacred Fruit of your Womb, have desired to be the Mother of God as you are;
they were but simple wishes; which had rather for their Object the admiration
and ravishment of your Felicity; than the belief of ever being able to attain
to it.

Your Dearly Beloved Son, how ever, has thaught you heretofore, what we ought
to understand by that way of speaking, when that with his own mouth he did
establish another kind of Maternity compatible with yours. Quae est matter mea
and qui sunt fratres mei and extendens manum in discipulos, dixit ecce matter
mea, and fratres mei. Mat. c. ^ 2. v 48.
Do you remember, O Blessed Virgin, how you have heard him, when as he stood at
the gates of the Temple, some one went to tell him that his Mother and Brothers
were looking for him: He dissembling, (but a dissembling replenished with
Mysteries;) demands, as if it were abruptly, who is my Mother, and who are my
Brethren? And at the same time stretching his Hand toward his Disciples; there
is, said he, my Mother, there are my Brethren: For who ever fulfils the will of
my Father who is in Heaven, he is my Brother, my Sister, and my Mother.

St. Jerome believes, that he, who brought this news to our Savior, was
carried on by malice and evil Faith, because that he would fain try if the
Messiah, Non autem fastidiose de matre sua s^^^sse existima^^^^s est, cui in
passione positus maximae sollicitudinis tribuit affectum. D. Hilar. Canon. 12.
in fine
who treated of no other thing before the Scribes and Pharisees, but of the
Will of God his Father, and of the Marvails of Heaven, would not suffer himself
to be carried away with the unruly affections of Blood and Flesh; thereby to
interpret sinistrously the Purity of his Designs. It Is therefore he answers to
the intention of his Adversary; without any regard to the Literal signification
of his Words. And so makes appear that far from disowning her that was
inseperably joined to him in the fact of Predestination: But on the contrary,
as Mary is no other than a Virgin and the Mother of God in the immovable
project of Eternity: So Jesus in the plenitude of times, could not behold her
otherwise than under this venerable Title, which by the Law of Nature does
oblige to all respects. He does suppose then that she is his Natural Mother:
And adds a kind of Consanguinity of Love, which ought to be found in all sorts
of Faithful, who, by the accomplishment of the Caelestial wills shall deserve
to engender again Jesus Christ in their Hearts; In propria venit, etc. Joan. 1.
v. 12.
wherein not only the Women, as St. Chrysostom says, but also the men may be
the Mothers of God.

What a Pleasure it is to hear St. John explain the sacred Subordination of
that double Alliance of men with God, both in the Mystery of his Incarnation,
and in the Mystery of his second Nativity. Our Savior, says he, is come unto
the World, as if it were unto his own, and his own did not receive him: To them
nevertheless, Potestas est potentia stabilita per adventum Spiritus, unde patet
quod non est in aliquo potestas, in quo non fuerit prius potentia naturalis
quia est in hominis voluntate ut possit fieri potestas si non ponit obicem
gratiae. Hugo Card. in c. 1. Joan.
that had received him, he gave power to be made the Children of God. That
power, says Hugo the Cardinal, is a stable Power determined by Grace, and
fortified by the Holy Ghost. A Power, says the same Doctor, which supposes
Nature already prepared to give it no obstacle nor opposition; with a great
difference however, for the Natural Power, which we have to be the Children of
God may be separated from the Almighty Power. Because that is but a simple
possibility far from any Act; this follows the conditions of liberty, which, in
the advantages of Grace, is near to its effect. Great God, says St. Augustine,
is not your Love without measure for men? You are not at all of the humor of
the Children of the World, who are afraid to have many Brothers Coheirs, that
they alone might succeed without any Associates to the Inheritance of their
Parents. You are the only Son of the Father, and yet you do not desire to
remain the sole Heir of his Substance. You call,) without any exception, to the
Rights of Heaven and Eternity,) all them, who, undervaluing the Dross of the
World, shall believe in your Gospel. We must not wonder at it, for the Wealth
of the Earth being divided, grows less; the Wealth of Heaven, contrariwise,
by communication does increase.

St. John pursuing the History of the Incarnation, adds, Quasi securitatem
faciens, ait and verbum caro factum est, quid ergo miraris quiahomines ex Deo
nascuntur? attend ipsum Deum ex hominibus natum. D. Aug. to. 9. tract 2. in
Joan. sub finem.
And the Word is made Flesh: Remark the Coherency, Dear Reader, he comes to
establish the Second Nativity of Jesus in the stable Powers of our Liberty: And
to the end, says the Great St. Augustine, that this should not seem incredible
to any, that a pitiful Creature should be Honored with a Title, not imaginary,
but subsistant of Divine Filiation; he says, that God is made man; as if he
were to draw this consequence, if the Omnipotent Power of a God infinitely
Adorable, contrary to the ordinary Laws, has abased it self to the union of a
Nature so abject of it self, as Humane Nature is: Who will doubt but that a
sinner, Anima namque habet aliquam propinquitatem ad Deum. Treophilactus in c.
1 Joan.
touched with the Graces of Heaven, and Converted by a sublime elevation, may
approach to the Throne of the Divinity, there to receive by pre-eminency the
Title of a Filial Adoption.

What were you willing to teach us, O Savior of the World, when nailed on the
wood of the Cross, Cum vidisset Jesus matrem and discipulum stantem, quem
dilegebat, dixit matri suae, mulier ecce filius tuus. Joan. 19. v. 26.
whereon you were rendering to men the last proofs of your Love, looking with
an Amorous Eye at your Mother, you said unto her, that from thenceforth, St.
John should be her Son? Will you refuse her after your Death, what you would
not take from her during your Life? What a heartbreaking would it be to the
Virgin, when, after the Death of Jesus, thinking to discourse of high
affections, to comfort her poor Heart afflicted for his absence; she should be
denied ever to call him again by this worthy Name of Son, more sweet than
Honey? No, this Commandment would be a thing impossible, and Love that knows
not what it is to Obey, where there is question of a Division, would never
consent to the rigor of its practice.

It Is that St. John, at the foot of the Cross, was the figure of the Adoptive
Children of Grace; And to the end that the Virgin should acknowledge them for
such, Love them, and Cherish them, as she who ought most to Interess her self
in the common and particular good of men. Our Savior says to her, Woman behold
thy Son; unspeakable Happiness to see, that he who had for his Lodging the
Bowels of Mary, should be pleased to assign us for a residence her proper
heart. Or else, let us say, Sicut portavimus imaginem terreni, portemus and
imaginem Celestis. 1 Cor. c. 15. v. 49.
that by his last Will and Testament, he was to give her an excellent proof of
his Affections, by leaving his Image deposited in her: For every sinner
Converted by the Grace of God is the Image of Jesus Crucified, according to the
Apostle's Doctrine, followed with a rare thought of St. Augustine; D. Aug. lib.
de Sancta virginitate.
for after he had said, that the Virgin is our Mother; Mother by Spirit, as she
is our Saviors by Nature; he goes further, and remarks that she bears her
Spiritual Children in her Bosom, not for the space of nine Months only, but as
long as they are in this Life, and is not delivered of them until she
introduces them to Heaven.

That is also the aim and scope of all the design of this Work, wherein we
shall make appear, how, that by the powerful endeavors of Grace, the Holy
Ghost labors incessantly to make us conceive the word of Salvation, whose term
must be Jesus formed in our Hearts; and it is that which I shall call hereafter
the Child of Heaven, and of Grace, and particular Savior. I am deceived, if
St. Mark would not fain speak of this Sacred Fruit, when he tells us, That the
Messiah one day took a little Child in his Arms, Quem cum complexus esset Mark.
9. Math. 18. v. 2.
and having set him in the middle of his Apostles, Embraced him tenderly. Where
St. Matthew adds, That he told them, if they would not become like unto that
Infant, they should never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

I omit diverse Interpretations of this passage, to speak of that of St. Jerome;
who by that Infant, understands the Holy Ghost, and says, That he who by Grace
is Converted unto God, D. Hieron in catena ad c. 18. Matthew.
receives the Holy Ghost, who bears him Testimony that he is a Child of God:
Who will doubt but that the Eternal Father will embrace this Infant for the
resemblance he has with his First Born: The Son acknowledge him for his Younger
Brother, and the Holy Ghost own him for his own Work.

In a word, my Dear Reader, Omnis qui filio Dei credit and conservatur secundum
Evangelicos actus, conversus ambulat quasi puer: Qui autem non convertitur ut
fiat sicut puer, hunc impossible est intrare in regnum celerum. Origenes
Tract. 3. ad illud qui scandalizaverit unum, andt.
Whoever is not a Child after this Nature, can hope for nothing in the
successions of Heaven. But take Courage, for he, who even from this World does
engage the Fidelity of his Word for assurance of an Eternal Blessing to them,
who without fraud or malice, hanging close at the Paps of his Graces, shall
draw from thence the Spirit of Life, will never deprive you of that
Inheritance; seeing, that his Goodness is altogether as plenty in the
Communication of his Favors, as the Fidelity of his Word is certain in the
Execution of his Promises.

The CONTENTS.
Chap. I. THat the Conversion of a Soul ought to be Framed according to the
Word-Incarnate. page 1 Chap. II. That the Conversion of a Soul, is a second
Nativity of Jesus. page 12 Chap. III. Who ought to be the Father in this second
Nativity. page 23 Chap. IV. That there is in this Nativity, a supposed Father,
as well as in that of Jesus. page 30 Chap. V. That the Delivery and Birth of
this Child must be in Pain and Sorrow. page 38 Chap. VI. That this Sorrowful
Delivery is the Accomplishment of the Word-Incarnate. page 47 Chap. VII. That
it is the Angel of Great Council who brings to the Soul the Word of her
Conversion. page 54 Chap. VIII. That it belongs to God alone to Convert a Soul.
page 64 Chap. IX. The Confidence that a Soul ought to have in her God. page 74
Chap. X. How God does cast into a Soul the Seed of her Conversion. page 83
Chap. XI. The Stratagems that Jesus makes use of to Convert a Soul. page 95
Chap. XII. That to become Servants to God, we must know the World. page 110
Chap. XIII. That we cannot complain of the want of sufficient means for our
Conversion. page 125 Chap. XIV. That the Infidel and Still-born Children cannot
complain of God. page 134 Chap. XV. God no sooner sees a Soul desirous of her
Salvation, but he gives her his helping Hand. page 146 Chap. XVI. How hard it
is to Convert a Lukewarm Soul. page 163 Chap. XVII. God will not destroy those
Lukewarm Souls, which he begins to vomit. page 172 Chap. XVIII. For to Convert
a Sinner, God must afflict him. page 181 Chap. XIX. How the Devil hinders a
Sinner to Convert himself to God in Affliction. page 192 Chap. XX. It is by
Preaching, that Sinners are efficaciously moved. page 202 Chap. XXI. How
Powerful good Example is for to touch a Sinner. page 217 Chap. XXII. If any
thing be contrary to the Conversion of a Sinner, it must be bad and scandalous
company. page 225 Chap. XXIII. That, to think of Death has a great power on the
Conversion of a Sinner. page 233 Chap. XXIV. That the remorse of the Conscience
is an Efficacious Instrument of our Conversion. page 249 Chap. XXV. That the
Sinner can never be Converted whilst he smothers the Remorse of his Conscience.
page 261 Chap. XXVI. That a Soul will not Convert her self to God, unless she
knows that she has no true Friend in this World. page 268 Chap. XXVII. That we
cannot meet with a better Friend than Jesus. page 279 Chap. XXVIII. That Jesus
is the only Friend who Comforts us on occasion. page 293 Chap. XXIX. That the
Immortality of our Soul ought to make us undervalue the World. page 307 Chap.
XXX. That the Mortality of our Souls sets all Crimes at Liberty. page 319 Chap.
XXXI. That the Angels are employed in the Conversion of a Sinner. page 327
Chap. XXXII. That the Devil hinders the Conversion of a Sinner. page 338 Chap.
XXXIII. For to resist the Devil we must know his Power. page 341 Chap. XXXIV.
The good Angels have more Power to Convert us, than the bad Angels have to
pervert us. page 352 Chap. XXXV. How the Flesh usurps on the right of the
Spirit. page 360 Chap. XXXVI. The Second unjust Usurpation of the Flesh, on the
right of the Spirit. page 365 Chap. XXXVII. The third unjust Usurpation of the
Flesh on the right of the Spirit. page 371 Chap. XXXVIII. That it is the Grace
of Jesus which maintains the Spirit in his Rights. page 375 Chap. XXXIX. That
the Grace of Jesus leaves that weighty obligation on all Christians to be both
Soldiers and Conquerours. page 393 Chap. XL. That the thoughts of Hell does
bring the Sinner to his Duty. page 406 Chap. XLI. The first consideration of
Hell. page 409 Chap. XLII. The second consideration of Hell. page 416 Chap.
XLIII. The third consideration of Hell. page 424
THE CONVERSION OF THE SOUL Formed by the Pattern of the Word-Incarnate. PART I.
CHAP. I. That the Conversion of a Soul ought to be Framed according to the
Word-Incarnate.
WHat a High and Mighty Lord is Man, what rich and ample Possessions has he, if
they had not been engaged for the payment of his Debts: All Creatures labor
for his Service, and seem to aim at nothing else, but to procure his Glory. St.
Paul, to set forth the Happiness of his Condition, assures, that the Angels
were Created to Honor him with their Attendance. Nonne omnes sunt
administratorii spiritus, Hebr. 1.
The Sun, the Moon, the Stars, are so many Lanthorns set out by the powerful
hand of God to lead and lighten him through darkness; the Heavens roll over his
Head to divide the year into Seasons for the welfare of his Body, and the
Recreation of his Senses; they do power down their Influences upon the most
private parts of the Earth, to form therein Jewels and Pearls, Gold and Silver
for his Expense and Pleasure: The Seas and the Floods, Omnia subjecisti sub
pedibus ejus, Ps. 8.
whose roaring waves and cloudy storms often make all the Earth to Tremble,
stand calm nevertheless at his Command, for to give him a firm and free passage
from one Pole to the other: In fine, there is not any Creature but what does
cast it self at the Feet of Man, in sign of Subjection and Reverence.

Who, perhaps seeing himself in the Splendor of that great Empire, will become
as Insolent as the Prince of Laodicea; who, beholding his great Wealth, his
resplendant Court, and gallant Attendance, Dives sum and locupletatus, Apoc
3.17.
said, I am rich and potent, I have all things at command, I want no bodies
help or assistance; His Pride made him to forget his Extraction from Dust and
Ashes; as also his dependency on God, and his former misery. Let not Man fall
into the same misfortune, let him not admire overmuch the Beauty of his fine
Feathers; let him not become so Insolent in the abundance of his Wealth, nor
conceive any vain glory at the Homage and Reverence which he receives from all
other Creatures: Let him remember, that He has nothing but what is lent to
him, and that he must be accountable for all the goods he does enjoy: He has
God for his Creditor, who by giving, cannot in any way alienate the property of
his Gifts, being that he cannot renounce the rights of Omnipotency; and
therefore, who ever receives from him, remains still accountable to him for
what he receives.

But if we must come to give up our Accounts; and pay to God all our Debts, we
must of necessity restore him all that we have, being that we have all from
him: Jacobi 1. Omne donum desursum est, descendens a Patre luminum
And if we must fully obey the commands of Justice: that is, to restore to one
another in the same kind, or equivalent to it, what appertains unto him; what
shall become of man? He can no more restore the same kind, since all the Gifts
he received from God are become worse in his hands, he would be overmuch
favored to be received to an Infamous cession of all Goods.

But if he be constrained to restore the equivalent, where will he find whereby
to acquit himself; for (as St. Augustine says, Non est Creaturae moliri officium
quo justu Creatoris recompenset praesidium Medit. 7.
) it lies not in man's Power to clear scores with his Creator; he is too far
engaged in his Debts; the Immensity of his Favors surpass our Thoughts, and is
far beyond our acknowledgements. Moreover, let man in no wise ground the
Immunity of his Debts on those vain. Immensitas donorum superat cogitationes
sensum Chrysostom. sermon. 69. in cant. and sermon. 12. in Psalm. 40.
and frivolous assurances, that his Creditor is of so good a heart as not to
call him to an Account, and that he will be satisfied with the bare
acknowledgment of his Insufficiency. No, no, God values more his Goods than so,
he values not ours, but he will not have us set any under-value on what we
receive from his liberal Hands; much less abuse his Favors, being that he
gives them by weight, number and measure, he will have us to return him the
same Account. A Doctor of the Synagogue seemed not to know this weighty
obligation, Quae sunt Dei Deo, Matthew 22.
when thinking to surprise our Savior, he puts the question to him, Whether it
be Lawful to pay Tribute to Caesar; the answer was made home, Give to Caesar
what belongs to Caesar, and give to God what appertains to God; Had the Doctor
the wit fully to conceive this Divine Answer, he might understand more of our
Saviors mind than he did, he might easily conclude that he would fain say,
That though Caesar had received the Tribute and Taxes of his People, yet Caesar
and his People were obliged to render daily to God the Sovereign Homage of
their Persons, as also the Tribute of their Goods, to be the better prepared
for that dreadful day, on which he has appointed to receive the general
Accounts of all Creatures.

David with all his Riches, with all his Power and Pomp, as often as he thought
of that indispensable obligation which hangs over our Heads, to give up our
Accounts to God, was forced to own his Insufficiency, and laying down his Royal
Scepter and Crown at the feet of his Creditor; does ingeniously confess that he
is Insolvable, saying, What have I worthy to be presented to my Lord and Master
for what he has been pleased to bestow on me? Quid retribuam Domino pro-omnibus
quae retribuit mihi. Psalm. 115. v. 3.
I will take the Chalice of Salvation, or as Didimus explains it; I will take
the Chalice of Jesus, and invoke the Name of the Lord; As if he would say, now
I have found whereby to satisfy my Creditor; his Divine Majesty thought
perhaps, that Humane Nature was so poor, and brought so low, that she had not
in the World wherewith to discharge the least of her Debts; True it is, that of
her own stock and proper Substance, she is altogether insolvable: But the day
will come that the Messiah will raise up her fortune, and repair all her losses
with the most happy advantage she is to receive by his Incarnation: The Eternal
Word will leave us a Cup filled with the purest Blood of his Sacred Veins, to
which we shall remit his Eternal Father to receive what is his due: For seeing
that the chief reason which makes us insolvable; is, that the Gifts of God are
Infinite, and our Payments limited: this Blood is of an Infinite price,
consequently in giving it for to acquit us of all our Debts, we shall be
reputed to have made full satisfaction.

St. Augustine thinking to have found whereby to clear his Accounts with his
Divine Majesty, begs that he would be pleased to accept of his Vows in payment
of all his Debts, and doubts not, but by that voluntary Oblation to clear off
all his scores with God: O God of Love, if I give my self altogether to you, if
I prostrate my heart at the Feet of your Altars; if I freely Sacrifice all my
designs to your good will and pleasure; and if by disowning my self, I do
engage to you my Free Will and Liberty, to serve you for ever, reserving only
to my self the bare use of my Life, and that I do firmly resolve to pass over
my days in a full submission to your Commandments; will you not be satisfied?
Why then, these are my Promises, Et vere quisquis been cogitat, quid voveat
Domino, out quae vota reddat hoc exigitur, hoc debetur D. Aug. in Psalm. 15.
such are my Vows: Hence this Holy Doctor concludes, That to consecrate himself
to God in this kind, is to give God that which is His by Right.

The Seraphick Doctor St. Bonaventure, considering sinners as so many Criminals
brought before the Bar of Gods high Court of Justice; who, notwithstanding upon
their Repenpentance, have found favor in the sight of their Prince, but with
that obligation to satisfy the injured party, remits them to that Parable of
the five hundred Pence, brought down by our Savior to justify the Repentance
of Magdalen, whose examples must be our Instruction: She says nothing for her
own justification, her heart is overwhelmed with Grief to have ever offended
so bountiful and merciful a God, streams of Tears run down from her Eyes to
cool the burning flames of her ardent Love; Mountains, Woods and Solitary
places, how often have you seen her strike her tender Body With Chains of Iron,
and give Bloody marks of her true Repentance to her dearly Beloved Jesus? But
to what purpose is all this Mortification and Penance, seeing she had already
received a general discharge, and full Absolution of all her sins! It was, says
this Holy Doctor, To satisfy, in as much as lay in her, the party concerned
and affronted by all her abominations and crimes; as also to rid her self of
the pain, which of course would have followed her offenses; But he adds, Si
Magdalena tot lachrymis reddidit, quingentorum denariorum debita, quantis reddi
debebunt fletibus, december millia peccatorum debita. D. Bona Ser. 3 ^om. 22.
post. pent.
That the same Grace which Magdalen received to wash off her sinful spots with
her bitter Tears, must not be a rule in its quantity for all forts of sinners:
For he that committed more Offenses than Magdalen did, ought to have a greater
Repentance, and shed more Tears than Magdalen; Betwixt five hundred Pence, and
ten thousand Talents, there is a great deal of difference.

I do respect and honor all the ravishing thoughts of those Holy and high
Spirited men: But let us reduce them all to an Unity; let us find out one
Gift, one Payment, one Satisfaction, which by way of Eminency may be all
Gift; (...) Payment, all Satisfaction; So that Offering it to God, he must of
necessity be contented, and rest satisfied with our Oblation. What is this
precious Gift? this plenary Satisfaction? this absolute Payment? Doubtless it
is the Son of God, a Son whom the Father has given us; and in giving him, he
gave us all that his Heavenly Court could afford; so that if he demands of us
that which appertains unto him, and re-calls what he has given us; let us
restore him back again his Son, or at least another who may be like him; and
this is all that he can expect.

But how shall this be performed? If it be true that the Philosopher says, Per
quas causas quid componitur, per easdem dissolvitur.
That by what causes a thing is composed, by the same it is dissolved: Then it
must of necessity follow, that we restore this Gift to God by the same ways we
received it, and by which this precious Gift descended down from Heaven to us.
He came forth from the abundant and fruitful memory of the Father, the Original
source of the Divine Persons, he took his way through the Love of the Holy
Ghost, who clothed him with a Robe of men's wearing, and hid him in a Virgins
Womb for the space of nine Months: The World has seen him born in a Stable,
laid down in a Manger, cry for Hunger, tremble with Cold, and die on a shameful
Cross in the sight of all Nations: There is the Child that God has given us;
but he is not the Child that the Father will have from us, because he has him
already seated at his Right Hand in his full splendor, and in all his
Dimensions.

He aims at another who must be like him, and who must also proceed from his
Substance, pass through the love of the Holy Ghost, be clad like Christ, be
born, die, and buried with him, for to rise up Glorious, and mount Triumphing
up to Heaven. This is a second Child formed by the model of the first, and Him
we must offer up to the Eternal Father, for to clear off our Debts; Here you
have the Mystery of it.

It Is true, that the Son of God has found out a way for us to pay off our
debts, it is the value and merits of his dying life; but this price must be put
into our hands; He is upon his journey to Heaven; what does he do? for to leave
us the handling of his Treasures, he sends us his holy Ghost to whom he leaves
his precious Blood together with all his merits, as a Heavenly Seed, wherein,
by the force of his Love, he concurs to the conception, not of the Son of God,
but of a Son altogether like the Son of God; to the end that this Son, (so like
unto the Son of God, conceived in the Sacred Seed of Jesus, after the model of
the word Incarnate, by the operation of the Holy Ghost,) may pass before God
for an equivalent satisfaction and payment of all our Debts.

This is what St. Paul calls, 2 Cor. 11.
Pledge of the Holy Ghost, which he reserves to give to men, when that
endeavoring to purchase Heaven, they shall be demanded, whether they have
sufficient payment for its Acquisition. St. Augustine is of a contrary Opinion,
for he will not have this payment to be called a Pledge, but an Oblation to
God: Because, that when the thing is restored for which the Pledge was laid
out, Pignus cum redditua res ipsa aufertur, arrha autem de ipsa reddatur quae
dando promittitur, ut res quando redditur impleatur quod datum est non mutetur.
D. Aug. ser. 15. de verb. dom. statim initio.
the Pledge of course must be taken up; and so God in giving us Heaven, which
is the purchase we aim at, the Holy Ghost must take away his Pledge, which is
his Grace; and that cannot be; for it is not the same with Grace, as it is with
Faith; for Grace ought to subsist with Glory, but Faith not; so that this
payment which St. Paul calls Pledge, rigourously taken, must be no Pledge, but
rather an Oblation to God, which is a part of the thing we would fain buy, and
which cannot be taken away when the Contract is completed: And in effect Grace
is the source and first beginning of Salvation, which ends in Glory, and has
its full consummation in Heaven.

Let us then give God this Gracious Child, the second work of the Holy Ghost:
Aspicis Christum hominem and Deum, sed ostendit tibi Pater hominem and servat
tibi Deum. D. Aug. Hom. 32.
But we must give him to God in the same shape and Form, as he gave Us his own
Son, reserving him Glorious with himself, and suffering amongst us: He did
always cherish him within his Sacred bosom, as him whom he does engender from
all Eternity, Coequal, Consubstantial, and of one and the same Nature: But
from himself, he deals with him as with a Criminal, and the chiefest of all
Malefactors, you would say that he does not acknowledge him for his Son. The
same way we must offer and treat this second Son, glorious and passible:
Glorious in the Cabinet of our Souls, but passible in the exterior of our
Bodies: Within we must consider him as the object of our most tender
Affections, give him a Princely attendance, and Adore him without any
dissimulation. Exteriourly, he must be a Crucified Love, covered with Wounds,
Crowned with Thorns, and the perfect Portract of the man of sorrow, Incarnate
in a Virgins Womb, 2 Cor. 4. v. 10.
and laid down amongst the Beasts in a Manger for the Love of men.

But alas, (says St. Augustine) our daily practice is quite contrary to this
advice of St. Paul, for Exteriourly we bear a most specious Jesus; but
Interiorly we cherish a most hideous Blackamore; Christians in appearance, and
really nothing less in our hearts: we shut up our Hearts with a Ring all
gilded, Annulo aureo corda obsignamus and putridas intus paleas recondimus D.
Aug. Ser. 10. Dom. 10. post Pent.
and underneath lies nothing but dirt and Infection, a heap of rotten straw;
the Apostle calls that, To crucify Jesus the second time: You must beware
never to offer that Child at the gates of Heaven, he will never be taken for a
Child conceived in the Blood of Christ, for he does not bear the form and
resemblance of one: The general redemption of mankind was completed on the
Cross and by Sufferances; never expect that the Spirit of God will work upon
any other example. The Holy Ghost never begets Children to God, but betwixt the
Arms of the Cross, consequently he can never beget any there, but Crucified
Children.

CHAP. II. That the Conversion of a Soul, is a second Nativity of Jesus.
THe Gospel relates unto us, how Nicodemus, (who took all the Actions of Jesus
for so many Prodigies, Rabbi scimus quia a Deo venisti Magister, nemo enim
potest facere haec signa quae tu facis nisi fuerit Deus cum eo John 3. ver. 2.
Nisi quis natus fuerit denuo, non potest videre regnum Dei, Ibid,
) took an occasion to visit him by night: Being come, Master (says he) we know
that your Mastership comes from Heaven, for none could work such high wonders
as you do, if God had not gone along with him: Whereupon our Savior replies,
Verily I tell you, that whoever is not Regenerated the second time, shall never
see the Kingdom of Heaven: As if he had said in plainer terms, You have seen me
revive the Dead, change Water into Wine, Cure the Sick, multiply the Bread,
cast Devils out of men's Bodies. These, and many more such Actions have daz'led
your eyes, and forced your mouth to confess ingeniously, that they must be the
works of Divine Power. I do receive and approve of your sentiments, for they
are conformable to Reason; But I will have you to know, that there is another
wonder worthy of your astonishment; which is, That to be saved you must be born
the second time.

This poor man was altogether astonished, Qui solam carnalem Nativitatem novit
quae non potest denuo fieri, ideo modum secundae quaerit. Glossa Interlin. ad
haec verba.
who had no other Theology than that of his Senses, and who did not as yet
comprehend the secrets of Heaven, falls presently on that Proposal, this main
difficulty; How can that be done? That a man must be born twice over, that an
Old man of threescore years with the full extention of his Body, must be
reduced to the form and state of a new born Child; must he re-enter into his
Mothers womb, there to be retained a Prisoner the space of nine Months? That
must be performed either by Rarefaction or Condensation of Matter, That in the
Mother, This in the Child; who did ever hear speak of the like thing?

Some one perhaps may ask me the same Question; Non mireris quia dixi, oportet
vos nasci denuo Spiritus ubi vult spirat. Ver. 7.8. and seq.
and seeing it in the front of this Chapter, The second Nativity of Jesus; may
tell me that it is an impossible thing that Jesus should be born the second
time; For the Virgin must have been re-call'd on Earth to become his Mother
once more: And if for to be born twice, he must die as often; it would be
necessary that Jesus who is once already dead, and never dies any more, should
die the second time, for to revive again, which cannot be.

Dear Reader, I have no other Answer for the clearing of your doubt, Si propter
haereditatem temporalis nascitur aliquis ex visceribus matris carnalis: and
propter haeriditatem Patris Dei sempiternam nascitur peccator ex visceribus
Ecclesiae D. Aug. tract. 12. in John com. 9. refer. tur in Catena.
but the same which our Savior gave to Nicodemus: Verily I tell you, that
whoever is not regenerated by water, and the Holy Ghost, cannot be saved: For
even as being dead by Original sin, you are regenerated by the water of
Baptism; so being dead by your Actual sins, you are re-call'd to life by the
water of your bitter Tears in the Sacrament of Penance. A Regeneration which
cannot be accomplished before that Jesus be new born in our hearts by a new
conception of Love, which I call, The second Nativity of Jesus, which takes its
Being, and all its Value from the First.

The Relations of the one to the other are admirable; For, as the first
Nativity of Jesus in the Sacred womb of the Virgin, was by the Hypostatical
Union of the Divine Person with Humane Nature, to appropriate to himself all
her Actions. So the second Nativity of Jesus in a Soul is accomplished by the
intimate Union of his Presence, by which he becomes the most happy source and
offspring of all her Actions, and renders them meritorious of Heaven. And as
Jesus, in as much as he was man alone, could not operate that great work of our
Redemption; Si tamen compatimur ut and conglorificemur Romans 8. v. 17. Si
commortui sumus and convivemus, si sustinebimus and conregnabimus. 2 Timothy cap.
2. ver. 12. Si enim complantati su^^us similitudini mortis ejus, Simul and
resurrectianis erim^s Romans 6. v. 5.
if by the means of that Union, he had not acquired the Power and Dignity of
it: Even so it is impossible, without that second Nativity of the Son of God in
us, to do any particular Action that might deserve Heaven. To say, that it is
to injure and entrench upon the Rights and Prerogatives of the first Nativity,
to refer the consummation of particular Salvation to the necessity of a second
Nativity, it is to destroy the Essential Subordination of those two terms,
suffer and suffer with, so often Preached by the Apostle, and to have that
Physic only laid on a sick man's Table should do him good without taking it. In
the Passion of the Son of God, we have a most powerful remedy for all our
distempers, but its effect in us depends on the compassion, as a condition,
without which, nothing turns to our advantage.

The Spirit is not as yet fully informed of the secrets contained in this
second Nativity; And therefore I must explain more at large the manner and
order observed in it: And of what nature is that Union of the Soul with Grace,
which brings God to be present with Man by a stricter tie, than that of the
Substantial Form, which gives him Life: For it is not an Union like that which
brings the Sun to be present to the very bowels of the Earth, by the emission
of his Influences, to produce therein all sorts of Metals. Neither is it an
union of Authority and Pre-eminency, as that of a King or Monarch, who is not
present in all the Provinces of his Dominions, but by the Officers of his
Crown. No, for all those presences, to speak properly, not being personal,
cannot produce such Holy and real approaches, as are found in that intimate
union of the Soul with God, to make him appear in the full luster of a second
Nativity.

What then? Lib. 12. de Deo trino and uno. c. 9.
the Learned Suarez (the second St. Thomas of our Age,) finds no comparison
more proper to express the reality of this Mystery, than to have recourse to
the Holy Sacrament of the Altar, and to say, that after the Sacramental words
pronounced by the Priest in the Consecration, the Body of our Savior is there
really present, not in Figure, as our Adversaries say, but really, and in
Substance: Even so immediately after the last disposition of a Penitent Soul,
which is a true and hearty disliking his offenses, with a firm resolution of
amendment; God is really and truly present to that Soul by a most intimate and
entire communication of his Nature, and of all what he has, so far, that if it
were possible, that God should not be present with all other things, by
Presence, Power, Cornel. in c. 2. Act
and Essence; he must of necessity be found in a heart that is in the state of
Grace.

The Royal Prophet did foresee somewhat of the greatness of these wonders:
Omnis consummationis vidi finem l^tum mandatum minis, Ps. 118.
I have seen (says he) the end of all Consummation; as if he had said, I often
employed my understanding to consider the ways of the Infinite Wisdom of God in
his government and conduct of men, Quid enim latius hoc mandato dilectionis,
quo sic meus humana dilatatur, ut intra substantiae suae palatium, majestatum
possit capere patris, Filii, and Spiritus Sancti, Rupert, lib. 11. in Joan.
cap. 3.
the greatness of the care and esteem he has for them: But I must ingeniously
confess that the Masterpiece of all his Wonders, the Abridgement of his
Clemency, and the consummation of his Love, is to see that a Sinner converted
by the powerful Assistance and attractions of Grace, receives and contains, in
the Substance of his Heart, all the Three Persons of the Trinity: And that all
three do concur with all their activity, to draw from the purest Affections of
the Soul, whereby to Organize a second Son of God; Ut sit ipse primogentius in
multis Fratribus, Romans 8.
who, without any prejudice to the First his Eldest Brother, will bear his
Image, and perfect resemblance, as being his younger Brother by Adoption.

Apoc. 22.
Angels of Heaven use what Compliments you please to St. John who offers to
prostrate himself at your feet; tell him if you think it fit, that you are his
most humble Fellow Servants, and that you will never admit of his submission.
For my part, I will not fear to say, that did I know for certain, that a man
were in the State of Grace, I would make him a more profound Reverence than
even to the sign of the Cross: For though the Cross puts me in mind of the
shameful Death on mount Calvary; however it is but a Sanctification grounded on
the bare touching of our Saviors Body, which supposes no other Title of
special presence besides the general, which is Essential to all things. I would
behave my self toward him, and in a manner treat him with as much respect as I
would the most Happy and ever Blessed Virgin, whilst she bore in her Chaste
womb her dearly Beloved Jesus (setting always aside the dignity of Mother,
which extols her above all degrees and orders of Saints and Angels, to the
Honor and Worship of Hyperdulium;) My reason for it is, that as the real
Existence of the Child in the Womb of Mary, is the ground of my Respects: Even
so the intimate presence of the three Divine Persons in the justified Soul,
should oblige me to pay her my most humble Respects and Homages.

The Patriarchs and Prophets, did with frequent Sighs wish and long for that
Happy day which was appointed from all Eternity, to let them see the Messiah.
Ah! Earth, they would say, open your bosom, and spread wide open your womb to
bring us forth the fruit of life, the Flower of the field, the Lilly of the
valleys. Heavens! give free passage to the sweet influence of that Celestial
dew, which has been so long since promised to us. Moments shall be to us as
days; Days as Years, Years as Ages, and Ages as Eternity, until we see, (the
expected by all Nations,) Jesus the Redeemer of the World. Let him come, he
shall possess our Hearts, and have our Affections; let him be Incarnate, we
will Adore him; let him appear, and we will all follow him.

If I durst authorize the design of this little work on the ardent Sighs of
Patriarchs and Prophets, and on their earnest desire to see Jesus in the state
of his last Nitivity. I might say, that all the following discourses are but so
many wishes lanc'd toward that happy moment, wherein we shall see Souls
disclose their Breasts, and enlarge their Affections, to give a free passage to
the Sacred influences of the Divine Spirit, who may give therein a second
Nativity to Jesus. Wishes, which the Ancient Bishop of Sevile did express in
handsome terms, and in the name of the Church, Laetare ergo in Domino, eo quod
non sis fraudata a defiderio tuo: nam quos tanto tempore gemitu tristi and
oratione continua concepisti, nunc post glaciem hyemis, post duritiem frigoris,
post asperitatem nivis velut secundam agrorum frugem, and laetos veris flores,
vel arridentes vinearum stipitibus palmites repent in gaudio peperisti. Leand.
episc. Epispal. orat. de convers. Gothorum.
which had seen the accomplishment thereof in the Conversion of the Goths.
Rejoice you in the Lord, O Mother, for a time sad and very much perplexed;
because you have not been disappointed in your expectations, for at one only
Birth you have engendered an Infinite number of People to your Christ: Them that
you have conceived so long ago by the sadness of your Tears, and the
continuation of your Prayers; you see them now engendered to your great
satisfaction and joy; even as we see with content a Rich Harvest in the fields;
the Flowers of Springtime on little Hills, and Blossoms on the Vine-trees;
after the Frost of Winter, and when the sharpness of Cold and Snow are gone and
past.

CHAP. III. Who ought to be the Father in this second Nativity.
THough humane nature has produced a Mother to the Son of God, yet it was not
in her Power to give him a Father; and if it had, she would not presume to
offer him one, for fear of losing the value and dignity of the price which this
Divine Child was to give, for the payment of our Debts: If he be called the Son
of man, It Is either, as St. Epiphane remarks, that it is he who ought to be
Incarnate; according to the prediction of the Prophets; Epiph. Adversus
naetianos, her. 57.
or, as St. Gregory of Nazianzen observes, Because he was descended from Adam
the common Father of Mortals by the way of our Blessed Lady: D. Greg. orat. 4.
de Theol.
But the most solid reason in my judgment, is, that of St. Augustine, who will
have that the Messiah be called the Son of man by a certain Antithesis, to let
us understand the difference that is between his Divine and his Humane
Filiation: And that the qualities he bears grounded on the rights of his
Eternal Birth on his Fathers side, are different from what he has founded on
the Prerogatives of his Temporal Birth on his Mothers side.

What a solid Answer St. Peter gives, ^^h. 16.13.
who being questioned by Jesus Christ, What did the World think of the Son of
man? Answered; You are Christ, Son of the living God: All the rest were of so
shallow a judgment, as to believe that some mortal man was Father to Jesus, as
well as to St. John the Baptist, and to the Prophet Elias; But St. Peter, who
already came to understand the secrets of his Master, made a public
confession, and an open acknowledgment of his Divine Filiation. Ah! Peter,
replies Jesus, My Father has discovered unto you the Mystery, and has told you
that I had no Father on Earth.

It is true then, that our Savior has but one Heavenly Father; Christus non de
substantia Spiritus Sancti, sed de potentia, nec generatione, sed jussione and
benedictione conceptus est, D. Aug. ser. 6. de temp. tom. 10.
But on Earth he is conceived of the Holy Ghost in the Sacred womb of the
Virgin Mary; not by way of Emanation, as in the bosom of the Father: For as St.
Augustine subtly remarks, He does not proceed from the Substance, but by the
Power of the Holy Ghost, not by way of Generation, but by way of command and by
Celestial Benediction.

If we must thus speak of the Paternity of the Messiah in the Incarnation of
the Eternal word, whom must we acknowledge to be the true Father of the second
Child formed according to the model of the first: I say, that neither of both
has a Father on Earth, and that the Holy Ghost has supplied the Office of a
Father to both: For as the Angel Ambassador to assure the Virgin, (who having
banished from her heart all love of Worldly Creatures,) could not comprehend
how she could be a Mother; Luc. 1. v. 35.
told her presently, Paraclitus autem Spiritus quem mittet Pater in nomine meo
ille vos docebit omnia Joan. 4. v. 26. Ego rogabo patrem and alium paraclitum
dabit vobis, ut m^neat vobiscumin aeternum Spiritum veritatis, ibid. v. 16.
That the Holy Ghost should come upon her, that the Virtue of the most high
should over-shadow her, and that the Holy who should be born of her, should be
called the Son of God; So our Savior, before he mounted up to Heaven, assured
his Apostles, who could not conceive the height of the Mysteries committed unto
them, That he would send the Holy Ghost, who by the infusion of his Graces
would come within our Hearts, pouring himself into our Souls; Alium paraclitum
nominavit non juxta naturae differentiam sed juxta operationis diversitatem
Didimus in Cathena.
would frame them all according to the word Incarnate, to form thereof another
Jesus Christ; That being so, may I not lawfully say that the Holy Ghost does
perform the Duty and Parts of a Father to both.

Non enim accepistis Spiritum servitutis iterum in timore, sed accepistis
Spiritum adoptionis filiorum in quo clamamus Abba pater Romans 48.1.16.
This is St. Paul's Doctrine in his Epistle to the Romans, where, after he had
said, That such as suffer the operation of the Spirit of God, are the Children
of God set at liberty, and freed from all slavish fear: He Imprints in their
hearts the same pretensions of Love which he had imprinted in the heart of
Jesus, toward the recognizance of the one and self same Father, who both adopt
them after the coming, and their receiving the Holy Ghost; an active Adoption
which is particularly attributed to the Holy Ghost; for though that Grace and
all her appurtenances are common Goods flowing from the liberal distributions
of the whole Trinity; yet because Love is a property of the Holy Ghost, and as
the Graces which we receive from him, are beams derived from that love, he
reserves to himself those communications by right of property.

The same Apostle goes on to confirm the certainty of that Adoptive Filiation,
when he says, That the Holy Ghost gives Testimony to our Spirit, Ipse enim
Spiritus, testimonium reddit Spiritui nostro quod sumus Filii Dei. Romans 8. v.
16.
that we are the Children of God, I know that our Adversaries giving a sinister
interpretation to this passage, would fain say that this testimony gives them
an assurance of Faith, Qui habet testimonium salvabitur, non damnabitur, ecce
ergo Spiritus obligans adoptans and testificans.
of the necessity of their Salvation; and that therefore their Conscience ought
to be free from all fear; But it is to give the Lie to St. Paul, who speaking
of himself in another place, dares not assure himself of his Justification,
though his Conscience be without any remorse of Crime; Nicol. Gozram in hunc
locum.
his design was only to fortify our hopes, but still notwithstanding he will
have us, to work out our Salvation with fear and Trembling. 1 Cor. cap. 4.


For this Testimony is not of Faith, nor of Infallibility, but of conjecture
only and of moral confidence: St. Basil gives you the form of it; Basil. in
reg. Brevioribus interog. 296.
For some one asking him the question, what certainty could we have of being
the Children of God? he answers; That if (laying our hand to our breast,) we
can say with David, I hate Iniquity, I have cherished, and always fulfilled the
Law, I have praised my Creator seven times a day, at midnight my custom is, and
always was, to get up and confess my sins, I did ever shun bad Company, and had
always Justice for the Rule of my Actions; or else, if we find that we have the
three conditions quoted by St. Bernard, Bern. de 4. orandi modis.
viz. A Spirit elevated toward Heaven, a Body subject to reason, and an ardent
desire to advance still in Virtue; If you find your self so composed, you may
lawfully conceive a moral certainty of your Salvation, but never look further
for an Infallible certainty, which might bring you to a false Peace, an enemy
to your Salvation, which ought to be wrought out with fear and diffidence.

This was St. Gregory's advice to the noble Matron Gregoria, who instantly
prayed him to give her satisfaction in this point; Daughter, says he, you tell
me, Rem and difficilem and inutilem postulasti: difficilem quidem, quia
indignus ego sum cui revelatio fieri debeat: Inutilem vero quia secura de
peccatis tuis fieri non debes, nisi cum jam in die vitae tuae ultimo, plangere
eadem peccata non vobis. D. Greg. l. 6. epist. ep. 186.
that you will not let me rest, until that I do assure you, that your Sins are
forgiven you, and that hereafter you may presume to be the Adoptive Daughter of
the Holy Ghost; your demand is both difficult and without profit; difficult,
because that I hold my self unworthy of the honor and privilege of having
Revelations; without profit, for you ought not to hope nor desire the
infallible assurance of the remission of your Sins, until the last breath of
your life be spent, when you shall have no more the power to be sorry for them.

Look at St. Paul, who, though rapt up to the third Heavens, where he had so
many Revelations, yet he Chastises his Body, and Mortifies his Flesh, for fear,
That Preaching to others, he should become a Reprobate himself: And you that
creep like a worm on Earth, would you fain live in Security! That is not
reasonable, dear and well-beloved Daughter; too great a security is the Mother
of Carelessness; he that will not watch, having his enemy hard by, does expose
himself to the danger of loosing his Life; we must be always upon our Guard so
long as we have occasion for Fighting.

Though these Verities cannot be contradicted, and that the Testimony which our
Spirit may give us to be the Children of God, Quod testimonium reddit per
effectum amoris filialis quem in nobis faciat, D. Thom. in hunc locum.
is not Infallible; however That ought not to be taken but as to Us, and in the
knowledge which we may have of it; but as for the Holy Ghost, it is most
certain of a certainty of Faith; that supposing the Grace of God in a man, he
is truly the adopted Son of the Holy Ghost; because Grace cannot proceed but
from that Eternal beginning, St. James is of the same opinion; for he says,
That all gifts come from above; whence it follows, that not finding a Father
on Earth for this second Child, we may justly derive his Pedigree from Heaven.

CHAP. IV. That there is in this Nativity, a supposed Father, as well as in
that of Jesus.
SOme would fain take away from St. Joseph the Title of Lawful Spouse of our
Blessed Lady, because he was not the true Father of our Lord Jesus; perhaps
they grounded themselves on that Ancient Tradition quoted by St. John
Damascene, Nicephorus, Damasc. lib. de fide 15. Nicephor. ex Euodio. lib. 1.
cap. 7. Andreas Cret. orat. de dormitione virg.
Andrew of Crete and other Authors, viz. That the Virgins which were kept in
the Temple, when they came to be Marriagable, were to be returned home to their
Parents houses; But because that the Parents of the Blessed Virgin were already
deceased; the Priests, to whom it belonged to provide for them in that case,
thought it fit to deliver her over to Joseph, only to be Guardian of her
Chastity; That Tradition might be further Authorized by some certain Expression
that the Fathers make use of; as St. Chrysologue, Josephus maritus solo nomine,
conscientia sponsus. Chrysol. ser. 175. D. Bern. Hom. 2. in Evang. Missus.
who calls Joseph a Husband by Name, and a Spouse by Conscience; as St. Bernard
who gives him the Title of Man, because he was a Man of Virtue, and no Married
Man,

I grant that Joseph is not the true, Filius ut putabatur Joseph Luke 1.
but the supposed Father only of our Lord; Yet it cannot be concluded thence,
that he was not the Lawful Spouse of our Lady, such bad Philosophy might bring
us to stumble and totter in our Faith; for the words of St. Luke are to be
understood literally; where it is said, Suarez in 3 part Tom. 2. q, 29. disp.
7. sect. 1.
That the Angel Gabriel is sent to Mary, Spouse to a man by Name Joseph.
Theology teaches us to distinguish three considerable things in Marriage, viz.
The Contract, the Cohabitation, and the Use; the Contract is a mutual Consent
of both Parties, who do engage themselves willingly by a mutual Protestation of
Marriage; the Cohabitation is when both come to live together, with a
Resolution to partake each of them jointly, the Labors and Toyls of a Family;
and the use is the Power which both parties have to concur unanimously to the
lawful Propagation of their Generation: That last part, (without speaking of
the second) is not of the Essence of Marriage, as you may find in the Decree of
Eugenius, in the Council of Florence, and in the four and twentieth Session of
that of Trent; and reason makes it appear; for in the Marriage of Adam, which
was a true Marriage, whilst they were in the Terrestial Paradise, it is most
evident, they came not to enjoy the Rights of that Society: So that the mutual
consent of Wills, without the use; completing essentially Marriage, Joseph
must be the true Spouse of Mary, though he be but the supposed Father of Jesus.

It Is an Honor, and the ground of all his greatness; for if St. Gregory
Nazianzen, willing to comprehend (in short) all what could be said to the
advantage of his Brother-in-Law, was content to conclude with these words,
Supremumscalae gradum cui Dominus innixus est Joseph obtinet, sed quomodo Deus
and Dominus huic homini inixus est? utique tanquam tutori pupillus, quippe qui
in hoc mundo sine pater natus est. Ruper. l. 3. de divin. of. and l. 1. de
glor. and hon. fill. hom.
That he was the Husband of Gorgonia; so it is enough to say, that Joseph is
the supposed Father of Jesus, for to comprehend in few words all that ever
could be invented to set forth his praise, and extol his merit; This made the
Abbot Rupert, (comparing the Genealogy of our Savior to Jacobs Ladder,) say,
That Joseph was the last step thereof, and that on that step Jesus does rest
himself sweetly, as the Orphan in the Arms of his Guardian; who, though he be
not his Natural Father, must perform the Duty of a Father to him, as well to
relieve the Mother in her necessities, as to Foster and Cherish the Child to
the utmost of his Power.

That being granted, who shall be the supposed Father of the Child of Grace,
and of the Soul formed on the Word-Incarnate, by the operation of the Holy
Ghost? Filioli mei quos iterum partutio donec formetur in vobis Christus, Gal.
4. v. 19
St. Paul would fain assume unto himself that Title of Honor, when he speaks
these words, My little Children of whom I travail in Birth again until that
Christ be formed in you. Quidnam aluo illo beatius fuit qui tales filios parere
potuit, qui in se Christum haberent. D. Chrysostom. tom. 5. hom. 10. de poenit.
versus initium.
My dear Reader, here is what deserves a serious consideration; to beget, is an
Action of a Father, and yet the Child who is to proceed from that Generation,
must be called Christ: It must be then, that St. Paul is not the true Father;
for had he been the right Father, he must then have been called Paul, as he
was; But having the name Christ, it must of necessity follow, that he is but
the supposed Father; and as this Christ of whom St. Paul speaks, Deus unicum
quem genuerat, and per quem cuncta creaverat, misit in hunc mundum ut non esset
unus, sed fratres haberet adoptates. Aug. tract. 2 in cap. 1. Joan.
cannot be the proper Son of the Virgin Mary, to whom St. Joseph is supposed
Father, as we have already said, we must conclude that he must be some other
Christ like unto him, and his Brother by Adoption; This is what I call Child of
Grace whom the Holy Ghost forms on the Word-Incarnate

The Apostle explains, by the comparison of a Gardener, how this quality befits
himself, I have planted, Apollo did water, Ego plantavi, Apollo rigavit, Deus
autem incrementum dedit. 1 Cor. cap. 3. verse. 7.
but God gave the Increase; and soon after he adds, That he who plants, as well
as he who waters, are nothing, all the Honor ought to be referred to God, who
gives the Increase; Petilian a Donatist falsifying these words of St. Paul,
does construe them thus, I made a Proselite in Christ, Apollo Baptized him, and
God has confirmed what Apollo and I have done; this interpretation is bad, for
betwixt Doing, and confirming what is done, there is great difference: Thus God
both makes and creates the Tree, the Flowers and the Fruit; he does then
something more than to confirm.

But why should we trouble our Heads to find out the Apostle's meaning, being
that he does explain himself: He hints at the Corinthians, who under color of
Piety gave overture to a Scandalous Schism; the one saying, that they belonged
to Paul, others to Apollo, every one boasting to have had for Master in the
Faith him who labored most to work their Conversion; Are you not as yet, says
he, Adhuc enim carnales estis cum enim sit inter vos zelos and contentio, nonne
carnales estis, and secundum hominem ambulantes, 1 Cor. v. 2.
altogether flesh and blood? and your Thoughts are they not altogether humane?
Do you know well what are Paul and Apollo? They are his Ministers to whom you
have engaged your Faith, forsaking the Synagogues of the Jews to embrace the
Gospel of Christ; they are Laborers, who Plant and Water, and nothing else; We
are but simple Instruments, who can work no further than Outwardly: God is the
only Agent and chief cause, who gives Life, Vigor, and a full accomplishment
to the Spiritual Generation: As if he had said, he is the true Father, we are
only the supposed.

Coelest. Hier. cap. 3. Ea demum cuilibet Divinae distinctioni dedito,
perfectio est pro modo suo ad Dei imitationem totis conatibus eniti, quodque
praestantius omnibus est ac divinius, ut sacra testantur eloquia, Dei
cooperatores fieri, divinamque in se operationem quantum potest palam cunctis
ostendere,
The Divine Areopagite extols highly the excellency of that supposed Paternity,
by giving to those Evangelical persons, who labor for the Conversion of Souls,
the Honor to be God's Co-adjutors in the Redemption of the World; For speaking
of the Celestial Hierarchy, he says, That she makes it her employment to treat
of Gods most high and Sacred Mysteries, as also to express in her self in as
much as possible, his Divine operations, to communicate his Light to their
subordinate Creatures; that is, (says he) the continual Study and Office of the
Angels in Heaven; But that of Apostolical men on Earth is nothing inferior,
being they are the men appointed by God to distribute and Communicate his
Sacred Mysteries to his People. Ita que pontifex in dies ad dei similitudinem
omnes homines salvos fieri cupiens and ad agnitionem venire veritatis,
praedicat omnibus vera Evangelia. D. Dionis. Eccles Hierar. c 2. Statim initio.
They are the true Imitators of his Divine operations: For to work the
Conversion of a Sinner, what is it else, than to draw the Copy and Resemblance
of our Savior in a Soul? It is to Organize and prepare a heart to receive a
Celestial Form which gives it life.

The self-same consideration moved St. Paul to speak thus to the Corinthians, 1
Cor. c. 4. v. 15 Nam si december milia paedagogorum habeatis in Christo, sed non
multos patres, cum in Christo Jesu per Evangelium ego vos genui.
Though you may have ten thousand Pedagogues, yet you have but few Fathers; I
am He who is your Father, for I have engendered you to Jesus by the Seed of the
Gospel, wherein he makes a notable distinction between Pedagogy and Paternity:
Verbum Dei est semen, quo Apostolus eos genuit verbo veritatis. D. Tho. hic.
Pater est qui primo generat paedagogus autem est quijam natum nutrit and
erudit. Id. Ibid.
For though the one and the other have Infancy for Object: the Pedagogues
design is to give them a slight Instruction, tending to I know not what of
Civility and Humanity, to appear among the wise of the World: The Spiritual
Father has other kind of Thoughts, for such as he begets to Jesus, they have
nothing of Humane, nothing of the World, does Grace animate them, does Love
conduct them, and Heaven is their only aim: And all that he pretends by the
exercise of that Spiritual Discipline and Mystic Education, is to form many
Children on the Word- Incarnate, and render them capable to sit one day with
Honor and Glory at the Table of their Eternal Father.

He that does otherwise, is condemned of Adultery by St. Gregory, (...)
cauponantes.
for commenting on the words of the Apostle, where he says, We are not as some
people who Adulterate, or, according to the Greek Translation, Who cook up the
word of God: Adulter quippe, non prolem, sed voluptatem quaerit, sic perversus
ac vanae gloriae serviens, recte adulterari verbum Dei dicitur, quia per sacrum
elo quium, non Deo filios gignere sed suam scientiam desiderat ostentare. D.
Greg. l. 6. mo. al. cap. 28.
he remarks, That he is an Adulterer, who in the Sacrament of Marriage aims at
nothing else but to cover and cloak the Insolency of the Flesh; and to enjoy at
ease his Brutish Pleasures: Even so the Preacher ought to be esteemed an
Adulterer, who in the Exercises of his Charge scorns the Spiritual Generation
of the Children of God, but puffs up his heart with vain and foolish
pretentions, and runs like a Thirsty Deer after the Applause and Praise of the
People: These are the Infallible marks of a bad Faith, and of a worse
Conscience.

CHAP. V. That the Delivery and Birth of this Child must be in Pain and Sorrow.
IT is to offend the Catholic Belief, to give out, or believe that the Virgin
Mary bore her Child Jesus in Pain and Sorrow: For to Groan is a Legacy left by
our Forefathers to such as are Criminals only: The Virgin which never was
attainted with the least spot, was never also condemned to the least
Punishment; and though she has been the Mother of a Son of Sorrow, yet she was
safely delivered of Him without the least feeling of either Pain or Sorrow.

It is also to my thinking, Tostat. in c. 12. levit. 9. q. 24.
a blemish to Christian Piety, to say, that her bearing of Jesus was
accompanied with the emission of her Blood, which can hardly be done without
Violence, Rupture, or Contusion; if that were so, Vide Suar. tom. 273. p. 935.
disp. 13. sect. 2.
how can we free her from Sorrow? Doubtless the Holy Ghost had so great a
tenderness for that rare piece of work, as not to suffer that it should be born
in the filth of a superfluous Blood, he had so great a care of both the Mother
and Child, as not to have them to be exposed to the shame of that uncleanness,
which is only incident to the Criminal and common race of Adam.

No, no, her happy Delivery was without those Infections of Blood, she was far
from those Infirmities of Nature, not only from those that are the punishments
of Sin, but also from those which cannot subsist with the Holiness of this
Mystery: Stulte unde sordes in Virgin Matre, ubi non est concubitus cum homine
Patre. D. Aug. tract. 20. cont. faustum cap. 3. and lib. de 5. haeres. c. 5.
It is a main folly, says St. Augustine, to look for dirt in a Virgin Mother,
who never permitted the approaches of any Man-Father: And it is for that reason
that she was not subject to the Laws of Purification, because, that in Breeding
she was of the Nature of the Lillies, or, as St. Cpyrian will have it, Jesus
proceeds from her Womb, Maria genitrix and obstetrix, nullus dolor, nulla
naturae contumelia in hoc puerperio. D. Cyprian. ser. de not.
as the Fruit does from the Tree, and the Beams from the Sun; whence he
concludes, That in this Sacred and secret business, she wanted not the
assistance of a Midwife, because that all filth and Infection of Nature was far
from her pure and spotless Childbirth.

We must not think the same of the second Nativity; for if there be question to
bring forth a Soul according to the model of the Word- Incarnate: If the term
and time be come to expose this fruit to the view of the World, what violence,
what pangs, what sorrows, what emissions of Blood must be and appear, and we
must not think it strange, if the Mother that bears the Fruit be condemned to
the sorrows of Childbearing; this Truth shall appear more in its luster, if we
will but understand who is that Mother of sorrow.

God has appeared to be nothing less provident in the order of the Generation
of Grace, than he has been in that of the Generation of Nature; for even as he
provided Women of a Vessel fit for the reception of matter, whereof their fruit
is formed and organized to a certain time of increase; at which they are
brought by the powerful and provident hand of God, to breath and enjoy at their
ease the common life; so says St. Ambrose, Ita est quaedam virtus animae, unae
velut quodam vulvae genitalis secreto, cogitationum nostratum suscipere semina,
conceptus fovere parts solet edere, harum gerationum quaedam foeminine sunt,
quaedam masculinae, etc. D. Amb. li. 1. de Cain. and Abel cap. 10. infine.
God has put in the Soul of Man a certain Virtue, as a Vessel to receive the
Seed of Good Thoughts and Heavenly Inspirations, whereof is formed and
organized the fruit of Life, which often miscarries by the common corruption of
Nature; so that often it falls out, that among those Generations, some are
Feminine, others Masculine: The Feminine are Malice, Wantonness, Letchery,
Intemperance, Impudence: The Masculine are Chastity, Patience, Prudence,
Temperance, Force and Justice.

In the following Book he continues to give an advice, which may very much
import to that sort of Generation, and this is it, never to delay or put off
our delivery, for fear that the same misfortune, which our Savior threatens us
with in St. Luke, Festina igitur anima, etc. paulo inferius, and in illo
genitali alvo animae nostrae Christus refulgeat. D. Amb l. 2. de Cain and Abel.
c. 1. Statim initio.
should fall on our heads, for our overmuch delay to bring forth our fruit into
Light: He will have us with all our force to press on that Celestial
formation, to be the sooner happy to see a Beautiful Sweet Jesus, who with his
Charms may banish from our hearts the remembrance of what labors and toil we
were in to produce him.

Sicut quae concipit cum appropin quaverit ad partum, dolens clamat in
doloribus suis sic facti sumus a faciae tua Domine concepimus and quasi
parturivimus Spiritum (salutis.) Isa. c. 26. v. 17.
That being supposed, it is easy to make out, that the Childbearing of a true
Conversion, is always accompanied with grief: The Prophet I say is my Author
for it: Even as the Woman, (says he,) who is near her time, and oppressed with
the pangs and pains of her Labor, roars out, weeps and laments her distressed
state and condition; so O Lord, before your face we are become to bring forth
the Spirit of our Salvation, as if he had said in plainer terms, Lord you have
been eyewitness of our Sterility, you have seen how could we were, and how
slow to receive and make good use of your Admonishments, what an undervalue we
have always set on your Inspirations and Graces; this has brought on our
criminal and guilty heads a deal of afflictions and crosses, Paulus non semel
sed bis filios parturivit, and clamavit dicens filioli mei quos iterum
parivrio, id adeo mulier nunquam pateretur neque susferret eosdem iterum
dolores, sed tolerabat holl Paulus quod in natura non est videri: nam and annum
totum saepe numero parturivit Paulus atque haud conceptos peperit. D. Chrysol.
to. 5. hom. 10. de poenit. verse. 5. principium.
which have pressed down our bodies to Misery, and replenished our Souls with
Grief and Sorrow. It has brought from our Eyes bitter Tears, and in this excess
of our Grief and Sorrow, we have conceived and produced the Spirit of
Salvation, which undoubtedly had otherwise perished in our hearts, as well as
the Fawn in her Dams belly, had not the noise and thundering of your Treatnings
hast'ned her safe delivery.

The great and mighty Cry which our Savior gave upon the Cross at the Sealing
up of his Life with that heavy Sigh, by which, as another Rachel at the
expiration of her nine Months, he engendered Sinners, the Children of his main
Grief and Sorrow, is a sufficient strong argument to make you believe that you
shall never purchase Heaven, nor attain to any considerable stock of Virtue but
by the Touchstone of Mortification and Penance; For if Heaven suffers
Violence, and that the Son of God had it upon that account, how can we pretend
to it at a cheaper rate. Whatever way you look upon this Spiritual Generation,
it can never be accomplished without Grief: For first, if you look upon the
Soul when she receives the first Seed of the word of God; what trouble, what
pains she is in, to conceive the Fruit of Life, what resistance she finds in
her self to a strong resolution of Amendment. A little more of my Unlawful
Pleasures, says St. Augustine; to morrow; to morrow, I will withdraw from the
World, and quit all my evil Inclinations; but why not this day? See the Battle,
re-mark the resistance; we ought to stand always in fear of some bad issue in
us of the word of God; seeing we are so backward to receive it, Nec statim
finis industriae, addidisse; sed tunc alterius laboris exord^um est, ut
lactentem infantiam sedulis nutrimentis and studiis usque ad plenam Christi
perducat aetatem. D. Hier. in c. 3. ad Galat.
so unwilling to entertain it, and so prone to blot it clear out of our hearts:
Moreover, what pains is man at to bring this fruit to perfection, when once
conceived; he must have it always in his arms, wrapped it up in Clouts, give it
the Tunick of a right intention, and the double Vest of Charity, until that it
comes to the perfect Age of Jesus.

But if this Seed be cast on a malicious and stony Heart, what violence must
there be to bring that fruit of Life to Perfection, and tear assunder the
obdurate Skin and Sinews of that rusty body of our inveterate malice: What
streams of Blood must run from the Mothers Womb, and what cruel Gripings must
she suffer before she comes to be delivered, no love for the World, nor there
must be no Friendship for Flesh and Blood; These are the preparations
absolutely required by the Prophet-Royal to make this new born Child appear in
his full luster to the World; Funes peccatorum circumplexi sunt me. Psalm. 118.
The number of my Sins, (says he,) has made up for my poor Soul a net of Ropes,
wherein all Inspirations from Heaven are entangled and Putrified, Putruerunt
and corruptae sunt cicatrices meae a facie insipientiae meae. Psalm. 37. v. 6.
as if they had fallen into a most rotten Sink. My continual folly, and my
re-iterating so often my Crimes, has thoroughly corrupted my Sores, but my
Remedy is near at hand, a True Repentance to have ever offended so Patient and
Merciful a God, and therefore by the assistance of his Holy Grace, I will break
loose the Cords of all my Abominations and Crimes; Laboravi clamans raucae
factae sunt fauces meae. Psalm. 68. v. 4.
and will cry and call so long to the Heavens for relief to my weak endeavors,
that my Voice shall become altogether Hoarse: Was ever poor man so intangl'd in
the Ropes of his Old Imperfections, as St. Augustine was? But was ever poor man
so perplexed? or did ever any man labor so much to get loose, as he did, in
his Confessions he would move a stony heart to compassion; Here you may see him
stretched on the ground, and suffer as much as one troubled with a
Wind-Collick, there you may perceive him get up of a sudden, as one troubled
with a Convulsion-fit, here the running streams of his bitter tears make a
channel from his Eyes over all his Face, there he lies in his sad dumps without
any feeling; he goes, Ecce intus eras, and ego foris, and ibi te quaerebam and
in ista formosa quae fecisti defermis irruebam me cum eras, and iterum non
eram: vocasti and clamasti, and rupisti suditatem meam, fragrasta and duxi
S^ritum and anhelo tihi, gustani and esurio, tetigisti me and exarsi in pacem
tuam. D. Aug. tom. 1. lib. 10. confess c. 27. per totam.
he comes, he speaks like one Distracted, he is so tormented with his evil, he
calls God to his assistance, he arms himself with Impatience against himself,
his Spirit sets him on, but his Flesh retains him, he will and will not, and by
not willing what he wills, he puts himself to a deal of pain; he sees that he
must of necessity Break loose with the Devil, if he aims to serve God, and
enjoy his Glory: But the old acquaintance of Ladies, those alluring and
deceiptful pleasures of the World (heretofore his greatest Joy and only
Recreation,) now look at him with a Smiling countenance, and renew his wounds
to make him miscarry. Augustine, your doleful expressions moves me to
compassion; but you must have Patience. It Is a Sentence pronounced at the Bar,
and by the Conclave of the Blessed Trinity, that your Delivery must be with
Grief and Sorrow, and that you must undergo a great deal of hardship if you do
intend to bring forth another Jesus on the Model of the Word-Incarnate.

CHAP. VI. That this Sorrowful Delivery is the Accomplishment of the
Word-Incarnate.
ACcomplishment is a term, and a way of speaking much used by Philosophers to
express the last perfection of each Nature, either in the constitution of her
bare Being, or in the further flourishing or ornament of her well-Being; And as
in the division of Beings there are found four sorts, Metaphysical, Physical,
Moral and Artificial; so each has his accomplishment, as well Essential as
Accidental: I do not here take the word Accidental in its rigorous
signification, for that which can be, and not be, without the corruption of its
subject; but only for all that does not enter into the precise constitution of
the Essence: Let us leave those terms to Philosophers.

Let us come to the point, and say that the Incarnation may be reduced to many
states: First, if we do consider it in the Eternal and Infinite Conceptions of
God, not as yet determined by the difference of times, then its Essential
accomplishment shall be Gods Eternal determination of the same ( viz.) That
among many other means which he might make choice of for to work the Redemption
of man, he resolved the Incarnation of his dearly beloved Son, with an
obligation of Suffering, which determination puts a stop to all other possible
ways of Redemption to bring it to that of a Suffering and Crucified Love. And
in so doing, I may reduce the Incarnation to a Metaphysical state: But the
Physical state is that Hypostatical Union ever to be Adored, which has joined
together in the fullness of time those Extremities so far assunder, the Divine
and Humane Nature; and which has given us the Divine Child Jesus and only
delights of mankind for to put in Execution that work so much importing the
Welfare and Happiness of all Mortals.

The Incarnation in its Moral Being, Haurietis aquas in gaudio de fontibus
Salvatoris, Is. 12. v. 3.
is the wonderful Virtue of the Divine Sacraments, which the Prophet-Royal
calls, The Fountains of our Savior, whence we ought to receive with joy the
Waters of Grace, which may conduce us to an everlasting Life: So Baptism that
represents his Death, the Eucharist his Birth, the Sacrament of Penance his
Resurrection, are Moral Causes, which by their formal Effects, the Essential
accomplishment of their Nature confers us Grace by the Virtue of the first
Agent, to whom they are only Instruments.

As for the Artificial Incarnation, they are the amorous inventions of the Holy
Ghost, which bring along with them as many particular differences, as they have
diverse Motives to bring us to good: And as the Painter's design is never to
leave off until he compleats the Pourtract according as he conceived it in his
mind; even so the Holy Ghost whom our Savior does promise to send to his
Church, has for the Sacred Object of his employment; to labor with so much
Industry to the Conversion of sinners, that he will never give over his
undertaking, until he forms in our hearts the perfect image of Jesus; unless we
do oppose him so far by our evil ways, as to oblige him to withdraw his hand
from us, as from a piece of work altogether incapable of his impressions.

Delens quid adversum not erat chirographum decreti quo erat contrarium nobis
and ipsum tulit de medio affigens illud cruci, Col. c. 2. v. 14.
The Incarnation in its essential accomplishment is brought so far to its last
Perfection, that no more can be added to it; for the Essences are like numbers,
which suffer no further Addition, without an alteration of their Species; Jesus
has paid our Ransom in rigor of Justice: The Title fixed on the Cross in all
Languages makes it out, says St. Paul; He found us a Sovereign Remedy to Cure
us of all our Evils; Justitia Dei per fidem Jesu Christi in omnes and super
omnes qui credunt in eum. Romans c. 3. v. 22.
there is nothing wanting on his side to the general good of our Redemption;
but in as much as the general merit of the Incarnation, before it brings to any
one the particular efficacy of its influences, does include an actual
application on our side, as an absolute condition of Contract, the which not
being performed, does make all void; we may say that its accidental
Accomplishment is performed by the actual application of this general remedy;
without which the Passion of the Son of God, though of Infinite Merit in it
self, shall be to me altogether unprofitable; so that I shall remain in
Darkness, and sit in the shadow of Death, if I do not by a special concurrance
of my liberty work efficatiously the accomplishment of my own Salvation.

St. Paul comprehends all what I have said in few words; A dimpleo ea quae
desunt passionibus Christi. Colos. c. 1. v. 24
I do fulfill (says he) what things are wanting to the Passion of Christ: I
know that the Heretic Besa on a Commentary, falsely Fathered upon St. Ambrose,
instead of these words, I fulfill the things that are wanting, sets down, I
fulfill the rest; but his explication is groundless and without any reason,
being that (the rest) means something of an abundance, and a surplus of a full
sum; (...).
It does also import a great deal of ignorance of the very Rudiments of
Grammar; for the Greek word in its natural signification is only taken for a
defect or want of some accidental Perfection, (...).
which is further explained by the word Accomplish, which in the Greek is taken
as well for to Accomplish, as for to Supply what is wanting of any thing.

The Angelical Doctor St. D. Tohm. hic in comment.
Thomas takes this Accomplishment of what is wanting for a part of the Eternal
Decree not as yet fulfilled; which are the Merits and Cooperation of the
Mystical Body of Jesus Christ. The Head who is Jesus, and whose Merits are
Infinite, has acquired his last Perfection; but his Members who are his
Faithful Sons, and who by proportion must have their particular merits, receive
not their Accomplishment but by measure, and according as they do suffer with
Christ.

Usque adeo praesentibus non terreor persecutionibus, ut mihi parum esse
videatur quod patior quoadusque in me passio impleatur D. Hier. in c. 1 ad
Colos.
It is therefore St. Paul says, That he does supply the part which is wanting of
that Eternal Decree, by afflicting his own Body; and that, without any
intermission, as St. Jerome remarks, until that the Passion of Christ be fully
completed, and accomplished in him.

Arboreus taking the matter in another Sense, says, that the Apostles and the
Evangelical persons, who by the obligation of their Charge are called to the
Conversion of Souls, Idcirco hunc bonorum omnium, autorem pro ratione nostri
officij praedicamus, suscipimus and extollimus, monentes unum quemque ut
studeat pro viribus in Christo perfectus evadere.

Arbor^s in c. 1. Col.


have for Employment to go over all the World with the Son of Gods Decrees and
Orders, and to supply in men's hearts the Sacrament of their particular
Conversion in the Absence of Jesus, who is no more on earth by his Corporal and
Visible Presence: Would you not say, to hear this Doctor speak, that he takes
Jesus for a great Physician, and that he looks upon the Apostles and Preachers
as so many Apothecaries. Jesus, before he died, did fix his Receipts for our
Salvation upon the Cross: The Apostles peruse them, compose the Medicines, and
give it to the Sick to be taken.

Venancius Fortunatus to parallel the two Apostles, S. Peter and S. Paul, calls
them the Gates of Heaven and the two Lanthorns of the Universe, who by Orders
from Heaven bring Light over all the World, and labor to accomplish what is
wanting to the Passion of the Son of God: The one pours out of his Mouth
Inflaming Words to bring the good to a high Perfection; the other lets fly from
his Pulpit Thunders to frighten Sinners: St. Peter holds the first Place by
virtue of his Charge and Supremacy; but St. Paul surpasses him by his Profound
Doctrine and Preaching; as many as the one acquires by force of his Arguments
and rare Eloquence, Corda per hunc hominum referantur, and astra per illum.

Quos docet ille stylo, suscipit iste polo. Fort. l. 3. Carmin^m.


(as chief Orator of the Church;) the other receives them into Glory, as
appointed Porter of Heaven by Jesus Christ; and both strive with a Holy
Emulation, who shall best fill the Vacant Seats of the Revolted Angels with
Souls Converted by them to a True Repentance.

These things supposed, I may lawfully say, without any offense to the Maxims
of Theology, that this Delivery is the Accomplishment of the Word-Incarnate;
being that without the actual application of the Infinite Merits of our
Savior, which is the main scope of all his Sufferings, the Incarnation had
been altogether unprofitable to each one in particular; though most sufficient
of it self to work the general Redemption of mankind: So the Beams of the Sun,
though they be of their own nature capable to Heat and Enlighten yet they
cannot work those effects on Bodies that will not admit of their Influences.

CHAP. VII. That it is the Angel of Great Council who brings to the Soul the
Word of her Conversion.
D. Thom. 22. q. 174.
IT is certain that our Blessed Virgin was thoroughly instructed in the Mystery
of the Incarnation in general; however she knew not that her self in particular
was appointed to be the Mother of the Emanuel, Spiritualem conceptionem
Christi, quae est per fidem, praecedit annunciario, quae est per fidei
praedicationem, secundum quod fides est ex audita.

D. Tho. 3. p. q. 30. art. 1. ad cum.


whose wonders she might have read of in Scripture: It is the same case with
man, though he receives no Ambassador to reveal unto him the Spiritual
Conception of Jesus in his Heart, he has notwithstanding the Faith, which
obliges him to believe that Grace is sufficient to operate that wonder, though
he be not assured by an Infallible certainty of its real possession.

However it was becoming and convenient that an Angel-Embassador should be
dispatched toward the Virgin, Citatus hic a D. Tho. art. 2. in corpore.
Acceptum humanae restarationis principium ut Angelus a Deo mitteretur ad
virginem partu consecrandam divino, quia prima perditionis humanae fuit causa,
cum, serpens a diabolo mittebatur ad mul^erem Spiretu superbiae decipiendam.
as well to reveal unto her the Decree of her Maternity, as also to get her
consent, to the end it should be put in Execution. It is by that way that the
reparation of Mankind should begin, says Venerable Bede, That an Angel should
be sent to the Virgin, who was to be Consecrated by a delivery altogether
Divine; because that another Angel under the shape of a Serpent had deceived
the first Woman with the Spirit of Pride, using all ways and Inventions
possible to make her the accomplice of his Perfidiousness; so the Archangel
made use of all the most pregnant Reasons he could afford, to draw from the
Virgin that Ecce, the most Happy Source of our Salvation.

He does insinuate himself into her Favors by an extraordinary Salutation, and
never as yet practiced, says Origin, for pronouncing the sweet Name of Mary, he
Honors her with three rare and wonderful Qualities, Fullness of Grace, Divine
Communication, Singular Benediction; immediately he makes the Narrative of his
Embassy, discovers the Intention of the Prince who sent him, the great
advantages of the Dignity to which she is called, the Grandeur and Excellency
of the Fruit of her Womb: and in fine, for conclusion, in few words after the
fashion they treat with Great Folks, he exhorts her to give her consent to all
this Sacred Progress; by the example of St. Elizabeth; who, by Divine Power,
was made Fruitful in her Sterility; That being done, the Virgin Consents, the
word is given, the Mystery is accomplished, and God is become flesh Contracting
with Humane Nature.

The matter is otherwise carried on in our Conversions, Notas facite in populis
adventiones ejus Isaie 12. v. 4.
an Angel must not suffice to bear the employment, there must be a narrow
search made in the secret Cabinet of the Infinite Wisdom to find extraordinary
Inventions to bring a sinner to give his Consent to his own Salvation;
Concilia, cogitationes, vias, and molimina ejus in redemptione generis humani.
Cornel hic.
The Prophet Isaih will have the Sacred Mystery of those Divine Inventions
Preached over all the World, all which inventions may be reduced to three
things, which if you will but Faithfully observe, you will never do amiss: The
wise sets them down thus, Eternal Verity, Opportune Council, and the Crowing of
the Cock: Eternal Verity, as being without any Error: Opportune Coouncel, as
conducing to a good end: The Crowing of the Cock, because it awakes us from
Sleep, which is the Image of Death: And yet notwithstanding, all those
Inventions are for the most part Fruitless, and without taking any effect in
man, though often represented and Preached efficaciously to him.

Here I find what is very strange, that one Fiat, draws all the World out of
nothing: One, I will have it so, conserves it in its Existence; one Ecce brings
down the only and dearly beloved Son of God from his Fathers Breast to his
Servants Womb: Three words of four Letters, Fiat, Volo, Ecce, works such high
Mysteries without any opposition, or difficulty; and the whole Volume of Holy
Scriptures, infallibly Dictates of the Holy Ghost, together with the secret
Inspirations of his Love, are not able to compass the Conversion of one
obstinate Soul: The Power of the Father Creates, the Wisdom of the Son
Conserves; the Goodness of the Holy Ghost animates all things: But as to the
Justification of an Obdurate Sinner, though the three Divine Persons contribute
with all their Activity to it; yet the Power of the Father is there without
fear; the Wisdom of the Son without Belief; and the Goodness of the Holy Ghost
without Love.

Liber literis exaratur palam contestans gloriam dei.
The Fathers Inventions in the Creation of the World to have himself obeyed, are
wonderful, being that as St. Basil says, All Creatures are as a great Volume
written in very large Characters, wherein all those Divine Wills and Pleasures
are highly published. Adam after his dismal Fall is condemned to the laboring
of the Earth, a Mystical punishment, to the end that he who would not obey his
Creator, by the motives of Justice, should learn of this Terrestrial Element,
(which being labored, brings forth Fruit in due Season;) how far less
Rebellious is the Earth to the Stock and Plough, than is an Obdurate Heart to
receive the Inspirations of Heaven.

What can be more attractive than the amourous Inventions of the Son of God, as
well in the Examples of his Life, whilst he conversed amongst us, as in the
proofs which he left us of his Love when he withdrew his visible presence from
us: His Sacred Body exposed on our Altars; is that Preacher and Master
mentioned by St. Lawrence Justinian, Christus praeceptor est, and apertas
codex, in quo legendo and meditando, universa virtutum disciplina ediscitur.
Justinian l. 2. de humilit. c. 12.
who holds a Book in his Hand heretofore opened on the Cross, but now covered
in the blessed Sacrament with the appearance of Bread and Wine, Book of Life,
Copy of Truth, Mirror of Perfection: It is there the Proud may learn, and
fully conceive the just motives of his profound Humiliation at the sight of a
God so low brought down for his sake; It is there that the Sensual man, plunged
in his daily Dirt and Infections, shall find a strong Target against all the
assaults of the Flesh, if he will but smell to this Odoriferous Flower which
sprung from a Virgins Womb; it is there you may hear the voice of Heaven, and
whence every Sinner may have a present remedy for all his Distempers; for it is
the Storehouse of that Sovereign Esculape, where nothing is wanting for the
necessity of men.

But if Love be Inventive, Ingenious, full of Artifice, Plato in Symposio.
nay a Magician in some respects, as Plato says, And that the Holy Ghost be
Love by Essence; what Artifice will he not make use of to engage us in the hot
pursuit of his goodness, he will distribute his Gifts largely, and with all
Hands, he will Court us with Complements of Honor and Grace, his Words will be
Sweeter than Honey: Nothing but Visits by day whilst the Sun shines; Visits
also at Night by Torches, to make his Love appear in his Luster and with all
its Allurements. O my God! cap. 2. v. 1, 2, 3. and seqq. Filii hominis, mitto
te ad filies Israel gentes Apostatrices quae recesserunt a me ipsi and parts
eorum praevaricati sunt pactum meum usque in diem h^^c.
what a deal of Ceremonies to purchase the Love and good will of a Sinner: You
would say that the Prophet Ezekiel makes God weary, and loath to continue his
Employment any longer, seeing what little Prophet he reaps by it: Son of man,
says he, to this Prophet, stand up and get you gone to the Children of Israel,
tell them that they are all Apostates, Rebels, Impudents, Incorrigible, a
company of Scorpions; but fear them not, I will have you to Announce unto them
the day of my Indignation, and how I am resolved to destroy them all in the
Justice of my rigor, being they refused to follow me in the Sweetness of my
often Invitations.

These threatening words would trouble me much, Arcum meum ponam in nubibus and
erit signum foederis inter me and iter terram.

Genes. 9. v. 13. Ego sum Dominus Deus tuus fortis, zelotes. Exodus 20. v. 5.
Dominus zelotes nomen ejus Deus est emulator.

Exodus 33.14.


but that since the placing of the Rainbow in the Clouds in sign of Alliance,
that is to say, since the extension of Jesus Christ on the Cross, a Mystical
Bow truly bended, but without any Arrows: Scripture assures me, that all Gods
Threatenings are the Counterfeit Frowns of a Loving Father, rather than the
Rigorous Sentence of an angry Judge; but I will stand to the Title and Quality
which Moses gives him of a Jealous God, of a God of Emulation; for that Quality
becomes Him, not only because he pulls down Altars set up for Idols against his
Honor, but chiefly by reason of his Indignation, to see Satan received and
seated with a great deal of Authority in the Hearts of men, whom he had bought
with the effusion of his precious Blood.

This affront brings him to conceive a jealousy, and to exhaust (if it were
lawful to term it so) all the most secret Inventions of his Saintly passionate
heart to recover the Favors of a Sinner, gain his Affections, and become
peaceable possessor of that Inheritance, which is his by so many just Titles.
St. Augustine, that incomparable Wit, seduced by the vain opinion he had of his
own Learning. St. Paul. that fiery Courage in the height of his Indiscreet
Zeal: And poor Magdalen altogether drowned in Flesh and Blood: One made Apostle
of the Gentiles, and Vessel of Election; the other a great Saint, and the Eagle
of Doctors; the third changed unto a Type of a True Repentance fed by the Hands
of Angels with Flames from Heaven; can give this testimony to all Nations, that
there is no Heart can withstand the earnest and strong pursuits of Jesus, when
that he is pleased to take in hand his Conversion. And therefore let us look
for no other Ambassador but Jesus, the Angel of great Council and only delight
of man: The Archangel Gabriel had but a Humane Body in appearance, when he
came to make his Complement to the Virgin Mary, this was not enough to know the
Inclinations of Man: But our Savior having conversed here amongst us as one of
our selves, he knew our Humors, he remarked our Customs, Scientia
experimentali.
and learned by what persuasions he might overcome the hardness of our Hearts:
The following discourses will make appear how he concurs to the Conversion of
Sinners, as well by Himself, as by second Causes. God of his Infinite mercy,
grant that this first part, which is all employed to set down the diverse
Motives which God makes use of, to bring us to Cooperate with his Graces, may
meet in you (dear Reader) that tenderness of Heart which may bring you to
resolve with the Prophet thus; Ecce paratum cor meum Deus, ecce paratum cor
meum. Psalm. 107. v. 1.
my God, behold my Heart is prepared, come when you please, you shall be
received.

CHAP. VIII. That it belongs to God alone to Convert a Soul.
IT is no sufficient acknowledgment of what great Obligations we have to God,
to pay him only our bare respects, and lay down at his feet the slender Tribute
of our Homage, for what Graces and Favors we received at his Hands, since ever
the Planets with their constant course began to measure out the year into
Seasons for the advantage and satisfaction of man: We must dive into the
Register-Office of Eternity; there we shall find the chief motive of our
Thanksgiving, and whereby to make appear to all Creatures, how Noble and
ancient is the Extraction of Man; being that the first thought of his Creation
is conceived at once with the generation of the Word, and that the care which
God the Father had of Humane Nature was before the Institution and order of
times, the object of his Love and knowledge: For bringing together within the
fecundity of his memory, all intelligible Objects, as well without as within
his Divine Essence, to make them in himself the Object of his knowledge, which
finds no other rest or settlement but his Eternal Word, he knows them all in
the Order and Excellency of their Nature, without the least confusion of
Thoughts. And because that among all intelligible Creatures, Man has by right
the second degree of Excellency to Angels; Man and Angel have been the Object
of the Father's Eternal Knowledge, and consequently of his Love; For as the
knowledge of the possible Being of Man enters into the Generation of the Word,
so his Love meets in the production of his Holy Ghost; for all that is
Intelligible verity to his understanding, is at the same instant a lovely
Object to his Will.

This is it that moved God in the difference of times to give us four
remarkable proofs of his Eternal Care: The first, he brings Man from nothing by
Creation: The second, when that Man had forgot his Respects to his Creator, he
resolves to repair his loss, by uniting Humane Nature to the Divine in the
Incarnation of his Son: The third, he prepares for him in Heaven an Immortal
Crown, in order to enjoy for ever in Glory the sight of his Divine Essence: And
the fourth, when that by his Actual Sin he shall come to loose all right to
that Glory, by the loss of present Justice in this Life, he offers him the
means of a Repentance, by the Feelings he gives him of his Conversion.

All these aforesaid Actions are the worthy Employments of his Divinity; but
the Conversion of a Sinner, of all seems the chiefest; as for the Creation, it
was as it were necessary, or at least most convenient that God should give
actual Existence to Man, being that his possibility was in his Thoughts from
all Eternity; otherwise it might be said That Power was faulty, being not
reduced to Act: To assign him a state of Glory, where after his Pilgrimage he
might find his Center and final Settlement; that follows immediately the way of
acting of the first Principle, who at the same instant, as he gives Being to a
Creature, gives him his Settlement and final rest. As for the Hypostatical
Union in the Incarnation, perhaps the design was taken in the most Sacred
Conclave of the Blessed Trinity before the Fall of Adam; Besides it was
reasonable that the Son should raise the Honor of the Father, very much
interessed in the loss of Man, the Noblest Masterpiece that ever came from his
hands, if he had remained without remedy after his Offense. But as for the
Conversion of a Sinner in particular, and after the re-establishment of Humane
Nature by the general remedy of Redemption, common to all men, to undertake as
yet his conduct and the transporting of him from the state of his actual Sin to
that of Grace; it is the effect of his Infinite Love; I must confess, but it is
also an Employment worthy of his Divinity, reserved for Jesus alone.

Reason makes it out, for we say that the resemblance makes things known, the
World is the Work of God and known for such, because its Perfections bear the
resemblance and Portract of its Maker: Grace which has Converted the Sinner
comes far nearer to the Likeness of God; for what goodness could render the
Soul good, make her partaker of Gods Grace, and the Object of his Sovereign
Love? What Power could give her a Right to Heaven, or to any part of its Glory?
what cause could procure her Eternal Felicity without any limitation or bounds?
but an Infinite Goodness, a first Cause, Primique referret luminis effigiem
sanctaque imitamina formae. Greg Naz. carm. 4.
an Eternity by Essence. St. Gregory thinking on the employment that God had
before the worlds creation, what was his occupation and pastime; says, that,
all his study was to render his perfections communicable: but his perfections
are all represented to the life in the conversion of a Soul; consequently the
worthyest employment that God had before the Worlds creation, out of himself,
was, to manage the conversion of Souls, and think of means to bring to pass so
noble an undertaking in the difference of time.

Quos praescivit and predestinavit conformes fieri imaginis filij sui, ut sit
ipse primogenitus in multis fratribus. Romans 8. v. 19.
I do ingeniously confess that the first and chief employment of the Eternal
Fathers, is to produce his only Son, and to love him; But after that the most
honorable employment his goodness could ever make choice of, is to produce
outwardly Children, by the most Noble Generations that can be imagined, without
any prejudice to the pre-eminency of his first Paternity; to wit, in unity of
supposit and love: the first born of his Children is Jesus: The rest of men are
younger Brothers, Sicut Deus pater suam naturalem bonitatem voluit aliis
communicare perticipando eis similitudinem suae bonitaris ut non solus sit
bonus, sed etiam actor bonorum ita filius Dei voluit conformitatem suae
filiationis, ut non solus sit ipse filius, sed etiam primogenitus filiorum.

D. Tho. in hunc locum Pauli.


less shared withal, for all Laws favor the first born; but notwithstanding
they have the same Father, same Inheritance, same Rights, same Coat of Arms; So
that as the Generation of the Word is God's first employment within himself,
the Adoptive Generation which is performed by the conversion of a Sinner, shall
hold the first rank without him; For even as in the super-adorable labors of
his Divine fecundity, he powers forth his knowledge without measure, until that
he meets with his Holy Ghost; who setting a stop to his emanations, seems as it
were by violence to retain the course of his action: This love must force it
self to render its fecundity without any limitation, both of acknowledgement
and love among creatures capable of its impression. So before the conversion of
a Soul, he proposes himself for Object of our thoughts, and his Holy Ghost for
the scope of our love; to honor us with the same Objects which his knowledge
and love have in the blessed Trinity, Debuit per omnia fratribus assimilari
Heb* c. 2.
for all filiations must have a reference to the first filiation, and the
nearer their reference is, the more excellent they will be.

Moreover, it is a prerogative belonging only to him, who is above all Genus
and Species, and has a right of Sovereignty over all Categories, to destroy all
Genus and Species, as well as to redress them to their ends, if once they
swerve from it: God alone has a right of absolute and Universal Sovereignty;
then he can as well reduce all Genus and Species of Beasts to nothing, as he
brought them out of nothing to give them a Being; Venit filius hominis
quaerete, etc. Luke 19. v. 10. Mat. 18. v. 11. Cum dicit, quod perierat, sub
intelligendum est genus humanum, omnia enim elementa suum ordinem servant, sed
homo eravit, quia suum ordinem perdidit. Remigius in catena ad c. 18. Matthew.
All humane nature in her Species was misled from the end for which God had
created her; It was then an employment suitable and reserved to the sole power
of a God, to work the establishment of so great a disorder. True it is, that
actual sin is only a personal offense; but because that it is a raising up
against God, and that God is the Center and last end of all the Species; in
that respect, we may say that all sinners are gone astray from their Species;
Hence I do conclude, that when a sinner converts himself to God, it is not
enough to conceive a displeasure for having offended him his peculiar good,
Erravi sicut ovis quae periit, etc. Psalm. 118.
and last end; but moreover he must be sorry to have opposed himself to the
common good of all humane nature.

The eloquent St. Lion, Ovis una homo intelligendus est in unius enim adae
errore omne genus humanum aberravit. D. Hilar. Can. 18.
had no less than reason to invite all men to a serious consideration of their
Nobility, and to conceive a high esteem for their Soul, the best and chiefest
part of their Individium; being that the care and management of her Salvation
is the employment of a Divinity: I strayed like a Sheep that was lost, but O
Lord find out your Servant, (says the King of Prophet;) St. Hillarion
understands this lost Sheep to be all mankind misled by Adam's error; O how
happy man is to have God for his Buckler to defend him, and for his Champion to
raise and redress him, when he falls from the right way which leads to
Salvation! The excellency of an action must be derived either from its end, or
from its beginning, or from both together; so the actions of Jesus are noble,
by reason of the Divine supposit, who does appropriate them to himself: Those
of God are as yet more noble, because that their end and beginning are but the
self-same thing; And amongst creatures that must be the most honorable, that
shall have for their end, the enjoyment and possession of his first beginning,
which is God: Such is humane nature, for to speak properly, the work of Grace,
and the Fathers action in the production of the Word, have but one way, through
which the current of Divine emanations does pass to the Holy Ghost, that is the
Son: It is by the same Son, (says St. Basil) that Grace does pass, whether she
descends to the Soul, or whether she returns to her Fountain; Ego sum via,
veritas and vita Joan 14. v. 6.
I am, (says our Savior) the Way, the Truth, and the Life; if then the
beginning, the way, and the end, gives the title of pre-eminency to the action,
what shall we say of the conversion of a Soul, which has for beginning the
Eternal Father, who is the first Offspring of all filiations, missions and
motions that tend to good? For way and passage, the Son of God: and for
co-operator, the Holy Ghost, who happily makes all the work of our
justification return to the beginning and source from whence it flows: Here
must the Angelical nature strike her Flag to pay homage to Grace, and
acknowledge, that if the Divinity Judges the conversion of Souls, an employment
worthy of her amorous Occupations: She is highly honored to be called to the
Guardianship of Men. The Pagan whose feeling and expression was, that he had
not received Life, or Understanding, but for to contemplate Heaven; would find
nowadays subject enough to give a sound and just check to Christians, if by
the light of Faith he had come to understand the particular care that God takes
to convert and Deifie a Soul; and doubt not but that at the hour of death, the
long List of our transactions shall be set before our eyes, as also so many
inventions of Love drawn out of the Treasures of the Eternal Wisdom, and all
employed to work our conversion, but to no purpose; our malice and our obdurate
hearts being so sunk in unlawful pleasures, have rendered all those endeavors
and inventions Fruitless. There is nothing more displeasing to a liberal
Prince, than to see those on whom he bestowed his favors, to repay him with
ungratefulness. Let us then begin to conceive an esteem for God's great
favors, and liberality to us, and concurring with our liberties to the design
of his love, let us follow him step by step, until that he does accomplish in
us that Masterpiece which can have no other model but the Word- Incarnate.

CHAP. IX. The Confidence that a Soul ought to have in her God.
THat Child all the rest of his days may live without care, and Glory that the
Heavens attended his Birth with a favorable constellation, when he met with a
Father who loves him as the Apple of his Eye, who studies nothing more than his
advancement, and spares no labor or care to make him great in the World: The
Mariners who undertake a long Voyage, and oblige themselves to Sail on the
main Seas, may lie down and take their rest without any disturbance, when they
do meet with a Master Pilot, so well versed in his Art, that he foresees all
Winds and foul Weather, the beginning, progress, and falling of a Storm, and is
ignorant of nothing that belongs to the secret practice of Navigation. The
Soldier may boldly march forward to a breach, and face his enemies without
apprehension, when he Fights under the Command and Conduct of a Wise and
Valiant Captain, who by long Experience has Learned to venture nothing rashly,
to find out Stratagems when Force fails, and in all Rencounters to remain
victorious and Master both of the Field and of all his Enemies spoils, whether
he does retreat Honorably, or stand steadfast to his Ground.

What the Affectionate Father is to his Children, the Pilot well experienced to
his Seamen, and the Valiant Captain to his Soldiers: The same is the Creator
of the Universe by way of Super-eminency to all his Creatures.

God is to us a good Father, Patrem dicendo, and veniam peccatorum, and
paenarum interitum, and justificationem, and sanctificationem, and
liberationem, and filiorum adoptionem, and haereditatem Dei, and fraternitatem
cum unigenito copulatam, and sancti Spiritus dona largissima uno sermon
signavit.

Do. Chrysostom. hom. 20. in cap. 6. Matthew. statim initio.


for where will you find a Father so desirous of the Temporal advancement of
his Children, as God has appeared Passionate for the good of Man: His Affection
is soon known by his dividing and sharing to them as well the moveable Goods of
Time, as the immovable and permanent Felicities of Eternity: The Heavens are
for us, and all their Celestial Globes so Artificially wrought one into
another, do not continue their Motions, but to entertain the course of
Sublunary Generations: The Elements do not subsist in the variety of their
Effects, but upon our account, and for our Welfare; if the Earth does ptoduce
fine Flowers and Fruit, it is to present them to us; the most adorable Mystery
of the Incarnation gives us an assurance of all the Goods of Eternity: It is a
Contract of Association, by virtue of which, we are made Gods Heirs and Coheirs
to his only and dearly beloved Son; And to the end that this Contract should
have the more force, he left us his real Body, the most precious Gift he could
afford, as the Interest of a thousand Blessings, which according to his Promise
we are to receive in Heaven.

Quis est hic quia venti and mare obediunt ei. Matthew. 8. v. 27.
God is to us a most Experienced Pilot; the Scribes and Pharisees admired him
under that notion and quality, saying one to another, who is this? Of whom the
Wind and Seas stand so much in Awe? and it happened, that being once in a Ship
with his Disciples, the Seas began to grow rough, the Waves to swell, and the
Winds to blow high; he gives the Word of Command, and presently a Calm was
made: no more high Winds, nothing of a Storm, the Seas lie as plain as a Table,
so that a Dice might run over all its Surface, and a Bird build thereon her
Nest, without the least danger of miscarriage: Tu Dominaris potestati maris,
etc. Ps. 88. v. 10.
This is but the shadow and figure of what we do resent in our Souls; Mystical
Vessels whereof he has undertaken the steering. For when the World, that
boisterous Sea, aims to make us miscarry, and run us down to an Abiss of
Misfortune, when Temptations over-sway us, and that Satan with an infectious
puff of his Breath strives to procure our utter destruction; it is then that
God does stretch forth his Hand to us. Movetur mare, contradicit mare, per
strepit mare, sed fidelis Deus, qui non vos sinet tenture supra id quod
potestus. D. Aug. in Ps. 88
Fear Faithful Soul, God will soon appease nothing all those Storms, and from
among so many dangers will safely conduct you to the Harbor of his Grace; so
it be, that you will let him stand at the Helm without controlling his Conduct.

God is to us a Valiant and Wise Captain; the Prophet-Royal knew him to be such
when he made him this acknowledgment: Benedictus Dominus Deus meus qui docet,
etc. Ps. 143 v. 1*
O God who have trained up my Hands to Battle, and my Fingers to War; it is by
order from this God of Battle that we have seen the Apostles plant the
Standards of the Gospel on their Enemies Trenches; Martyrs expose themselves
Merrily to so many hazards to maintain their Masters Honors, and confound all
Hell by the Testimony of their Blood; Innocent and Tender Virgins give up the
Ghost amidst the Flames with a great deal of Joy, to conserve the first Flowers
of their Virginity to Jesus. And you, O great St. Paul, I dare say, that you
would have laid down your Arms and given over the Combat, Si adversum se
dissentiunt caro and Spiritus molestus and periculosus labor, sunt enim in domo
tanquam maritus and uxor; si maritus vincatur and uxor dominetur, pax perversa.

D. Aug. in Psalm. 143. to 8.


when Satan darted at your Flesh one of his Arrows, had you not so soon
overheard this voice of your Captain; Paul, That my Grace may suffice to
strengthen you against all your Enemies Assaults; it is my Pleasure and great
Satisfaction to see you Fight so like a Christian Champion, and by the
assistance of my Grace give all the World to understand, that there is nothing
to be feared where I do command.

If our Savior, whilst we do continue Obedient and Submissive Children, has a
special care to Advance, to Cherish, and to place us at our ease; if whilst we
sleep in the Vessel of his Providence, he has a care to keep us in the right
and assured road to Heaven; and if whilst we are good and Valiant Soldiers, he
gives us a good look and a gracious Countenance, do you think that he will
abandon us immediately, when (becoming refractory to his Laws) we shall follow
our own evil Inclinations? That he will never look after any further lodging in
our Hearts, after that by Sin we shall loose his Grace? That he will never
withdraw us from under the Tyrannical Hostility of our Adversaries; when that
by our own Cowardliness we shall fall into their hands? No, we must not believe
it, it is an Employment worthy of the Divinity to relieve the miserable; and to
show unto men in their want of all Humane Assistance, the great necessity of
his Powerful and helping hand.

This Truth will appear without any contradiction, if we consider the nature of
the first Principle, who is not content to give a bare Existence to things,
drawing them from the possibility of their Being by a reiterated production,
and that in two ways; the one, furnishing the Means; Instinct and Inclinations
convenient to attain to their last end: The other, driving off all contrary
Causes, which might interrupt the aforesaid Inclinations. Man, on that fatal
day of his Transgression in Paradise, lost at once, and by one bit of an Apple
his rare and leading Inclinations toward his Supernatural end: I grant, that
the Divine Justice, (to deal rigorously) might have left him in his Misery,
being he brought himself thereunto by his own proper Election: But
notwithstanding, this God of Mercy, who protests that his dearest delight is to
live among men, bears them so much Affection, that he will rather employ his
Power to Regenerate them Spiritually by his Inspirations, than leave them under
the lash and rigours of Justice: For he aims not at the death of a Sinner, but
at his Conversion and everlasting Happiness.

Omnis qui non amat Dominum Jesum anathema sit. 1 Cor. 16. v. 22.
O Vessel of Election, what would you conclude? when by a Spirit of Zeal, you
thundered out Excommunication against all them that loved not Jesus: Paulus mea
manu.
And to assure us that you had a particular feeling of the Ingratitude of Men,
Si quis non amat Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum, Dominum jure creationis,
nostrum beneficio incarnationis Jesum officio Salvationis, Christum plenitudini
unctionis propter haec enim quatuor est amandus, sit anathema, Gozramus in c.
16 Cor. v. 22.
you say, that you wrote the Excommunication with your own hand.

This great Apostle has no other ground for the Solemn pronunciation of that
Censure, but to say, being that Jesus is come down from Heaven on Earth, to
undertake the management of our Affairs, to concern himself so much in the
conduct of our Souls, and to oppose himself to all our Enemies, who ever, after
all those proofs he gave us of his Love, will not love Jesus, and put all his
confidence in him, let him be Accursed, Excommunicated, and (as a Monster of
Nature,) banished far from the company of men.

But what! God rich in Power, Eternal in continuance, and Infinite in Wisdom:
Man, weak in his Designs, limited in his Time, faulty in his Councels: God
Immortal by his Being, Impassible by Nature, All-sufficient of Himself: Man,
the spoil of Death, Theater of Misfortunes, and incident to all Misery; what
report, or relation can there be betwixt two such Extremes, and so far
assunder! To believe that God should trouble himself with the care of so vile
and abject a Creature; Quid novit Deus, quasi per caliginem judicat, nubes
latibulum ejus, nec nostra considerat, etc. Job c. 22. v. 12.
Is it not to advance a proposition that comes near to the nature of a Riddle?
No, such a thought cannot enter into the brains of those Licentious Atheists,
who represented God as a Powerful and Proud Monarch, that never came without
the Gallery of his highest Heavens to take notice of what passed here below;
says Holy Job, I remit such as are of that feeling to the little Birds of the
Air; Considerat lilia agri, etc. Mat. 6. v. 28.
which, without Dunging or Tilling of the Earth; nay, without the least
trouble, find their Victuals set before them in such good Order, that the best
Oeconomer in the World could not parallel it: I refer them to the
Flower-Deluces, which you may see in the Springtime clad so Gloriously and
with so much Majesty; that Solomon with all the Pomp and Splendor of his brave
Attendance, is not to be compared to them: They shall understand that it is the
most Liberal Hand of God that gives to the one whereon to Feed, and to the
others whereby to Adorn themselves: Man far more to be considered than all
other Creatures; being that by the degree of Understanding (which he has by
Nature) he bears the Image of his Divinity; shall he not have the better share
in his Divine regards? Will not that Lover of Men delight to relieve them in
there necessities? Yes, doubtless, to believe otherwise, would be to break down
the Altar of his Clemency, whereon all poor sinners hope to find full ease to
all their pains.

CHAP. X. How God does cast into a Soul the Seed of her Conversion.
AMong all the Qualities and Titles of Honor that the Savior of the World
gives to the Eternal Father; Pater meus agricola est. Joan 15. v. 1.
That of a Labourer seems to me full of Mysteries: For I cannot think of the
Action of a Labourer in the Fields, who under his his left Arm holds his Bag of
Seeds, and with his Right Hand casts it on the Earth; but presently I am
obliged to raise up my Thoughts toward the Eternal Providence in the same
Action at the beginning of the World: For in the Left Hand of his Omnipotent
Power, I take notice of a Sack full of Creatures, which with his Right he
spreads over all the face of the World: He casts a Handful into the Sea, and on
a sudden you see a Cluster of all sorts of Fishes Swim, and in so great a
quantity, that the Prophet cannot make out the number: Another Handful on the
Earth, and there you may see Lions, Tigers, Elephants and all other Sensitive
Creatures of one side; and on the other, Plants, Flowers and Simples, with so
much Grace and Beauty, that they do ravish our Hearts and dazzle our Eyes;
Afterward he flings another Handful into the Air, and presently you take
notice of an Eagle, who with the vivacity of his Eyesight becomes a borderer
to Heaven; a Merlin flies after and very near as high, where he holds himself
at a stop; and the rest of the Birds that sing in their own Tone the Praises of
their Creator: He lifts up his Arm and casts a fourth Handful toward the
Heavens, whence on a sudden comes forth an innumerable number of Stars and
inserts themselves in the Firmament as so many Carbuncles and precious Stones.

Germinet terra herbam virentem, and statim omni surgente germine terra
completa est. D. Ambr. tom. 2. lib. 3. Hexam. c. 17. statim. initio.
God is not as yet at the end of his project, neither is the first cast of his
Creature out of the hand of his Omnipotent Power, the final scope of his
^ction: For even as the Labourer committing his Grain and Seed to the Earth,
does not intend to have it lost, but contrariwise in Harvest time, expects for
one Grain a hundred. So God giving to all Creatures a Being, will not have them
to stand there; they must go further, Festinarunt campi non commissam sibi
frugem edere, ignorata viti olerum genera, florum miracula germinaro, etc.
Idom. cap. 16. initio,
and produce each one actions conformable to their Nature: Natural Philosophy
teaches us the same, and will have the Operation to follow immediately the
Being. So God is an Act most Pure, most Simple, most Actual: So the Angel is
not a substance only Intelligible, but also Intelligent, Active, Operative; for
the good Angels from the very instant of their Confirmation in Grace, have
always produced the formal Act of their Felicity; and all Creatures in this
point of their Activity are Gods following steps: So that if it were possible
that God would have or admit of a contrary, it must have been the first matter,
which we call pure possibility, or in a manner nothing, because it has no
manner of Activity, and so produces nothing to the Public that bears the marks
of her Author; or if it does, it signifies as much as nothing.

Dear Reader, you may easily see that my aim is to pass over from the designs
of God in Nature, to his Sacred Projects in Grace, Dei agricultura estis, Dei
aedificatio estis. 1 Cor. 3. v. 9.
the Seed of our Conversion; And say that our Beloved Master Jesus is a
Mystical Labourer, who casts (without intermission) that Seed of Eternity into
our Hearts, not that it should remain there idle, buried and without effect,
but Vigorous, Active and Operating.

Sapientia filiis suis vitam inspirat, and suscipit inquirentes se, and
praeibit in via justitiae, Eccl. c. 4. v. 12.
If you set me the question, what is the Nature of that Seed of Grace, I will
tell you that if you take it in general, it is a breathing of the Holy Ghost
into our Souls, earnestly soliciting us to re-enter into our selves, for to
consider the condition we live in, to take on strong resolutions of amendment,
if we be in Sin: But if we be in the state of Grace; it does inspire into us to
advance still from Virtue to Virtue; Sicut matter filios in utero vivificat,
eisque vitam naturalem aspirat, ita sapientia suis inspirat super-naturalem.
Corn. in Eccl. supra.
and always to make new acquisitions of Merit: An Inspiration altogether as
necessary to continue the motions of the Spiritual Life, as is the Respiration
of the Air to preserve the Life of Nature; for as it is impossible that a
living Creature should subsist any long time without respiring the Air; so it
is impossible for a man to continue any long time grateful to God, Lux enim
gratiae quae desuper venit, spiraculum hominis praestat ad vitam, and occulta
mentis penetrat Rabanus lib. 1. in Jam. Jeremie c. 1. v. ^0.
nor live the Interior Life of the Spirit, without this Divine Breathing to
encourage him, and push him on to new resolutions of Adoring and Serving God:
But I must set this only difference, that we of necessity must respire the
common Air; whereas on the other side, we are free to receive or to refuse the
Divine Inspiration; this is all the inequality; for the want of Inspiration, as
well as of Respiration, deprives us of Life: This, of the Life which we have
common with all Sensitive Creatures; That, of the Life which makes us capable
of Heaven and Glory.

It Is this Messenger from Heaven that goes in Post toward those Licentious
Livers, Annuncia populo meo scelera eorum and domui Jacob peccata eorum, Is.
58. v. 2.
that take delight to live constantly in the puddle of Sin, and with the
assistance of the worm of their Guilty Conscience, makes them to apprehend the
fatal issue of their everlasting Perdition and Woe; if they do not follow his
Calling, and make good use of his Correction.

It Is that Inspiration that meets at all hours at the gate of Honest and Godly
Livers, for to summons them to a further Progress in Virtue, and never to be
satisfied with the degree of Perfection which they have acquired, until the
final Grace do Crown all their Labors.

That being supposed, Fratres videre ne in vacuum gratiam Dei recipiatis. 2
Cor. c. 6. v. 1.
the Apostle St. Paul, that Faithful Heart to Gods Inspirations, exhorts us
above all things to conceive a great esteem for those Divine Callings: My
Brethren, says he, beware you receive not the Grace of God in vain, he is a
liberal Prince to them that esteem his favors, but he will shut up his hand to
such as undervalue them.

Gratia ejus in me vacua non fuit. 1 Cor. 15. v. 10.
The Atheist, who in the impiety of his Belief, imagines that all things are
Governed by, I do not know, what, Principle of Fatal Necessity, despises and
sets at naught all Inspirations, Gratia in me vacua non fuit, id est otiosa,
qui ea usus est ad quod data est sibi.

D. Tho. in com. hujus loci.


when that God (though highly offended with his Blasphemy) awakes in him that
light of the Prophet, grafted in our hearts from our Mothers Womb, which gives
us to understand that there is a God; whose private checks he smothers with the
corruption of licentious life and conversation: the most part of our
cross-grained Christians do the same when they give the deaf Ear to that
Internal reprehension, that puts them in mind of their solemn Vow made to God
in their Baptism, to renounce Satan and all his allurements, and never to
follow the course their disordinate appetite: The very Religious and Solitary
Souls are in some respects guilty of the same crime; when the Holy Ghost
invites them to think on their former fervency, which brought them to resolve
courageously to forsake the World, that by the serious consideration thereof,
he might revive in their hearts those Seraphick flames, yet notwithstanding
they are content to lead a languishing kind of life, which certainly will lead
them to their utter destruction and loss.

We must confess that it is crime of less Majesty Divine, Cadunt secus viam and
volucres Coeli comedunt, cadunt in petroso ubi non habent Terram multam, cadunt
in spinas and suffocantur. Ex Mat. c. 13. v. 5.
to despise his Graces: But we must also ingeniously acknowledge, that this
Heavenly Seed will hardly ever grow or take root in our hearts; more
impenetrable to the sacred influences of Love, then are the Rocks of Caucasus
to the Rays of the Sun.

Notwithstanding we must not fail of our courage, Audi justi semen, filioli mei
quos iterum parturio donec formetur in vobis Christus, qui enim in animo suo
partus fidei feret, semen ei Christus est. D. Amb. in Psalm. 38
all the virtues come in a body to the fight, Perseverance will have the
Victory: God holds up the arm of the Labourer whilst he is at work: The
comparison of the Grain of Wheat brought down by our Savior to this purpose,
makes it appear; For what a deal of pains is taken, and how difficult it is to
raise up that little creature to perfection, the Labourer must cast it into the
Earth, as if he were to destroy it, it must rot there under the Dung; Winter
declares open Wars against it, and comes thundering upon it with all its
rigor, blocks it up in Prisons of Ice; a lift of a Spade wounds it to death,
and for all Funeral Ceremonies, turns it off with a kick into a Tomb of Snow:
The very Birds after its death, threaten to have a fling at it: However it
bounces up against all those assaults, Ast ubi se geniculata jam spica
sustulerit, vaginae quaedam, futurae frugi parantur, in quibus gra^^m formatur
interius, ne te^ ejus pri^^^dia aut frigus laedat, aut ^^lis aestus exurat,
etc. Vide D. Amb. l. 3. He^^m. c. 8. per totum.
and assures it self of a Victory over all its Enemies; if it be so that the
Sun will give it a favorable look; And so it happens, for the Sun no sooner
appears in its Spring, but this little Grain as if it were getting out of its
Tomb, begins to cleave asunder the great clods of Earth that cover it, and
appear with its green Bonnet over the ground, turn up its Reeds in form of
Pillars with little Mouldings at equal distance, through which springs up an
Ear with as many Pikes to Guard it, as it has Grains in its little Purses.

Aliud est semen diaboli aliud semen Christi quod feritur ad justiciam, quod
semin^nt Christus regnum est Dei quod semin^t diabolus peccatum est. D. Amb.
lib. 3. Hexam. c. 10.
God, when he has visited a sinner in the sweetness of his Blessings, with a
good inspiration to alter his life, and consecrate his heart unto him; there is
a Grain of Wheat cast into a Conscience, but it must increase; Oh! what Pains,
what Convulsions, what a deal of Labor must be taken: The Dirt and Infection
of Carnal concupiscence rots it; the Ice which has Frozen our hearts in the
service of God, deprives it of all liberty to appear outwardly; the winds of
Pride gives it a thousand Battles; The Snow of Hypocracy does persecute it;
Self-love (the most cruel of all,) leads the rest of the Domestic Enemies
toward it, with a resolution either to smother it in its Cradle, or at least
to wither it, and leave it without any vigor: Qui administrat semen seminanti,
and panem ad manducandum proestabit, and multiplicabit semen vestrum, and
augebit incrementa frugum justitiae vestra 2 Cor. 9. v. 10.
But fear nothing, dear Soul, be only faithful to your God, hear his voice,
follow his call, and you shall soon see that the Sun of Justice will free you
from all those difficulties, bring together your affections scattered by the
Storm of Temptations, change that obstinate and stony heart that made you
insensible of all his corrections, he will put into your hands offensive and
defensive Arms to withstand the assaults of all evil inclinations, Gignitur in
planis quidem sed densissimis in vepribus, rubisque, difficilis collectu,
metitur non nisi permiserit Deus Jovem hunc intelligunt aliqui. Plin. lib. 12.
c. 19.
and plant Virtue where sin was before in Garrison.

The natural Hystorian discoursing of the nature and property of the Cinnamon,
says, that it is a precious and Divine Plant, which, as if by natural instinct
it were aversed to grow among other Plants, withdraws from the sight of men to
hide it self among Bushes and Thorns that by their pricks her Fruit might be
preserved from all hands: Assabinum illi vocant quadraginta quatuor bonum
caprarumque extis impetratur venia caedenti, non tamen aute post occasum lecit
ibid.
The Ethiopians were of opinion, that there was a particular God, (by name
Assabinus,) who took on himself to be the Patron and Defender of this Plant, to
prevent any profane hand from turning it to common use, because it should be
preserved to adorn his Altars. The Inpiration of God is a Cinamon-Plant truly
Divine, Sicut Cinnamonum and Balsamum aromatisons ordorem dedi. 1 Eccl. c. 14.
v. 20.
being that it takes root in Heaven, but it will not grow in all places, a
heart plunged in the delights of the World, as an Earth over-soft cannot
conserve it; its natural Soil must be a heart given to Mortification and
Penance, it is there that the Divine Assabinus, (Jesus Christ, will maintain it
in its luster,) for though God refuses none the assistance of his Grace, and
that he Acts without any distinction either of Time or Place; a Christian
notwithstanding would be foully deceived to believe that the Inspiration which
he received when he was in the occasion of sin, should continue still; No, he
must get out of the occasion, as Lot got out of Sodom, and transplant this
simple mystic on the Mount Calvary; close to the Cross of Christ: There you
may see it produce its effects and no where else: For as the Plants never come
to perfect maturity, unless the Heavens do sweetly power down their showers
into the bosom of the Earth; So God's Inspirations in a Soul, will never come
to the just point of their perfection, if they be not often watered with the
Tears of true Repentance, to certify the displeasure we conceive of our
offenses.

We must then of necessity improve God's Graces, Ego quoque in interitu vestro
ridebo and subsannabo, cum vobis id quod timebatis advenerit Proverb. 1. v. 26.
for the infallible truth makes us an open Declaration, that whoever this
misfortune shall happen to, to jeer him in his presence (which is done by
undervaluing the Inspirations which render God present to us) shall suffer the
same punishment at the hour of his death: God will laugh at him; but why at the
hour of death? it is a custom to laugh at a man who makes at that hour
extravagant wishes, and out of all reason; he who would fain Reap and never
Sowed a grain; he who would make a Will of ten thousand Crowns, and has not
five Pence in the World; he who is but of the scum of the People, and leaves
Orders to be buried like a King: He who in his Lifetime undervalued God's
favors, makes altogether as extravagant wishes at the hour of his death; if he
thinks to Reap the Blessings of Heaven, as well as Virtuous and Godly men: he
who never Sowed in the teritories and ground of his Soul, but corruption during
his life; if he makes an Authentical Will of Piety, who in all his actions had
not the least shadow of Virtue: if he desires to be Seated with the Saints in
Heaven, who never had thoughts but upon the Earth, nor any other pany but his
concupisences: Who past over his days in a constant Rebellion against God and
his Holy Ghost; Qui habitat in Coelis irridebit eos, and Dominus subsannabit
Psalm. 2. v. 4.
his thoughts are out of all reason; what he aims at is altogether impossible;
God laughs at it, he makes but a jest of it, and seems to take no notice of
what he says.

Let us then prepare our hearts to God, and train them up to be submissive to
his holy Laws, let our daily practice be to temper them as Wax is made soft by
the fire, to receive the Divine Impression of his Sacred Characters; Let us
improve the grace and Favors of Heaven, being they are the most happy Seed of
a happy Eternity.

CHAP. XI. The Stratagems that Jesus makes use of to Convert a Soul.
I Cannot but approve of the Feelings of so many Holy men; who seeing the
manifold Miseries that poor man is subject to, Mane sicut herba transeat, mane
floreat and transeat, vespere decidat, induret and arescat. Ps. 89. v. 6.
represented him as the most miserable of all Creatures; he is a Sink and
Common-shore full of Dirt and Infection, says one; He is the Abridgement of all
Misfortunes; says another, this man's opinion of him is, That he is the Spoil of
Times, the Fable of the day, the Mocking-stock of Fortune; another describes
him to be a Shadow that goes away, a Flower that passes, and a Water that runs.

These Verities admit of no contradiction, Omnis caro foenum, and omnis gloria
ejus quasi flos agri, exscicatam est foenum, and cecidit flos. Isa. c. 40. v. 6.
if we consider Man in the state of his Fall: But if we look upon him as he is
the Amorous Object of Gods Delight; Trismegist will tell you, That he is a
Miracle; As for my part, I may lawfully call him a Monarch; being that we daily
see the King of Eternal Majesty knock at his door, as at the door of some great
Sovereign, to be Entertained, live in his Company, and Eat at his Table: Quid
est homo quia magnificas eum, aut quid apponis erga eum cortuum, visitas eum
^i^ulculo. Job. 7. v. 17.
Job is surpised at this; O great God, what is man that you do so Magnify
him, that you Visit him every Morning at his waking? It seems that you would
fain share your Scepter and Crown with him.

It is commonly said, that our Sworn Enemy transfigures himself into an Angel
of Light, Allicit ut perimat blanditur ut fallat, extoliit ut deprimat foenore
quodam noeeudi, ut quo ampliot fuerit summa voluptatum, eo major exigatur usura
poenarum. D. Cyprian. ad donatum.
that he may the easier deceive us under the appearance of Millions of
Promises; that shall never have any other end, if he can, than the Eternal loss
of our Souls: But our dear Jesus, whose Affections we know to be sincere and
true, seeing himself refused at the door of a Christians heart, transforms
himself to all the Passions of a Celestial Lover, to invent the best means how
to overcome his Disgrace, and flatter himself with hopes, that though he
received a shameful refusal at his first Visit, he may be more honorably
received at his return: I reduce his admirable inventions to three Heads, all
taken out of Scripture: The first is grounded on the excellency of his proper
Person; the second on the setting forth of our Praises; The third on the
account he gives of all the Labors and Pains he takes in the pursuit of our
Souls: Attolite portas principes vestras and introibit Rex gloriae, Dominus
virtutum ipse est Rex gloriae, Psalm. 23. v. 9.
He produces for his first Invention the excellency of his proper Person, and
with a great deal of reason, for the Royal Prophet giving us a description of
his entering into Heaven, after he had accomplished on Earth the Will of his
Eternal Father, represents him to us knocking at the gates of Paradise: Open
your gates, O Prince! They enquire within, what he is; and he answers, that He
is their Lord, Powerful and Strong, the Lord of all Virtues, the King of all
Glory; Whereupon they presently opened their Gates, received him in, and
brought him into his Throne with the acclamations of all the whole Heavenly
Court. Vox dilecti mei pulsantis. Aperi mihi soror mea, amica mea, columba mea
immaculata mea, Cant. 5. v. 2.
The Holy Ghost represents himself in the self-same posture before a Heart that
he is desirous to Convert; open your door to me, my Sister, my dearly Beloved,
my Dove; The Mystery of this invention lies in that Word, To Me; For he might
absolutely command as Lord and Master, but he will have the Gospel of his
proper Person under the Title and Notion of a Lover, to be the Motive of our
Obedience: Open to me, who am not of the common sort of Lovers, but a Lover
that loves by Essence, a Lover without any mixture of Interest, only that of
your Salvation; I am He that carries about me Pardon and Mercy; and my Visits
are never without the effects of my Liberality. Ecce esto ad ostium and pulso,
si quis audierit vocem meam, and aperuit mihi januam, intrabo ad illum and
coenabo cum illo and ipse mecum. Apoc. 3. v. 20.
But if we take that same word in another sense, we shall find it to be a sweet
Correction he makes to a Soul; open your Heart to me, being that you did open
it to many others that are of a far Inferior condition to me. Here stands at
your door, He who is greater than Solomon; you have opened it, and given
admittance to the false Pleasures and deceitful Charms of the World, which have
violently dragged you into the dark Dungeon of Sensuality, there to devour you
at their leisure and ease: Quid necesse est ut cordis tui ostia clausa sint?
sponso aperiantur Christo, claudantur diabolo, juxta illud, si Spiritus
potestatem habentis ascenderit super te, ne demiseris locum tuum. D. Hier.
Epist. 22. ad Eustochium post me.
I am an Inchanter, it is true, and my voice has Charms, but none such as
Orpheus had to draw Rocks and Mountains; No, no, my Charms aim at a higher
purchase, which is the Hearts and Consciences of Men: All sorts of Sins are as
so many Night-walkers and Highway-Robbers that made their Address to you by
night or by day, have been heartily welcome to you: But what entertainment had
you from them? They compelled you to content to a Rebellion against your
Creator, they rendered you guilty of loosing Divine Majesty; And for conclusion
of a Fatal Tragedy, they will expose you at the mouth of Hell, as a lost sheep
and a loose Corn; to the end that dying in that Act of Treachery, you may learn
by your own sad experience, that their Salleys are never without a surprise:
Recover then your Wits, O wandering Souls, and know that the Excellency of a
Sovereign Majesty, (who humbles himself to find you out,) deserves well to have
the preference of your Affections.

What excuse can be made to such Powerful Charms? Pauper sum ego in laboribus a
juventute mea, Psalm. 87. v. 16.
What reply to such sweet Words? Youth answers, that Jesus knocks at their door
too early in the morning, that they are as yet in Bed, and will not rise so
soon; they believe that it is to press them overmuch to have them to engage
themselves so soon in the Service of God: Poor Children of Adam, what a weak
excuse you give ear to? He asks you nothing but what he practiced himself: I am
poor, says he, and was born poor, and from my Cradle I have been always in
labor and toil; To put off your Conversion till the next day, is a dangerous
thing, perhaps the Bed you lie on this day, may be your Grave to morrow;
perhaps that He who called you once, being put off with a denial, will come no
more to give you any further invitation: Moreover, if you fear to be weaned too
soon from the Contentments and Pleasures that this World can afford; Melior est
dies una in atriis tuis super milia Psalm. 83. v. 11.
know that the Pleasure of one day in Gods House, surpasses all the Pleasures
that the World can afford, if they were to last for an Eternity.

The second Invention that God makes use of in his call and pursuit of a Soul,
is, that after he had seen the first was to no purpose, he comes to our
Commendations and Praises, a common practice among worldly and false-hearted
Batchellors to get the Love of their pretended Mistress; you will see some of
those flattering Fools, to gain the Affection of a Mistress, Paint her Face
like unto a Morning Star, when it bears the first Rays of the Sun on our
Hemisphere; her fine Locks as Yellow as any Indian Gold, when it comes out of
the Cruisible; both her Eyes like to so many shining Stars in her Forehead,
which, with one favorable glance can revive the most languishing Heart; her
Body whiter and more polished than Ivory; her Voice sweeter than that of
Angels: In fine, she is a Mortal Deity, at whose feet they make so many
Protestations and Vows; Folly worthy to be laughed at by all reasonable men:
However the invention, when well applied, is most excellent, God makes use of
it; He gives the Soul four Titles of Honor, my Sister, my well-Beloved, my
Dove, my Immaculate; De sanguine meo soror mea, de accessu meo proxima mea, de
Spiritu meo columba mea, de sermon meo quem before ex etio didicisti,
perfecta mea. Lyran. in c. 5. Cant.
Remember that you are my Sister by the Sacrament of my Incarnation, if the
motions of a Civil Request, grounded on my own proper Merits, could work
nothing on your haughty Spirit, at least let the Right of Spiritual
Consanguinity be a motive of your recognizance. You are my Beloved by my
Passion, if there be no greater Friendship than to expose his Life for his
Friends; You ought to love me above all Creatures, for I suffered Death upon
your account: You are my Dove by the Communication of my Spirit; if the
simplicity of that little Creature, which has been to me a Symbol in my
Baptism, and a Faithful Messenger to the good man Noah in the Deluge, giving
you to understand that I had no Gaul in my heart against you, though you
deserved I should have reserved some to Chastise you for all your Abominations
and Crimes; you may learn further by her Example to live so in this World, that
you never wet the foot of your Affections, nor loiter, as the Crow did, to feed
on dead Carcasses, but to be always in a readiness to return to me, when I
shall open unto you the window of my heart, a Mystical Ark, pierced with a
Lance for your Love. You are my Immaculate by the use of the Holy Sacraments,
that my Flesh and Blood, (which is to you Food and refreshment in the
Eucharist,) be not a bit to poison you as another Judas, by the indisposition
of your ill prepared and ill affected Conscience, but rather a Sweet Nector to
increase and fortify the Life of your Soul, and perfume all her Faculties with
the delicate scent of Piety, that I may take pleasure to reside constantly in
your heart.

Dixit insipiens in cord suo, non est Deus. Psalm. 13. v. 1.
This second invention of Love prevails but very little, or rather, nothing at
all with Christians, and why so? Nam ita supere peccat and inverecunde ne si
non esset D^us. Lyran. in Psalm. 13.
Their excuse will be Ignorance, they did not know who it was that spoke: The
fool said in his heart, it is not God that knocks; It is therefore that the
Soul sends her Lacquey to the door to tell that Madam is not within, that he
that knocks may come another time, or if he has any Packet, to leave it, and it
shall be given to Madam when she comes from her walk: That Lady is the Soul,
the Lacquey is the Body; Caro concupiscit adversus spiritum, spiritus autem
adversus carnem. Gal. 5. v. 17.
for when God calls us to infuse some good Notions into our Souls, the Body is
always contrary, (as St. Paul says,) to the Spirit, is hard by to make
opposition: Let us consider, I pray, the malice of that excuse. What is the
reason that a Body gives orders to tell that he is not within when he is called
for? It is either because he is not dressed and in a condition to appear; or that
the person that looks for him is not grateful to him, or that he is Indebted to
him, and having not wherewithal to pay him, he commands his Servants to tell
that he is not within. O great God be not offended with the Impudence of that
bold Harlot, who gives Orders to tell that she is not within, when you call for
her: For in good earnest she is not within, she is far from you; her Sins have
carried her away to some Foreign Region, as far off as another Prodigal Child;
and though she had been within, she wants the Robe of Charity; she is in no
condition to appear: Her Face is made black with the Cole of her Crimes, your
sight would make her horrible; moreover, your company is nothing acceptable to
her; Quae enim participatio justitiae cum iniquitate, etc. 2 Cor. 6. v. 14.
for betwixt Light and Darkness there is no Communication. Belial and Jesus
never lodge under the same Roof, but what troubles her mind most, is, that she
is your Debtor, and accountable to you for so great a number of Graces, that
she has not wherewithal to make you the least satisfaction; an excuse without
ground, apology without any reason; Ad excusandas excusationes in peccatis.
Psalm. 104. v. 4.
Let it be so as you will have it, that she is far from her God. Is it not God
that gathers together the scattered Sheep, and leaves Ninety Nine in Heaven to
look for one that is lost on Earth? If she be naked and without the Ornaments
of Charity, is it not Jesus that clothes them without any other cost, charge or
trouble, only to be willing to receive them? But she has not wherewithal to
make satisfaction, let her not trouble her mind with any; and if she had, she
cannot of her self merit the least degree of Grace in the rigor of Justice,
whilst she is under the Law of sin: It is enough that the precious Blood of
Jesus is of an Infinite value to make all those excuses frivolous, and never to
be admitted of.

The third invention of Love that Jesus imploys in our search, is to set before
our eyes the labors he undergoes upon this account; as a loving Father to his
Children, though debauched out of all measure: after the respect and authority
of a Father could not prevail with them, no more than his sweet alluring words,
and his threatenings; he comes at last with a sad countenance, the tears in his
eyes, and fetches a languishing sigh from the bottom of his Heart. Ungrateful,
will you always continue the subject of my Afflictions? At the age that I am
in, I should by course take my rest; Yet it is Then that I see my self engaged
in a thousand troubles, and all this upon your account: I deprive my self of
all contentments for to advance your Fortune: I expose my life to many hazards
for to preserve yours; if you have not the good nature to requite my
affections, at least have compassion of my Labor and Toil. God does the same,
Aperi mihi quia caput meum plenum est rore, etc. Cant. 5. v. 2.
as you may see in many places of Scripture; My hair (says he) is all wet with
the dew, and therefore opens the door to let me in. A Man who has traveled all
night upon some earnest occasion, will come to the door of a Lodging two hours
before day; in the morning he appears there all in a Fog, and dung-wet; the
first that meets with him is moved with compassion; Oh! Poor Traveller, I see
you are sadly wet; and how (says he) could I avoid it? Here I have stood these
two long hours under all this Rain, knocking at the door, and as yet I see no
body come to let me in. Servire me fecisti in peccatis tuis, etc. Isa. 43. v.
24.
It Is so with the Savior of the Word, I ran, (says he) all night in Post have
to meet with a Soul at her up-rising; I went through thick and thin, Frost and
Snow, in a Cold, Windy, Rainy Season, I arrived early before the break of day
at her door, I knocked, I called, and recalled, I knocked again and again, but
no body appeared; and here I am wet and weary, and have nothing for all my
Labor: But here I discover another Mystery; For if our Savior's hair be wet
with the dew, for having tarried too long a time at the door of our Souls, it
must of necessity follow that he was bare-headed; Even as a Man who is desirous
to hear what is said, or see what is done in a Lodging, stoops down, takes off
his Hat, draws nearer for fear that he should not hear the voice of them from
whom he expects his answer; En ipse stat post parietem nostrum respiciens, etc.
Cant. 2. v. 9. In pariete propriae voluntatis fenestras reperit Deus,
inclinationis nimirum ipsius voluntatis, per quas respiciat gratiae intuitu,
and quasi per cancellorum foramina inspirationum suarum radios immitat:
Gislerius in cap. 2. Cant. expo. 3. v. 9.
So that in the ardent desire he has to hear and see what is doing within
doors, he willingly suffers all foul weathers: The Holy Ghost makes use of the
same Comparison: Lo! here he is, (says he, speaking of the Spouse,) hidden
behind the wall, who looks in through the openings and chincks of the door; for
he is so desirous to know what we do, and whether we hear his voice or no, that
he spares not to stoop down and look in through those overtures with a great
deal of attention, for fear that our answers should be so weak, that he could
not over-hear them.

Have we spoke the good word? have we produced an act of amendment of life? God
is overjoyed, as if he had found what he looked for, he gives notice to the
Angel-keeper; Oh! I have heard her voice at last, that Soul hitherto always
gave me the deaf Ear! Here she comes now to the Door, now she is mine; I heard
her say that she would quit the World, and all its allurements to follow me: I
am extraordinary well satisfied now for all my Labors.

Vos de deorsum estis ego de supernis sum, etc. John 8. v. 28.
The third excuse that Worldings bring down to justify their crooked ways, is,
that they are not of the same Religion that Jesus Christ is of, and therefore
they can have no Communication with him, without undervaluing their own
Profession; Pray, dear Jesus, let us know what Religion you are of? I am, (says
he) from above, and you are from below; I am from Heaven, and you from the
World: Above and below, Heaven and Earth, are far asunder: We must not think it
strange then, if betwixt God and us there is so little correspondence; if he
goes among the great ones to purchase their Souls, they will be very free with
him, they will tell him plain downright, that they are none of his Profession,
they will warn him away from Court, for they will have none of his Maxims
there. Jesus makes an open Declaration in his Gospel, that though he be King of
all the World, yet that his Kingdom (as for the Dominion of Lucre and Profit,)
was not here below; For Humility was his Prerogative; the Cross his Scepter;
the Thorn his Crown; Calvary his Palace; Labor and Toil, Afflictions and
Crosses, his Revenues: The Martyrs his Regiments; the Disciples his Guards;
Filij Agar exquierent sapientiam que de terra est. Baruch. 3. v. 23.
and the Poor Apostles his Officers. The care of Great ones is quite contrary,
for all their Study is to amplify their Estates, by the utter Destruction of
their Inferiors, and Ruin of the Vulgar sort; To shun Crosses, to follow
Ambition; to suppress Devotion, and all Christian Exercise; to follow the
Maxims of a most unlucky Policy, that makes no further use of true Religion,
than as long as they see it consist with their Designs; Matchiavel's Doctrine,
the most wicked of all Mortals. If he goes to knock at the door of
Ecclesiastical Persons, he shall receive no better welcome: Obliti sunt Deum qui
nutrivit eos, etc. Baruch. 4. v. 8.
For if Jesus be a vigilant Pastor over all his Flock, and feeds his Sheep with
his own Flesh, and the Blood of his Veins, to give them Life everlasting, if
well received, the most part of Churchmen will be either wicked or
unprofitable, wicked for not honoring the greatness of their Character and
Sacerdotal Ministry by the good example of their holy life and conversation:
unprofitable for their want of courage to arm themselves manfully to resist the
often incursions of Satan that Infernal Wolf, who devours the Flock of Jesus;
not daring to bark for fear of blows. Totus mundus in maligno positus est. 1
John 4. v. 19.
Go over all other States and Conditions, their return shall be the same, their
answers alike, and their obstinacy in all points equal. So that what ever
endeavors our Savior makes to convert us, and call us to himself, Arvinae
toris membrorum moles robusta pinguesci ut saginatus in poenam charius pereat,
etc. Cypr. ad donat.
though they be very efficacious, yet they are often without effect: Because
that it seems we made a Vow to destroy our selves. A State truly deplorable, if
our dear Jesus had not a greater Love and Care of us, than we seem to have of
our own Salvation.

CHAP. XII. That to become Servants to God, we must know the World.
IT is a true Maxim generally received among Philosophers, that to speak
pertinently of a thing, we must have a full knowledge of its Nature; which
cannot be acquired but either by Definition or Description: The first makes
appear it is Essence in the constitutive Principles of its Being; the second
discovers its principal properties, by the Operations that strike at our
Senses. My aim is to let the Soul know, that to convert her, God sets before
her eyes what a deplorable thing it is to serve the World: I cannot perform
this methodically, but by describing its properties, to the end that we
conceive as much esteem for it, and no more than it has of real and
well-grounded conditions, which render it worthy of Love.

What is the World? Omne quod est in munda concupiscentia carnis est, etc. John
2. v. 16.
If I make my Addresses to Scripture, there I shall find the three main Pillars
that bear it up: Concupiscence of the Eyes, Disorder of the Flesh, and Pride of
Life. If I consult the Philosopher, he will tell me, that it is a Sophistical
and cheating Argument, that always deceives by Equivocation, that places the
shadow for the real Existence of things, That has but Negative Principles, and
would fain conclude affirmatively: If I put the Question to Astronomers, their
answer will be, that it is a strayed and wandering Star, that has no fixed or
settled place, and whence they can draw no assured ground to know the Horoscope
or Fortune of any Creature, that it is a Body formed in the Region of the Air,
which, having no support but a light and inconstant Cloud, vanishes away as
soon as it begins to appear. The Mathematician is much of the same opinion, he
will tell you that it is an unknown Figure, that it is at the same time both
Limited and Infinite, Circular and Quadrangular. Quid est mundus nisi lutum and
faex, penset qui potest quantis usque in hodierum diem sordibus haec mundi
valis repleatur, etc. Petus Blesensis. Archid. Batton.
The Poets will Rhyme it out, that it is an Icarus, whose Wings, being fixed on
with Wax, do melt with the Sun; a Cupid that has no eyes, a Laborinth that hides
a Minotaur who devours as many as venture to come into it. The Holy Fathers are
of the same Confession with Peter of Blois; that it is but Dirt and Misery,
whose Infection began to plague the World, when Adam began his revolt in
Paradise.

1 Reg. c. 6.
If we be desirous to see its pourtraict drawn to the Life, we may go to the
1st. Book of Kings, where we shall find how the Children of Israel, (always
lovers of alteration and change,) would no more submit themselves to the Divine
Laws under the conduct of Judges; the resolution being taken, they dispatched
one of their Elders to Ramatha where Samuel was, he tells of his Commission
from the three States Assembled some days before, Congregati ergo universi
majores natu Israel. etc. 1 Reg. 8. v. 4.
in the same Order and Form as usual, to treat about the most important Affairs
of the City: and what have you done in your Meeting? He answers, Dixerunt ei,
e^ce tu senuisti, and filij tui non amb^lant in viis tuis constitue nobis
Regnem, etc. Ibid. v. 1.
considering that you are grown old, and that your Children do not follow your
steps, their resolution is to be Governed no more by Judges, but to have a King
to Govern them; And therefore I do in their Name demand a King, who may be
pleasing to the People, and for the good of the States in general. Poor Samuel
was very much surprised at this unexpected alteration; for he thought, that for
his many good Services done to this ungrateful People, they would continue him
and his Posterity after him in that Honorable Charge: But God, who resents the
afflictions and affronts cast upon his Officers, Non enim te abjecerunt sed me,
ne regnem super eos.
assures him by his Angel, that he takes that affront as done to his proper
Person: He comforts him by telling him, that it was no wonder they should treat
him so, being they trod under their Feet the respect they ought to have for his
Majesty, and as for their request that they should have it e're long, but that
they should soon repent so Foolish an undertaking. Therefore I command you to
tell them in my Name, Hoc erit jus Regis qui imperaturus est vobis and Ibid. v.
11.
that they shall have a King, seeing they do demand one: But fail not to tell
them what shall be the Order of his Government, and Rights of his Scepter.
First he shall employ their Children in the Ministry of his House, some shall
be his Grooms, others his Lacqueys to follow his Coaches. As for their
Daughters, Filias quoque vestras faciet sibi unguentarias and focarias and
panificas. Ibid. v. 13.
let them never expect to come to any great Fortune, or have any Honorable
Alliance that shall be able to free them from Slavery; They shall have no
better condition than to be Skullions in his Kitchen, to bring Paste to the
Oven; and for conclusion, they shall become Strumpets for the Rabble. Moreover,
let them know, that the King they look for, will strip them out of their proper
Inheritance, therewith to reward his Servants. Greges quoque vestros
addecimabit, vosque eritis ei servi. Ibid. v. 17.
This is not as yet all; For what little will remain to them of their Goods,
and what they will be able to acquire by the Labor of their hands, and sweat
of their brows, shall be so charged with Taxes and Subsidies, that they shall
be forced to confess that Death would be more grateful to them, than a life so
languishing, and so intermixed with Miseries; Yet notwithstanding all those
rigours, this People (obstinate in their misfortune) do laugh at all those
threatenings, and will have a King to their fancy, whatever it cost them.

That is, I think, Satis r^rus est qui possit dicere tuus sum, non potest
dicere saecularis, plures enim dominos habet, venit avaritia and dicit meus es,
quia argentum and aurum quod habes fervitutis tuae pretium est, venit luxuria
and dicit, meus es, quia unus diei convivium pretium tuae vitae est, etc. Ambr.
in Psalm. 118. sermon. 12.
very near the humor of those, that live in the World if they be weary of
God's conduct: They would fain shake off his Yoke though light and pleasant: In
a word, they call for another King to Govern them, but he must be at their own
Election, and so they make choice of the World. God, who never covets a
multitude of People to amplify his Dominions, being that all Creatures, as
well actual as possible, have not the power to add the least Flower to his
Crown, would freely scorn those frantic Salleys of our corrupt nature, but
that he reserves always a Fatherly Heart for the poor Sinners, Et Paulo post de
Juda ait venit and intr^iuit in eum Sathanas and coepit dicere, tuus non est,
Jesu, sed meus est, etc. Paulo Inferius. Tecum bibit, and mihi sanguinem tuum
vendit, tuus est Apostalus, and meus mercenarius. D. Ambr. supra.
notwithstanding all their disorders; he will not, (it is true) retain any in
his Service, against the Laws of Free Will and Liberty: However when a Soul
bids him adieu, and is fully resolved to get out of his House, he cannot but
resent it. His expression on that occasion is so full of Love, that it moves me
to weep when I read it: My People, (says be) what have I done to you? What is
it that I have molested you in, Popule meus quid feci tibi, aut in quo molestus
fui, responde mihi. Micheae 6. v. 7. Pro quo sanctus Hieron vertit, quo labor
te pressi, Vatabus quanam re fatigavi te, Chald. quam infirmitatem gravem
multiplicavi superte. Quid feci, inquit tibi, tanquam reum se constituit, and
te judicem. D. Ambr. in Psalm. 10. ad illud, ut vincas cum judicaris. Istud
ipsum summopere admirandum est quod cum experimentum coeperit and gustum
divinae benignitatis persenserit peccator cognoscatque Christum esse Dominum,
relicto tamen Christo crudelem Tyrannum complectatur. C. Chrysostom. com 4.
homil. 18. in c. 5. Ephesians.
that you are resolved to forsake my House and Service? Have you therein been
unworthily dealt with? What did you want for? Have my Commandments surpassed
your forces? You cannot complain of any want, being you have the management of
all my Treasures, and that also you have the Keys in your own custody: I
boarded you at my own Table, where you have been served with the Bread of
Angels. Upon what account then have you taken that resolution, to serve another
Master? The obstinate Worldling continues still his purpose to have the World
for his King, whatever betides him: Well, says God, you shall have it for your
King, being you are of that mind; go on, you will soon repent your bad choice:
You know not as yet the Master you desire to serve; his Laws are most rigorous,
his Government Tyranical, his Scepter a Rod of Iron.

I may soon let you see by a most sensible deduction, what a sad thing it is to
serve the World, and how often you meet there with what you never looked for.
The wishes of a Man in the World, may be reduced to three heads; either to
content his ordinate appetite, refusing nothing to his Senses, or to have a
great deal of Wealth to put himself in Vogue among the People; or to have a
good Issue of Children to suceeed him in his Inheritance, and keep up his Name;
My opinion is, that a Man's condition in the World is most unlucky in all those
three respects.

But first I must tell you, that your King (the World) has many
Vice-Governours, who will pretend to a Mastership over you, so that by serving
that unhappy King, you bind your selves over to many Masters; Covetousness will
tell you, that you are his Servant, and that you have from him your Gold and
Silver as a Reward for your good Service: Letchery will allege that you are
his Servant, because that he gave you a Feast of a moment, for an Eternity of
displeasure. Hi velut irr^tionabilia pecora naturaliter in captionem and in
perniciem in his quae ignotant blasphemantes, etc. 2 Petr. 2. v. 12.
Treachery gets into Judas, and tells Jesus that he is none of his Servant, for
the Devil his Grand-master bought him to betray his Savior and Lord for Thirty
pence, though he drinks with you, (he tells him) he sells your Blood to me; he
is your Apostle, but my Hireling: Now as for the pleasure of the Body, besides
that it is to resent the Beast, and the Epicurian; Quid deliciarum foeditas
mali non inducit, sues ex hominibus facit imo vero etiam multo majores: sus
enim in luto volvitur, and stercore nutritur, hic vero abominabilem magis
mensam sibi construit, iniquas commixtiones excogitans, hic nullo cette a
daemonico discrimine separatur. D. Chysost. homil. 58. in Matthew.
I will tell you that it could never as yet, nor ever will afford it any true
pleasure; for they should be true and solid, either by the cause that produces
them, or by the Subject that receives them, or by the effects that follow them:
The cause that produces them, is a vicious and corrupt nature, which is cursed
by the mouth of the Omniponent in Genesis: What good could ever come from a bad
Principle? the Subject that receives them, is Man, who is it that ever was made
happy by taking his pleasure? I know that the foolish sort of this World, have
received from Satan a new kind of Religion, wherein they have but two Articles;
the one, is never to Think, or trouble their mind for things to come: The
second Article, is never to deny to their Appetites what pleasures the present
time can afford: But I remit such as are of that Belief, to natural Theology,
which, if received in their Hearts, may dissolve all those Clouds of Ignorance,
if they do not set a stop to its light: If they do, I must then remit them over
to experience, which I may call a night Lanthorn. The effects that follow, do
likewise show the Malignity of the Cause; for in exchange of one pleasure you
have a thousand sorrows, for a moment of Joy, eternal Punishment: their
lamenting, and the Tears that come from their Eyes, are sufficient witness of
the bitterness they do resent in their Hearts.

To find in the World a Child who gives any true content to his Parents, Utile
est mori sine filiis quam relinquere filios impios. Eccl. 16. v. 4.
is a rare thing on Earth; he must be an Arabian Phoenix, who can well be
described, yet never found out but once in an Age; Their birth is waited on
with Lamentation and Tears, Pueritia tua adolescentiae tua inhonestamentum fuit
adolescentiae senectutis dedecoramentum, senectus Reipublicae flagitium.
Isidor. lib. 2. Orig. c. 21.
and with a deal of reason, to the end the Fathers and Mothers should observe,
and set down in their memorials, that the first day they became Parents, they
begin to spin a Thread which would lead them into a Labarinth of Afflictions:
It is better to depart this World without Children, than to leave wicked ones
behind, (says the Wise) for you shall see some (hardly come to the use of
reason) play such mad prancks, Ossa ejus implebuntur vitiis adol^scentiae sua
and cum eo in pulvere dormient. Job 20. v. 19.
that they rather seem to be an Offspring of Hell, than the production of any
Christian Race; the Breasts that they have Sucked, (in my opinion) were more
full of Malice than of Milk, being that their Souls are better stored with bad
habits, than their Bodies with any good substance, which makes me believe, that
they will be rather the Blood-suckers of those that gave them the Breast and
Birth, than their Relievers, and Staff of their old Age. Job confirms the same
thing, (he says) that an old Man will carry the Crimes of his Youth, along with
him to his Grave.

Equus iudomitus evadit durus, and filius remissus evadit praecip^. Eccl. 30.
A wild Horse you may be sure will be hard mouthed, and a wild youth will run
headlong to his damnation, if he be not strictly kept under and curbed; this
is the feeling of the Holy Ghost, and it must be very true. A poor Father will
run himself headlong into so many Inconveniences, Filii dum pueri sunt
parentibus differunt capitis dolorem, dum vero adoleverint cordis dolorem.
Proverbium Belgarum
he will deprive himself of the influences of Heaven and Earth, to have them
fall on his Son, thinking that he will be the Staff of his Old Age, and the
Pillar of his Family; But it happens to the contrary, for in lieu of a Staff of
Old Age, he has but a Reed full of wind; and for a Son, a Tyrant to torment him
every day and every hour: By sending him to the Academy, he thought he should
return home a true Nursery of Wisdom, the Honor of Virtue, and the
unchangeable Defender of Justice; but all his Hopes are changed into an Abiss
of Sadness; for he is become a Monster of Malice, an abominable Scandal to all
the World; by day he is a greedy Crow carried on by his Venereal Flames to all
rotten Carcasses and slaves to Venus; By night he is no better than a Ravenous
Wolf that lives by the spoil of the very poor; every where he goes he has the
repute of a Devil, his Body is the Hell of his Soul; you hear nothing come from
his Mouth but dark and Sacrilegious words; These are the smoaky stinking
vapors, which the very Satanick Impiety, that consumes his Heart, breaths out
at every moment: The thoughts of Heaven and of his Salvation are as rare with
him, as if he had been already confirmed in his everlasting misfortune. There
is a man of the World for you, harnis'd like a Mule in a Wagon full of
Maledictions.

Virtuous Ladies are as rare, as Children well Bred. The Philosopher, who in
the open Streets of Athens with a Lanthorn in his hand at noonday, looked for
a Virtuous man, Elevatae sunt filiae Sion ambulaverunt extento collo. Isa. 3.
v. 6.
might very well take one in each hand to find out a Wise and Virtuous Lady:
For Vanity seems to be so incident to that Sex, that on all occasions they
would have themselves adored as so many Divinities; but that the ugliness of
their Feet, even as the Peacock, forces them to acknowledge the frailty and
weakness of their Nature. If the foolish fancies of Love have once got into
their Breasts, there is no talking to them of living any longer under their
Mothers wings: Their Stubborness, their Impudence, their Boldness, turns clear
from their Hearts and Faces, all Respect, all Modesty, all Shame: The World has
got such an Influence over their Affections, as being their King; that after he
had treated them as the Scullions of his Kitchen, he leaves them as a Reward
for all their Service, an everlasting repentance for having ever loved him so
much. Ut pulvis a turbine, sic opes ab aliis ad alios subinde ventilantur atque
jactantur, umbrae qui instar manibus teneri nequaquem possunt, nec desperatae
carentibus, nec satis certae possidentibus. Greg. Naz. in orat. ad Julianum
tributorum exequatorem.


In fine, perhaps the great Wealth, Estates, Possessions and Riches, that the
World gives to some, will be a sufficient motive to retain them in his Service:
Alas! how can they be ignorant, that these are so many Nets to entangle them
further in their slavery, and render them incapable ever to enjoy the liberty
of true born Children of God, which might wean them from all the Terrestrial
Affections, and transport their love toward Heaven the originary land of their
Nativity; they are Tokens sold and bought very dear, and for which he expects
extraordinary service, with a thousand sorts of compulsions and violence:
However all this might be born with, if we were but sure of its constant
enjoyment and long possession: But we see in the twinkling of an eye, a Rich
man made the most miserable of Mortals; now a Craessus, presently a Craetes. It
is then very true by the deduction of those three heads, that he who forsakes
the service of God to live under the Government of a Tyrannical Prince,
forsakes his Father to meet with his Enemy, turns tail to his Happiness, to
face his Misfortunes, declines from his true and well-affected Judge, to cast
himself into the hands of his Tormenter. Vadam post amatores meos qui dant
panes, mihi and aquas meas. Ozee. 2. v. 5.

An non est hoc durae frontis, and meretriciae impudentiae, ut in suo scelere
glorietur and dicat sequar amatores meos, etc. D. Hier. hic.




That our God makes use of that knowledge to Convert a Sinner, Scripture makes
it out, where you may find in Hosea the Prophet, a man who resolves to forsake
the Service of God, to follow his Passions, and rank himself under the
Tyrannical Laws of this corrupt World; I will go, says he, after my Lovers,
that give me both Linen and Woollen, and Oil to Drink; as if he would say,
the ways of God are very Austere, in his House they speak of no other thing,
but of carrying of Crosses, renouncing ones Self, banishing proper Love,
practicing Mortification, and wearing of Hair-Cloath: I grudge those ways, I
will hereafter give Obedience to the World, whose Maxims are far more sweet,
the company more grateful, and the Commandments more conformable to Nature:
What says St. Hierome, To glory in their Iniquity, and declare openly that they
will forsake God, to follow the World, and to run after its unlawful
Allurements; is it not to bear the front and face of a bold Impudent Strumpet.

Spinis electorum viae sepiuntur dum dolorum punctiones inveniunt in hoc quod
temperaliter concupiscunt, quasi interposita materia vis eorum obviat quorum
nimirum defideria perfectionis difficultas impugnat. D. Greg. 34. moral. cap. 2.
No, no, says our Savior, I stop you there, you shall not find what you look
for in the World, I will set Bushes, Thorns, and great Stones in the way where
you think to pass through, that at last you shall be constrained to come back:
You think to live at your Ease in the World; I will contrive it so, that all
Creatures shall rise up against you, to control your Designs: You think to
meet with Friends, but I will order it, that your nearest Relations shall be
the first that will trouble your Settlement; you think to enjoy your Liberty
with more ease and less contradiction, Vadam and revertar ad virum meum
priorem, nam dum diversitatibus mundi, quem diligit anima morderi coepit, tunc
before intelligit, quanto illi, cum priore viro melius fuit eos ergos quos
voluntas prava pervertit, plerumque adversitas corrigit. Idem Greg. supra.
by withdrawing your self from my conduct: I will render you a far greater
Slave than any of the Criminals at the Chain in their Galleys: Those sound
Corrections and Divine Reproaches had so much power over that wavering Spirit,
that at last he is forced to acknowledge his fault, and openly declare that he
would return to his former Master; because, says he, it is better to be with
him than here, where I find but the bare shadow of good luck and contentment:
Whereas in Gods Service I shall have all assurance of Glory, and everlasting
Felicity.

CHAP. XIII. That we cannot complain of the want of sufficient means for our
Conversion.
WE must suppose for a ground of this our Discourse, that all Gods Graces
tending to our Conversion may be reduced to two equal Divisions: That is, to
the Graces, that begin and dispose us to our Coversion, and all those Graces
are comprehended under the term and notion of (less sufficient to Salvation,)
or to the Graces which do effectually concur to our Conversion, and those we
call actual and efficacious Graces: This is, the Doctrine of all true Divines
against Calvin, Bellarm. tom: 3. controvers. l. 1. de great. and lib. arbitrio.
c. 11.
Luther and Pelagius; The one, as Graceless, denies Grace for good and all; the
rest will acknowledge none but what is Efficacious: The great St. Augustine, D.
Aug lib. 1. de praedest. sanct. c. 10. tom. 7. statim initio.

Vocat Deus praedestinatos multos filios suos, ut eos faciat membra
praedestinati vinci filii sui non ea vocatione qua vocati sunt qui noluerunt
venire ad nuptias, sed ea vocatione praedestinatos vocat, quam distinxit
Apostolus. Vide catera ibidem.


discoursing at large of the effects of Gods good will for us, gives us the
same distinction in diverse Expressions; In one place, he says, That God has two
means which he makes use of to Convert a Sinner and work his Salvation; the one
is Powerful in its Effect, Infallible in its Operation; and this he imploys for
Predestinate Souls; The other is that which he gave to those that he did invite
to the Nuptials, but took their Excuses and would not come: The former is
called Efficacious according to Gods purpose; This, sufficient, in the design
that he has to destroy no body. That is so infallible in its effect, that
whosoever receives it, St. John assures him, John. 16.
That Hell with all its forces shall never be able to take him out of Gods
Hands. This, is an effect of the Divine Goodness, but suspended through the
malice of our corrupt Will, which does not concur with that Offspring of all
her Happiness: That, is never found separated from the practice of Good, or the
exercise of Virtue; This is only a bare faculty, which gives of it self the
Power to hope for Goodness, if we please; but most commonly we keep it a Slave
and a Prisoner under the Irons of Blood and Flesh, as the Apostle says, Romans 8.
v. 4.
The benignity of God has called you to Repentance; but the hardness of your
Soul, and your obstinate Heart has increased Gods Indignation and wrath which
shall come thundering on your Heads at the day of Judgment.

This distinction makes out, that the word, Sufficient, must not be taken as
the Grammarians do; that is, as if this only means had been able to conduce a
Soul to the final point of her Conversion: No, it must be understood in the
style of Theology, for a means sufficient to Salvation, if it be naanag'd as it
ought to be. So we say in the most Sacred Mystery of the Incarnation, that our
Savior did sufficiently operate the Salvation of all men; yet notwithstanding
all that sufficiency, Mortals-will fall into the large and common rode of
Perdition, if they do not really and efficaciously apply the passion of Christ
to themselves; by resenting his Sadness, his Grief, and his Pains, and join
this application to that sufficiency, as a condition, without which, nothing
can be done to our advantage.

In the second place we must suppose, that among the sufficient means to
Conversion; some are Interior, others Exterior; the Interior means is no
other than a Godly Thought, which by Gods assistance gives light to the
understanding to see the misery and deplorable state of the Soul, and makes the
poor sinner to give a mournful glance toward Heaven, his Native soil, and
place of rest; or otherwise an affection or desire in the will to withdraw the
Heart from all Terrestrial Laws, to aim only and earnestly at his Sovereign
good, which is God. The Exterior sufficiency of means further off, are helps
proceeding from second Causes whereof God makes use as of Instruments to
conduct us by degrees to a capacity of receiving far greater Graces: Vis^rum
sua sionibur agit Deus ut velimus and credamus, and extrinsicus exhortationes,
sive intrinsecus, ubi nemo habet in potestate quid ei veniat in mentem, sed
consentire vel dissentire. D. Aug. de spiritu and lit. cap. 3.
In this rank of Exterior means, are Exhortations, Preaching of the Word of
God, Reading of good Books, the good Example of Neighbors, the afflictions of
the Body, troublesome Times, alteration of Things, and such like misfortunes.

That being supposed, let us draw out of the Registery of Holy Scripture the
justifying pieces of Gods good will for Man, to whom he never denied the
sufficient means of his Conversion, Miseris omnium quia omnia potes, non enim
odiens aliquid constituisti. Sap. 11.
and his coming to Salvation. But, before we proceed any further, let us make
use of a familiar comparison, to give the Reader a clearer understanding of
this Doctrine, and say, That God behaves himself in this Case as would a
General of an Army, who has good wishes for two of his Soldiers; to one he
gives a Captain's place; by which, if he does acquit himself well, he may raise
his Fortune without any great Cost: The other he leaves with the bare
Qualification of a single Soldier, but he orders him to be paid punctually as
the rest, assuring him nevertheless, that if he be Faithful to perform his
Duty, he will advance him from Charge to Charge, until that he attains to the
condition of his Comerade: The one and the other are sufficiently provided for
by their Captain of means to come to a Fortune; And it is to no purpose to say,
that there is a great deal of inequality in the case, being the one is brought
so near the Throne of Fortune, that he may touch it in a manner with his
Finger; and the other is in the highway to come to it in time, but only with
more toil. So God in the desire he has to save all men, sets some in a state
so near their Conversion, that they need only to stretch out the Arm of their
Will, by a free concurrence of a sincere Cooperation, and there they are
presently out of Satan's Power, under the jurisdiction of Jesus, King of all
Glory. He puts others in a state further off, that tends notwithstanding to
their Conversion: if they do but stand Faithfully to their Arms, and fight
Courageously; so that they may well say with the Angel speaking to the Prophet
who lay weary under a Tree, Illuminat omnem hominem ven^ent^^ in hunc mundum.
Joan. cap. 1 v 9. Id est illuminat eum qui a Deo r^cedens, and cadens en mundum
cac^^us est. Glosa in^erlin^^^s tit.
we have as yet a long way to go. However the one and the other are
sufficiently provided for by our bountiful and gracious God: St. John the
darling of Jesus Christ, (who by leaning on his Masters breast, (the
Word-Incarnate) had learned the highest secrets of Theology in its proper
source,) represents him to us, coming into the World under the Symbol of a most
bright Sun, Enlightening all men that were to come to life from the Creation to
the Consummation of all Ages. An excellent comparison, for even as the Sun
there above seated in his Lightsom Throne, pours down on all parts his Rays and
Lights with such a deal of Liberality, that you would say he would exhaust
himself, Per solemn intelligi potest non iste visibilis, sed ille de quo dicitur
vobis qui timetis nomen domini orietur sell justitiae, and per pluviam irrigatio
doctrinae, quia and bonis and malis aparuit, and evangelisatus est chorus. D.
Aug. tom. 4. de sermon. domini in monte lib. cap. 46.
and deprive Himself of Himself for the good of the World, so far as to oblige
the very Rocks to open their bosoms and receive his Influence. So our Savior
and Redeemer of our Souls, true Sun of Justice seated in his Throne of Glory,
pours down with both Hands the Blessings and Divine Influences of his ardent
Love; all Breasts though never so hard, are watered with his Graces, to let
every one know that his design is to banish from our hearts the clouds of our
Ignorance and the Obstinacy of our Malice. The Prophet-Royal seems to dive
further into the secrets of this comparison, when he says, that not only he is
Enlightened with this Divine Light, Non est qui se abscondat a calore ej^^,
Psalm. 18. v. 7^
who presents himself without any resistance to receive his effects: But also
that Jesus is a fire who brings his heat into the most frozen Souls to molifie
and dissolve their Ice.

Hence it comes that God sometimes dispatches an Angel from Heaven on purpose
toward a Sinner obstinate in his Abominations, Ite Angeli veloces ad gentem
convulsam and dilaceratam, etc. Isa. 18. v. 2.
who passed over all the days of his Life in the cold Winter of his
In-devotions, to open his Heart for to receive the Flames of his Love: Another
time he commands a Preacher, Vocatio gentium hic describitur, and liberatis de
manibus mundi and Sathanae per Christum facta, heu inquit terra quae es sita
ultra Aethiopiam, quae scates fluminibus, id est, terra in extremo orb posita,
synec dochice ultimas. Vatabl. and fererivo hist.
and an Apostolical Missioner to cross the Seas, hazard his Life, and break off
all obstacles to meet with a poor Sumatre, a Javan, an Indian, a Japanian, to
Preach the Gospel to him, give him a full knowledge of the Mysteries of our
Redemption, make him to forsake his Barbarous ways and Behavior, as also the
Worship of False Gods, to live hereafter under the Government of one God, and
of one Law, that requires and commands nothing but Love and Peace.

The Eternal Wisdom jointly with his Paternal Providence are so forward to
maintain the Union established in the order of Creatures at their Creation,
that the grand pieces of the Universe would sooner quit their stations than
fuffer any disorder or disunion among them: In case of necessity you would see
the Earth ascend, and the Firmament to descend, sooner than suffer any void
place within the enclosure of Nature: The Divine Providence, in matter of Grace
and Communication of his Favors, observes the same Rules; for sooner than
suffer any vacuity in a Soul, or give occasion to any reasonable Creature to
complain that he had not received sufficient means for his Conversion, The
Seraphins in Heaven who live only by the ardent Flames of Gods Love, and who by
their charge are always the next to his Throne, as being the Angels of his
Privy Council: They would notwithstanding sooner forsake Heaven, if it were
necessary, to bring into a Sinners Breast the Light of Grace, and draw him out
of all danger of everlasting loss by force of Cords and Ropes. In funiculis
Adam traham eos. Osee. 11. v 4. Non arbitreris istam asperam molestamque
violentiam, dulcis est, suavis est, ipsa te suavitas trahit. D. Aug. tom. 10.
sermon. 2. d^^verbis Apostoli.
You would sooner see the dead Carcasses revive, and get out of their Graves to
Preach to the Living, than they should be deprived of sufficient means to work
their Salvation. St. Peter will have all men to humble themselves under the
Powerful Hand of God, and cast all their care on him, because that being our
common Father, he has engaged himself to provide for us in all our necessities.
Omnem solicitudinem projicientes in eum, quoni^m ipsi cura est de vobis. 1
Petr. c. 5. v. 7.
The Vessel of Election, St. Paul, who more particularly than the rest of the
Apostles, seems to extol the Uniformity of God's Graces, (says openly,) that in
their distribution, he keeps such an equality, Idem Dominus omnium dives in
omnes. Romans cap. 10. v. 12.
that the Jew has nothing to boast of more than the Grecian, because that he is
absolute Lord of the one and of the other; always resolved, as for his part, to
open in such sort, the Treasures of his Riches to this Man, that the other
shall have no occasion to say, that he is positively excluded from any share.

CHAP. XIV. That the Infidel and Still-born Children cannot complain of God.
Omnes homines vult salvos fieri and ad agnitionem veriatis venire, etc. 1 Timothy
cap. 2.
THe Infidel cannot complain of God's proceedings in matters of Salvation,
though he had been hidden among the rest of wild Beasts in the Caves and Dens
of the lower Thebaide, had he been far more wild than Tigers, and fierce than
Lions: For the general propositions of Scripture, which give us to understand,
Sine acceptione personarum judicat, etc. 1 Petr. 2. v. 17.
that God wills not the death of any person, but that every one be converted
and live; that all men be saved and come to the knowledge of Truth; Quinque
modis vult Deus omnes salvos fieri 1 s^b condition, si ipsi volunt 2 cum
impletione, quia nullus nisi eo volente sanus fit: 3. cum distributionis
restrictione, id est, de omni genere aliquos, colligit enim electos a quatuor
ventis: 4. de praesenti and quas effective, id est, facit omnes velle quia
omnes naturalit^r volunt salui fieri: 5. de futuro si^q^e praecipit, consulit
exortatur, ut salui fiant, que omnia sunt signa divinae voluntatis. Gozram ex
glossa, in c. 2. 1 Timothy* v. 4.
that all the Earth is replenished with his Mercy; that he acts without any
exception or Partiality, must fall out to be so true, that Heaven and Earth
shall sooner pass over, than the least point should want its accomplishment:
For the Nature of general propositions, is to subsist in their truth in each
one of the Individuals that are within their Praecincts: As for example, all
men are subject to Death; this is a general Proposition: Then John, Peter,
Paul, and so of the rest, by Deduction, must of necessity submit themselves to
the rigours of Death: God will have all men to be saved, this is a general
Proposition; then of necessity, the Infidel who falls under that generality, as
well as the rest of men, must partake of God's good will, otherwise the
proposition should not be true, which cannot be thought of without Impiety. And
being that all causes that act with Order, aim not at an end, but at the same
time they do dispose suitable means to attain to that end. God, who does all
things by Order, and by the Rule of his Infinite Wisdom, in Weight, Number, and
Measure, has appointed the enjoyment of his Divinity in Heaven, to be the last
End of Man, then of necessity he must provide him some means to attain to that
End; which he does faithfully perform by the voluntary, and free Gift of his
Graces: Let us then confess that his design is never to fail any in that
respect, consequently that all receive at his most liberal hands sufficient
means for their Salvation; whether they do receive them by the sufficiency of
means further off, or by the sufficiency of means nearer hand; for the one and
the other are capable to put us in possession of our last end; St. Chrysostom
assures you of it, D. Chrysostom. hom. in John.
the Grace of God, (says he) slides into the Hearts of all men, as a
participation of the Divine Essence, without any exception of Slave or
Freeborn, Man or Woman, Old or Young; She offers her self to all, flies from
no body, D Dionysius select. Hierach. cap. 9.
all the World has a share of her. The Divine Areopagite taking the matter at
the height of Providence, upholds it with Expressions altogether Celestial,
that God's design in man's Creation, Neque ab hoc excusabiles sunt nationes,
ctc. Paulo infra. Adhibita est enim semper universis hominibus quadam supernae,
mensura doctrinae, nbae ut si parcioris occultiorisque gratiae fuit, sufficit
tamen sicut Dominus judicavit, quibusdam ad remedium omnibus ad salutem.
Prosper. lib. 2. de vocatione gentium cap. 14.
was to make him partaker of the Glory of Angels in everlasting Bliss. The
Infidel cannot then complain of God: And Foreign Nations, (says Prosper of
Aquitain) shall not be heard at the Bar of the High-Court of Justice in Heaven,
when they shall allege, that God made himself known only in Judea, and that
the Favors which flow from him now abundantly in the Evangelical Law, in some
parts only of the World, never comes to their Country; for no difference shall
ever be found of either Time, Place, or Person, that the Grace of God as a
Fountain of Water of Everlasting Life, ever ceased to let flow her streams
sufficiently.

The excuse of the course-grain'd Christian, is less to be received than that
of the Infidel, for he can take none but what will prove to be a strong
deposition of his malice, and a convincing proof of God's goodness; for whether
you take a bad Christian for a man who broke the Faith of his Baptism, Ipse est
propitiatio pro peccatis nostris. 1 John 2^ v. 1.
when that coming to the use of Reason, he revolted against God as often as he
committed actual and mortal Sin: or whether you take him for one so seduced by
the Spirit of Pride, Preterium sanguinis ejus est sefficiens ad salutem omnium,
sed non habet efficiam nisi in electis propter impedimentum. D. Thom. comment.
in c. 2. ad Thim.
that he tore asunder the Robe of Jesus, by declaring himself an Heretical
person; you shall find that the one, as well as the other, always received
sufficient means to understand at full, the deplorable state of his Soul. The
one, to fly from Sin, which has rendered him God's Enemy, and embrace his Grace
to become his Heir; the other, to know the union of the true Church, and detest
all Errors, which Liberty, rather than Ignorance, made him to follow. The
First is condemned by all our Saviors exhortations, so often repeated over all
the body of the Bible. In the Ecclesiastic, Eccles. c. 5. Isa. cap. 31.
tarry no while to convert your self to the Lord. In Isaiah, convert your self
to the Sublimity of my Grace, Effusio pro injustis sanguinis Iustistans potens
fuit ad privilegium tam dives ad pretium ut si universitas captivorum in
redemptorem suum crederet, nullum Tyrannica vincula retinerent. St. L^ ser. 12.
passionis.
even as your sins have brought you to serve the Devil in the lowest degree of
all humiliations. In Ezekiel, live God, (says the Lord) I will not have the
death of a Sinner; my joy and all my content, is, that he comes to me to be
received. In St. Peter, God who heretofore was called the God of Revenge, who
Ordered Torments and Tortures, to be always the following steps of Abominations
and Crimes, now more mild, as it seems, expects with Patience the return of a
Sinner to his Duty.

To what purpose all those exhortations? All those good Wills, and Designs? Had
it been impossible for a Sinner to comply: Moreover, God knows full well, that
within the limits of humane power, there is no virtue able to produce one
supernatural Act, as is that of a true Conversion; consequently it must of
necessity follow, that God gives a sufficiency of Graces for the Conversion of
all Sinners; being that he does exhort them to that which is far beyond their
Forces. Prosper of Acquitain concludes that God did never as yet cut short the
way of his Mercy to any that he has seen a Friend to correction; so that none
can justly say that ever he was put to any impossibility of doing well: The
second goes on in the like degree of condemnation, seeing that they cannot bring
any manner of excuse for their error, that they were not instructed, or taught
which was the true Religion: For they were told a Million of times; Six
authentical marks of a true Religion, which agrees with our Roman profession,
and with no other: The first of all, is, the Prediction of its Existence,
before that the Messiah, (the Author and first beginner thereof,) gave it a
vent in the Evangelical Law; So the Prophets, the Sybils, the Poets, and
Philosophers, though of a contrary opinion in other matters, yet to set forth
the properties of our Religion, they are all of one mind, and of one opinion.
Secondly, the Merits of its Institutor, who is no common man as others, but
both God and Man, Irreprehensible in his Life, Impeccable by Nature, good to
all People, and who does authorize his Doctrine, both by the rare Examples of
his Holy Life, and by the Greatness of his Miracles; as the very Mahomet does
openly confess in his Alcoran. Thirdly, the Integrity of the things Preached
and taught in this Religion, all which come to two points, the Honor of God,
and the Profit of Man. Fourthly, The general Victories over Idolatry, the
banishment of Devils, and silence of Oracles: For in Augustus's time, and at
the first coming of Jesus, Oracles are consulted, but have not a word to
Answer, Porphire, Juvenal, Lucian, Celsus and the rest, are altogether
astonished at their Silence, not understanding that it is the true Religion,
which begins to make it self known to the World. Fifthly, Its general
publication over all the World without any earthly assistance, favor or
support, without Pleasure, Profit, or any Temporal satisfaction, in Patience,
Humility and Affliction; In fine, the Infallible Assistance of Jesus to them of
that Profession, as well by the use of Holy Sacraments, wherein he confers his
Graces on us, as by the care he has to give us his Angels to guard and protect
us: his Holy Ghost to comfort us, and his Promise assuring us of Eternal Life:
Let the Heretic then as well as the bad Christian, confess that it is not God,
but the bad use they make of their own free will and liberty, that is the cause
of their everlasting Misfortune and woe.

But alas! what shall we say of those poor little Creatures, which in their
Mothers womb, (or soon after they breathed the common air of Nature,) are
deprived of Life, before they become Peaceable possessors of the same, passes
from one Prison to another, and (not having along with them the safe conduct of
Baptism) are prohibited to come within the gates of Heaven. Must so ancient a
Sin, and so far from us, as that of Adam is, be the cause of our daily
misfortunes: Original sin, what a subtle poison your Infection is? being that
it is impossible for any Creature (except Jesus and Mary, He by Nature, she by
a special Privilege) to avoid its fatal stain. Were it not far better to
deprive those poor Babes of Life for good and all, by leaving them blocked up
within that Chaos of nothing, than to bring them to a state where they shall
have cause to lament for ever their misfortune, without any to comfort them or
condole their bad luck. St. Augustine, Your Expressions are able to break any
Heart to pieces, when you say that very many Children receive not the Grace of
God, because they die without Baptism, though they have no will contrary to the
will and Holy Laws of God; and though the Parents and Priests make as much have
as they can to Administer the Holy Sacrament unto them; thing worthy of
compassion, they run in all haste to look for a Remedy to the Evil, and the
Patient expires before its application, God permitting it so to fall out. I
confess ingeniously, I would wish a more Happy condition to those poor little
Creatures, if Faith had suffered me to follow my feelings: But it obliges me
under pain of Damnation to submit my thoughts to Divine Revelation, which gives
me to understand, that it was the Eternal Fathers Decree to send his only Son
on Earth for the Reconciliation of Mankind; then, the Decree must of necessity
be equally put in execution, Prosper lib. 2. de vocat. gent. c. 23.

Non irreligiose arbitror dici, quod isti paucorum dierum homines ad illam
pertineant gratiae partem, quae semper omnibus est impensa nationibus: totaque
illa principia nec dum rationalis infantiae sub arbitrio jacent voluntatis
alienae, nec ullo modo eis nisi per alios consuli potest. Vide per totum.


so that none comprehended within the List, and Obligation past in the
Terrestrial Paradise, can say that he has not been made partaker of sufficient
means to Salvation. St. Prosper was of the same feeling; I do not believe, says
he, that we do in any way transgress against either Religion or Conscience, to
say, that those little Children, Creatures of few days, appertain to that part
of Grace which is communicated to all Nations; and which, if their Parents turn
to good use, doubtless will take its effect; for all those small Grafts and
Exordiums of Creatures not yet Reasonable, lies under the good will of another.

The reason is, that as the Children are not guilty before God, but by the
fault of their first Parent, and never contributed on their side to any actul
malice, that is in them, but only by a flowing of an Hereditary propagation,
which sticks to all them that come to the World, by the way of ordinary
Generation, so they have not the sufficient means to stop this Original
disorder, but what depends on the Will of another: Now we must suppose that it
is morally impossible but that the Parents have an actual desire to confer on
their Children this necessary means to Salvation; and this is what the Divines
call the sufficient means of little Infants. But if it happens by hazard, or
otherwise that the Child dies in the Mothers womb, or soon after, this can be
no reason to dress up a complaint against God, because that those sad
Mischances, arriving through Natural Causes, make that God, who in the general
disposition of the Universe acts as first Principle, suffers also all things to
go according to the course of their Nature, without conceiving any formal
design notwithstanding against that Child; or this in particular, that he
should be deprived of Sufficient means to Salvation: Would you have that God to
hinder an Eclipse of the Sun, should disturb and destroy all the order of
Nature: Sicut per unius delictum in omnes homines.
The Apostle says, that the Sin of one man had so infected all Humane Nature,
that from the Child in the Mothers Womb, to him, who after a long scope of
years waits for his Coffin and Grave, there is none but has been condemned to
die when first he began to live. Even so by the Justice of another man, not by
Terrestrial, but even Caelestial Grace, as a brave Sun of an Infinite
Greatness, powers down her Rays on all men, with so much proportion, that the
Child as well as the Old Man, must ingeniously confess, that nothing is wanting
to them of Gods side, who will never violate the Laws of his General Providence
to hinder the operation and effects of particular Causes.

Let none then hereafter, (if it happens, that unfortunately he falls into the
common road of Perdition,) accuse the Eternal Providence of either Injustice or
Partiality, being he never refuses any Body sufficient means to work the
Conversion and Salvation of his Soul.

CHAP. XV. God no sooner sees a Soul desirous of her Salvation, but he gives
her his helping Hand.
OUr God in the Prophet Malachie speaks a most sweet word to the People of
Israel, that deserves well some return more than a Complement; I have loved
you, (says he to them, Malach. c. 1. v. 2 Dilexi vos dicit d^minus, and
dix^stis in quo dilexisti nos.
) and what ought they to reply? how, or in what terms should they acknowledge
their great Obligations to him? Should they not say, it is true, my Lord, we
have had several proofs of your good will, Heaven and Earth on occasion might
appear as Irreproachable Witnesses of the Favors we received at your most
Liberal Hands: Oblite sunt benefactorum ejus, etc. Psalm. 77. v. 11.
But ungrateful and most unmannerly People, (for all acknowledgment,) begin to
contest with him, and disown that ever they were obliged to him in the least;
Bona repromissoris sibi ascribit peccator, etc
Is it possible that this ungrateful People have already forgotten the Favors
which God did them in Babylon, when (that resenting much the Affronts done them
by the Idumeans,) he brought them out of their Captivities? There they were
Chained, Cuffed and Bolted; and have they so soon forgotten him, who broke and
struck off their Irons? Was it not a great proof of his Love to have sent Moses
armed with his Omnipotent Power to bring them from Pharaoh's Jurisdiction and
Slavery? Coram patribus eorum fecit mirabilia in terra Egypti, etc. Psalm. 77.
v. 23.
The notorious Signs and Prodigies which Egypt has seen, shall be the
Memorials of his Love; Do they remember who it was that commanded the Seas to
give them a free passage through their main Gulphs, when that their Enemies
came close on their backs: And after all this they are so bold as to ask God
the question, How, or where has he showed them any Love? Before they should
return any such Answer, they should cast all Creatures into the fire, being
that they are in this point so many convincing proofs and witnesses of their
Ingratitude. They are not to be excused, Qui etiam proprio filio non pepercit
sed, etc. Romans 8. v. 52.
I must confess, however, they are in some respects to be Pardoned; For though
they had the Laws of God in their Hands, yet they did not as yet see or know
the Author of Grace, the Word-Incarnate: But if a Christian should demand of
God, Sic Deus dilexit mundum ut filium suum, etc Joan. 3. v. 16.
wherein have you loved me? I would willingly conjure all Creatures to appear
at his Trial, as Evidence of so heinous a Crime, and as Executioners of so
great a Malefactor: But my God, why should I dissemble where Truth is so plain?
For even among Christians we may soon find some of so Brazen a face, Cum filio
dato, omnia donavit nobis, ut ce dant in bonum nostrum, superiora quidem
scilicet divinae personae ad fruendum, rationales spiritus ad convenidum, and
omnia inferiora ad utendum. D. Thom. in comment. Ephesians. ad Romans cap 8.
as to pronounce the words, or at least show by their Actions that they do not
believe that God has a Love for them; yea without doubt. For how can you think
of them otherwise, to receive daily the Divine Inspirations, to see at all
hours and moments the amorous Inventions of God to convert us, to hear the
Eternal Father repeat so often and in such express terms, that he Loved the
World so far as to give his Dearly Beloved Son to redeem it, and not to be
moved in the least to requite his Love with Love again; it is not in Conscience
to repeat those Blasphemous words, wherein have you Loved me?

I do not find it expedient to give any further Answer to the Ingratitude of
Christians, then to set before their Eyes the wise conduct of Jesus in the
management of our Conversions, to let the Soul know, that if she makes good use
of the first Grace she receives; Nonne est ipsa beata vita quam omnes volunt
audimus nomen hoc, and rem ipsam omnes nos appetere fatemur non enim sono
delectamur, etc. Paulo infra. Nota est igitur omnibus hominibus, quia una voce
si interrogari possent, sine ulla dubitatione velle responderent.

D. Aug. tom. 1. lib. 10. confess: cap. 20. per totum.


God will never deny her the continuation of his Graces, until that her
Conversion be fully completed: But because that the sufficient Grace whereof
we spoke heretofore, is a general term that comprehends all the particular
Graces which precedes the Justification, as Dispositions requisite to the
Introduction of that Noble form. I suppose with St. Augustine, that the first
Thought that falls into a Reasonable man's Heart, whatever state he is in, is a
great desire to be Saved; A desire which the Divines call a Velleity of
Salvation, to which God concurs with his special assistance, to make this weak
desire come to a perfect will.

For to comprehend the merit of that Grace, Quae sursum sunt sapite non quae
super terram. Coloss. 3. v. 2.
it should be necessary to remark with St. Augustine and other Saints, that all
Spiritual Gifts, all Graces and Favors, which God of his Infinite Mercy
communicates to our Hearts, have no other end or aim but to stir up our Wills
to Actions conducing to Salvation: Which to perform after a sweet way, God
indues the Soul with two attractive Powers, he fixes one to the objects of our
Conversion, and the other to its beginning and ground: He orders that the
Object shall lance a thousand Lustres of Beauty toward the poor Sinners Soul,
Quae oculus non vidit, etc. 1 Cor. 2.9.
and so many brightsome Beams whereby Heaven is represented to him as a place
of Rest, where all Tears, all Labors, all Crosses and Sufferings are Divinely
changed into so many Splendours and Lights of Glory; where Saints are Sweetly
reduced, and Happily necessitated to Love, freed of all Misery, and replenished
with that Saintly Pleasure, which takes its source from the Divine Essence.

These are the Charms which the Object pours down into our Hearts; and to the
end that its ravishing Beauties should the sooner come to lodge therein, God
shapes them either into so many Figures, which he knows will draw our
Affections to them, or at least reforms the former Species we had of them, by
giving them a more lively color.

His Charms are altogether as great for the Understanding and Will, the
concurring Principles of our Conversion, but Principles so corrupted since the
Fall of Adam, and so disordered in their Inclinations, that, besides the
difficulties they meet with in the practice of Virtues; they are blindly
persuaded that all good and felicity, resides where Vice even sits in its The One
with Authority: But God, to bring them from that error, takes off all
contradictions, makes all difficulties plain, drives away all dark Clouds,
clears the understanding, and helps on the Will in the pursuit of things which
she thought impossible, whilst she was plunged in the dirt of sin, and lead by
the inclinations of corrupt Nature; then she finds that there is more
satisfaction and pleasure to die on the Cross, than she had of inclination to
live in the flesh, and is very well pleased to gather Roses amongst Bushes and
Thorns.

However, let us not be persuaded, that the faculties of the Soul, (to work her
Conversion,) requires only the intimate presence of God, without any further
concurrence of any created Principle. I do acknowledge that God has the power
of Essential dependency over all Creatures, which makes them always be in a
readiness to obey his Orders beyond their Natural Principles, and the Precincts
of their Activity: In that Case* it is enough that he raises up their power
proportionably to the miraculous effect that he aims to produce. For such
miraculous effects tend not to the profit or contentment of the things
elevated, being altogether incapable of any such, but only aims to make known
the power of the Supreme Agent, who makes use of them; So that for to Act, they
need no other created Principle. But as for Man, it is not the same with him;
Postquam convertisti me egi poenitentiam. Jerem. cap. 31. v. 16.
for God setting him on in the work of his Conversion, will have him to concur
really, and as an effective Principle, even as he did in his aversion from him,
when that he committed Sin, which cannot be performed by him, unless it be
beforehand, God bestows on him a Divine quality, which leaves him in a free
power to work the accomplishment of his Salvation, which he is not able to
perform by the bare and sole Principles of Nature: Moreover, had not Man
received any other extraordinary quality, Liberum arbitrium est causa sui
motus, quia homo per liberum arbitrium movet se ad agendum. D. Tho. 1. p q. 83.
art, 1. ad 3.
to raise up his will to supernatural Actions; as all those are that tend
directly to Salvation; It might be said that he is a principle merely passive
in the practice of Virtues, which is contrary to the common Belief: Also God
never supplies by himself the defect of any second Causes, when it can be done
by any other way: The Example of the Blessed in Heaven, will make this Divinity
easy to be understood. It is not enough for a Soul that has for her happy
residence everlasting Glory, that God discovers unto her the Mirror of his
Divine Essence, and makes his Glorious Beams to shine all about her; her
Understanding must also march under the conduct of a Light of Glory, to enjoy
its Felicity, that must be the resplendent Garment, without which, it durst not
appear.

It must then follow, that the Soul receives some Grace from Heaven, Venit
adoravit. eum dicens, Domine Adjuva me. Matt. 5. v. 15.
which God drops down from the Cabinet of his most tender Love, and not to make
her bear in her understanding the knowledge of all the Divine Beauties, for
that is the Duty and Office of the exciting Grace; But to help her Will, and in
so doing, to make her the necessary principle of her Conversion, as all the
Fathers of the Sacred Council of Trent do teach; The Holy Church owns the
necessity of that Grace, Trident. sess. 6. Cent.
and that all our endeavors for Salvation, are too weak to draw us from the
corruption of this World, without the assistance from Heaven; this is it that
moved her to dress up that form of Prayer, Actiones nostras quaesumus Domine
aspirando praeveni and adiuvando prosequere, etc.
by which she desires the Divine bounty to prevent in such sort the beginning
of our Actions by the sweetness of his aspirations; that nevertheless he
forsakes us not in the progress; to the end that all we do or think, may tend
to his Glory, as the Rays to their Sun, the Lines to their Center.

The Apostle St. Paul, who was not content to have cast the Seed of Faith into
the Hearts of those that he had newly engendered unto Jesus, (if he had not
prescribed them the means to preserve it;) comforts them with this good news,
that the Holy Ghost does ease and help our Infirmities: Romans 8. v. 26.
Similiter autem spiritus adiuvat infirmitatem nostram.
As if he had said, I do not doubt in the least, my dear Children in our Lord,
but that the Devil who is so well versed to deceive men, will invent many ways
to make you decline from the Rode which leads to Salvation, and which you have
learned but of late, for there is nothing he aims more at then to snatch your
Souls out of the Arms of Jesus; the World, (always contrary in its Maxims to
the Holy Laws of Heaven,) will breed in your Hearts, if it can, a horror and a
distaste of that Crucifying and Crucified life, which is observed and practiced
in the Evangelical Law: Nevertheless, do not say or imagine that your Enemies
are strong, your Resolutions weak, the Victory doubtful: Let not all those
apprehensions pull down your courage; for I do ^assure you in my Masters Name,
that he will assist you, by fortifying your weakness, that he will solace your
Infirmities, by strentghening your Arms in your most bloody Skirmishes. That he
will cast dust in your Enemies eyes, to give them the Rout, and You the
Victory, that he will make you carry Laurels on your Foreheads, as so many
brave Conquerours, whilst They shall bear on their Faces, nothing but shame and
confusion.

The Prophet and King, a Man truly according to the Heart of God, (not, for
having Governed his People with a deal of Authority; not, for having subdued
strange Nations by the happy success of his Arms; not, for having gathered an
abundance of wealth in the splendor of his Glory: Psalm. 93. v. 16. Nisi
Dominus adiuvisset me, etc.
But for having so happily managed the Graces of God, in the course of his
Conversion;) Confesses ingeniously, that were it not for the help and
assistance he had from Heaven, his Soul had very soon taken up her quarters in
Hell: Alas! How many are there now alive, Prope rueram in illam fossam quae
paratur peccatoribus, hoc est Paulo minus haberaverat in inferno anima mea,
quia jam nutabat, probe consentiebat, nisi Dominus adiuvisset, me.

D. Aug. com. 8. in Psalm. 93. v. 17.


that may as well as David, confess the same? and say, My God, had you but
given power to your Sarjeants in Hell, to bring in such a Man's Body to their
dark Dungeon at the same time as he became refractory to your Holy Laws, and
plunged himself in the dirty puddle of Concupiscence; he had been already
partaker of what punishments the Damned Souls suffer, as he has been guilty of
their Crimes, if your charitable goodness, (taking compassion of his
blindness,) had not helped him to get out of his Dirt and Infection.

How many are now Tryumphing in Glory, and appointed by God to bear company
with his Holy Angels for an Eternty? Who, if they had not been prevented by
that Grace, would be Chained in Hell, and as complicies to Satan, would have
been his unfortunate Slaves, without any expectation of redemption. Magdalen,
my dear Penitent, this day you take the sweet sleep of the Spouse in the Arms
of your beloved Jesus, shining like a Morning Star, without fear that any
should evermore trouble your rest: However, you would have been condemned to
bear company with all reprobate Souls, had not he, who went so many steps to
find you out when you were lost, helped you to forsake the World and its
Vanities, to draw you to himself, with the sweet smell of his most precious
Ointment. St. Paul, you do boast, Ter Dominum rogavi ut, etc. 2 Cor. 12. v. 19.
Quoties ego ipse in eremo constitutus, and in illa vasta solitudine, quae
exusta solis ardoribus horidum monarchis praebebat habitaculum putabam me
Romany interesse deliciis: itaque omni auxilio destitutus ad Jesu Jacobam,
pedes, rigabam lachrymis, crime tergebam, and repugnantem carnem heb domadarum
ine, dia subjugabam. D. Hier. to. 1. Epist ad Eustochium de custodia virginit.
and with a great deal of reason, to have been Ravished up to the third Heaven,
to be the Apostle of holy Jesus by excellency, to have exercised your Function
and Charge in the Church with Honor, and without any Reproach: But had not our
Savior helped you to surmount the Angel of Satan, who did so often assault you,
doubtless, you had given up your Arms. I grant that St. Hierome did abandon
Rome, and broke clear off with the false pleasure and insolent allurements the
World could afford, to retire himself to Bethlehem, and keep his constant
residence in those Holy Monuments of our Redemption, that he brought down his
Body by Fasting, by Watching, by Discipline, and by his continual practice of
Mortification and Penance: However, he does of himself confess, that the
ancient Figures of his past Vanities, would often return to his remembrance,
and come in a Body before his eyes; And that if his Savior had not helped him
in his vast Wilderness, the very Hermitage had been no more advantageous to the
designs of his Salvation, than the most populous City in the Universe.

Council. Arans. Cant. 22.
The Holy Council of Orange will have us to believe, that whoever has in his
possession the Grace of Justice and Verity, could not receive it but by the
means of that inexhaustible Fountain of Liberality; and that God gives that
Grace to Men, as being Pilgrims in this World, to the end, that being refreshed
by the sweetness of its influence, they may not be out-breathed under the
burden of the Cross. And in another place, the same Council makes out, Idem
Cant. 10.
that it is not only necessary to them, who, by reason of their weakness, falls
often into Sin; but also to them, who seemed otherwise to be more confirmed in
Virtue: The reason is very plain, for if it be a truth which suffers no
contradiction; Avertente autem te faciem tuam, turbabuntur, auferes spiritum
eorum and deficient, etc. Psalm. 103. v. 29.
that if God, in the being of Nature, had but withdrawn for a moment the
assistance of his general concurrence; the Heavens, that roll over our heads,
would soon stop their course; The Sun, that lightens all the World with so much
Majesty, would cover its Face with darkness; All that great body of the
Universe, would soon fall into a Convulsion fit, because it does not subsist or
operate, but by the favor of that concurrence and continual assistance of God.
It is the same in the conduct of our wills, to actions of Salvation: For if God
withdraws the concurrence of his Graces of help and assistance from us, we
shall soon fall to the ground: All the luster of Natural Lights, were they more
brightsome than the Sun is among the Stars: All the force of our Wills, though
they had points sharp enough to Print in our hands and feet the Stigmats of
Jesus, as well as on a St. Francis: All that I say would be to no purpose, if
we had not a help from Heaven. This is that has put so often those words in the
Prophet Royal's Mouth. I lifted up my eyes to the Mountains, Levavi oculos meot
in montes undeveniet auxilium mihi. Psalm. 120. v. 1.
whence I do expect all help and relief: Doubtless he makes here an allusion to
the formation of Man, who bears his Face erected toward the Heavens, whence he
expects his assistance; whereas we see the Beasts look toward ^the ground, as
being their Offspring and last end.

The devout St. Bernard, who in the flower of his Age, was adorned with all the
gifts of Nature, that could render a young Man considerable in the World,
forsook notwithstanding Father and Mother, Brothers and Sisters, Friends and
Relations, to confine himself to a Cloister, he received the effects of that
Grace without measure: and to carry its merit into the Hearts of those, who by
his example would do the like, he does exhort them to fear nothing, D. Bern.
sermon. 15. in Psalm. qui habitat.
assuring them, that though they had met with Aspicks and Basilisks, Lions, and
Dragons, the one hurtful by their Poison, the others dreadful by their very
Terror; they should be freed from all sad accidents, and for no other reason,
but that God helps and relieves all them that endeavor to stand submissive to
his holy Vocations and Callings.

Decit Piger Leo est foris in medio plutearum occidendus sum. Prove. c. 22. v.
13.
Let me hear no more talk then of those timorous and cowardly Souls, frightened
by their very shadows, so that they dare not look at their Enemy but over the
Walls, nor give a set Battle to Vice, without apprehension of losing the Field:
Do you not hear them speak in the Proverbs? I will not get out of the Lodging,
for the Lion is in the street to devour me. (I cannot wish so much hurt to my
body,) always accustomed to lie in Holland Sheets, on a Bed of Down in all
pleasures of the Flesh, to load it with so heavy a harshness, as that of
Mortification and Penance; That would be to me as loathsome as to carry on my
bare Skin an Armor of Musquet-proof. Fasting makes my Brains to run mad:
Watching disturbs my Rest: Mortification endangers my Health: To hear all those
Religious Men discourse, you would say, that there is no Heaven, but for such
as pass over their days in Cloisters and Hermitages: Cannot People be saved in
the World, as well as there? David, Jacob, Abraham, are they not Canonized in
the Holy Scripture, though they lived in the height of all abundance and
greatness, and wanted for nothing that could make a Man happy in this World?

I grant it, I am satisfied; remain in the world in a good hour, so be that you
make Penance as David did; that with the Tears of a true Repentance, you
sprinkle your Bed as David did; That at Midnight you may be found in your
Closet before a Crucifix, Praeterii sancta paulisper Dei gratia, ut nobis ad
imitationem vita eorum fiat disciplina, and sicut innocentiae ita and
poenitentiae magisterium de eum actibus sumamus: ergo dum lapsus eorum lego,
consortes etiam illos infirmitatis agnosco, dum credo consortes, imitandos esse
praesumo. D. Amb. apolo. David c. 2. ver finem.
offering your Prayers to God, as often he was; so that you be the supplanter
of your Vices and evil Inclinations, striving Body against Body, as Jacob
against the Angel: So that you be obedient to the voice of your Creator, who
commands you to get out of your Iniquities, as Abraham got out of his Country,
and from all his Acquaintance. But does God offer you any injury, by giving you
the ways and means to become honest Men? Is it to trouble your rest, and cross
your contentments, when seeing you clearly carried away (by the most unlucky
current of the World,) to everlasting Perdition, he powers down from the
Cabinet of his Love, the light of his Grace into your poor Soul, gives you his
Divine Inspirations, to encourage you to fly from Vice, and embrace Virtue? Is
not that to bring you from Shipwreck, to the Harbor of all assurance and
happiness? Let us then banish far from our hearts all those thoughts, as mortal
Enemies to our Salvation; and let us firmly believe, that to the least desires
that our hearts will let fly toward Heaven, with a firm resolution to save our
Souls, Jesus does most willingly comply with his Graces of help and Relief to
fortify our Courage.

CHAP. XVI. How hard it is to Convert a Lukewarm Soul.
AMong the wise Maxims, and brave Instructions which Pythagorus left to his
Posterity; This, in my opinion, may hold the first rank, Alciat Emblem 81.
where he commands all tepid and lazy Companions to get out of his School, and
Orders to write over the door of his College, that none should place himself
there with cross arms, because that posture became not a follower and lover of
Virtue: Non votis, neque suppliciis muliebribus auxilia deorum parantur, sed
vigilando, agendo, been consulendo omnia prospere cedunt, ubi socordiae atque*
ignaviae te tradideris, ni quidquam Deos implorabis, Salustius in Catilinar.
Hence the grave Athenians learned that good custom, to meet at every years
end, to examine how the Citizens had spent their year; who ever had lived
without employment, passing his life in laziness and idleness, (besides the
public correction, which they would give him to his great shame and disgrace)
he was to be condemned to a Penalty.

And Periandus among the Corinthians ordered, that whoever had been seen with a
more Splendant Train than ordinary, should be questioned by what means he had
acquired that new change of his condition; If it had been by his own Labor and
Industry, that they should admit him to continue; But if otherwise, that he
should be condemned to die as a Robber, and a Plague to the Commonwealth. Not
only all the lazy among them were guilty of Death, but also the wild inconstant
People, who upon the least occasion offered, Male malo mihi esse quam molliter,
etc. Paulo infra. Brevissimo somno ator, aliquando dormisse scio, aliquando
suspicor. Senec. Epist. 33.
would give over their good undertakings, for want of Courage to break off all
Obstacles, and strive against all Accidents: It Is therefore they had reason to
represent them by the little Fish called Remora, that makes the best Sailers
stop, though they have Wind and Tide for them.

St. John, the wise Pithagoras of the Evangelical Law, Aliciat. emb. 82
in one of his Revelations, receives Orders from Heaven to question the Bishop
of Laodice, how came it that God took on a Resolution to vomit him out of his
Mouth: Quia tepidibus es and nec frigidus, nec calidus incipiam te evomere ex
ore meo. Apoc. 3. v. 15.
I know, says he, that you are neither Hot nor Cold, I could wish you had been
either of both; but because that you are Lukewarm, I will begin to vomit you
out of my Mouth; as if nothing had been more displeasing to God, nor more
contrary to the Perfection of the Soul, than that Tepidity and Spiritual
Slumbring which makes her to sit on the seat of Laziness, without any Life or
Courage to practice Virtue: Such Souls ought to be banished out of any
Christian Commonwealth, as the Athenians banished them whom they knew to live
without Employment.

It is a great satisfaction to see the Holy Fathers, each one deliver their
Feeling of those three different qualities of Hot, Cold, and Lukewarm Souls:
St. Gregory understands by Heat, Charity; by Cold, Mortal Offenses; by
Tepidity, D. Greg. lib. 14. moral. cap. c.
the Affected Ignorance of Sin, hidden under the Mask of base Hypocrisy.
Cassian will have the heat to appertain to good Religious Souls; the Cold to
bad Seculars; Cassian colat. 4 cap. 4.
the Tepidity to Imperfect Religious: Whereupon he brings our Savior to
deliver this his Opinion: I would wish you had been either a good Religious
man, or a bad Secular; But because you are neither, I will vomit you out of my
Mouth. The Abbot Rupert's opinion is, That by the Lukewarm, we may understand
the proud and haughty Souls, who are replenished with a good esteem of
themselves; Live, as if they had cast up their Accounts, and cleared their
Scores with God, and were Cock-sure of their Salvation. Of that Cathegory was
that proud Virgin, which the same Author brings down, and says, That it had
been more to her advantage to loose that Treasure which made her so proud, than
to possess it without humility.

St. Anselm explains that Tepid humor under the Figure of a Bird on a Branch;
Apt negligentiam graviori damnat judicio quam imprudentiam, frigidus est enim
qui fidem nescit calidus est qui Spiritus Sancti fervore succensus est qui enim
calorem fidei non habet, tolerabilius illi fuerat fidem non accepisse quam
neglexisse est enim tepidus pejor frigido. D. Ambr. ser. 2. in Ps. 118. ad illa
verba, in cord meo inquisivi te.
that will, and will not; He will fain live in the repute of a good Liver, but
he will never venture to Fight against his Passions. Alcasar, by that Lukewarm
man, understands a man, who on one side would not willingly fall into Mortal
Sin; but on the other, cares very little to advance in Perfection, and devours
Venial Sins without the least scruple of Conscience, saying, that a Million of
such Offenses are not enough to destroy him; A most pernicious Belief: For
though it be true, that Venial Sin deprives us not of Grace, nevertheless it
gives a large overture to all sorts of Crimes: Whence it happens, that though
the Cold of Mortal Sin be more hurtful to the Soul; yet the Tepidity of a
languishing Soul, is a state far more dangerous: For, as the wise say, He who
makes nothing of small faults, Quem admodum manes in corpore quod vovendum est
plus accessit, ita qui debet excludi si retineatur, nec se corrigat totum
corpus exulcerat. D. Ambr. supra.
will fall by degrees to greater. The state of a Mortal Cold brings us
presently to seek for a Remedy; But that of Tepidity makes us to Loyter in our
Laziness without any apprehension of fear, and without the least thought of any
Resolution to amend our Lives.

Set such an unlucky Spirit into a Religious Company; I will tell you with St.
Bernard, who, D. Bernard. sermon 6. de ascens. Contra sane invenire est homines
pusillanimes and remissos deficientes sub onere virga and calcaribus
indigentes, quorum remissa laetitia, brevis and rara compunctio, animalis
cogitatio tepida conversatio, etc.
after he had extolled the rare qualities of those fervent Spirits the Apostle
speaks of, adds presently the properties of a lazy and languishing Soul: They
are Pusilanimous men, and of little Heart, who go on like so many Snails in the
way of Salvation, who have need of Rods and Spurs to set them a going. If they
do rejoice, it is not with that Holy Liberty, proper to the Children of God,
who offer up their Vows with a Cheerful Heart to their Creator. If they be Sad,
it is but a Mercenary Sadness, it is only for fear of a reproach, or for the
sake of some Temporal Reward: Their compunction is very rare, and passes as the
Wind: Their Thoughts are altogether Brutish; their Conversation without
Example; their Obedience without Devotion; their Recreation with Excess: Take
notice of them in their Conference, and on all other occasions, they cannot
Speak, but they must pick a Quarrel with this Man, Snap at another, and so
Trouble all the Feast: If you do consider them in Prayer, their Bodies are in
the Choir, their Minds are in the Fields, Distractions without number; Castles
in Spain, Monsters over all; follow them to their Chambers, Sleep overcomes
them, Reading displeases them; to be alone is odious to them: In a word, they
are come to that pass, that the Torments of Hell are not able to Fright them
out of their slumbering and languishing Life: It is no more reason that rules
their Actions: They are neither without nor within; they are neither Dead nor
Alive, it is a deplorable thing to see them.

It is to this purpose, that one of the Ancient Fathers of the Desert, being
asked the question, (what was his opinion in this matter, Ruffious in vivis P^.
lib. 3. number. 204.
) brought down a rare Comparison; Just, says he, as the Flies never come so
near as to sit on a Pan that is Boiling, because they would loose there both
their Wings and Lives; Filii tui projecti sunt, dormierunt in capite omnium
viarum, sicut ^rix illa queatus, cap. c. 51. v. 20.

Septua. Vertunt sicut beta semicocta: Arab. sicut beta deficiens prae
siccitate, hoc est imago hominis tepidi, qui prae desidia caput erigere non
valet: Purpureus veluti eum fios succisus ar^tro. Languescit moriens, lassaque
cadavera collo. Demisere caput pluvia cum forte gravantur. 9. Aeneidos.


But when they do meet with Lukewarm water in a Vessel, there they take up
their quarters, and leave their dirt: It Is the same with a fervent Soul burning
with the flames of true Charity; all her actions are so many boilings of Love:
Never fear that Satan ever comes near her, he is an Enemy to those Divine
Fires, at which he endures more Torments, and receives more Affronts, than he
does in Hell amidst the Flames: contrariwise, if he meet with a Languishing
Spirit, with a Fire half out, there he keeps close, there he gives a solemn
Invitation to all his Comerades to dress up their Beds: Whoever had but the
Eyes of an Angel to consider the diverse motions of those Devils, he would see
them as so many Bees swarm like those miserable Wretches, and from time to time
cast thousands of foul imaginations into their Brains to Poison their Souls.

If the same Spirit comes to take up his quarters among the Wordlings, the
Blood of Jesus is already frozen within their Hearts; the Primitive Fervor of
Christianity in a manner decayed: If they be called to the Service of God, they
are half dead? if they be summoned to go to Confession, to think of their
Conscience, they think themselves in the Pillory? If they abstain from some
unprofitable Visit, to go hear a Sermon, at every step they go upon Thorns: I
would rather meet with a Drunken man, nay, rather with a man plunged in all
manner of Vices, (so that he had not altogether smothered the worm of his
Conscience,) than with a sinner that goes at random and by custom to his
Devotion; his Hat is down on his Eyes, his Beads in his Hand, D. Greg.
pastoral. part 3. admonit 35. Quoniam frigus ante teporem sub spe est, tepor
autem post frigus in desperatione, id est, qui adhuc in peccatis est,
conversionis fiduciam non amittit, qui vero post conversionem tepuit, simul
spem quae erat de peccatore subtraxit.
and his Heart over all his Concerns: St Gregory gives you this reason for it,
What ought we to expect of a thing that is Cold, when that it is put to the
Fire; we must expect it to be first Lukewarm, and soon after to grow ^old: So
it is with a grievous Sinner; the very first thing we can expect of him, is,
that drawing near to the Fire of Divine Inspiration, he will forsake his bad
Life, banish all his Cold qualities, which are contrary to the Flames of Grace;
and by little and little with a just application of the Active to the Passive,
he will acquire that degree of heat, whereon even his Conversion shall be
formed: But a lazy Soul which was once made hot in the Furnace of Gods Love,
and goes far from the state of Grace by her Tepidity; the first thing to be
expected of her, is, Cassian. collat* 4. c. 19.
that she will grow Cold, that is to say, that she will fall into a Mortal Sin:
We have seen, says Cassian, many Carnal, Debauched Libertines brought from the
cold of Sin, to the heat of Love; But in our Lives we have never seen any lazy
sluggish Companion pass from Tepidity, Rotis o bubulce manus applica, and
Stimulum bobus admove, ac deorum deinde opem poscito ne si tu cesses frustra
dii in invocentur. Aesopus.
to the heat of a greater perfection in Virtue.

We read in a Profane History, of a man whose Cart was so far bogg'd in the
High-rode, that he could not get it backward nor forward; yet this poor Fellow
without any further trouble to get his Cart out of the Mire, sits down hard by
it expecting some Passengers, and invoking the very Gods to his assistance:
Hercules happened to come that way with his Club in his Hand, admires the
laziness of the man, he makes him to get up, and to set his Shoulder to the
Wheel, assuring him, that after he would do his endeavors, the Gods would not
fail to relieve him, and release him out of his Trouble.

I may say as much to all those Souls I spoke of; It is no more the time to sit
idle with cross Arms, much less to linger in the dirt of their Abominations and
Crimes: Manum admoventes invocate numina. Proverb.
It is good to have a Tongue to call to the Passengers, and to invoke God and
his Saints to their assistance: But they must join the Hands to the Tongue, the
Faith to the Works, the Belief to the Operation: Never was their sleep under
the Tree Lothos so fatal to the Companions of Ulysses, as is the deceitful
slumbering of a languishing Soul, in the shadow of her laziness. I see already
Jesus the Divine Hercules appear, with his Cross in his hand, coming toward us
with all speed; let us hear what he will say.

CHAP. XVII. God will not destroy those Lukewarm Souls, which he begins to
vomit.
Lazarus amicus noster dormit, vado ut a somno excitem eum. Joan. 11. v. 11.
THe Grace of Excitation, and this morning Alarm, is no other in the Opinion and
Doctrine of the Sacred Council of Trent, than an Interior Light of the Holy
Ghost, received into the Soul, by which he touches the Heart of the Tepid and
Sleepy man, to excite him to his Conversion.

That Grace, according to the diversity of her effects, has diverse
appellations. If we do consider her as a forerunner of the Will, to which she
is sent by the sole Mercy of God, without any cooperation or precedent
invitation of Merit on our side: She is called a fore-running Grace; If we do
take her for an Accident that comes to lodge in the Soul as into her proper
subject and residence, to solicit her to the work of her Salvation; she is a
Grace of Impulsion: But if we come to Contemplate her under those Glorious
Titles of morning Star, dawning of the day, Scout-master of the Sun, which
banishes away the dark Clouds from the Earth, Sleep and all Drowsiness from
men's Bodies, we shall find, that she is a Grace of Excitation and a Morning
Alarm.

I cannot better explain the nature of her, than by discovering the properties
of the same term. To excite, to speak properly, is to awake some one person
that is either a sleep or slumbering: Ego dormivi and sopor^tus sum, and
exurrexi quia dominus suscepit me. Psalm. 3.^.6.
Imagine with your self (dear Reader) a poor Pilgrim weary, spent and quite
tired after a long Journey, Multi cum dormiunt non faciunt locum Domino, tales
excitat Apostolus, surge qui dormis, nam istae omnes foelicitates quae videntur
saeculi somnia sunt dormientium.
the Night draws on, and he finds no House to lodge in where he happens to be,
there he falls asleep; But alas! it is close to a Precipice, just on the brink
of a steep Rock, the darkness of the Night hinders him to perceive the danger;
there he lies fast asleep; if he stirs but in the least, he is a lost Man; one
passes by, moved with compassion, takes this poor Pilgrim by the shoulders,
awakes him, pushes him, excites him: Friend, that is no place for you to sleep
in, do you not see that Precipice close by you? This Traveller awakes of a
sudden, stretches his arms, rubs his eyes, shakes his Clothes, looks round
about him, sees the danger, and makes his escape. We are all Pilgrims in this
World, Dormiebam in utramque aurem securus, nullo pavore solicitante, ecce
autem timore ingruente excitatus sum, velut quem calamitas convovet, and velut
ille corripit e stratis corpus, socioque fatigat, praecipites vigilate viri.
Egubing. Psalm. supra.
wearied, spent, tired, (as the Holy Scripture says) in the way of Iniquity,
Sleep even overcomes us, Laziness makes us to stumble at every step: We must
lay our selves down, Belly to the ground, and stretch at all our length: But
alas! where is it that we lie? One will sleep under the Boughs of a
Wall-nut-Tree, a true symbol of obstinacy; another close by the Cave of
Miermaids, the figure of Lust and unlawful pleasures: This Man sets his foot on
the Precipice, whereinto he is in danger to fall; the other is near at hand to
his everlasting destruction and loss. What does God do, this great Overseer of
the World? He draws near, takes us by the shoulders, excites us, awakes us:
Poor Christian bring up your hand to your eyes, rub those Clouds off your
eyelids, see the danger you are in; it is Jesus that gives you this warning.

St. Paul sets before our eyes the necessity of that Grace, Ephesians. 5. v. 14.
Surge qui dormis, and exurge a mortus, and Illuminabit te Christus.
when that speaking of our Savior, the Eternal Light, he exhorts the Ephesians
to adore his Beams; and to give a greater weight to his exhortation, he borrows
the words of the Prophet Isaiah: You that are asleep, Isaiae c. 60. v. 1 Surge
Illuminare Jerusalem, etc.
get up and awake out of the slumber of Death: By which the Apostle compares
the state of a Sinner to Sleep, and to Death: To Sleep; for even as he that
Sleeps, is incapabble of any good action, without he be capable of producing
some motions of Liberty, the imagination laboring to make up the Fabric of a
thousand extravagant Dreams; of all which at his awake, he finds not the least
sign or token: So it is with a Sinner, (says St. Augustine) when he shuts up
the eyes of his reason, D. Aug. in Psalm. 131. v. si dedero.

Sommum oculis meis and temporibus meis dormitationem. Vide ibi D. Aug.


to give a general License of acting to all his Senses, without reserving
himself the power of regulating their excess: For what are all his actions, but
so many Dreams and raving Fits? he does imagine that all they can tell him of
the Kingdom of Heaven, and of the pleasures of Paradise, are but Fables; so
Hell with all its Torments and Tortures are but the amusements of Preachers to
frighten the common sort of people, Quid stygia, quid cocytum, quid nomina
vanatimetis materiam vatum. Claud.
who are much apprehensive in their thoughts, of such idle Toys, that the
frequenting of the Sacraments, as well as the most innocent practice of a
Devout life, is but an entertainment for weak Spirits; That the excess of a
Melancholic humor, drives them into the practice of such Exercises, rather
than the prudent conduct of a well regulated motion; Dormientem and mortuum
dicit Dominus qui in peccatis, est, nam and male foeter ut mortu^s, and
inutilis est ut dormiens, and nihil videt quem admodum and ille sed somniat and
vana imaginatur. D. Chris. tomo 4. in cap. 5. Ephesians*
His Heaven is the Earth; his everlasting happiness, his Riches; he makes for
himself a God without eyes or hands; without eyes, that he should not see the
disorders of his life; without hands, that he should not chastise him according
to the Enormity of his Crimes. He compares him as yet, to Death; for even as
the Soul, that admirable Form, which gives Grace and Beauty to all the
Commonwealth of the Body: Anima quae peccat moritur, non quidem more tali,
qualis est corporis sed multo gravior est animae, nam corporalis mors est que
salutis and sejunctis invicem anima and corpore, hoc quidem a multis curis ac
laboribus liberat, anima aurem post quam a corpore saluta fuerit,
incorruptibilis eorpore devinctam in ignem detrudit inextinguibilem. D. Chrysostom.
supra.
The Vision to the Eye, the distinction of harmonious Sounds to the Ear: The
Scent to the Smelling; and to each one of the Senses the use of their
Functions: She no sooner leaves off to perform that Mass, but it looses its
Ornaments, and nothing remains but a sad Carcass, whence flow such noysom
Infections, that to be preserved from its Poison, they are constrained to
convey it speedily under the Earth. In the same manner, God, that
super-adorable Form, who animates our Souls not as a substantial part of our
Essence, for He is all in Himself without division, but as the Sovereign
principle of Grace and Nature being once separated from our hearts, by the
substraction of His Graces, Man is no more than a vile Carcass, more fit to be
the receipt of Devils, than the Temple of the Holy Ghost, being he lost all
that made him to be commendable, by losing the Grace and Favor of his God.

But he who is dead by mortal sin, as well as he who slumbers affectedly in
Venial sin, have not the power of themselves to re-enter into the Rites of a
Spiritual life, nor to mount up to a higher degree of perfection, without the
Spiritual and special assistance of God: Therefore he offers them the Grace of
Excitation, and of a Morning-alarm, whose properties are comprehended in the
words of the Apostle: Christ shall illuminate you, as if he had said, get up O
Sinner, hear Jesus, who knocks at the door, open your heart, he is a Glorious
Sun, who lances forth his Rays: St. Ambrose, in lieu of his saying with the
Apostle, Christ shall illuminate you, turns it, the Lord shall teach you: St.
Chrysostom says, That the words were drawn out of the Prophet Isaiah, and that
they were directed to our first Father Adam, who was buried on the Mount
Calvary, in the same place where our Savior's Cross was planted. Not without a
special design of Heaven, that the Blood which ran down from the Virgin-Flesh
of Jesus, and battered with blows, should touch the bones of Adam: And that by
virtue of that touching, he should deserve to receive the first Fruits of the
Passion, and the freedom of getting into Heaven: I know that St. Jerome does
not approve of this Tradition, and that he calls it a Theatral wonder, found
out by certain Stage Players, who would have themselves admired by setting
forth a History never as yet heard of; Nevertheless, Et vere fratres non
incongrue dicitur quod ibi erectus sit medicus ubi jacebat aegrotus and dignum
erat ut ubi ceciderat, humana superbia ibi se inclinaret divina misericordia,
and sanguis ille pretiosus etiam corporaliter.

Pulverem antiqui peccatoris dum dignatur stillando contingere, redemisse
credatur D. Aug. tom. 1. sermon. 71. de tempore.


this great Doctor may give me leave, (if he pleases,) to say, that it is the
Belief of Origin, Tertullian, St. Anastace, and St. Augustine: My Brethren,
(says he) it is very reasonable to believe that there the Sovereign Doctor and
Physician of our Souls, had placed his Chair where the Patient lay, and that
there the Divine Mercy should humble her self, where the Pride of Man had
received the mortal blow; to the end that this precious Blood which run down
from our Saviors Veins, should touch the dust of the ancient Sinner to awake
him from his slumber, to become the spectator of his Redemption.

I do respect and honor all those Holy Fathers feelings, but I think that the
Apostles chief intention is to exhort all languishing and sleepy Souls to
awake, not only to receive the glorious Impression of the exciting Grace, to be
the better able to go on in the way of their Salvation, but also to re-double
their steps, and recover the time lost, because our remaining days in this
World, are both uncertain, and bad.

Would he fain make us believe as a certainty, Redimentes tempus quoniam dies
mali sunt Ephesians. 5. v. 7. Non dies mali sunt per se, sed per homines. D. Hier.
to, 9. in c 5. Ephesians. Viri sanguinum and dolosi, etc. Psalm. 54. v. 24.
Restituite in uno tempore quod minus fecistis in alio, ut sic sites dimidi
antes dies: non sicut mali qui non dimidiant dies suos, sed totum in malo
expendunt. Goz. in c. 5. Ephesians.
that which hitherto in all Schools was thought to be imposible, to recover the
time past, to re-call the days of old, and render the past ages present? here
lies a contradiction; therefore we must judge that his meaning is, that God
often, to punish our sins, shortens our lives: and that He, who in course would
have attained to live under the Flag of an honorable old age, had he been but
steadfast in the Field of Virtue, having plunged himself into all sorts of
Vices, sees himself at the gates of Death, when he does but begin to taste of
the sweetness of Life.

Do you not remember in Genesis, that God had agreed with Noah to allow six
score years life to them of the Law of Nature, to the end they should have
sufficient time to repent? Yet he cuts them short of full twenty, seeing them
persist in the criminal liberty of so many abominations. And really how many
Handsome Young Grafts do we see in our age decay, by reason of their overmuch
liberty, and as a Flower of one days growth, die most miserably in the dawning
of their age, who by God's Decrees, were appointed to live the years of a St.
Paul the Hermit, had they but followed his Examples, Vide D. Tho. comment. in
c. 5. Ephesians.
and become true Imitators of his mortified life; These are the days that the
Apostle calls bad, and that the exciting Grace invites us to redeem: That is to
say, as soon as a Sinner, by God's Mercy, shall know the state of his Soul, how
long it is? a Month perhaps, a Year, two Years, more or less, that he sleeps in
mortal Sin; he ought to blot those days out of the Book of Everlasting Life:
They are so many moments lost for Heaven, they are so many bad days: But
however they may be recovered, Mercantes and ementes occasionem and
opportunitarem ad been agendum, ad lucra coelestia comparanda.
if by force of a generous resolution, the Sinner comes to encourage himself to
good, excite himself to Virtue, to the end, he repairs the great loss he
suffered in the days of his Laziness.

CHAP. XVIII. For to Convert a Sinner, God must afflict him.
TO say, that any Afflictions, and Crosses, Disciplinam Domini, fili mi, ne
abjicias cum ab eo corriperis, etc. Prove. 3. v. 12.
are the most Rich pieces, and precious Jewels of Jesus Christ's Cabinet, and
that he never imparts them, but to such as are his intimate Friends, is to
advance a Paradox which has often puzl'd many great Wits to find out the
explication of it. You would say, that the Prophet Jeremiah himself, knows not
the secret of it, when that addressing his complaints to God, (he says) Ah!
Lord, you are just, and if I durst undertake to dispute in your presence, I
shall always find the order of your proceedings full of Equity: Justus es
Domine, etc. Paulo infra. Via impiorum prosperatur, etc. Hier. v. 1. c 12. Hoc
proprie contra haereticos dicitur, qui cum sint impij, via erum prosperatur,
generantque filios eas quos in haeresi deceperunt, praevar^cantur and inique
agunt, ita ut Ecclesiem spolient, and dum in pravitate sent^nt^ae persev^rant,
jac^ant se a Deo esse plantatos, etc. D. Hear. to 5. hic.
However give me leave, (if you please) to ask you this only Question: How
comes it to pass that the wicked do prosper? The most vicious are in your
favor. You do plant them on the top of Mountains, as the Cedars of Libanus,
you raise their Fortune, and leave the Power in their hands to prescribe a Law
to the rest of Men: as if he had said, I cannot conceive how the wicked, who
for their crimes deserve the rigor of a just vengeance to fall on their
criminal and guilty heads, are notwithstanding, the best stored with Blessings.
And contrariwise, the Virtuous livers constantly submissive to the Laws of God,
merely for his Love, and whose Innocence the Heavens do authorize, are always
in misery, as so many Criminals condemned to suffer.

And he whose Innocence all ages did admire; The holy Man Job, Job c. 21. v. 7.
Quare ergo impii veniunt, subluvati sunt, confortatique divitiis, etc.
what was he on his own Dunghill, but a poor Criminal, crushed to pieces on the
Wheel of this World? It is in that equipage that he addresses the same
complaints to God. What is the reason (says he) that the Wicked Man lives at
his ease? Is he no more subject to the Laws of common Mortality? Blessings are
but for him: The frowns of Fortune, the Rain, the Storms and Thunder are not
for the wicked, they are in shelter of the Laurels; In fine, the Heaven, (as it
seems) are not but for them.

Habbakkuk the Prophet, Quarerespicis super iniqua agentes, and ^aces devorante
impio justiorem se, etc. Non quod ipse sic sentiat, sed quod impatientiam
humanam in s^a person^ exprimat. D. Hier. hic.
takes it more hainously, my Lord (says he) if your eyes be so pure, that they
cannot abide the sight of Evil, how comes it, that you suffer Innocence to be
oppressed with Impiety, and them who are more faithful to execute your Laws, to
be the abjection and upbraidings of the People? Why do you not concern your
self to uphold their Interest on all occasions? It is not to be believed, that
you have put up all your Favors in store for them, that make nothing of your
Laws.

It is true that this was an unknown Mystery to past ages, Noli aemulari in
malignantibus neque zelaveris facientes iniquitatem. Psalm. 26. v. 1.2.3.
and a Language never learned, until the spotless Lamb had opened the great
Volume of the Apocalypse, shut up with seven Seals, until that the impassible
had willingly submitted himself to the Decree of the Passion, until the triumph
of the Cross had blotted out of Men's hearts that vain Belief, that Afflictions
and Crosses were only for the Miserable.

Quidquid in mundo vel bonorum accidit v^l malorum non absque providentia and
fortuito casu accidit sed ju^icio Dei, terra nunc sterilis est, herba siccatur,
vis nosce rationem malitiae habit^torum ejus hoc faciunt. D. Hieron. to. 5. in
c. 12. Hierem.
O Prophets! be pleased to forbear then, do not be scandalized, if God, whose
Actions are always with Weight, Number and Measure, proceeds with that
inequality in our thoughts, the weakness of our understanding cannot comprehend
his ways, by which he Governs wisely, and Rules the whole Monarchy of the
World: No Mortal Man was ever of his Privy Council, to know what course he
takes to make Nature subsist; we may well see the effects of his Power, but to
comprehend his motives, we must stand in everlasting admiration of his
Councils, and acknowledge our obligation to adore with silence the Doctrine of
his Justice.

If the wicked be mounted high on the very Wheel of Fortune, if the people
consider them as the Gods of the Earth, Vidi impium elevatum, sicut Cedros
Libani, transivi and ecce non erat. Psalm. 36. v. 35.

Nullum est scandalum quod impij pro tempore floreant licet enim proficiant,
filios generent, and faciant fructum tamen non parva est consolatio quod quasi
pecora saginantur ad victimam. D. Hieron. supra


if all things come to their wishes without opposition or further delay, that
is but an imaginary moment, (says David) I have seen them elevated as the
Cedars of Libanus; as I returned, I looked for them, but they were no more to
be seen, I cannot tell what is become of them. If the Creator of the Universe
be pleased to impart his passing favors to those that deserve them less, we
must not be therefore discouraged: This moment of good luck, shall have for its
assured follower, an Eternity of misfortune, whereinto the main heaps of their
offenses shall reduce them: they do feed themseves for a time, Duos filios
habet homo, alterum dimittit, facit unus male and non corripitur a patre, alter
mox ut se moveti flagellatur: unde ille dimittitur and ille caeditur: nisi quia
huic caeso haereditas servatur ille autem dimissus exheredatus est: videt eum
non babet spem and dimittit eum ut faciat quod vult. D. Aug. to. in Psalm. 93.
in fat Land, but it is to be hereafter, the fatal Victims of God's Eternal
vengeance.

But if Afflictions fall to the lot of good livers, they ought not to think
that they are rigorously dealt with, that the Heavens are very sparing of their
Influences to them, and that God has no care to maintain their Rights:
Contrariwise, the B. Savior of the World assures them in St. John, by a solemn
Oath, that even in this World their sadness shall be turned into joy, and
through their Afflictions, he will let run the streams of his Heavenly
Consolations: Si me persecuti sunt and vos persequenter. Joan 15. v. 29.
Gaudium vestrum nemo tollet a vobis. Joan 16. v. 22.
They shall taste Honey from the top of the Rod that whips them: If he strikes
at them, they ought to consider him as a Shephard, who for to gather his Flock
before him, takes up with his Pastoral Staff a clod of Earth, to fling at the
Sheep that goes aside: Una pendet in vitibus and oliva in arboribus, and
quandiu pendent in frutetis suis, tanquam libero acre perfruuntur at nec una
vinum est nec oliva selum ante pressurant: sic sunt and homines quos
praedestinavit Deus ante saecula conformes fieri imaginis fillij sui, qui
precipue in passione magnus hortus expressus est, etc. Paulo inferius. Accedens
quisque ad servitutem Dei, ad torcularia se venisse cognoscat, non ut in hoc
saeculo pere^t, sed ut in apothec^s Dei deflunt, etc. D Aug. to. 8. in Psalm 1^.
qui est pro torcularib^^.
If he puts them under the Press of Afflictions, it is only to squeese out of
them what is mortal and terrestrial, to be the better able to fly toward the
Region of Immortal things.

This is not as yet enough, God has other Designs on the Souls which he does
afflict in this World, he aims to bring them by the means of Afflictions, from
that large Road which leads to Hell, and to conduct them into the narrow Lane
of Heaven: For being it is very true, that a Man who was never otherwise lead;
than by the pernicious Maxims of Blood and Flesh, is as much incapable to think
of Heaven, and knows the obligations of his Salvation, as is the Owl to look at
the Sun in his full height: God could never make choice of a more efficacious
means to convert a Sinner, than to expose his Body and Flesh to the rigours of
the Cross, thereby to revive his Spirit. And it is very true, John 17. v. 9.
for St. John the Faithful Secretary of Jesus, relating the Articles of his
Masters last Will and Testament, says, That he Prayed to God his Father, not
for the World, nor for the Worldlings, that always live in Prosperity; But for
them, who for his Love willingly made choice to carry their Cross. But I pray
to what end was this Prayer made, which doubtless will be heard for the
Reverence of him who makes it? St. Luke resolves me; as for you, says he, Luke
22. v. 18.
who by my Example have stood firm and constant in all your Temptations; I do
dispose unto you the Kingdom that my Father prepared for me; Et ego dispono
vobis sicut disposuit mihi pater meus regnum.
a disposing which is never performed but by the Holy motions that he casts
into a Soul, whilst she is afflicted; it is then that he does dispose her by a
generous Conversion to make her self worthy of the Kingdom of Heaven.

The Prophet Joel, Quis scit si convertatur and ignoscat and relinquat
benedictionem. Joel c. 2. v. 13.
after he had exhorted the People to Convert themselves with all their Hearts
by Fasting and weeping, seems to doubt, if after all that, God, (all good, all
merciful as he is,) be pleased with our Fasting and Tears: For we can sometimes
Convert our selves to God; but it is hard to know if God has Converted himself
to us: Vide D. Hieron. to. 6. ad haec verba Joelis. hic.
Who is it that knows, (says he,) if, after we fulfill what God demanded of us,
whether he leaves us his Blessing, or no. The Abbot Rupert clears us of this
doubt, Rupert in c. 1. Joel.
by remitting us to that infallible sign in Exodus, where God assures the
Children of Israel, That they shall not resent the rigours of his Indignation,
nor suffer the exemplary punishments of the Egyptians; so that he sees their
doors sprinkled with the Blood of the H. Lamb, ^ scit apud (...) peccata (...)
ab eis ^^^^ricordia ^bitur ei, (...) ^^^que (...) ^ald. ex He^^^^o.
it is to this sign that he leaves his Blessing. Among Christians we have not a
more sensible mark, to know that God has a good will for a Soul, than to see
her covered over with the Blood of Jesus, and carry her Cross after him. When
it pleases this Sovereign King to come the Circuit of the World, if he falls
into the Great ones Palaces, where he perceives a superfluity of all sorts,
Par Deo dignum, vir fortis cum malafortuna compositus spectaculum Deo dignum:
fortuna ut gladiatur fortissimos sibi pares quaerit: alias fastidio transit,
ignem expe^^tur in mutio, etc. Seneca lib. 1. de providentia.
he never stops there with his Blessings, but goes through; if he meets with
Cities, Towns, or Houses, where nothing is free but Crimes, he passes by, he
seems not to look at them; If he comes into the company of Ranters and
debauched Livers, he makes no matter of them; and as well the one as the other
he leaves them in the hands of his Revenging Angel, who puts them all to the
Sword, and in the very place: But if he meets with a good Soul forsaken by all
the World, abandoned by his nearest Relations, under the heavy load of
Oppressions, which nevertheless lifts up her Eyes toward Heaven, whence she
expects all her Relief and her Comfort: It is there he goes in, there he pours
down his Graces by full handfuls, to complete her Conversion.

The Infidels, seeing heretofore the Christians under the rage and fury of
Tyrants, some to be Strapado'd, others crushed into pieces on Wheels; here a
great company cut into quarters, there as many more Fley'd Alive, could not
conceive, how the God, for whose Love they protested to suffer all those
Torments, could be the God of the Afflicted, that it was no proof of any true
Friendship to strike where he Loved. But the Prophet Joel gives them their
Answer, that they are the Caresses of a Loving Father, and that God is
displeased with the Earth for pardoning his People. Ite igitur and succendite
eum igni, succenderunt ergo servi Absolam segetem igni, etc. 2 Reg. v. ^0, 31,
etc.


Absolon was banished from his Fathers Presence, and in the Disgrace of his
banishment, (desirous to receive some Consolation from his Friends) he sends an
express to Joab, to entreat him to Honor him with a Visit, Joab desires to be
excused: Absolon the second time sends to him, requesting earnestly, being
whilst Fortune favored him, he professed to be his real Friend, that now in
his Disgrace he would not deprive him of that great satisfaction, he was in
hopes to receive by his Presence; Joab, (as some Friends of the times are wont
to do) gives the deaf Ear to avoid the obligation of so just a Request: What
does Absolon do? He calls all his Servants, commands them to cut down Joab's
Wheat, rifle his Vineyards, destroy his Inheritance, pillage and plunder all
his Farms: Joab hears the News, he takes Horse, comes to see Absolon. You see
that he who refused to come by Mildness and Courtesy, is forced by this
Stratagem to wait on his Prince.

The sinner does banish God from his Heart, when that by his Infidelities he
turns off his Grace: What does God do; he who cannot see himself far off, nor
banished from our Hearts without resentment, who does that Honor to Men, Cum
occideret eos quaerebant eum and revertebantur, etc. Psalm. ^7. v. 34.
as to call their Company his Delights: He sends to the Sinner for the first
time, the worm and remorse of his Conscience, to let him know, that
notwithstanding his Ungratefulness, he desires to see him, and discourse with
him about matters of importance: But he makes nothing of his Messenger, much
less of his Request; he chooses rather to live miserably with the Devils, than
obey the Summons of his Creator. God holds not himself affronted by that
discourteous return: He sends the Angel-keeper of the Sinner with Pacquets from
himself, to invite him to take notice of the deplorable state of his Soul, to
re-enter into himself, and to repent his faults: Quia ad aeterna gaudia redire
non possumus; nisi per temporalia detrimenta, tota Scripturae intention est, u^
spes manentis laetitiae nos inter haec transitoria adversa corroboret. Greg.
tom. 1. l^b. 26. in c. 35. Job.
But the obstinacy which has already possessed his Soul, takes from him all
feelings of his Happiness. Yet God is resolved to bring him to his Duty: He
commands all Creatures to afflict him; if he has Children wherein he has placed
his hopes and all his expectation, he will snatch them away before their time;
or if he suffers them to live many years, they will be Debauched, and so much
given to their unlawful Pleasures, that they will afflict them to death; if he
has Friends that he has put his confidence in, he will make them to become his
Mortal Enemies; if he be stout on the account of his Riches, he will in a trice
make him the poorest Beggar in nature; and will chase him so close, until
acknowledging his fault, he takes on a new resolution to draw near him, from
whom he got himself so far off; and as another Prodigal-Child, after he had
made away all his Substance, he comes to cast himself on the neck of his
Father, who waits on him with open Arms to give him the motions of a perfect
Conversion.

CHAP. XIX. How the Devil hinders a Sinner to Convert himself to God in
Affliction.
Tertul. praescript. c. 40. Qui ipsas quoque res Sacramentorum divinorum in
idolorum mysteriis aemulatur.
TErtullian setting himself the question, to what Doctor did the Heretics make
their Addresses to, to get the Interpretation of Scripture, and a false color
to their new found Doctrine; Answers, That it was to the Devil, whose Office is
to render the clearest Verities most obscure, to employ the most Holy
Ceremonies of Sacraments to the Profane use of Idolatry, Ipse Sathanas
transfigurat se, etc. 2 Cor. 11. v. 15.
to falsify Baptism, and to counterfeit in as much as can, the very Actions of
God. Falsi illi fallacesque daemones qui cum per spiritus immunditiem miseri ac
maligni multis effectibus clareant, per corporalium tamen locorum intervalla, a
provectu animorum nos avocare moliuntur. Vide reliqua D. Aug. lib. 9. Civit. c.
13. to. 5.

Venit Diabolus and tollit verbum de cord eorum, etc. Luke 8. v. 12.


Consider (says he) the superstitions of Numa Pompilius, the Offices, Rights,
and Privileges of Sacrificatours, the Vessels and Ornaments of Temples, and
the Order and Curiosity of their Vows and Prayers; you shall find that it is a
pure disguisement of what passed in the Mosaical Law. It Is therefore that the
learned St. Augustine calls the Devils, false and dissembling Mediators, who
make it their work to set astray such as go the right Road to Heaven, and cover
the malice of their suggestions, with the Mask of the most Amorous Inspirations
of Jesus.

Our Savior himself in St. Luke, gives us a hint of that pernicious cheat,
when that explaining the Parable of the Seed, (he says) that the Devil plucks
all good Inspirations out of man's heart, for fear, that coming to give credit
to it, he should be saved.

The Savior of the World by our very corporal Afflictions, Piere Matthieu,
lib. 1. de l'hist. de Henri 4. page 189.
has a design to manage the salvation of our Souls; Satan uses all his
endeavors to make us take it another way, and in a quite contrary sense. A
Deluge comes over all Rome, in the year One Thousand Five Hundred and Thirty,
Mala illa quae civitas pertulit Christo imputant, bona vero quae in eos, ut
vinerent propter Christi honorem facta sunt, non Christo sed fato imput ant cum
potius deberent providentiae divinae tribuere, quae solet corruptos hominum
mores, bellis emendare, etc D. Aug. to 1. lib. 1. de civit. Dei c. 1.
in less than four hours, it carried away our Lady Bridge, all the
Stationers-Shops: all the Storehouses that were about St. Angel's Castle: the
Churches, on Christmass-day, were without Priests, Mass, or People: That was a
great Affliction! But what should be the cause hereof? Some will say that the
Meredian Winds, together with the constant Rain, swelled up the course of Tyber
so far, as to break down its Arches with its violence; But why do they
attribute their misfortune more to the Natural cause, than to the motions of
God's indignation and wrath?

It is an invention of the Devil, (says Peter Matthews) who rocks us to sleep
as Jonas in the Ship, that we might not know how we are the cause of the Storm.
Ferrare shakes, and in less than forty hours, this shaking re-doubles to an
hundred and forty times: Their loss was esteemed four Millions of Gold, yet
they do not think the cause of their loss to be the corrupt inclinations and
evil practices of the City, which* provokes the Justice of God; No, it is the
Situation of the place, full of Pores and Caves, where Water got in, or Wind.
Cruciatus qui corporaliter inferuntur aut ut exerceant conversos ad Deum, aut
ut convertantur admoneant aut justae damnationis ultimae praeparent obduratos,
etc. D. Aug. to. 8. in Psalm. 9.
The Plague comes into Venice, not by God's Order, no, the Bogs are the only
cause: It Is come to Paris, the streets must be kept clean, their dirt was the
occasion: Lion is Infected also, away with those Chandlers, the base smell of
their rotten Tallow has brought the Disease amongst them: We are like so many
Dogs, we run after the stone that God does cast at us, without considering what
hand it comes from, without turning our Face toward him who strikes at us, to
know what was his meaning to strike us. We Lop our Trees, and why? to hinder
that unprofitable Branches may not take away the substance: We prune our Vines,
that they should have less Leaves, and more Fruit, less Buds and more Grapes.
You rub your course Irons, and why? It is to pollish them and take away the
Rust. God by means of Afflictions, cleans our Souls to confirm us in his Grace,
he clips and cuts us to pieces, that we may the sooner produce the Fruits of a
true Repentance; he sets us under the main Hammer of the Cross in this World,
to take away the Rust of old Sores, and polish our Souls for an Eternity: Satan
will have us believe the contrary; Omnia quae patiuntur mala, inique se pati
dicunt; dantes illi iniquitatem per cujus voluntatem patiuntur, aut quia non
audent ei dare iniquitatem, auferunt ei gubernationem. D. Aug. to. 8. in Ps^ 31.
and as by the supposition of a false Belief, he dulled us so far, as not to be
able to conceive the effects of God's Providence: He will soon oblige us to
believe, that whatever misfortune hapens to us, has its offspring from some
fatal necessity: And so, in liew of considering our Afflictions to be the
amorous inventions of God's Love, who calls us to his Service, we take them for
sinister causes, which reduce us to bear company with the most miserable
Creatures that Nature can afford.

This is not only found to be true in the general Afflictions which God is
pleased to lay over a whole Kingdom or Province, to chastise them for their
misdemeanors, but as yet in particular and personal Afflictions, to which
every one of us all is subject: Let us take for example, Diseases, (St. Basil
says) That they are God's Prisons. If there be a wild young Man in a Country,
a Highway Robber, a Murderer, a Whore-master, or otherwise idly given, whom
the fear of the Justice of the Law is not able to reduce to any right
understanding; the Magistrate to bring this spend-thrift to his Duty, issues
out his Warrant to the King's Officers, to bring in his Body; He is taken,
brought to his Trial, and condemned to Prison; there he begins to implore the
clemency of his Judges; he, who a little before undervalu'd both God and Man: A
Sinner, who had no regard of God's Laws, Jam saeviat quantum voluerit, pater
est: sed flagilavit nos and afflixit, and contrivit nos, verum est, sed pater
est: fili si ploras, sub patre plora. Paulo infra.
trod under foot all remorse of Conscience, made nothing of the inward
reprehensions of his Angel-keeper: God, who, notwithstanding will not have this
poor wretch to perish, sends his Sergeant with a Warrant to seize on his body,
a good sound sickness, casts him down on his Bed, puts Irons on his hands and
feet, to the end that at last in that condition, he be forced to beg his life
of his Creator, implore his Clemency, and expect, that by his special Grace, he
leads him into the Road which all good Christians take to arrive in Heaven: Si
non vis repelli ab haereditate, noli attendere quam poenam habeas in fl^gello,
sed quem locum in testamento. D. Aug. to. 8. in Psalm. 103.
We must not attribute the cause of our Afflictions, to some fatal
constellation which had preceded at our Birth, or to the bad constitution of
our Bodies, or to the want of good Government in our Diet; for though all those
causes may contribute somewhat, we must acknowledge, that there is a Supreme
and Sovereign cause, which has a far higher design than that of sickness, and
which ends not in that exterior Infirmity of our Bodies, but goes on to cure
us of a far more dangerous Disease, which is the Interior Malady of our Souls.

A Wife has lost her Husband whom she loved as her heart; a Husband lost his
Wife, whom he cherishes as his one half; both are weeping, lamenting, sighing,
Alas! the Wife will say, did the Heavens join us together with so sure a knot,
as that of Marriage to separate us so soon? at least, if I had been the first
to pay my Duty to Nature, I would have had the comfort, as not to outlive the
object of my misfortune; Alas! (the Husband will say,) what shall become of my
poor Children, after having lost a Mother who loved them so tenderly? What
shall become of my House and Family, being that I have lost my Wife, my
Adviser, my Helper, my Housekeeper, and prudent Oeconomer, who eased me of all
my cares? Could I but release her life with the effusion of my Blood, I would
soon empty all my Veins, to bring her to life again. I freely pardon those hot
expressions of Nature, for being we are all made of Flesh and Blood, we must
have a feeling for our Friends: But to speak like a Christian, God demands
other guess thoughts of you in those Afflictions; he pardons those tears that
pass in a moment; But he does expect a grief that shall have no other term than
Eternity. The Virgins of Jerusalem, seeing our Savior to toward the Mount
Calvary, covered with blood, and all battered with blows, wept bitterly: He
does not approve of their Grief, but tells them freely, that their tears had
been better employed for themselves. I say the same to those Souls; we ought
rather to weep for the loss we have often had of our true Spouse Jesus Christ,
when that by our infidelities we lost his presence; Tears on this only occasion
are grateful to God, and well received by his Apostles, when they do produce in
us a true Grief of our past idle life, and a constant resolution of amendment
for the future.

Another is entangled in Law, has lost his Suit, which takes away all that he
has in the World; to whom shall he make his addresses, to tell him of his
misfortune? Now he lays the blame on the Judges, and says that they were
mis-inform'd, and more inclined to favor his Adversaries; that they gave
Sentence for them who had no Justice on their side; Maledictus autem qui spem
suam ponit in homine, confunderis quia fefellit te spes, fefellit spes posita
in mendacio: si autem ponas spem in Deo, non confunderis quia ille in quo spem
posuisti falli non potest. D. Aug. to. 8. in Psalm. 36.
another time he finds fault with himself; and accusing himself of laziness,
says, that he either lost his most material Papers, or left them at home in his
Closet: He complains of his Friends, that they were too backward to speak for
him, and that if they had employed their credit, he had got the better; Merely
deceipts of the Devil: Friend, you have been too much a Slave to your Riches,
your overmuch ease had brought you to perdition, your great possessions had
Damned you: But God made you poor, that you should resemble himself, and that
you should run with more speed and less trouble through the paths of Virtue:
Vide D. Aug. to. 1. in Ps. 31 circa finem.
Perhaps, if God had made the Rich Glutton Poor, and that in lieu of the great
Revenues he had, he were brought to Poor Lazarus's condition, he would be at
the present, glorious among the Angels; whereas he sees himself burned in Hell
among the Devils.

We must then conclude, that it is a most powerful Motive to convert our selves
to God, to make good use of Afflictions, which are in appearance the rigours of
a Judge, but really, they are the caresses of a loving Father, nothing of Evil
can happen to a man who receives all things as coming with Commissions from
Heaven. The Worlding attributes all that happens to him, to the blind Lot of
Fortune; and he to the Divine Providence, the more he sees here of disorder,
the more he admires God's Judgments, who directs, (whether men will or no) all
those inconstancies to a certain end, he knows there is no Enemy but Fights for
his Victory, nothing so wicked, but strikes at his aim; to believe firmly that
all comes from the hand of God, is as a Shelter from Hail, a Shadow against the
Sun, a Relief against a Fall: If the Roots of the present life be bitter, the
Fruit shall be sweet in Glory: Let us never give credit to the Devils false
Councels, for all his desires and will, tends to falsity God's most Holy
proceedings in regard of our Salvation.

CHAP. XX. It is by Preaching, that Sinners are efficatiously moved.
THe Abbot Rupert says, that God foreseeing from all Eternity, that a Sinner at
such or such a time, Rupert l. 2. in Jonan. c. 3.
would be converted to a true Repentance, Spes reposita est vobis in Coelis,
quam auditis in verbo veritatis Evangelij quod pervenit ad vos, etc. Coloss. 1.
v. 5.6.
never failed to send him Preachers, to instruct and teach him the right and
assured Road to Heaven. And he seems to have affixed the Salvation of men to
that condition: (to wit) to save them by the means of his word, he tells you as
much in the Gospel; Suscipite insitum verbum quod potest sal vare animas
vestras. Jacob. v. 21.
where the Rich Glutton seeing that he had left Brothers in the World, who
might follow him into those eternal Flames, and increase the accidenal pain of
his Torments, imagines, that if any from among the dead would appear unto them,
to tell them of his misfortune, and bring them to avoid the same by a true
Repentance, that without doubt at the sight of so extraordinary a thing, they
would seriously think of their Salvation, he begs Abraham to do him this
favor: No, no, Non erubesco Evangelium virtus enim Dei est in salutem omni
credenti. Romans 1. v. 16.
(says Abraham) we must not have recourse to Signs and Prodigies, where the
ordinary ways may be sufficient, they have Moses, they have the Prophets, they
have their Preachers, let them hear their Voice; if they will, they are God's
Messengers, sent as so many Mercuries by the Holy Ghost, over all the high
Roads, to tell all Passengers the way they must of necessity take to come to
Heaven.

And to the end that God's design in this point, may appear in its full luster
to the eyes of the Reader, I divide the Sinners that are to be converted by
Preaching, into three Classes, (viz.) Obstinate Sinners, Sinners who
procrastinate their Conversion, and languishing Sinners. God, to convert the
obstinate Sinner, must become a Smith-Preacher: To convert a Sinner who puts
off his conversion from day to day, he makes himself a Soldier-Preacher: To
convert the languishing Sinner, he must be a Physician-Preacher. The obstinate
and obdurate Sinner is Painted to the life in Holy Scripture, Frons mulieris
meretricis facta est tibi, noluis^i erubescere. Jerem. 3. v. 3.
he has a Harlots Face and Forehead, nothing can make him blush, he has lost
all shame, he is no more a private Sinner, he tells openly all, and sometimes
more than what he has done, he boasts of his Iniquity, his mouth is full of
Maledictions, for he cannot speak a word but he must out with a bloody Oath; he
bears Venom under his Tongue, and as a malicious Serpent, he waits for an
occasion to annoy his Neighbors; his Heart is harder than Iron, colder than
Marble, and more Rebellious than the Dyamond: What shall God do to convert him?
Nunquid non verba mea sunt quasi ignis dicit Dominus, and quasi mall^us
conterens Petram. Jerm. c. 23. v. 29.
He will take a great Hammer in his hand, as a Smith, and give so many strokes
on the obdurate Heart, that he will force Fire to come out of it. My words,
(says he in Jeremiah) are like Fire, and as a Smiths Hammer that breaks to
pieces the hardest Stones: God commands this Prophet to go and Preach to the
People of Israel, Meus sermo paleis peccatorum comminatur incendium, ut corda
dura; and instar filiis indomabilia sermonis sui malleo conterantur, auferens
cor lapideum ut ponat pro eo cor carneum, etc. D. Hier. to. 5. l. 4. in Hierem
c^p. 23.
but he makes his excuse, and (withal) his Apology, that he has not the Person
or Quality of a Preacher, that he has no good delivery; and withal, that he
has no hopes to reap any profit by Preaching to such obstinate Souls: All what
you allege, is nothing, (says God) they are not your own words you shall
speak, neither is it upon your own account that you shall go, it is in my Name
that you are to speak, they are my words you are to deliver; go on then, pluck,
destroy, root out, cry, storm, strike, make of my words a Hammer, and crush
those Rebellious heads. St. Chrisostom exhorts all Preachers never to be tried
in their Employment, though they may perceive their Labor to be for the most
part unprofitable, because that the word of God is not only a Hammer, but also
a Fountain, which never leaves off to run, though no body comes to drink of its
water: That Jesus gives Judas a kisst, hough he knows him to be a Traitor, and
a Soul already lost: That he who will not be converted this day, may be
reconciled to morrow. St. Augustine was obstinate and slow enough, he often
heard St. Ambrose Preach, sometimes he would laugh at his Sermons; and he does
himself ingeniously confess, Quid est illud quod in terlucet mihi and percutit
cor meum sine laesione, and inhorresco and inardesco: inhorresco in quantum
dissimilis ei sum, inardesco in qu^antum similis ei sum.

D. Aug. to 1 lib. 11. confess. cap. 9.


that the curiosity of hearing good Language, brought him to be one of his
Auditors, rather than any desire he had to learn the Verities of Salvation: But
in fine, at long running, he finds himself taken: The sweet mildness of St
Ambrose, together with the force of his words animated with the Fire of Divine
Love, made a breach on St. Augustines heart; and out of the obdurate and hard
Anvil of his Soul, brought the miraculous flames of his most happy conversion.
But if any be, who, notwithstanding the redoubled strokes of this Mystical
Hammer, notwithstanding all those earnest importunities of the Apostle, will
continue always his accustomed crimes. Scripture will have for the last remedy,
that Heaven and Earth be called as witnesses of his hardness, and how Life and
Death, Vice and Virtue, Pain and Glory, were set before his eyes, and that yet
he was not astonished in the least, Testes in voco hodie Coelum and Terram quod
proposuerim vobis vitam and mortem, etc. Deuter. 30.
nor moved to a Conversion; Let him not then think it strange, if for having
undervalued the word of God in his life time, he be left without any cumfort at
the hour of his Death, without remorse of Conscience, without compunction of
Heart, without Repentance for his Faults; being that his obstinate and fierce
humor had deserved him that disgrace.

The Sinners that do procrastinate their Conversion, are those, who in matter
of changement of life, turns it off to another day, who defer and prolong their
reconciliation as much as they can, saying, that it will be time enough to
think of those sad entertainments, when the heat and lust of Youth shall be
clear past and spent, that God is not so rigorous as they do Preach. The good
Thief said but three words before he died, and he got into Heaven; Mary the
Egyptian took all manner of pleasures whilst she was young, yet she made a
most Happy and a most Glorious end. They are Souls that stand out firm against
God, and will not upon any account surrender, and though they be offered most
advantageous conditions, they are for a cessation of Arms; they will have Time
to capitulate, and find still new excuses for not surrendering* What does God do
to Convert those Souls? He lays Seige to them as to revolted Cities, which deny
Obedience to their Sovereign. You may find in Scripture, Deuteronomy. c. 20. v. 10.
Offeres primum ei pacem v. 19. Non succcides arbores de quibus vesci potest,
etc. c. 21. v. 11.
how he commands a general Destruction over all, that they should preserve
Fruit Trees only; as for others, they should root them out of the ground; and
after that they should give a general assault, they should put all to the
Sword; and that such as under pretense of capitulation deferred to surrender
themselves, Si videris in numero captivorum mulierem pulchram, etc.
they should receive exemplary punishment. But if among those poor wretches,
there should be found a handsome portly Woman, the Conqueror may take her for
his Spouse, with a condition to cut off her Hair, to pair her Nails, and to let
her have a full month to lament her Father and Mother. So God deals with
Sinners that put off their Conversion, after that the Preachers had summoned
them in his Name: He commands his Angels to sound a general Destruction,
whereupon comes a Plague into a City, and leaves it waste, he orders all the
unprofitable Trees (which bear not the worthy Fruits of a true Repentance) to
be cut down. He who has escaped the Plague, shall be taken with an Apoplexy,
which shall not afford him that short time, to invoke the holy Name of Jesus to
his assistance; Another shall be prevented by a sudden death, whilst he is in
mortal sin, and there he is lost for an Eternity. And why all this? It is
because those Souls would fain capitulate with God Almighty; they would not
surrender, when the white Flag of Peace was presented to them; They always
delayed their Repentance, so that God was compelled by their obstinate ways, to
proceed against them with all manner of rigor.

Herodot. lib. 1.
The Ionians, (as you may read in Herodotus) Besieged by King Cyrus who often
before offered them honorable conditions, that they might carry away their
Lives and Goods safe, or stay in the City, and enjoy peaceably all their
Immunities and Liberties; that their Garrison might March off with Drums
beating, Colors flying, Arrow in hand, Sword by their side, Lance at a stand:
Yet they were so headstrong, that they would not surrender; But at last being
not able to hold out any longer, they resolved to send their Deputies to Cyrus;
Being come, Cyrus, for an answer, tells them of a Parable: A certain Man, who
could play well on the Flute, walking along the River side, begins to play on
his Instrument, as if he were to invite the Fish to Dance, to come ashore, and
rejoice at the hearing of so sweet a Harmony: the Fish (instead of coming near
him,) fled away in full Squadrons under the Banks and muddy places of the
River, for the fear of being catched: whereupon he throws in his Net amongst
them, and brings up a great quantity, which were no sooner laid down in the
Meadow, but they began to Dance, leap, and strike with their Fins; No, no,
(says he) it is no more time to Dance, Salationis verbo non histrionis motibus
sinuati corporis rotatus, sed impigri cordis devotio and religiosa membrorum
designatur agilitas. D. Aug. ex Hugon. Cardinal in c. 7. Lucae.
you shall die. This is to say, that Cyrus would hear no more speaking of
Peace, being that the Ionians were so far overseen as to refuse it once, when
it was offered them by his Ambassador, and in his Name. God by his Preachers,
often invited Sinners with the harmonious sound of his words, to get out of the
muddy waters of their Concupiscence, and come to the shore of their Salvation,
to Dance and Rejoice with the Angels at the day of their Conversion: Saltant
animae quae pennulis virtutum fultae per coeleste desiderium saltant ad
contemplationem, quamvis in se relabantur per carnis fragilitatem. D. Greg. ex
Hugone ibid.
But they fled afar off, and launched themsemselves further in under the Banks
of Hell: The hour of death comes on, they cannot hold out any longer, they have
no more the power nor the occasions to offend God. Then they begin to cry, my
God, we would willingly make our Peace with you, do not cut us off so soon; we
beg a cessation of Arms, for one day more: No, no, says our Savior, Canta
vimus ei non saltastis. Luke c 7. v. 32.
in St. Luke, I Sung, but you would not Dance; Now that you would fain Dance, I
am no more in the humor to play on the Music. In die illa voc abit Dominus ad
Fletum, etc. Isa. 2, 2.
Yet if among this poor afflicted, be found any comely handsome Woman, that is to
say, a Soul which acknowledges that she has undervalued her Gods most liberal
offers, and comes to prostrate her self at his Feet, as another Magdalen; she
shall be received with compassion, so be that she cuts off her Hair, and gets
out with a Martial courage from all evil occasions, which, like so many Ropes,
kept her fast as a Slave under the heavy yoke of Sin, so be that she pares her
Nails by Mortifying her evil inclinations, so multiplied in her Heart, by her
often transgressing the Law of God; so be that she does firmly oblige her self
to lament, not for one month, but all the days of her life, to have so ill
employed the time, which God of his Mercy, was pleased to bestow on her, to
manage her Salvation.

The Infirm and Languishing Sinners, In Canticum oris sui vertunt sermones
tuos, etc. Ezeck. 33. v. ult.
are they who really reap some little profit by hearing of Sermons, who confess
and receive some times, who give freely Alms to the Poor, and do many more good
works: But they are so crazy, that upon the least occasion, they fall into a
Relapse; any company brings them off from God's Service, they are so faint and
feeble in their practice of Devotion, that the least attack overcomes them; so
that they need a strong and efficacious Medicine, to Purge them of those
weakening humors. Apoc. c. 10. v. 9. Accipae librum and devora illum, etc.
And it is therefore that God does transform himself into a Prysician-Preacher,
as you may find in St. John's Revelations; Take this Book, devour it
altogether, as long as you keep it in your mouth, it shall have the taste of
Honey: But when it shall come into your Stomach, you shall feel a great deal of
bitterness, a great deal of Gripings and Convulsions. Gallen and Hypocrates
would laugh at such a receipt; Nay, they would never believe that a confection
of Papers could in any respect conduce to men's health: But St. Thomas
(understanding this Book to be the Word of God) makes it appear that it is a
Medicine sweet to reason, Beatus homo qui corripitur a Domino, etc. Job. 5. v.
17.
but sower to sensuality, sweet in the speculation, but sower and troublesome
in the practice: A Medicine Composed of several Ingredients, which cannot be
pleasing to the Body; they are Sugared Pills, but within lies Wormwood and
Myrh. The Sugar and Honey of the Word of God, is, when the Preachers describe
unto us the Beauties of Paradise; the Glorious and Everlasting residence of the
Blessed; The originary Country of praedestinate Souls; When he does explain
unto us the sweetness of that intuitive Vision, Intus vulnera infligit, quia
mentis notrae duritiam suo desiderio percutit, sed percutiendo sanat, quia
terroris sui jaculotransfixos ad sensum nos rectitudinis revocat. D. Greg. lib.
6. moral in c. 5. Job c. 18.
which is to be for ever the Beautifying object of our Souls, when he does
assure us of the other life, that it is a permanent State without any
alteration or changement, a place of Pleasure and Joy, without any mixture of
sadness; a collection and gathering of all imaginable contentments, whose
possession can never fly from him who dies in Grace. But the Myrh, the
Wormwood, and the Diascartamum of the Word of God, are Mortfications, Penance,
Fasting, Hair-cloath, and other Austerities: They are the main displeasures to
have ever offended God; they are the just punishments we must lay on our selves
to chastise bur Rebellions: Cum sanciata men's in Deum anhelare coeperit, etc.
Paulo infra. Ad tentationem protinus ei vertitur, quicquid amicum prius
blandumque in saeculo putabatur. D. Greg. supra
They are the solemn Protestations we make, that to the hazard of our lives we
will abstain from Evil, and avoid all occasions of Sin. Ha! The languishing
Christian will say, I cannot swallow that Pill; it is impossible for me to take
that Medicine, the very smell of it makes me to grudge at it, and provokes me
to a Vomit. Friend, I have but one word to tell you, if you be desirous to be
cured of your Infirmities; here, I prescribe unto you the only Remedy for your
Disease, there is none other.

Gallen, the most Learned Physician of his time was upon a day highly
displeased with certain Mountebanks that he had seen prescribe nothing but what
was pleasing to their Patients: If they would call for Drink in the height of
their Fever, they presently ordered that it should be given to them: If they
had a mind to eat Fruit, they would command it to be served to them
indifferently; Their usual Medicines were composed of the Roots of Mandrakes,
the juice of Dog-Roses, and of Storax, more fit to set their Patients asleep,
and turn them to their Graves, than Purge them of their bad humors, and
restore them to their Health. Erit tempus cum sanam doctrinam, non sustinebunt,
etc. 2 Timothy 4. v. 5.
Nowadays, by I do not know what corruption, we look for Preachers (like unto
those Physicians) who will flatter us, and be loath to tell the truth; for fear
to offend us, Preachers of a new stamp, Filij mendaces, filij nolentes audire
legem Die qui dicunt videntibus loquimini nobis placentia. Isa. 30. v. 10.
nothing but Court Language, Satin Discourses, Bone-Lace Style with fine
Flowers, pretty Peticoats, Stage-Actions, jolly in their Garb and Behavior,
winning looks, who take away the Nails from the Cross, to set in their place
some precious Stones; who will have no Thorns, but Roses grow in the way which
leads to Heaven: In a word, who place a Bolster under our heads, rather
inviting us to sleep in our Iniquities, Melior est manifesta correptio quam
amor absconditus, etc. Proverb. 27. v. 5.
than to awake us at the sound of a Warlike Trumpet, and of a solid Sermon.
Jesus Christ is none of those Preachers, his prescriptions are far contrary to
our humors: We will have the Wine of pleasures, he does ordain us to drink of
the bitter waters of Penance: a Tu igitur, Domine Jesu, uti clementissimus
medicus peccatores omnes cura, utens accommodatis ad salutem medicamentis, non
modo secando, urendo novaculam adhibendo, sed etiam alligando exsi siccando,
injiciendo medicamenta lenia, cicatricem obducentia, emolliendo sermonibus
consolatoriis. Si vulnus altum fuerit, reficito sua vi unguento, ut repletum
reliquis partibus aequetur. D. Clemen. lib. 2. constit. Apostol. ca ^ 45.
We will eat of the Fruit of the forbidden Tree, he will have us served with
the Pears of Sorrow taken from the Tree of the Cross; we are for a mild
Physic, he will have us to be often Blooded: he spares no Iron nor Fire; and
as he is extraordinary well versed in his Art, and knowing full well the cause
of our Evil, he applies thereunto the Remedies which he knows to be most
efficacious for its healing: It is better to receive the Receipts of a Doctor
somewhat rigorous, than to languish miserably under the hands of a flattering
Mountebank.

That being so, if hitherto we have been Sinners obstinate in our crimes, let
us molifie our hearts, and force out of the Anvile of our Steely Breasts, some
little sparkle of good will for our Conversion: If we have been as so many
greedy Ravens croaking a Cowardly Cras, Cras, to morrow, to morrow, putting off
with a foolish delay to another time, the grand affair of our Salvation; Let us
say with the Prophet, it is This day, and at this present moment that I begin to
make Penance. If we have been weak and feeble, falling incessantly to our old
evil practice; let us swallow down with a courageous Heart that wholesome
Medicine, composed of the Blood and Sweat of Jesus, striving in the Garden of
Olives against the feelings of Nature; to the end that being once well Purged,
we may continue Strong and Hearty in the Service of God; and never to assist at
Sermons hereafter, but with that resolution, to make use of what we hear for
the amendment of our Lives.

CHAP. XXI. How Powerful good Example is for to touch a Sinner.
IT is not a question so easy to be resolved, as People may imagine, Ad
invenit omnem viam disciplinae, and tradidit illam Jacob puero suo and Israel
dilecto suo post haec in terris visus est, and cum hominibus conversatus est.
Baruch 3. v. 37.
to wit; whether the Miracles of Christ were of more force to convert Sinners,
than was his sweet Conversation among men: For in favor of his Miracles we may
allege this Maxim of Philosophy; That Active Powers are more Powerfully drawn
by that which moves them most: But it is another Maxim of Philosophy, That what
we have daily before our Eyes, breeds no passion in our Hearts. Ab assuetis non
fit passio.
The proof is very plain in all the course of Nature: What is more to be
admired, than to see the Heavens with all their great Train, roll (constantly
and with such good Order) over our Heads: The Sun to take its course with so
great Majesty from one Tropic to another, and as it enters into its twelve
Stations, or Mansion Houses, to produce so many rare and different effects: The
Moon, which by the secundity of its continual Influences, predominates with so
much Empire over all Sublunary Generations; the Earth which every year revives
so many Plants, and draws them out of the Tomb where Winter had buried them:
However all those things, because we have them daily before our Eyes, moves not
in the least our Powers. But if any thing happens extraordinary in the course
of Nature? If the Sun be at a stop, Non ait Dominus tollite jugum meum super
vos discite a me quoniam quatriduana de sepulchris cadavera exsuscito, atque
omnia demonia de corporibus hominum morbosque depello and caetera hujusmodi:
sed tollite inquit, jugum meum and discite a me quia mitis sum and humilis
cord, illa enim sunt signa rerum spiritualium mitem autem esse and humilem
charitatis conservatio est. D. Aug. to. 4. lib. ^unico in Epist ad Galat.
or go back so many Degrees, as once it happened; if the Moon be Eclipsed, if
any Prodigious Sign or Comet appear in the Air, we are all presently in a maze,
we are astonished at the sight of those new and extraordinary things. We might
then conclude, that Miracles, which are extraordinary things, which are the
Wonderful Productions of a Supreme Cause, and which depend immediately of an
Agent far beyond the limits of Nature, should have far more force to move Souls
to think of their Salvation, than either Example or Conversation.

However, we must conclude, that the Conversation of Jesus was more available
to Souls for their Conversion, than were all his Miraculous Actions: For the
Conversion of a Sinner consists in the perfect imitation of Jesus, by doing
good Works: Miracles bring not People to Imitation, but only to Admiration; To
raise the Dead, to restore their Sight to the Blind, their Hearing to the Deaf,
their Speech to the Dumb, Health to one Sick of the Palsy: They are Actions
which cannot be imitated by men, because they do surpass the reach of their
Activity: But to suffer Affronts without the least reply, do good to his
Enemies, carry his Cross with Resignation, practice Virtue on occasions; they
are I must confess Heroic Actions, Rogo vos imitatores mei estote sicut and
ego Christi, 1 Cor. 4. v. 16.
which may be imitated by Gods good Grace. To work Miracles it was needless
that the Eternal Word should become Man, being that they are the effects of his
Divinity: But to do Works which may be imitated, he took on himself our
Resemblance, Bona non solum coram Deo, sed etiam coram hominibus. 2 Cor. c. 8.
v. 20.
leaving us in the course of his Humble and Mortified Life, a Gracious Model,
and a most Lovely Pattern for all our Actions.

The Scribes and Pharisees had not many Complaints to make against his
Miracles; Quare cum publicanis and peccatoribus manducat Magister vester.
Matthew. 9. v. 10.
but as for his Conversation, they murmured, and could not suffer, but with
Jealousy to see him so familiar with Sinners and Publicans: For it was the
only means to disabuse that poor blind Nation, and bring them to open their
Eyes to see their own Follies: And in effect, those that a great number of his
Miracles could not Mollify, the Example of Jesus Crucified on Mount Calvary,
forced that Confession from their Mouths, Verily, this Man was the Son of God;
and knocking their breasts, they returned back full of Sorrow and Contrition to
have known so late the Merits of so Holy and so Perfect a Man: Whence came it
that Pilot would fain declare him Innocent, and withdraw himself from judging
of his Cause, but from the Sweetness of his Conversation, from the rare example
of his Modesty, from his Patience more than Humane under that heavy load of
Affronts which he received at the Hands of that Barbarous and Bloody Nation;
Hence he drew that necessary consequence, that the Virtue of the most high did
animate all his Actions, and that such a gathering of so many rare Virtues
could never be found in the Person of any Criminal.

This Truth cannot be better understood, than by the Commissions which our
Savior gave to his Apostles and Disciples: For, as he did not establish them
his Lieutenants on Earth, but for to make an end of that which he began; (viz.)
the Conversion of Sinners; he ought to give the means most proper, and the
necessary Instructions to attain to that end. There they have it in St.
Matthew, Matthew. c. v. 19. Luceat lux vestra coram hominibus ut videant opera
vestra bona.
let your Light shine before Men, not by making the fire of Heaven to come
thundering down on the Criminal and guilty Heads of Sinners, not by commanding
the Earth to open its flanks to swallow into its Bowels all Obstinate and
Rebellious Souls; nor the Air to form and let fly its Thunderbolts to frighten
the World: Ego lucem accendi, ut vero peseveret ardens, vestri sit studii, non
propter me vosque ipsos tantum, verum etiam propter eos qui eadem luce
potientur, vobisque ducentibus viam veritatis invenient. D. Chrysostom. to. 2.
hom. 15. in c. 5. Matthew.
But by rendering your selves imitable by your good and Holy Conversation, to
the end that Sinners seeing your good Works, may Glorify your Father which is
in Heaven. St. John the Baptist wrought no Miracles (at least that ever we
heard of,) either by History or otherwise: But his Conversation was so Powerful
to move Souls, that all Herod's Court were his Admirers; the austerity he
always observed in his Eating and Drinking, the Courseness of his Garment, his
Zeal in Preaching, and extolling the Glory of Penance, put so great a feeling
into the Hearts of Sinners, that he drew them after him as the Lodestone draws
the Iron.

D. Basil Epist. 175.
St. Basil relates, that such as went to the chase of Pigeons, in his time,
thought of a very good invention to draw them into their Pidgeon-houses; they
would take a tame and Domestic Pidgeon, and put a grain or two of Musk under
her wings, and afterward let her fly: This little Creature, soon after would
fall into the company of wild ones, and draw them wherever she went, with
the sweet Perfume she had hidden under her Wings. Christi bonus odor sumus in
omni loco. 2 Cor. cap. 2. v. 16. Foelix praedicator qui sic praedicat evidenter
ut sit odor Christi non foetor antichristi. Gozra. in c. 2. Corint. Coelius
Rhodig. lib. 6. antique lection. cap. 29.
Jesus Christ is a Pidgeon, who bears under the Wings of his Humanity the Musk
of a Celestial conversation, the Girls of the Cantick followed him at the
Scent of his Perfumes. The Apostles, (as St. Paul says) are Musked Pigeons
sent by Jesus Christ over all the World to Perfume all Nations, and bring them
by the sweet smell of their Angellical Conversation, to the Pidgeon-house of
his Church.

We may read in Coelius Rhodignus, that at a certain Banquet where the seven
wife Men of Greece met, there was (according to their custom,) a Question
proposed: Which was the House and Family that they might lawfully call most
happy? Solon answered, it was that which was well stored with Riches lawfully
gotten, and well managed. Cleobulus, where the Master made himself more to be
loved than feared. Pettacus, Propter nos conscientia nostra sufficit nobis:
fama propter proximum, qui autem bonae conscientiae fidens famam negligit
crudelis est. Gozram in c. 8. 2. ad Corinth.
where all things abounded as well for decency as necessity. Chilon, where the
Family was Governed after a Monarchick way; and so of the rest: But Bias, (in
my thoughts) hit best, when he said, that the most happy, was, where the Master
and Servants were as well ordered and ruled in their exterior conversation
among Men, Sanctificatus est enim vir infidelis per mulierem fidelem. 1 Cor. 7.
v. 13.
as if they had been daily in the presence of the Gods. St. Paul seems to be of
the very same opinion, (when he councels a Woman, who had taken an Infidel to
her Husband) not to forsake him, Inter omnia quae regunt hominem in viae
salutis, praecipuum est sequi societatem sanctorum, hoc ostendit psalmus verbo
cum sancto sanctus eris, and Coeciliae facto, quae virum suum ad fidem
convertit. Gozram. in c. 7. 1 Cor.
because she might convert him by her good Example, by her sweet and most
Friendly Conversation. Magdalen ought to return many thanks to her Sister
Martha, for who do you think was it that made her resolve to go hear Jesus
Preach in Jerusalem, where she received the most lively feelings of her
Conversion? (if we give credit to Tradition,) it was her good Sister. Jesus may
most lawfully claim the best and chiefest part in that holy and most happy
Penitents Conversion; But the good company of Martha, and her rare Examples of
Virtue did much contribute to it. Our ancient Fathers, (who knew by their long
experience, the great advantage of good and commendable company) esteemed
nothing so much, as to meet with a virtuous Man, to whose prudence they might
impart their most secret thoughts: I shall always harbor a good opinion of a
Christian, whilst he delights to be among good People: We cannot remain any
long time near Roses, but we must partake of their smell: Virtue is a Charm to
allure all those that come near it. One shall hear ten Sermons without any
alteration of life, who by seeing a good Christian in a Church with a dejected
countenance, a modest face, and a posture altogether Religious, shall be moved
to compunction. The Tongue may speak wonders, but the Hands must work them. A
Prelate will make Statutes and Decrees, far surpassing those of Lycurgus or
Corondas; But if his life be not conformable to his Laws, all will soon vanish
away: We must then have an esteem for good company, being God does appoint them
as a means much conducing to our Salvation,

CHAP. XXII. If any thing be contrary to the Conversion of a Sinner, it must be
bad and scandalous company.
THe Prophet-Royal had very good reason to begin his Psaltery, Videte ne forte
licentia vestra offendiculum fiat infirmis, etc. 1 Cor. 8. v. 9. and 12.
by declaring him a blessed man who is never found in the Assembly of the
wicked, never known to go the same Road with Sinners, and never seen to sit in
the Chair of Pestilence. It was a great happiness for Enoch to have quitted the
World so soon; Sap. c. 4. v. 10 Raptus est ne malitia mutaret intellectum ejus,
etc.
for God made haste to transport him from Iniquities, to a place of assurance,
far from the society of the wicked, where he might preserve the integrity of
his life. Principium beatudinis sapientiae and sanctitatis est separari a
commercio improborum, non haec quidem perfecta beatitudo, sed exordium and
gradus primus. Engub. in Psalm. 1.
If it be commendable to resort to Wise and Virtuous Men, because with them we
may soon profit both in Wisdom and in Virtue: It is very hard to preserve our
Innocence among them, that glory in nothing more than in Vice; It Is there that
a man must have a great deal of force and courage, where Virtue cannot uphold
Her Prerogatives, but by force of Arms. You shall find but very few Mercury's
in the World, Qui cum sapientibus graditur sapiens erit, amicus stultorum
similis efficietur. Eccles. 13. v. 20.
to show, and set you in the way of Virtue, when you happen to fall out of the
Road: For every one following the beaten ways which lead to perdition, know not
the secret and bypath by which the Wise make their escape, to arrive at the
Port of their everlasting rest.

The Israelites mixing themselves with God's Enemies, learned among them in a
short time to make Idols, profane the Sanctuary, undervalue Divine Worship:
They had been far more happy, if, (as Job, whom Origin calls the Pidgeon among
the Kites, the Lilly among the Thorns, the Lamb among the Wolves;) they had got
out of the company of Infidels without a spot, as he departed blameless out of
the Society and Congregation of the Hussites. People may tell me that it is hard
to break off so with his Friends, contrary to the rules of civility: But I
answer, that it is a great piece of folly, that a man should suffer himself to
be consumed by the flames of a scorching Fire, rather than remove himself a
little further off: Never was a wicked Man a good Friend. It Is a great honor
(says St, Isidore) to have bad livers to be his Enemies, Isid. lib. 2.
soliloque.
for it is an evident sign, that he whose licentious life we do abhor, will have
but very little authority, or none at all, to leave in us any Impression of his
evil qualities. Sicut multa bona habet communis vita Sanctorum sic plura mala
affert societas malorum, sicut ergo optandum est ut boni pacem habeant ad
invicem, sic optandum est ut mali sint ap invicem discordes. Beda in locis
communibus cap. 62.
For it is not enough to have the object present, for to invite us to consent to
action; there must be moreover an inclination, and a natural Instinct in the
Agent, and something in the object also, able to draw the Agent to action:
which shows, that a good Christian, who has made it his aim and conduct of his
life, to shun above all things the company of the wicked, will easily escape
their contagion, if by a serious discussion he comes to understand their malice.

If there were no other consideration for to invite us to fly from evil
company, but that of our own proper Interest; it is more than sufficient: for
being it is true, that where two or three are assembled in God's name, God is
there present to power down his Blessings on them: Also by the rules of
opposition I must conclude, that where two or three are assembled (but not in
God's name) there God is never present, otherwise than well-stor'd with
Maledictions which he thunders down on their heads. If the Fire of Heaven
descend on such an Assembly, it is not the Fire of the Holy Ghost; No, no, they
must be the Thunderbolts of God's Indignation and Wrath.

St. Ambrose (speaking of St. Peter in his dangers of Shipwreck,) makes this
subtle Observation; that whilst he was alone in his Vessel, he had all things
to his hearts desire, a brave Sun, clear Sky, calm Sea, favorable Wind: Judas
comes no sooner in, but the Sun darkens, the Skies are cloudy, the Sea swells
up, the Wind blows high, a Storm comes on, the Bark is in danger, Shipwreck is
near at hand. You would say, that the hand which gives a motion to that
Element, commands both Heaven, Wind, and Weather to cry vengeance, and be angry
with all the company, upon Judas's account, and only for his consideration: So
often the good are punished, when they do happen among bad livers.

Et dixerunt ad invicem, nonne cor nostrum ardens erat. Luke 74.^.32.
Would to God, that all our conversations were as profitable to our Neighbors,
as that of Jesus was to the Pilgrims of Emaus, who returning from Jerusalem,
had the happiness to meet him in the Road; They draw near him, they speak to
him, they hear his discourse with attention; being come to their Lodging, one
says to another, tell me in good earnest, was not your heart all in a flame, as
mine was, whilst he discoursed with us in the way? Did you not feel in your
self a lightness of heart? As for my part, the way appeared to me very short; I
thought I was not a quarter of an hour going all that long Journey: But what do
you think was the subject of Jesus's discourse? Was it of Histories made for
pleasure, of Romances, of Discourse without any ground, of unprofitable words,
of common Affairs and of no Consequence: No, no, he gives them a right
understanding of Scripture, of the Mystery of the Incarnation, of other
Mysteries of Faith, of the Resurrection, and of the Wonders of Heaven.

The Prophet Isaiah complains of a great misfortune which happened to him, Vae
mihi quia tacui, quia vir pollutus labiis ego sum, and in medio populi polluta
labia habentis ego habito. Isa. c. 6. v. 5.
(viz.) to have conversed with overmuch familiarity among a People, who had
their lips polluted: A Conversation which was so prejudicial to him, that in
accusing himself of it, (he cries) woe be to me, who for suffering my self to be
carried on by the current of common and unprofitable discourse, have already
forgotten to speak of God, extinguished the Spirit of fervor; which did
heretofore animate me to publish his Glory in all places, wherever I went. It
is certain, D. Chrost. in c. 6. Isaiae, and D. Hieron. ibid.
(says St. Cyril, and St. Jerome) that one of the greatest faults, which Saints
might have committed, is to be overmuch familiar with Worldlings; For besides,
that overmuch familiarity breeds contempt, we do easily contract the habits of
them, whose company is grateful to us. One shall come out of his Cloister pure
as an Angel, Ebriosus convictores in amorem vini traxit, impudicorum coetus
fortem and si liceat virum emollit Seneca lib. 3. de ira.
who at his return, shall surpass the deformity of an Ethiopian. The brave
Meditations which were the grateful entertainments and Glorious Employments of
his Spirit in Prayer, shall be confounded with so many Worldly shapes, and
evaporated into Millions of extravagant discourses. His heart, which you might
see to vent out so many devout Aspirations and Holy Affections for his God,
lances out no more but the profane Darts of a more profane and unruly Love:
That Soul, peaceable, and far from all troubles, naturally inclined to Virtue,
becomes tepid, lazy, and has no more for her constant entertainment, but
perpetual distractions. I know that what is related in the Gospel of Scribes,
Pharisees, Valde difficile est, ut linguae saecularium men tem non inquinet
quam tangit, quia dum plerumque eis ad quaedam lonquenda condescendimus,
paulisper assueti hanc ipsam locutionem quae nobis indigna est etiam
delectabiliter tenamus, ut ex ea jam redire non libeat, ad quam ex
condescensione venimus inviti. D. Greg. to 2. lib. 3. dialog. cap. 15.
and Capharnites, happens to very many in our days, which is, That our Savior
speaking to them of Holy and Profitable things, of the Institution of the
Blessed Sacrament, of the necessity of Crosses, of the obligation of
sufferance; says, that they are things hard to be digested, they cannot give
ear to them, they are altogether displeasing to them; and for to express their
unwillingness to practice them, they do withdraw themselves one after another
from under so heavy a Yoke. Is it not a strange and most deplorable thing, that
nowadays it is taken for the meerest folly in Nature, to speak of God in any
Meetings? He is but an Alter-piece, a devourer of Images, a rouler of Beads, a
Melancholic and Hypocondriacal man, who will offer to speak of Devotion in
company; they will presently begin to jeer him, to smother his. feelings of
Devotion and Piety: Gorrumpunt mores bonos colloquia prava. 1 Cor. 15. v. 33.
Is it possible that the World has blotted out of our hearts the Memorials of
the Recognizances which we owe unto him, whom the very senseless and dumb
Beasts cannot forget? We will make such large amplifications of a matter of
nothing, and we shall not have a word to say of the King of Glory, of a God of
Majesty, inexhaustible source of perfection. We will pass over whole days to
entertain a company with Stories, with Fables, with Fictions, without truth or
ground, and we shall be sorry for one quarter of an hour, employed to set forth
the Praises and Glorious Prerogatives of our Redeemer. A Commedian, a
Stage Player, shall be heard as an Oracle, and he who will declare the Word of
God, must be commanded to keep silence.

Do we not fear the Fatal Effects of that most Dreadful Sentence pronounced by
our Savior, against them who shall be ashamed to confess him before Men;
Vitiorum exempla oppugnant animum, immutant, transformant, miraculo erit inter
incendia vel non s^mi vel ce^te non inca^es^ere. S Cyprian. de spectaculis.
that he will not acknowledge them before his Father which is in Heaven. They
are the People to be shunned as a Plague that infects all the World, as so many
Incarnate Devils, whose conversation and company, brings us nothing but
misfortune and woe. It is then most true, that good conversation and company is
an efficacious means that God makes use of to convert Souls: That of the wicked
is also another strong means, whereof the Devil makes use to cross his designs
of their Conversion. And so we must conclude, that he who is taken with this
company, goes on headlong to everlasting destruction; whereas the former has
found out the right Road to Heaven, and the assured means to work his Salvation.

CHAP. XXIII. That, to think of Death has a great power on the Conversion of a
Sinner.
THere is neither Rule nor Law so Universal, Statutum est omnibus hominibus
semel mori, post hoc autem judicium. Heb. v. 27.
but admits of some exceptions or difficulties; there have been many, (and are
at this present, to my great grief) that will hardly believe the Existance of a
God. But all without either exception or difficulty concur in this Point, that
we must all die, we tread under our feet the dead to day, and we shall be dealt
with the same to morrow, Testamentum enim hujus mundi, morte morietur. Eccl.
14. v. 12.
For my part, I do adore all thoughts which may conduce to my Salvation, as of
the love of God above all things, who, (without any desert of mine) has given
me so many Graces; of the Beauty of Heaven, glorious and everlasting residence
of the Blessed; of the noble extraction of the Soul, appointed from all
Eternity to enjoy the intuitive Vision of the first Essence: But in this point
I must confess the corruption of my nature, the dullness of my understanding,
such thoughts are good for purer Souls than mine is; they are motives able to
ravish a St. Paul into the third Heavens, to Print on a St. Francis the
Effigies of Christ, to set a St. Bernard beyond his Senses, and make all those
extatical Spirits to fall into a weakness. I am an insensible Rock to all those
truths: a Dyamond which those Darts cannot penetrate: I am colder than the very
Ice at the approach of those Fires; But when I come to think thar poor Brother
Lion Capucin must die; that I am now standing on my Legs, and, that to morrow
they will put my Head into a Capuce, for to cast me into the Earth: That they
will sing a doleful de profundis at my Funeral, to send me to another World,
and give me the last farewell; I raise up my shoulders, I re-enter into my self,
my Blood is already frozen within my Veins, I have no more mind to laugh, than
I have to live.

And really, as I shall make it appear by moral induction, there is no Motive
more powerful among the Exteriours, to stir up all sorts of persons to the
feelings of their Salvation, than the thought of dying. To Youth it is a curb
to stop them when they are in their full carreer to Perdition. To Kings,
Princes, Emperors, and Monarchs, (a Subject of humility,) that they should not
puff themselves up with overmuch Pride above the People. To Soldiers and
Warriors a cause of humiliation, that the favor of Fortune and Arms should
not make them insolent. To the most Holy Souls, an ordinary entertainment, Mors
rot a incerte fixa, brevis haec est multiplex vita sursum movetur ac deorsum
trahitur fugiens tenetur and manus effugit, saltat plerumque nec tamen fugere
potest stationem suam motu trahit and retrahit. Greg. N^zianz. in distichis.
to keep them within the limits of humility, and from presuming any thing
rashly by the Justice of their actions.

As for the Youth, that Ancient practice of the Romans was a rare spectacle,
and a brave Lesson they gave the young men of the City; when they made up a
most magnificent Sepulcher to the young Princess Servilia, the rarest beauty
that ever appeared in the Roman Empire: Over the Marble cover of her Tomb, was
in the very middle an Earthen Pot, and at both the ends two Nymphs in Women's
shape, from the Head to the Navel, and thence downwards light-footed Deers; so
Artificially joynted: Greg. Nazianz. in Moncast.
which looking fixedly at the Pot, with a jeering smile, would give it a kick
at the same time and break it to pieces. That Earthen Pot represented the Body
of Servilia, a Vessel stuffed up with Earth and Dung: Those light-footed Deers
are the days of her life, which with a great deal of speed conducted her to
Death: That jeering smile, showed the vanity of all her greatness and
Pleasures; This breaking of the Vessel, the separation of the Soul from the
Body. In fine, Omnes eodem eogimur, omnium Versatur urna serius ocius. Sors
exitura and nos en aeternum. Exitium impositura Cymba. Horat. lib. 2. Carm.
the whole exposed to the public view, was a brave instruction to the Youth of
Rome, to curb them and stop the course of their insolency. But let us not seek
for so Ancient a fact: let us go and open some Tomb, wherein of late days is
cast some rare young Beauty, which Death had overcome. Imagine with your self,
dear Reader, this Carcass to be left in your Chamber: Ask it the question, What
is become of those fair eyes, which were but two days since seen to open with
such Majesty, Circum ferabatur apud Aegyptios inter pocula sceletus, hoc est,
corporis ossea duntaxat compage exextantiseffigies, in memoriam, ut ajunt
manerotis isidis alumni, quem annis innocentibus immatura morte fata
praeripuerant Herodot. l. 11. and Petron. in Satyrico.
and give a bold look at the admirers, to shut down their lids for shame, to be
dazzled with fear; to grow black with sadness, to be inflamed with anger, to
grow mild, and smile at a Lover? Where are those optic Veins, which carried by
their continuation, the usual ray on the very door-case of the Eye, to receive
the Species, and frame the Image of such as were represented Exteriourly? Where
are those Tunicks and little thin skins, which locked up so artificially all
humors, that nothing should annoy this great little Masterpiece of Nature?
All That is no more but a stinking Dunghill, mixed with nasty Blood, more
horrible to be seen, than ever was the Carcass of Helena, which Menippus had
perceived in the dark Dungeon of Hell: But what is become of that pure, white,
proper, and well set Body, so pampered, so carefully washed, so curiously
decked, so interlac'd with thousands of Sky-colour'd Veins, which Nature had
framed as a Net to entangle all men in her Love; all is nothing now but a
rotten lump of Flesh, where Worms have taken up their quarters to feed at their
ease. Let us go further to find out the Heart, first alive, and at last dead,
whence proceeded all Passions as so many Sovereign Ladies and Queens of that
little World: Alas! It Is now but a small handful of ashes, the least touch will
reduce it to dust, as the Apples of the Lake Asphatite, where Sodom and
Gomorrah stood heretofore. There is no young man in the World, let him be the
greatest Ranter that ever was heard of, if he will but consider seriously this
doleful pourtraiture, he will conceive a distaste of all Earthly pleasures, he
will stop the course of his Debauched life; knowing for certain, the day will
come, that infallibly he will be brought to the same condition.

Damascenus in historia Balaam and Josaphat testatur priscas Sanctorum
reliquias religiose in theca ex collo pendente gestasse, non tantum
venerationis sed and memoriae mortis causa.
Tradition gives us to understand of the Patriarch Noah, how after he had made
an end of building an Ark, and received Orders to get into it with all his
Family; The first thing he would have observed in his new House, was, that his
Children should think often of Death, as a strong motive to keep them from Vice
and Deadly Sin: And to bring them to this good Custom, he commands them to go
look for the Bones of Adam's Body, which being all found, and brought home to
the Community, (except the hinder part of his Head, which they left on the
Mount Calvary for the accomplishment of the Messiah Mysteries;) To one, he he
gives the Thigh Bone; to another that of an Arm; and to all the rest, each one
his proportion: To the end, they might always think, that if God, by his
special Grace, delivered them out of all danger of Shipwreck and Deluge: Yet
they were not exempted from the inevitable Laws of Death. If Jonathan thought
of that Sentence in time, he would not take the news of his Death so much to
Heart. And we should not know by Scripture the weakness of his Courage, and the
main excess of his Grief, which made him say with a weeping Tone; Alas! for
having tasted a little Honey, must I die so soon? I did as yet, but begin to
receive the sweet Air of Life, and here already I am summoned to march off to
take up my Lodging in the thick and dark shadows of an Eternal Night. Nature to
me is a most Cruel Stepmother, to show me so much of her Pleasures, and
presently to cut me off before I tasted of their sweetness? We must then
acknowledge that of all Exterior means the most serious thought of Death is
the strongest to move Youth to their Conversion.

Ponite quotidie ante oculos vestros finem vestrum, cogitate cujus erunt and
quid vobis proderunt quae post vos remanebunt: haec cogitate haec inter vos die
ac nocte in secreto and in publico tractate. S. Anselm. ad Burgundium macherum
ejus conjugem Epist.
As for Kings, Princes and Monarchs, who by the eminency of their Dignities,
should seem to be out of all fear, being that all Creatures show them their
Obedience as to the Gods of the Earth. What made them undervalue and forsake
their Scepters and Crowns to live in a Desert, as Josaphat Son to the great
Abenner. Who was it that obliged them to quit their Palaces and Royal Houses,
for to lead in a Cloister the Life of a poor Religious man, as a Charles the
Great? Who persuaded them to have a greater esteem for the Cross of Jesus, than
for the Richest Treasures the World can afford, as a Constontine? but the
Thoughts of Death! Leonitus in the Life of the Ancient Fathers, relates, That
at the Coronation of the Emperors in the City of Constantinople, before they
had gone further in their Ceremonies; Vide apud Xiphilium in domit, funebre
convivium domitavi.
there would come a number of Sculptures, every one with his Marble in his
Hand, who Addressing themselves to the Emperor, ready to be Crowned, would
make him this Complement; Sacred Majesty, according to the Custom of your
Predecessors, and the Order Established in the Ceremonies of your Unction; here
we do Prostrate ourselves at your Feet, with these Marbles; and our Request is
to be informed by your Majesty, what form we shall give your Tomb? O my God!
what different Ceremonies have we here! On the one side, I see Palaces,
Louvres, and Imperial-Houses preparing to receive the Prince with a great deal
of Honor: And on the other side, I hear of nothing, but Stones, Tombs and
Sepulchers, wherein he is to Lodge after his Death? There, they cry with a loud
voice and solemn Acclamations, Live the Emperor thrice Happy; And here they
let him understand, that he must begin to die: There every one Congratulates
his new coming to the Crown; and here there is nothing heard but the mourning
Discourse of a Tradesman, Pallida mors aequo pede pulsat, etc. Horat.
who summons him to think of the Duties and Tribute which he must pay to
Nature: We must not be astonished at it, for Death is as welt overheard among
those lofty and proud Appels at Court, as in a poor man's Cabin; and therefore
to think of it seriously, is altogether as Profitable to the Great ones of the
World, as to the Little ones: To the Rich, as to the meerest Beggar in Nature.

St. John Damescene gives us a further Confirmationn of it, relating a brave
Stratagem of a King, who after he had seriously thought of that last Hour,
lived all his Life in great fear and apprehension of Gods Judgments; every one
read in his Face the alteration and change of his Soul: His Brother Laughs at
him, and taking his fears to be but pannick Terrors, he accuses him of a
Sadness rising from overmuch Melancholy, nothing becoming a man of his
Quality. The King hears of it, and early in the Morning he commands a Trumpet
to be Sounded at his Brother's door, a signal of Death among those People. The
Prince, altogether astonished, leaps out of his Bed, and runs half Dressed to his
Brother in the Kings Palace, imploring his Mercy, protesting his Innocence,
begs his Life. Brother (said the King) then, mock no more at them that fear
Death; at the sound of a simple Trumpet, there you are all in an Alarm, though
your Conscience does not accuse you of any Crime committed against me; know, as
for my part, that I am a Criminal and guilty of treason against the Divine
Majesty, for so many sins which I have committed: It Is therefore I have great
reason to be sad, and to apprehend Death.

Perhaps the thoughts of Death will be altogether useless and unprofitable to
Warriors; who, Alexander monitorem sibi in magna fortuna statuit qui quotidie
mane sibi inclamaret hominem eum esse quo scilicet tumidiores animos
comprimeret, etc. Aucto. 1 vie vitae, apud Cornel. Eccl. 14. v. 12.
for being accustomed to Blood and to Slaughter, and to see no other things but
dead Corpse stretched at their Feet, will remain insensible to the Powers of
that Meditation. No, no, let them boast as much as they please, let them vapor
and strike fire with their Swords, let them defy as much, and as often as they
list, both Heaven and Earth. If nevertheless they be pleased to take one
quarter of an hours time, to entertain themselves with that thought that they
must die; I do assure my self, that their Arms will soon drop but of their
Hands, and that from roaring and bloody Lions, they will become mild Lambs;
they will come to cast themselves at the foot of a Crucifix to do Penance. The
great William Duke of Aquittain, did he not by the force of his Arms, put all
the Church in a Combustion? Did he not become as another Attila, the Scourge of
God? Did he not declare open War to Priests, and Swear never to be reconciled.
St. Bernard makes use of no other Stratagem for to Convert him, but to set
efficaciously before his Eyes, the rigorous account he shall be forced to give
at the hour of his Death: An invention which had so happy a success, that he
sent him as Gods Prisoner to Rome, to beg Absolution of his Holiness in all
Humility; Absolution which he received, and accompanied with a thousand Sighs,
irreproachable Witnesses of his displeasure, to have so much offended God by
his abominations and Crimes. He changes his Life, takes on new and Holy
Resolutions; retires himself into the Wilderness to pass over the rest of his
days in the height of Mortification and Penance, never as yet paralleled and
never will be to the Worlds end. Ask me now the question, whether such as have
abandoned the company of men, and have freely engaged themselves and their
Liberties under the yoke of Obedience and Evangelical Councels, shall be
obliged to the thoughts of Death; have they not sufficient strong assurance of
their Fidelity? No, they must as yet think of Death to keep them in Humility,
the ground of all other Virtues. I cannot but find fault with certain
Spirituals of the Sect of Scribes and Pharisees, Philosophers of the purest
grain, refiners of Devotion, who make certain persons believe, that they have
already attained to the height of Perfection; that they are come to the
indivisible point of Spirituality; And therefore that they must think no more,
but of the attributes of Unity, Simplicity, Immutability, and Essential will of
God: That there is a state of Inaction, where the Soul is no more Acting, but
Suffering under the simple motions of bare Faith; that the thoughts of Death
are good for beginners in the Purgative Life: But as for them, Unde ista
simulatio fratres mei? unde haec perniciosa tepiditas? unde haec securitas
maledicta? quid seducimus miseri nos ipsos? forsitan jam divites facti sumus,
forsitan jam regnamus, nonne ostium domus nostrae horribiles illi Spiritus
obsident? D. Bernard. sermon. 2. in festo Sanct. Petri and Pauli.
who are already in a manner Deify'd, and whose operations are altogether
Angelical, that it is to afflict the Holy Ghost to bring them down to such a
low and gross exercise. All that is mere folly, nay pure madness, they do
seduce themselves; Satan, for being overmuch Spiritual, was damned. Tertullian
and Origin for getting out of the common rode, and desirous to show the
subtilty of their Wits, broaching a Doctrine contrary to the feelings of the
Church, are, I fear, in danger never to see the face of God; are we more
perfect than St. Hilarion? Hilarion the Honor of the Desert, the Father of
Hermits, the Leader and Light of all Religious Souls: Hilarion, who at the Age
of Fourteen years, distributed all his Goods to the Poor, and built himself a
Cell, so narrow, and so little, that it was scarce able to contain him.
Hilarion, who never wore but a Hair-cloth; who was an object of Admiration both
to Angels and Men, for the Austerity of has Life; Could he not confide in the
Mercies of God? Had he not all reason to believe that Jesus was very well
pleased with his Actions, and therefore that he should not fear Death? He who
had so Faithfully served his Creator for the space of threescore and five
years: Yet Hilarion this great Hermit apprehends Death, he thinks of it often,
and ready to yield up his Ghost, he shakes with fear at the sight of that cruel
separation; and we poor miserable wretches who serve God but to the eye, and at
random, who are but novices in the Spiritual Life, who are so Lukewarm and so
languishing in the exercise and pursuit of Virtues: We think that it is to put
an undervalue on our other imaginary exercises, to take the Object of Death for
the subject of our Meditations. You are sadly mislead; perhaps the Devil has
persuaded you as he did our Forefathers, that you shall be all Gods, Knowing
Good and Evil; That you will acquire the esteem among your Neighbors of being
great Mysticks, well Illuminated, by entertaining those foolish fancies: Be not
deceived, you shall find the conclusion to be most fatal to you, if you do not
carry Humility along with all your Actions and Designs.

Come, come, to St. Chrysostom, Eorem te meminisse velim quae in Evangelio
dicuntur, Angelorum circumcursantium, conclavis clausi, lampadarum extinctarum,
potestatem in fornaces trahentium, etc. D. Chrysostom. tom. 4. in cap. 2. Romans
and he will teach you how to make use of the Thoughts of Death, to reap the
motions of a true Conversion. We must imagine, says this great Doctor, that we
are no more in the World, that Athropos has cut off the thread of our Life,
that we are judged before God, and condemned for having ended our days in
Mortal Sin, without Repentance: Let us behold on one side the Devils armed with
fury and Vengeance to come and take us by the Shoulders, put a Rope about our
Necks, and draw us along with them: On the other side, let us cast a look on
those Eternal Flames which are to Torment us for all Eternity? What shall we
have to say then? Alas! what a miserable wretch am I, what made me not to think
of Death sooner; I had been my self the revenger of my Crimes, if God were so
pleased to prolong the term of my Life for one year logger, I would cast my
self into the Arms of the Cross, my Eyes should never be seen without Tears; my
Mouth without Confession; my Breast without Sighs; my Heart without Sorrow; my
Hands without Whips and Chains of Iron, for to execute on my most sinful Body
the punishments due to all my Abominations and Crimes. Dear Reader, do all that
now, for now is the time and season: O si possemus in talem speculam ascendere,
de qua universam terram sub pedibus nostris cerneremus. Jam tibi ostenderem
totius orbis ruinas, gentes gentibus and regnis regna collisa.

D. Hieronym. tom. 1. Ep. 3. ad Heliod. in Epitaphio Nepotiani.


All those brave resolutions shall be to you useless, and altogether
unprofitable at the hour of Death: But let him who is full of Life and Health,
think often of Death: If he be a young man, it is that will put a stop to the
lewd course of his Debauched Life, to think seriously of the other World. If he
be a Prince or a Monarch, it is that will humble him under the Powerful Hand of
God: If he be a Warrior, it is That will make his Arms fall out of his Hands,
for to prostrate himself at the feet of the great God of Battles, and implore
his Clemency: If he be Devout, it is that will keep him in fear to presume any
thing of himself to the prejudice of Gods Rights. Sepultus nihil habeas curam
de seculo, tanquam defunctus omni terreno te abdica negotio contemn vivens
quae post mortem habere non poteris.

D. Ambr. l. 4. Epist. 29. ad Florianum.


Let us then often think of that dreadful hour, being that it is to be the end
of all our Sorrow, and the beginning of all our Happiness, if we be Virtuously
given: But it will be the end of all our Comfort, and the beginning of all our
Misfortunes and woe, if we do continue wilfully in the obstinacy of our malice.

CHAP. XXIV. That the remorse of Conscience is an Efficacious Instrument of our
Conversion.
A Pagan Philosopher extolls very much the Honor and merit of Conscience, to
say, Menande. (...). Mortalibus omnibus conscientia est Deus.
that it is a Divinity which resides in all Mortals from the very instant of
their Birth; Let us draw Oil out of this Rock, and discover the secret hidden
under that intricate Sentence, for those poor Infidels masked with the vail of
Ignorance, advanced often by the Divine permission, true propositions, whose
end and scope were altogether unknown to themselves. Conscience is no such
thing as a Divinity, but I shall be approved of by all those that are versed in
Scripture and the Fathers, if I say with Oecumenius on St. James, Oecumenius in
epist. de Jac. c. 1
that it is a word inserted, a Reasonable Intelligence, a Divine motion, which
may save our Souls. A word of Intelligence, and secret motion, which the
Creator has Printed in our very Hearts, to maintain them in the fear of God;
or to term it better, an Agent and a Commissary from God, for to conserve in
our Souls the Rights of his Majesty. Misericors Deus principio cum formaret
hominem illi indidit accusatricem perpetuam quae decipi, and deceptionem far
nusquam posset.

D. Chrysostom. Homil. 17. in cap. 3. Genes. tom.


Even as the Governors and Vice-governours of Sovereigns are established in
remote Provinces, with special Orders to keep the People in Obedience, and
conserve the Rights of the Prince in their entire extent: It Is this Sacred and
Renowned Parliament that God erects within our selves, where Reason presides in
quality of a Judge, Conscience stands by as a Party, the diverse motions of the
Soul confronted one with another are heard there as irreproachable witnesses of
the good and evil which we do commit. It Is this that St. Paul calls the work of
the Law, written in our hearts, Romans c. 2. v. 15. Ostendunt opus Legis scriptum
in cordibus suis testimonium, reddente illis conscientia ipsorum.
where Conscience appears to present her charge, dress up her complaints, and
set all the pieces of her accusation in order; and Reasoon, as a reporter,
fully informed, accuses or defends the Soul, to condemn her if she be criminal,
to dismiss her out of Court and Process, if she be Innocent; or to be received
as Defendant, if there be a doubt in the heads proposed.

And really we see of two men, who were a long time in Law, after the
definitive Sentence, (without Appeal, is given;) one to rejoice, the other to
be sad: So we see the same happen to a Soul, whether Conscience gives her the
gain of the cause, or whether she renders her Justiciable. The good Conscience,
Hugo Vict. lib. 3. de Anima cap. 3.

Vide Cornel. in proverbia Salomonis. c. 15. v. 15.

Ad illa verba secura men's juge convivium.


(says Hugh of St. Victor) is a Garden of pleasures, a Field of Benediction, a
Treasure of Peace, the Temple of Solomon, a Residence for God, the Joy of
Angels, the Title of Religion, the Cabinet of Graces: It Is the Herb Nepenthe,
so much cried up by Homer, which mixed among our actions, does banish all
sadness, and gives us the fore-taste of Glory; yea, and leaves us the smell of
so grateful a conversation among Men, and so great an esteem of us with God,
Bias interrogatus quidnam in vita metu vacaret respondit bona conscientia.
that our Neighbor covets our company to ease him of his sadness, and God the
presence of our hearts, for to take his delight therein. The guilty Conscience
contrariwise is a Tyrant, who tears us, a Serpent who devours us, a Devil who
torments us. Caesar provoked the Gods, and for not appeasing their Justice by
the humbleness of his Vows; Lucanus lib. 1. Pharsal.
Lucan represents him on the Stage of this World in so deplorable a state, that
he did imagine at all hours, that the points of all the Lances broken in the
Battle of Pharsalia, were gathered and planted in his Breast. Conscientia est
quae homines punit cum se male operatos fuisse recogitant: eadem furiarum
paenas apposuit Oresti, quando adversus matrem insaniit. Philostrat. lib. 7. de
vita Apollonij cap. 7.
Orestes, for the Murders committed on the persons of Pyrrhus, Egistus, and
Clitemnestra, ran over all parts like a man possessed with the Devil; and had no
other answer to make his Friends, but that his Conscience tormented him for his
crimes; so that Pilades brought him to the Temple of Diana the Taurick, for to
expiate his Offenses. Pausanias thought he went a cunning way to free himself
of the worm of his Conscience, but he was deceived, for Cleonica whom he had
lately killed in cold blood, after he had deflower'd her, appears unto him
every night, accompanied with a Meager countenance, does publish his bloody
act, Surge ad supplicium valde est damnosa libido.
and summons him to appear before the Gods, to receive the punishment they will
ordain for so horrid a Murder.

Herod the most cruel of Men, Occultum quatiente animo tortore flagellum.
Juvenale Satyr. 13.
an insatiable blood-sucker, who fearing to have any Competitor in his Kingdom,
pursued his proper Children to death, and put his dear Mariamne also to the
Sword. Quisquis malus est male secum est, torqueatur necesse est, ipse enim est
poena sua, fugit ab inimico quo potuerit, a se autem quo fugiet. D. Aug. tom.
8. in Psalm. 36.
Judas the most perfidious of Mortals, who withdraws himself, both from the
Union and Communion of the Apostles, to contrive that damnable Treachery
against Jesus his proper Master: What do you think is the state of their
Conscience after such execrable crimes? That man, weary of his life, gnawed
with Worms, eaten with Lice, banished from all Friends, troublesome to all
people, insupportable to himself, as he thinks to smother the remorse which
gnaws his Conscience, he cries vengeance more and more, Sic tantum in sontes
Nemesis divina redundans.

Majori in poenam foenore tarda venit.


and calls to his aid all the Furies of Hell, to exterminate out of the number
of the living that unfortunate Canibal. The other had no sooner made overture
of his bad design to the Jews, but he presently falls, into Despair, by the
appointment of his own Conscience, which condemns him out of hand, and as a
Sergeant, or a Sheriffs Bailiff, forces out of his Pocket the Pence of his
Sale, ties him, Pinions him, and brings him to the Gallows, there to end his
days, and Preach from the top of that Gibbet to all mankind, that we may
sometimes escape the censure and Judgment of Men; but that we cannot delude
our Conscience, when she does condemn us as Guilty of having offended the
Divine Majesty.

Saphonias cap. 1. v. 12.
Sophonias (speaking of the diligent search, which the Chaldeans were to make
for the Jewish Nation, that none of them should escape from being their Slaves)
represents God taking of Lanthorns to make that earnest discussion: and our
Doctors transporting the meaning of those words to a Tropologick sense, takes
that Examen for the narrow search which is to be made at the day of Judgment,
where God, by the means of the five Created Lanthorns, which are, the Law and
Word of God, the Angels and Devils, the Sun, the Moon and Stars, the life of
Jesus Christ, and of his Saints; But above all, the remorse of Conscience,
shall make a solemn Inquisition of all men's lives, and what must be done that
day in view of all the World, is practiced at the hour of death in the
particular Judgment. We have read hereof in the life of the Fathers, an
authentic Example of one Stephen a Hermit, who for the space of forty years
had renowned his Penance with a Million of Heroic actions; lying on his Bed
sick, as if he had been before his Judge, to answer what was laid to his
charge, nothing was heard of the questions, but only the answers of the
Accused: At one time, he would say, yea, it is true; but for satisfaction of
that sin, I Fasted three whole years: Another time he would cry with a loud
voice; No, I am not guilty of that, I had the temptation of it, but God gave me
the Grace not to consent to it: A quarter of an hour after, you would see him
lift himself on a sudden up in his Bed, as a man in a hot dispute with another;
you do urge me overmuch, let me breath a little, give me but a short respit of
time, to think of what you do accuse me: And being ready to yield up his Ghost;
on the one side he looks with an eye of compassion at his Brothers, humbly
beseeching them to pray for his Soul: And on the other side, he makes his
Addresses to the Crucifix his last refuge, conjuring his Redeemer, through the
Merits of his Blood, not to Judge him according to the rigorous depositions of
his Conscience. It Is true then, that God has placed in our hearts a secret
Intelligence, an inward Motion, a private Commissary; we must follow that
Intelligence wherever it leads us; we must esteem that Commissary, and all his
advices, when he tells us of the Princes will.

Gloria nostra haec est testimonium conscientiae nostrae.

1 Cor. cap. 1. v. 12.

Senti de Augustino quicquid volueris sola me in oculis Dei conscientia non
accuset.

D. Aug. contra Secundinum Manich. c. 10.


You shall find many in this World who will complain of their Ignorance, and
make their Appology, that they do not know the things necessary to Salvation,
that the Casuists are so contrary one to another, that in lieu of clearing
their doubts, they do wrap them up into as many difficulties, as they have
contrary feelings; some make the way to Heaven so large and spacious, that the
great and destructive Engine of Troy might easily go through: Others make the
door so narrow, that hardly any can get in; unless he becomes as little as a
Pismire: The former find out by their Anagogick subtilty such delicate
distinctions, that Usury, Symony, and a number of other crimes, condemned
without any further form of Process by all Laws Divine and Humane, are no
offenses, otherwise than in the weak understanding of Fools, and Ignorant
Fellows; They were too long in their Journey, the Church expected a long time
their coming, to reform the Roman Calendar: Attendat Sanctitas vestra quomodo
nolunt intrate domos suas qui habent malas uxores quomodo exeunt ad forum and
gaudent, coepit esse horae qua intraturi sunt in dom^m suam contristantur,
intraturi sunt enim ad taedia. Paulo infra.
But these (led by an unknown and particular Spirit,) take a by-fashion and way
of speaking, that they may be admired for their obscure terms, far from the
simplicity of the Evangelical Style; where we see, that our Savior Jesus,
makes always use of plain downright Parables, which is all the Grace of his
Language: They do Teach a sort of Spirituality, which has no other ground than
their weak imaginations, and do Believe they have found the Philosopher-Stone
in matter of Devotion, when they have expressed by a Superlative, what others
will speak in the Positive; So that there is nothing of a certainty among them,
but all is in a confusion. As for my part, the best Casuist in my thoughts,
that we can make choice of is our own proper Conscience; no Doctor can give
such sound resolutions; so that we be faithful to practice them without any
interpretation; it is the Master that God has given us from our Infancy, to
teach us the first Elements of our Salvation. Epictete, that poor Philosopher
had the same feeling, Si ergo miseri sunt, qui cum redeunt ad parictes suos
timent ne suorum perturbationibus evertantur, quanto sunt miseriores qui ad
conscientiam suam redire^ lunt, ne ibi litibus peccatorum evertantur. D. Aug.
tom. 8. in Psalm. 33.
even as our Carnal Parents, careful of our Education, gives us Tutors to breed
us according to the World; So God gives us our proper Conscience, to conduct us
to Virtue, and teach us by infallible principles, how to discern Good from Evil.

That being so, (beloved Reader) will you know the state of your own Soul, and
if there be no Infernal Serpent hidden in any of her corners, who hinders Jesus
to work your Conversion. Will you, for Example, learn to know, if casting your
eyes on a Creature which pleases you, if conversing in a company where
Neighbors are ill spoken of, and their actions misconstrued, if giving a free
overture to all sots of Thoughts, which at their first approach were perhaps
Innocent, there may not be found a second recollection which makes the sin?
Will you know (I say) wherein consists the Right, which Nature may take in the
simple use of her Faculties, and discern the Tyranical suggestions of the
Devil, who is always desirous to Fish in troubled Waters, taking a share where
he ought to have none: Hear therefore what your Conscience shall tell you, for
Conscience is nothing else than an aversion of all what Nature condemns and
disaproves; and this is what the Prophet-Royal calls the Seal and Signet of
God, Printed in our Faces, to behold the Beauty of a Creature, and cast your
eyes on an Object, whose charms do invite the Faculty to contemplate her
perfections; This can be no sin in him who goes no farther, for so far is but a
Natural Action, justified by the Author of Nature, who gave to each one of our
Senses the free exercise of their Function. But if that eye, (as our Savior
says) come to scandalize you, (that is to say) if you suffer the unlawful
pleasure of that object you looked upon, to get into your heart unawares; Or,
if for want of occasion to consumate your sin outwardly, you suffer the scandal
of it in your Heart, give ear, attend with silence, and you shall hear
Conscience speak, for she never fails to give you advice of the disorders you
do commit: Your Duty then is to stop where she commands, and go no farther:
There is the resolution of your inward Casuist; To haunt company, to be Civil
and Complacent, is a Virtue which St. Thomas calls Eutrapelia, most grateful to
God, and most profitable to Man; But at the same instant, when you hear your
Neighbor is brought down, to back-bite at his Actions, and degrade his Honor,
take notice of your self, and you shall presently feel a certain (I do not know
what) thing, Nihil est jucundius, nihil tutius, nihil ditius bona conscientia,
premat corpus, trahat mundus, terreat diabolus, secura semper erit, cum corpus
morietur, cum coram Deo praesentabitur, etc. D Bern. lib. de conscientia.
that comes to you to smother the words in your mouth, and advise you to cut
short all such discourses; Fail not to obey that secret Intelligence, for it is
the director which God has given you, it is charge is to have a care of you, and
to give you a check when you do amiss: Your forgetting of your God, has brought
you to neglect your Salvation; For to lead the life of a Beast, and follow in
all things the conduct of your evil inclinations, do not give the deaf ear to
those tacit reprehensions, which you hear so often in secret; for it is your
Domestic Commissary, your familiar Angel who labors for your Salvation: If
you are come to that misfortune as to despise those Sacred Fountains of Love,
the Amorous inventions of God, to convert you: Do not think it strange if this
Tutor does whip you, if this Intelligence does punish you, if this Commissary
does grumble at you. And if your proper Conscience becomes your Tyrant to
torment you for all your crimes: For it is a just Law that he should be beaten
with his own Arms, who for want of courage, had not the heart to make good use
of them upon occasion.

CHAP. XXV. That the Sinner can never be Converted whilst he smothers the
Remorse of his Conscience,
It Is none of the meanest Stratagems in matter of War, Vade and pone
speculatorem, and quodcunque viderit annunciet. Isa. 21. v. c.
(to gain a place, and become absolute Master thereof) to surprise the Centry,
and cut his Throat; For as the Centry is set by the Captains Order, there where
he does apprehend the Enemy may come, that at the first noise of either Horse
or Foot, or at the sight of their lighted Matches, he may be sure to let fly
his Shot, to give warning to the Main-guard: So he, who knows how to take his
time to come unawares on the Centry, and give him his mortal wound, will find a
most safe and ready way to take the place, for then Horse and Foot may come on
without fear, fill the Sconces with Faggots, set Ladders to the Walls, secure
the chief places, and of most importance; enter into the Citadel, and at the
break of day with the first sound of Trumpet and Drum, put all to the Sword,
before the Inhabitants can have time to look about them. Statue tibi speculam
pone tibi amaritudines dirige cor tuum in viam rectam Jerem. 31. v. 21
God has placed in our Souls, (which are Cities of great importance, and
bordering on the Enemies Quarters,) Garrisons composed of as many Soldiers as
we have Interior faculties to conserve that place, as well from the Hostility
of the invisible Enemy who assaults it at all hours, as to hinder, that by
Taxation, or any civil Sedition they come not to cut their Throats, and render
the memory of their misfortune as Fatal, as were the Sicilian Vespers to the
French Nation. He has ordered our Conscience to stand as a Centry at the
passage coming in, with a command, upon pain of death, at the first noise of
either Enemy, or civil Sedition, to Alarm the Garrison, that every one may
stand to his Arms, and put himself in a posture to Fight manfully for his
Freedom and Liberty. Satan thereupon, Quis alius nomene bestiae nisi antiquus
hostis accipitur qui deceptionem primi hominis saevus impetiit and integritatem
vitae illius male suadendo laniavit latibulum suum ingrediur, ut in eo
demoretur; vas quippe illud diaboli antrum ac latibulum bestiae est ut
insidians hominibus viam hujus vitae carpentibus, in illo and per signa lareat,
and per malitiam occidat, etc. D. Greg. 27. Moral c. 19. statium initio.
who appears no more among Men to fight in a set Battle, since the remarkable
day of Calvary, where he saw himself overcome and clearly routed in sight of
all the World, has his recourse to Crafts and to Cheats; he covers himself with
a Fox case, having learned by experience, how fatal the wearing of a Lions Skin
was to him; he imploys all his industry to surprise the Conscience of a poor
Sinner, to smother her remorse, cut her Worms Throat, and utterly destroy the
Soul from all good intents and purposes; or at least, if he can do no more, he
will endeavor to corrupt the Centry by vain and false persuasions; he will
cast him a Bone, as to a Dog, for to hinder him to bark, and discover his
treacherous designs to the Inhabitants within. Has he gained the Conscience?
Why then, wonder no more at the Hostility which he is to exercise therein; he
enters into the Citadel of the Soul, forces all the faculties, puts all the
Garrison to the Sword, batters down the Fortifications, violates the Love of
God, prostitutes the rarest Virtues we had possessed, exposes all to the
Plunder and Pillage of his Infernal Legions, and leaves nothing that bears not
the marks of his cruelty; if there remains as yet any Inhabitant, for he cannot
destroy the principles of Nature, Vadit and assumit septem alios spiritus secum
nequiores se, and intrantes habitant ibi. Mat. 12. v. 43.
yet he loads them with so many Taxes and Subsidies, that it were better for
one to die, than live miserably under such Tyranical Laws.

You may then soon perceive, that as much facility as Jesus finds in an
incorruptible and faithful Conscience, for to bring her to the designs of her
Salvation; so much, or rather more does he find of difficulty, in a Soul which
has no Conscience, or at least behaves her self as if she had none; So we
commonly say of a Man who neglects his Salvation, that he is a man without any
Conscience. The Apostle St. Paul, Ephesians. c. 4. v. 17. Tinebris obscuratum
habentes intellectum alienari a vita Dei, per ignorantiam quae est in illis
propter coecitatem cordis ipsorum, qui desperantes, semetipsos trudiderunt
impudicitiae
was a perfect discoverer of Satan's Cheats and Plots, in surprising of
Conscience; (and no wonder, for he is one of the wisest and stoutest Champions
that ever Fought under the Standard of the Militant Church) speaking of the
Gentiles, conjuring the Ephesians not to imitate them in three notable
failings, whereinto the Enemy of Nature had cast them headlong, (to wit,) is to
be vain and foolish in their feelings, obscure in their understanding, blind in
their hearts, Vain in their feelings, by reason of the too great esteem they
had of their own sufficiency, to submit to no body, to aim and look for the
first ranks and Chairs, to swallow down by mouthfuls, as the famous Courtier of
Antiquity, the vain smoke of a popular Applause; obscure in their
understandings, to know no Divinity, but what was in Idols, to despise the
humble Crucified, and never to Judge of things, but by the false report of such
as did intend to seduce them; Blind in their hearts, holding out obstinately
against the motion of Reason, which is the Sun of the Soul, that they are more
Rebels to what is good, than is the Anvil to the Smiths Hammer. And because it
was not enough to let them see the grievousness of those failings, if he had
not thought them in the mean time, the source from whence they proceeded, as
the pernicious effects of a bad cause, says, that all this has happened to them
for having smothered the Remorse of Conscience, which has brought them to
Despair; Desperantes semet ipsos.
or (as St. Jerome explains it) to a State of sloathfulness or lack of pains;
for he who has no Conscience, accustoms himself to Sin; (...).
Custom engenders a second Nature; Nature so corruped, brings on Despair;
Despair a moral impossibility to convert himself to God.

We must then, (if we do not intend to render the Holy and Amorous designs of
Jesus altogether useless and unprofitable for our Conversion) shun above all
things that deplorable State, wherein our Conscience being made a Prisoner and
a Slave, can no more exercise her charge with Liberty, for fear it should
happen to us what the Fable says, that the Thieves having stolen away from us
our Watch-Dogs, which were wont to bark in the night time at the first noise of
Robbers, they may without any hindrance, Plunder and destroy what is best and
most precious in the Cabinet of our Souls. Non tacebo quoniam vocem huccinae
audivit animae mea, clamorem praelij, etc. Jerome. 4. v. 19.
The Prophet Jeremiah seems by another comparison to give us the same advise: I
have heard (says he) the sound of a Trumpet, I will not hold my Peace; In War
they make use of Trumpets for two ends; One is, to call the Soldiers to their
Arms, Cum fortis armatus custodit atrium suum in pace sunt ea, etc. Lucae 11.
v. 19.
to animate them to Battle, to stir up their blood; this they call to sound a
Charge: The other to make every one retire to his Quarters, follow his Colors,
come into their Ranks, and think of what Order they are to keep as well in
their Retreat, as in their Victory, this they call to sound a Retreat. And
these are the two chief Offices of our Conscience, to sound a Charge, when the
Devil, (that roaring Lion, who wheels round about to devour us,) is near at
hand, when the occasion of Sin is imminent, when our Sensuality thinks of a
Seditious revolt, it is Then that we are not to stand with cross arms, but to
animate our selves to a Combat, shake our Bodies, and stretch our Veins, and
show how we have learned from Jesus Christ, in his Mystical Academy to do well
on the like occasions. It Is a Spectacle worthy of his Divine regard, to see a
brave Christian Dispute courageously for his Salvation, and Celestial
Inheritance to the danger of his very life. To sound a Retreat, is, when our
Conscience does advise us to re-enter into our selves, when by overmuch
liberty we fall out of our Ranks, for to follow the Streamer of the Flesh; to
make us return to God, when we are gone far from him by our Offenses, as the
Prodigal-Child to his Fathers House: In fine, to render our selves more capable
of the Amorous and Wise conduct of Jesus; by the care we shall have hereafter
of our own Salvation, that we have been unworthy to partake of his Graces,
under the unhappy Rebellion of our Senses.

CHAP. XXIV. That a Soul will not Convert her self to God, unless she knows
that she has no true Friend in this World.
Amicus fidelis protectio fortis, etc. Eccl. 6 v. 5.
ONe of the greatest disorders that has followed in Humane Nature the dismal
Fall of our Forefathers, is that our faculties have remained so blinded in the
choice of their Objects, that the Spirit, in lieu of carrying it self directly
to the knowledge of one Truth, source and first beginning of all others, has
busied it self, about I do not know what apparent Verities, which have brought
the understanding to as many Errors, as it has produced Actions soon after
this choice. The Will, which by the Natural weight of her inclinations, should
not engage her self but in the Love of a real and subsisting goodness, which
should be the originary cause of all goodness: For having embraced like a blind
tope as she is, that which appeared good and handsome, she has found her self
unfortunately under the heavy yoke and Empire of as many unprofitable
affections as the deceitful senses had brought her Species, a disorder opposed
by the general Maxim, which will have in all sorts of things always one to be
the first, who may be the rule and leader of others, who may be the antecedent
cause of all effects, even as the Lines come from the Centeral point to dilate
themselves after into the Circular amplitude of the Circumference. Plurimum
didistat ratio considerantis a necessitate indigentis, seu voluptate cupientis,
cum ista quid per se ipsum in rerum gradibus pendat, necessitas autem quid
propter quid expectat, cogitet; and ista quid verum luci mentis appareat,
voluptas vero quid jucundum corporis sensibus blandiatur, exquirat. D. Aug. to.
5. l. 11. Civit. c. 16. in ^^ne.
We have an Election and a choice to be made, whereof depends all our
Happiness, it is of a true Friend. Hercules in that field wherein he met with
Virtue and Pleasure coming to offer him their service, is very much perplexed;
Pleasure would have him for her Friend, and by her charming words, by her
countenance full of allurements, conjured him to renounce that sad and toilsom
exercise of straining and laboring so much his young Bones under the rigorous
Law of War, that her company was far more pleasant, that the Fields of Mars and
Bellona were covered over with Blood and with Dust, whereas hers were spread
over with Flowers and Roses. Virtue with a Grave presence full of Majesty,
which carried Modesty in her Face, exhorts him not to suffer himself to be
seduced by that Dissembler, that her Friendship was most inconstant, that she
had often deceived others, that it is her custom to come at great and
courageous Hearts, after that Nature had put the Spindle and Distaff into their
Hands, in lieu of a Bow and a Club, she triumphs to render them Idolaters of
her Beauty, to Glory in their own Spoils. As for my part, I do confess, those
that follow me are obliged to all sorts of Heroic Actions, they must give the
proofs of their Courage by the difficulty of high Enterprises: But they may
assure themselves that I will serve them both in Time and in Eternity, as well
for to render their Renown Glorious among Men, as their Memory Venerable to
Posterity. The World would fain Convert Man to it self, God will have him also;
the one and the other, with the most puissant motives they can think of,
presents themselves to invite him to the choice of their Friendship: To which
shall the Soul give the preference? It is necessary, says Plato, Plato in lib.
qui lysis, seu de amicit.
this Genius of Nature, that in the matter of choosing a good Friend, we begin
to proceed to the Election by way of Discussion and Investigation; that is to
say, we must make a gathering and an Assembly of all things, which seems to us
to be worthy of our Friendship, and after having seriously considered them,
setting aside all considerations of particular Interest; To question our
Spirit, and to demand where is the Originary source of all Friendship. For, if
the multitude proceeds from Unity, it must be that all Friendship is found
eminently enclosed in some excellent Subject, which must be the very Primum
Mobile of all Amities, until that you meet with this, stop not, advance still,
for all that is underneath it, has but the appearance of Friendship, subject to
deceit. I was willing to give you this advice; O Friend Lysis, that you may not
be deceived in the choice which you pretend to make of a perfect Friend, taking
the shadow for the Body, the Effect for the Cause, the Ray for the Sun; and the
Stream for the Source.

The Soul will go far in the way of her Salvation, if she comes to understand
that all the World together is not able to furnish her with a perfect Friend;
and then will conclude that this perfect Friend must be looked for out of the
World; That there is no true Friend in the World, I cannot produce either Proof
or Testimony of it more sensible than that of Job in Holy Scripture, for the
just complaints he makes upon the account of his faithless Friends, are able to
cleave asunder any heart, if it be not harder than a Dyamond; he must have no
feelings of Nature, who will have no compassion of poor Job, when he gives an
account of all his disgraces in this point.

Job. 19. v. 13. and seqq. Fratre. meos long fecit a me and noti mei quasi
alieni, etc
Such as made choice of me heretofore to be their Council, and took advice of me
as of their Trustee, whilst all Prosperities attended my Fortune, whilst Heaven
and Earth were at strife to heap up my contentments, and whilst I was in esteem
amongst Foreign Nations, have basely now forsaken me upon occasion, thinking
they should be grieved for my Afflictions, I let them know the State of my
Affairs, but they made nothing of my Letters, and looked upon me as a Stranger;
nay, for fear that by perusing my Lines, where I put them in mind of the Rites
of Ancient Friendship, they should be moved to afford me some consolation,
Divitiae addunt amicos plurimos, a paupere autem, and hi quos habuit,
separantur, etc. Proverb. 19. v. 4, 6, 7.
they were so ungrateful as to cast them into the fire, and to have no more the
memory of them. I had Neighbors, to whom I was never otherwise than civil, I
showed them all manner of courtesy, I do not believe that ever I eat a meal,
but I would have them called one after another to sit at my Table, they had the
liberty to make use of all that I had in my House, as their own proper Goods:
God did no sooner touch me with the Rod of his Justice, but loosing all
remembrance of me, and my former kindness, Inquilini domus mea and ancillae
meae, sicut alienum habuerunt me, and quasi peregrinus fui in oculis eorum. Job
19. v. 15.
) as if I had been some abominable Man given over to the Devil,) they had a
horror to see me: I had a great number of people that held Farms from me, whom
I never pressed to pay me, though their Terms were expired, from whom I never
demanded any reparation, or other satisfaction, for any destruction or damage
they might have done to my Tenements and Lands; I had patience with them, and
suffered them to live in peace, forbearing with their Poverty, and expecting
their own convenience to pay my Rents; But alas! since I lay down on this Bed,
not one did appear to me, nor give me the least word of consolation in the very
excess of my Sorrows. Servum meum vocavi, and non respondit, ore proprio
deprecabur illum. Ibid. v. 16.
I had Servants who esteemed themselves happy to live in my Service, far from
having any ground to complain of me, that I kept their Wages from them; for
after I had paid them well, I always gave them some gratification, to which I
was not obliged. If they had a desire to withdraw themselves from my House and
Service, I gave them their liberty, and in discharging them, the means to
advance and further themselves each one according to his condition: Seeing that
my poor body all full of Sores and Scabs, took away the use of my Limbs, that
by great ado could I lift up my arm to bring my hand to my mouth, that my Legs
as stiff as a stake by reason of the gross humors which dulled my Sinews,
(principle of motion,) would not permit me to stir out of one place; I would
call them my self, and by their proper names, as flattering them that they
should be the more willing to come at me to ease me of any of my pains. To one
I would say, I pray thee Friend, bring me a bit of Linen, that I may rub off
the Matter and Dregs which run down from this putrified wound, whose sharp and
biting humors put me to a thousand pains: To another, Oh be graciously pleased
to help me to change this posture, my Back is all bruised with lying so long
upon it, the Bones pierce my Skin, I am half dead! To this Servant, alas! is
there no means to get me a drop of fresh water? I am so dry, that I think my
Stomach is nothing but a hot Furnace, I can hardly speak, my Mouth is so dry,
my Tongue sticks to my Palate. My God! What heart would not burst to hear the
moaning and pitiful tone of a poor Creature so much afflicted? Nevertheless,
Job must have patience; his Servants will no more acknowledge him, nor hear his
voice; Let him cry, let him complain, let him lament, there is none now that
cares for him, he is but a dying Dog in their thoughts, they expect no more but
the last breath, to cast his rotten Carcass into some Ditch.

This is not as yet all, I had a Wife, Halitum, meum exhorruit uxor mea. Job
19. v. 17.
(says he) whom I loved as my self, or rather more, I would be very sorry to
displease her in any thing, whatever opposition she might have given to my
designs, I would captivate my self for to follow her inclinations, and let her
know that all my feelings were the same with hers. But Alas! She was to me more
cruel and Inhumane than all the rest; I am so much an eyesore, and a
heartbreaking to her, that she scorns to look once at me, she would with all
her heart see me a hundred foot under ground: If by chance she sees any Cup
which I made use of to drink in, the Servants must presently put it aside out
of her sight; For she says that it smells of the Leprosy, and that the only
sight of it provokes her to a Vomit; Nolite diligere mundum neque ea quae sunt
in mundo, non dixit nolite habere sed nolite deligere ecce concupivisti,
haesisti, quis dabit tibi paenas ut columbae, quando v^labis ubi requiescas,
quando hic ubi male haesisti perverse requiescere voluisti; nolite diligere
mundum, tuba divina est. D. Aug. tom. 1. ser. 34. de veeb. Do^ secundum Lucam.
if she be forced to pass sometimes hard by me, she puts with all speed her
handkerchief to her mouth and nose, and tells me that my breath is insufferable
to her: I lie down stretched on a Dunghill, and she will not take the pains to
have me carried to a Stable, where I might be sheltered from Rain and bad
Weather; she sees me, and suffers me to languish in that bad Equipage.

What man of Judgment would ever after rely on the Friendship of this World,
whose consequences are so Tragical, who will not seek to lodge his affections
elsewhere, being that among Men there is so much disloyalty and falsehood? You
will tell me perhaps, that they are exaggerations to frighten Souls; And
moreover, that Histories are full of a number of good Friends, who have been
both Faithful and Friendly to their dying day. Hercules and Theseus, Pilades
and Orestes, Socrates and Choerephon, Damon and Pithias, Nicocles and Phocion,
Scipion and Pompeius, Lucillius and Brutus, Coesar Augustus, and Maecenas. It Is
true, but besides this, that those Friendships had only for ground, that weak
foundation of Blood and Flesh, they lasted no longer time than the moment of
this present life. A Christian ought to look for a Friend, who is a Priend
without Interest, a Friend without any difference of times, a Friend for to
make his beloved to resent the effects of his Friendship; we must not seek for
him in the World: Jacob c. 4. v 4. Quicunque ergo voluerit amicus esse hujus
saeculi, inimicus Dei constituitus
For St. James assures us in his Masters behalf, that whoever takes the World
for his Friend, has God at the same time for his mortal Enemy. Parmenion did no
sooner imagine that he had a better Friend in the World than Alexander, but
Alexander out of hand forgot him, and dismissed him out of his Court. Dyrce the
Thebeian, seeing that Lycus her Husband had an affection for Antiopa, she could
not bear that affront, she has Antiopa tied to the Horns of a furious Bull, and
turns off her Husband Lycus, as a Man unworthy of her company. Mundi amor, and
Dei pariter in uno cord cohabitare non possunt, quemadmodum jidem oculi Coelum
pariter and terram nequaquam aspiciunt. Auctor lib. de 12. abusionibus, inter
opera Augustini.
God will have us to believe that he is in love with Men, and that the least
glance we give at Creatures, to the prejudice of what we owe unto him, he takes
it to be criminal, and cannot conceal his feelings of it: Though it be true,
that he lets us sometimes run at random, that we may know to our own cost, how
rigorous are the Laws of all other Friendships but his; but it is to the end
that having learned by experience, how all things underneath him are subject to
change, we come to confess, that of necessity we must get out of the World, for
to find a perfect Friend, and so insensibly withdraw our selves from all
Earthly troubles, to settle better the compass of reason, and find a Friend,
who shows that he loves us, by saving our Souls.

CHAP. XXVII. That we cannot meet with a better Friend than JESUS.
IF the Catastrophes, and Bloody Tragedies of the amities of the World
constrain us by reason to detest their alliances, Speciosus forma prae filiis
hominum, etc. Psalm. 4. v. 3.
the rare qualities which render Jesus amiable above all things, Rebus
intelligibilibus tanta est pulchritudo, ut illa sit Archetybos; nostra
simulata, umbrarilis, pendens, and nascens a corporeis lineamentis illa in
lumine claritatis suae haerens, in hac est Deus form^sitimus, etc. Egubinus in
Psalm. 44.
shall have no less power to engage our affections in the pursuit of his Love.
I do not think it strange what St. Augustine says in his Confessions, where he
accuses himself to have wept in his younger days, reading in Virgil the love
which Dido and Aeneas had one for another: For though the continuance happened
to be disgraceful to Dido, this Poet nevertheless represents the beginning with
such a deal of chaste motions, that St. Augustine could not read without Tears
the fatal end of so innocent a Love: He makes that Princess appear so ravished,
musing upon the happiness she had to have lodged her affections in so worthy a
subject, that she could never be out of her dumps, unless it were to relate the
perfections of her Friend, and by that sweet evaporation ease the heat of those
Fires which consumed her Heart: If she looks on his bright Armor and Martial
Forehead, Virgil 4. Aeneid
she believes that there is nothing in the World can withstand the greatness of
his courage: If he opens his Mouth for to broach a Discourse, she finds therein
so much Grace and Charms, that she thinks it a wonder to see Mercurius and Mars
agree so well together in one Subject; Now she takes in her Arms the little
Ascanius, Son to Aeneas, (for Aeneas was the Widower of Lavinia, as Dido was
the Relict of Sichaeus) and looking into the pollished Crystal of his Eyes,
where the Image of his Father (in her fancy) did shine, she flatters her self
with hopes to have the like consolation by the Rights of a Lawful Marriage;
Another time she takes her Sister Anne aside, and discharging her Heart to her,
Credo equidem, nec vana fides g^nu esse deorum. ^bidem.
says, I must not tell you a lie, my dear Sister, there is a Man above all Men;
For my part, I do believe, and am not deceived, he must be of the Race of the
Gods. It seems to me that this is the discourse of Magdalen and Martha of their
dearly beloved Jesus.

Magdalen over-light in her Friendship, whilst she remained a Slave to the
World, and Subject to its Laws, had no sooner seen the Face of the Messiah, and
washed his Feet in the Pharisee's House, but coming back to her Lodging all in
a sweat; Ah! my dear Sister, let me hear no more talk of the World: Jesus has
gained my Heart, I shall never Love any other; what a wretch am I to begin so
late to understand his Merits, he is both handsome, sweet and gracious, he is
affable withal; they made me believe that nothing came from his Mouth but
Thunders, Remissa sunt ei peccata multa quia dilexit multum. Lucae 7. v. 47.
from his Eyes but Lightnings, and from his Hand but Thunderbolts. It Is true,
but they are Thunderbolts without any hurt, Lightnings without any terror, a
Thunder without noise: Ardor charitatis in ea rubi ginem peccatorum combussit,
peccata cremab^lia sunt, and ad faciem ignis stare non possunt. D. Greg. ex
Hugone Card. in c. 7. Lucae.
I never expected from him so favorable a reception as I had: The company
begins to grumble at me, but he most graciously took my defense in hand; they
would fain blame my actions, but he was pleased to justify me before all, and,
which is more, he was so merciful to me, as to give me the full absolution of
all my Sins: Let Dido burn, if she please, in her flames for Aeneas: For my
part I will never have any Friend but Jesus, at this present I do renounce with
all my Heart all other amities, for to live and die in Jesus my sweet Love.

Deligebat Jesus Martham and Sororem ejus Mariam and Lazarum, ille languens,
illae tristes, omnes dilecti, sed diligebat eos and languentium Salvator. imo
etiam mortuorum suscitator, and tristium consolator. D. Aug. tom. 9. Tract. 49.
in cap. 11. Joan.
Magdalen had reason, for besides that Jesus by his proper Nature,
inexhaustible source of the primitive Love, is worthy to be loved above all
things, by a Love of benevolence, the effects which we do receive daily of his
Friendship, ought to render him amiable to us, and worthy of Love, which may be
both sensible, and of proper Interest: For if we come to consider the favors
he gives us, they are without number, if we take notice after what fashion he
bestows them, they are without example; If of the times wherein he does them,
there is not a moment of our lives, but is under the influences of his
Liberalities.

The favors which God is pleased to do us, are without number, for whoever
could exactly set down the Riches of the Earth, the Profits of the Seas, the
Commodities of the Air, the Necessity of the Fire, the Fecundity of the Moon,
the Wonders of the Sun, the Influences of the Heavens, the Multitude of Beasts,
and the Number of Fishes, the Beauty of Flowers, Quid dicam quemadmodum
clementia Dei humanae prospexit utilitati? Foeneratum terra restituit quod
acceperit, and usurarum cumulo multiplicatum homines saepe decepiunt, and ipsa
foeneratorem suum forte defraudant, terra fidelis manet, etc. D. Ambr. lib. 3.
Hexam. cap. 8.
the Ornament of the Universe, and the Diversity of so much Treasures; all that
appertain to Man by a free and authentical gift, Signed, Sealed, and set up in
the Register-Office of the Divinity. Let all the Monarchs of the World be
Assembled in one, for to furnish Man with the least and meanest part of all
those Goods, their abilities shall become short: And to the end that we should
have our obligations all entire to him, who with so liberal a hand gave us so
much Riches, he has deprived all other Creatures both of Understanding and
Reason; That not knowing what they were, nor what they had, they might not
appropriate to themselves that, whose Possession was reserved for Man only.
They commonly say of a Father after his death, that he loved his Children
dearly, when he left them an ample and rich Patrimony, or a Succession in a
very good Estate, an Inheritance without strife; yet after his Decease, it
falls out that the Children are at a deal of pains and trouble to preserve
their Goods: The Gifts of God in the beginning were not accompanied with these
encumbrances: For if a Man had conserved himself in the Innocence of his
Creation, the Earth, which is now become a Rebel to the Stock and Plough, had
opened her Bosom without the least violence to give him his Livelihood; and
which is more, if, in the same disorder we are in at present, and where we
suffer the punishment of Sin by the general revolt of all Creatures; there were
Men, who would entirely submit themselves to the wise conduct of the Eternal
Providence, without being so over-earnest in the cares and concerns of the
Earth; Scripture assures us, that they should be abundantly provided for in all
their necessities: For if God does cherish all that came from his bountiful
hands, Considerate lilia agri, quantus sic candor in foliis, quemadmodum
stip^ta ipsa folia ab imo ad summum videantur assurgere, ut scyphi ex primant
formam ut auri quaedam species intus effulgeat, quae tamen vallo in circuitu
floris obsepta nulli pateat injuirae. D. Amb. lib. 3. Hexam. cap. ^.
if he covers the Flowers with Purple and Scarlet, if he nourishes, maintains
and preserves the little Birds of the Air, if he keeps an exact account of each
Leaf of a Tree, what will he do for Man, had he been the wickedest of all
Mortals? This Sun of Justice will never deny him the benignity of his
Influences, being that he will have the distribution thereof to be made as well
to the good as to the bad, with that differenc,e that the good do participate
not only with the bad of the common Goods of Nature, which is equally shared,
but as yet receives, (by way of pre-eminency,) extraordinary favors. Si foenum
agri quod hodie est, etc. Matthew. 6. v. 30.
So we see Fathers and Mothers, (authorized by all good manners and customs,)
make over a special and free Gift to one of their Children, who will among all
the rest be most obedient to their Commandments, who will have more inclination
to serve them, and who by the effects of their good nature, shall, as a Stork
render the Duties of Piety to them, who gave them their Being; a Gift Judged
irrevocable by all Laws, as well written, as introduced by Custom, chiefly,
when the cause of merit is expressed in the said donation: And though it should
be subject to a decision, God, who is the absolute Master of all Goods, and
owes nothing to no body, advances whom he pleases, and none can bring him to
question for it, much less find fault with him: And as the Goods which concern
the Salvation of Man, imports him more than those who aim at nothing else but
the present life; So God (besides the general Graces which he imparts to all
without exception,) he reserves some particular Graces for them that he takes
to be the most worthy objects of his Love. The fashon whereby God loves us,
Quod homo homini det, multae possunt esse causae, Paulo inferius Deus non
indiget aliquo cum ipse det omnibus vitam, inspirationem and comnia: si
peccaveris quid ei nocebis, and si multiplicatae fuerint iniquitates tuae quid
facies contra eum, patet ergo quod ex pura liberalitate deligat nos Deu.. Hugo
Card. in c. 3. Joan.
is no less considerable; For the manner of acting of all sorts of Powers, is
what extols and gives a luster to the action, God loves us not for our good
Offices done to him, being that we are declared Criminals by his Divine Majesty
even from our Mothers Womb. It Is not for having continued Faithful in his
Service, since we were re-called by our Baptism to the Rights of an Adoptive
Filiation, being we no sooner came to the use of reason, but we began to be
refractory to the Holy Laws of Heaven; It Is not by our loving him, he receives
any Surplus of Glory; For as our Creation has added nothing to the merit of his
Power, by drawing us out of that Chaos; So his reducing us to nothing, would
lessen in no respect the Dominion of his Grandeurs.

Seneca de Clementia.
Cinna was cherished by Octavius Caesar, who chose him for one of his
Favorites, to whom he was more inclined to impart his most secret Affairs.
Cinna could not conserve himself any long time in that Honorable Employment;
He detracts from his Prince, murmurs against his designs, censures all his best
actions. Caesar hears of it, Caesar dissembles, and seeing that Cinna had
subject to complain, that making him his Favorite, he did not as yet Treat him
according to his merit: He takes on a resolution to advance him, gives him
Riches, suffers him to have the handling of his Treasures, sets him at his
ease, and invested him with the most Honorable Employments that were in the
Senate: hoping that this wild Spirit (overcome with so many Civilities,) would
be constrained to bear him an affection. Cinna more ungrateful than ever, at
the very first up-rising of the Commonwealth, where all the Factious did
Monopolise against the State, nay, against the very Person of Caesar, casts
himself amongst them, he will be of the Party, and makes himself the most
concerned in that horrid Enterprise. Caesar is told of it, the Conspirators
disclosed, the hour and moment of the Treachery discovered, and Cinna known to
be the furtherer and Author of that Enterprise. What thereupon should a Prince
do, or a Monarch, dealt so with? There is no Judge at the first hearing, but
would Condemn this unfortunate Fellow to all the Torments and Tortures of
Phalaris. Caesar does otherwise, he calls him by, locks him up in his Closet,
takes a Chair with his own hands, makes him to sit down by him, and with a
sweet tone full of mildness, goes to tell him. What Cinna? must I be obliged to
believe ail that is related to me of you? Shall the effect of my Courtesy be
always the object of your Ingratitude? Shall the Friendship which I have for
you, find no other acknowledgement than a design that you have to destroy me?
Whereas I ought to have banished you out of my presence for the bad Offices you
have rendered me, I have managed your Advancement against the advice of my
Council; yet if the disowning of my Favors had only produced in you the
forgetfulness of your Duty, I would not take it so ill: But here I understand
how you do aim to take away my Life, there is your Seal, three is your
Handwriting, you cannot deny it, the Heavens could not conceal so Criminal an
action! What, are you weary to see the Sun which gives you light? Why will you
take away with my life the power to love you? Those that put you into that bad
humor, are jealous of the Friendship I bear you: But let us forget all that is
past, I do freely forgive you your life, I receive you again for my Favorite
and Confident; Let us both strive hereafter who shall surpass the other, you by
acknowledging my Liberalities, or I by finding out new ways to gratify you.
Really I must confess there is a Friend who has not his match among the Pagans,
(but Jesus Christ) is a thousand degrees beyond him: Si enim cum inimici
essemus, etc. Roman 5. v. 10.
for we have not only treated him most unworthily by words, calling him a
Drunkard, a seducer of the People, a Man possessed with the Devil; but we have
taken up Stones to cast them at his head, and when he was in the heat of his
Affections for our Salvation, Omnia gratificant beneficium reconciliationis si
consideremus, quis reconciliavit? quomodo, cui, quos a quid. Gozram. in cap. 5.
Rom
we have put a Cord about his Neck, and we have dragged him through the
streets, without any regard either to his Merit, or to his Person; we have torn
his Sacred Body with full strokes of Chains, and Whips, we have crowned him
with Thorns, and exposed him to the laughter of the People, in an equipage a
thousand times more inhumane than that of Zophirus, Cinna had a design to kill
Caesar, but the Execution did not follow. We, to satisfy our own rage, have
served as Executioners for to nail Jesus to the Cross, Mortuus est pro te, o
homo mortalis; ut vivas cum illo, susepit mortem nostram, ut donaret nobis
suam, accepit ex te unde moreretur induit se carne, mortali in virginitate
matris induet te vita perenni in aeqalitate Patris. Glossa. ordin in c. 5. Romans
and make him suffer shamefully in sight of all the World: Caesar Pardons
Cinna, Jesus prays for his Murderers; Caesar forgives the faults of Cinna;
Jesus dissembles with ours, and seems not to see them. Caesar is content to
continue Cinna in his Employments, but Jesus gives us his Scepter and his
Crown, which Caesar did not to Cinna, and will have it, that in quality of
Brothers, we enter into a communication of all his Goods, and that without a
word ever to be spoken of our Infidelities, we may have a right to his Fathers
Succession. Caesar loved Cinna for some simpathy of humors, but Jesus loves us
with a pure Will exempt of all Interest, but that of our own good; The sole
desire he has to save our Souls, is the scope and end which puts a period to
all his pursuits; and this is the manner that he does cherish us.

Cum dilexisset suos qui erant in mundo in finem dilexit eos. Joan 13 v. 1.
As for the time wherein he loves us, his Friendship receives a thence main
motive to oblige us to the undervalue and refuse of all strange Alliances: For
not to speak of that intimate dependency, whose concourse is inseperably tied
to the conservation of all things: In such sort that the substraction of one
sole moment, would cause the total ruin of the Universe: Quid est in finem
dilexit, id est, amans continue and semper quod est argumentum very amoris,
juxta illud Proverbiorum, omni tempore delexit qui verus amicus est. D. Chrysostom.
Hic.
We have another special obligation to God, in this, that he makes the effects
of his amity more abundantly appear, when that forsaken and abandoned by all
the World, we have not any to make our Addresses to in our adversities but to
him. The Worldlings have but the present time for their Friendship; and withal,
it must be fair and calm, and we must have Wind and Tide along with the course
of our Prosperities; Nec noscitur ulli, agminibus comitum qui modo cinctus erat.
For as soon as the Storm begins to appear, every one flies away, and leaves us
in the middle of the dangers. It Is in vain for us to call unto them for help,
for none shall appear to stretch out his hand to draw us ashore. Etiam post
mortem quinque fratres suos dilexit ille superbus atque impius, and usque ad
mortem nos dilexisse putandus est Christus? Absit charissimi ut dilectionem
morte finierit, qui non est morte finitus. D. Aug. tom. 9. tract. 55. in cap.
13. Joan.
God loved us before the times, he loves us now, and will love us to the end of
the World. He loved us from the beginning; for before that the Heavens, Clock
of the World, had measured out by their courses the diversity of moments, God
had a design for the good of Men; from the beginning of his ways, he possessed
humane Nature: He loves us now, being that notwithstanding the Rebellions and
Insurrections of our Souls, he contrives a thousand ways to bring us to a
Repentance, assuring us of a Pardon, if we be but sorry for our crimes: he will
love us after all Ages, being, that asigning Heaven over to us for the
performance of his Promises; he prepares for us there as many Immortal Crowns,
as we shall have done good works by improving his Graces.

That being so, where is the Christian, who, considering that Jesus is his best
Friend, that he bestows upon him so many favors, and with so liberal a hand,
that he admits of no difference of times in the distribution of them, but he
without ever giving over, and at all moments he labors for to convert him,
will not say with the Prophet, for my part, I will adhere to God; he is my only
Good, he is my Hope, he is all my Expectations: Mihi adhaerete Deo bonum est.
I will bind my self fast to Jesus, even as the Companions of Ulysses to the
main Mast of their Ship, being that from Him, and out of his favor, all is
subject to Inconstancy. The Miermaids of the World will labor in vain to tell
me of their Charms and Plasures, they shall never be able to make any
impression on my Heart, because I shall live in assurance, whilst I shall keep
close to Jesus.

CHAP. XXVIII. That Jesus is the only Friend who Comforts on occasion.
SAdness and Joy, Tristitiam long repelle a te, etc. Eccl. 30. v. 24. Animus
gaudens aetatem floridam facit, Spiritus tristis exsiccat ossa. Proverb. 17. v.
22. Letitiae magnus rarus, and tardus est pulsus, laetis enim diffunditur per
universum corpus calor, ac plus for as motus ejus effertur, ut tristibus intro;
tristitiae parvus languidus, and tardus and rarus est; nam cum tristitia ipsa
refrigeret, caloremque intro cencitet, merito contrarios superioribus efficit,
qui laetitiam sequuntur Galen. l. 3. de causis pulsuum
Consolation and Heaviness, Motion and Rest, Trouble and Peace, follow one
another, step by step, and there where one takes place, the other must of
necessity withdraw: They are the Poles of Humane Nature, on which of necessity
all our Actions must roll; if Joy takes on her self to clear our Horrison,
Sadness must withdraw to seek for a residence in the Antipodes: They are
contrary signs which never lodge in one House: They are different in Nature,
as they are unequal in their very Effects. Joy dilates the Heart, Heaviness
makes it narrow; Joy sets the Soul at rest, Heaviness drives her into trouble;
Joy clears the Senses, and brings a calm over all our little World, Heaviness
brings nothing but Confusion, and where ever it happens to be, all is subject
to Storms: It Is a wonder to see those two contraries give one another a
thousand Battles, and Man to remain always the Object either of their loss or
of their victories. Doubtless it must be an Order established by God, for such
constant motions cannot remain invariable, but under the Laws of a
never-changing Principle. If Consolation be a good, and Sadness an evil, one
must be under the Genius of good, and the other under the Genius of evil: And
so, as a Fountain, which from its Source spouts out pure, clean, and
Chrystaline Waters, discharges it self into its leading-pipes with the
self-same purity to the very last drop: And contrariwise, if they be dirty,
black, and muddy waters, they will conserve still the same qualities; the same
will happen to be true in the principles of Consolation and Heaviness.

Deus totius consolationis qui consolatur nos, etc. 2 Cor. c. 1. v. 2.
God is the first Source and Sovereign principle of all Consolations; Joy
considered in that Source, is Pure, Neat, and without any mixture of
contradiction; whoever will fain draw the Waters of a true Contentment, it is to
that Fountain that he must approach: But they may tell me, if God be the
Principle of Consolation, and that by the attribute of his Immensity, he is
present in all Places? why does not that Source so dilated over all the corners
of the Earth, Idem hoc Propheta dixit, in afflictione dilatasti cor meum, non
dixit, non passus es me incidere in afflictionem, aut effecisti, ut coleriter
transiret afflictio, sed ea manente dilatasti me, hoc est* multam cordis
latitudinem ac relaxationem dolorum indulsisti. D. Chrysostom. tom. 4. Hom. 1 in
c. 1, 2. ad Cor.
replenish also all Creatures with the Sweetness of its Consolations? Why is
man subject to so much Heaviness? Why does he find so much difficulty in the
exercise of Penance? God has not Created man to do all his Actions by a
necessary determination, as things without reason, which, without any choice,
are carried toward their Center, for no other end, but to find therein their
rest; For the Center of each thing, is the natural place of its contentment,
the which being allotted to them by the supreme intelligence, they look for it
with Passion, and cannot but with violence be brought from it: Therefore they
strive to defend their just title and rights in all, and against all. Free Will
sets man in another Category, and though it does not change the Nature of his
Center, it puts him nevertheless in a condition to shun it, or to seek for it,
but with that clause, that at the same instant we get over the Ecliptique Line,
which leads to this Center, as it is from thence, that all true consolation
takes its offspring, so, out of it we shall find our selves under the Tyranny
of Heaviness and Sadness. For as the Love which God bears to himself, is the
cause of his Eternal Consolation, so he is to men the Principle whereon depends
their rest. Let us not then seek elsewhere for the offsprings of our Troubles
and Sadness; for here it is, we have lost the road which leads to our Center.

Deus, Deus meus ut quid dereliquisti me. Psalm. 21. v. 1.
Dear Reader, do not allege, (for to weaken these Reasons,) the Complaints
which Jesus made agonizing on the Cross, no more than his Combats in the Garden
of Olives: For though on the one he makes his Address to God his Father, who
seems to have forgotten him, and that in the other all overwhelmed with Tears,
his Soul perplexed beyond measure, Seperavit se divinitas, quia subtraxit
protectionem, sed non soluit unionem. Incognitus in Ps. 21.
he redoubles his Prayers to divert the Sentence of his Sufferings; and so
strives to banish Sadness to receive Consolation: For answer, I have to say,
that those very Actions of his confirm the Truth of my Thesis; for they were
the-Senses of passible Nature, which presented their request to the Principle,
from whence flows all Consolation, to receive what was sustracted from them for
a time, though reason, (the Superior part of the Soul) has been always united
to God, exempted from all those Alarms, and To teach the Christian on the one
part, Duplix fuit Christi oration, una ex voluntate deliberata procedens, and
talis semper fuit exaudita, altera per modum affectionis and ista non sempter
fuit exaudita, quia sensualitatem natura liter mortem abhorrentem rationi sub
debat. Idem. v. 2.
that though he be grateful to God, and couched down in the Book of Life among
the Predestinate, nay assured by Divine Revelation of the eertainty of his
Salvation, he ought not for all that expect to live without some heaviness,
distaste, and sadness. And on the other part, to let us know, when we shall be
brought to that State, whom to make our addresses to, to find true consolation.

In all Arts, (as well Mechanic as Liberal) say the Masters, Hoc dixit, quia
multi clamant in tribulatione qui non exaudiuntur ad voluntatem, sed ad
salutem. Ibid.
there is a certain secret which they will hardly communicate; There is in
humane life also a secret to live contentedly, which I would wish all the World
had known; Dear Reader, here it is for you in three words: Love only where you
ought to Love, and you shall never be heavy at the Heart; you shall be always
content; you shall see sometimes one in the turning of a hand) to be altogether
changed in his humors,) of a jolly hearty companion, become on a sudden,
mournful, sad, drowzy; whatever he sees pains him; where others find their
recreation, he gets wherewith to entertain his Melancholy; he shuns all
company to give more leisure and liberty to his dark thoughts, to grieve him
and trouble his Rest the more. Has he a desire to get out of that dimness,
where Sadness sits in her Throne? Will he know whence he had that grim
Companion, that litigious Domestic, that trouble-feast, who sets a disorder
over all the Commonwealth of the Soul? Let him not find fault with the bad
constitution of his Body; Let him not attribute any thing to the change of
Seasons, nor to the Influence of the Stars, for none of them are the cause of
his heaviness: But let him examine his own affections, let him never give over
to search until he discovers the Object that retains them: For doubtless, they
are in some place, where true consolation cannot be lodged, Omnis nostra
tribulatio est ex nobis, sed consolatio ex solo Deo, ex nobis sunt
conturbationes, sed ex Deo finis earum. Incognit. in Psalm. 41. D. Aug. 4. Cons.
c. 12.
as in some Creature, or in some vain hope, finding out this too, to be true,
let him love where he ought to love; Let him withdraw his affections thence,
and place them where Justice, Reason, and his own Interest will have them to
be, and I do assure him in God's Name with St. Augustine, that he has found the
secret to live content and happy in this World,

There is nothing so much to be admired in the process of times, as to see how
God, (to teach this secret to Men) Summons them to the experience of a thousand
Fatal accidents, and permits them to place their desires according to the
choice of their liberty, how he permits afflictions and heaviness to rise, at
the very instant Men thought to rest happy, and repose themselves sweetly in
the Lap of consolation and Peace. Was there any thing more Glorious in
appearance, than Belissarius under Justinian the Emperor? Belissarius the most
Valiant Captain that ever bore Arms in the three Neighboring Ages; who reduced
the Persians under the obedience of his Prince, who suppressed the insolency of
the Goths over all Italy, who went along to Africa, to Subdue those Barbarous
Nations, whence he brought Prisoner the King Gilismer, as the Crown of his
Victories: He returns to Court full of Glory, gives an account of his Actions,
brings Scepters and Crowns to the Feet of Justinian, hoping to find Peace,
Tranquillity, and a favorable Reception, as a Reward of his Fidelity. But God,
who will not have Man to lean upon the brittle Staff of Creatures to find his
Consolation, suffers, that, He who was obliged for his life to Belissarius,
enters into a Jealousy of the Honor of his Conquests, forgets all the hazards,
wherein he exposed himself for his Service, has both his eyes plucked out of his
Head, strips him out of all his Means, reduces him to a State of such extreme
misery, that poor Belissarius is constrained to build himself a little Cabin of
Dung and Straw on the Highroad, to ask the Alms of Passengers for the love of
God. Eusebius. lib. 2. Hist. cap. 5.
Belissarius had lodged his hopes very ill, but Philo the Jew (more wise than
he) found out the secret, Deus non tibi declarat ipsam misericordiam, quam tibi
per diem mandavit, nisi per noctem, cum venorat ipsa tribulatio, tunc adjutorio
te non deserit, ostendit tibi verum fuisse quod tibi per diem mandavit, etenim
scriptum est, speciosa misericordia Domini in tempore tribulationis sicut nubes
pluviae in tempore siccitatis. D. Aug. tom. 1. in Psalm. 41.
for being accused by Appion before Cajus Caligula, and being very hard put to
for to justify himself of what was laid to his charge, failed not nevertheless
to find in short his true Consolation: He turns himself with a smiling
countenance toward his Countrymen, courage, my Companions, here is the hour
come, wherein it is necessary that God should comfort us, seeing all Humane
assistance has failed us; As if he would say, that God, by a solemn Decree of
his Divine Providence, has, as it were, obliged himself to Man, that at the
same time, when he shall know by experience, that a Creature cannot be the
Object of his Consolations, and that he will convert himself to him, he will
receive him in his Arms to comfort him, in all his Afflictions and Heaviness of
Heart.

It is then very true, that he who has found out the secret of living
contentedly, has concluded, out of the weakness of Creatures, and by their
inability to furnish any true contentment, that God alone is He who can really
comfort him; a consequence which is very easy to be deduced, if we will but
suppose a Principle known of it self to be true, by natural reason; which is,
that all Men in general, without exception of any whatever, desires to be
content, and live happy: This good luck is never found but in the pursuit, or
in the enjoyment of our last end, after which there is no more to be desired.
But it is most evident, by the ordinary unquietness of our mind, which is never
here at rest through the unruliness of our Souls, always at the chase of new
affections, by reason of the disordered Appetite of all our faculties, which
are never satisfied with the Metaphorical food of their Objects; That the
Creature cannot be our last end, seeing it cannot afford us so much good at
once, as that we may never desire any more. God alone then remains for our last
end; for he only can give such contentment, and so perfect, that after it we
cannot desire any more; And therefore no Consolation can be true, if it has not
the full enjoyment of its last end.

But because there is a great difference betwixt the Desire, and the Enjoyment
of the thing desired, and that this true Consolation which all Men look for, is
as the Golden-Fleece of Antiquity, that could not be carried away without
danger of life, and that we must not expect that this Inheritance, which is
ours by right, (contested nevertheless by so many Cheats,) must not cost us
thousands of strifes, heaviness and sadness: There is the time that God waits
for, to comfort us: it is the hour appointed by Jesus to come and maintain our
cause, fortify our Hopes, and give a sure ground to all our steps. For my
part, I hold for Moral Heresy the Doctrine of some newfound Spirituals, who
Preach for a point of high perfection, to live in Crosses without any
consolation, that it is proper Love to seek for any Pleasures in Torments: This
is good to be told to them who know not, Si in hac vita tantum in Christo
sperantes sumus miserabbiliores sumus omnibus hominibus. 1 Cor. 15. v. 19.
that it is to the damned Souls they refused a drop of Water in the burning
heat of their flames, to refresh their Tongues. St. Paul is not of the opinion
of those ignorant Zealots; for he says, that Man would be the most miserable of
all Creatures, if all his hopes were only in Jesus dying on the Cross.

Ah! St. Paul, what do you say? Expectantes ab eo hic remunerari,
miserabiliores sumus omnibus hominibus, qui ad minus perfruuntur bonis hujus
vitae, nos autem patimur mala. Lyran in c. 15. 1 Cor. part 6.
Have you already forgotten to have said, to the confusion of all the Enemies
of Jesus, that you did not intend to place the precious point of your Glory
elsewhere, than in the Cross of your good Master, that none should find fault
with you for bearing his marks, that others should seek their consolation where
they pleased; that for your part his Infirmities were all your delights. Haec
dixit partim quidem ad resurrectionem corporum credendam eos confirmans, patrim
vero immortalitatem persuadens, ne prorsus hic dissolvi nostra omnia
putatentur. D. Chrysostom. tom 4. hom. 39. in c. 15. 1 Cor.
How can all those brave resolutions agree with the Maxim which you now
advance? And with that which you defended publicly in the famous City of
Athens, that vain was our Faith, if Jesus had not been resuscitated. It Is that
the Apostle would conclude two verities; in one he supposes that it is a
necessary precept to Salvation, to drink with Jesus of the Vinegar of
bitterness; being, that among a number of efficatious means, which he might
choose to work our Redemption, he has made choice of a passible State, which
affords nothing but Afflictions and Sadness: In the other he will have us to
understand, that among those Crosses, Heaviness, Afflictions and Sadness,
Cervus enim cum montium juga conscendit, quaeque aspicit aspera, etc. Paulo
infra. Ita electorum mentes quaeque sibi in hoc mundo obsistere atque obviare
conspiciunt contemplationes saltu transcendnut. and more cervorum despectis
terrenorum sentibus in superna se evehunt. D. Grg. l. 29. Moral. in c. 35. Job
cap. 10,
we must have some consolation: And to this purpose he fears not to say, That
if our hopes were only grounded on the death of Jesus naked on the Cross, on
his Blows and Blood, shed at the Pillar, on his Affronts and Reproaches
received on Mount Calvary, on his Head Crowned with Thorns, without a firm
Belief, that after Death, must come Life; after those Wounds, Impassibility;
after those Injuries, Everlasting Glory; after those Thorns; an Immortal Crown;
Doubtless we had been the most miserable Creatures in the World. And so vain
would be the Faith of a Christian, who freely suffering with patience, because
he hopes for Peace and Rest after his Troubles and Sadness, would be frustrated
of his expectation, if he had not in that expectation, (and whilst he is in
that actual Passion,) a certain and an assured Belief, that this moment of
Tribulation shall be rewarded with an Eternity of Pleasures. And it is in that
State of expctation and delay, that Consolation is necessary, the which comes
altogether out of season, when we do enjoy what we desired.

Dear Soul, Et ecce ego vobiscum sum omnibus diebus, etc. Matthew. 18. v. 20.
have you a desire to secure your Salvation? Why then never go backward, though
you see the Road which leads to Heaven, beset with Crosses, made up with
Thorns, laid over with Stones; Rememorat eis consummationem, ne praesentia
solum inspiciant, quae simul cum praesenti vita dissolventur. D. Chris. apud
Hugo. Card. hic.
Life is in the Cross, Roses in the Thorns, and Oil under the Rock. Jesus,
whose promises are altogether as infallible as his words are true, for to
encourage his Disciples, and all them, who in the difference of times, would
profess his religion, to live content in the hight of their sufferings, gives
them no other motive of it, than to tell them, that he will be with them to the
end of the World.

Cato, Lucanus lib 9.
to encourage his Army to follow him in the Wars of Afric, (where, not only
the Renown of those People bred up to Arms, but even the extreme rigor of
those horrid Deserts, through which they were to pass, rendered the enterprise
both dangerous and difficult, and also made an Alarm among the Soldiers) could
think of no better way to raise up their daunted courage, than to tell them,
that he would be the first himself, to make way for the rest through the Sands;
that without fearing the excess of Heat, or the danger of Serpents, he would
make them know that a good courage can do all: And moreover, that if they had
seen Him go back but one step, whether it were to look for a cold Spring to
quench his thirst, Recogitate eum qui talem sustinuit a peccatoribus adversus
semet ipsum contradictionem, etc. Hebraeorum 12. v. 1.
or the shelter of a Bush to avoid the scorching heat of the Sun, he gave them
a full permission to go back; At the very sound of these words, their blood
began to boil in their Veins, they could wish they never made appear their
weakness: Every one animates himself to do well, Exagitate tantum estis, and
persecutionem passi, Christus autem pro vobis sanguinem fundit ille usque ad
mortem pro veritate certavit, vos autem nec dum ad pericula pervenistis quae
minantur interitum. D. Chrysostom. tom. 4. in c. 12. Hebrae.
and strives who shall be the nearest to his Captain. Jesus is to Us a Divine
Cato, before we come near the Borders of Heaven, we have many vast Fields and
Deserts to pass through, they are wild loansom Plains, where you shall hardly
meet with any Person to teach you the Road, for few go that way; The Devils
Infernal Serpents trade there by thousands; This is able to strike a terror
into any heart. But what comfort is it, to see the Son of God March first at
the head of a Christian Army, passing over with a generous heart all the
difficulties and bad steps, that he meets with in the Road; if there be Hunger,
Thirst, Cold, or Heat, he must be the first to feel it in his own proper
Person. Can there be a Christian, if he be not a greater Coward than a
Thersite, who will not take a strong resolution to convert himself to Jesus,
Addit deinde Apostolus ibid. Et obliti estis consolationis quae vobis tanquam
filiis loquitur, etc.
follow his Colors, fight under his Conduct, being (that besides Heaven, which
he does promise us as the reward of our Victories,) he does oblige himself to
comfort us as often as we fight, and as long as our Combat shall last.

CHAP. XXIX. That the Immortality of our Soul ought to make us undervalue the
World.
ARchimedes the Geometrician, did boast in his days, that he would make the
Earth get out of its Center, if any would assign him a point out of the Earth
whereon he might fix one of the Rods of his Compass: whether that be possible
or no, Cum interrogas unde sit anima utrum quasi regionem ejus and patriam,
unde huc venerit nosse desideras? propriam quandam habitationem animae ac
patriam Deum ipsum credo esse a quo creata est: substantiam vero ejus nominare
non possum, non enim eam puto esse ex his usitatis notisque naturis, quas istis
corporis sensibus tangimus. D. Ang. tom. 1. de quantitate anima, cap. 1. circa
initium.
I refer it: At least I can tell for certain, that the effect of his Art had
never any Existence but in his own imagination: And yet bragging that he would
do it, has acquired himself the admiration of all Antiquity. If God had
reserved those poor Pagans, to live in the Age of the Evangelical Law, they
would have far greater reason to admire the inventions of him who placed Heaven
and Earth out of their Center. There was a Man who gave such strong shakes to
Heaven and Earth, that he forced them to change their Center; He is the Son of
God, who taking humane flesh, has brought himself to nothing, and in the point
of that humiliation has made himself the Center of the World. Heaven did
incline it self to come toward the Earth, and the Earth leaped with joy for
having by a new transmigration found so perfect a settlement hard by its
Center. Quid de anima firmissime teneam non tacebo, anima hominis immortalis
est, secundum quendam mo^um suum, non enim o^^ m^do de si^^t Deus, de quo
dictum est quia s^l^s habet immortalitatem. Pa^lo ^nferius.
This wise Philosopher teaches us another Secret, no less to be admired than
the former, which is not only to make the Earth change its Center, getting it a
place in the very middle of the Firmament, but also to draw down the Firmament,
to give it place in the middle of the Earth.

The Christian, Sed quod ita moritur, alienata a vita Dei, ut tamen in natura
sua vivere non omnino desistat, etc. D. Aug. to 2. de natura and origin
animarum Epist. 28. non long a principio.
who has a firm belief of the immortality of the soul, is an admirable
Mathematician, who can, when he pleases, set the Earth where Heaven is, and
Heaven where the Earth is. He sets the Earth where Heaven is, when that walking
without the gallery of his senses, he lances the thoughts of his spirit into
Eternity, for to contemplate the wonderful productions of Paradise, and that
glorious Inheritance whereof a Terrestrial creature pretends to take
possession. He sets Heaven where Earth is, when with St. Paul, he converses
among men, as if he had lived in the company of Angels, entertaining nothing in
his spirit but Angelical thoughts.

Seneca the moral Philosopher in an answer he makes to one of his Friends, who
earnestly desired that he would be pleased to prove the immortality of Souls,
makes it well appear, Habet anima mortem suam cum vita beata caret quae vera
animae vita dicenda est; sed immortalis ideo nuncupatur, quoni^^^q^ alicumque
vita etiamsi miserrima est, nunquam (...) vivere ^ etc. fuse.
that it lies in the power of man to do that wonder; telling of himself, that
he did exercise himself a long time in that employment, altogether Divine, You
have very much troubled me in my rest (says he to his Friend;) for when I
received your Letter, I was giving my soul the fore-taste of glory, and
charming the drousiness of my Body, by the sweet thoughts of the Immortality of
my spirit; D. Aug. to 3. l. 14. de Trin. c 4. statim mitio.
I was of belief, that there was nothing in the world able to divert me from so
happy an entertainment. You have crossed me in the object of my delights,
importuning me about a question, of which all well-tempered souls ought not to
have the least scruple. You had obliged me more, had you either abstained from
writing, or written to exhort me to live conformable to my belief. Would to God
that the effect of that repartee of Seneca had happened to be true among
Christians, and that such as are employed to instruct the people, Imago Dei
invenienda est in animo hominis, id est, rationali sive intellectuali, imago
creatoris quae immortalitati ejus est insita. Aug supra c. 3.
were not obliged to trouble themselves to prove that verity, so conformable to
nature, that the very Heavens, (according unto the saying of the learned
Suares,) imprints in our bodies a certain feeling of immortality. I must
acknowledge with Aristotle in his charms, that some unfortunate genius,
(jealous of so great an advantage) has pierced our hearts through with a fatal
nail, and makes us like so many Estriches, who can well strike at our flanks
with our wings: But the corruption of our nature (which is no other, than the
Philosophers nail) makes us always to incline downwards, without giving us the
liberty to look at Heaven, until that a favorable Zephirus comes pleasantly on
to solace our weakness by the powerful contribution of its forces, and makes us
to enjoy that innocent pleasure St. Augustine speaks of, which is to live
Immortal in the corruption of the Flesh by the serious meditation of Eternity.

And really if a Christian will but give himself the least leisure to think on
this Subject, he will soon find out, Cleombrotus in hac animi magnitudine
teperitur quem ferunt lecto Platonis libro, ubi de immortalitate animae
disputavit, se praecipitem dedisse de muro, atque ita ex vita migrasse ad eam
quam credidit esse meliorem. D. Aug. to. 5. l. 1 civit. c. 22.
that his Spirit is immortal. He knows well that Nature suffers no Powers to
stand idle or useless: She has given them sufficient employment about their own
proper Objects, otherwise the Author of Nature had failed in his work. For
example, in vain had God so Artificially wrought out the Eyes which he has
placed in man's Forehead as the Organs of his Visual Faculty; if withal we
could not behold the Beauty of Colors; which cannot be said without
Blaspheming against the Sacred Proceedings of the Divinity. It Is therefore,
that the same Author of Nature, who had grafted in each Faculty a seeking
Inclination for its Object, has likewise set in the Object other Inclinations
for the inquisition of its faculty. Man has a faculty of Understanding and
Reasoning, De animi immortalitate multi etiam philosophi gentium multa
disputarunt, and immortalemesse animum humanum multis and multiplicibus libris
conscriptum memoriae reliquerunt. D. Aug. tom. 8. in Psalm. 88.
which is as essential to him as his proper Nature, being that it is his chief
difference, by Virtue of that faculty, he passes when he pleases beyond all
what is material among the Creatures, shapes within himself their Species, and
having reduced them all to a small Volume, he lodges them within the roof of
his Understanding. Nay, which is more, he takes his walk into the very
imaginary spaces, where he finds other Heavens, other Worlds possible,
wonderful handsome, if God had been pleased to reduce them to Act: This is not
as yet enough, his activity admits of no bounds, until it comes to the
knowledge of an Eternal, Immortal, Impassible Being, which must be the
originary principle of all things. If that be so, and that our Spirits go
beyond all Creatures, to contemplate on that which is Eternal, Immortal,
Impassible; and that moreover, the faculty ought to enjoy its Object; we must
conclude two necessary Verities; the one, that our Spirits are Immortal; the
other, that they are Created to participate of that Immortality, which God
gives us as a reward for our good Service.

If the matter had gone otherwise, Man, who is Created to the Image and
Resemblance of God, to be the Happiest Creature in the World, would remain the
most miserable of all Creatures: For, if we do consider the strength of his
Body, Qui animae suae curam gerunt, etc. Paulo infra.
Lions and Bulls surpass him: If the length of his years, Trees are far beyond
him: If the Subtility of his Eyesight, the Eagle surmounts him: If the Health
of his Body, Ipse non oportere contraria facere existimantes Philosophiae
ejusque solutioni ac purificationi ad hanc viam se convertunt, sequentes illam
qua praeit ac ducit. Plato in Phaed.
the Fish has the advantage; If Riches, the Bowels of the Earth may argue with
him of Poverty; If Contentment, the Birds of the Air make but a mockery of his
Pleasures; If good Clothes and Rich Garments, the Roses and Lillies are covered
with Satin, with Purple and Scarlet: Whereas he sees nothing on his back but
the Spoils of dead Beasts; It Is then necessary that there be another state,
wherein it must be found true, Ubi mors ad hominem accesserit, mortale quidem
ipsius ut apparet moritur immortale vero saluum and incorruptum abit, etc,
Plato ibidem.
that Man is the most Happy of all Creatures: This cannot be here on Earth,
where Corruption joined with Inconstancy, Nurse of Alterations and Changes,
suffers not any thing to subsist long without decaying, and finding its doom
where it had its birth. The Savior of the World ordained the days of his
Incarnation to teach all Faithful Souls the place so much to be desired of
their Eternal rest, he makes them a public Lesson of it, in the famous Sermon
on the Mount, where the common sort made up the main part of his Audience; He
proves by formal Induction of all the Beatitudes and Consolations which may
happen to Man, that there is none true or solid here to be found on Earth,
consequently that Heaven must be their place.

Quod si immortalis est anima cura sane opus habet, etc. Paulo infra.
Cercidas the Arcadian, was at deaths door, when being demanded, if he did not
fear so cruel a Separation? Contrariwise, my Friends, hitherto 'twas my Body
that lived under the rigorous Laws of an urgent Destiny, it must be restored to
the Earth that demands it, Nunc vero cum haec immortalis esse videatur, nullum
aliud fuerit ipsi refugium, neque salus a malis praeter quam, ut optima and
sapientissima fiat, nihil enim aliud secum transiens anima ad inferos habit
praeter eruditionem ac educationem. Plato infra.
being that we must restore to every one what appertains to him; As for my
Spirit which is Immortal, it goes to the Elisian Fields, where it shall meet
with Pythagoras the Philosopher, Olympus the Musician, Hecate the Annalist,
Homer the Prince of Poets. That brave repartee would sound better in a
Christians mouth, when his Friends exhort him to resign himself to Death, if
with a Spirit truly Faithful, he would say, Alas! what is your reason to exhort
me to take Death in good part; I have no such great cause to desire a longer
Life, being that the Tears which drop from my Eyes at the hour of my Birth, and
the continual troubles which have accompanied the rest of my days, have
preached no other thing to me than the necessity of this passage: For my part,
I hope in the Mercy of my God, that he will admit me into the company of the
Blessed Virgin, Hamana anima ita immortalis est, ut mori possit, ita mortalis
ut mori non possit, etc. Paulo inferius. Ut ergo breviter dixerim and
immortaliter mortalis est, and mortaliter immortalis. D. Greg. l. 4. Moral. in
c. 3. Job. c. 7. Si cor hominis in manu Dei, multo magis anima, si anima in
manu Domini est, non utique anima nostra sepulchro simul cum corpore
includitur, nec busto tenetur, sed quiet pia fungitur.
of all the Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, and the rest of the
Blessed; For if the day that the Prisoner sees himself discharged of his Irons;
freed out of his slavery, drawn out of a dark dungeon, to enjoy his beloved
Liberty; live in the company of his Friends, and enjoy the sweet Air of his
native country, is pleasant and grateful to him. Know that the moment of my
departing, brings me no less consolation, my nature has laden me with Irons,
my Body made me a mere slave, my Actions have cast me into a dungeon: if the
Commissary knocks at the door, I do rejoice, for it is to make me enjoy the
true liberty, live in the company of Gods servants, and enjoy the sweet Air of
Heaven, the native country of all blessed souls: why should I not then take
death in good part, being that I always believed the Center of my soul could be
no other then the place of Immortality. D. Ambr. to 1. l. de bone mortis c. 10.
per totum.


CHAP. XXX. That the Mortality of our Soul sets all crimes at liberty.
IF the only thought of the Immortality of our Souls, be a motive sufficiently
powerful to blot out of our hearts the horror of Death, and breed therein an
undervaluing of the World; Doubtless, it will beget in us also the hatred of
sin, and a strong inclination to purchase Virtue.

His igitur freti intrepide pergamus ad redemptorem nostrum Iesum intrepride ad
Patriarcharum concilium, intrepide ad Abraham Patrem nostrum cum dies advenerit
proficiscamur: Ibimus enim ad patres nostros, ibimus ad illos fidei nostrae
praeceptores, ut etiams^ opera desint, fides opituletur, defendat and
haereditas, etc. C. Ambr. to 1. de bono mortis, statim initio, c. 12.
A young Religious man of the Famous Congregation of the Carthusians, poor of
Extraction, but had a Noble heart, and a spirit well grounded in the belief of
the Immortality of Souls; falls sick, a violent Fever sets him in a flame; The
Doctors have a bad opinion of him: St. Bernard goes to his Cell to visit him,
and with the sweetness of his mellifluous words, disposes him to Death;
exhorting him to be of good courage, to have confidence in God, and believe,
that the hour was come, that his corporal labors should be rewarded with an
Eternity of contentments: The sick man presently makes answer; why, Father,
should I not have confidence? I, I, certainly I do believe firmly, that I shall
have very soon the happiness to possess the land of the living. St. Bernard as
a good Pastor, fearing, his poor sheep should be lost by the presumption of his
feeling, changed his mild discourse into a paternal and sharp reprehension, to
find out from what spirit came that reply; What you little wretch, says he to
him, what have you said, make, make, the sign of the Cross, to banish away that
proud Devil, who has possessed you; How come you to speak with so much boldness,
have you already forgotten, that you were but a poor Boy, whom we have received
here for the love of God, rather for compassion of your indigent condition,
then for any good quality which might render you grateful or worthy to be
admitted into any Religious Assembly? you had not Bread to put in your mouth,
but what you got by the labor of your hands, and sweat of your brows; We have
suffered you to sit at the common Table of our Religious men, who in the world
were Rich, Noble and Powerful, and there where you ought to find a Subject of
Humility, you have acquired a proud Soul, you believe that God is as yet your
Debtor, and that Heaven is yours without dispute: The sick man heard all these
words with attention, which after they were ended, with a modest tone, and
smiling countenance, he tells St. Bernard, Noctem pressuram nominat David, and
tamen liberatorem suum inter angustias exultationem vocat, foris quidem nox
erat in circumdatione pressurae, sed intus carmina resonabant de consolatione
laetitiae, etc. D. Greg. l. 26. in c. 35. Job. e. 11. infinne.
be pleased to pardon me, Father; for if I committed a fault, you are the cause
of it; I have not as yet blotted out of my mind, how you have often admitted me
with other Religious men to your Spiritual conferences, where exhorting us to
the exercise of the Virtues of Humility, Obedience and Resignation, you made
the practice of them appear sweet and pleasant to us, by the hopes you gave us
of an Eternity: I did endeavor in this point to acquit my self of my duty with
the grace of my Savior; and this is it which makes me now speak with so much
the more confidence, that I believe your words to be true, and Gods promises
infallible.

This is one of the Lessons which St. Paul had learned in the third Heavens,
and which he repeats to us, saying, for my part, when I understand that we are
to have a weight of caelectial glory for what tribulations we suffer in this
life; I can find therein no other proportion, but that which might be put
betwixt a Moment and Eternity: So when they do plant a sweet Bryar, what is it
but a thorny stump, without either Grace or Beauty? but the Belief they have to
see fine flowers grow some day among those thorns, makes them to cherish the
stem with all its deformity and sharp points. The Cross is a thorny Bryar
without either Grace or Beauty, none can touch it without running the hazard of
being pricked: But we are of that belief, Sic itaque electorum desideria dum
premuntur adversitate proficiunt, sicut ignis flatu premitur, ut crescat, and
unde quasi extingui cernitur, inde roboratur. D. Greg. lib. 26. moral. cap. 10.
in cap. 35. Job.
that out of that stock must come the conversion of a sinner, and the eternity
of glory: that it is from this stem we must take the flowers, to make our
selves a Crown of Immortality; that makes us to cherish both the stump and the
thorns, we take delight to besprinkle it with the blood of Jesus Christ, that
in due season we may see thereon both flowers and Fruit. The hopes of a good
Harvest, sets the labourer to work in the foulest weather of the year. The
hopes of a good booty encourages the Soldier to go through the toils of War;
And shall not the hope of glory make us detest our crimes, and redouble our
paces in the practice of good? shall not the belief of Immortality strengthen
us under the labors of the Cross, until the day of Victory? If not, we are
mere cowards, and most unworthy to bear that title of followers of Christ.

St. Jerome spoke heretofore with a great deal of Honor, saying, that Heresy
had infected all other Kingdoms but that of the French, which remained alone
exempt and clear of those Monsters: If this great Saint had seen the state of
that Kingdom nowadays, and considered, how after the revolt of Heretics, the
most part of Christians fell into Atheism, which carries along the mortality of
Souls as a faithful companion from Hell: he would say without doubt, that it is
a property only belonging to France, to produce, not Monsters, but Devils; For
what makes that in the reign of a King, in whose heart piety appears as in her
Throne, who knows how to join in one breast Virtue and nobility to the
admiration of all the World, if this makes him to be the first Monarch of
Europe in height of extraction, that makes him to pass without contradiction
for the most Religious Prince in the Universe, who seems in his Birth to have
brought from his Mothers womb, Hercules's club, to destroy both Vice and
viciously given; We see nevertheless the corruption to be so Universal, the
Sanctuary polluted, the Temples profaned, Devotion without any luster, Virtue
without shineing, Jesus Christ trod under foot, God altogether forgotten; and
what is most deserving of our respects, set at naught, and utterly disdained?
For my part, I remit the offspring of those disorders to the want of believing
the Immortality of Souls; For wherever that pernicious error has crept (that
all dies with the Body) they may attempt on the Sacred Persons of Kings, and
without any respect to the Divinity (whereof they are the lively Images on
Earth,) treat them unworthily, so be that their dealings be underboard; For if
all dies with the Body, and that there is no account to be taken of their
crimes after death; If they do betray the State, if they do sell their Country,
if they do commit the most horrid crimes that ever were heard of; they may fear
no punishment, if that unhappy belief takes place in their Spirits; Let the
great ones oppress the little ones, let the rich cut the poor peoples throats,
let the enemy execute his vengeance, all is permitted to him who gives no more
advantage to his Soul, than to that of a bruit beast; Let them speak no more of
the commandments of God, of the Sacraments of the Church, of the reward
reserved for the good in Heaven, of the punishments prepared for the wicked in
Hell; if there be no more in man then Living and Dying, we may say as much of
the Patriarchs of Religious Orders, Benedict, Bernard, Dominick, Francis, that
they have not obliged their Children to bring them from the World to pass over
the best of their days in crucifying of their Bodies; For if the Souls be not
Immortal, all those sufferings are but a mere oppression of Innocence.

I have heretofore joined my small and weak Prayers to the common Vows of all
France, for a Blessing from Heaven for our Sovereigns Arms, whilst he had them
in his hands, to fight against Heresy, but I will have a thousand times more
sensible feelings of his Piety and Courage, when he shall make appear his Power
and Authority to suppress those unfortunate execrements of Nature, who are so
bold as to lift up their Horns to strike at Piety.

In the mean time I call you again brave Chrysanthus and Musonius, most worthy
Prelates of the Church, get out of your Tombs, pierce the Rock of your
Sepulchers, and announce unto us your Belief in this point of the Immortality
of Souls. Chrysanthus and Musonius were two Famous Bishops among them, who
assisted at the general Council of Nice, in the year 1328, where the two
Articles of the Resurrection of the Flesh, and of the Life Everlasting were
particularly treated of, it happened that these two great Prelates died before
the conclusion of the Council; After the Fathers had Signed all and each of the
Acts, they brought the Papers on the Tombs of the Deceased, with this humble
supplication; Holy Fathers, the well beloved of God, who have assisted at the
Acts of this present Council, as we have found you always Faithful to maintain
the Rights of the Church, the Faithful Spouse of your Master and Ours; and as
you have Fought with us to defend her against her Enemies; So We do beseech you
if you have as yet the same feelings with us of the Articles proposed, that you
may set your honds to these present Papers: A thing truly to be admired, next
Morning they found, that all was Signed with their proper hands.

If that Article of it self cannot be contradicted, but by him who will deny
the Principles of Nature, the Authority of the Holy Ghoct, and all common
feelings; can there be Christians found hereafter, who will live in the World,
as if all would die with the Body; But if they do believe the Immortality of
Souls, how can it be, that they have no thoughts but for the Earth. It Is a
folly like that of a Merchant, who Freights a Vessel to go to the Indies, to
Peron, to China, to enrich himself: And being arrived where the Mines of Gold
and Silver are, he spends his time in looking at the Hills that are about the
place, the Streams that are underneath, the Woods that are hard by, and does
not think of loading his Ship, nor of returning back to his Country. God has
placed our Souls in our Bodies, as in a Mystical Vessel, it is to load us with
the Goods of Eternity, and the Merchandise of Heaven: One spends his time with
pampering of his Flesh, another to build a Fortune in the Air; This Man Fights
with the Winds, that Man Paints on the Waters, and none thinks that his Soul is
Immortal, nor that she is to return to her Country some day; was there ever the
like folly?

That was a strong Receipt and more than ordinary, Plato in eo q^ Carmi.
which Zamolxis a Physician of Thrace, gave to a young Man, whom Plato calls
Carmis, Son to Glaucon, who complained of a great pain in his head, and of a
Megrim which made him giddy-brain'd; He orders no cooling Plasters to be
applied to him, no opening of a Vein, no Scarrifications; he will have his Soul
to be Purged, assuring, that the Infirmities of the Body proceed from the
alterations of this Principle; This Purging is no other than a discharging of
all feelings of the Earth, to bring her to the thoughts of Immortality.

This is the Receipt which Jesus prescribes to all those who are willing to
convert themselves. I will make bold to borrow the words of Seneca the Moral
Philosopher, Seneca, Ep. 102
to make the Induction thereby. If the Infirmities of the Body trouble your
Health, and that by redoubling their rigours, they bring you to Death's door,
rejoice as the Prisoner at the first news of his Liberty; For Death is no other
thing than an enlargement of the Soul out of the Prison of the Body; where she
sighs under the Irons and Chains of corrupt Nature: If any ask you the
question, which is your Country, and your Native place? do not say that it is
Alexandria or Smyrna; No, tell boldly that it is Heaven, being there is nothing
here on Earth can content your heart, nor set a stop to your expectations, for
all rouls under the unavoidable Laws of Mortality; Consider, that even as the
Mother which carried you in her Womb, was not resolved to lodge you there
still, but, that after nine months space you should come weeping into the
World; So the World that has harbored you for a time had no design to give you
a perpetual residence, but only to suffer you to refresh your self, as a
passenger without any tie to the place where you have lodged by way of civility
only, and as a Passenger, not as a Proprietor. This vale of Misery is but an
Inn, the Riches are but Honors and Vanity, the Pleasures are the
Household Stuff; Man is the Pilgrim and Traveller, he is not permitted to carry
any thing along with him, he must first account with his Host, and after march
off from whence he came; and as he has nothing here but the bare use of things,
as all other Creatures, nothing remains to him but the Immortal thoughts of
Heaven to maintain himself in the advantage of his pretentions.

Let us then aim at Heaven, our Native Soil, if we be not willing to be placed
among the number of Bruit Beasts, and to the great undervaluing of the wise
conduct of Jesus, who by the thoughts of Immortality desires to wean our
affections from the Earth, and bring them to purchase an Immortal Glory.

CHAP. XXXI. That the Angels are employed to the Conversion of a Sinner.
I Do no more admire, that Antiquity represented Love to be blind, now that the
super-adorable Sacrament of the Incarnation of Jesus has given us the full
knowledge of that Riddle, and taught us that we must not understand it of
Humane Love, but of Divine; whereupon Theology gives us a notable distinction
of those two Loves: For Humane and Profane Love, which never labors but for
its own Interest, never does engage it self in the pursuit of any Object but
what it supposes to be both good and worthy of Love, and in so choosing, it
seems not to be blind. But Divine Love, by Loving, renders what it Loves
amiable, can find therein no charms able to captivate though it Love, but what
proceeds from his own proper goodness; It Is therein that it seems to be blind,
being that it loves a thing which is known beforehand to be nothing amiable.
Hypo^ipos^.
A great Monarch moved to compassion at the disgrace of his Subject, whom he
sees reduced to that extremity, as to Beg from door to door, without the least
overture of any ease to his misery: Willing to release him out of that
Thraldom, becomes bound for him to his Creditors, clears him of his Debts,
assigns him over a House of a thousand Crowns Rent, commands his Officers to
put him in possession of it, and that none should dare to molest him in his
Rights. There is a great Love indeed. This Subject forgets the good will and
favor of his Prince, he commits a crime of Leze Majesty in the first degree,
there he is condemned to die, his Sentence is solemnly pronounced, his
Posterity must be blotted out of Men's memory, a Piramide raised, whereon in
great Characters all Ages to come may see and read the horror and
grieviousness of his Offense: Before the execution of that Sentence, the
Monarch, comes, and grants him his Pardon, gives Orders that all the pieces of
his Process be brought out of the Registers-Office of Parliament stands by, and
sees all burnt; This is not all, he commands upon pain of Death, that a word
should never be spoke of to his disgrace; Of a mere Clown as he was, he makes
him a Gentleman, gives him his Patents of Nobility, and to confirm them, he
makes him a Knight of his own Order: without doubt that is a particular Love.

This is not enough, this Subject dies, and leaves Children behind him, who are
like to be crossed by those that envied their Fathers great Fortune; This
Monarch apprehending such a disorder, has an Inventory made of all his Goods,
puts the Money out to Use, appoints a Prince of the Blood to be a Tutor to the
Orphans, and will have beyond all common Laws that he become accountable to him
for the true Administration of his Charge: Blind Love never to be paralel'd.

Jesus is our Monarch, we are his Subjects. Before the Creation what were we? A
no Being, a meet negation, a pure nothing. Adam is no sooner come out of the
Matrice of that Chaos, but God puts him in Possession of Heaven and Earth,
expressly commanding all Nature to obey his Orders, he commands his Angels to
cast a Line, and mark out the Platform of a Royal House, of a magnificent
Palace, of a Terrestrial Paradise: All being set in good Order, they bring him
into that Inheritance, he was not there full three hours, when that by an Act
of Felony he becomes refractory to his Divine Majesty, and by a manifest
Rebellion he undervalues the Ordinances of his Sovereign, through the unruly
Appetite of a most vile concupiscence: All Creatures would have been revenged
of so great a disorder, and the very insensible themselves drawing up his
Process, would have punished him in the very place; but that the Dauphin of
Heaven, the Son and Heir of the Eternal Father, undertakes to accommodate that
matter, makes himself to be put into his place, takes from Humane Nature by
Incarnation whereby to repair that disorder, and make full satisfaction to the
Parties offended in rigor of Justice through the Infinite Merit of his
Proctorship: The Criminal is restored to his Rights which he lost through his
disobedience; all the pieces of his Process are brought out of the Eternal
Fathers Register-Office, and nailed on the Cross never to be produced any more
against the Transgressors; does not this show the greatness of God's Love for
Men.

Love goes on always, increasing as the Morning Star, and even as the fire
never stops the course of its activity, until that all combustible matters
which entertains its action be taken away: So the Divine love never gives over
to spread its flames, whilst it finds objects capable of its Impression; And in
case he finds none, he creates some; For man the second time becoming insolent,
and being surprised in Rebellion, his Arms in his hands, that is, committing of
actual sin, was resolved to nail once more Jesus his Redeemer on the Cross, as
St. Paul tells me: Action, which ought to set a stop to the course of his love,
but that he puts a mask on his eyes, and seems not to take notice of our
insolences, he appoints his Priests to be Commissaries to examine and judge
the Delinquents, but with orders not to deal rigorously with them, nor
according to all the points of Law; and that he will never fail to confirm the
graces of Absolution which his Judges shall give, so be that they do attest the
repentance of the penitent; Nay, and which is more, he is resolved to give them
Letters of Nobility, and make them Knights of the Order of the Holy Ghost, if
they do but leave off their base trading with Creatures, and exercise
themselves in the noble actions of Heaven and Salvation.

And because that those extraordinary favors will be an object of
contradiction, and of revolt to Devils, by reason of their ancient jealousy of
our happiness; God even to hinder their bad design, has put us in the
Safeguard, and under the protection of good Angels, making them our Overseers,
to manage his Graces in us, and improve his Inspirations in our hearts whilst
we shall remain in our minority.

The Articles of that Overseeing are distinctly set down in the Holy Scripture,
in the Book of Exodus, Exodus 23.
where among other advices which God gives to Moses, and to all the popularity
of Israelites, for to pass happily through the Deserts, never to be weary in
their journey, to get the victory of their Enemies, he will have them always to
follow the Angel that he would give them for their Leader, to hear his voice,
and never to loose his sight. Judith returning from that remarkable expedition,
where, with a courage more then manly, she cut off the head of Holofernes, knew
well that her good Angel did strengthen her Arms, and had conserved her entire
among so many unchaste Souls, which were in a readiness to destroy her honor,
and therefore she renders him her actions of Grace. Love God, because that his
Angel has blessed the enterprise of my journey, Judith. c. 13. v. 20.

Angeli tenent curam animarum, eisque ab Infantia tanquam tutoribus hominum
custodia committitur.

Orig. in c. 8. Genes.


as also my safe return. St. Basil admires this care that God has of men, and
Origin with the same expression remarks the practice of it, from the very first
day of our birth to the last moment of our life; when they must give an account
of the administration of their charge; St. Ambrose explaining this verse of the
Prophet, where he says, that they who were near me have forsaken me on
occasion, desires the Christian not to understand these Words to the
disadvantage of the Angels; for though they do seem to forsake us sometimes on
occasion, when our Enemy has us fast by the neck, Ne dixeris Angelis quomodo
long staut qui in adjutornium sunt missi, non illi se separant, sed expectant
juvandi tempus ad nutum Imperatoris, qui athletas suos quo gloriosus vincant
diutius certare permittit.

D. Ambr. in Ps. 37.


as St. Anthony was, it is not to abandon us altogether, but that God who takes
pleasure in our combats, commands them to stand till he perceives our Lances to
be broken, our Hands to grow stiff, our courage to be weak'ned, and then he
sends them to give us a refreshment, and assist us in our necessity.

That verity was not unknown to the Pagans, for Aristotle, the genius of
nature, willing to give the intelligence of some Secrets to his Disciple
Alexander; do not you know, (says he,) according to the testimony of
Hermodorus, Lib de secretis s^r torum ad Alexand. refertur a Bernardino de
Bustis 2. part. quadrag. sermon. 10. circa finem.
that you have two invisible Spirits collateral to your Person, the one at the
right hand, the other at the left, who are employed to spy your Actions,
observe your designs, remark your words; to give a faithful report thereof to
the Creator of the Universe. The ground of that Guardianship of men instructed
to Angelical nature, is the incomprehensible Decrees of the Eternal wisdom, to
wit, though that God might of himself, and by himself, immediately govern all the
Universe; even as of himself, and by himself, he brought it out of nothing,
without the assistance of any; Nevertheless, it is a thing more becoming the
Grandeur of his Majesty, to commit their conduct to the Angels, not absolutely,
but with a dependency on his supreme power; So Kings have Governors of
Provinces in their Kingdom to keep each one in his duty, and hinder the people
to revolt from the obedience which they ow to their Prince.

The great St. Augustine believes that assistance of Angels so necessary to the
provident Oeconome of the World, Una quaeque res visibilis habet potestatem
Angelicam sibi deputatam.

D. Aug. 3. Trin. c. 4. and l 83. 44. q. 79.


that the very senceless Creatures have an intellectual substance to guide
their motions; work of nature, work of Intelligence, says the Philosopher;
consequently, being that of all Creatures man is the most excellent, God must
have a more special care of his conservation, and will have his Angels restore
us into his hands at the day of Judgment, dead or alive, damned or saved: And
really that conservation is so powerfully authorized in the Evangelical Law
since the Incarnation of the word, that the Apostle St. Paul (speaking of the
Angels, In ministerium missi, propter eos qui haereditatem capiunt salutis.

Anton. Perez in Laur. Salm. certam. 3. c. 9. n. 69.


) gives them no employment on Earth more Honorable, than to be the Ministers
of men's Salvation.

If any will tell me, that the Angels do abandon us when we are in mortal sin,
being that God himself forsakes us in that deplorable state: I answer, that our
Divines are generally of a contrary opinion; For if it be in necessity that a
Friend is known, and that man could never fall into a more extreme necessity,
then into that of a a mortal sin, which deprives him of Gods grace, Non
contemnendum putes, quia non dimittet te cum peccaveris.

Deuteronomy. 22. v. 21.


and brings him out of his presence, the Angels would not be our friends, if in
so present and pressing an occasion, they would refuse us their help and
assisting hand.

The Civil Law breaks off, and annuls all Contracts that a minor should make in
his None-age, as prejudicial to the Rights of his Overseer; and God giving us
over to the Tutorship of his Angels, approves not of our Actions but in as much
as they are stirred and directed by their wise conduct.

It Is then true, that God sends out his Angels as scouts, to see whether the
sinner will suffer himself to be charmed by his Divine calls; And it is a wonder
to consider how much they are concerned to manage an inspiration fallen into
the heart of one who is willing to be converted. (St. Augustine,) you know it,
is it not true that your good Angel never suffered you to be at rest since the
time that St. Ambrose gave you the first feelings of piety, until he made you
resolve the generous design of a full conversion, you were going back from your
good purpose, but he pressed you on; you were flying away, but he ran after
you; you would say, it shall be to morrow, but he would answer, no, it must be
this day; his opportune importunity did overcome your courage; we must then
give ear to our good Angels, being the end of their exercise and charge, is the
Salvation of our Souls.

CHAP. XXXII. That the Devil hinders the Conversion of a Sinner.
It Is a Process that hangs on the nail these many thousand years, that of the
good and bad Angels, about the government of men committed to the good by way
of preheminency, and the bad for ever excluded from bearing any such charge.
The first occasion of this debate, was a jealousy conceived in Heaven against
men, because that (the Eternal word taking a resolution to unite himself to a
Creature, to make Her enter in to an Association of his perfections;) the
Humane was chosen and not the Angelical. The good willingly does acquiesce to
the ordinance of this Decree, and cannot but adore the proceedings of their
Sovereign in that election: The bad begin to snuff at it, Lucifer is highly
displeased, he discovers his grievances, brings all the discontented to his
Faction, makes the most litigious to raise a mutiny, and all of one accord, do
protest never to render any obedience to that nature so united; being this
union was made to the prejudice of their state. But contrariwise to prosecute
her all manner of ways, and never to let slip any occasion to make her resent
the passion of their envy and hatred.

And, without delaying any longer time, the effect of their rage, Aut. Perez.
Lansal. cert. 3. c. 7. no. 59.
as at the second instant of their creation, they knew that one of the first
among the good Angels was to be honored with the Embassage of that divine
Alliance of the word with Humane Nature; the bad also deputed Lucifer, the
first among the Rebellious Spirits, to deceive and seduce Adam in the
terrestrial Paradise.

A charge whereof he has faithfully acquitted himself hitherto, Diaboli parts
sunt invertendi veritatem, res Sacramentorum divinorum in idolorum mysteriis
emulari, expiationem delictorum de lavacro repromittit imaginem resurrectionis
inducit, etc.

Tertull. de praescript. c. 40.


as well by himself, as by the accomplices of his Rebellion, as Tertullian
remarks, if God on the one side in the vast extent of his Mercy has given us
convenient means to Salvation; the Devil, on the other side, by his crafts and
deluding ways, has falsified their Practice: If God has instituted Sacraments,
the Devil has made Sacriledges; to the Sovereign Worship, he substitutes
Idolatry; to the union of the Church, the Assembly of Heretics; to the bloody
Sacrifice of the Cross, the butchery of children. St. Augustine speaking of the
good and the bad Angels, says, that the one and the other are Mediators, but
upon a far difference design; Falsi autem fallacesque mediatores daemones, per
corporalium locorum intervalla and per acreorum corporum levitatem, a profectu
animorum nos avocant, viam non praebent ad Deum, sed ne teneatur impediunt.

D. Aug. civit. l. 9. c. 18.


the former holds us by the hand as children to aid and assist us; the latter
pushes us on violently to make us fall into the ditch; the one conducts us
through the secret ways of the Cross to make us avoid the bad rencounters of
the high Roads, which lead to perdition; the others guide us straight thither,
where they know we shall have all our throats cut, and they are the first
themselves that will contribute to the murder: The good bring unto us
faithfully the sacred messages of Heaven to let us understand the will of God;
Venit diabolus, and tollit Verbum, etc.

Luc, 8. v. 12.


The bad come to us with the fraudulent and cheating Pacquets of Hell, wherein
their malicious suggestions written in gross Characters, do teach us how to
divert our thoughts from the clear prospect of our everlasting happiness.

It Is a question in Theology, what is at present the chief occupation of the
Apostate Angels after their dismal fall. All are of opinion, that their prime
employment is to draw man to sin. I fear very much, says St. Paul to the
Corinthians, Timeo ne sicut serpens Evam seduxit astatia sua, etc.

2 Cor. 11.


that Satan puffed up with the pride of his Victories, and knowing by a long
experience the greatness of our weakness, and the power of his own arms, does
(...) easily corrupt our senses by his craft, making us to fall from the Spirit
of simplicity, which is in Jesus Christ to follow the vain appearances of an
immaginary truth. St. Peter (under the Symbol of a roaring Lion, who wheels
round about to devour us,) forewarns us to stand upon our guards, and to
shelter our selves with the buckler of a strong Faith from the assaults of so
cunning an adversary.

CHAP. XXXIII. For to resist the Devil we must know his power.
FOr to conceive well this point of Doctrine, we must observe when we say that
the Devils have power to tempt men; that this power is either Natural or Moral,
the Natural as inseparable from their nature, is given to them by God in the
very instance of their creation, being that this power is no other thing than
the same free will, which ought to bring them to good; but being perverted by
sin, is become obstinate in evil; the Moral power, is, either positive or
permissively positive, as if God had given to the Devils a certain faculty to
make use of the natural power they have to tempt men, according to all the
extent of their bad will; a faculty, which never was, nor ever will be granted
to them; for otherwise they would destroy in a trice the most part of men;
Permissive, when God permits the Devils, for reasons best known to himself, to
make use sometimes of the natural power they have to tempt men, whether it be
for to train them up to Gods greater glory, or to antidate the pains of
Purgatory by the merit of their patience; whence we may derive a manifest
difference betwixt the inspirations of our tutelary Angels, and the suggestions
of our Enemies; for the Eternal bounty of God is the positive cause, whereon
depends all the good will of Angels in our regard; whereas the Devils have but
a limited permission to do us evil, and as yet the consequences are more fatal
to themselves than profitable.

All the permission that God gives to the Devils over men, may be reduced to
two heads; either to temptations, which induce us to the evil of pain, or to
those which conduce us to the evil of fault; the former has for his bounds the
afflictions of body, and time; the latter, the trouble of Soul and Conscience.

In the rank of temporal afflictions comes in the first place the enchanting
operations of Witchcraft, by a tacit or express pact with the Devils, by which
means we daily see thousands of disorders committed over all the World; Non
subjecit Deus Angelis orbem.

Hebrae. 2.


for though the Devils cannot confound the general order of nature, by the
reason which St. Thomas gives, (to wit,) that it appertains to him alone, to
change, alter, or corrupt a thing, who is the supreme Author and Cause of the
same, as God is of nature: Yet notwithstanding he can continue Earthquakes, by
blocking up the Winds into its Bowels, and by shutting up all the passages for
a time, to the end that those exhalations, so represt, should pierce the Earth
with their impetuosity, break down Houses, pull up Trees by the Roots, blow
down Castles and high Towers; they do form Meteors in the Air, Lightnings and
Thunder: It Is so that Satan did raise a violent Wind, for to pull down the
House where Jobs Children were Banqueting, and buried them all under its
ruins.

He can very much annoy the Goods of the Earth, when that men do bear them
overmuch affection; and this, either by a disordering the Seasons, Carmina
laesa Ceres sterilem vanescit in auram;

Deficiunt laesi carmine fontis aquoe, Illicibus glandes, cantataque vitibus
una Decidit, and nullo poma movente fluunt.


to render the land fruitless by reason of the want of sufficient heat or
humidity; or by destroying the Harvest in time of Reaping, with heavy showers
of Hail: This was known to be true by the very Pagans themselves. Ceres, says
the profane Poet, being wounded by an enchanting Verse, in lieu of Corn, gives
now but dirt and weeds; the Fountains are dried up in their source; the Acorns
fall off the Trees before their time, Omnes humanae injuriae quae religiosis
viris inferuntur, non eosdem habet authors quos ministros, executio hominis
est, sed diaboli instinctus est. D. Hil^r. in Ps. 128.
and the Vintage is made before the Grapes are ripe.

St. Hillarion gives a further addition, he says that the Devils have power to
set people by the ears, and that all the affronts, wrongs, and injuries which
good and virtuous Livers receive in this World, come from the Devil, though men
be the Executioners of his rage. It Is very true, says the great Synesius, for
the greatest solemnity in Hell, and the rarest Banquets that the Devils can
have, is the abundance of human Calamities.

Humane Bodies, by Divine permission, are subject to their torments; either by
Possession or Obsession; by Possession, when that they do make use of their
Limbs, according to their will and pleasure, making them to operate things
above their nature, as would be to make an ignorant body to speak Greek and
Latin, hold a man hanging in the Air, without any visible support, transport
him to foreign Countries in a short time, and other such Works. By Obsession,
when that they are not permitted to do what they would with humane Bodies, but
only to cause them a thousand vexations Exteriourly, as to frighten them with
such a deal of fantastical representations, and hideous forms, to drive men
into panique fears, trouble, and confound the Species before that our faculties
receive them, whence come so many extravagant immaginations, for one will
believe that all that he sees is red, another, that all that he eats has the
taste of Wormwood; and so of the rest: They also do procure a number of
Diseases. Hence comes it that St. Luke relates of a certain Woman, whom the
Devils did afflict with a great pain in her back bone, that made her stoop down
to the ground, and could hardly go, he calls the Devil who gave her this
Distemper, a Spirit of Infirmity, (that is to say) a Devil, whose Office was to
cause Sickness.

As for Temptations which bring us directly or indirectly to sin by the
impulsion of the Devils; I find two different feelings among the Fathers, the
One is of St. Anselm, Ansel. in c. 15. Mat.
who Judges them worthy of reprehension, who, to palliate their Offenses, will
cast all the blame upon Satan: And that we must stand to the terms of
Scripture, which says, that from the Heart come all evil thoughts: The Other of
St. Cyprian, who will give this privilege to the merit of the Evangelical Law,
that a Christian having received Baptism, is no more subject to the Temptations
of the Devil; he brings down to Authorize his own opinion, the Example of
Pharaoh, who can well cause a displeasure to Moses, whilst he remains in
Egypt, but as soon as he sets his foot into the water, the Symbol of Baptism,
he loses all his strength; Moses makes his escape, Pharaoh falls down to the
bottom with all his Baggage: However, these thoughts and different opinions may
be accorded, for the first must be understood of the consent of the will, and
not of the instigations and motions of the Devil; The second is true, for the
design of its Author, is, to say, that since the Sacrament of the Incarnation,
the Devil's Forces were so much weakened, and the Church so well provided with
so many efficacious means, to blow up all his Mines and crush all his Forces to
pieces, that he does not exercise his Power any more with so much Empire, as he
was accustomed to do in the ancient Law, because the Blood of the Messiah had
not as yet besprinkled their Sacraments, as it has ours, Nocent illi quidem,
sed iis a quibus timentur, quos manus excelsa Dei non protegit, qui prophani
sunt a Sacramento veritatis. Lact. l. 2. Just,
the Pious use thereof puts into our hands as many Offensive and Defensive
Arms, as they have particular Effects, each one in its Nature. And so as
Lactantius does well remark them, are only among Christians the Object of their
rage, who like so many cowardly Clowns, do suffer themselves to be beaten with
their own Arms, and whilst they have them in their hands.

You see then that from the cowardliness of our Hearts, they do take what
advantages they please to tempt us: They do proceed after two ways, of
persuasion and disposition; by way of persuasion, when they do deceive our
Interior faculties, by representing unto them the Purity of their Objects; the
understanding, when in lieu of Eternal verities, they do Print therein
deceiptful verities, which being drawn out of a bad Principle, cannot engender
but most pernicious consequences; even as by transforming themselves into
Angels of light, they deceived our first Parents under the false Title of
Divinity; which brought them no other thing but the loss of their Innocence,
and of their original Justice; The will, when that confounding the Love which
we owe to God, with the Love of Creatures, they make her look upon God, as upon
an Object far out of her reach; and because that the great distance of the
Object is less able to move the Faculty, than that which is present, by a
diabolical malice they do substitute the presence of Creatures to God, whom
they removed afar off; and by that block, which makes an obstacle, they do
hinder us to have that real and true affection for our Sovereign good: It Is by
that way that he has settled those two unfortunate Maxims in the Heart of our
Worldly Politicians; who will have themselves to be the strong and undaunted
Spirits only upon that account, that they will not batter their Brains with
musing upon future and invisible things; There is the first Maxim, and the
second is that they will enjoy at full the things present, for fear to deceive
or afflict Nature in the overmuch care of things absent.

The Devils do seduce us by way of disposition, in our sensitive faculties, Cum
in reproborum cordibus pravum quid oritur, mox per studium delectationis
diaboli malitia enutritur, and cum sibi minime resistitur, protinus ex consensu
roboratur, etc. D. Greg. l. 27. Moral. in c. 37. Job c. 19. sub Enem.
as well Interior as Exterior: To bring us to Hatred, to Envy, to Anger; they
may trouble our Senses so by deluding the Eyes, confounding the Fantasy,
tossing the Immagination, that Man (altogether beyond himself) will do actions
as far out of Reason, as his feelings shall be out of their Duty, not that the
Devils are the Physical cause of those extravagant sallies, by the Impression
of any Interior quality which is received in the faculties, but by the
application of the Active to the Passive, they do so dispose the Economy of
all the Species, Hostis itaque callidus contra celestem militem modo ex
pharetra per insidias eum sagita vulnerat, modo ante ejus faciem hastam vibrat,
quia videlicet vitia and alia sub virtutum specie contegit, and alia ut sunt
aperta ejus oculis opponit. D. Greg. l. 13. Moral. in c. 39. Job cap. 30.
statim initio.
that if the Will, (as Mistress of the Lodging) comes not by force, of Arms to
banish those Trouble-Feasts, and set each piece in its own Order, they will
soon put all the House in disorder.

We must not believe that the Devils, when they have undertaken to deceive or
tempt any body after that nature, will have it cried out with the sound of a
Trumpet over all the corners of the City, or that they will set up
Proclamations on the Gates, and in all public places; No, they go another way
to work; here is their craft: They do search and consider the predominant
humor, Si autem fortasse validum contra avaritiam cernit, importune ejus
cogitationibus suorum domesticorum inopiam suggerit, ut dum men's ad provisionem
curam quasi pie flectitur, seducta futurim in rerum ambitu inique rapitur. Idem
Greg. Ibid.
and the inclination that takes most authority in each person: For it is certain
that we bring from our Mothers Womb two inclinations, Passions and Humors, the
one good, the other bad: the good serves as an Instrument to the good Angels to
convert us; the bad is an occasion to Satan to pervert us: At the sight of that
bad inclination, as by the favor of a strong Bulwork, our Enemies do make
their Batteries in all assurance, do and represent Objects Exteriourly, which
may be conformable to that inclination, and then they do let fly their Arrows,
with that assurance that we shall not use much violence to curb our unruly
Appetites, they do expect to gain the Victory very soon; if they know a Man
whose inclination leads him to sensuality, they will charge his phantasy with
so many lubrick and carnal Species; they will furnish so many present occasions
to the evil; Cum malum aliquod cogitamus sive parum sive multum, nulli dubium
esse debet, quin Angelum malignum hortatorem habeamus D. Aug. ad Of. in erem^.
they will kindle so many fires on the hearth of our concupiscences, that we
shall sooner burn alive in our scorching heat, then we shall take notice of
their flames; so true is the saying of St. Augustine, that we never think of
any bad thing, be it great or little, but we have a malignant Angel who sets us
on to commit it.

There are your Enemies for you, you have seen their endeavors, and wherein
consists all the power they have to Tempt us: But all that is not able to make
us go back, when we have a magnanimous Heart to go through with the design of
our Conversion: They have their Arms in hand, but they dare not strike at us
with them, if we do not give them liberty: They have their Arrows to let fly
at us, but we have the Buckler of Faith to mortify their points. If they do
wound us, the Blood of Jesus will cure us of all our wounds; and their
Temptations being made useless by our courage, will give us an increase of
Merit, and to them an augmentation of pain.

CHAP. XXXIV. The good Angels have more Power to Convert us, than the bad
Angels have to pervert us.
Dominator Caelorum mittae Angelum tuam bonum ante nos, etc. 2 Mat. 15. v. 23.
Angelicos spiritus recte Dei milite; dicimus quia decertare eos contra
potestetes aereas non ignoramus, quae tamen certamina non lalabore, sed imperio
peragunt, quia quicquid agendo contra immundos spiritus appetunt, ex adiutorio
cunc^^ regentis possi^t.
IN the Conduct and Order of Created things, we find that the Superiors, by way
of Eminency, contain all that is Good, Handsome and Noble in the Inferiors: The
Plant which does possess the first degree of vegitative life, contains also in
it self the simple being of a Stone, which is Inferior to it; the sensible
Creature more perfect than the Plant, besides her essential form, has the
simple being of the Stone and the vegetative of the Plant; Man, who has an
ascendance over the Beast, besides his special difference which makes him
reasonable, possesses in a degree of excellency, the simple being of the Stone,
the vegetative of the Plant, D. Greg. l. 7. Moral. in caput. 26. Job c. 8.
statum init^o.
and the feeling of the Beast: The Angel superior to Man, as he does surpass
him in the Nobility of his Nature, so he contains by way of eminency all what
he has of Good, Handsome, and Noble in his Intelligence. What great pleasure I
take to consider with the Philosopher, the natural Pensel of this invisible
Painter, who devises in Man all the Images of corporal things, with so much
perfection and ne uity. For stripping them out of all what they have that is
course and terrestrial, he renders them so delicate and small, that they do
pass without the least difficulty through the Organs of the Immagination and
Phantasy, for to lodge themselves in the memory, wherein they are set up in
Order, as so many Pourtraicts of Zeuxis and Apelles in that most renowned
Gallery of the great King of Persia; to see a big Tree, Block, Bark, Fruit,
Flowers, Leaves, Branches, and Roots; the Heavens so many degrees bigger than
all the Earth; fixed Stars, Planets, Sun, Moon, Elements; a City all entire,
Streets, Houses, Palaces, Towers, Churches, Steeples; and all this to pass
through the Apple of an eye, which is no bigger than a little Pea, to conserve
themselves in the memory without any confusion; and though there be a Thousand
Millions of such like shapes, to know how to pick them out upon occasion, and
to make use of them, is there any thing more ravishing? Sancti Angeli,
proculdubio universam creaturam in qua ipsi sunt principialiter conditi, in
ipso verbo Dei prius noverunt, in quo sunt omnium etiam quae temporaliter facta
sunt aeternae rations, tanquam in eo per quod facta sunt omnia, ac deinde in
ipsa creatura quam sic noverunt, tanquam infra respicientes, eamque referentes
ad illius laudem in cujus incommutabili veritate rations secundum quas facta
est principaliter vident. D. Aug. tom. 3. l. 4. de Genes. ad litt. c 14. per
totum.
Why then all that is done by the means of the Species and Images, which the
Spirit of Man, (invisible Painter,) draws from all the material Objects: I say
Images, which bear no other name in our Schools than that of diminitive
entities, so much they are to be admired in their smalness.

The Angels who are superiors to Man as well by the Nobility of their Nature,
as by the constitution of their Essence, have also the shapes and Images of all
Sublunary things, which give them a full knowledge of their singularities after
such wonderful ways, that there is nothing here on Earth but is perfectly
represented to them in Heaven, by their Pourtraits, which they do so
artificially devise within themselves, but with this difference, that Man by
the long experience of things which he knows and perceives by his Senses, takes
even the Copies thereof, and forms their Images on the model of the objects;
whereas the Angel, who has neither Organs nor Senses to shape those Images, and
intelligible Species, receives them from God immediately, and by way of
infusion, from the very moment of his existance.

A acknowledge, which is the foundation and ground of all the Angels power, in
regard of Men, moreover to show that the Saints, now Canonized in Heaven, have
a particular care of those that are as yet on Earth, besides the Article of
Faith which obliges us to believe, that according as their Knowledge does
increase to a greater perfection, so their Charity also will become greater,
and of a more vast extent: The same it is with Angels, whose powers may be
reduced to two Heads, pursuant to the two sorts of knowledge they have in
relation to men.

The first is relating to Man in the state of his corporal and individual
nature; Banc. in 1 part D. Tho. q. 57. art. 1 p, 740.
not only touching the generality of his Essence, but as yet in the singular
circumstances of the Accidents, and special Rencounters which are to befall
him; So the Angel of St. Peter; for Example, from the very instant of his
Creation, received from God by infusion an intelligible Species, whereby he
might know him when he would come to the World, and with such particular marks,
that he could in no wise be deceived, in such sort that the same abstractive
Image which he receives of St. Peter before he comes to the World, is the
self-same which brings him to his knowledge when he is in the World; wherein he
partakes of the Excellency of that Eternal Idea, which being but One (and most
simple,) represents unto him without any change, things possible and actual.
God gave not this knowledge to Angels of our Persons, Angelis suis Deus
mandavit de te, etc. Psalm. 90. Petrus de Natal. l. 4 c. 141. De excelso
coelorum habitaculo, ad consulendos, visitandos and adjuvandum, nos, attrahit
supereminens charitas Angelos, propter Deum, propter nos, propter seipsos

Author libri de diligendo Deo, apud A^g. to 9. c, 3. in ^ine.


nor of the accidents which happen to us, but with that weighty obligation to
have a special care of us. God commanded his Angels, says the Prophet-Royal to
direct and secure your steps in the slippery Ways and paths of the Earth, that
your foot may not meet with a stumbling Stone which might give you a fall. It Is
so that the devout Pilgrim of Orleance continuing his Journey to St. James in
Calice received no hurt by the Robbers who waited for him at the passage of a
River to plunder him; for his Angel- Guardian, transported him to the other
side of the water, sooner than his Enemies could put their hands to their Arms
to take away with his purse his life, which was dearer to him then all that the
World could afford him.

The second knowledge of Angels on the fact of men is to know the Supernatural
means necessary to their Salvation, among which the most adorable Mystery of
the Incarnation holds the first rank, as the chiefest, and whereof depends all
the rest, with this difference, that at the first instant of their Creation,
Faith made them only believe the chief motive thereof; whereas at the second
moment, they had seen in the word, both the motive and the particular
circumstances; as are his Nativity in the Stable, his Death on Mount Calvary,
his Resurrection from the Tomb, the Sacrament of Baptism, the Institution of
the Eucharist, and the rest which were to follow that general motive: And this
for two Reasons, the one touches themselves, the other regards Us: That which
touches Them, is, being that Jesus Christ according to St. Paul's Doctrine was
appointed supreme Head both of Angels and Men, Hebr. 1.
and the first among the second objects of their Beatitude, they could not
affix themselves to him, but they must have had him in perspective by Faith,
and in enjoyment by the Word, and in the Word: That which relates unto Us, is,
that the Angels by the Duty of their charge being obliged to procure the
Salvation of Men, and to be the Ministers thereof, according to the same
Apostle, it was convenient, that they should know all the appurtenances of the
Incarnation; Otherwise, God would have ordained them to an end without giving
them the means to attain to it; it would be to make them Guiders and Leaders to
Men, without knowing where to conduct them, and have no ground to exhort them
to the veneration of those Mysteries, if they had not a former knowledge of
their merits.

Now if the Devils at the first instant of their Creation knew the substance of
this Mystery, yet they stopped there without passing any further, Christus
Dominus tantum innotuit daemonibus quantum voluit, voluit autem quantum
oportuit. D. Aug. 9. civ. c. 22.
not only because they would not know the circumstances of it in the Word, for
That was a Privilege reserved to the blessed, and which was denied to the
Devils, as being Apostates, and Rebellious Spirits, but only as for the
Incarnation brought to pass in the difference of times, they remained always
doubtful whether the Son of God, should, or could die for Men, until that by
three Actions, which could not come but from an Agent, who resented a fullness
of Divinity: (To wit, to resuscitate glorious from the Tomb, to bring the
Fathers out of Limbo, and mount up to the Heavens by his proper Virtue;) they
were compelled against their Inclinations to confess with respect and fear what
they did obstinately contest before.

We must then fear no more the Devils in the enterprise of our conversions; For
besides, that all their power is under conditions, and so little advantageous
to their ill will for us, that they cannot hurt us but with our own consent; we
are assured in the behalf of our good Angels, that they have both the power to
comfort, strengthen, and also assist us without limitation, and a good will to
discharge themselves faithfully of their duty without weariness, and upon all
occasions.

CHAP. XXXV. How the Flesh usurps on the right of the Spirit.
In vicino versatur invidia. Senec. de brev. vitae.
Neighborhood is never without envy, says the moral Philosopher; and I think
him nothing seated to his advantage, In hoc flexu aetatis fama Coelii haesit
admetas, notitia Clodiae mulieris impudicae, and iufoelici vicinitate.

Cicero pro.


who has made it his choice to reside close by a bad Neighbor; For there he
shall always find something to be debated; The Body and the Spirit, the
Superior and Inferior part of the Soul are two Neighbors that lodge Door
against Door, always in War, always in strife, M. Coelio. Video aliam legem in
membris meis repugnantem legi mentis meae. Romans 7. v. 23.
never out of trouble: The one brings down his Laws, his Customs and daily
Practices; the other alleges his own: But the Body better versed, and more
learned in the subtilities of Pleading, gives the Spirit much to do.

He acts the part of a malicious Usurper, who will invest himself with another
man's Goods, and makes it his ordinary business to conceive and produce three
Acts of bad Faith; by one he pulls down and destroys the Meers and Bounds which
set a distinction betwixt both the Inheritances; by the other he burns,
confounds, or retains with himself all the pretensions and titles of his
Neighbor, that he might have nothing to show whereby to make appear the right
and justice of his possession; By the third, he passes all the Farms in his own
name, receives the Rents and duties; and so of a slave oftentimes he makes
himself absolute Lord and Proprietor of that which he held from another by
credit and Homage, Aggenus l. de Limitibus agrorum.
and also with an obligation of Bondage.

As for the first, which is the taking away of Meers and Bounds, it is an Act
against the common Law of Nations, which prescribes unto each thing its Mark,
that the Lord and Master thereof, may be known, and that no body might encroach
or trespass on his Land. The collation of those Meers was so Holy and venerable
among the Ancients, that they would accompany it with as many Ceremonies, as
they would their most solemn Sacrifice to their Gods; the stones being gathered
into a great heap on a firm ground, they would Crown them with a Cap of
Flowers, and cast thereon some Aromatique Ointments, to Embalm the place; the
Trench being made deep where the Bounds being to be settled, they were to kill
some clean and spotless Beasts, which they would bury therein by quarters; and
be-sprinkle them with Blood freshly drawn out of their veins, the Sacred Fire
being put to those materials so disposed, and at the greatest force of the
activity of these flames, when the Flesh began to boil in the Blood, they would
cast the stones into that deep trench so carefully made hot, Frontinus lib. de
limitions.
and this they would call Meers of Inheritance; Ille homo Primitus Dei lege
transgressa, aliam legem repugnantem suae menti habere coepit in membris, and
inobedientiae suae malum sensit, quoniam sibi retributam dignissime
inobedientiam carnis suae invenit.

D. Aug. to 7. l. 1. de nuptiis and concupisc. ad Valerium cap. 6. statim intio.


which no body durst take away by reason of the punishment decreed against such
transgressors, which was to be immediately comdemned to the Mines.

The Body, as a bad Neighbor, after he had at that dismal day of the Garden of
Eden, raised up in Arms, all the unruly motions of his concupiscence, to
provoke the Soul to the disorder of the Crime which she there committed,
believed he had acquired advantages great enough, to entrench upon her Rights,
knowing very well by the experience he had of her little courage to maintain
them, that he would soon get the better of her, if he would undertake to
entangle her in a Process; he begins with the first Act of a bad Faith, which
is to take away and pass over the Bounds, which God and Nature had put betwixt
him and the Soul.

But what are the Meers of the Body assigned by the Decree of the great
Surveyor of the Universe, it is a little bit of Earth, of five or six foot in
length, two or three in breadth for the most corpulent: An inheritance, which
is never better measured then by the same Body, when that they do cast him into
his Tomb, and stretch him over all what he is worth in the World; and as yet
the Worms will strive for the same, and pretending the prosperty to be their
own, they gnaw the carcass so far as to take away all form and shape belonging
to a Body. Morever, whilst the Body is alive, he is subject to all manner of
slavery, which can be exacted of a Vassal; If the Soul, as his Sovereign, can
absolutely command him: And if she could make use of the Justice of her Power
and Prerogative, the Body in respcct of her would have no further credit or
esteem, then what we usually have for a mere Slave; because that the Soul being
of a Celestial offspring, she can have no bounds upon Earth, her limits touch
the very point of Eternity, whence she derives the Antiquity of her Race, and
the Grandeurs of her Nobility. What has happened upon that account? what but
that great misfortune which St. Paul will have the Corinthians to avoid; Non
sit schisma in corpore. 1. Cor. c, 11.
(to wit,) to hinder that the Body should become Schysmatique; that is to say,
to hinder that no division should be betwixt the Members and the Head, the
Vassal and the Lord, the Servant and the Master. The Soul is the Head, the
Lady, and the Mistress of the Body: Yet by reason that the Soul cannot exercise
the Acts of her power, unless that she does pass over the Earth of the Body;
and that the Spirit cannot receive any intelligible Species, unless she draws
them from abroad by the favor of the senses which are the Organs of the Body;
Hence, the Body in the continuation of the Soul passes and repasses, seeintg
she had need of his assistance, took the occasion of a revolt, and in a short
time, being weary of serving, and getting without the Meers of his duty, he
reduced her to that pass to serve and wait on his unruly appetite, Servitutes
praediorum confundantur, si idem utriusque praedii dominus esse coeperit.

Digest. l. 8. tit. 6.


and to labor the Earth, though she be a Princess of Heavenly Extraction; And
this, because she knew not how to hold her own rank, maintain her Rights, and
make the Body know how far she could extend her bounds.

CHAP. XXXVI. The Second unjust Usurpation of the Flesh, on the right of the
Spirit.
THe Lord and Proprietor being no more able to obtain what is his by right,
through the unjustice which was done unto him, by destroying and taking away
his Bounds: the bad Neighbor proceeds further; he finds out means, either to
burn or take away his Titles, Contracts, and Public Instruments, which might
make out the Righteousness of his Possession; and at the same time he forges
others, to debar him from his pretensions: These are the proceedings of the
Flesh against the Spirit; the Soul had three fair Contracts to show, and drawn
in a very good form in the first state of her Creation: The one was of Original
Justice; the other of the Gift of Immortality; and the third of the Infusion of
Science.

The Contract of Original Justice has put her in Possession of the Sanctifying
Grace, according to the feelings of all the Fathers, who by these words of
Genesis, (Let us make man to our Image and Resemblance,) takes the Image for
her constitution in her intelligible being, and the resemblance for her
interior ornament through the infusion of Grace, after which comes Charity.
The Queen of all Virues, waited on by all moral perfections, which as Ladies of
Honor are always inseparable from her; the Justice then comes first Leader,
and Chief among the Cardinals, with the rest that follow immediately the
Theological, all which in the first instant did acknowledge God for their
object, and were so punctual to serve him on occasions, that nothing could be
imagined better ordered in that little Commonwealth.

Man was admitted to the Privy Council of the King of Glory, so far as to know
the most secret affairs of the Divinity, as was the decree of the redemption of
mankind in the fullness of time, by sending one of the Divine Persons, who
uniting himself to humane Nature, would discharge her of her Debts in rigor of
Justice: Moreover, by Virtue of his Contract he had not only reasonable
inclinations toward his Creator, but as yet his Will did taste with so much
sweetness of all manner of things which concerned the Divine Worship, that the
sensitive appetite has not so much of sensible pleasure in the enjoyment of her
delights. The Contract of Immortality exempted Adam, and all them who by
Original propagation were to come from his Race, from that rigorous tribute of
Death; whereby the Soul could have received a great advantage; for by this
means she would have shunned the experience of what grief and sorrow she met
with in the separation, when that those two essential pieces of Man, the Soul
and Body so perfectly united, comes to break off. I must confess this Contract
was not grounded on any right of nature; because that man suffers within
himself a continual War of four contrary qualities, which at last must end his
life to begin his Death, and therefore he could not expect to be Immortal by
Nature, Mortalis erat Adam condition corporis animalis, immortalis autem
beneficio conditoris. D. Aug. in c. 7. Genes.
but even as the King who is above the common Laws of his Kingdom, dispenses
with whom he pleases: So God, says St. Augustine, did order, that Man, Mortal by
the condition and property of his animal Body, should be Immortal by the
benefice of his Prince: Ne mors undequaque subreperet, vel senectute confecti
decursis temporum spatiis interirent. Idem ibid.
A Benefice nailed to the Tree of Life by an adherent quality, which acted this
great wonder, that eating the Fruit which hung from the Branches, it did not
only give nourishment to the Body, to preserve Life, but also was an expulsive
Medicine of all gatherings of ill Humors to keep him always in the just
proportion of a perfect health.

Infusione non per se, sed per accidens.
The Contract of the Infusion of science, did raise the Spirit of man from the
very instant of his Creation to the perfect knowledge of all natural things,
God having granted him that Grace, that whereas now we spend years and ages to
attain to some little knowledge of Learning, in one instant he would become an
able Philosopher. For, whatever thing he would apply himself to, either
Material, Spiritual, or Divine, he would easily draw from thence all possible
consequences by way of nature: In material things he had a clear knowledge of
their constitutive Principles, of their genius, difference, properties and
accidents; he gave to each thing Names, which were evident signs and marks of
their substance, that from one they would easily come to the knowledge of the
other: The motion of the Heavens, Ordinary, Extraordinary, Influences, Aspects,
Regards, Positions, Colors, Zodiac, Eccliptick, Signs, Constellations, and
the wonderful enclosure of all the Globes one into another, without confusion;
all that was the entertainment of his Spirit. In Spiritual things the very
Angels met under the sphere of his Activity, and made up a part of the object
of his science; for though he had no material Species of the Angel, being that
the matter cannot be the Image of the Spirit, nevertheless by illations and
Universal consequences by proportion of the Soul, whose Functions are
Intellectual, he could conclude the existence of a being purely Spiritual,
without any mixture of matter. In Divine things there was no Creature in the
World, wherein he did not consider either the trace or Image of God, and
carrying his understanding from visible to invisible things, would conclude
that of necessity, there was one originary cause, a primum mobile, a Sovereign
Agent.

Fomes peccati.
The Body, after he had corrupted nature, did falsify, burn, and corrupt all
those Titles, Contracts, and Privileges, Substituting in their place the Leven
of concupiscence. In the practice of Courts, they would call that, a demising
which the Soul makes of all her rights to the Body, not having courage enough
to maintain them: This is what St. Paul calls the Law of sin, which causes the
Soul that she dares not appear, to hold her own rank in the quality of a
Princess by the excellency of her extraction, nor to have her self obeyed as
Mistress and Regent of the Body: Her cowardliness makes her to take with the
vile and abject condition of a Servant, and receive the Laws of the Flesh,
whereas she ought to command absolutely.

CHAP. XXXVII. The third unjust Usurpation of the Flesh on the right of the
Spirit.
THe Meers and Bounds being taken away, the Contracts confounded, the bad
Neighbor seizes on the Inheritance, sells and alienates all that he can: What
a grief is it to a poor man, to see before his eyes, all his Chief and best
Goods proscribed, the hangings of his Halls, the Beds and rich Furniture of his
Rooms, Quisque peccando animam suam diabolo vendit, accepta, tanquam pretio,
dulcedine temporalis voluptatis.

D. Aug. in expos. propositionum ad Romans Number 4.


the brave Linen conserved so long a time in the Coffers, all seized on, all
exposed to sale: If for to conserve the memory of his race, he would fain buy
one of the Pieces, they make him pay a double rate for it: The Body deals the
same with the Soul, he sets all her moveable Goods to be sold, he gives no
further respite for the buying of them but as long as a farthing Candle shall
give light on the bottom of a Tub or Hogs-head, who ever gives most, shall have
all from him.

St. Paul to the Romans, complains of that disgrace; I am altogether carnally
given, Ego Carnalis sum venundatus sub peccato, infoelix ego homo quis me
liberabit de corpore mortis hujus.

Romans c. 7. v. 14


and brought under the heavy yoke of sin: Alas! what a wretch am I, who shall
deliver me from the Tyranny of this Body. That Candle lighted, is our Life,
whose light is so short, that it often does Eclipse from our Eyes, before we
can enjoy a glance of its brightness; and yet notwithstanding Eternity depends
on this moment; It Is in this moment that we must either be Saved or Damned;
That we must do good, the seed of Glory: Or sow incorruption, the seed of
everlasting misfortune.

The Body will have this moment to himself alone, and tho he knows this moment
to be of a short continuance, and that this life passes away as the Wind; he
will not give over to build designs in his brains, which seem to strive with
Eternity. Solomon, (the most wise among men,) gives an ample description of
that folly, where a man in so short a time will undertake so many things; the
discourse he makes of it is altogether as pleasant, as it is necessary, to
oblige all Spirits to make good use of this moment.

I was, (says he) King in Jerusalem, Great, Powerful, Rich, at my ease; and
seeing that the pleasures did much weaken the vivacity of my Spirit, Eccl. c.
4. v. 4.
and that in the continuation of their bad use, I was declining from the
conduct of wisdom, I abstained from the delicacy of Wines by a rule of
sobriety, which bridled my appetites. I set my hand to work, building of
Palaces, planting of Vines, dressing of Gardens, ordering of Vineyards and
Orchards. I reformed the state of my House, and made it my Study to render it
the most renowned of all the World: I did seek to procure for my senses all the
objects they could desire: And, as the power to possess them was as easy to
me, as the desire to have them, I did satisfy them at full in the moment of
their appetites; But all the goods and pleasures of the World well considered,
are but Vanity, and affliction of Spirit.

I would afterward fain know what difference was there betwixt the folly of
the World, and the wisdom of Heaven, betwixt a prudent man, and a fool. I have
seen that the Wise had his eyes in his head, and that the fools walked in
darkness: The one and the other were equal in this point, that death without
any respect or consideration, does cast them both into the Grave: If it be so,
says I to my self, that Death pardons no more the Wise then the Fool; that the
Learned and Ignorant come to the same end; to what purpose is so much time
spent in such unprofitable labors? it is but vanity and affliction of Spirit.

The passionate desire I had to see him prosper, who was to succeed me in my
Dominions, has engaged me in a thousand cares, which gnawed my heart; But
reflecting seriously on their anxiety, I detested their pursuit, not knowing
whether he who is to be my Heir, will be of the number of the Fools, or of that
of the Wise; or if he will not be prodigal of the Goods, whose acquisition cost
me so dear; This is that which made me resolve to give my self a little ease,
and without troubling any further the quietness of my life, to pass over
sweetly the rest of my days in peace.

Continuing by induction to make appear the sad occupation of Men, who have no
God but their Body, and who in a moment undertake so many affairs, to the
prejudice of their Souls, they do show evidently the advantages of the Flesh
over the Spirit: And as the Spirit, if he does not get himself off speedily and
with courage from under the Tyrany of his Hostilities, will be utterly subdued
without expectation of any agreement.

CHAP. XXXVIII. That it is the Grace of Jesus which maintains the Spirit in his
Rights.
It Is but in vain for the Flesh to plot or devise unjust Usurpations on the
Rights of the Spirit: Nihil damnationis est iis, etc. Romans c. 8. v. 1.
She may Rebel against his Empire, but to no purpose, Corruption corporis quae
aggravat animam non peccati primi est causa sed poena, nec caro corruptibilis
animam peccatricem, sed anima peccatrix carnem fecit esse corruptibilem. D.
Aug. tom. 5. l. 14. civit. c. 3. per totum.
for the Spirit will always find whereby to dissolve all her slights, her
revolts and subtle inventions. The Word-Incarnate will furnish us with
sufficient means to annul all her pursuits: Whereupon the Apostle fears not to
say, That there is no damnation for them that are in Jesus Christ, so be that
undervaluing the Sedition of the Tempter, they do avoid as much as they can the
deceits of his practice: because that the Law of the Spirit taken from the life
of Jesus, Res violenter p^ssassa non pote^ ^su capi vel praescribi, nisi vitium
violentiae sit pro^^tum p. 14. tit. 3.. 14.
delivers us from the bondage of Sin and Death; Not that the Apostle absolutely
speaking, would give the Christian Letters of assurance of the Infallibility of
his Salvation, for that would be contrary to Holy Scriptures: His design is to
show the power of the Word-Incarnate, in the use of Baptism, where we do
receive so authentical a Pardon for our Crimes, that our Souls being perfectly
Purged of all original spots, Concupiscentia vocatur peccatum quia peccato
facta est cum j^^r in regeneratis non sit ipsa peccatum, sicut vocatur lingua
locutio quam facit lingua, frigus pigrum non q^ pigris fi^t; sed quod pigro
faciat. D. Aug. tom. 7. de nupt. and concup. c. 23.
there remains nothing that deserves the name of Sin: If Concupiscence remains
after Baptism, it holds not the rank of a Crime in our Hearts, but is left only
for the exercise of Virtue, as the originary Seed of all the Combats betwixt
the Spirit and the Flesh, where every good Christian ought to make his courage
appear, and remain always Victorious, whether he flies from his Enemy when he
discovers his Treachery; or that he withstands Manfully against the violence of
his assaults.

Non regnet peccatum in vestro mentali corpore. Romans 6.
If the Saints sometimes make use of the word, Sin, speaking of Concupiscence,
even as St. Paul to the Romans, exhorting us that we should not permit Sin to
reign in our Mortal Bodies; it is to take the word, Sin, in a very general
extent, and not in the precise Intelligence of its malice: Concupiscence then,
to speak properly, is no other thing in St. Augustine's opinion, than a
languishing tepidity to produce the actions of the Spirit; That puts all the
Members of the Flesh into a Lethargy, when there is question to obey the
commandments of the Soul; this idleness becomes a Tyrant, if permitted to
command absolutely; and our proper feelings will become Arms of iniquity,
Languor iste tyranus est, si vis te ti^anni esse victorem Christum invoca
imperatorem. D. Aug. verb. Apost. sermon. 12.
if we have not recourse to the Storehouse of the Cross, and take thence the
Shield of Mortification, on which Jesus our true Captain, having received their
most violent attacks, has disabled them, thereby to teach us how to prevent
their effects.

You would say, that St. Cyprian intends to make of Man a Smiths Shop; Caro
autem sic utitur anima sicut faber maleo vel incude, in qua format omnium
turpitudinem idola. D. Cypr. in Prolog. tract. de operibus carn Christi.
The Flesh is the Smith, his Hammer is Concupiscence; he makes of his Soul an
Anvil: The Flesh, armed with her Concupiscence, strikes with both Arms full
strokes on our Soul, to forge therein the Idols of pleasure, and expose them to
a public adoration: And a little after (falling from the Analogy of that
comparison,) he casts himself on another, where he compares the Flesh to Circe
the Witch, that mingles in her Pottage a mortal Poison: Men's ebria, corpus
contumeliis applicat, and junctis amplexibus ambo, in mortiferas suavitates
elapsi, obdormiunt. Idem. ibid.
For as soon as the Spirit does taste of that Potion of the Flesh, there he
lies drunk of a sottish Love, which makes him give over to Concupisence a full
right in all his pretentions, and giving one another an unfortunate kiss, they
both fall into the fatal Bed of common perdition: But all those actions
proceeding from a bad Faith, and grounded on a deceitful Cheat, can give no
gain of cause to the Body, if the Soul be pleased to make use of the pieces
which will easily justify her Rights and Titles: Nay, without going any
further, let her use the Right she has of a substantial Information, and she
shall soon see the Body brought to his Duty. By the right of a substantial
Information, Non est caro dictatrix peccati, nec inventrix malitiae, nec
cogitatus format, nec agenda disponit, sed officina est spiritus, qui in ea and
per eam, quaecunque affectaverit peragit and consummat. D, Cypr. supra.
the Soul has such an assendance over the Body, that, as the Body in the Being
of Nature, cannot boast to possess life, but for so long a time as the Soul
will stick to him. So in the Moral Being of the practice of Good and Evil, to
make an action good or bad, the Body will contibute nothing, if the Soul does
not co-oporate, the Flesh does not dictate the SIN, she does not invent the
malice, she does not dispose the thoughts, she is only the Workhouse of the
Spirit, where the Good and Evil begins, and is consumated.

If the Soul cannot redeem her self from the Tyanny of the Body by the right of
her Information, Quis me liberabit, etc. Romans 8. v. 25.
let her have recourse to the means which St. Paul does prescribe in like
occurrences, who sighing under so cruel a Thraldom, seems to cry for strength
and assistance to God through Jesus Christ. When St. Augustine was on the point
to break with all Worldly pleasures: D. Aug. lib. 8. Concess c. 11. Ibi tot
pueri and puellae ibi juventus multa and omnis aetas and graves viduae, and
virgins and in omnibus ipsa continentia nequaquam sterilis sed faecunda matter
filiorum gaudiorum de marito te Domine, and irridebat me irrisione
exhortatoria, quasi diceret tu non poteris quod isti est istae, an vero isti
etistae.
They all presented themselves unto him under the colors of a malicious
compassion, to mollify with their Charms the force of his Courage: To what
purpose, would they say, do you engage your self in a life, whereof the
ordinary practice is to be among Chains, Crosses, Wheels, and Gibbets? But this
great Saint, considering on the other side, the powerful Grace of Jesus, as a
Victorious Princess, which carried, in her right hand, the List and Names of so
many young Children, of chaste Virgins, of Noble Matrons, snatched from the
World and the Flesh, to serve God; suffers himself to be easily persuaded, that
God, who makes no exception of persons, will not refuse him the efficacious
assistance of the same Grace. He fights then under that hope, he invokes Jesus
to his aid, and notwithstanding the contradictions of the Flesh, he appears
Stout, and Courageous against all occasions of Vice.

This Example will let those that are in Love with Liberty, see that it is not
incompatible with effectual Grace; because this, (according to St. Augustine,)
is a Victorious pleasure charming our Soul; a Tryumphant Love, predominant over
our Will, and a powerful persuasion captivating our understanding.

Forasmuch as God has made Man free, never taking that from him which once he
has bestowed upon him; he could not have employed a more gracious, nor more
effectual way to gain Him, than pleasure. All Creatures are taken with it, and
the Poet had reason to say, there is nothing that is not sweetly Mastered by
Pleasure. The Ambitious seek not so much the reputation in Honors, as the
pleasure, because they contemn them as soon as they cease to be agreeable. The
Covetous is not so much provoked with profit, as pleasure in the desire of
Wealth, because he spends many times prodigally, to procure other things that
more delight him; Nay, the Lascivious Wanton, is not so much in Love with
Beauty as with pleasure, because he places his affections sometimes upon
Objects that have no appearance of Beauty, and many times forsakes a handsome
Woman to Court a deformed one: Thus pleasure is a powerful Charm, that masters
all Hearts, Plunders Liberties, and makes Slaves that never complain of
Bondage, because they are voluntary. Lovers that seek the secret of purchasing
affection, study nothing but Complacency, being assured they shall produce Love
in that Heart where they have begot pleasure. Flatterers never insinuate into
the minds of great Men, but by rendering themselves acceptable; nor do their
false commendations steal in at the Ears, but because pleasure takes up the
place of Truth.

The very Devils, though our Mortal Enemies seduce us not, but because they
please us; and had they not found out the Art of mixing Pleasure with Sin, all
their Temptations would be fruitless. But the Will of Man, though never so
free, has such an inclination toward pleasure, that did she never so strongly
barracado her self, she could not possibly resist it: She holds out against
Truth, because she is blind, and sees not the Beauties it is adorned with; she
secures her self against violence, because she is free, and naturally opposes
whatever seems to incroach upon her liberty; She does not acquiesce in reason,
because she is deaf, nor hears any discourse but such as charms the
Understanding by convincing it; But Pleasure has allurements which she can no
ways withstand: She trembles whenever it sets upon her, she is afraid to lose
her liberty in his presence; and knowing the power it has over her
inclinations, she calls in Sorrow to her succor, to Guard her against this
pleasing Enemy.

If it be true, that Pleasure reigns absolutely over the Will, we need not
think it strange that Grace which is nothing but a Victorious suavity, has
such advantage over her; For besides, that this Heavenly Influence surpasses
all the delights in the World that charm us, having more allurements than Glory
and Beauty, that makes so many Lovers and Martyrs, Tunc enim bonum concupisci
incipit cum dulcescere incipit: ergo benedictio dulcedinis est gratia Dei qua
fit in nobis ut nos delectes and cupiamus, hoc est amemus quod praecipit nobis.
Aug.
it insinuates much deeper into the Will, than whatever ravisheth us Mortals.
Being in the hands of Jesus Christ, whom nothing can resist, it glides into the
very Center of our Hearts, making Impressions there, that are never more strong
than when they are most agreeable; thence it cashiers all Pleasures that have
unjustly Usurped upon us, and knowing all the weakness of the place it sets
upon, we need not wonder if she makes her self Mistress. Other Pleasures enter
not into the Will, but at the Gate of the Senses; they have lost half their
strength before they can make their approach; and her inclination being unknown
to them, they many times cause aversion intending to procure Love: But Grace
wooes the Heart without the mediation of the Senses, and more powerful than
Pleasures that act not upon all the faculties of the Soul, carries light into
the Understanding, Faithfulness into the Memory, and Pleasures into the Will;
so that we need not wonder if the Sinner suffer himself to be overcome by a
Divine quality that sheds delight into all the powers and faculties of the Soul.

That which Grace effects thus agreeable by Pleasure, Amor imperium habet super
omnes animae vires propter hoc quod ejus objectum est bonum Arivis and D. Tho.
it brings to pass more powerfully by Love: For according to the Judgment of
St. Augustine, Grace is nothing else but Charity, and when God means to convert
a Sinner, his sole design is to make him his Lover. Love is the Master of all
Hearts; there is no impossibility this Passion undertakes not; Miracles are his
sports, and all the Prodigies Antiquity has produced, are nothing but the
effects of this Sovereign. Scripture is never more Eloquent, than when it
intends to express the force thereof: Nothing satisfies it in this design; all
words seem too weak to express its conceptions, and finding no comparisons that
answer the dignity of the Subject, it descends to the Tombs, where having
considered the Trophies of Death, is forced to confess, that his power equals
not that of Love: It passes to the very Center of the Earth, observes the
unrelenting sadness of Hell, and comparing the pains of the Damned with the
anxeity of Lovers, leaves us in doubt whether Hell or Love be more pitiless.

But not to aggravate his power by such strange comparisons, let it suffice to
Judge of him by his Effects: Though he be the Son of the Will, yet is he the
Master; he disposes so absolutely of his Mother, that she has no Motions but
what her Son inspires her with: She undertakes nothing but by his Orders; it is
the Weight that sets her a going; the Lodestone that attracts her; the King
that Governs her; and she so absolutely depends upon his Power, that nothing
but an other Love can dis-engage her: She is so fierce or so free, that neither
Violence nor Fear can tame her; She laughs at Tortures, preserves her Liberty
in the midst of Fetters, and many times Torments make her but more wilful: Only
Love mollifies her hardness, his Charms gain upon her, what sorrow cannot, and
Experience teaches Us, there is no surer command then that which is founded
upon Love. In the mean time, Vanity, which is almost the inseparable Companion
of Greatness, persuades Kings that it is a debasement to seek the Love of their
Subjects; and seduced by this false Maxim, They endeavor to make themselves
feared, not being able to make themselves Beloved. But God, who has formed the
Heart of Man, and knows how they may be Vanquished without being forced, owes
all his Conquests to his Love; He never appears more absolute, then when he
tames a Rebellious Will, when of an Enemy he makes him a Lover, and changing
his Inclinations, sweetly compels him to fall in Love with him. Forin secus
terret per legem, intrinsecus delectat per amorem. Aug.
His Power sparkles in his Corrections; He astonisheth Sinners when he loosens
the Mountains from their Foundations, when he makes the Earth shake under their
Feet, the Thunder rumble over their Heads, and threatens the World with an
Universal Deluge, or a general Conflagration: But all these Menaces convert not
the Guilty; The fear that terrifies them, does not reduce them to their Duty;
their Heart remains Criminal, when their Mouths and their Hands be Innocent;
and if God inspire not his Love into them, he punishes indeed their Offense,
but changes not their Wills; This Prodigious Metamorphosis is reserved for his
Love; it is his Charity that must Triumph over Rebels: Nor is there any thing,
but his Grace, that by its Imperious Sweetness can oblige a Sinner to Love him.

I am not afraid to injure Man's Liberty in using Terms so Significant; Because,
supposing Grace to be nothing but Love, it can do no Violence to the Will: For
of all the things in the World, there is none freer then Love: A Man cannot
complain that he is forced, when nothing but Charms of affection are employed
to gain him: And if there are some Lovers that have blamed the Rigor of their
Mistresses, there is none that have found fault with their Love: If it be an
Evil, it is a Voluntary one; it hurts none but those that willingly Embrace it;
and of so many Punishments that torment Us, there is none more Innocent,
because none more Free: Crowns may be snatched from Sovereigns, Confidence may
be taken from Philosophers, Orators may be convinced, any man may lose his
Life; but what ever Stratagems are made use of, what ever Violence men
Practice, a Lover cannot be forced, nor his Love extorted from him. Seeing then
Grace is nothing but Charity, and Charity nothing but a Holy Love; We must not
apprehend Violence, nor imagine that the Assaults of this Divine Quality can at
all injure our Liberty; because it does not dis-engage us from Evil, but by
obliging us to Love God. If Grace cannot force our Will because it is a
Victorious Love, it ought less to constrain it; Because, according to the
Language of St. Augustine, it is a pleasant persuasion: For this great Man
considering that he was to deal with Free Will on one side, and the Power of
Grace on the other, that he was to maintain the Empire of God, and the Liberty
of Man; He has always expressed himself so happily, that he never prejudiced
either: And, as indeed, Grace never forces Man, but persuades him, it holds
some thing of Eloquence or of Reason, that Triumphs over Liberty without
compelling it. Rhetorik is an Art that teaches us to persuade Truth; Orators
are agreeable Sovereigns that bear Rule over the minds of their Auditors, that
calm their Passions, change their Designs, and gently force their Wills:
Therefore was it unhandsomely done of that Ancient to compare Pericles with
Pisistratus, Quid enim inter Pisistratum and Periclem inter fuit, nisi quod
ille armatus hic sine armis Tyrannidem gessit. Cicero.
because this Tyrant domineered but over Men's Bodies, that Orator exercised a
Dominion over their Souls; The one made use of Violence, the other employed
nothing but Sweetness: The one procured the hatred of his Subjects, the other
the Love of his Auditors: For no man could complain of Pericles, because he
used nothing but Eloquence to persuade; his command was founded upon Reason,
his Chief force consisted in Truth, he subjected no understandings but by
clearing them, nor changed any Men's Wills but in taking them by their Interests
or their Inclinations.

In a word, Eloquence may boast her self a Sovereign that Reigns without Arms,
Subdues People by her Word, convinces Philosophers by her Reasons, and
Subjects Monarchs by her Power: She protects the Innocent, comforts the
Distressed, condemns or absolves the Guilty; and she Animates the Advocates or
the Judges, produces different Miracles in their Souls. Whether she inchant
the Ears by the Harmonious Cadencies of her Periods; whether she excite Love
and hatred by her Gestures, her principal design is to master the Liberty of
Man. She appears complacent, that she may be persuasive; nor does she require
the attention of her Auditors, but that she may get their consent: It Is true
never any man complains of her Violence, because she is Sweet; and he that has
changed his mind at the hearing of an Orator, never accused him of Tyranny.
It Is certainly upon this ground, that St. Augustine calls Grace, a very
Powerful persuasion; because imitating Eloquence, it clears our Spirits, calms
our Passions, and gains our Consent; it has this advantage over Eloquence,
that it has no need of our Ears to win our Hearts; it transmits it self, by
its self, into the inmost recesses of the Soul; finds out Reason in her Throne,
without employing the Senses; carries Light into the Understanding, and kindles
Love in the Will. Thus she persuades what she will to the obstinate, Subdues
Rebels without Arms, makes her Subjects will what she desires they should; and
when she displays all her Forces, she works the Conversion of a Sinner in a
moment. This certainly was the power Jesus Christ made use of, when he laid St.
Paul flat at his feet, when he Converted that Persecutor into an Apostle,
changed his Heart and his Tongue, and made him that breathed nothing but
murder, say, Lord what will thou have me to do? He lost not his Liberty, for
having lost his Fury; He changed not his Nature, for having changed his
Judgment; nor can we say that the persuasion that gained his consent, was less
free, or more Violent for being too sudden. Grace knows how to be obeyed,
without making us Slaves; She can persuade without compelling, and, more
Powerful then Eloquence, is able to make us Love what we hated before. That
great Orator that guided the Roman Commonwealth with his Tongue, and made his
Opinion so Dexterously pass into the Soul of his Auditors: That Gallant Man, I
say, has wrought Miracles by his Eloquence, which we have much ado to allow
the Grace of Jesus Christ to effect. He could boast that he altered the
Resolution of Coesar, defending the Cause of Ligarius; that he shook the Papers
out of the Hands, and the hatred out of the Heart of that Conqueror; that he
made him re-call the Sentence he had already pronounced in his Soul; that he
overcame him by his Reasons, that he Subdued all by his Arms; and trampled upon
the pride of a Tyrant that had Triumphed over the Liberty of Rome. In the mean
time, we have much ado to believe that Grace can work Miracles; We weaken its
Virtue, to preserve our own Free Will: We are not content that Jesus Christ
should be as Powerful as an Orator: and when we hear of these Victorious
Graces, and of these invinsible persuasions, we imagine as if there were a
design to oppress the Public Liberty: Let us ascribe that to Grace, which we
grant to Eloquence: Let us confess that the Son of God knows how to imprint
Truth in our Spirit, and Love in our Heart, to persuade us Infallibly: Let us
acknowledge that he is not to seek by what Stratagems to gain our Inclinations;
that his Grace, more intimate then Concupiscence, is able to become the
Mistress of our Wills; and whatever command she Exercises over us, she never
destroys our Liberty; because she has no other design then to redeem it out of
Servitude.

Let us then conclude with the Example and Doctrine of St. Augustine, that the
Profession of a Christian, and the Excellency of the Children of Grace, is not
to Prophecy future things, nor to hurl the point of their Intelligence into
the hidden Mysteries of Holy Scripture; but to be Magnanimous, and Courageous
in the frequent Combats which Concupiscence give us, for that is the only
employment which will make appear how strong the Love is which we bear to Jesus.

CHAP. XXXIX. That the Grace of JESUS leaves that weighty obligation on all
Christians to be both Soldiers and Conquerors.
THe God whom we adore takes his Glory as well from War as from Rest; and if he
be called in Scripture, the God of Peace, he is as often called, the Lord of
Hosts; Multitudo militiae Caelestis.
His Angels are the Soldiers that wait upon him to the Battle, who avenge him
of his Enemies; The Stars, which keep watch as Sentinels about his Palace, bear
the name of the Militia in the Language of the Prophets: And all those that
serve him for Ministers in his Embassies, serve him for Combatants in his
Conquest. Labora sicut bonus miles Christ. 2. Tim. 2.
Therefore did the Angels who gave notice to the Shepherds of the Birth of
Jesus Christ, take their name from their principal employment, and called
themselves the Heavenly Host; And when the Son of God was taken in the Garden
of Olives, and blamed Saint Peter, Nemo coronabitur nisi vicerit neque vicet
nisi certaverit: Quis autem certet nisi inimicum habeat? Ex Sent. Prosp.
who would have hindered the work of our Salvation; he told his Disciples that
it was easy for him to ask of his Father Legions of Angels to defend him from
his Enemies.

Men are considered under this quality upon Earth; the Holy Scripture calls
them Soldiers; and if we believe the Testimony of Job, their whole Life is a
continual War-fare: They have as many Enemies as Subjects: Rebellion is spread
over every Corner of their State; the parts whereof they are composed, are
revolted; and, which way soever they turn themselves, they find occasions of
Fighting. Christians are yet more obliged to War then Men: The Sacrament that
enables them, withal engages them in the Combat: The Earth is the Field where
they try the Mastery; and these Terms of a List, a Crown, Terribilis ut
Castrorum acies oedinata.
a Soldier, which St. Paul so often uses in his Epistles, are so many Proofs
of so known a Truth: The Church it self is an Army, the Christians whereof it
is formed are the Soldiers; It Is therefore that the Scripture represents Her
as a terrible Army drawn up in Battallions, with their Arms in their hands,
ready for a Fight.

Wherein it seems we may behold the difference between a Camp and a City: both
of them are Bodies which have their Head and Members, their Laws and Policy,
their Designs and Employments: But in Cities we observe a pleasing Variety of
Conditions equally contributing to their Advantage and Beauty: There we see
Priests, who chaunt forth the Praises of God in his Temple, who load his Altars
with Offerings; and mixing their Tears with the Blood of Victims, endeavor to
appease his just Indignation. There are Majestrates which end Controversies,
maintain Peace among the People, and make Justice reign in Families: There are
Merchants, which Traffic with Strangers; who, by their Commerce, occasion
plenty, and by their Diligence supply all necessities. But difference of
condition seems to be banished from Armies: As all Fight, so all are Soldiers:
Those that command, and those that obey, bear this quality, and both of them
place their Glory in their Valor. Therefore the Church being an Army, those it
consists of must necessarily Fight: The most feeble must be Courageous; the
Women must be Amazons; and all Christians, forgetting the difference of their
Conditions, must take upon them the quality of Soldiers. Enemies will not be
wanting to Exercise their Courage, because the World, the Flesh, and the Devil
hold Intelligence to set upon them; For the Christians War is at Home; whatever
he has received from Adam, is an occasion of exercising him; and, for a
punishment of his sin, he is obliged to fight with himself. The Flesh is never
at agreement with the Spirit; These two Parties have always some difference to
compose, and though linked together by Natural Chains, and common Interests,
cease not continually to make War on one another: They are two Friends that
usually fall out, and two Enemies that caress each other; two Friends that
shake hands, and two Enemies that make mutual visits; two Friends that cannot
endure one another, and two Enemies that can never be asunder. This division is
the first punishment of our Sin: And when we began to be upon ill terms with
God, we ceased to have any good corespondence with our selves.

But that which seems most troublesome, is, that one Combat furnishes us with
many Enemies: For, as St. Augustine says, we daily fight in one Heart; in such
a little room we find whole Armies; and sometimes we grapple with Avarice,
sometimes with Pride, sometimes with Impiety: So that it is very hard, being set
upon by so many Enemies, if we receive not some wound: This Combat is
obstinately disputed; if there be some Truce, there is no real Peace: It lasts
till Death; and if Soul and Body be not separated, it is impossible to make
them Friends: The Senses bring us false reports, the Passions raise Storms, our
inclinations set up a Party; And, to defend us from so many Enemies, we are
obliged to borrow the assistance of Virtue. Every Age has its exercise:
Infancy is oppressed with Error and Ignorance, Youth is baited with Ambition
and Wantonness, Old Age is clogged with Anger and Peevishness; So that there is
no condition but has need of Grace, to defend it from those Enemies that set
upon it.

The Devil takes part with the Body to destroy us, imploys his Wiles or his
Force to terrify or seduce us; he mingles himself with our humors, disorders
our Passions, troubles our Temper; and as if he were the Sovereign of Man, as
well as the Prince of the World, he debauches our subjects, to disquiet our
rest. Sometimes he takes upon him the shape of a Lion, and sometimes that of a
Serpent, that using subtilty and violence, he may gain some advantage upon us:
He studies our inclinations, to destroy us; suits himself with our humors, to
surprise us; and, regulating his promises according to our desires, propounds
Honors to us, if Ambitious; Riches, if Covetous; Pleasure, if Wanton: He
persuades us that our Revenges are just, our Inclinations reasonable, and our
Recreations innocent; and hiding Vice under the Mantle of Virtue, hinders us
from reforming or defending our selves. To secure us from so redoubted an
Enemy, who sets upon us so many different ways, we must oppose our Prudence
against his Cunning, our Patience against his Fury: We must countermine his
Stratagems, penetrate his Intentions, and discover the Hook which lies under
the Sugared Bait: We must also bless the Justice of God, who exercises us by
the Cruelty of this Executioner; put our confidence in his goodness, and
remember that in this conflict we can overcome only by suffering.

Having obtained this Victory, In mundo erat, and mundus eum non cognuovit.
Joan.
we must Arm our selves against the World, which is the most dangerous Enemy a
Christian can have: He set upon Jesus Christ in his Birth, Mundus me odit
and being true to his Tyrant, knew not his Lawful Sovereign even then when he
came to be his deliverer: He persecuted him during his life, and lost no
occasion wherein he might do him a mischief; Ego non sum de hoc mundo.
He conspired his death with the Devils, and expressing himself by the mouth of
the Scribes and Pharisees,) charged him with calumnies before the Tribunal of
Pilate, cast fear into the Soul of that cowardly Judge, and forced him to
Condemn a Man whom he acknowledged Innocent. Non pro mundo rogo.
Therefore neither had Jesus Christ any commerce with the World, he protested
he had nothing to do with it; and that contrary to his Maxims, he could neither
approve, nor suffer it: He would not so much as Pray for it, when he Prayed for
his Executioners: Confidite, ego vici mundum.
He boasted in the presence of his Apostles, that he had subdued this Rebel,
and defeated this Enemy. Finally, he promised his Disciples, that he would
destroy the World in the dreadful day of his Vengeance; so that professing to
imitate the Son of God, we are obliged to hate what he never loved, and to
defend our selves from a Traitor, who imploys Lying, Grief, and Pleasure, to
gain us to his Party. He tries to deceive us, that so he may corrupt us;
Duplicem aciem mundus producit contra milites Christi; blanditur ut decipiat
minatur ut frangat; adutrosque aditus occurit Christus and non vincitur
Christianus. Aug. de sanct. vinc.
He sets up Maxims which (under a pretense of maintaining Society,) introduce
Libertinism amongst Men; he makes Debauches pass for Recreations, Revenge for
greatness of Courage, Impurity for a Lawful Affection: If he cannot seduce us,
he goes about to terifie us, casts pannick fears into weak Souls, makes them
apprehensive of Grief or Infamy; Persuades a Young Man that Chastity is a
blemish to his Reputation; A Woman, that Modesty spoils the luster of her
Beauty; A Gentleman, that the forgetting of Injuries damps his Courage, and
being a Tyrant, makes use of fear to keep his Subjects in obedience: But when
he meets with generous Souls, who reject his Maxims, and contemn his Threats,
he has recourse to Pleasures, and imploys Charms to soften the obdurate: This
last Battery is the most to be feared, because the sweetest; This is that which
enervates the Sampsons, Masters the David's, and Tryumpths over the Solomon's:
Engages these great men in a Lie by blinding them, terrifies them by making
them Cowards, and breeding fear in their Hearts with Love, causes them to
apprehend the loss of those things he makes them passionately affect. He lays
before their eyes whatever may allure them; makes pleasure enter in at their
Senses, and forgetting no kind of Artifice to render wickedness agreeable,
widens his Empire, and increases the number of his Subjects.

If we be Christians indeed, we must give battle to this Enemy, oppose the
Maxims of the Gospel against his falsehoods, destroy Error by Truth, and
protest, that being the Subjects of Jesus Christ, we acknowledge no other Laws
but those of his Church; To evacuate those Terrors wherewith he shakes our
Courage, we must discern true Honor from false, fix our Glory in our Duty; and
remember, that the true Disciples of Jesus Christ, ought always to prefer
Virtue before Honor, and Conscience before Reputation. To defend us from the
Pleasures the World tempts us with, we must look upon their end, and represent
the shame and grief that never forsakes them: Finally, we must beg Grace of
Jesus Christ, who has overcome the World; that assisted with his favor we may
vanquish his Enemies, with all the Errors wherewith he would seduce us, the
fear wherewith he would astonish us, and the Pleasures wherewith he would
enchant us.

For it is not enough for the Christian to be a Soldier, if he be not also
Victorious; his Condition is more painful than that of Soldiers: For though
these are the Victims of Glory and of Death, that for a little pay they expose
themselves to a thousand dangers, they are not responsible for the Success of
the Battle; and provided they lend their Heart and Hand to their General, there
is nothing more can be expected from their Valor. But the Christians are such
Soldiers as must be Victorious; It Is not enough that they Fight, they must win
the Field, they must overcome here, if they mean to Reign with Christ
hereafter: It Is true, Omne quod natum est and Deo vincit mundum. Joan. 16. v. 5.
he has this advantage over all other Captains, he inspires courage into his
Soldiers, and gives them Victory who engage in the Combat; so that it is their
fault if they be defeated, and the Glory of their Commander if they remain
Conquerours: Their Birth obliges them to this Duty; For the Scripture teaches
us, that those that are born of God, overcome the World; that Grace which
contains Glory in the seed, is able to preserve them from Sin; and that leaving
them to the Spirit that Inanimates them, they remain impeccable in his Hands:
St. Bernard is of this mind, and will have their Victory over Temptation, a
certain Proof of their Adoption.

The Virtues themselves they have received at their Baptism, are helps which
facilitate the Defeat of their Enemies; For Faith is not only their strength,
but their Victory, and renders them as well Conquerours as Soldiers; Hope does
heighten their Courage, and giving them the Almighty for their Second, makes
them gain as many Victories as they Fight Battles. Charity, that finds nothing
impossible, which measures its Power by its Courage, and more prevalent than
Death, over-turns whatever resists it; inspres them with so much force, that
they vanquish all griefs, and Master all Difficulties: But if there be any
Virtue that renders them invinsible, we must confess, it is their despoiling
themselves of the Goods of the Earth; For Satan never catches us but by those
things, that engage us; He seduces only by those things, that please us; and
when Self-denial has perfectly separated us, they lose the boldness to set
upon us, and the hope of overcoming us. Therefore does St. Augustine admirably
conclude, that he that only loves that good which cannot be taken from him, is
truly invinsible: And Seneca (founded upon the same Principle) had reason to
say, that Alexander was vanquished by Diogenes, because he found a Philosopher
to whom he could give nothing, and from whom he could take nothing away.

Indeed the Ambitious are not Subdued, but because they are afraid to lose
their Honor; the Immodest are not gained, but because they have a mind to
preserve their Love; nor are the Covetous engaged in Iniquity, but because they
cannot resolve to part with Riches. But the Saints, who are wedded only to God,
laugh at Tyrants and Devils; and cruelty being not able to ravish from them
what they love, they happily assume the quality of Conqueror with that of a
Soldier. Let us add, that the Believer is invinsible, if he be persectly
united to Jesus Christ; our strength depends upon this Union; and when the
Devil breaks the secured Bonds, he has an advantage against us. He defeated us
in the Person of Adam; He vanquished all men in one; He gained a hundred
Victories in one Duel: But he has lost all his advantages again by Jesus
Christ, in Him we are Conquerours; and as St. Augustine says, his Victory would
not be persect if he did not still Conquer the World in his Members: Let us
therefore unite our selves to him, that we may be invinsible. When we feel the
Solicitations, of the Flesh, or the Devil; and these two Tyrants (confederate
together) endeavor to overpower us; Let us implore the assistance of our
Head, and nothing presuming upon our own abilities, but promising our selves
all from his Grace, render the Honor to Him of whom we hold the Victory.

CHAP. XL. That the Thoughts of Hell does bring the Sinner to his Duty.
Quicksilver among all Metals, is of so great an Activity, that there is
nothing, it seems, can set a stop to its course, Brimstone only can give it a
subsistence, and serve as an Hypostasis to it: The Spirit of man (more airy and
light then any Quicksilver,) is always in action; he comes, he goes, he mounts,
he descends, nothing can stop him: The thoughts of Heaven, of Paradise, of
Virtue, are not able to keep him steadfast in the presence of God: Jesus is of
advice to cast before him a handful of the Brimstone-ashes of Hell; to the end
that this heart (which would not be touched with the amorous attacks of a
peaceable conversion,) should at least be moved by the apprehension of those
Chastisements, which he cannot avoid, if he does resist any longer the sweet
violence of the Holy Ghost.

The Prophet-Royal will have us now and then to take a time to make a Voyage
into Hell, Descendant in infernum viventes. Ps. 54.
and to descend thereinto whilst we are alive: Alas! It is not to give our eyes
the satisfaction of seeing there handsome Greens, Beautified with thousands of
fine Flowers, or Artificial Fountains which let their Waters run so ingeniously
round about their Neighborhood: Those are not the appurtenances of the place
whereinto we are to descend, but to contemplate therein the sad Occupations of
those unfortunate Souls, to smell therein the ill-savoured filth of the Earth,
which flows thereinto as into the common-shore of all the Universe, to hear
those horrible Cries, those dreadful Groanings, those voices of Fury, Madness,
Rage, and Despair; to the end, by the misfortune of others we become wise, and
shun the Crimes which have reduced them to so Tragical an end. When they are
willing to pardon a Criminal, and give him his Life, they are satisfied to lead
him to the Gallows that he may see the Execution of his Confederates.

It Is an act of a well-ordered Policy to Execute Criminals in a Public Place,
and in the sight of all the World; and moreover to erect patibulary Justices in
the Highways, for to hang thereon those miserable Wretches; It is not to add
to their Punishment, being that Death makes them insensible of all those
after-Torments; it is but to advise the Passengers to have a care of themselves,
not to become the Partners of their Crimes, if they will not be the Companions
of their Penalties. The patibulary Justices of God, is Hell; it is there that a
poor Father sees his Child, the Wife her Husband, the Brother his Sister, if
they be Dead in Mortal sin, without exception of Rich or Poor, Ignorant or
Learned, Subject or Lord: For, betwixt the Justice of God, and that of Men,
there is this difference, that Men may do against humane Laws in favor of
some, whose Rank and Birthright seems to Authorize them in their Vice: But
God, (who shuts up his eyes to all humane considerations, and takes nothing for
the Law of his Judgments but the Essential Righteousness of his Wisdom,)
Justifies the poorest man, if he be found innocent, and places him in a Throne
of Glory without any regard to his Extraction: Whereas he condemns the Prince,
and the King, if he be a wicked Liver, and gives him no other rank in Hell,
than to be the most tormented by the Devils, if he has been the most vicious
amongst Men.

David invites us all to this Spectacle, and tells us, that three
considerations among all others which might be produced, render the thoughts of
Hell most dreadful: The first is the greatness of the Torments, together with
an extreme Rigor: The second is that vast and long Eternity: The last, but the
Principal, is that Exile, and irrevocable Banishment, that chases the damned
Souls from the presence and vision of God for ever.

CHAP. XLI. The first consideration of Hell.
BEatitude is a happy aggregation and meeting of all manner of Good;
Beatitudine est status omnium bonorum aggregatione perfectus. Boet.
so that if one of all had been wanting and subtracted from a Saint, he would
not be in the possession of a complete and absolute Felicity: If that be true,
it must follow by the rule of contraries, that the infelicity of Damned Souls,
is a gathering of all sorts of Pains, Rigours, and Punishments; being, that in
this most unhappy State, they are deprived of all manner of Good, and
overwhelmed with all imaginable Evil.

Aristot. Ethic. cap. 32.
That Man is out of his Wits, says Aristotle, who fears not the chastisements
appointed by the Gods; And because that your ancient Goalers did not apprehend
Thunders and Lightnings, they were esteemed a stupid People, and of no
Religion. What would they say of Christians, who believe by Articles of Faith,
under pain of Excommunication, the Rigours of so many Torments prepared for a
Sinner, and who nevertheless runs to them headlong, and without any fear,
doubtless they would accuse them of madness.

Galenus l. 2. de locis effectus in cap. 3.
Galenus against Archigene, maintains, that it is impossible for a Man to be
sick at one time in all the parts of his Body, by reason of the
incompassibility of the Subject with such a form; The Devils laugh at that
Philosophy, having found it to be false, by the experience they have made of it
in the Person of Job: St. Anthony's Sore, otherwise called the Sacred Fire, and
the Vermin, are contrary Diseases; 1 Plaga in sanabili.

2 Manus Domini tetigit me.

3 Ulcere pessimo.

4 Nic dimittis ut glutiam salvam meam.

In amaritudinibus moratur oculus meus, etc.


yet Job had them both, and calls them incurable Evils; the Scab and the
Leprosy, the Falling- Evil and the Canker, the Pox, and the Gout, the
Dissentery and the Pluerisy, the Esquinancy and the Hungry Evil, the Opthalmia
in the Apple of the Eye, the Allopecia on the Lids, seem to be Diseases that
never meet in one Subject, yet Satan makes them to find a place in one Body:
All the Afflictions of Job are but a very course Painting of the Torments of
Hell: For if God, (who did not afflict this Holy Man but to prove his
Constancy,) did set a limit to the Devils power in the Execution of his Pains;
what shall it be, when he will give a full Authority, and an absolute
jurisdiction to Satan, to exercise all his rage against a Damned Soul?

Add to this all the sufferings of the Martyrs, the Pinchers of a St. Agatha,
the Grid-Iron of a St. Lawrence, the skin fleyed of a St. Bartholomew, the
Wheels of a St. Catherine, the Discipline of a St. Francis, the Hair-cloth of
St. Hillarion, and all the voluntary Torments of the Inhabitants of the Desert.
Quare in inferno mors quaeritur, and non invenitur, quibus in hoc saeculo vita
affertur, and nolunt accipere in inferno quaerunt mortem and non poterunt
invenire, etc. D. Aug. to Sermon. 252. de tempore.
All that separated from the Love which rendered them tolerable, shall make up
but a small part of the pains of the Damned: Alas, if a little Headache sets us
out of all order and patience, a little swelling or matter under the nail, will
make us cry to Heaven and Earth, the least prick of a Pin will give us a
feeling; what shall it be among so many and such searching evils of their own
Nature, and without remedy by the Divine Ordinance?

Let us pass over all this, and come to consider the anguish and perplexity of
the Spirit; Let us, (if it be possible,) cast up an account of all the Rages,
Despairs and Melancholies of Men; of that of a Judas, who hangs himself, of
Otho the Emperor, who, not being able to get the Victory of Vitellius, runs
himself through with his Sword; Of a Cassius, who, with the same Dagger he
murdered Caesar in the Senate, deprives himself of his Life; Of a Silvius, an
Italian Poet, who at the age of seventy five years, plunged in a profound
sadness, finding no other thing whereby to Exercise his rage, pierces his heart
with the point of a Nail; Of a Galerius, who smothered himself in his Sheets;
And a number of others, who went tormented in their Souls, some have cast
themselves into Privies, others from the top of high Towers: Yet all That is
nothing to be compared to the rage and despair of a damned Soul.

The Devil will take occasion to Exercise new punishments on the reprobate from
the pleasures he was most given to in the World: Ambition made him to raise up
his horns, and in the smoke of a passing honour-to build for himself an Idol of
presumption, to which all his wishes and desires should offer continual
Sacrifices; Undervaluing, Taunts, Contempts, and Rebukes, shall be his ordinary
Serenades; Now a Devil boxing him, will say, get you gone, unfortunate Soul,
you have lost your share of Heaven for a point of Honor: Another will publish
his most hidden sins, Ibi dolor permanet, ut affligat, and natura perdurat, ut
sentiat, quia utrumque ideo non deficit ne paena deficiat. D Aug. to 5. l. 19.
Civit. c. 28. per totum.
there is the Hypocrite who past for a Saint among men; to complain of these
affronts, he would not dare, (if he be not willing to have them redoubled,) to
seek for one to comfort him, or to be revenged of those Murderers, it is in
vain, all compassion is banished out of that Land, it is there that Cruelty sits
in her Throne? Ah dear Soul! to escape those torments, will you not have pity
of your self?

This is not as yet enough, those fires remain without mercy, those burning
flames which devour, and those parching heats, which consume, without giving
death, and give Death without consuming; Qualitatem doloriferam igni Deus
imprimit. Suarez.
Flames which act no more within the order of their natural Activity, though
the same be most rigorous, but which receive new dolorous Qualities, which God
draws from their obediential power, as well for to torment the Body the more,
as for to act against the Soul, Quod a diabolus, ejusque Angeli, cum sint
incorporei, corporeo, tamon cruciantur igne, quid mirum si animae, antequam
recipiant corpora corporea sentiant tormenta. D. Greg. 4. Dialo.
though she be Spiritual: For as God (uniting our Souls to our Bodies,) makes
it, that our Souls are sensible of the sores of the Body; he may as easily
command the fire to act against those very Souls, and make them to resent the
violence of its Action: And even as he does elevate the Water, which is an
Elementary Body, to the Spiritual effects of Baptismal Grace; so he does
elevate those Fires, though they be Material, to the punishment of Spirits,
without any contradiction or dis-agreement of the Soul with the Fire, no more
than there is of Grace with the Water.

The Prophet, I say, cannot look on those Furnaces, but he must fall into a
weakness of heart: Hugo of St. Victor gives us the reason of it; and says, that
those Fires are to be admired in one point, which is, that they do operate
without loosing any thing of their force, because they meet with no contrary
Agent, that might moderate their Action; they are mixed with a Sulphurous,
Fat, thick, bituminous matter, to give them a more scorching heat; And which is
more, this Doctor is of opinion, Ibi omnia genera, tormentorum sunt congregata
sicut aquae maris in alveo suo. Hugo. Card. in c. 16. Luc.
that if all the Waters of the Sea, nay if the Heavens had opened their
Cataracts even to power down therein an Universal Deluge, it would signify no
more then a little drop of Oil cast into Vulcan's Furnace.

We must not imagine that those Fires have no further power to act on the
Damned Souls, than to intimate their commission at length, and to startle them
with a threatening pain, or to serve as high Walls only in form of a Dungeon,
where the Spirits are detained Prisoners. No, no, those Fires are not to be
supposed to act only by an intentional Species, which supplies the want of a
proportionable Object: For then the Devils having a general Species of all
matterial things by infusion from the instant of their Creation, it would be no
great trouble to them: And therefore it is necessary that the real presence of
the substance of the Fire be there, Habebit tunc carnis substantia qualitatem,
ab illo juditam, qui tam miras and varias rebus indidit, quas videmus and eas,
quia multae sunt non miremur. D. Aug. l. 21. Civit. c. 4. per totum.
joined with the dolorous qualities, which God gives it in the instant of its
Elevation, to the end that it should adhere to the Souls with so straight a tie
says St. Augustine, that the Union of the Soul with the Body, in the rights of
Information, cannot be more intimate than that of the Damned Souls is to the
Fire of Hell.

CHAP. XLII. The second Consideration of Hell.
Virgil. 6. Aeneid.
WHo will not tremble and cry out at the sole remembrance of that dreadful
thought? The Latin Poet describing the horidness of those Subterranian
Mansions, conceives a Den in form of an Abyss, fortified with a triple Wall,
which a Torrent of Flames does environ on all sides, and an Iron Tower with
Brass-Gates, which all the Gods are not able to break open; on one side a
Gnosius and a Radamantus may be seen there, to put those unfortunate Criminals
to the torture; and on the another, the Alcides, Titans, and Salmones, punished
for their crimes committed against Jupiter: Nevertheless he seems to give them
some hopes, that after the expiration of their offenses, they may fly unto the
Elizean Fields, though it must be with some difficulty: However, Faith will
have us to believe the contrary; Theseus got out of the Labarinth, by the
favor of a Thread he had received from Ariadne: But he, who once shall fall
into Hell, can never get out of it.

I know that Origin could never submit his Spirit to believe that a sin
committed in an instant deserved an Eternity of pains; imagining that the Mercy
of God (after a long Series of years,) would have compassion on those
unfortunate wretches; But by overmuch raising his Mercy, he brought his
Justice very low, and by stretching overmuch the Arms of his Clemency, he
would fain cut short that of his just rigor.

He ought to consider, Vide D. Aug. l. 21. Civit. ^ 23. 24. and se^
that Justice and Mercy in God, (flowing from the same principle, I mean his
Divine nature, have also for rule of all their actions the same Nature, always
equal and uniform. Cum Christus in eodem ipso loco in una eademque sententia
dixerit, ibunt justi autemin vitam aeternam, etc. Paulo infra.
God does no injury to Man when he will have, that in a moment of conversion,
he merits Heaven; no more does he do him any wrong, when he ordains that in a
moment, and for a moment of aversion, he be Damned, Par pari relata sunt hinc
supplicium aeternum, inde vita aeterna: dicere autem in hoc uno eodemque sensu,
vita aeterna sine fine erit, supplicium aetornum finem habebit multum absurdum
est. D. Aug. tom. 5. l. 21. Civit. c. 23. in fine.
if he does die in that state: For if any thing could be said to this, that God
does punish a Sinner with an Eternity of pains, for having sinned in a moment,
there might be likewise somewhat said to this, that for a moment of Penance,
for an act of Contrition, produced in an instant, he gives him an Eternity of
glory; none as yet was ever scandalized by the second, no more ought any
complain of the first, being that all things are equal in the one, and in the
other.

The Love of God above all things, is that fundamental reason, which causes the
moment of Conversion to be rewarded with an Eternity of Glory; and the hatred
of God above all things enclosed in that moment of sin, is the only cause of
that Eternity of punishment. If that moment had taken the evil consequences of
its continuation, only from the principle whence it departs, it should be
limited and have some end: But because it has for its Object an offended God,
whose Majesty is infinite, it must be likewise Eternal, and without end.

A Criminal Condemned to a hundred and one years of Bondage, that is to say,
for all his life, comforts himself nevertheless in two things; the one, that at
last his Torments will end with his death; the other, that he shall not be
always obliged to live in Slavery: In Hell, it is an Eternity, where they do not
know what is a hundred years, no more than a hundred thousand millions of
years: The length of time never produces the habit of enduring, which renders
Hell more insupportable: For the same feelings which the Damned Souls will have
the first day of their condemnation, will continue in the same degree of rigor
for an Eternity. My God, if I cannot suffer, for the space of one Pater Noster,
the top of my Finger on a red Cole; what shall I do, if my Iniquities oblige me
to live for an Eternity in those Flames.

CHAP. XLIII. The third Consideration of Hell.
TO be for ever banished from Paradise, and deprived of the Vision of God, it is
a thought that goes beyond all that can be said of misfortune. Never to see
that Divine Face, which does rejoice the Angels, that source of all Goodness,
from whence all the blessed derive the vivifying Spirit of their Beatitude:
That voluntary Looking-glass, wherein all Creatures are to be seen, eminently
comprehended, as in their originary principle; can any thing be thought of,
more deplorable?

Super flumina Babilonis, illic sedimus and flevimus, cum recordaremur tui Sion.
The Children of Israel sitting along the Banks of Babylon, looking on one side
at the Waters, which by the swiftness of their course, flowed by, and ran away
without ever stopping, a lively Image of the passing Pleasures of this World:
On the other side, beholding that Beautiful Sion, whence they were carried by
force, to be led to Captivity, would let fly a Million of languishing sighs
from the bottom of their Hearts; they are commanded to sound their Trumpets,
play on their Harps, pinch their Lutes; they answer, that it is to treat them
most inhumanely, to require them to Sing at so extreme a misfortune, and that
they could not exalt the Praises of the Lord in a strange Land. They are (I
must confess,) miserable in this point of their Captivity: But the day will
come that they will return Tryumphing to Jerusalem, when that by the sencerity
of their humiliations, they will appease the indignation of the Omniponent^ The
Damned Soul will have Eternal wishes to see her God, and the Beauties of the
Celestial Jerusalem: Wishes really which would not be so troublesome to her,
if God had deprived her of the lights of Faith: For had she not so distinct a
knowledge of the Good she looses, Durandus in 3. distinct. 25. 9. 9. Art. 2.
Alensis 3. part q. 64. memb. 7. Catharinis and Salmeron in c. 2. Jacob. Greg.
de Vatentia^ 2. q 5. art. 2. punct. 2.
she would have less feeling of her misery, she is deprived of Hope and
Charity: And yet some Doctors, (worthy of Belief,) are of opinion, that Faith
remains to her entire, which sets incessantly before her eyes, the loss of her
God, and makes her clearly understand, that by her own proper malice, she has
brought her to that irrevocable Exile, and that she has Banished her self for
ever from the intuitive Vision of God's Essence.

God lets her to see the degree of Glory which was pepar'd for her in his
Eternal Idea's, if making her profit of the Graces of Heaven, she had amended
her Life, Servatur diviti and cognitio pauperis quem despexit, and memoria
fratrum quos reliquit, ut divisa gloria despecti and de poena inutiliter
amajovum amplius torqueatur. Hugo. Card. in c. 16. Luc.
and at the same time she knows that another Possesses the self same degree of
Glory, for having profitably managed the Grace which she did undervalue; She
knows the Honor which God renders to Holy Souls, and how faithful he is in the
Execution of his promises, so far that he will not suffer the least glass of
Water given for his Love to be unrewarded, nor the least good thought without a
special Title of Splendor and Glory: And all those knowledges are newfound
Punishments for a damned Soul, which entertains a continual memory of the Goods
which appertained to her through the sufficient Justice of the Incarnation; but
which she shall never enjoy through the infidelity of her Actions. Alas! among
all those afflictions, here is a new subject of grief and sorrow, which renders
man in Hell more un-fortunate then all the Devils: For besides the loss of the
intuitive Vision of the Divine Essence he is condemned never to see the Sacred
Humanity of Jesus, which is to he the Beatifying object of our Bodies, as the
Divine Essence is that of our Souls; She would willingly be of the condition of
still-born Children, and without Baptism, which in truth are damned, because
they do not see God, but their Damnation is so much made less, that having no
explicit Faith, by which they might learn the great advantages of the
Supernatural Life, they do not so much resent the misfortune of its
everlasting loss.

Moses and St. Paul in the Excess of their ardent Charity for their Neighbor,
made great and most earnest Prayers to God; the one to be blotted out of the
Book of Life; the other to be Anatheme for his Brothers, but always their
Prayers were with that Essential Clause, that they should not be for ever
excluded from the sight and presence of God: For without that Circumstance,
their Vows would have been Criminal, with that condition they were just: For
they knew well both the one and the other; that if God could be seen in Hell as
a blessed Object, Hell would be a Paradise; and if in Heaven they could be
deprived of that Vision, Heaven would be no better then a Hell to them.

The Poor Cain among other Articles of his Judgment, for the Fratricide
committed on the Person of Abel, was not so much perplexed, until that he had
seen himself condemned to withdraw from the presence of God: Ah? what shall
become of me now, says he, must I go like an Errant and a Vagabond among the
Bruits? the first that shall come to take me by the neck, will cut my throat,
if he be so dispo'd: To whom shall I have recourse, if God does banish me from
himself? Whom shall I make my moan to, if he will not hear me? Christians, the
Banishment of Cain is but a Metaphorical Privation of the presence of God; But
that of the Damned, is real and true, and withal, it puts me in mind of that
Great and General Torment, which is so often repeated in Scripture by the name
of the Worm of our Conscience; Vermis Conscientiae. Mat. 9.
so called, because, that as a Worm lies Eating and Gnawing the Wood wherein
she is Lodged, So shall the remorse of our Conscience lie within us, griping
and tormenting us for ever. And this Worm or Remorse shall Chiefly consist in
this, to represent to our mind, the means and causes of our present extreme
Calamities; that by our main Folly, and through pur woeful negligence we have
lost the happiness which others have acquired by the constant care they had of
their Salvation. And at every one of these Considerations, this Worm shall give
us a deadly pinch, which shall reach even to the very bottom of our hearts. As
when it shall appear to us, how easily we might have conquered Heaven, and that
we shall see the occasions which had been offered to us to avoid the misery,
wherein we are at this present, and shall be for ever entangled. How often we
were to resolve our selves to lead a good Life, and yet how unfortunately we
put off our good Resolutions. How many times we were foretold of this danger,
and yet how little care we took to avoid the same. How vain these Wordly
Trifles were, wherein we spent the best of our days, if not all our life, and
for which we lost Heaven to purchase Hell with all its intolerable Miseries.
How they are now exalted, whom we thought Fools in the World: And how we are
made Fools, and laught'd at, who thought our selves to be the Cato's and
Solomon's of the World. These considerations and a thousand more laid before us,
and by our own Conscience, shall bring our Souls to an Abbyss of Desolation and
Greef, without hope of ever receiving any comfort; this is what I call the Worm
of our Conscience, which will be of more force to make Men weep and howl at
that dreadful day, then any other torment that Hell can afford, considering how
Negligently, Foolishly, and Vainly they are come into that dark Dungeon, where
they shall have no more time, place, or leave to redress their Error.

For now is the time of Weeping, Wailing, and of everlasting Lamentation for
these Men; and yet all shall be in vain. Now they shall begin to fret and rage,
and wonder at themselves, now they shall say, but too late, where was our
Judgment, when we followed the Vanities of the World, and post-pounded, nay,
contemned the main Work of our Salvation: Now they may say in those devouring
Flames, what the Sinners do say by the mouth of the Wise in Scripture; Sap. 5.
What has our Pride, or what has the Glory of our Riches availed Us? they are
all now vanished like a shadow: We have wearied out our selves in the way of
Iniquity and Perdition, but the way of the Lord we have not known. This shall
be the everlasting Song of the Damned and Tormented Conscience in Hell: Eternal
repentance, and to no purpose, which will bring him to such despair, says
Scripture, that he shall turn into fury against himself, tear his own Flesh,
rent his own Soul (if it were possible) and provoke all the Devils and Damned
Souls in Hell to add more to his Torments, because that he has so beastly
behaved himself in his lifetime as not to provide a better Residence, and a
more pleasant Entertainment for his poor Soul. Oh, will he cry, if I could have
but another short life to lead in the World, what would I not do? what
Mortification and Penance would I not undergo, with what diligence, and
severity would I Practice all sorts of Virtues! But all this will not do, for
there is no such grant to be expected, neither is there any Price or Value able
to purchase it for him. We only (dear Christians) that are as yet alive, do
enjoy this inestimable Grace and Treasure of Time for our amendment; I wish we
may be so happy as to improve it to our everlasting advantage; One of these
days we shall be past it also, and shall never recover the same again, no not
one moment, if we would buy it with a thousand Worlds. Let us then now make
good use of this benefit, for this is the only time wherein we may shelter our
selves from all the Rigours of the World to come; Now, I say, and out of hand,
for we know not what shall become of us to morrow. It may be to morrow, our
Hearts will be as hard, and as careless of these important Affairs, as they
have been heretofore, and as Pharaoh's heart was, Luc. 16.
after Moses departed from him. O how fortunate a Creature had he been, if he
had resolved himself thoroughly whilst Moses was with him? If the Rich Glutton
had taken the time whilst Lazarus, lay at his Door, how blessed a Man had he
made himself? He was foretold his Misery (as we are now) by Moses and other
Prophets; but he would not hear them. Being snatched into Hell, He fell into
such admiration of his own folly, that He would needs have Lazarus sent from
Abraham's Bosom unto his Brethren in the World, to warn them of his Error and
great Misfourtune; but he was told, that if they would not be advised by their
Preachers, and Teachers, that the Dead restored to Life would never prevail
with them. It is the same with the wicked of this World, if one should arise
from among the Dead, and tell them that their Parents or Friends are Damned in
Hell, for such and such offenses, as themselves are entangled withal. What
then can God devise to do to save these Men? what way, what means, what order
may he take, when neither Warning, nor Example of others, nor Threats, nor
Exhortation will do any good? We know, or at least may know, that leading the
life we do, we cannot be saved. We know, and ought to know, that many before us
have been Damned for less matters. We know, and cannot choose but know, that we
must shortly die, and receive our selves, as they received, living as they did,
or rather worse. We believe that the pains which do attend the wicked are both
Intolerable and Eternal. We confess them most Unfortunate and Miserable, that
for any Pleasure Convenience in this World, are now fallen into them. What then
should hinder us to relinquish out of hand all Impediments, to break with a
great deal of Courage and Violence to our corrupt Nature all the Bands and
Chains of this wicked World that sets a stop to our time and zealous
Resolution? Why should we sleep one Night in Sin; not knowing but that Night
may chance to be our last, and so the Everlasting cutting off of all hope to
come?

Some perhaps moved with the Holy Spirit of God, Initium sapientiae timor
Domini, Prove. 1. Eccl. 16.
may chance say, what remedy is there to avoid these Miseries which undoubtedly
will fall heavily on those that take the liberty to live in Sin; I answer, that
true Faith and the Fear of Gods Judgments, are two great Steps unto a most
Efficatious and solemn Remedy: For Faith is the first Foundation and Ground of
all good Motions; and Fear the first part of the Building that is to be laid
thereon: It Is therefore that Fear is called the beginning of Wisdom, and
consequently, the beginning of our Conversion.

Credunt and contremiscunt. Jaco.
But yet these two only are not sufficient, for that St. James says even of the
Devils themselves, they Believe and Fear, and yet shall not be Saved. Wherefore
we must pass further unto those other Virtues, also which our Divines do
require (together with Faith and Fear) as Hope and Charity, and that other
which does flow from all these, as the effect from the Cause, I mean Penance,
and a true Repentance for our former Faults; with a firm Resolution of true
amendment for the time to come.

This is the true Remedy indeed: This is the Sovereign Salve and Medicine for
all our Sores and Maladies in this kind. This is the only Prevention of all the
foresaid Miseries and Calamities; the Anticipation of all Perils; the Diversion
of Gods Threats and Manaces; the Pacification of his Wrath, and the very
Victory (in a certain sort) of a Sinner over Gods Justice and Judgments; and
finally, the Antidote of Hellfire it self.

The End of the First Part.
The Reader is desired to excuse what Errata's have crept into this First Part,
it being Printed by a Forreigner, who is partly a Stranger to the Language.

ERRATA.

PAge 9. line 9. read, all payment. p. 37. l. 19. r. Grace does. l. 20. r. Love
does. p. 44. l. 21. r. wrap. p. 53. l. 2. Marg. r. reserantur. p. 58. l. 3. r.
infallible. p. 77. l. 10. r. fear not. l. 12. dele nothing. p. 88. l. 18. r. of
his. p. 89. l. 9. r. a Crime. p. 94. l. 16. r. Object. p. 99. l. 2. r.
offending. p. 103. l. 10. r. motions. p. 117, l. 1. r. disordinate. p. 170. l.
22. r. hot. p. 177. l. 7. r. form. p. 214. l. 27. r. Periods. p. 237. l. 10. r.
visual. p. 239. l. 5. dele he. p. 258. l. 24. r. all sorts. p. 264. l. 30. dele
is. p. 274. l. 30. dele of any. p. 290. l. 25. r. thence a, p. 334. l. ult. r.
entrusted. p. 350. l. 30. r. and do. p. 410. l. 13. r. Goals. p. 413. l. 2. r.
were. p. 415. l. 1. r. Isaiah. p. 421. l. 27. r. her felf entire. p. 430. l. 8.
r. timely.


