NEHEMIAH, OR, THE EXCELLENT GOVERNOR.

BEING A Discourse delivered at the Cathedral of the Holy TRINITY, Dublin,
Aug. 1669.

Before the Right Honorable THOMAS Earl of OSSORY Then Lord Deputy of Ireland.

BY J. P. D. D. and Dean of the said Church.

OXFORD, Printed by H. Hall Printer to the University, for Ric. Davis. An. Dom.
1670.

Imprimatur

P. MEWS Vicecan. OXON.
Jan. 2. 1669/70.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND TRULY NOBLE THOMAS Earl of OSSORY, late Lord
Deputy of Ireland, and eldest Son to the Illustrious Prince JAMES Duke of
ORMOND His Grace etc.
My Lord,
THis Sermon which not long since had the honor of Your Lordship's ear, I
have now made bold to present more publicly to Your Lordship's eye, being
ambitious to let the world see that those great obligations of Duty and Honor
which the Author owes Your Lordship and illustrious Family, are a part of my
debt also, not only as related to Him, and a Father before Him, eminent by your
Favors, but also in the honor of being known to your Lordship and most Noble
Family, and also by many Favors perticularly obliged to subscribe my self
with all gratitude and zeal,

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most Humble, and Devoted servant B.P.

NEHEMIAH c. 13. v. 14. Remember me O God concerning this, and wipe not out the
good deeds which I have done for the house of my God and the offices thereof.
IN the midst of Judgment God usually remembers Mercy, and a Nation once chosen
by Him, may in its lowest ebb (if there be any hopes of amendment) find a
reserve of kindness.

Though the Israelites (for their Rebellion and impenitency) be overwhelmed by
all the miseries of War at home, and often times carried Captive to a strange
land abroad; yet God does not utterly forget them in their bondage, The Jews
in their lowest estate are owned by God, who raises some of their own Nation
still to be in favor with the Conqueror.
he is pleased still to raise up some of their own Nation to be in favor with
the Conquerours: whose endeavors do much lighten (though not wholly take off)
their Chains.

Daniel with Nebucadnezar.
Thus whilst that enthralled Nation was groaneing under Nebucadnezar, a wise
Daniel is promoted, who by his interest in that great King, in part dryes up
their tears.

When in the time of Assuerus the subtilty of Haman brought them near their
last gasp, a fatal decree being sent out, for their total massacre, God then
advances Mordecai and Hester, whose diligence recalls that hasty sentence, and
not only saves the distressed Jews from butchery, but hangs the author of it
upon that gibbet which he prepared for another. Thus providence instilled into
Cyrus (that great Prince) a very particular kindness unto the whole Nation;
Cyrus always heed them.
who openly acknowledges, The Lord God of heaven has charged me to build him
an house at Jerusalem. Esra 1.2.


Thus as that Captive people were in the time of Artaxerxes weeping by the
waters of Babylon, Nehemiah with Artaxerxes.
whilst their Harps were hung upon the melancholy willowes, and a deluge made
in that river by their own tears, God is then pleased to pity their heaviness,
and to give them hopes of one song more in Sion, by the promotion of a generous
Nehemiah into great favor with that Prince, whose noble temper makes use of
his interest for the public advantage of his own Nation.

For whilst Nehemiah (as we find it recorded) is upon his attendance at Court,
His public spirit. Chapt. 1.
he receives sad news from Jerusalem; the little scattered remnant there was
preyed upon by insulting enemies, the wall broken down, and the gates burnt
up. This strikes deep into the public spirit of Nehemiah, and drownes him in
mourning and tears, and the trouble of his heart became visible in the disorders
of his countenance, whilst he attends as a Cup Bearer, the King perceives that
unusual sadness, and when (upon strict inquiry) he knows the reason of it
from himself, His Commission to be Governor over Judea chap. 2.
he thinks fit to send him with a Commission as his Lieutenant to govern that
people with whom he was best acquainted, and for whom he had so tender a
respect, The King only desires him not to stay long away, for he cannot be
much without him, he loves his person and stands in need of his advice.

Nehemiah's Commission is no sooner sealed but he begins his Journey, and being
arrived at Jerusalem he vigorously acts in that Sphere he was placed in; and
notwithstanding all attempts of Enemies abroad, and the disorders of entangled
interests at home, he governes like himself as a prudent unbyased Deputy, and
a true Patriot of the real concerns of his Country: and at length having much
settled that distracted Land, his Master cannot any longer be without his
company, and therefore having finished all that man could perform, he is now
upon the close of his Government, and in my Text we find him upon his knees in
a modest reflection upon what he had done, and a passionate entreaty for
somewhat which he desired in the words I have read unto you, His Prayer upon
the close of his Government.
Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and wipe not out my good deeds that I
have done for the House of my God, and for the Offices thereof.

Thus you may see my Text is the prayer of a chief Governor or Deputy under the
great King Artaxerxes, Wherein is 1. somewhat mentioned by Nehemiah.
over the Land of Judea, wherein we may find these particulars: 1. somewhat
particularly mentioned and represented by Nehemiah, 2. the Petitions requested
from God.

1. That which is mentioned is his good Deeds, which he performed in his
Government; and these are interweaved with all the actions of his Authority,
and may be reduced unto these two heads. 1. Acts of Justice, and love to the
whole Nation in the settlement of their Civil Rights. 2. His service to the
Church, to the house of God, and to the offices thereof: the one bespeaks his
Piety to God, the other his Justice and Charity to man; the first contains his
diligence in Settling their temporal Interests, and the last comprehends his
industrious establishment of God's worship and Religion.

His good deeds to the whole Nation.
As for the first, his Acts of Kindness to the whole Nation, these may be
viewed in these following particulars.

1. In accepting of the Government in a dangerous time.
1. His taking the Government upon him in troublesome, dangerous, and calamitous
times; the afflictions of Jerusalem were heavy, and the whole Nation lay in
Poverty and Contempt, their Purses as well as their Spirits so much exhausted,
as that Nehemiah could not expect to better his fortune, or improve himself; he
knows the whole Province is in a flame, the gates of the holy City burnt, and
the wall of it in the dust; the neighboring people testify their enmity by
their continual Rapine and Incursions, dead bodies (as Josephus tells us)
strewed the High ways, and the whole Nation tired, very poor and low. Though
all things be thus disheartning and sad, yet Nehemiah refuses not to stand in
the gap, very generously endeavors the cure of this distemper, and thereby
proclaims, that he prefers their common good before his own private ease,
which as it was an act of generosity in it self, so it was hugely acceptable to
that low distracted people. Thus it is some satisfaction not utterly to be
forsaken, and they call for thanks who own our difficulties by participating in
them, to pull us out; they deserve our acknowledgments, who venture themselves
to save us from sinking. The Senate of Rome met Terentius Varro (though
unsuccesful in his fight with Hannibal at Cannae) with much honor, merely quia
de Republica non desperasset, he despaired not of a more happy day: when the
Sea smiles, it is not much valor or toil to take up the Helm, but for a man
voluntarily to engage in a Storm when he might be set safe at land, to labor
at the Helm when his neighbor's Ship springs a leak, to adventure into the
mouth of a Canon to save his friend, when only his own courage not any Imposal
called him thither, this speaks somewhat generous and handsome. Thus good
Nehemiah thinks it worthy of himself to take the Helm when Judea was almost
shipwrackt, whereby he gives the first check to those Enemies who thought to
swallow up all, Chap. 2.10.
and who (it seems) were exceedingly trooubled that any should appear to seek
the welfare of that perishing Nation.

2. His vigorous prosecution of the public interest before his private
Concerns.
2. Nehemiah's second Act of Justice and love to his people appears, in his
vigorous prosecution of the public work, before any advantage of his own
private Concerns, (though these were many and great) but in the repairs of
Jerusalem, and in all he evidenceth all the great Qualifications of a Commander
and Minister of State. Wherein appeared


1. His Wisdom.
As first his wisdom, whereby he wrought the people to his own mind; and by
prudent orders set many hands with much discipline to work: these animated by
the example as well as the command of their General, cheerfully did perform
their several tasks, Chap. 3.
they finished the Wall and the Bulwarks without any noise or confusion.

2. His watchfulness and unwearied Vigilance, 2. His Vigilance
in that though surrounded with Enemies of all sorts, the Samaritans, the
Arabians, and the Amorites, who strongly oppose that defense, yet his watchful
Eye cuts off all attempts, and that 1. By gaining intelligence of their Cabinet
Counsels, 2. By keeping a strict VVatch and well disciplined Guard, and in his
own person he assists in the Repairs: 3. By discovering the falseness of
pretended friends; for some of his own party of the Nobles, being related to
the Enemy by marriage and interest, many private Letters past betwixt them;
these he diligently intercepts, and dissipates their confederacies against him.

3. 3. His Courage* Chap. 4.3.
He gave upon all occasions good testimonies of much Courage and resolution,
and that mixed with a sweet affable pious temper; whilst the Enemy scoffs he
prays, and when by rumors of invasions and hired Prophecies they endeavor to
terrify him, he scorns their fears, and very undauntedly goes on. When they
find that terrors cannot prevail, they change their note, Chap. 6.2.
and sliely invite him to a personal conference, to a cessation of Arms, the
better to surprise him, and effect their designs, let us meet, said Sanballat,
in some one of the villages of the plains, but he desires to be excused; they
thought (said the good Nehemiah) to do me a mischief: thus no pretense could
hinder his resolution, his public management of Affairs.

His Acts of kindness appears in several other particulars:
3. Nehemiah's acts of Justice and Love to the whole Nation appears in his sweet
affable tenderness in all the lesser Concerns of that afflicted people: as 1. in
dispatch of Petitioners, as In casing the poor, and Dispatching of Petitions.
2. in easing the poor from those pressures which lay too hard upon them. In
unsettled calamitous times the meanest usually suffer most, the great fish
commonly breaks through whilst the lesser are swallowed up; this good Nehemiah
endeavors to remedy by abating their usury and exactions, by sweetning the
Masters toward their servants, and in openly rebuking the great men he brought
matters to a more tolerable moderation.

Whereas Nehemiah might have expected a general assistance in defraying those
public expenses, and so might have been chargeable to the people as some
Governors before him were, he desires from them no such Contribution, His
Charity and open Hospitality.
he has a large revenue of his own, and he makes a noble use of it, he
maintains his family much upon his own charge, and in case he had an allowance
from his Master, that will not serve, he spares not his own Estate, and keeps
an open free Table, and he himself assures us, Chap. 5.17.
That an hundred and fifty Jews were at my Table, besides those that came unto
us from among the Heathen that were about us. The Rulers of the Priests and of
the people were within, and the poor distressed, who were stripped and forced
into the City by the cruelty of enemies abroad, these all find a kind reception
and comfortable relief from him.

Thus you see the first of Nehemiah's good deeds his Acts of Justice, and love
to the whole Nation, manifested 1. In his taking upon him the government in an
hazardous time. 2. In a generous and vigorous prosecution of the public good
before his own private concerns: wherein he evidenceth

1. Wisdom and Prudence. 2. Vigilance and Care. 3. Courage and Resolution,
besides his many other Acts of mercy and kindess in speedy easing the people,
in moderating Taxes, relieving the Poor, in keeping an open Hospitality, and
spending his own fair Revenue.

Three inferences. And from all this I may infer these following Observations.

1. That a people once owned by God may be driven to great exigencies by want
and disorder at home by the confederacies and violence of enemies abroad.

2. That a Nation thus in straights cannot be blessed with a greater visible
mercy, than with a Governor of a noble true generous Spirit. It Was Israel's
happiness to have such as Moses to deliver them from the slavery of Egypt, and
such as Joshua to conduct them in the hardships of the wilderness, and such as
David to feed them in a green pasture, and such as Nehemiah to build up a
ruinous Jerusalem, to settle that broken Nation, and therefore

3. It is certain that as an excellent Magistrate is a great blessing, so the
not being sensible of that mercy, is a great sin. The grumbling at David, and
repining against Moses, and complaining against Joshua, a not being content
with Manna, and the speaking ill of those who spend themselves for us, is a sin
of a deep dye, and does not usually go unpunished.

I have now done with the first part of Nebemiah's good deeds, The second part
of Nehemiahs good deeds for the Church.
his Acts of justice and kindness to the whole Nation, in the settlement of
their civil Rights. I come now to the second, his services to the Church, and
the Offices thereof. He confines not himself to Acts of Civility and
Tenderness to the people, he knows that something is to be done for God as
well as Man, and that whatever is performed for his service is the readiest way
to advance their reputation abroad, as well as their prosperity and peace at
home. He thinks himself obliged to provide for the welfare of their Souls as
well as of their Estates, and therefore this prudent Deputy carefully sets
himself to the reestablishment of that Religion which was banished long from
Jerusalem, and to discountenance and weed out those tares and corruptions which
liberty and confusions had brought in. This he performs with zeal, and
particularly mentions in my Text, the good deeds that I have done for the house
of my God, and for the offices thereof.

These I shall reduce to the following particulars.

1. In clensing the Temple. Chap. 13. v. 8.
1. He took care for the cleansing and adorning God's house, and for the
unmingled purity of its Offices. In his absence from Jerusalem (being several
times sent for to the King) Tobiah had intruded into the Courts of the Temple,
and placed his own household stuff in those chambers which were appropriated to
a more holy use for the vessels of the Lord; this good Nehemiah is much
displeased at, and upon his return tells us, it grieved me sore, therefore I
cast forth all the household stuff of Tobiah out of the chamber, and thither
brought again the vessels of the house of the Lord, with the meat offerings and
Frankincense.

2. 2. In deposing intruders into the Priesthood. Chap. 7.64.
Intruders into the Priesthood are deposed, and made incapable of that service;
they who could not make out their legal qualification and descent, were, as
polluted, put from the Priesthood.

3. 3. In encouraging the Rulers and Priests in exposition of the Law.
Nehemiah (being happy in careful prudent Governors of the Church, he with
their help) sets up a diligent preaching and exposition of the Law. Chap. 8.
Painful Ezra with his brethren are not idle, they counsel and instruct the
people, and convince them of their Errors, in a Language they understood; he
reads and they are attentive, he expounds the difficulties and they modestly
receive his exposition, he makes a convenience for audience a Pulpit of Wood,
and they hang upon the Priests lips which are to preserve knowledge. The people
do not pretend to be teachers themselves, or that they know enough already, but
they are modestly attentive, and promise all obedience to what they hear.

4. In prescribing a Conformity in the matter and manner of their worship.
4. To keep off Confusion and new fancies he obliges them to a Conformity in
their worship of God; as to the matter, he prescribes all the Commands of Moses
without partiality to be punctually obeyed by all; as to the manner, Chap. 8.6.
they hearken to it unanimously, in one general posture, reverently and
decently, he opens the Book and they stand up, he praises God and they openly
proclaim Amen, Amen; they lift up their hands in sign of their consent, they
bow their heads and worship the Lord with their faces to the ground in token of
their humility.

5. In proclaiming a Fast. Chap. 9.
5. To work the people to a true Sense of their former miscarriages, and God's
unexpected mercies, he proclaims a solemn Fast, and enjoins an open confession
of sin.

6. In sanctifying the Sabbath.
6. He rectifies the abuse of the Sabbath, and represses the profaneness of
those who made no distinction of days.

7. Whereas the Dues of the Priests were wrested from them, and the Revenues of
the Church swallowed up by the great invaders of its Patrimony, 7. In restoring
their Patrimony to the Church. Chap. 13.10.
we find pious Nehemiah vigorously acting in the restoration of them; he
liberally contributes toward their maintenance himself, and builds houses for
the Prophets, and contends with those Nobles who thought it no robbery to keep
what they can, he compels them to be just, and to pay their Tithes, and takes
care that they shall not depend upon the Arbitrary benevolence of the people.

These were some of the many good deeds of this noble Lieutenant in his service
both to the Nation and the Church; in whom an excellent Magistrate may find a
pattern for himself. And truly Nehemiah's good deeds were of so noble and
diffusive an influence, as that some of the Ancients have thought him a type of
our blessed Savior Christ, Nehemiah whether a type of Christ?
which though uncertain whether intended by God's spirit, yet it is most
infallibly true, that our Savior did spiritually and substantially perform
that, which this Governor did outwardly effect: He like Nehemiah came to his
own in a time of extremity and need, to comfort the brokenhearted, and to
raise up the ruins of decayed mankind. Christ built up the walls of new
Jerusalem (his Church,) and has appointed Pastors and Governors to feed his
flock, and his Gospel to sever the Wheat from the less useful Chaff. He, like
this good man, pulled off the chains of the miserable, and proclaimed liberty
to the Captives laden with debt. Thus Christ did that spiritually, which
Nehemiah did outwardly, and those virtues which were so bright in him, were
such as Christ both requires and rewards in Magistrates, Lib. Antiq. 11. c. 5.
and Josephus his character of him is not yet dead, he was (...) etc. A just
person of a most excellent disposition, a great passionate lover of his
Country.

5 Inferences.
From all these put together I gain these following particulars.

1. Chief magistrates may interpose in matters of Religion.
1. That the chief Governor has power to rectify the abuse of God's service,
according to the established Laws of God and his Church: he may lawfully do what
Nehemiah did; it is no encroachment upon Christian liberty to determine the use
of things indifferent, nor is it prejudicial to the Commands of Christ to obey
the constitutions of Authority.

2. 2. But not usurp the office of Priests.
Though the chief Magistrate may oversee the Priests, and cause them to execute
their duties, yet they have no power to usurp their offices. His being a
Magistrate did not privilege him to exercise the Priesthood; that Calling is
sacred, and requires a due Mission as well as Abilities. If Corah offer to take
up the Censer, the Earth may open and swallow him up. If Vzziah (though a King)
intrudes into the Priests office, God will meet him in the way, and as he
stretches out his hands with a Censer, a Leprosy breaks out on his Forehead;
and he who would needs offer incense to God, becomes loathsome to himself; and
he who was not satisfied to come in as a King, is shut out as a Leper from
approaching the Sanctuary.

3. That the information of Judgment is the most natural means of rectifying
the disorders of our affections. Information of Judgment a good means of
gaining affections.
The preaching of the word, and the instructing of the people, is the best way
to make them sensible of their sins.

Confession of sin to attend upon our knowledge of it.
4. That a due confession and acknowledgment of our guilt must attend upon the
sense and knowledge of our sins: a solemn Fast is proclaimed after reading the
Law.

To oppose sacriledg an argument of a pious soul.
5. That a restoring unto God the things that are God's, and the opposing of
Sacrilege is usually an act of a pious and generous soul. This overcomes very
high temptations, which many sink under: Nehemiah will stand in the gap and
hazard a contention with any, and rebuke the Nobles, rather than connive at the
robbing of God. He will honor the persons, and keep sacred the possessions
dedicated to his service, and not suffer the Priesthood to be exposed to the
arbitrary benevolence of the people.

Last part of Nehemiahs request, of what to be remembered.
Thus I have done with the first part of my Text, that Nehemiah mentioned and
represented his good deeds for the Nation and for the Church, I come now to the
last part, to that which he requests of God, and that is a Remembrance of
these, Remember me O my God, and wipe not out etc.

In two phrases he desires the same thing, 1. a Remembrance, 2. a not wiping
out his good deeds.

The first is positive, the second negative, A twofold Remembrance.
both to the same purpose, both mutually explain each other: there is a
remembrance Theoretical, and there is a remembrance Practical; the first is
immanent, the second transient, that in affectu, this in effectu; and since
Nehemiah enforces this request by a not wiping out, we may conclude that his
prayer to God is, that he may be effectually remembered.

Here two things offer themselves, 1. by whom he would be remembered, 2. how he
would have this Remembrance expressed?

1. The Remembrancer desired is God, The Remembrancer desired God.
Remember me O my God.

Though Nehemiah's Acts of kindness to the people be great, and his sweet
behavior and care had extremely obliged all, yet he makes not his address to
them, he minds not Jerusalem of her rebuilded wall, nor the Rulers of their
vindicated honors, nor the Priests of their restored function (prostituted
before to the basest of the people,) he minds not the whole Nation of its
settlement and peace, as far as their entangled interests would permit, he
turns not to any of these but to his God, Remember me O my God.

Most eminently, especially before Man.
He turns to his God 1. most especially and eminently before man, 2.
exclusively, he utterly excludes and rejects the remembrance of man. Philip. 2.


1. He turns most especially to his God, because his good deeds were performed
in obedience to him.

2. Because they were effected by God's grace and peculiar strength, who
works in all men to will and to do; and who actuates Princes and Magistrates
with Spirits suitable to their Stations.

3. Because God's glory was the great aim of what he did: this the Gentiles
scoff at, and from the ruins of the City and the neglected defilements of the
Temple, took occasion to contemn the God of Israel, who once owned himself
their Protector and their mighty deliverer.

4. Because God is pleased to accept of acts of Charity and love to man as done
to himself, and therefore for these and many more reasons he most especially
has recourse in the first place to God, Remember me O my God.

2. He turns to God exclusively. Man's remembrance is not at all desired, he is
silent of that, and only begs this, because

1. God was not at all obliged to him, nor his Debtor for his good deeds, but
man was, and therefore were men Candid and ingenuous, and but tolerably Just,
Nehemiah might have very well expected that they would not easily forget him;
or if they did, he knew it would be their own fault, not his, and consequently
the ill would be theirs too for being so ungrateful; and therefore this noble
Governor is above their flattery, and hunts not after their praise, he seeks
no monument in their remembrance, he minded not himself in doing them good, nor
does he court their applause for what he did perform.

Nehemiah omits any desire of being remembered by man, out of a real distrust of
ever having it duly paid; for if God be forgotten, man cannot very well expect
to be remembered, and they who are too usually unmindful of the daily mercies of
God, will quickly be strangers to the kindness of man. Experience tells us, that
a little trouble or hardship of a few hours, blots out the memory of mercies
poured down the whole life before by God. If Israel want a little water, they
will forget the wonders of Egypt; a little bad news, or a wanton desire of
flesh, or a few days absence of Moses, makes them all dance after a Calf. Well
therefore may the Magistrate distrust a remembrance of man, since man thus
easily forgets his God. Magistrates, who move in an open Sphere, (though never
so sweet and pleasing in their influence, yet) accidentally may attract some
unquiet exhalations, and if they displease but once, that one ungrateful Action
is the only thing remembered. And therefore as every pious prudent Christian
secures to himself a more faithful repository for his treasure in Heaven,
because he finds the moth and the rust breaks through all on earth, so good
Nehemiah, because he finds men grossly ignorant, causlesly querulous, unconstant
in their affections, and ungrateful for kindness and favors received,
therefore he thinks not fit to rely upon their memories, nor court their
applauses, but looks only upon his God, who faithfully records all, whose
gifts and promotions are without repentance, in whom there is no variableness
or shadow of Change.

But some may question, whether this may not be an Act of Presumption for any
man, Whether it be any presumption in Nehemiah to be remembered by God?
who at best is bad, to present his good deeds to God for a remembrance for
him, in whose Eyes the Seraphims themselves are impure. But it is certain

1. That Nehemiah did no more than what many good men before him did. Thus
Obadiah mentions his good pious service in hiding the Prophets in a Cave etc.

How far a man may reflect on his own good deeds?
2. He did no more than what lawfully may be done. For seeing that deeds truly
good are done in Obedience to God, in faith and to his glory, they flow a Deo
in Deum, and therefore cannot but cheer up the Soul, and breath into it those
Comforts which attend upon a good Conscience, and add Confidence to our
Addresses unto God. This St. Paul triumphs in, 2 Cor. 1.12.
and when man is silent, God is often pleased to show publicly his remembrance
of good Actions, done in obedience to him. If Abraham put a knife to his sons
Throat when commanded, God openly remembers it, and promises a reward. If the
people murmur against Moses, God himself will vindicate him, he is faithful in
all my house; he owns David to be a man after his own heart, and proclaims Job
to be a perfect and an upright man; and he tells the Church of Thyatira, I know
thy works, and charity, and service, and faith, and patience: and therefore we
may safely conclude, that this kind of representment of good deeds to God,
infers neither presumption in the Agent, nor merit unto Justification; for a
deed may be good in its kind, yet not meritorious, and a good man may rejoice
in the testimony of a good Conscience without arrogance or boasting.

To Nehemiah therefore, and such as he is, it may be said, Thou have been
faithful to God and thy own Master; no hazards could stagger thy principles,
nor the potency of several factions lessen thy care of God's service and
honor; the whole Nation has for many years tasted of the Sweets of thy
Government, and the Revenue and Persons of Priests shrouded under thy
protection, and therefore however men may be affected, yet it is thy comfort
that thou have an infallible Record in heaven, who sees in secret and openly
rewards, to him thou may freely call Remember me etc.

Nehemiah clears him from presumption by being to be spared. Spare me etc.
And to all this let me add two words more, which Nehemiah makes use of wholly
to clear his words from presumption: thus v. 22. Remember me and spare me
according to the greatness of thy mercy. God's sparing is an act of
Providence; it is the not inflicting of that evil on a person, which God might
in justice or power send down, it is sometimes expressed by not imputing, by
covering sin and pardoning offenses, and therefore done according to multitude
of mercies.

And truly the deformity of Sin is so monstrous, and the Curses which attend
upon it so hideous and many, as that to spare when punishment is deserved, to
forget the sin and remember the sinner, is not a single kindness but a
multitude of mercy.

Thus you see Nehemiah's request, Spare me O my God, is not the Language of
pride, nor the pleadings of merit; it is no Pharisaical lisp, but the groan of a
Penitent, God be merciful to me a sinner.

And truly we may find that Nehemiah, Good reason for it.
though never so godly, has good reason to beg for a Spare me, for though his
good deeds as such do not deserve a reward, yet they are not as such subjects
of punishment; however he has reason to cry Spare me. For

1. Because he may smart for the peoples sins.
There is an union and consociation betwixt the Magistrate and People; and we
often find that the one is punished for the misdemeanors of the other.

Thus some thousands of David's Subjects smart for his sin of numbering the
people, and an excellent Josiah removed for the sin of Judah: God was angry
with Moses for the peoples sake, and let Nehemiah be as just and as innocent as
he can, yet he may suffer for the peoples corruption, and therefore in
prevention of this he may cry Spare me O my God.

2. It is certain, that the best of his deeds had their mixture of
imperfection, and therefore being conscious to his own failings he begs for
pardon and acceptance. Magistrates are but men, and not utterly privileged
from the passions of flesh and blood; 2 Timothy 2.1.
and therefore St. Paul enjoins supplications, prayers, intercessions, and
giveing of thanks for all in Authority; we are obliged not only to render
(...) thanks, for the happiness of Government, and the good it brings with it,
but (...) supplications, for the averting of Calamity from their persons, and
(...) prayers for those graces they stand in need of; and we must send up to
the throne of Grace (...) intercessions, for God's pardoning unto them their
sins, for his remission of their personal offenses, as well as their public
failings. This well weighed would stop the censures of men, a sense of this
invites Nehemiah to wave all thoughts of his good deeds, to banish any thing
which exceeds an humble Spare me; he claims not a Crown for his merit, but
petitions for a pardon for his failings, and that according to the multitude of
mercies.

Lastly, Nehemiah closes up his whole Book with one word, which wholly clears
his Prayer from presumption, and that is, Remember me O my God for Good.

1. For good! This is the voice 1. Remember me for good. This voice 1. of
Humility.
of Humility, whereby he acknowledges himself to be in a state capable of being
made better; though he be highly loved by his Prince, and of great authority at
Court, and tenderly honored by Priest and People, yet there is a greater good
than all this which he aims at, and makes the object of his desires, and this
he looks for there only where it can be had, from his God, to him he cries,
Remember me for good.

2. For good! 2. Of Faith.
This is the voice of confidence and trust, it implies his steadfast belief
that there is a reward laid up for good deeds in general, and that his good
services particularly shall be crowned with good.

This God has promised, and therefore every good man of us, as well as
Nehemiah, may rely upon it; especially if we make God peculiarly our own by our
relyance and faith, so as to call him justly my God: and if we evidence out
faith by our good deeds to God and to Man, if every one of us in our own
Spheres discharge our duties to God, to our King, and to one another, if we do
all this sincerely and constantly, we may then confidently pray with good
Nehemiah, Lord remember me; we may then be assured we shall not be forgotten,
and that our humble Spare me will be attended with the greatest good.

Application, but that I am confident that most of this Auditory have done that
in their thoughts already, and therefore I shall conclude all with these 2 or 3
Queries, Three queries.
which I shall leave to your own resolution.

Whether, when we of this Kingdom were like those of Jerusalem, at a low ebb,
surrounded with storms and unexpected tempests, when enemies pressed us without,
and calamities and distress disheartened us within, whether then we were not
happy in a gracious King, who pitying our sad estate did give Commission to a
real Nehemiah, whose wisdom and vigilance, whose courage and conduct preserved
a very small handful from violence and ruin; whether our Pilot did not
generously engage in our storms to keep us safe, neglecting his private ease
for the public good, and charitably relieving the naked and poor, when he had
but little left to maintain himself.

2. When Rapine and Confusion encroached upon the Office as well as the
Patrimony of the Church, when the chambers of the Sanctuary were filled with
Tobiah and his followers, when the portions of Gods Altar were shared betwixt
Sanballat and his crew, whether then we were not once more (by the care of our
present Sovereign) made happy with his return, under whose wing and protection
we had been formerly preserved? whether he has not upon all occasions both
before and now encouraged religion, and respected the very persons as well as
the function of the Clergy? Whether he did not refuse all profers which were in
the least inconsistent with his duty to God or his Prince, or the tranquillity
of his Charge, whether I say upon all opportunities he has not showed himself
a Nehemiah indeed?

Lastly, if upon search we find all this and much more to be true, then,
whether we of this place are not obliged 1. to thank God for his mercy, 2 to
thank our Sovereign for his still continued care in sending such to cherish and
protect us, 3. (to conclude all) whether it does not befit us that that request
which Nehemiah in my Text put up for himself, may be our joint Prayer for him,
whose Government and Care we have had so kind an Experience of, viz. That God
would remember both him and us for good, that he would spare them according to
the multitude of his mercies, that he would not wipe out all the good deeds
which he and they all have done for this whole Nation, for God's Church, and
for the Offices thereof. Amen.

FINIS.

