A PASTORAL Upon the DEATH of HER GRACE THE Duchess of Ormond.
Qua nihil majus, meliuse Terris
Fata donavere, bonique Divi,
Nec dabunt: Quamvis redeant in Aurum
Tempora priscum.
Horat. MYRTILLO. ALEXIS.

Myrtillo. IF loaded Eyelids, and a clouded Brow,
Crossed Arms, and rising Sighs, great Sorrow show;
And if one Friend may know another care,
Why these sad Marks does my Alexis wear?

Alexis. Alas, Myrtillo! cast thy eyes around,
And tell me, What like comfort's to be found?
The Sun has not sent forth one cheerful Ray,
But worn a Cloud of Mourning all the day.
See how our drooping Flocks no Pastures heed,
But bleat about us, and neglect to feed!
Let Nature look in all her Orders sad;
Nor Envy dare to show it, if she is glad;
Since nothing, nothing now can Joy restore,
For Fate has struck, and PYRRHA is no more.

Myrtillo. PYRRHA! for whom our daily Vows we paid,
And best-lov'd Younglings on the Altar laid;
For whose long Welfare, Life, and happy State,
All grateful Prayers on the good Gods did wait;
Whose Virtue Nymphs were taught to copy young,
For 'twas the Theme of every Shepherds Song:
Has Fate at last prevailed! And is SHE gone!
O whither now shall many wretched run!
The Injured, for Redress; the Poor, for Aid;
Worth, for Reward; or Grief, to be allayed:
Since Justice, Pity, Bounty, quits our Plains;
But Sorrow grows Eternal, and remains.

Alexis. As full-blown Flowers, that long have decked the ground,
And with their Odours filled the Air around,
Bend down their heads at last to Mother Earth,
And fade away, though to a second Birth;
Or as tall Caedars, who (admired) have stood
For many years the Glory of the Wood,
Finding in time their sacred Roots decay,
Are by the next rude Tempest torn away:
So flourished PYRRHA, and as high did rise,
Adorned the Earth, and seemed to reach the Skies.
Fair, without blemish; Lofty, without Pride:
But, Oh! the Tempest rose, and PYRRHA died!
Gone then is all Spring, now Winter's only ours;
Sighs rise like Storms, and Tears must fall like Showers.

Myrtillo. If full of Years and Honors PYRRHA fell,
Grief may with Swains of humbler Talents dwell,
While to a nobler Work our minds we raise,
Suspend our Sorrows, and proclaim Her Praise.

Alexis As round Heavens Throne whole Choirs of Angels throng,
Yet all their Triumph's one Eternal Song:
So here on Earth should PYRRHA 's Praises last,
Till Time's no more, and Natures works lie wast.

Myrtillo. Then let us tune our Reeds; Thou first the Lay
Begin; Our Flocks shall listen, and I Will play:
So up to PYRRHA'S Fame our Notes we'll raise,
Suspend our Sorrows, and proclaim her Praise.

Alexis. Mean time, ye boundless Winds, your Gusts forbear,
And all ye Hills and Valleys round give ear;
Keep back ye Rivers, and forbear to run,
Till the great Tale of PYRRHA 's Fame be done:
Then let each wind bear it where-e'r it blows,
Catch it, ye Hills and Valleys, as it goes,
With your assenting Echoes in the close.
Murmur it, Floods, as to your Seas ye creep,
And with it add new Wonders to the Deep;
For the Renown of PYRRHA 's Name shall last
Till Time's no more, and Natures Works lie wast.

Myrtillo. On then.

Alexis. -- As Stars before the rising day
Seem in their Orbs to sink, and dive away;
So all the Nymphs upon our fertile Plains,
Though proud and cruel to their sighing Swains,
When PYRRHA 's powerful Charms approachd, they failed,
And any Satyr might have then prevailed:
So much in blooming Youth could she surprise,
Sh'ad all the panting Hearts and wishing Eyes,
Come then, ye Nymphs of Arcadia, draw near,
Weep round her Earth, and all your Garlands tear;
For PYRRHA 's Beauty once no Equal knew;
But Fate has seized Her now, and must have You.

Myrtillo. PYRRHA's bright Eyes enlightened every Grove;
And fired at last ALCANDER's Heart with Love;
The Nymph found Him a Triumph worth Her Charms,
And She alone was fit to fill His Arms:
Many did either Conquest wish to have made;
But only They each other could invade;
For in Her Form did Nature seem improved,
And He was framed to Love and be Beloved:
Therefore Heaven smiled, and all the Stars looked kind;
When Pyrrha and Alcander's Hearts were joined.

Alexis. Who has not heard of great Alcander 's Name,
So long the Muses Task, and Pride of Fame?
Pan early chose, and made him great in Power,
When the Wolves raged, and did our Flocks devour:
He took the guard of the molested Plains;
Saw our Lambs fed, and cheered Us frighted Swains;
Waked with us 'midst dark Nights and pinching Colds,
To drive the howling Monsters from our Folds:
In all which time, PYRRHA, His charming Bride,
Often came, and watched as He did, by His side;
Of his worst dangers still her part would bear,
And for all Joys She gave Him, asked but care.
Now, ye poor Flocks, go bleat about, and stray;
Ye Shepherds, cast your Scrips and Hooks away;
Stretched on the ground, your fatal loss bemoan,
And call on PYRRHA 's Name at evr'y groan.

Myrtillo. Full Fifty happy years this matchless Pair
Lived in unshaken Love; No Jealous care,
Or mean Distrust, did once their Joys molest,
So in a Noble Offspring were They blessed,
Of Warlike Youths, worthy their Fathers Name,
And Daughters, spotless as their Mothers Fame:
Bold Celadon, the Darling of loud War,
And Strephon now, whose pious, shoulders bear
The burden of his aged Fathers care;
Young Damon, lovely as the Beams that play
about our East, and lead the corning Day;
Fair Phyllida, who was with Aegon wed,
And blessed Him with a Faithful Fruitful Bed;
Generous Lysca too, by Nature taught
To recommend the poor man's cause unsought.

Alexis All these the Offspring were of PYRRHA 's Womb:
Come then, ye Mothers, mourn around Her Tomb:
In PYRRHA 's Name your Mystic Rites perform,
When to your Aid ye would Lucina charm,
Either the laboring Matrons pangs to ease,
Or bless the Barren Mourner with increase.

Myrtillo. Oh! kind Alexis, still pursue thy Song,
How these fair Branches grew, or withered young.

Alexis. Brave Celadon through Fate untimely failed,
And was by Pan and all his Train bewailed;
Some mourning Muses sung Him to His Tomb,
Yet others felt more grief, and thence mere dumb.
Young Damon faded in His Beauties Pride,
And Phyllida no less lamented died.
But long may Strephon 's Life rejoice the years
Of good Alcander, and assist His Cares.
Fullness of time, kind Heaven, to Lysca give,
It Is for your Honor, Gods, that She should live;
For She, the more of days you Her afford,
By Her good Deeds will make You more adored;
Since Lysca was of pious PYRRHA born,
And PYRRHA 's Virtues Lysca 's Heart adorn.

Myrtillo. But what shall now give good Alcander joy?

Alexis. The Gods, when Fate took Celadon away,
Called Daphnis forth, the Heroic Race to run,
Which his great Parent had so well begun:
From Celadon 's brave Loins young Daphnis came,
Full of His Heat, and conscious of His Fame,
Whose Mind his Fathers Deeds did so employ,
He grew Alcander 's Hopes, and PYRRHA 's joy.
PYRRHA loved Daphnis, and with pleasure found
The Hero 's Virtues in the Youth abound.
When Daphnis languish'd, PYRRHA did provide
The charming soft Aminta for His Bride:
Aminta! tender as the Lambs that play
In Sunny morns, and Innocent as They;
Sweet as those Evening Airs that gently blow
Where the rich fragrant Eastern Spices grow;
Calm as our Groves in a fair Summers Night,
And Lovely as the first-created Light.
Daphnis was born, Amyntas with Him joined,
To chase all sorrows from Alcander 's mind;
To add new Honors to His store of Fame,
And a long Race of Heroes to His Name:
His Name, which shall, with PYRRHA 's Praises, last
Till Time's no more, and Natures Works lie wast.

Printed and Sold by N. Thompson, at the Entrance into the Old-Spring-Garden
near Charing Cross, 1684.


