THE FANATIC INDULGENCE Granted, ANNO 1679. Si natura negat facit indignatio
versum
Qualemcunque potest.
Juvenal. Sat. 1.By Mr. NINIAN PATERSON.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by DAVID LINDSAY and his Partners, at the foot of Heriot's
Bridge, 1683.

Ad Illustrissimum Principem IACOBVM ALBANIAE Et Eboraci Ducem.
PRinceps magne meae tibi si placuere Camoenae,
Muneris instat erit, quod plac^^re tibi.
At si displiceant, metuendae praem^^ poenae,
Damnum ingens claris displicuisse viris.
Principis est laus summa tamen, dare dona Poetis,
Vel magis ut placeant, displiceantve minus.
TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS JAMES Duke of ALBANIE.
GReat Sir, this Poem still concealed have I,
Till time has Christn'd it a Prophesy.
Indulgence now unmasked, strives to tryst
With John of Leyden against Antichrist.
This is the Trojan Horse, wherein there lies
Catsbie and Vaulx, with new conspiracies.
This the Shaftburian Crockodil his blind
To lure Scotes Rogues to English commons mind;
Nor is this twattling fame, but sure as death,
Witness where Welsh resigned his latest breath.
This Meteor impregnated the air
With some to usurp the throne, and sacred chair
With a new faith, but not without its works:
Yet such as more beseems Jews and Turks.
But now wee'r fallen in that dismal time,
Wherein to utter truth's an heinous crime.
When squinteyed slander, and hypocrisy,
In triumph bear away the verdant bay.
Protect me then, the galled Brotherhood
Smart censures will reject, tho wise and good;
Being swelled with that same fury, which before
Glutted it self with our dread Soveraings Gore.
Noll is revived, his Ghost drinks our ill health,
And we must once more try a common wealth,
No more Succession, rather be it our fate
To truckle under illegitimate.
And then in our career, each friend, or foe,
Just as we please, we will call, or make him so.
And like an hurrying flood we will still increass,
And swell our channel, as we mend our pace.
We Will scorn Hobs Leviathan, whill we play
Our selves in the Ocean of Stern Tyrranny.
Begone Religion, and be buried Law,
Britain must once more turn Aceldama.
But often omnipotency lurkes, until
The Creaturs Policy, and prowess fail;
And GOD will Joseph press, and gall, and wring.
E're he advance him second to the King.
And has decreed this lot for every man,
To pass the red Sea e're he taste Canaan.
We see the Sovereign, and imperial State
Is not exempted from the common fate,
Nay Heavens impartial, and resistless brow
Frowns oftener on the Scepter then the plough:
When he securely whistles to his teem.
The other fears a tottring diadem.
All my desire, Great Sir, is that I may
Live like an Atome in the radiant Ray
Of your life-giving heat, and glorious light,
Whose crisping spires may make me warm and bright.
Princes ar Prophets Guardians, ye know,
Jacobus Rex was, Aris excubo.
David was Poet; and King James they sing,
Was King of Poets, and the Poets King.
And this emblazons most a Prince renown.
When he with Muses Laurel Crowns his Crown.
Poets and Prophets both inspired of GOD,
Were Kings Companions, till our late Bownd rode:
Where Reason and Religion did invade
A Frantic passion, and prevailing made
That giddie fury, that awaits the power
Of thy more sacred charming Hellebore.
And be it thy fate, for to suppress this flamm,
And be true Majesty thy Anagram;
Which for thy Anagram may justly pass, James Stuart Anagr. True Majeste
ablato A. S.

As wanting the dull omen of the A. S.
And spite of envy may thy glory be
Confined to nothing but eternity.
The FANATIC INDULGENCE, ANNO 1679.
Juven. Sat. 1.
Sed si mora longior hortum
Fanatico Indulget non illi deerit amator,
Mittentur braccae, cultelli, fraena, flagellum,
Agmina sic veteres referent Whigimiria mores.
Idem Sat. 2.
Sic, sic, Fanaticus oestro
Percussus Bellona tuo pugnavit, and ingens
Abstulit omen adhuc clari magnique triumphi:
Nam regem cepit: sic de temone Britanno
Excidit Arviragus, sat not a est bellua, cerno
Erectas in terga sudes, ast absit ab illo
Dedecus hoc Claverus ait.
Sat. 4. ver. 124.
Sic vetus indulget senibus Clementia porcis.
Idem Sat. 6.
Quae stimulat vos
Iam sibi materiam Ducis indulgentia quaerit,
Spes nulla ulterior.
Idem Sat. 7.
Iramque animosque a crimine sumunt.
THE FANATIC INDULGENCE.
To the KING. 1.
INDULGENCE! thunderclap! Medusa's head:
Which makes us all like stones, dumb, stupefied.
And with amazement confidently vow,
The British isle it is grown Africa now.
Its Crete, its Crete, this Island, and at length
Indulgence tells us what is the Labyrinth;
Not in one Town, but all the Nation over
Ten thousand sold to feed the Minotaure.
And which would make an heart of flint to bleed,
No hope appears of Ariadne's thread.
We are in Monsters ^ertil; after this
Impossible? incredible what is?
What is it that the Fanatic asks so great
Transcends his hopes, or can his wish defeat?
When we thy Loyal Subjects looked for
Some Halcyonian days, the Tempests Roar:
And to our eyes on every rising wave,
Death sits in Triumph, and presents a grave,
And in the midst of our dispaires, and fears,
Tears drowns our sighs, and sighs dries up our tears.
We are like Job's these ninteen years perplexed,
Betwixt distractions, and destructions vexed.
And that (dread Sir) tho not so strange, as true,
By Scabbs, and Devils now Indulged by you.
2.
Indulgence! Mercy LORD! from whence? to whom?
From CHARLES; Nay: to ripp his mothers womb
As Nero did, I Will never belive't; like this
Ovid has no such Metamorphosis.
CHARLES both merciful and wise, to Act
The much deplored Athamas mistake,
To murder his own Children, and to spare
The loathsome vermin the Sanum.
whole body tare.
To set three Kingdoms all again in flamm,
And throw poor Meleager in the same,
To please some mad Altheas: Acts like those,
May frett thy friends, not satisfy thy foes.
To lay the tittle, Faith's Defender, down,
The richest Jewel of thy radiant Crown.
Strike Loyalty, Law, and Religion dumb,
To please a fullsome, nastie, hairbraind scum,
A furious spawn of fiends, by whom alone
The devil does blush to see himself outdone.
I mean their Master leaders, the rest all sees
Hes no more brains, then silly butter-flies;
And yet can act such bloody monstrous crimes,
Not writ in Registers of former times.
Rebellion, The Bishops murder.
murder, sacriledg, a fault
Complext, not to be purged with fire, nor salt!
These to indulge, is Scepter to resign,
And let the bramble King it o'r the vine.
O boundless mercy! Heaven and Hell here lies,
In strange (how?) reconciled antipathies.
Base unrelenting fate could thou not spare
Good Major Weir till now to have got a share.
Unhappy Mitchel had thou lived so long,
Thou had escaped in this damned throng,
And had been sentenced at the Council Table,
The innocentest traitor of the Rabble.
III.
Indulgence in the Hebrew Hamal is,
Yet Hamilton swears this is none of his
Projecting, or procuring, or desire;
His grace would never kindle such a fire.
The other great, and mighty DUKE, he vows
It came from Hell for any thing he knows.
The Legate, men suspected most, he says,
He acted but as sticks in puppet plays;
He acted being acted, this was all
His influence on its original.
Avaunt then snake unto these dismal deeps,
Where every thing but damned sorrow sleeps.
IIII.
Indulgence is CAINS mark, or such another;
No man may kill him that has killed his Brother.
And herein Cain was Scot: the DUKE like GOD,
Who sent the Traitor to the Land of Nod;
And yet confind him home to this his Nation;
A Land of fugitives and trepidation,
A Land wherein disgrace, and loud toung'd shame,
Has split the Trumpet of our former Fame,
Either for Arms or Arts. Your Huskoes yield,
Ye Sons of Mars its cowards gains the field,
These only now the Acts of grace commands,
Because no Widow cursed their swords, nor hands.
An Apple cleft in two is not more twin,
Then their Religion and their fights have been;
Whose chiefest properties lies in their voice,
Like shearing of a sow, no wool but noise:
For when with Covenants they brag the stars.
Unto their heels they do commend there wars.
Just as the forced air below, does fall
In noise and loathsome stink, and there is all.
They are no witches, tho their exercise
Are parallels, murders and Tragedies.
They Are always grumbling, cruel, furious,
Ill looking, spiteful, and malicious,
Blood-thristy Tigers, never pleased but when
They swill like Leeches in the blood of men.
Their Baptism they renounce, or do as much;
They need no Devils each of them is such:
For being baptized to the Trinity,
They dare sit mute to the doxologie.
They dare not sing, what they dare say, like those
Despise in verse what they commend in prose.
They to their souls in conscientious care
Prefer their babbling to our Saviors prayer.
And take their grounds of fighting from the word,
Because our Savior said put up thy sword.
Just like that wily Jesuits mistake,
That of Saint Peter did salt Peter make.
They say a Bishops office is for a Turk,
Because Saint Paul did call it a good work.
It brings damnation for to resist,
Saint Paul did say, they say its the cause of Christ.
Strange Estredg consciences that quick devours
Great Camel-truths, fired with gnat-Metaphors.
Be subject all for conscience sake; these Heroes
Can swallow that, and fight at curse ye Meroz.
But as of faith, and manhood, they are outted,
Their learning too it mightily is doubted;
Their Logick's out of date, for they do know
No Syllogism, but in Fer^o.
And when their courage with their powder's spent,
Indulgence closes all in Celarent.
They Are puddle-rithmers too, they dare we see
Discharge their bumbast at our Poesy.
And its reported that they largely share
In glistring Guinies, for their Paltrie ware.
The famine in Samaria we see
Makes slimie sordid doves dung sell so hie, 2 Kings 6. 25.

They gave (in ghuest account) when wanting bread,
Near ten pound Sterling for an Asses head.
(Had all our whiggs been there, from rear to van,
They had happ't headless every mortal man)
Muse burn thy bays, gold and the laurel now
Is only given to the thick brained crew.
Empiricks let alone, your market falls,
The Revenues of Close-stools and Urinals.
We need no potions to our paunch, nor purse;
Trai^ours indulged, will gratis murder us.
Close up the Muses Courts, the Colleges,
A living vatican, each Fanatic is.
Baronius and Bellarmin ingrost,
Their first two syllables in his brains have lost.
Our Musickes all in discords: acts of grace
Has highest trebl's joined with lowest base.
We croak like Ravens, and we screech like Rats,
And for one SHARP we have ten thousand flats.
Out notes so dissonant will never agree
In Church, nor State, to make an Harmony.
Our Kirk's a new Benjotral, which we call
Nor Presbiterian, nor Episcopal.
All tend to the old chaos, our very Laws
Are all ingulphed in the good old cause.
No wonder, Traitors make monopoly
Of the embalmed Name of honesty;
And will admit no honest man but him,
Dare call a Bishop Antichristian limm:
No honest man if not of their opinion,
Although he were almighties dearest minion.
Saint Paul himself they scorn to call him Saint,
Because he never took their Covenant.
Yea from fool-hatred of the Organs they
Made poor bagpypes sing dumb, and out of play.
V.
Indulgences ar Popish things, then why
Should they be fancied by such Saints as they?
Since their foundation fails them; for its known
That neither Saints, nor merits they can own.
And too, for which I verily am sorry,
They are not yet come to their Purgatory.
Besides Indulgences they have no place, Vid. Pell. de Indulg: Lib. 1. c. 13.

If men be not into the state of grace,
And they the very name of grace think vile,
Because it sometimes is a Bishops style.
But now the case is stated amongst all,
Treason indulged makes all sins venial.
May not the Papist say what need of Rome
For Pardons now, since CHARLES is Pope at home.
Had Luthers mind run parallel with his,
No strife had been about Indulgences.
Martin had still been Monk, nor had he yet
In genial sheet protested with his Kate.
But yet to Pardon those, by Pardons worse,
Is Heavens dire vengeance, and Earths heavy curse.
Saw ye an Ape, that a purgation took,
Before these news so did our Whigmares look.
Now like a Passenger that escaped a grave
In the sweld womb of an impostum'd wave;
They knock the Stars with their advanced head,
As Phaeton when he the reins did guide.
With that same success too, the world they will fire,
By guiding ill, what they did ill desire.
For they repent not what they late have done,
Vowing the second part of that same tune.
Clearing both throats and pypes; its not in vain,
A well paid spring ought to be played again.
If ancient Sages saws with you have credit,
To spare a vice, it is the way to spread it.
Tame mercy is the breast that suckls vice,
Till hydra like her heads she multiplies.
In sparing thieves and murderers, all see,
A private favour's publicque injury.
Should pity spare, and let the gangren spread,
Until the bodies wholly putrified?
What Surgeon would do this, but he that is mad?
He Is cruel to the good who spares the bad.
Cause feed them fatt, and give them flesh and wine,
Bring in a water pipe to wash the Swine.
Cause light the Western lamp, which when it died,
Was ay with fire and sacrifice supplied
Give them a power rebellions trump to blow, Lightfoots Temple. Service. c. 9.

In that same breath forbid them to do so.
Give them all Kirkes, reward them for their flight,
Encourage them to such another fight.
When all is done, let the whole world view,
They only hold Kirk Government of you.
O Power (i will not blaspheme) beyond divine,
To make mere contradictions so combine;
Things so discordant meekly to agree,
The Presbiterians and Monarchy.
The Covenant, and the alledgeance oath,
Bear-chaff and butter, makes a choking broth.
No longer then, this Prophecy is hid,
The Leopard must lie down with the kid.
Then wheel about, and as at first ye were,
The Court commands the haughty Presbiter.
Auspicious peace clapps her triumphant wings,
Betwixt the Presbiterians Cause and Kings.
That valiant heel runs from it self at last,
That lately ran from Bothwel-bridge so fast.
Yet who should challenge those the King will cocker
This was fulfilled in Cameron, and his company the Spawn of the Indulgence.
Stay, stay, and then take up that ewe and yoke her.
A company of bloody mutineers,
Who always set both Church and State by the ears.
The Planets, if we trust the Astrologer,
At their wretcht birth were all irregular;
A tribe that would that learned Greek compel
To bring Metempsychosis too from hell. Pythagoras.

Changing like weather Cocks, still at the flight
Like Metra daughter to the hungry wight.
Still skittish finding fault with that, with this,
Making the Bible Metamorphosis.
The Hieroglyphics of all ill; no less
Then the perfection of all wickedness.
For if uncleanness, lies, and murders be
The Devils marks, they are Devils more then he.
Sleep Pluto, sleep, thou has no more to do,
Where Is one of those there is hell and Legion too.
All coxcomb, motly clowns, yet could invent
A way to Heaven called Kirk Government.
Where Major Wier, who galls their memories,
Is now called Maximus, and bears the keys.
They Are Dan and Bethels Calves, yet whom before
Ladies not on their face prostrate adore.
These she-Fanaticks worst of Papists be
If creature worship be worst Popery.
Yet since Sharp's slain, Justice may fall asleep,
And her revengful sword in scabbard keep,
And it may be Astrea's gainful trade,
To use her balance now, more then her blade.
Or since correction makes the rabble worse,
Its gallantrie to let them take their course.
So Lybian Lions in there high wrought rage
With Bulls and Panthers only will engage.
While the dull snail, and painted butterfly
Glides through the Air, or craw'ls securely by.
We fear not then the Caledonian Boar,
As the Tangier his wanscot faced Moor.
For such Indulgence, were he never so wild,
Would make a Tiger, or a Panther mild.
How many have severe proceedings ended?
Whom such indulgence might perhaps amended.
If Jove dart thunder still when men revolt
He quickly would not leave himself a bolt. Si quoties peccant b^mines, etc.

VI.
Indulgence, if an Act of Policy,
Its deep as hell, or as the heavens it is hie.
To gather altogether in a train,
And Iehu and Baals Priests to Act again.
Or else it is like to JESUS who did call
From Heaven, and pardoned a slaughtering Saul.
Amen, good LORD; but let us never see,
Our King accursed for letting Syria free.
Me thinks, I saw our trembling Kirk for life.
Panting like Isaac underneath the knife:
And heard Heavens cry, CHARLES withdraw that blow,
Let not these ramms caught in the thickets go.
But since its done, Heavens pardon all offense
In pities, or in Policies pretense;
Yet we thought Policy should taught you rather,
To Indulge them as they indulged your Father:
Or, as he did, we fear, too late yee'l see.
There are extremes of gracious Clemency.
Since none may say what do thou, I take leave,
Indulgeo seldom hes the accusative.
Mollis illa educatio quam indulgentiam vocamus, nervos omnes, and mentis, and
corporis frangit. Quintilianus.

Nimia principum clementiorum lenitas, innumer a mala, Caedes, Latrocima, in
ipsorum ditionibus gignit, adeo principum Indulgentia, quam inclementia public
nocentior est. Machiavellus de Principe, cap. 17.

O Cruel, and wicked Indulgence, that is now found guilty of the death, not
only of the Priests and People, but of Religion! Unjust mercy can never end in
less then blood; and it were well, if only the body should have cause to
complain of that kind cruelty. Halls-works first vol. lib. 11. page 967.

In Mr. Ninian Paterson his Book of Epigrams, Lib.3. Epi.4. The Ghost of King
Charles the First, is brought in, thus speaking, Non scelus ingrati populi, non
palma rebellis,
Me non ira poli, noxa, luesve soli;
Non vis foeta dolis, non daemonis aestus. and astus,
Sed mea me pietas perdidit, atque fides
Esto tibi clemens, populo (me test) rebelli
Impius es princeps, qui cupis esse pius.
Englished abus,
Nor crimes, nor sucoess of the rebel crew,
Nor yet Heaven vengeance, nor earths curse me slew,
Valor not wiles, Hells craft, nor rage annoyed,
Me my Indulgence, and my faith destroyed,
Art thou a pious Prince, learn this of me,
Kindness to rebels is impiety.


A welcome to his Royal Highness JAMES Duke of Albanie, to the Kingdom of
Scotland.
Novr. 24. 1679.
NOw, now, I know what made the Eolian ^lave
Stern Northern Boreas lately so outbrave
Our hosts of mists and clouds, At the arrival of his R. Highness it blew hard.
and sweep the sky
With his swelled cheeks; to brush a canopy
For Justice Princely Stuard; that none may know
Tempests above, or murmurs here below.
Welcome Great Sir, welcome as was the light
To Chaos after an eternal night:
For in this distance from our CHARLES his wayn,
Only lights elder Brother here did reign.
We were so dark, and in so great a thrall,
Egypt might well boast our Original.
And Lesly make less-ly, who says we came
From Scota Pharohs Daughter; whence our name.
And make Buchanans Ghost for to recall
Both our Ius Regni, and Original.
Shine then upon our poor Cimmerian clime,
Make this our first of months, of years, of time;
All annals eternize this happy day,
Let it be Rubric and an Epochee
To all succeeding generations: Since
THE BLESSED ARRIVAL of that Noble Prince.
Let old men bless their fates, that made them last
Till now, and young men, that they made such haste:
For all days until this, had lost their Names
In golden number, since our late King JAMES.
Heavens grant our Scotland once more the renown, The duchess was reported
with Child.

To bring him forth shall wear the British Crown.
And since it is thought good fortune Lacqueys names,
Let him be REX Pacificus, A JAMES.
That so this Isle the worlds Epitomee
( Neptuns enclosure) once more Gods may be.
Yee'r welcome then Great Sir, to put a date
To the tempestuous tumults of our state,
Whose boiling billows to that hight did rise,
Like Giants, to wage war against the skies.
Ambitious is that raging foaming main
Once more to exalt it self over CHARLES his wain.
But all in vain, Heavens will all storms defeat,
Where CHARLES is Pilot, and Great JAMES his mate,
Be our physician, all our fears appease,
Calm Church distractions, and cure states disease,
And crush them (Sir) for they are your worst friends,
Who turns their public power to private ends.
Ambitious Phaetons may they have place,
Will gladly sacrifice their Countries peace.
Ye will see Royal sparks amongst our smoke,
We Will be your Ivi, if yee'l be our oak;
And faithfully we promise for our parts,
Tho we cannot give Crowns, we will give hearts.
Let English be more fortunate throughout,
Bate us that ace, we Scots are still as stout.
Nor power, nor honor is confined to place,
The Trojans ruins raised the Roman race.
Nay we have some who fame and honor breath.
Dare gaze undaunton'd on the face of death;
Who to the whispers of a palefac't fear,
Or dreadful danger, never lent an ear.
Whose purchases although not great, yet good,
Were bought with sweat, and sealed with their blood.
All which in camp, or court, by night, or day,
If you command, are ready to obey.
May't only please your Highness quash these fears,
We have conceived from dalted Whiggimares.
And yet what e're these villains did presume,
Their flamm at last did only prove a sum.
So may health, honor, saftie, still attend
Your Royal Highness to an happy end.
And still like Caesar's may intrancing bliss
Crown your desires, or else prevent your wis^^
And be it registrate in after story,
Your presence, was our happiness, and glory.
Ad Illustrissimum Principem JACOBUM ALBANIAE and Eboraci Ducem.
DVX duce ubique DEO, per te tua Scotia sumit Fracta ani^^s mores barbara,
pa^per opes.

FINIS.

