REFLECTIONS UPON THE DEVOTIONS OF THE ROMAN CHVRCH.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE DEVOTIONS OF THE ROMAN CHVRCH.

WITH THE PRAYERS, HYMNS and LESSONS themselves, taken out of their Authentic
Books.

In Three Parts.

This First Part, containing their Devotions to Saints and Angels.

ALSO Two Digressions concerning the Relics and Miracles in Mr. Cressy's late
Church History.

Vtinam tam facile vera invenire possem, quam falsa convincere. Cicero apud
Lactantium de Orig. erroris, Lib. 2. LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston,
Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty. 1674.

THE AUTHOR'S Advertisement TO THE READER.
A Great Part of the Devotions mentioned in this Book, is taken out of the
Breviary, and other Offices now in use in the Roman Church; the rest chiefly
out of those Public Offices that were used in the English Church before the
Reformation; such as the Breviary and Hours of Sarum, and other Books
heretofore in great reputation.

If any one shall object against the frequent citation of those old Books; My
Answer is this: No reasonable man can think it strange, that they should be
charged with the Absurdity of those Devotions which they have laid aside: for
since they were formerly allowed, and recommended and enjoined, their Church
must be always accountable for them, or else confess that she was once
mistaken. If she has at any time taught her Children to invocate for Saints
Romantic names, such as S. Christopher and the 7 Sleepers; or to insert in
their Prayers Ridiculous Tales, such as S. George's killing the Dragon, etc.
These either errors or wilful forgeries, can never consist with her pretended
Infallibility in Canonizing of Saints, and directing as well the Worship as the
Faith of Christians. But they understand too well the consequence of
acknowledging mistakes, ever to be guilty of so much ingenuity: and therefore
though they have removed many of those scandalous Legends out of the common
Offices, it is without disclaiming them, and with the pretense of other
reasons, such as may save the reputation both of the Legends and of the Church
that received them for true Histories. Thus Carthagena informs us, That the
Office of S. Roch and S. Anne (and he might have said the same of the rest) was
not left out of the Roman of Office, Citat. a Martyrol. Francisc. p. 351.
because it contained any untruth in it, but that all things might be reduced
to the ancient order.

Most of those Saints whose Histories are omitted in the Breviary reformed by
Pope Pius V. have proper offices for them, appointed to be used in some
particular Churches. The Allowance is particularly remarkable which this Pope
gave to the Franciscans; of whose chief Saints little is said in the common
Breviary, but very many of their old Lessons are still retained in the Proper
Offices of that Order. There is no mention made of S. Crispin and Crispinian in
the Roman Breviaries; in that of Sarum they have three short Lessons, October.
25. But in the proper Offices of the Church of Lisbon (Printed there 1625) we
have three long Lessons concerning them; wherein they relate, that they were of
Noble Parentage, that in the Persecution of Diocletian, they set up the Trade
of Shoo making, in which they were so extraordinarily assisted by God, that
they exceeded all the Practitioners of the Gentle Craft, and mended poor
peoples Shoes for nothing, etc. S. Gabriel the Archangel, is also left out;
but he has a very solemn Office performed by the Order of the H. Trinity for
the Redemption of Captives, on March 18. with several Hymns and Nine Lessons:
Examples of the same kind are to be found in the proper Feasts of all the
several Orders. It Is plain too by the practice of the Vulgar, what judgment
they are taught to make of the omission of some Names and Histories that were
used before in their public Devotions: The Saints are numerous, and their
number increases every day; the old ones have had a fair time to receive the
honor and veneration of the People, and may perhaps think it reasonable to
resign their places to others; any thing will more easily be imagined, than
that the Histories were omitted because they are Fabulous. S. Roch is left out
of the Calendar in the present Breviaries and Missals, who had a place there
before: but he is still prayed to; Altars and Churches are dedicated in honor
of him; his Images and Pictures set up; and when a Plague was at Arles in
France, a Fraternity was erected to his honor, Martyrol. Francisc. ad Aug. 16.
p. 350.
40 Days of Indulgence given, that Sodality confirmed with many Indulgences by
Urban VIII. an. 1629; a fair Church was built, and a silver and gilt Statue of
S. Roch given by the Fraternity; and a form of Prayer in time of the Plague,
relating to his help, remains in the French Office of the Bl. Virgin, Printed
at Paris, 1615, which I shall after mention. So it is too in the case of S.
Margaret: Her old Legend, how she was put in Prison by the Heathen Tyrant
Olybrius, how the Devil in the shape of a Dragon swallowed her up, etc. is all
expunged; and though she has a place still in the Calendar, yet there is
neither Proper Lesson nor Proper Prayer remains for her: and yet still it is
made use of, it is read to Women in Labor (that bursting of the belly of the
Dragon, out of which she came forth, being interpreted, I suppose, for a kind
of Childbirth) and Women with Child are girded with her Girdle, kept in S.
Germans Abbey at Paris, where the Friars perform that charitable office for
them. Since therefore these old and Fabulous Devotions have the countenance of
common practice, and the favorable connivance at least of their Church, there
can be no reason to blame me for giving an account of them.

Especially when the many false Relics, which give life to the superstition
of the Vulgar, are every where publicly exposed and venerated, those of the
most Romantic Saints not excepted: If they intended that their Histories
should be no longer believed, when they left out their old Lessons; why did
they not at the same time prohibit any farther showing of their pretended
remains? Can these be justified by any Tradition, that will not justify all
the rest that is said of them? Will it be enough, when I set down the Romance
of Vrsula, and the 11000 Virgins out of the old Breviaries, to tell me, that
there is not a word of their story remains in the New; when at Colen all passes
as current as ever, and a thousand of their Relics are there and at other
places still produced? Can this Church be thought to intend, that men, if they
please, may disbelieve the Acts of S. George, and yet at the same time
countenance the showing of his Arm? If they really design the reformation of
abuses, why do they not begin it where the cheat is most notorious, and where
the People still hear and read more Fables, than in all the Lessons of the old
Breviary put together? I do not hear that this Trading with Relics is as yet
set up publicly by them in England; but it will, no doubt, be used in due
time, if they succeed in their hopes: it cannot be amiss therefore to let our
People understand the way of this Traffic, and what taking commodities they
expose in other places: and because the following Book will afford the Reader
many rarities of the Saints Relics; I will therefore here only give him one
small Collection, with their Speeches to the People at the showing of them, as
I find them in a Print of theirs of a Procession at Aquisgranum or Aken, 1650.
Part of the Wood of the Cross, and a Nail of the same. Some of the Manna in
the Wilderness, and of the blossoms of Aaron's Rod. Part of the Sudarium, of
the Reed and Sponge of our Lord. A Girdle of our Savior's, and another of the
Bl. Virgins. The Cord with which Christ was bound at his Passion. Some of the
Hair of S. John Baptist. A Ring of the Chain of S. Peter. Some of the Blood of
S. Stephen, and of the oil of S. Catharine. The Arm of S. Simeon. The Image
of the Bl. Virgin drawn by S. Luke. The Relics of S. Spes (or S. Hope.) Some
of the Hair of the Bl. Virgin. (methinks the having her Hair, should have made
it very fitting to have purchased one of her Combs; since the last Age was
furnished with 2 of them, one at Rome, and another at Besancon in Burgundy; and
at a place near Lions they showed the Combs of all the 12 Apostles.) These and
some others which I forbear to mention, are Yearly produced. But there are 4
Relics besides, which they seem to account more sacred than the rest, being
showed but once in seven Years, viz. The shift (indusium) of the Bl. Virgin.
The Swathes of our Savior. The Linen Cloth upon which S. John Baptist was
beheaded: and the Cloth with which our Savior was covered on the Cross. When
these are exhibited, there are these solemn Proclamations made to the People.
(thus translated out of the French.) 1. Proclamation. You shall have a sight of
the Shift, that holy Garment, which the Virgin Mary the Mother of God had on,
upon the Night of our Lord's Nativity: wherefore let us humbly pray to God, to
be able to behold such Relics to his glory, to the end that we may partake of
his Grace for the attaining salvation. 2. Proclam. You shall have a sight of
the Swathes, those holy Clothes, in which our Savior Jesus Christ was wrapped
on the night of his Nativity: wherefore let us pray Almighty God, to behold
these Relics to the increase of his Honor, to the end that we may never be
separated from him. 3. Proclam. You shall have a sight of the Holy
Linen Cloth, upon which S. John Baptist was beheaded, with the marks of his
blood spilt upon it, to whom God gave testimony, that he was the most holy
Person that ever was born of a Woman: Let us therefore pray our Lord Jesus
Christ, that we may behold it to his honor, and that by his grace we may be
saved. 4. Proclam. You shall have a sight of that holy cloth, which was put
before our Lord's Body, and veiled it upon the Tree of the H. Cross, when he
suffered death for our sins on Good Friday. Pray we therefore our Lord Jesus
Christ, that we may behold it with such Devotion, that we may be partakers of
his Death and Passion, and may be delivered from all evils and sins.

These things I perceive are never likely to be reformed, though the shameful
abuses have been often discovered; and if there were Liberty thoroughly to
examine them, we should find most of them, Calvin admon. de reliquii^ inter
Tractat. Theologic.
no doubt, to be such cheats as Mr. Calvin mentions (and may sure be trusted in
a matter of Fact, belonging to the Church where he lived) about Part of the
Brains of S. Peter, which was shown for a precious Relic at Geneva, but upon
examination was found to be only a Pumice-stone.

I need add no more, to justify what I have here set down out of their old
Devotions, after I have told the Reader, that I hope I may have leave to do
that, which their own Authors do with so much Approbation. Mr. Cressy has
published, not long since, a great Church History, where he has again revived
many of the old Legends (such as that of S. Winefrid and others) and supplied
the World anew with a prodigious heap of Fictitious Gests: nay, there seems to
have been a Late Conspiracy to bring the Ridiculous stories of their Saints
into vogue again, by other Writers of their Lives; witness the work of Johannes
Colganus in his Acta Sanctorum Hiberniae (whose first Volume in Fol. came forth
at Lovain, An. 1645.) and especially the vast undertaking of the Jesuit
Johanne's Bollandus in his Acta Sanctorum, containing the Lives of all the
Saints: whose first Volume was Printed at Antwerp, 1643, and was continued
after his death by Henschenius and Papebrochius of the same Society: which Work
if it be carried on sutably to the first draught, will amount to above 30 great
Volumes in Folio. He has taken liberty to collect in Latin what he pleased out
of a vast number of old Breviaries he mentions (and can it be any fault in me
to do the same in English?) and he has had the hardiness, after all that
Churches reformation, to defend the Golden Legend of Jacobus de Voragine; nay,
he has told us, how that an Angel taught the Roman office (which must be the
old one) to S. Veronica, and bore a part with her in reciting the Responsals
and Antiphona's, which is more I think than they can allege for the
countenancing of the New one.

And now that I may prevent, if possible, their usual clamours about false
citation of Authors, I will here once for all set down the Editions of some
Books cited most frequently.

Books of Devotion.

Horae B. Virginis secundum usum Sarum. Paris. 1519. Horae sec. usum Romanum.
Paris. 1570. Breviarium (seu Portiforium) sec. us. Sarum (pars Aestivalis and
Hyem.) Paris. 1555. Missale secundum usum Sarum. Rothomagi, 1554. Missale
Romanum Antiquum. fol. Paris. 1520. Breviarium Roman. Antiq. always refers to
an Edition, 1543. Sacrarum Coeremoniarum Romans Eccles. Libri tres. Venetiis,
1516. Where you at any time find in the Margin, Missale Romans or Breviar. Romans
or Rituale Romans without the Addition of Antiq. it always signifies the Missal,
Breviary, and Ritual now in use.

Some other Books often made use of.

Baronii Annals Ecclesiast. Antverp. apud Plantinum. 1st. Vol. 1610. Baronii
Notationes in Martyrologium Romanum. Antverp. 1613. Matthew. Paris. Londini,
1640. Martyrologium Franciscanum. Paris. 1638. Ribadeneirae Flos Sanctorum.
Coloniae, 1630. Surius. Coloniae, 1617. Bibliotheca Patrum Cisterciensium, una
cum Dialogis Caesarii de Heisterbach. Bonofonte, 1660. Gononi Chronicon SS.
Deiparae Virg. Lugduni, 1637. Dauroutii Catechism. Historial. Tom. 2 dus.
Duaci, 1616.

The Editions of other Authors shall be mentioned, if there be any need, as
they occur in the Book.

Dolenter hoc dico potius, quam contumeliose, multo a Laertio severius vitas
Philosophorum scriptas, quam a Christianis, vitas Sanctorum; longeque
incorruptius atque integrius Suetonium res Caesarum exposuisse, quam
exposuerunt Catholici, non res dico Imperatorum, sed Martyrum, Virginum and
Confessorum: illi enim in probis aut Philosophis aut Principibus, nec vitia nec
suspiciones vitiorum tacent; in improbis vero, nec suspiciones virtutum
produnt. Nostri autem plerique vel affectibus inserviunt, vel de industria
quoque ita multa confingunt, ut eorum me nimirum non solum pudeat, sed etiam
taedeat. Melchior Canus. Loc. Theolog. Lib. 11. Fol. 333. IMPRIMATUR,

Sam. Parker R. in Christo Patri ac Domino, Domino Gilberto, Archi-Episc.
Cantuar. a sac. Dom.
Jun. 1. 1673.
Faults to be Corrected.
Page 29. Line 8. for and read or. p. 32. Marg. r. Art. 4. p. 40. l. 29. dele
the. p. 66. l. 15. dele farther. p. 70. l. 33. r. 3 Thumbs. p. 77. l. 15. r.
Juthwara. p. 199. l. 11. r. Cenomans. p. 207. l. 14. r. Celestine III. p. 208.
l. 12. r. points. p. 251. l. 22. r. 20 of July. p. 276. l. 3. r. with in. p.
309. l. 24. r. tell us. p. 310. l. 29. r. surlily. p. 318. l. 5. r.
complaining. p. 342. l. 16. r. Aldelme. p. 354. l. 29. dele one of. p. 359. l.
ult. r. tivity. p. 385. l. 4. r. rape. p. 432. l. 19 r. what was.

The Reader may also, if he thinks it more proper, change the Latin Names of
some places, into those of more ordinary use; as p. 32. l. ult. r. Barcellona.
p. 40. l. 30. r. Veii. p. 97. l. 31. r. Strasburg. p. 201. l. 26. r. Sens. p.
263. l. 9. r. Clervaux. p. 279. l. 17. r. Valentienes. Ib. l. 19. r. Hainault.

The Virgin MOTHER
S LUKE. 11.27 Blessed is the Womb that bare thee, and the pap^ which thou have
Sucked. v. 28. Yea, rather Blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep
it. depiction of Virgin Mary

CHOICE DEVOTIONS OF THE ROMAN CHVRCH, With some Reflections upon them. PART I.
IN the Hours of the Bl. Virgin, according to the use of Sarum, fol. 124. I
find this Prayer.

Peto Domine Jesu Christ, largire mihi in amore tuo, modum sine mensura,
effectum sine modo, languorem sine ordine, ardorem sine discretione: Amen.

If I had Mr. Cressy's faculty of understanding mystical Divinity, and
commenting upon Nonsense (which I observe by a late Book of his, he is very
good at) I should then have translated this Prayer; but till then, I can only
look upon it as a piece of pure Fanaticism; and having long since learnt, never
to admire that which I cannot understand, I have nothing farther to wonder at,
save only the excellency of the contrivance, that the very Prayer it self
against prudence, should be so foolish a one in the make of it. And there being
many more of the same sort, I now begin to think the Church of Rome has some
reason on her side for keeping her service in Latin; for surely nothing is more
fit, than that absurd Devotions should be in an unknown Tongue, and that such
Prayers as are made without Discretion, should be said without understanding.
That this is not a slander against that Church, I desire the unprejudiced
Reader to suspend his censure so long, till he has perused the numerous
instances of it, that now shall follow.

Devotions to Fabulous Saints, or where the ground of them, is Fabulous.
Horae. sec. usum Sarum.
De S. Wilgefortis, Virg. and Martyr.
Antiphona. AVe Sancta famula Wilgefortis Christi,
Quae ex tota anima Christum dilexisti,
Dum Regis Siciliae nuptias sprevisti,
Crucifixo Domino fidem praebuisti.
Jussu patris carceris tormenta subiisti;
Crevit barba facie, quod obtinuisti,
A Christo, pro munere quod sibi voluisti,
Te volentes nubere sibi confudisti.
Videns pater impius te sic deformatam,
Elevavit acrius in cruce paratam;
Ubi cum virtutibus reddidisti gratam
Animam, toties Christo commendatam.
Quia devotis laudibus tuam memoriam virgo colimus,
O beata Wilgefortis ora pro nobis quaesumus.
Verse. Diffusa est gratia in Labiis tuis.
Resp. Propterea benedixit te Deus in aeternum.
Oremus.

FAmiliam tuam, quaesumus Domine, beatae Wilgefortis, Virginis and Martyris
tuae Regis filiae, meritis and precibus propitius respice, and sicut ad preces
ipsius, barbam quam concupivit sibi caelitus accrescere fecisti, ita desideria
cordis nostri supernae gratiae digneris beneficiis augmentare.

Per Christum.

Pater noster. Ave Maria.

On S. Wilgefortis, Virgin and Martyr.
HAil Holy Wilgefort,
Maiden of Christ,
Who with all thy heart thy Savior did love,
While to match with Sicily's, King thou deny'st,
To thy crucified Lord thou faithful do prove.
While thy Father in Prison procures thy woe,
A miraculous beard on thy Face did grow.
Christ gave it in lieu of the heart he had had,
The design of the Match-makers quite was marred,
Thy Father observing this change grew so mad,
Without mercy he hanged thee on cross he prepared.
Thy Soul so often given
To Christ, went to Heaven;
There need be no fear
Of thy welcome there,
When so many graces enrich thee;
And for us that here raise
Devout Hymns to thy praise,
Pray for us St. Wilgefort, we beseech thee.
Verse. Grace is poured into thy Lips.
Ans. Therefore God has blessed thee for ever.
Let us Pray.

WE pray Thee, O Lord, look graciously upon thy Family, for the merits and
prayers sake of S. Wilgefortis thy Virgin and Martyr, the Kings Daughter; and
as in answer to her Prayers, thou made the beard which she desired to have,
miraculously to grow; so vouchsafe to augment the desires of our hearts with
the benefits of supernal Grace.

Through Christ, etc. Our Father. Hayl Mary, etc.

NOTES.
IT may seem a little strange, that the words of the 45 Psalm, which are
plainly Prophetical of our Savior, should be here applied to this Virgin: but
I doubt it is worse still, and I wish they did not profanely pick out these
words of Grace on thy Lips (though they have been used also to other Saints)
and apply them to her with a peculiar reason, in allusion to what went before,
concerning the graceful beard that grew there; for I observe they are very good
at such allusions: Horae. sec. us. Romans
as the Antiphona for St. Joseph says thus.

Cum securi, Faber sancte, excide in me vitium,
Ut sim Lignum adoptivum ad coeli palatium.
O Holy Carpenter hew down with axe all vice in me,
That I for Heavens Palace may adopted Timber be.
And in the Manual of Godly Prayers, 1637, page 70. there is such an other
comfortable allusion. O Celestial Father, chase away from me the venomous
Serpent, and the Vice of Gluttony, and nourish and conserve in me the Fish of
Faith in the Water of Holy Baptism, for as the Fish lives in Water, so the
Just lives by Faith. The Fish of Faith here, seems a hard Metaphor, but that
the reason which is added makes it so very plain and easy. For as the Fish
lives in Water, so the Just lives by Faith: only here is a small mistake in
the parallel; for according to that, Faith is the Water and not the Fish. So in
the French Office of the Bl. Virgin, I find this Prayer.

Most sweet Lady, for the great joy you had when your sweet Son fed 5000
People, Paris. 1615. Les quinze joys de nostre Dame.
with 5 Barly-loaves and 2 Fishes: sweet Lady pray, that he would govern my
five Senses (which answer to the five Loaves) and direct my thoughts and
actions (answering to the two Fishes) unto him.

Neither are their Sermons any whit behind their Prayers in fruitful invention
upon this subject: Of which take the following Instance, out of one of their
old Homilies. Christ fed 5000 People with 5 Loaves and 2 Fishes. The first Loaf
is contrition of sin; Festival^ fol. 24.
the 2d. is, shrift of mouth; the third is, satisfaction for their trespass;
the 4th is, not to turn again to his sin, for he that is often afraid shall do
well; the 5th is, perseverance in good living. And the 2 Fishes been good
Orysons and Almesdeeds; for these been nourished in Waters, that is, weeping
tears of devotion: These 2 Fishes get what they will.

As for that which follows in the Prayer, viz. that their desires may be
answered for the increase of grace, as this Virgins desires were, for the
growth of her beard; I think there need be no scruple concerning its being
heard; since I believe this Churches Grace and the Maidens Beard have grown
much alike.

De S. Christophoro.
Horae sec. us. Sarum, and sec. usum Roman.
Anaphona.

MArtyr Christophore, pro salvatoris honor,
Fac nos mente fore dignos Deitatis amore:
Promisso Christi quia quod petis obtinuisti,
Da populo tristi bona quae moriendo petisti.
Confer solamen and mentis toll gravamen
Judicis examen fac mite sit omnibus, Amen.
Verse. Ora pro nobis B. Martyr Christophore.

Resp. Ut digni efficiamur promissionibus Christi.

Oration.

M^ssale Sar. de S. Christoph.
COncede quaesumus, omnipotens and misericors Deus, ut qui Beati Christophori
Martyris tui memoriam agimus; ejus piis meritis and intercessione, a morte
perpetua and subitanea; a peste, fame, timore and tempestate, clade and
paupertate, and ab omnibus inimicorum insidiis liberemur. Per te, Jesu Christ,
Salvator murdi, Rex gloriae, quem ipse meruit in brachiis portare.

Pater noster. Ave Maria.

Alia de S. Christophoro.

Horae sec. us. Roman.
SAncte Christophore Martyr Dei pretiose, rogo te per nomen Christi Creatoris
tui, and per illud praerogativum quod tibi contulit, quando nomen suum tibi
soli imposuit; te deprecor in Nomine Patris, Filii, and Spiritus Sancti, and
per gratiam quam accepisti; ut erga Deum and Sanctam ejus Genetricem mihi
famulo tuo N. sis propitius peccatori; quatenus tuo pio interventu, facias me
vincere omnes, qui cogitant mihi mala; and per illud leve onus, quod est
Christus, quod trans marinum flumen in humeris tuis feliciter portare meruisti,
alleviare dignare praesentes meas angustias, paupertates, tribulationes, malas
and perversas machinationes, fraudulentas conspirationes, mendacia, falsa
testimonia, occulta sive aperta consilia, and alia quae contra honorem meum
cogitando vel conspirando veritatis aemuli, mihi servo tuo infer conantur; ut
vita comite and salvo honor, tecum gaudere valeam in secula seculorum.

Oremus.

DEus, qui B. Christophorum, Martyrem tuum, virtute constantiae in passione
roborasti; quique unigenitum tuum Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum, in suis
humeris mirabiliter portari voluisti; concede propitius, ut qui ejus
commemorationem agimus, ipsius meritis ad regna coelestia pervenire mereamur.

Per Dominum, etc.

Of St. Christopher.
O Christopher holy Martyr,
For the honor of Christ we desire,
To God in every heart here
True love for to inspire.
Since thou failest not to obtain
Thy requests by the promise of Christ,
Give the people that now complain
The good things thou did ask when thou dy'dst.
Thy sweet comfort to us impart
Drive all sorrows away from our heart,
The great Judge 's strict examen,
Make easy to all of us, Amen.
Verse. Pray for us, O Bl. Martyr Christopher.

Ans. That we may be made worthy of the promises of Christ.

A Prayer.

GRant, we beseech thee, Almighty and merciful God, that we who keep the
memorial of S. Christopher thy Martyr, may by his holy merits and intercession,
be delivered from sudden Death, from Pestilence, famine, Fear and Tempest,
destruction and poverty, and from all the snares of our enemies: Through thee,
O Jesus Christ, the Savior of the world, the King of Glory, whom he merited to
carry in his Arms.

Our Father, etc.

Hail Mary, etc.

Another of St. Christopher.
O St. Christopher, the precious Martyr of God, I entreat thee by the Name of
Christ thy Creator, and by that Prerogative he bestowed on thee, when he put
his own Name on thee alone; I beseech thee in the Name of the Father, Son, and
H. Ghost, and by the grace thou did receive; to make God and his holy Mother
propitious toward me thy servant N. a sinner; so that by thy pious
intercession thou may make me to overcome all those who think ill against
me; and by that light burden (which is Christ) which thou did merit happily
to carry on thy shoulders over the Seariver, vouchsafe to alleviate my present
distresses, poverties, tribulations, evil and perverse machinations, fraudulent
Conspiracies, lies, false testimonies, hidden or open Councels, and those other
things which the haters of truth think or conspire to inflict on me thy
servant, against mine honor; that so my life and honor being in safety, I may
be able to rejoice with Thee for evermore.

Let us Pray.

O GOD, who did strengthen S. Christopher thy Martyr, with the virtue of
constancy in suffering, who also would have thy only begotten Son Jesus
Christ our Lord, to be wonderfully carried on his shoulders; favorably grant,
that we who make a commemoration of him, by his merits we may merit to come to
the Celestial Kingdom.

Through Christ, etc.

NOTES.
THose are pretty big requests, one would think, considering the Saint to whom
they are presented; concerning whose story, of his carrying Christ over the
River upon his back, we are forced, for want of ancient Authorities, to resolve
our faith into the Aurea Legenda, and his Pictures upon the Sign-posts. There
indeed he is made a mighty Giant, with a great Beam in his hand, as he must in
all reason be, when he carries Christ over the marinum flumen (as it is in the
Prayer) an arm of the Sea. Mantuan says, Lib. 7. Fastor.
he was 12 Else high; and Ludovicus Vives In lib. 15. cap. 9. August. de civit.
Dei. Mund. subter. lib. 8. p. 58.
tells us, that in a Church, a tooth was shown him for one of St. Christophers,
bigger then his fist: which might have given some credit to this Saint, if
unluckily the Jesuit Kircher had not lately told us of a place in Sicily, where
he and another Nobleman in his Company, saw whole Cart-loads of such Teeth.
And as his stature was great, so were his deeds mighty, for Jacobus de
Voragine, quotes it out of a Preface of St. Ambrose, Surius also mentions the
same Preface, in the life of S. Christoph. on July 25.
that S. Christopher by his bright Miracles converted Forty-eight Thousand
Gentiles to Christianity. But Serarius (Litaneutic. 2. qu. 20.) says, he never
could see that Preface yet, and he believes Baronius never saw it neither, by
his silence concerning it; and I do firmly believe as much. But Baronius has
luckily delivered us from all fear; Quod pertinet ad Giganteam staturam qua
pingi consuevit, quid dicam non habeo: He knows not what to say to his Giantly
stature; Baron. notis in Martyrolog. Romans ad Jul. 25.
and he inclines to the Opinion of Hieronymus Vida, who has turned all to an
Allegory: but alas! these Allegorical Saints will do nothing to salve the
credit of the Prayers. If this Saint had had the good Fate to have been born in
England, or that report had ever made him stalk over our narrow Seas, in all
probability he had come off better than thus: and we should have had a pleasant
account of his Adventures from Father Cressy, and this his carrying Christ upon
his back, would have suited rarely well with the word Gests, so often used by
him. Of his inclinations to pleasure us in this particular, I am pretty well
assured; because he has set down as great a Romance as this is in his
Church History, in the Tale he has there told of S. Winefrids head, Chapter
History. lib. 16. c. 8.
which after it was cut off by her Brutish Lover, came tumbling down the Hill
into the Church among all the Assembly, and being carried up the Hill again,
where her dead Body lay, and joined to it; by the Prayers of the Church, she
arose and lived again; and no sign remained of her ever having lost her head,
save only that where the head was rejoyned to the body, there appeared a white
Circle compassing her Neck, small as a white thread, which continued so all her
Life; and as for him that did the fact, upon the Prayer of the Holy-man, that
God would punish his detestable crime, he immediately fell down dead; and which
was more strange, his body presently disappeared, and many say that it was
swallowed up by the Earth, and with the wicked Soul sunk into Hell: and in the
very place where her Head fell, immediately sprung out of the Earth that famous
Well, which took both its Name and Virtues from the Miracles that then were
showed upon her. This Mr. Cr. takes, as he says, from Robert Abbot of
Shrewsbury, who lived 500 Years ago; from whom also I must suppose the Author
of the Salisbury Breviary took it, for all this I find there almost Verbatim,
in several Lessons on S. Winifrids Day, November. 3. The truth is, when I
consider the large swallow of Mr. Cressy's faith, and find in his History the
story of Guy of Warwick and Colbrand the Danish Giant set down out of
Harpsfield; Lib. 31. cap. 5.
I pity the hard luck of Sir Guy, that he was only a poor Pilgrim, and not a
Bishop of his Church; for if he had been so, I doubt not but he would have made
a shift, to have salved the Objections he mentions against the Truth of that
Legend, and have given us as good an account of it, as of S. Winefrid; and then
his landing at Portsmouth, just in the nick of time, when K. Athelston was in
such distress for a Champion, should have been not the effect of a lucky
chance, but of a Vision, or a Revelation, which he is very free upon all
occasions to produce. If I could be assured that Mr. Cr. way of writing
Histories, was like to be in any great vogue, a little matter would tempt me to
Translate the Lives of the Saints, as I find them in the ancient Breviaries of
the Romish Church, (whereas now I shall only touch upon them as they fall in
my way) for that they are in good credit with him, I cannot question, since I
find him adding the Authority of the Breviary of Sarum, Lib. 9. cap. 20.
to that of Baronius, in the case of Vrsula, and the Eleven Thousand Virgins,
to justify an Opinion he mentions, about the time of their Martyrdom.

Longini Martyris Memoria.
Oration.
Brev. Romans Antiq. Martii 15.
OMnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui pretiosissimo tui sanguinis liquore, oculos
Sancti Martyris tui Longini illuminasti; quaesumus, ut dono tuae gratiae mentes
nostras illustrare digneris, quatenus post hanc vitam in aeterna beatitudine te
perfrui mereamur.

Qui vivis, etc.

St. Longinus Martyr.
The Prayer.
ALmighty everlasting God, who by the most precious liquor of the blood, did
inlighten the eyes of thy holy Martyr Longinus; we pray Thee, vouchsafe to
illustrate our minds with the gift of thy grace, so that after this life we may
merit to enjoy thee in eternal blessedness.

Who live, etc.

NOTES.
THis Prayer is founded upon so excellent a Fable that follows there in the
forecited Breviary, that I cannot omit to translate it, especially because the
Lessons are but short.

Lesson 1.
We have it by Tradition, that Longinus a Freeman, and belonging to the Roman
Soldiery, his Eyes being almost blind, with his Lance pierced our Lord Jesus
on the Cross, and by the touch of that blood (which fell, it is supposed on his
eyes) immediately recovered his sight, and believed; who forsaking his Military
profession, being instructed by the Apostles, lived 38 Years a Monastic life
in Cesarea of Capadocia; and continuing in all sanctity, by Doctrine and
Example converted many to the Faith. At length he finished the glorious strife
of Martyrdom, for the Confession of Christ, under the President Octavius.
[This story of blind Longinus piercing Christ's side, and recovering his sight,
and being converted, they would countenance by the revelations of S. Veronica;
Bolland. Act. Sanctor. ad Januar. 13. p. 912.
but Baronius looks upon the story of Longinus the Soldier that was blind and
pierced Christ's side, Ad. an. 34. number. 127.
as taken out of Apocryphal writings. Bollandus, though he has given us his
life, yet confesses that his name was not heard among the Greeks, till the Year
715. and among the Latins not till the writing of the Martyrologies, Bolland.
Ibid. ad Mart. 15. p. 376.
and those too not the most ancient, for that of the Genuine Bid has it not.
It is also farther remarkable, that though this Lesson and many Martyrologies,
agree in making Longinus to be a Martyr of Cappadocia, yet the Mantuans
maintain a strong contest, See Bolland. loc. citat.
that his Martyrdom was at Mantua, and that there his Body was long ago found
(viz. an. 804.) together with a Vessel having some of the Blood of Christ in
it, which he brought thither; and they say, that Mantua, or a place hard by it,
was of old called Cappadocia. They of Sardinia do the like, and maintain that
Longinus was born among them, suffered under Nero's persecution there, and that
the Body of this Romantic Saint, was found and dug up by them, an. 1626.
but to go on with the Lessons.]

Lesson 2.
When he was brought before the President, while he by various Arguments sought
to draw him to the Worship of Idols, among other things he said to him;
Sacrifice to the Gods, for I perceive that through thy too great abstinence,
thou art not able to endure torments. But while he continued still to preach
Christ, the President in choler commanded all his Teeth to be struck out, and
his tongue to be cut off. Longinus notwithstanding this, did not Qui res
humanas a Divu, quorum historias scribendas sumunt, alienas fore censent, hi
Divos ipsos ne homines quidem fuisse videntur credere. M^lch. Canus. L^c.
Theol. l. 11. c. 6.
lose his speech, but said to the President; If thou believe the Gods which
thou worshippest to be truly such, suffer me to be punished by them, whilst I
break them in pieces, and then I will believe them to be true Gods; but if
after this they do me no harm, I will believe still in my God. The President
gave him leave, who taking an Axe, hewed in pieces all the Images, and
whatsoever was in the Temple. Whereupon the Devils presently going out of the
Images, entered into the President and into his Servants; who raving, and
barking, and falling prostrate at Longinus his feet, upon the request of the
People that made great acclamations, that the Saint would drive away the
Devils, he healed them, and a great number of the bystanders, seeing this
wonder, believed.

Lesson 3.
But a little while after, the President being instigated by the Devil, and
accounting all these things to be but illusions of the senses, he spoke thus to
S. Longinus; When the Emperor shall hear, that through the Magical Arts of
Christians, this City has departed from the Sacrifices of the Gods, he will
destroy us all. The President being sharply reproved by Aphrodisius
Commentariensis, for tormenting a Man of God, who had delivered them all, and
the City; the President thereupon commanded the said Aphrodisius his Tongue to
be cut out. But by the judgment of God he presently hereupon was struck blind,
and being tortured in his whole Body, he began to cry out and desire, that the
Man of God Longinus, against whom he confessed he had acted foolishly, would
pray for him. To whom Longinus answered, if thou will be saved, kill me, and
then I will pray for thee, and thou shall be healed. Immediately by his command
he was beheaded, and the President prostrating himself, upon his repentance
received his sight, and burying the Saint honorably continued in the Faith:
[Thus far the Legend.] Baronius in his Annals ( ad an. 38. s. 2.) seems plainly
to doubt of the truth of this story, when he questions whether he may give
credit to Metaphrastes the relator of it. If, says he, we may give credit to
the Acts of Longinus the Centurion, recited by Metaphrastes, it is plain, that
by Pilate's cruelty the said Centurion, together with other 2. Soldiers, were
beheaded, because they freely confessed Christ. And yet upon the Roman
Martyrology ( Martii, 15.) he is not ashamed to tell us of the venerable Body
of S. Longinus, that is kept at Rome in the Church of St. Augustine. As another
Author informs us, that his Head and Arm are preserved at Prague, among the
numerous Relics that were brought thither by Charles IV. but I think, a Man
may believe as he pleases, Bollandus Vol. 1. Append. ad Jan. 2.
when he observes in the Catalogue such particulars as these, viz. some
Relics of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. The Arm and some part of the Body of
Lazarus; Two pieces of two Girdles of the Bl. Virgin: A part of the Body of S.
Mark, and a part of his Gospel of his own handwriting: A piece of S. John the
Evangelist's Coat: A piece of the Staff of S. Peter, and another piece of the
Staff of S. Paul: A part of S. Peter's chain: A finger of S. Anne: A part of
the B. Virgins Vail. The Head of S. Luke the Evangelist (though that also is
showed in a Church at Rome) some of the Relics of S. Katherine of Alexandria.
The Head and Finger of S. Stephen; and an Arm of one of the Holy Innocents,
etc. We are told also by the same Author, Vit. sanc. ad Mar. 15.
of the Vatican Church having his venerable Arm, with a Ring upon his
Ring-finger, and of several other places where his Relics are preserved. One
may the less wonder that such ridiculous Fables as these should be pinned upon
the Gospel History, by those that have taken the boldness in their public
Books of Devotion to alter and corrupt even the very Gospel-Text it self; for
then there can be no security against such absurd comments as this of Longinus,
and Twenty other like it. To give a few instances of both.

In the old Roman Missals and Breviaries, upon the Feria 5. post Dominicam 2 in
Quadrages. the Gospel (Luc. 16. v. 19.) begins thus, In illo tempore dixit
Jesus Discipulis suis parabolam hanc. Homo, etc. The Missal of Pius 5. 1580.
reads, In illo tempore dixit Jesus discipulis suis, and leaves out parabolam
hanc. The present Missals and Breviaries have it, In illo tempore dixit Jesus
pharisaeis. But there is not one word of any of these, choose which you will, in
the Text.

Thus upon the Sabbatum post Domin. 2 in Quadrag. (Luc. 15.11.) The old ones
have it, In illo tempore dixit Jesus discipulis suis parabolam hanc. Homo
quidam, ande. The new ones say, In illo tempore dixit Jesus Pharisaeis and
Scribis parabolam hanc. Homo, etc. But there is nothing more in the Text, then,
Et dixit, Homo, etc.

So Domin. 3. post Pentacost. (for the Gospel, Luc. 14.16.) the old Missals
have added, Dixit Jesus Discipulis suis parabolam hanc. The new, Dixit Jesus
Pharisaeis parabolam hanc, which are also both false, for our Savior spoke to
one particular Man.

So, Dominic. 4. post Quadrages. (Gospel is Joh. 6. v. 1.) Instead of Posthaec
abiit Jesus, etc. Both old and new read, In illo tempore abiit Jesus. Which is
not to be turned off, by saying that In ilio tempore, is a common beginning of
the Gospel-Lessons, (as In diebus illis, commonly begins the Lessons of the old
Testament) to signify I suppose to the people, who do not understand Latin,
when the Gospel begins. For surely the Church ought not for any such pretended
convenience of the people, be so uncivil to the Scripture as to contradict it,
and put At that time, for After that time.

But the most remarkable instance of corrupting the Text I meet withal, is in
the Feria 3. post. dominic. 3. in Quadrages. where all the old Breviaries and
Missals I have seen begin the Gospel for the day ( Matthew. 18.15.) in this
manner: In illo tempore, respiciens Jesus Discipulos suos, dixit Simoni Petro,
si peccaverit, etc. And so it is in the Reformed Breviary of Pius V.
Antverpiae, 1580. The reason of this addition is plain, because the Gospel
says presently, Whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven,
etc. and they thought it not fit, that Christ should say these words to any but
to Simon Peter, to whom the Keys of the Kingdom or Heaven were committed. Now
in the present Books it is altered thus. In illo tempore dixit Jesus discipulis
suis, which is an addition to the Text still, for there are no such words
there, though more tolerable, because it is true, that Christ did speak them to
his Disciples.

And as they have endeavored to abuse the Text, so they have also made lewd
comments in several places upon it. Of which I Will give the Reader a few
remarkable Instances, as I find them in a Book called the Festivale (or
Homilies upon the Festivals before the Reformation:) We read in the Gospel that
the Bl. Virgin was astonished when the Angel Gabriel brought his happy Message
to her; now that Book gives this reason for it. There was in that Country a Man
that could much Witchcraft, and so with help of Fiendes, he made himself like
an Angel, and came to diverse Maidens, and said he was sent from God to them on
his Message, and so often times lay with them, and did them great villainy: Then
when our Lady heard tell of that Man, she was addread lest it had been he, for
she had spoke with none Angel before, fol. 93.

So fol. 72. in the Sermon upon the Circumcision of our Lord, it says, The
flesh which was cut from Christ's member at his Circumcision, an Angel brought
it after to King Charles for the most precious Relic of the World, and for
the greatest worship he could do thereto, he brought it to Rome, to a Church
that is called Sancta Sanctorum. (concerning this foreskin we shall have a fit
occasion to speak more afterward.)

Ibid, fol. 67. When our Lord lay in the Cratch, the Ox and the Ass fell down
on their Knees and worshipped Him, and eat no more of the Hay.

Ibid. fol. 66. Thomas the Apostles It is no doubt this hand that is meant, in
that story Stapleton tells of this Apostle, how John the Patriarch of the
Indies, An. 1120. declared publicly to the Pope, Sanctum Thomam Apostolum omni
anno communicare populum suum, manu propria porrecta dignis and retracta ab
indignis. Stapleton de tribus Thomis. p. 19.
hand that was in Christ's side, would never go into his Tomb, but always lay
without, which hand had such virtue in it, that if the Priest when he goes to
Mass, put a branch of a Vine into his hand, the branch puts forth grapes,
and by that time that the Gospel be said, the Grapes been ripe, and he takes
the Grapes and wringeth them into the Chalice, and with that Wine houselleth
the people.

Idem, fol. 108. Concerning the death of the two great Apostles Peter and Paul,
it says thus. St. Poule for that he was a Gentleman born, for the more worship
they smote off his head, but crucified Peter with his head downward.

So, fol. 91. (speaking concerning Judas his bursting asunder) The Fiende could
not draw out the Soul of Judas when he hanged himself, out of his mouth,
because he had lately kissed the mouth of Christ, therefore the Fiende brake
his Womb and shed out his Guts, and then he took his Soul and bare it to Hell.
But surely the foul Fiend, employed about this work, was not such a fool as
this Writer, not to remember a certain Backdoor very proper for such a foul
soul as Judas his was, to issue out at, and so to no purpose at all for this
end to take such needless pains.

A Prayer to the 3. Kings of Colen.
Horae Sec. usum Sarum.
TRium Regum trinum munus Christus homo Deus unus unus in essentia trina dona
tres signent Rex in auro, Deus thure Myrrha mortalitas. Colunt reges propter
Regem summi Reges servent Regem coloni Coloniae. Nos in fide sumus rivi, hi
sunt fontes primitivi, gentium primitiae.

Tu nos ab hac Christ valle
Duc ad vitam recto call
per horum suffragia,
Ubi Patris, ubi Nati,
Tui and amoris Sacri
Frui mereamur gloria.
Oremus.

DEus qui tres Magos Orientales, Jaspar, Melchior and Balthazar, ad tua
cunabula, ut te mysticis venerarentur muneribus sine impedimento stella duce
duxisti; concede propitius, ut per horum trium Regum pias intercessiones and
merita commemorationum, nobis famulis tuis tribuas, ut itinere quo ituri sumus,
celeritate laetitia gratia and pace teipso sole vera stella vera luminis luce,
ad loca destinata in pace and salute, and negotio peracto cum omni
prosperitate, salvi and sani redire valeamus.

Qui vivis, etc.

Amen.

Hora sec. usum Romanum, 1570.

O Rex Jaspar, Rex Melchior, Rex Balthazar, rogo vos per singula nomina, rogo
vos per Sanctam Trinitatem, rogo vos per regem regum, quem vagientem in cunis
videre meruistis; ut compatiamini tribulationibus meis hodie, and intercedite
pro me ad Dominum, cujus desiderio exules facti estis: and sicut vos per
Angelicam nunciationem de reditu ad Herodem eripuit, ita me hodie liberare
dignetur ab omnibus inimicis meis visibilibus and invisibilibus, and a
subitanea and improvisa morte, and ab omni confusione mala, and ab omni
periculo corporis and animae.

Oremus.

DEus illuminator omnium gentium, da populis tuis perpetua pace gaudere; and
illud lumen infunde cordibus nostris, quod trium Magorum mentibus aspirasti.

Per Dominum, etc.

Since I can make no sense of some part of this, I shall therefore make no
Rithme upon any of it, let him do it, that has a mind. Instead thereof, I Will
give you an excellent account concerning the 3. offerings of these wise Men,
out of the Festivale on Epiphany day, which is this Joseph kept of the Gold as
much as him needed, to pay his tribute to the Emperor, and also to keep our
Lady with while she lay in childbed, and the rest he deeled to the poor. The
incense he brent, to put away the stench of the stable there as she lay in: and
with the Myrrh, our Lady anointed her Child, to keep him from Worms and
Disease.

Let us Pray.

O God, who by the guidance of a star did lead without impediment the 3
Eastern Magi, Jaspar, Melchior and Balthazar to thy Cradle, to worship thee
with mystical gifts; mercifully grant, that by the pious intercessions of these
three Kings, and by the merits of their commemorations, thou would afford
unto us thy servants, that in the journey which we are undertaking, with speed,
joy, grace and peace, thou thy self being the Sun, the true star, the true
light of the day, we may come to the places we design to go to, in peace and
safety; and after the dispatch of our business, may be able to return safe and
sound with all prosperity. Who live, etc. Amen.

O King Jaspar, King Melchior, King Balthazar, I entreat you by every of your
names, I entreat you by the holy Trinity, I entreat you by the King of Kings,
whom you merited to see crying in his Cradle; that you would compassionate this
day my tribulations, and intercede with the Lord for me, for the desire of
seeing whom, you were made exiles; and as he delivered you by the Angels
message from returning to Herod; so he may vouchsafe to deliver me this day
from all mine enemies, visible and invisible, and from sudden and unforeseen
death, and from all evil confusion, and from all danger of body and soul.

Let us pray.

O GOD, that do enlighten all Nations, grant unto thy people that they may
rejoice in perpetual peace, and infuse that light into our hearts, which thou
did breath into the minds of the three Magi.

Through our Lord, etc.

NOTES.
THis piece of Devotion is so great an instance of the folly and gross
superstition of this Church, that I cannot but make some considerable Remarques
upon it, before I go farther: and especially because this tale of the 3 Kings
of Colen, is again revived by Mr. Cressy in his late Church History, who I see
is resolved (such is his discretion) to play all the lost Games of the Church
of Rome, and would fain give veneration to a story, which for its
ridiculousness (and without any other design) has been set to a Tune in the
Catch-Book, after it had been blotted out of the Devotions of the Church.

It cannot but seem very strange to all but those who are for Devotion without
Discretion, that any should in their addresses to Almighty God, presume to tell
him their idle and uncertain stories; especially when they have his own
direction (who sure best knows what is pleasing to himself) what name they are
to use, and to whom they are to go in all their prayers, that they may speed in
Heaven. We have often heard of the Son of God, in the Scripture, as a prevailing
Advocate with the Father, but never a word there of the Mother of God, as
destined to such an Office; or an instance of any there, that ever came to God
by her, or by any other departed Saint. A man might well suspect, that these
men who thus apply themselves to them, imagined that either Christ's hands were
too full of Petitions, or that his heart was not so tender as theirs; (which I
shall after show, is indeed their plain sense concerning the Bl. Virgin,) or
that some Courtiers in Heaven had lately stepped into greater honor and favor
with God than he. But how I pray come these 3 Kings of Colen to be in so much
vogue for intercession? The Scripture, I am sure, neither tells us, that the
Men who came from the East to visit our Savior, and to offer gifts to Him,
were either Kings, or that their number was only three (their three offerings
do not prove it, for each one might offer all three) or that their names were
Jaspar, Melchior and Balthazar; and yet all this must be put (as if it were
unquestionable) into a Prayer. But, it may be they will say that Tradition will
supply all these defects. If it were such a Tradition as has delivered the
Bible to us, and the names of the several Writers of that Holy Book, we might
and would accept it; that is, if it were ancient enough, and agreed with it
self. But the learned Isaac Casaubon (not to mention others) has said enough in
his second Exercitation, number the 10th. against Baronius, to show the folly
of this pretense. For to pass over their being Concerning which see Maldonate
upon the 2d. of S. Matthew, v. 1. who says thus, Ecclesia Magos fuisse Reges
non certa and Catholica fide, sed probabili opinione credit. Licuit enim
Christiano poetae (sc. Mantuano) salva Religione dicere: Mec reges ut opinor
erant. (the more shame their prayers should be so positive that they were so)
Licuit multis nostro tempore Catholicis and eruditis Theologis idem scribere:
and then he mentions such arguments as these; Non fuisse Evangelistam silentio
nomen Regum, si reges fuissent, prateriturum, cum id ad honorem adorandi
Christi magnopere pertineret: majore apparatu excipiendos ab Herod, Reges a
Rege.
Kings, (which if they were, they must be only truckling and petty ones) the
ancient Writers have not pronounced their number to be only three, and neither
Ancient nor Later have agreed that these were their Names.

I think if I had their persuasions, that the Saints are mightily pleased with
the addresses that are made to them, and reflected withal upon the slender
assurance that is given, that they were but three in number, I should be
afraid, lest there should happen to be a fourth, and he as deserving a King as
any of the other; and that every time I invoked the three, I should be in
danger of disobliging him, by seeing his fellows venerated and courted
perpetually, and himself without regard, and having nothing to do. But what if
they have guessed right at their number, and have been out in their names? Are
they sure that the Saints will not take it ill to be miscalled? And what if
they should not know, whether you have any thing for them to do, till they hear
their own true names? What will this prayer then do good to Jaspar, Melchior
and Balthazar, when another tradition says their names were, Apellius, Amerus
and Damascus; a third, that they were, Magalath, Galgalath and Saracin; and a
fourth calls them, Ator, Sator and Peratoras? which last I should choose (in
this uncertainty) to call them by, as having the more Kingly sound, if it had
not been for a scurvy story Casaubon mentions out of an old Greek book, that
these three, together with Misael, Achael, Cyriacus and Stephanus (the names of
the 4. Shepherds that came to visit our Lord in Bethlehem) had been used (and
he tells how) for a charm to cure the biting of Serpents and other venomous
Beasts.

But it may be I needed not have offered all this about their names, since
neither Mr. Cressy nor Baronius (who has so large a discourse concerning them)
have undertaken to justify this prayer in that respect, or so much as to
mention how they were called. Let us come therefore to the main matter, wherein
Mr. Cressy is to be considered, and that is concerning their Relics to be
seen at Colen, which is the reason they are called the 3 Kings of Colen; for I
hope the Laity of the Romish Church, though they are very ignorant, yet do not
imagine, that these three ever reigned in that place together, like the 2 Kings
of Brentford.

A Digression concerning Relics.
IT seems to be a story very hard, without great proof, to be believed, that
these three dead Bodies should ever come to this City; But we need go no
farther for the resolution of this doubt, than to Mr. Cressy, who thus informs
us out of the supplement of the Gallican Martyrology.

At Colonia Agrippina (or Colen) is celebrated the memory of the three holy
Kings, Chapter Hist. lib. 7. cap. 16.
who on this day ( Jan. 6.) adored our Lord in his Cradle at Bethlehem. The
Bodies of these Saints were by the care and devotion of the holy Empress
Helena, brought out of the East to Constantinople; where in the Temple of
Sancta Sophia (afterward more magnificently repaired by Justinian) they
remained to the times of the Emperor Emanuel; who bearing a great affection to
Eustorgius Bishop of Milan, by birth a Grecian, at his earnest prayers bestowed
on him those sacred pledges Eustorgius presently conveyed them to Milan,
placing them in a Church of Religious Virgins. But in the year Eleven-Hundred
sixty and four, the Emperor Frederick, having by force reduced Milan to his
obedience, granted to his Chancellor Raynaldus, Archbishop of Colen, at his
most earnest suit, the same three sacred Bodies, which he transferred to Colen,
where he reposed them in the principal Church, in which place they are to this
day celebrated with great veneration. Thus far he.

When I first read this story, it seemed to me, just such a made idle speech,
as the shewer of the Tombs would say over the Bodies of King Arthur, or Guy of
Warwick; and I wish it be not the very Tale that is told over them, to those
that visit those holy Relics, at the Metropolitan Church of Colen. I think I
do not despise this story without a great deal of reason: for Guil
Neubrigensis, Lib. 2. de reb. Anglic. cap. 8. Nec notum est a quibus personis
sacrae illorum reliquiae illuc ^ilaiae, ibique repositae fuerint.
who lived at that very time when Milan was taken by Frederick, and who
mentions, that these Bodies of the Magi were found in an old destroyed
Monastery, yet adds, That this Treasure was not known to the Monks and Clergy
that ministered there, but was found when the Church was overturned to the
foundation, and revealed by manifest tokens, to whom they did belong (but what
those tokens were he says not a word of) and a little after, -- Nor was it
known by what Persons their holy Relics were brought and laid there; (it
seems there was not a word said about Helena at this time.) Besides, it is
scarce imaginable, if this story were true, that not one word of it should be
mentioned either by Eusebius or Socrates, and especially not by his beloved
Baronius, who with so much care has collected out of all Authors the progress
of Helena into the East, to the holy Land; who certainly was led to it in her
extreme Age of above Fourscore, out of Devotion to the Sepulcher, and to visit
the places, that were so famous for the actions and sufferings of our Lord; and
when she had found what she went in Quest of, he tells us of no journey
forward, or circuit she made into the East, but there, for ought we can learn,
her steps rested till her return. And indeed, by what those Authors relate of
her, we may easily conceive, how she might spend a Twelve-moneth (if she had so
long a time both for her progress and return) without going farther. For we
hear, when she came to Jerusalem, of her curious search after the Cross, for
the finding of which, she was fain to dig some while, and of her building two
Churches, one at Bethlehem, and another at Mount Olivet. And as her great Age
must needs make it improbable, that she should take much pleasure in farther
journeying, when this great curiosity was satisfied: so the little time she
lived after, makes it still more: for Valesius makes it out, Vales not. in
Eusebius. de vit. Constantin. l. 3. cap. 47.
that Helena must end her days, either an. 326. (which was the year she came to
Jerusalem) or an. 327. with whom Mr. Cr. here agrees, saying, She seems to have
ended her life, either the same year, or in the beginning of the following
year; and both he and Baronius will have her to dye at Rome, after her return
to Constantinople, which, considering her Age, could not be dispatched in a
little time. I might also add farther, that if really Helena had been informed
of the place of the burial of these 3 Magi, and had brought their Bodies along
with her to her Son to Constantinople, (as this story pretends) it could scarce
have been possible, (considering that Age of Learned men, and the fame of the
thing) but that a more certain Tradition of this would have remained in the
Church: Besides, we now see so little evidence of the place where they were
buried, that scarce any thing has more exercised the Pens of Learned Critics,
than to determine what Country that is, which the Scripture calls the East,
from whence they came; some thinking it was Chaldaea, some Persia, and some
Arabia; and all giving probable conjectures for their several Opinions; and
when not only Later Writers, but even the Fathers themselves are divided in
this matter, as any who will but consult Maldonate, in the forenamed place (to
omit many others) may see.

But I have not yet done with Mr. Cr. but must add a few words more to tell
him, that he quite mistook his Cue, in stuffing and swelling his History to
such a great bulk, by such a prodigious number of Legends, concerning the
Relics of the Saints and Miracles about them: that his Faith is a great deal
too big (for so charitable I Will be, though some I doubt will imagine him to
have none at all) and his Discretion apparently too little for the
inquisitiveness and Learning of the Age he lives in. That in this wild way of
promoting his Faction, he has done infinite disservice to our common
Christianity, and that in an Age, wherein too many, God knows, are inclined to
Infidelity, by prejudicing them against the belief of the undoubted Miracles,
by which our Christianity is proved, when they see such an heap of wonders
produced, to countenance apparent fooleries and superstitions, but little
differing from that of the Heathens, and things contrary to the sense of all
sober Mankind. If he had lived in the 9, or 10 Century (as his Talent seems to
be fitted for such a credulous Age) I am inclined to believe that he would not
only have been famed for a Writer of others Miracles, but some Monk or other,
would have made him a worker of them too. What pity was it, that Mr. Cr. was
not in Being 2 Ages ago, when that important Controversy was menaged with such
zeal about the Bl. Virgins Ring wherewith she was espoused to Joseph, and 2
Towns went together by the ears, in contesting to whom it did belong (which
story I Will give the Reader afterward.) There could not have been picked out
such a man as Mr. Cr. to have made a Prologue to that Play: He could have
represented, what vast expenses Princes were at heretofore, to obtain such holy
Treasures, as they were now concerned about: How the Relics of S. Austin's
body had been purchased with a 100 Talents of Silver, Chapter Hist. l. 34. c. 3.
and a Talent of Gold: How great a Sum the Arm of S. Bartholomew cost Queen
Emma, when she purchased it of the Bishop of Beneventum: Ibid.
He could have told them, that there could scarce be any hard bargain in buying
the precious Arm of S. Sampson Archbishop, which was taken from such a
shoulder, upon which, Id. l. 31. c. 10.
when he received the Order of Priesthood, a Pillar of Light from Heaven was
seen to rest, till the whole Office was finished. And what could he not have
said in representing the mighty concern of Henry the Emperor, who when he
could not with Promises and Rewards, Ibid.
obtain from Rodulph Duke of Burgundy, the Lance with which our Lord's side was
pierced, and to which was fixed one of the Nails of his Cross; at last with
threats of an Invasion extorted it from him, and how he after rewarded the
Duke, not only with store of Gold and Silver, but with bestowing on him a
great part of the Province of Suevia. Here was a pious Emperor indeed, who to
obtain (as he thought) the Lance which pierced our Savior, could have been
contented to have really murdered Thousands of Christians, in which it is hard
to say, whether he had expressed more kindness to our Lord, or his Members.
These stories, no doubt, would have been very acceptable in that Age; but Mr.
Cr. must exercise a little patience, if we now should chance to smile at the
fooleries of his History in this particular of Relics; and we promise him to
be contented to be called Jews, and be ranged by him in the society of evil
spirits (I give you his own language) or any thing else he pleases in his
Frantic fits to call us; so he will but give us leave to look, before we turn
purchasers, and not quite lay aside our reason, when he calls upon us to
believe and venerate.

To begin therefore with the last instance I named, concerning the Spear and
Nails of the Cross, which the Emperor had. As for the Spear; since the story
of Longinus (who was once said to pierce our Savior's side, and to be
converted at the cross) may well be looked upon by all as a Fable; this Spear
too I doubt must now follow his fate; especially since the Historians,
Socrates, Sozomen and Theodoret, who have told us of Helena's finding other
Instruments of Christ's passion (and some of them have related, how she found
and disposed of the Nails, as by and by we shall hear) yet say not a word of
her finding the Spear among the rest, that were dug out of Mount Calvary,
where she found the Cross. And as for the Nails, by which our Savior was
fastened to the Cross; Baronius has confessed, that there could be but 3, or at
most 4 of them, and he also informs us how Helena disposed of them: With two
she caused a Bridle Theodoret applies to this the Prophecy of Zachary (cap. 14.
v. 20.) where, following the 70, he reads, Holiness shall be upon the Bridles
of the Horse: but the Hebrew (...), (which signifies Bells, not Bridles) quite
spoils the conceit, if nothing else did.
to be made for the Emperor Constantine; the Third she put in his Crown; and
the Fourth (which in my Opinion was best bestowed) was thrown in a great
Tempest into the Adriatic Sea, to becalm it: But then any one may see how the
Cardinal is put to it, to answer for all the other Nails that are shown in
several places. Baron. ad an. 326. nu. 54.
Thus he attempts it. Sed fortasse accidit, etc. Perhaps it so fell out, that
to every one of those Nails (that are shown) there might a small portion of
Iron be taken from a true Nail, (that pierced his body) and added to it, (the
least I can imagine, is, when two Nails are rubbed one upon another, and so
one may be sanctified by the other) or rather, when the ancient Monuments were
lost, that testified the matter, then those Nails by which the pieces of the
holy Cross were joined, were taken for those by which Christ's Body was fastened
to the Cross: And perhaps in some places it so happened, that a Nail kept
among the sacred Relics, whereby one of the mystical members of Christ, viz.
a Martyr, was pierced, was taken for one of the very Nails of the Passion of
Christ (a fine fetch to save a lie, the Nail that pierces Christ's mystical
members, pierces his body) and then he concludes, Quicquid sit, fides purgat
facinus; whatsoever becomes of it, faith purges the crime (not of those that
cheat with it, nor of the Church that connives at it) for none of the faithful
worships the Iron, but rather venerates and adores the Passion of Christ in the
Iron: (which pretty excuse of the Cardinal, may as well serve for all the
stupidity and cheats of the Heathen Idolatry; for they never worshipped any
thing, but with relation to that which they verily believed to be a Deity.) But
to return to Mr. Cressy: He tells us out of Matthew. Paris, Chapter Hist. l. 2. Cap.
13.
that the Master of the Hospital of St. John at Jerusalem, sent a portion of
the Blood of Christ shed on the Cross, in a certain crystal Glass, by a Brother
of the Temple, well known to Henry III. the which present was confirmed by the
Testimony of the Patriarch of Jerusalem, of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and
Noblemen dwelling in the H. Land, and with what reverence the King and Nobility
entertained the said holy Treasure; as also (in the same Chapter) that S.
Joseph of Arimathea brought with him into Brittany two Silver Vessels, filled
with the Blood of our Savior, which precious Vessels, by his order, were
buried with him in his Tomb: and he gives two excellent reasons, why he would
have them thus buried with him. 1. Because, if they should have been consigned
to any particular persons in those times, before Christianity was settled in
this Island, either a losing and profanation of them could scarce have been
avoided: (by the same reason we should never more have heard of the Spear; and
why could not a Miracle, such as is showed perpetually in preserving and
increasing the Wood of the Cross, have preserved them?) Whereas a certainty
that they were reserved in that place, would be an occasion to stir up the
Devotion of present and succeeding Christians to frequent it, and reap benefit
by the virtue of them. 2. Again, Saint Joseph had no doubt the same design
herein, that the Emperor Constantine expressed, who made (as Eusebius tells us)
the Relics he had collected of the Apostles, be laid up in his Tomb, to the
end that being dead, he might be partaker of the Prayers, which there in honor
of the Apostles should be offered to God: [both which reasons are confuted by
himself in the foregoing Chapter, where he tells us, that the particular place
where S. Joseph was buried is unknown, and that though one John Blome,
(thinking he had a Revelation) obtained leave from the King to search for it,
yet his labor was in vain, and that his Relics could never be discovered;
insomuch as some anciently doubted, whether he was indeed buried at
Glastonbury.] But however highly he may seem to estimate the Blood of Jesus,
while it is thus preserved in Glasses and Silver Vessels; yet I doubt he forgot
one thing, which argues it, in my Opinion, to be more sacred, and too precious
to be deposited any where on Earth; and that is, (what the Apostle to the
Hebrews insists on) that this Blood was to be presented in the most holy place,
Heb. 9. v 11.12, and 23.
being that of an expiatory Sacrifice; and that the Heavenly things were to be
purified by it.

It may be worth Mr. Cressy's resolving, whether the blood that was shed on the
Cross, after it was poured out, had any relation to our Savior's Body: if it
had; whether, when his Body became glorious Dr. Jackson on the Creed, Book 10.
cap. 46. page 3258. To inquire, says he, what should become of all our Saviors
blood, whether shed in his Agony or upon the Cross, will seem I know a curious
Questions, specially to slothful students in Divinity. On the other side, it
would argue a drowsy fancy, either voluntarily to imagine, or to be by others
persuaded, that this most precious blood being shed in such abundance, should
be like water spilt upon the ground, or mingled with dust, or dispersed by the
heat of the Sun, and resolved into vapors: Seeing every drop of it was truly
the blood of God, it can be no sin to suppose, nay to believe, that all of it
was by his death, made, as his body now is, immortal; that all of it was
preserved entire and sincere, and brought either by his own immediate power, or
by the Ministry of his holy Angels, into those Heavenly Sanctuaries, which were
to be consecrated by it, to be the Seats and Mansions of Everlasting Bless unto
all true Believers, and thus brought in at the time of his entrance into
Paradise, in Soul, though not in Body, which was immediately after he had
commended his Spirit unto his Heavenly Father.
and immortal, after his entrance into the holy place, that is, into Heaven, we
must not say the same of his Blood too: unless we will make a strange and
incongruous difference between the Body and Blood of Christ; which would be
more still, if some part of his Blood (as we must suppose some remained in his
Body, and was not wholly evacuated when he dyed) suffered such a glorious
change, and other parts of it remained as they were before; some of it
translated above, and some of it remaining still below: If he say that all of
it was made like unto his glorious Body; I ask then, whether he may not as
wisely think, to fill a Bottle with the Sunbeams, as with this Blood?

I foresee Mr. Cr. will have a hard task, to resolve this with satisfaction;
because I observe how the great Jesuits of his Church are at a loss in a like
case, though of less difficulty, to wit, about the Praeputium of our Savior,
which was cut off at his Circumcision. How this sacred Relic was preserved
and found we shall have occasion to mention afterward; but they are not
agreed, where it is kept. See Bollandus Act. Sanct. ad Jan. 1. de praeputio
Christi. And Rivets Apologia pro S. Maria virgin lib. 1. c. 17.
Costerus says, it was kept at Antwerp many years, till the fury of Heretics
took it away, in the Year 1566. Cardinal Tolet says, to this Day it is kept at
Calcata in the Church of Saint Cornelius and Cyprian, Tolet in cap. 2. Luc.
annot. 31.
where it has been worshipped from the Year 1559, to 1584. Salmeron out of the
Legend of Jacobus de Voragine, Salmeron in Evang. Tom. 3. Tract. 36.
will have it to have been given by the Bl. Virgin, first to Mary Magdalen, and
afterward to have been brought by an Angel to Charles the Great at Aken, and
after came to be laid up in the Lateran; Hence those Verses.

Circumcisa caro Christi, Sandalia Sacra,
Atque umbilici viget hic praecisio chara.
That is, Christ's foreskin and blessed Sandals are kept here,
And what was cut from off his Navel dear.


But for all this, the Church of Antwerp seems to say the most for themselves,
that they were the owners of this Treasure; if we either consider the Miracles
they also pretend to, or the numerous testimonies Bollandus has mentioned:
First, that of the Chapter of Antwerp, an. 1416. Loc. citat.
of Theobald Archbishop of Bisonti, an. 1427. of John Bishop of Cambray, an.
1428. (in whose presence, we are told the wonder appeared, of three drops of
blood, which distilled from the Praeputium upon the Corporal on which it was
laid) of Pope Eugenius, an. 1446. and the Bull of Clement VIII. an. 1599. in
which the Confraternity of the Circumcision is confirmed, which was long before
there instituted. There is another place still that pretends to this Relic,
for those of Podium do carry it about with great Veneration on the Feast of the
Ascension; Bollandus in Appendic. Vol. 1. ad. 1. Januar.
but the Knife of the Circumcision is shown to the people at Compendium.

But then comes a farther doubt; If this be true, says Salmeron, it is very
wonderful; for since that Flesh is of the truth of his humane Nature, we
believe that upon the Resurrection of Christ, it returned to its glorified
place. Suarez the Jesuit is also put to it, to resolve the Question; who
notwithstanding all the Revelations to S. Briget concerning the preservation of
this Relic, Suarez. in 3 part. qu. 54. Act. 4. disp. 47. Sec. 1.
concludes; That the Body of Christ rising from the dead, had a foreskin;
because this is a particle of Man's body, belonging after a sort to its
intireness; therefore it is not wanting to the Body of Christ now in Heaven, in
which there is no imperfection: Besides, Adam, and other beatified Saints have
their Bodies entire, without the defect of this part, etc. As to the Objection,
that the foreskin of Christ is still preserved in the Church, he answers, 1.
That Innocent the III. called it in Question. 2. He adds that the foreskin
belongs to the intireness of the Body formally and not materially; therefore
some material part may remain on Earth, which was supplied to the Body of
Christ in Heaven, from other matter that was sometimes of his Body, and had
been resolved by continual Nutrition. Thus he. Now if all this difficulty
appears in salving this Relic, which is a less considerable part of our
Savior's Body; the difficulty must increase when we speak of this Relic of
his Blood; especially because it was that very individual Blood, which was last
in his Body when he dyed, and then a part of it: And it ought to abate Mr. Cr.
confidence still more; when he calls to mind, that it is the most common
Opinion of the Schoolmen, that the Blood of Christ was Hypostatically united
to the Word, not only when he was alive, but also in Triduo mortis; and that a
Divine of Barcinona, who preached that the Blood of Christ shed in his Passion,
was separated from his Divinity, was condemned for preaching Heresy, and a
Book written against him, by the command of Pope Clement VI. Vasquez. in 3
part. Thoma Qu. 5. Artic. 2. Disp. 36. cap. 4.
and he was made to recant his Sermon, as you may see in Vasquez, who asserts
it as his own Opinion, Ibid. cap. 8.
that, No portion of the blood of Christ did remain on Earth under the form of
blood, but only under its color, amissa forma sanguinis. Aquinas also is
positive, Whatsoever, says he, belongs to the nature of a humane body, was
wholly in the body of Christ when he rose, Thomas part 3. qu. 54. Artic. 2.
respondeo dicendum.
as his flesh and bones and blood, etc. and therefore all those were in the
body of Christ when he rose, and that entirely without all diminution,
otherwise it had not been a perfect resurrection. And more fully afterward,
"all the blood that flowed from the Body of Christ, Ibid. ad Tertium.
since it belongs to the verity of humane Nature, rose in the body of Christ:
as for that blood which is preserved in some Churches for Relics, it did not
flow from Christ's side, but is said miraculously to have flowed from a certain
Image of Christ that was pierced. Which last words refer to that story that is
told in a Book attributed to S. Athanasius (though falsely, as Bellarmine
confesses, de Scriptor. Eccles. p. 116.) wherein he relates how a Jew at
Berytus pierced the Image of Christ upon the Cross, and blood issued from it.
But enough of this matter. As Mr. Cressy's discourse is weak and childish (to
say no worse) about the Blood of our Savior, so it is too, about the Bodies of
the Saints. The Roman Church celebrates the Martyrdom of Eleven Thousand
Virgins upon the 21 of October, all slain at one time: I shall now only deal
with Mr. Cr. about their Relics, deferring to speak to their story, which I
intend to give afterward. If we suppose what he says about their slaughter and
the circumstances of it, to be true, one may then allow the place pretty easy
to be found where they were buried, Chapter Hist. l. 9. cap. 20.
and we will suppose it, as he says, to be near Colen; and that that might be done
about 10 Years after, which he says the Archbishop of Colen did, taking their
Bones out of the ground, and reverently burying them again in Chests hewn out
of stone (which is hard to be believed, the number is so great; but if Colen
could show 1100 such Chests, allowing 10 Bodies, which is fair, to one Chest,
that doubt might cease) we might then also grant, that several of those Bodies
and parts of them, might have been preserved a long time, (though without a
Miracle, they that have been dead 12, or 1300 Years, will scarce look so fresh,
as I suppose their pretended remains do at Colen, and other places, where they
show more than stone chests.) Grant too, that these Relics have been
dispersed, as he would have them, all over the World, and let the Town of
Maydenhead, take its name from the Head of one of the Virgins, there (I know
not how long since) kept and venerated. But now comes that wherein my faith is
crampt (which yet Mr. Cr. runs off as roundly as any part of the story) viz.
his confident pretending, Ibid. lib. 9. cap. 23.
that the body of such a one of these Virgins, naming her, lies at such a
place, and he mentions above 40 of them, with the distinct places, where their
Relics are preserved. The body of S. Vrsula her self (the Leader of them) is
still preserved at Colen, As certainly, as that very Gold-Ring is still kept
there, with which Ursula was betrothed to Prince Connanus, which Laurus says
he saw shown at Colen among their Relics. Laurus de annulo pron. B. Virg.
page 2.
"but her Head was translated to Paris, where the College of Sorbon
acknowledge her their Patroness: (having got so choice a part of her, as her
head) At S. Denis in France is a commemoration of Panefredis, Secunda,
Semibaria, Florina and Valeria companions of Vrsula, whose Relics repose
there: In Flanders the Monastery of Marcian possesses some part of the Body of
Cordula, etc. Now I desire Mr. Cr. to satisfy me in this one demand; since
these bodies undoubtedly were buried at first, as rudely as they were slain,
and that in a strange Country far distant from their own, where they were
known to none; and are not pretended to have been stirred out of their first
grave, till about 10 Years after their burial; Let him tell me without flying
to a Miracle (which is as foolish in this case, as idle talking of Occult
Qualities in a Question of Philosophy) how could any one know the body of S.
Vrsula from that of S. Cordula; S. Babcaria from S. Semibaria; and so
distinguish any of the rest? If he thinks the Question hard, I Will give him time
to send to Colen to be resolved farther about it, and if he pleases too, about
the 3 Kings there; and he would do well to inquire whether Vrsula had not more
bodies and heads than one; since in the Index of the Relics of Glastonbury
Abbey, it is thus recorded. In a coffin, the Relics of S. Vrsula the Virgin
are contained satis plene, Bish. Usher de Britan. Eccles. prin. ord. p. 626,
627.
and in the same coffin is contained a third part of the Relics of S. Daria
the Virgin (who yet in the Visions of S. Elizabeth is said to be the Mother of
Vrsula, which creates a farther doubt worth resolving) the gift of Henry Bishop
of Winchester (who was Abbot there, and lived at that time when the Sepulchral
Titles were discovered, that gave occasion to the dispersing the Relics of
the 11000 Virgins, in the Year 1156.) The Bergomenses also firmly believe, that
they have the head of S. Vrsula, as well as they of Colen. But to go on.

He tells us of S. Audoens Relics, that being applied to one almost consumed
with the Leprosy, and to another half dead with the Palsy, Lib. 32. cap. 3.
by the hand of S. Odo Archbishop of Canterbury, they were immediately
restored to health. Now though I could have wished, that any other hand had
applied them, than S. Odo's, because some may doubt, considering how great a
Miracle-worker (as we shall see afterward) S. Odo was, whether it was his
hand, or the others Relics that wrought the cure; yet I shall be so civil, as
to make no farther scruple about either Adon or his other two Brothers, they
may all work miracles, I Will not question it, when Adon, Dadon, and Radon,
Capgrave calls them Ado, Bado, and Dado. in vit. S. Audoen.
are their names.

He says, concerning S. Brigid, (lib. 10. c. 12.) that in Testimony o^ her
Virginity, having touched the wood of an Altar, it became presently green: But
I shall take leave to suspend my faith in it, till I am told, who ever called
her Virginity in Question (for that he says not a word of) and I cannot upon my
Principles imagine that any such miracle would have been shown, unless that
which it gave testimony to, had been opposed; any more than that there would
have been any miracles in the Primitive Church, if there had been neither Jews
nor Heathens, who blasphemed and contradicted the sacred Doctrines of Christ;
for these are not for them that believe, but for them that believe not. I Will
also give him another miracle of S. Brigid, to make my peace with him, (if he
can believe it he may; for I cannot) which I find in the Breviary of Sarum,
Les. 2. of S. Brigid (where also that about the Wood being made green is
mentioned) S. Brigid being sent by her Mother a milking, in order to the making
of Butter, she gave all the Milk to the poor; and when the rest of the Maids
brought in what the Cows afforded, she prayed to the Lord, and he bestowed
Butter upon his Virgin in great abundance. (As if God would miraculously
encourage that which he has so expressly forbidden, the doing of evil, that good
may come of it? this sure is only fit for them to believe who very often
practice it.) We are farther informed also, that she used to divide the Butter
she gave away into 12 parts, as if it were for the 12 Apostles, Bolland. Act.
Sanct. ad Febr. 1.
and one part she made bigger than any of the rest, which stood for Christ's
portion: though its strange she forgot to make another inequality, by ordering
one portion more of the Butter to be made bigger than the remaining ones, in
honor of S. Peter the Prince of the Apostles. These Butter-miracles, I was apt
to fancy, could afford no Sure Footing to a wise Man's faith; and yet I
observe, that the only wonder that we are told, Bolland. ad Januar. 26.
of another She-Saint, (to wit, S. Haseka) is but this, that at a meal, by her
prayers she made stinking butter sweet. But Mr. Cressy calls us to harder tasks
of believing still in some other instances he gives about the Saints bodies.
Lib. 14. c. 3.
The one is concerning St. Baldred, out of the English Martyrology. Where it is
said, That he was wonderfully buried in three places, seeing three Towns,
Aldham, Tinningham, and Preston, contended for his body. The meaning of which
is, that his whole body unremoved was buried in three places, else it was no
wonder at all. This Mr. Cr. believes, and so do I, only we differ in this small
circumstance, that I believe it to be a stupid and notorious lie. But I seem
plainly to apprehend, that he did not intend that we Protestants should much
trouble our selves about it; for he knew well enough, that this was too hard a
morsel for us to swallow down, upon the mere credit of a Martyrology: but oh
this is a sweet story for his Catholics, who are resolved to believe in spite
of all their reason, that the whole Body of Christ may be at the same time in a
thousand places; and let them take the comfort of it, I shall not envy them.
Another is somewhat to the same purpose, concerning S. Theliau: After he was
dead, Lib. 11. c. 13.
the Inhabitants of three several places contended earnestly which of them
should enjoy his body: those of Pennalum, where his ancestors had been buried;
those of Lanteliovaur, where he dyed; and those of Landaff, among whom he had
been Bishop. When therefore no agreement could be made amongst them, there
appeared presently three Bodies so like to one another, that three eggs could
not more perfectly resemble. So each of these People took one of them, and by
that means the controversy ended. But then it follows, That by frequent
miracles at his Tomb it appeared, that the Inhabitants of Landaff possessed the
true Body. This story neither need create us but little trouble, since, as good
luck will have it, it confutes it self. For can any one imagine, that when
three Towns are with equal zeal and devotion contending for the possession of
so great a Treasure as his Body was, that only one of them should glory in the
prize? or that the same miracle which gave it them, should give them occasion
to laugh at the other two, who were fobb'd and cheated with an aerie Image, and
made to embrace a cloud instead of Juno? I can allow easily that God might deny
20 Towns, who should have put in for it, but I cannot believe that he would
thus deceive one: This was a trick fit for none but the Devil to play, who
delights in cousenage and abusing of Mankind: but rather than thus to think of
God, I Will sooner be persuaded that a tender hearted Father, when three of his
hungry Children cry to him for Bread, will fill the Belly of one of them, and
still the complaints of the other two, only with a painted Baby or a Rattle.
And now me thinks I begin to be weary of considering these follies, and it is
well if I have not made the Reader do some penance too; since therefore I hope
I have sufficiently secured him, from giving too hasty a credit to Mr. Cressy's
Legends, I dare now trust him with such idle tattle, as this that follows.
(Only premising, that if there were 20 more such miracles told us, though we
should hear of the finding Children unhurt on the tops of Trees in Eagles
nests, as in the case of Nesting, (lib. 32. c. 19.) if they have the seal of
St. Dunstan's age, or the next upon them, that is, refer to 900, or a 1000
Years after Christ, the Reader may give them a pass in course, and need not
examine them farther, or stop them.)

The Lungs of King Edward the Martyr continued fresh for many Ages, Lib. 33. c.
17.
and seemed to pant.

Lib. 33. c. 15.
The Chariot in which the body of S. Edmund was carried, passed over a Bridge,
narrower than it self, without any harm, so that one wheel rolled in the Air.
(pure Capgrave.)

A Monk of Glastonbury named Ailsi, refusing to bow, as others did, Lib. 32. c.
19.
to a Crucifix; at last either out of compunction, or by command of his
Superior, he bowed himself: but a voice proceeding from the Image, said these
words distinctly; Now too late Ailsi, now too late Ailsi, which voice so
frighted him, that falling down, he presently expired: And so that which
follows of a cross shaking over King Edgar's head, and a Crown falling. So (
lib. 32. c. 25.) After a great debate between the Seculars and Monks, when a
great many things had been alleged against the Monks, and every one expected
S. Dustan's resolution, who was present; an Image of Christ on the Cross, which
was fastened above in the Room, spoke these words distinctly in the hearing of
all. It must not be, it must not be, you have ordered things well, you shall do
ill to change them. Every one was amazed, and S. Dunstan said, my Brethren,
what would you have more? you have heard the affair decided by a Divine
sentence: They answered, we have indeed heard it: and upon this the Monks of
Winchester remained secure, and were never after disturbed in their possession.
But Mr. Cressy adds, though the Debate ended, the minds of the contrary party
were not yet satisfied, but they still pursued their pretensions; that is, I
suppose, they were crafty knaves, and knew more than others did of the secret
of speaking Images; and so Pol. Virg. Anglic. Histor. l. 6. in fine, atque sic
monachi open divina vel humana potius (nam etiam tum non defuerunt, qui id
oraculum Phoebi magis quam Dei fuisse, hoc est, hominum fraud, non dei nutu,
editum putarint) utcunque parta retinuerunt.
Polydore Virgil mentioning this very matter, says, that some thought this
voice was rather formed by the fraud of men, than by the ordering of God: and
indeed any man without much breach of charity may have liberty to suspect these
things of contrivance, since this device of moving Images was practiced no
longer since, than the Age before us; when the famous Image of the Rood of
Grace, was brought forth and publicly showed at St. Paul's cross with all its
tricks and Mechanisme L. Herbert. Hen. 8. page 432.
: and we could (if need were) tell Men of Books, that will direct them how all
such things may be done; and how even the Image and representation of Christ in
the form of a child, (a thing talked of not long ago, as a wonder in France,
and which Mr. Cressy relates an instance of, lib. 9. c. 11.) may at Noonday be
made to descend, to remain unmovable and fixed upon an Altar, to ascend up
again without wires, or any visible hand to move it, or possibility of stirring
it one inch out of its place, (if any by-stander should attempt it) and all
without either conjuring or miracles. But if any stiff Catholic be resolved to
believe these voices to be miraculous, and thinks they mightily serve for a
proof of their way of Religion and Worship; he may do well to bethink himself,
that whether he will or no, the old Gentile Religion will come in for a share
in the demonstration, and an equal kindness in all reason should be expressed
to their superstitions, which have been long since recommended to the world by
just such wonderful attestations; for, what is the difference, I pray, between
the voice that said in the case of the Monks, Ye have ordered all things well,
etc. And that which Valerius Maximus mentions, of the Image of Fortune, which
spoke to the Matrons that had by their prayers hindered Coriolanus from
destroying the City, Val r. Maxim. lib. 1. c. 12. n. 4. Rite me Matronae
vidistu, rite dedicastis.
and spoke it twice, You Matrons have rightly seen me, and rightly dedicated
me. And the same Author tells us, Val. Max. ibid. Number. 3.
that when Camillus took the Veiae, the Soldiers by the command of the
General, being about to remove from its seat, and bring into the City the Image
of Juno Moneta, which was there chiefly worshipped; when one of the Soldiers
jestingly asked the Goddess, whether she would remove to Rome, she answered,
She would remove: which voice being heard, the jest was turned into admiration;
and now believing that they carried not the statue of Juno, but the very
Goddess come down from Heaven, with great joy, they placed it in that part of
Mount Aventine, in which now her Temple is to be seen: that is, they had as
good reason (if not better after the hearing such a voice) to be persuaded that
Juno was pleased, and that this translation of her image would turn to the
advantage of their City; as the devout People of the Roman Church have
confidently to presume the Patronage of that great Saint, whose Image or
Relics they carry about with so much joy and triumph in a solemn procession.

And now me thinks I fancy, without pretending to one of Mr. Cressy's visions,
that I see him not a little angry and chafing at me, as one very profane, pert
and presumptuous, who have dared thus irreverently to handle the Holy Treasure
(as he often calls it) of the Saints, attempted to enervate the force and spoil
the credit of so many miraculous stories, which it cost him so much time and
pains to bring to a general Muster in his History; and have told the world in
effect, that a deleatur might have been put to one half of his Book.

I am willing to fancy also, that when the angry fit is over, and he will
calmly hear me speak for my self, I shall be able, if not to make him my
Friend, yet at least make him have a better opinion of me: In order to which, I
first of all assure him, that I have a mighty veneration for true Miracles,
true Saints, and true Histories, and, which may make his pique the less against
me, that I am none of the Married Clergy. But then I add farther, that if I am
spoiled as to my faith in his history, he himself has helped to do it: he is the
Person who has taught me to be cautious, and to suspend my belief, to consider
the nature of the things, as well as the number or fame of the Writers that
assert them, before I give credit to them. I Will give him an instance of his
own, which, as I take it, gives any man liberty to believe as much, or as
little as he pleases, about the Relics and Miracles that are recorded in his
Book: it is that which I find, Lib. 9. cap. 6. concerning the Staff of Jesus:
which I will set down, word for word, as it is there, and hope to make good use
of it afterward. It is thus:

St. Patrick by Divine Revelation, passed over to a certain solitary Hermit,
living in an Island of the Tyrrhen Sea, whose name was Justus; which he made
good by his actions, being a Man of a Holy Life, great Fame and much Merit.
After devout salutations and good discourse, the same man of God gave to S.
Patrick a Staff, which he seriously affirmed, had been bestowed on him
immediately by the hand of our Lord Jesus himself, who had appeared to him. Now
there was in the same Island at some distance, other men also who lived
solitary lives, of which some seemed very fresh and youthful, and others were
decrepit old men. S. Patrick, after some conversation with them, was informed,
that those very old men, were children to those who appeared so youthful. At
which being astonished, and inquiring the occasion of so great a miracle, they
thus acquainted him, saying; We from our Childhood by Divine grace, have been
much addicted to works of mercy, so that our Doors were always open to all
Travelers which demanded Meat or Lodging. On a certain Night it happened, that
a stranger having a Staff in his hand, was entertained by us, whom we used with
all the courtesy we could. On the Morning after he gave us his Benediction,
and said, I am Jesus Christ: my members you have often hitherto ministered to, and
this Night entertained me in my own Person. After this he gave the Staff which
he had in his hand, to a Man of God, our Father both spiritually and carnally;
commanding him to keep it, till in succeeding times, a certain stranger named
Patrick should come to visit him, and to him he should give it: Having said
this, he presently ascended into Heaven; and from that day we have remained in
the same state of youthful comeliness and vigor to this hour; whereas our
Children, who then were little Infants, are now as you see become decrepit old
men. Thus far the story.

Now I desire any man that has read Mr. Cressy's Church History, to tell me,
whether he look upon this as the most strange and improbable story in his Book;
and whether there be not 40 others, as unlikely to be true? But now that which
amazes me, is, that in all the prodigious things Mr. Cr. has related, and those
few of them I have set down before; I never to my remembrance found his faith
at a stand, but only here. This he leaves uncharitably to shift for it self,
and take its chance; Whatsoever fortune so stupendous a story may find in the
mind of the Reader, (they are his words) and before he tells it out of
Joceline, he says thus, Without interposing my credit for the truth of it.

Now I thank Mr. Cr. with all my heart; this was the passage I waited for a
great while, but could not meet with it before; I thought I should have heard
something like it, when he told us of the Blood of Jesus kept in Silver Vessels
and Crystal Glasses; but that was too near the beginning of his Book, and every
Catholic Reader would have cried shame on the Jadishness of Mr. Cr. faith, if
at the first going out from easy trot into full speed, it should have lagg'd
or drawn a lame Leg after it: But here it does you see; he dare not attest the
truth of this. Why, what is the matter? Is not Joceline a man fit to be relied
upon? he has never told, that I know, any stories in favor of Heretics;
however I am sure this is none of them: and suppose it depended upon his single
testimony, yet that is no news at all for Mr. Cr. to assert a miracle upon the
credit of one witness. Capgrave, I am sure, has many a time been trusted, in
matters as hard to be believed as this. But the case is not so here; We have
Saint Bernard and Giraldus Cambrensis, both of them speaking home to the point,
as to this Staff of Jesus, and if there were need of farther witnesses, the
whole Irish Nation is ready to depose for it; so that (as Cambrensis tells us)
in their Opinion, it was with this very Staff, that S. Patrick cast out of the
Island all venomous beasts. I might add also, that Mr. Cressy knows not what he
does, when he goes about to question the miracles of Staffs, since a great part
of the Religion of the Irish, seems to be supported by wonders of this nature.
For how many of the dried Staffs of Saints being fixed in the ground, have
taken Root afresh, and grown into great Trees? So we are told of S.
Florentine's, p. 157.
of S. Tressan's, p. 272.
S. Indract's, Colganus Act. Sanct.
p. 254.
S. Fingar's, p. 390.
S. Mochoemoc's. p. 592.
St. Furse's p. 295.
staff, being stuck in the ground, produced presently a Fountain of fresh
water, which was of such virtue, that it cured all the diseases of such as
washed therein. When S. Fechinus wanted water to drive a Mill he had built, he
fetched it from a Pool a mile distant, only by throwing two staves p. 132.
into it, which like Quicksilver bored their way through a Mountain which was
between the Pool and his Mill, and so supplied it ever after with Water. But
what talk I of staves; any bit of the Wood of S. Colmanus's famous Tree that he
planted, Colganus. Ibid. p. 246, 247.
being carried about a Person, who has confidence in the Saint, is a miraculous
security against the most imminent dangers of death; insomuch that we are told
that not long ago, a certain Malefactor adjudged to dye, before he was hanged
up, having a piece of the wood of that Tr^^ about him, he put it into his
mouth, and was found alive after he had hanged the usual time; and so he was a
2d. and a 3d. time hanged up, yet could not be strangled; but the Officers
examining the matter farther, found the bit of that wood in his month, which
when they had taken out, he then quickly dyed: So ill advised was Mr. Cr. to
begin his doubts with S. Patrick's staff. However I am resolved to tell his
Catholics the news: Mr. Cressy himself dares not be a fourth man, to vouch for
a story, where S. Bernard is one of the witnesses, and where he has Tradition
too, and the veneration of so wise a Nation to back it. This is his hour of
Temptation; he has been listening to the whispers of carnal reason, that great
enemy to faith, and credo quia impossible, is now no part of his Divinity: He
has let go his hold of that Staff, which if it had been well menaged, might
have given the Heretics such a blow, as they could not in have have recovered
it; but now they turn the weapon with great advantage against himself, and
there is no Circle, that he can ever hope to conjure us into; but by the help
of this Staff of Jesus, we shall make our way out, and dissolve the charm: and
so I take my leave at this time, and I hope fairly, of Mr. Cressy; and give him
over to Father Patrick to be chastis'd by him, not only for his gross
infidelity, but for his insolent affront of the whole Irish Nation.

And now I think it is high time to remember my promise, and give the Reader as
short an account as I can of that famous Controversy two Ages ago, concerning
the Ring with which the Bl. Virgin was espoused to Joseph; The famous
Controversy about the Sponsal Ring of the Bl. Virgin.
which story I hope will somewhat refresh him; and show him into what folly and
madness People will run, when their Religion degenerates into superstition.

The story was first written by Joh. Baptista Laurus the Pope's Protonotary of
Perusia, and one of the Bedchamber to Urban the VIII. His Book was Printed at
Rome, An. 1622. (and afterward put by Bzovius into his Annal. Ecclesiastic. ad
an. 1480.) I shall give you the substance of it, leaving you to consult him in
his large excursions.

Laurus begins his story with this supposition; that in contracting of
marriages, Rings were in use, not only among the Romans and Grecians, but also
among the ancient Hebrews, as a testimony of Faith and Conjugal affection:
(which because it is the foundation of all that follows, we will consider the
truth of it in the Conclusion) He then adds, that those Ancient Rings of the
Hebrews, were not of Gold (that he knew would not so well agree to the meanness
of Joseph's condition) but of baser metals, as Iron; or were made of an
Onyx-stone, to show the frugality and parsimony of the ancient manner of
living. And he says, that this of the B. Virgin, must not be thought like those
Rings, we read that Christ often used in mystical marriages with holy Virgins,
as S. Agnes, S. Catharine of Sena, etc. which were Rings in appearance: nor of
the same kind with that, wherewith S. Joachim was married to S. Anne the Mother
of the Bl. Virgin, and is kept at Rome by the Nuns of S. Anne, (another
precious treasure) for that is a rude Silver one, etc. but it is the true Ring
with which the Bl. Virgin was espoused to Joseph, made of an ordinary Onyx, or
Amethyst (for it is somewhat doubtful, says he, which it is) which being very
old, seems to have something obscurely engraven on it, where some fancy they
discern flowers, representing the budding of old Joseph's Rod: (which is an old
Fable, mentioned in the old Roman Breviary on S. Joseph's Day, March 19. that
to know to whom the Bl. Virgin was to be espoused, the High Priest commanded,
that all that were unmarried of the House of David should appear at the Temple,
and bring dry Rods in their hands, which Joseph also did; but in the presence
of all, his Rod had green Leaves presently upon it, and some add (which this
Author mentions) that a Dove descending from Heaven, sat upon the top of his
Rod.

These, you will say, are good preparations, and now follows the History of this
wonderful Ring. Of which there is not one word said, till the days of Pope
Gregory the V. and of the Emperor Otho the III. who both began their Reign
together, an. 996. So that we are fallen again into the Fabulous Age, and I Will
warrant you the story will work right which commences there; especially after
that the Ring had lien dormant a 1000 Years before.

At this time then, Judith the Wife of one Hugo a Marquess of Etruria, being a
great Lover of Jewels, employed one Ranerius a Jeweller of Clusium, and a
skilful Lapidary, and to whom she gave good store of Money, to go to Rome to
make a purchase for her. Here it was, by the favor of Heaven, that Ranerius
meets with a Jeweller come from Jerusalem to Rome, from whom (you shall hear
presently how) he obtained this Ring: and (as the Author adds) it was not
fitting, that any where else, save at Rome, (which is the great Market of
sacred Relics, and already possessed the Manger where Christ was laid) this
Sponsal-Ring of his Mother should be brought to light. After then that Reinerus
has furnished himself, and was now ready to depart and take his leave of his
Merchant, the Jeweller professing a strange love to him, takes out this Ring
and presents it to Reinerus, as a pledge of their future kindness: which he
looking upon as a thing of little or no value, would have put off the receiving
it with a slight complement. But the Jeweller bid him not to contemn it, though
its aspect bespoke it to be of no great value, for it was the Ring by which the
Virgin was espoused to Joseph: and so made him take it with this charge, that
he should carefully see, that it did not come into the hands of any wicked
person. But Reinerus not regarding what he said, when he came home, carelessly
threw it aside in a little Chest, among other things of small value. [And, to
add that before I go on, he had indeed no great reason to mind his words much,
for if the cunning Merchant, had known it really to have been what he
pretended, he would unquestionably rather have made a present of it to the Pope
himself, (who would sure have rewarded him well for such a treasure, if he
could have made it out, that it belonged to the B. Virgin) than have given it
to one who was wholly a stranger to him, and whose whole purchase of Jewels
bought of him, could not come near the value of this one Ring; but to proceed.]
Ranerius at his return to Clusium, gives an account to Judith, how he had laid
out her Money, but forgot to say a word to her of the Ring, and if he had at
that time, it might have signified little, for she was more addicted to Pride
than Religion, being of her Husbands humor, who minded little else but his
pleasure and sports: but he in a Vision of the B. Virgin to him, at a time when
he had been wearied with Hunting, was severely chidden; and the effect of it
was, that he became a devout Person, and built many Religious Houses, and a
very venerable one at Florence, in honor of the B. Virgin; his Wife Judith
also became remarkable afterward for her Piety.

But the forgetfulness of Ranerius cost him very dear; for having only one Son
of 10 Years old (and so long it was that he had disregarded the Ring of the
Virgin) he fell sick and dyed, and was carried out to be buried at the Church
of S. Musthiola hard by Clusium. As the Hearse went forward, on a sudden the
dead Body of his Son rises in the Coffin, bids the Bearers stand still, and
calls to his Father to come to him, to whom he spoke to this effect. That by
the favor of the B. Virgin, he was come to him from Heaven (whither after he
had delivered his message, he must return again) to convince him of his
contempt of Religion, for letting that most holy Jewel be in a common heap, he
having never showed it to any body, no not so much as to him: that now he must
send for it, and produce it publicly, that it might be venerated; and that he
might not doubt of the truth of what he said, he gave him a sign, by telling
him of his secret vows of taking a Pilgrimage to Mount Garganus, and to
Siponto, and of repairing a Church, which he had not performed.

Immediately the Chest is sent for, and delivered into the Son's hand, who
amidst a number of other stones, presently finds the Ring (though he had never
seen it before) and fervently kissed it, and openly showed it to the company,
who were all in readiness to venerate it; and the Bells, as some say, of their
own accord rung a joyful Peal, as a sign of public happiness. The like story
is told us of St. Pega, that going from England on Pilgrimage to Rome, as soon
as she entered the City, the Bells of every Church rung out, of their own
accord, for an Hours space, and told all the City the merit of her sanctity.
Bollandus ad Januar. 8. vol. 1. p. 533.
After having dispatched this weighty business, which he came from Heaven on
purpose about, and having directed them to the place where he would be buried,
and delivered the Ring to the Curate of the Parish, the Child laid himself down
in the Coffin, and went to Heaven, and his Body was buried. The fame of this
drew a great conflux of People to visit this holy Relic, wherefore binding a
Gold-Chain to the Ring, they prepared a Coffer to keep it in; but before it was
laid up, it wrought several wonders. For a Woman of Royal Extraction called
Vualdrada, in a sudden pang of zeal, snatching the Ring, and putting it on her
Ring-finger, immediately that Finger These are just such lying wonders, as
Card. Tolet mentions (in the forenamed Comment. on Luke 2. annot. 31.)
concerning the foreskin of our Savior, found an. 1557. which at the sacking of
Rome, an. 1527. was taken away, with several other Relics, out of the Lateran
Church, and hid by a Soldier in a Cellar at Calcata, who afterward confessed
where he had laid them, and after search made by the command of Pope Clemens
VI. they were found, and brought by a Priest to Magdalena Strotia: which
Magdalene, going about to unty a silken bag, in which the praeputium was, found
her hands grow stiff; and trying a second time, she found still a greater
benummedness seize upon them, and upon a third trial, two of her fingers were
st^ff and hard: then with tears by the advice of the Priest, she committed the
undoing of it, to her Daughter Clarica a young Virgin, who presently without
any difficulty unloosed the string, and laid the praeputium in a Silver Vessel,
which says he, Densum ac crispum erat instar rubri ciceris. Then follow other
Miracles; how an. 1559. certain Women comeing to Calcata, (the Town where it
was preserved) went to see it with lighted Candles in their hands, and as soon
as the Priest laid it on the Altar, a Cloud filled the Church, and hid the
Relics for 4 Hours time, so that nothing could be seen, save only the Cloud,
Stars and Flames of Fire. And when one Pimpinellus, a Canon of the Lateran
Church, tried with two of his fingers, whether the praeputium was soft or hard,
by the pressure of his fingers, he brake it into two parts; upon the doing of
which, says he, Oh wonderful, what Thunders there were, what Lightnings, how
dark the Air was over the place, so that even all the bystanders were even
dead for fear. All which being related to the Pope, they confirmed them for
true Relics; and for the greater fame of the place, Sixtus V. anno 1584.
granted a plenary indulgence in that Church of Calcata, on the day of Christ's
Circumcision, for Ten Years.
withered, and so continued to her death. It is said also, that one Contulus,
who was troubled with a Sciatica, made an impression of the Ring in wax, and
applying it to his Hip, when the pain afflicted him, always found ease by it.
And the Author says, that he, at the entreaty of some great Women, caused some
Ivory Rings to be touched with that sacred one, and they received such virtue
from it, that being put upon the finger of Women that had hard Labor, they
were presently relieved: The Ring also was found beneficial for defects in the
eyes, and for reconciling the affections of married People that lived at odds,
and the freeing several from the vexation of evil spirits.

Thus this Sponsal Ring of the B. Virgin, remained in the possession of the
Clusians 484 Years.

After this it came into the hands of the Perusians, an. 1473. in this manner
following.

The Church of Musthiola becoming ruinous, where it had remained, it was
brought into an House of the Franciscans in Clusium, and freely enough shown to
the People; which a certain Franciscan Friar, a German, observing, whose name
was Wintherus, a very crafty Knave, under the show of great devotion, he begs
of the Magistrates of Clusium to have the office of showing the Ring, who
granted his petition. One time, after he had made a Sermon and showed it to the
People, stooping, as if he intended to put it up in the place provided for it,
he secretly conveighs it into his sleeve, and locking the Door, gives the Key
boldly to the Magistrate, and privily conveighs himself away from Clusium,
taking the Ring along with him. He had no sooner crossed the River, but the
Field was filled with so thick a Mist and Darkness, that he knew not which way
to turn himself or go: At last, his conscience smiting him for what he had
done, taking the Ring out of his bosom, he hanged it by the Chain upon a
little bough of a Tree, and falling on the ground, with tears he accuses
himself, and expostulating his sad condition to the Ring, if he should return
to Clusium, he prays to the Ring, that it would send forth such light, as to
dispell the Mist, and direct him by it, in the way wherein he should go:
Presently he took the Ring again, and there came so great a light from it, as
showed him the way to Perusia, where he put in among the Augustan Friars.

A while after he attempted to go into Germany, his own Country, (whither he at
first designed to carry it) but he was hindered in the same manner by the
darkness that again came suddenly on him, so that he was forced to stay: and
this not only infested him, but the whole City for 20 Days, till at last he
unbosom'd himself to his Landlord, one Lucas Jordanus, and declared to him all
the adventure of the Ring; who with great craft and cunning, by representing
the danger he was in from the Clusians, and the benefits he would receive from
those of Perusia, he prevailed with him at last to bestow it upon this City;
and as soon as ever it was showed to the People, all the Mists and Darkness was
presently scattered and dispersed. The Friar was well rewarded; but for his
better security against the Clusians, he was brought into the House of the
Chief Magistrare, where, though in show a Prisoner, he was well provided for.

In the mean while they of Clusium understood his theft and their loss, and
dispatch over their Bishop to Pe^usa, who endeavored partly by Entreaties, and
partly by Threatening to regain the Ring. They engage also the Citizens of Sena
(a confederate City) to assist them in recovering o^ it, who sent Letters about
it to Perusia, and after that an Ambassador of theirs, one Barth. Bonaspirius
to plead the cause before them; whom the Citizens of Perusia received with
great respect; but told him, that since it pleased Heaven to bestow upon them
that Ring, which they by no sacrilegious Arts had endeavored to procure, that
they might not be thought injurious to the Mother of Christ, they would defend
it with their Arms, and admit it not only within their Walls, but their
Breasts, and receive it as they would do the Ark of the Covenant, or if there
were any thing more sacred.

When this course would prevail nothing; at last the Clusians bring their cause
before Pope Sixtus IV. and they of Sena gravely prepare for a Holy War Neither
were the Perusians idle, but send their Ambassador to Rome; whose first work
was to secure the favor of Cardinal Petrus Riarius, and Count Hieronymus his
Brother, who were of the Pope's Kindred, for they did not at all doubt of the
Pope's good inclinations to favor their City, having begun his studies among
them, and been enrolled in their College of Divines, and declared the chief
Prelate of the Franciscans, in the General Assembly, 1464.

In the mean time, Wintherus, by the importunity of the Clusians to the Pope,
is put into closer hold, but there maintained at the public charge, and the
heat of prosecuting him in a while being over, he lived merrily 30 Years in
Perusia; and when he dyed, there happened another Religious quarrel, between
the Franciscans and the Canons of S. Laurence, who should dispose of this
Ring-stealers body, and it was carried for the latter; in whose Chapel, before
the Altar dedicated to Joseph and the Bl. Virgin, he was buried, an. 1506. upon
whose Tomb they wrote an Inscription, wherein they acknowledge that Perusia owed
no less for the sponsal Ring of the Virgin, though a casual gift, than if he
had offered it of his own accord; nay perhaps it was the sweeter for being
stolen. They allowed also an Annual Pension to the Brothers of Luke Jordan, who
had done them such good service in procuring the Ring: and now their next care
was to provide by all possible securities, that the Ring should never more be
taken out of their possession: It was kept therefore under 4 Locks, whose Keys
were delivered to 4 Fraternities, of the Dominicans, Franciscans, Servitae, and
Augustinians, and was never to be showed, but when they were by: it was also
decreed, that it should not be in the Liberty of any Mortal to carry it any
whither out of Town, nay it was Banishment for any one to propose so much. They
also, the better to grace the solemnity of showing it, ordered the Fathers to
appear in costly Habits; Drums, Trumpets, Organs, Bells, and a Musical Consort
to sound at that time; and they took a public Oath of those, to whose care it
was committed (confirmed by taking the Sacrament in the presence of the Bishop,
and Magistrates, and all the Clergy) to look carefully to it. Three appointed
times of the Year, they decreed it should be shown, the Fraternities
accompanying it from the Palatine Chapel to S. Laurence Church; and there in a
Pulpit, one of the chief Prelates, should hold it to be seen, the space of one
Hour, Morning and Afternoon: After this it was ordered to be shown only once a
Year; but that Law was abrogated a while after, upon the clamorous Petitions of
devout People. But now the Controversy grew hot, between the Senenses (whose
Clients the Clusians were) and the Perusians: and one while the Pope hears of
the Miracles that were done by the Ring, since it came to Perusia, and how fit
it was, that famous City should still retain it: Then the Ambassadors of Sena
were brought to him, by means of Cardinal Riarius and Vrsinus, to whom they had
promised 25000 Pieces of Gold, in case by their means the Clusians should get
the day, (which I much wonder that it did not determine the business) and they
represent to him, how much the Perusians had been heretofore beholden to them,
how ungrateful they had been to them in this affair, and sacrilegious in
detaining that which they had got by theft, etc. The Pope appoints Eight
Cardinals to hear the matter, and to weigh the Reasons on both sides, and in
the mean while enjoins the contending Parties to live in peace, telling them
how absurd a thing it was, that the Ring which was a pledge of Love and
Conjugal affection, should now be an occasion of contention and strife: (and it
was absurd enough in all conscience, without this witty Reason which the Pope
gives.) The Ambassadors on both sides, returned, and were gladly received, the
Perusians especially rejoiced, thinking their cause was the better supported.
But the two forenamed Cardinals, being allured with the great promises which
the Senenses made to them, in case they could overthrow the Perusians, went
thither to solicit their cause; where being honorably received, they, in the
name of the Pope, began to urge the Perusians to restore the Ring, that had,
for so many Ages, belonged to them of Clusium, and in generosity, not to suffer
such a reproachful mark of injustice to lie upon them; this they discoursed at
first more privately, afterward openly, and at last came so far as to threaten
them with the sad effects of War, in case they refused. But while these things
were thus transacted Cardinal Riarius dies in the flower of his Age, being but
28 Years old, and the Perusians, being frighted with the Authority of the
other, prepare for War, and begin better to fortify themselves; they send
Ambassadors to Venice, Florence, Millan and Naples, to entreat their
assistance, and raised a Band of men. A few Months after, the Perusians began
some skirmishes against the Clusians, who preyed upon their flocks, and laid
hands on the Contrymen they met, and put them in hold; neither did the
Perusians spare the Fields of the Bishop of Clusium. (Though dull and carnal
men, who do not understand the worth of Relics, would be apt to think it had
been much better, that this Ring had at first been thrown after one of the
Nails of the Cross, into the Sea, than that such a stir should have been made
about it.) But the Perusians had reason to take more heart, because they were
favored by many great ones, and at that time Cardinal Fortebrachius made
attempts of war upon the Senenses. The Perusians after this, endeavor to
oblige the Pope's Kindred, especially Hieron. Bassus the Nephew of Sixtus, who
was newly made Cardinal, and favored their affairs. But they of Sena, being
perplexed with many troubles that befell them, grew more cold in their
prosecutions; and some at Rome gave the Pope counsel (which he had also before
threatened) to demand, that the Ring should be brought to Rome, and placed in
one of the two Houses, dedicated to the Bl. Virgin, which he had repaired:
accordingly by a Letter dated, Dec. 18. 1480. the Pope desired the Perusians to
deliver the Ring to J. Baptista de Sabellis, his Cardinal Legate, promising to
put it in some venerable Temple of the City, and to give them holy Relics in
recompense to their content. But when the Legate came to urge the Perusians to
comply with the Pope's desires, instead of answering to what he said, they
burst out into tears and howlings, cast themselves to the ground before him,
and with sighs, and beating their breasts, in the most pitteous manner,
beseeched and begged of him, to implore the favor of the Pope on their behalf.
He was so moved with their tears and sad complaints, that he became a
suppliant by his Letters to the Pope on their behalf, which joined with a
moving Oration, of Hieron. Riarius, made the Pope alter his determination, and
let the Ring still abide there. Also by the Pope's interposing, the differences
betwixt the Senenses and the Perusians were composed, and by agreement, they
were to have no more words about the Ring; and Marcus Barbus is persuaded to
mitigate by his Authority the unpeaceable minds of the Clusians. But while
these things are menaging, Pope Sixtus IV. dies; and the Controversy was not
fully decided, till the 3d. Year of Pope Innocent the VIII. an. 1486. When, the
contending Parties agreed, being weary of squabling, to leave the matter to be
determined by the Pope, and Cardinal Piccolominaeus, who did that which Eight
Cardinals before could not effect, and the Ring was adjudged to Perusia: who
testified how welcome the News was which their Ambassadors brought them by
making Bone-fires, and turning the very Night into Day, by Flames and Torches,
and showing all other imaginable expressions of joy, etc. And now for the
greater honor of the sacred Ring, the Perusians removed it from the Palatine
House, to a more worthy place; for to this end they built a Chapel in S.
Laurence his Church; and caused this Inscription to be placed on high.

Hic sociata suo colitur Regina marito,
Et facili justas accipit aure preces.
Hac sacer intactae Matris jacet annulus aede,
Qui dedit, est custos muneris ille sui.
That is, Here Heavens great Queen is worshipped with her Spouse,
A gracious Ear to all just Prayers she lends.
The untoucht Mother's Ring lies in this House,
And he that gave't, his Gift with care defends.


Also against the Festival dedicated to Joseph and Mary, they caused a curious
Piece to be drawn, by one Peter, a Perusian Painter; in which was elegantly
represented the Temple of Jerusalem; and in the open Court of the Temple was
drawn on one side a Chorus of Virgins, and on the other side a Chorus of young
Men, with withered Rods in their hands, and one of them breaking his Rod upon
his Knee in anger, seeing Joseph's Rod to flourish: Also the High Priest was
represented taking hold of the hands of Joseph and Mary, and preparing with the
Ring to espouse them. There was also instituted a Society of Seculars, called
the Sodality of S. Joseph, who together with the Clergy of S. Laurence Church,
were perpetually to serve in the Chapel where the Ring was, and a Statue was
placed at the right hand of the Altar, dedicated to S. Joseph, which was
publicly produced upon his Festival, on the 19 of March. Thus the Perusians
being enriched with their prey triumphed over the carelessness of the Clusians.
[Thus far the account of Laurus.]

This story, I think upon the very relating of it, without any farther
commentary upon it, must needs appear to any judicious and unprejudiced Reader,
to be the most egregious piece of Foolery, that ever entertained the World for
so long a time: and I will be very thankful to Mr. Cressy, if for the credit of
his Religion, he will be pleased to match this story with any thing equally
ridiculous among Turks, or Heathens: for it grieves me, that any that bear the
name of Christians, should run into such extravagant. Follies, as the most
absurd Religions in the World were never guilty of. It might be sufficient to
stagger the Faith of any wise Man in this Perusian Ring; to tell him what
Bollandus (or his Continuer) has observed; Commentar. History de S. Joseph. ad
19. Mart. Sec. 8.
that in Burgundy, a Priory pretends to have had the Sponsal Ring of the Bl.
Virgin, the space of Eight-hundred Seventy-seven Years: And another Monastery
in Holland, puts in strongly for the honor of having it, and have the
countenance of miraculous examples, of Women, who in the sharpest pangs of
Travel, have by this Ring found present ease. But I have one thing farther to
offer, which must needs utterly spoil the credit of this Onyx Ring of the
Virgin, and also of that Silver one, mentioned at the beginning of the story,
as the Sponsal Ring of Joachim, and S. Anne, the Parents of the Bl. Virgin,
(though this too is countenanced with a pretended Miracle, that being stole
from Rome, when the City was sacked in the Days of Pope Clement the VII. it was
brought again, Bolland. Act. Sanct. 21. Mart. in vit. S. Santuccia. p 363.
and laid upon a Stone in the view of many, by a Crow.) and both of them must
fall into the Number of those cheating Bawbles, with which this Church abuses
the World and Religion. And that which I shall offer, is a quite contrary
story, to that which Laurus has laid as the foundation of all his discourse,
viz. That this Custom of espousing by a Ring, though it was used by other
Nations, yet was not practiced by the ancient Hebrews. Which we are
sufficiently assured of, by two as learned Men, as can be named in matters of
this Nature, and as well acquainted with the Jewish Customs.

The one is Buxtorfius (in his Book, De sponsalibus and divortiis, Sect. 45. De
forma and modo desponsandi) where he shows, that their Espousals were performed
these 3 ways; by Money, by an Instrument in Writing, or Concubitu: which last
way as less honest, though they suppose it lawful according to the Law of
Moses, yet has no longer place, but is prohibited under the penalty of beating
See of this more largely, Seldens Vxor Hebraic. lib. 2. cap. 2.
. He tells us indeed ( Sect. 57.) of their confirming espousals by a Ring, out
of some of their later Authors, but he expressly adds, that Maimonides never
mentions any thing of it. And though he mentions, out of a Book of Victor de
Carben, a baptized Jew, (Printed at Cohen, an. 1509.) that the Jews take great
care, to put the Ring upon the Forefinger of her that is espoused, because
they write, that Mary, when she was espoused to Joseph, wore her Ring on the
Middle-finger, whence no Jewish Woman will put hers to this day upon that
Finger; yet, says Buxtorf, I could never meet with any such thing in their
Books: and indeed he was not worthy to be Baptized into that Church, that could
not invent such a story of his own head, with all his old Jewdaisme to help him.

The other Author is the Learned Seldom, who tells us, that though there are to
be found some slender Testimonies in the Jewish Rituals, Sel^ens Vxor Hebraic.
lib. 2. cap. 14.
of the use of a Ring among the Jews, yet he says, it is expressly asserted by
Leo Mutinensis, the Ruler of the Synagogue at Venice, that the use of a Ring is
very rare among that Nation: and Seldom says, he never remembers the least
mention of a Sponsal Ring in the whole body of the Thalmud: But the ancient way
among them was, to give to the Woman a Piece of Money (or its value) as a
pledge of their contract of Marriage: but the Later Jews observing, that other
Nations used a Ring for such a Token and pledge, Vxor Hebr. lib. 2. cap. 2.
brought in its use by imitation, and graved on it (...), wishing them good
luck: but still this King was not used qua annulus, under that notion, but only
to supply the place of the Money mentioned before; which he proves out of their
Rituals, showing that two witnesses were called in, to inquire, whether the
Sponsal Ring then produced, were of equal value with the (...) or Money,
whereby Marriage-contracts were wont to be made. And whereas we heard Laurus
before telling the story, that the Jews, to show their frugality, caused their
Sponsal Rings to be made of Iron or Onyx-stone: Buxtorf says clean contrary,
that this Ring was to be made of pure Gold, Annulus autem debet esse ex auro
puro, sine gemma inserta, idque ideo, ne fraus aliqua intervenire possit,
adulterinam sc. gemmam pro vera, vil^m pro pretiosa sponsae offerendo, and hac
ratione desponsatio fiat erronea and vana. Buxtorf. loc. citat. sec. 57.
without any stone in it, lest any cheat should happen, by offering an
adulterate Jewel for a true one, a common for a precious one, and so the
Espousals become erroneous and void.

As for such as have, with Laurus, the faculty of running up the use of such
Sponsal Rings, as high as Moses his days, because that among the offerings of
the Children of Israel to the Tabernacle, we read of Rings and Onyx-stones;
they may next, Exodus 35.22, 27.
for ought I know, be pleased with that Blasphemous fancy (mentioned by the
Elder Buxtorf out of the Talmud, Synagog. Judaic. cap. 28.
and altogether as wisely collected out of the Text) that God himself, at the
Marriage of Eve, made up finely the Hair of her Head, and adorned it, sang
before her, and danced with her in Paradise; which they deduce from Genesis 2.22.
where it is said that God brought Eve to Adam; that is, say they, he brought
her as a Bride is wont to be brought, elegantly dressed, and her Hair curled
(calamistratam) with leaping and dancing. There is nothing indeed more common
in this Church, than to seek to countenance their Fables and Follies, by Texts
of Scripture, where only the sound of one Word, without the least regard to the
sense of it, is enough to serve their purpose; of which take an instance or
two. We are told concerning St. Endeus, that leaving his Government, Colganus
Act. Sanctor. in vit. S. Fanchtae. ad 1 Januar. p. 1, 2.
and taking the habit of a Monk, his Companions came to endeavor to draw him
from his purpose, but upon the prayers of St. Fanchea, and her making the sign
of the Cross, their Feet immediately stuck to the Earth like immovable stones;
but hereupon becoming sensible of their fault, and promising repentance, their
Feet were again loosed, and they went their way; in which (says the Author of
the Life) was fulfilled that of our Lord, Whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth
shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on Earth shall be
loosed in Heaven. We have another pleasant instance of this kind, in the
Letters of the Church of Antwerp, concerning the Praeputium of our Savior,
cited by Bollandus; Bollandus Act. Sanct. ad Januar. 1. page 6.
where relating how a Chaplain of Godfrey of Bullen, had brought this Relic
from Jerusalem to Antwerp, they add, Esa. 37.32.
For God said by the Prophet, De Jerusalem exibunt reliquiae; out of Jerusalem
shall go forth Relics, (instead of, a remnant.) And in another place,
Disperdam de loco hoc reliquias, I will disperse Relics from this place,
Zephan. 1.4.
(that is, from Jerusalem) but they left out the word Baal which follows, and
we rightly translate, I will cut off the remnant of Baal from this place: And
in another Prophet, Possidere faciam reliquias populi hujus; I will make them
to possess the Relics of this people; Zachar. 8.12.
instead of, I will make the remnant of this people to possess all these
things. If this way of playing with Scripture were allowable, they might have
added another out of the Prophet Micah (chap. 2.12.) In unum conducam reliquias
Israel -- tumultuabuntur a multitudine hominum: I will gather together the
Relics of Israel -- they shall make a noise by reason of the multitude of
men; which last words might serve as well as the rest, to countenance their
singing, when the Relics are carried in procession, with a multitude
attending them: But this by the way. And now, after all these things I have
said, are well considered, I hope, without any dishonor to the Bl. Virgin, we
may take leave to set a far less price upon her pretended Ring, than those of
Perusia have done; and to laugh at their folly, for contending in such good
earnest about it. I will refer the Reader (lest I should tire him) to consult
another Controversy in Bzovius, Bzovius Annal. Eccles. ad an. 1463. parag. 60.
(almost like this of the Ring) about the Body of S. Luke, which the Duke of
Venice had obtained from the Grecians, with a very strong certificate of the
Truth of it, and of Miracles wrought by it; but it was upon examination found
to be a cheat, and that his true body was at Padua long before, only without a
head (which the Venetian body was supplied with) and his head had been long
preserved at a Church in Rome. Rivet also gives us another fine entertainment
in what he presents us with, Rivet, Apologia pro S. Virg. M^ria. lib. 2. cap. 9.
concerning the Figure of the Sole of the Bl. Virgin's Shoe, graven in Spain,
and set forth with License; which, he says, he preserves by him, and has caused
the Figure of it to be graved, after the Spanish Original, in the foresaid
Book. I have measured the length of the Sole in our inches, and it is just 7
inches; perhaps some Ladies of the Romish persuasion may find much comfort, in
finding their Feet just fitting this measure.
In the midst of the Sole is written this. The measure of the most holy Foot of
our Lady; And then is added. Pope John XXII. has granted to those that shall
thrice kiss it, and rehearse 3 Ave Mary's with devotion to her blessed honor
and reverence, that they shall gain 700 Years of Pardon, and be freed from many
Sins.

I cannot well omit a memorable passage in Baronius, which if duly considered,
Annal. Eccles. ad an. 1027. p. 89.
may serve to abate and lessen our Adversaries high Opinion both of their
Relics and of the Miracles that are said to be done by them. Thus he writes.
Cum autem Reliquias Sanctorum tam caro precio, etc. A certain crafty Knave,
understanding that the Relics of the Saints were sold at so dear a rate (he
mentions before, how the Arm of S. Austin, was purchased at Papia, at the rate
of a Hundred Talents of Silver, and a Talent of Gold) "he set up a wicked Trade
of merchandising with the counterfeit Relics of the Saints, of whom Glaber
relates this story. There was at that time a certain ordinary Fellow, a crafty
Huckster, of an unknown Name and Country, who that he might not be discovered,
gave himself diverse Names, at several places where he skulked. This man
secretly taking up the Bones of dead Men out of their Graves, sold them for the
Relics of Martyrs or Confessors. After he had played many such cheating
tricks in France, at last he came among the Alps, where a sort of sottish
people inhabit. There he called himself Steven, who otherwhile used to go by
the name of Peter or John. There, after his wonted manner, he gathered by Night
in a sorry place, the Bones of an unknown person, which putting into a Chest,
he had it by Revelation from an Angel, that those were the Relics of the
Martyr Justus. All the idle Country people flock together at the report, and
the cheater was troubled, if there wanted at any time diseases to be cured.
Then he leads the weak, bestows his little gifts, watches whole Nights,
expecting sudden miracles, which (mark well) are sometimes permitted to be
wrought by evil spirits, to try men that before have been sinful, which
doubtless did evidently then appear, etc. And a little after, Baronius mentions
the complaint of S. Austin, that in Africa, many Impostors, pretending to be
Monks, went up and down selling Relics for gain, which they called the Bones
of Martyrs. And methinks he himself, if he had been ingenuous, might have put
into the number of cheating remains, that which he mentions upon the Roman
Martyrologie. That the most holy Forefinger of John the Baptist, August 29.
wherewith he pointed to Chrst the Lord, saying, Behold the Lamb of God, etc.
was brought from Jerusalem into the Island of Melita, by the Brothers of S.
John's Hospital, and there is had in great veneration. To draw toward an end
of this Digression about Relics; I cannot but approve the saying of Isaac
Casaubon. Hodiernas reliquias, etc. Exercit. 16. Sec. 104. adv. Annals Baronii.
The most of the Modern Relics, are either of uncertain credit, or plainly
counterfeit and false, which ought not to have been dissembled by the defenders
of them, if they had taken care to approve their piety toward God; which is
well matched with the wise discourse of Cassander in his Consultation,
Cassandri opera page 973.
concerning the Veneration of Relics; (who being a person of their own
communion, his words may perhaps meet with greater regard from the Romanists)
Thus then he discourses. Hodie vero cum passim, etc. At this day, when all
places every where seem to be filled with the Relics of Saints, it is to be
feared, lest, if Bishops and Princes would use that diligence they ought, in
inquiring and judging of true Relics, great and abominable Impostures would
be discovered, as it has fallen out in some places, and as it happened of old
to S. Martin; who coming to a place of his Diocese, famous for the Monument of
a certain Martyr so accounted, he found the Tomb of a wicked Thief (not of a
Martyr) frequented and venerated by the People, which presently he commanded to
be overturned and demolished: Though they also ought not to be approved, who
through hatred of superstition, have violated the certain Monuments of pious
men, and with the greatest Ignominy have thrown away and dispersed those Bones
and Ashes, which even the most barbarous people have spared. Since therefore
the true and unquestionable Relics are very few, especially in these
Provinces; and many of those that are shown, may with great reason be
suspected; since the frequenting and veneration of them, serves piety but a
little, but serves superstition or gain very much; it seems a great deal more
advisable, that there should be no showing of Relics; but that the people
should be provoked to venerate the true Relics of the Saints, that is, to
imitate the examples of their piety and virtues, which are extant in Books
written by themselves, or of other Men concerning them. It were a most easy
thing, if this discourse did not swell too big, to show that these two great
Men last named, had just occasion thus to censure the Modern Relics. I Will
give the Reader a taste only out of a late Book; that he may see and detest the
horrible affront, Lassels his voyage into Italy.
this Church is resolved still to put, not only upon Religion, but the common
discretion of Mankind, while they presume to show such things as these which
follow, designing to have them believed for true Relics, viz. The holy Syndon
(or Linen) in which Christ's body was buried; shown at Turin. The Dish in
which Christ ate the Paschal Lamb, made of one Emerald; at Genua. A Nail of our
Savior's Cross, fixed on the Roof of the Church at Milan.

At Rome these are shown.

The Stone upon which Abraham offered to Sacrifice his Son, and another Stone
upon which our Savior was placed, when he was presented in the Temple. The top
of the Lance with which Christ's side was pierced, and the Statue of Longinus
under it. The smock of S. Prisca, in which she was Martyred, above 1400 Years
old. A Thorn of that Crown of Thorns, which was put upon our Savior's Head.
The Head of the Woman of Samaria, who was converted by our Savior. The Arm of
S. Anne, Mother of the Bl. Virgin; and the Chain of S. Paul. The Table upon
which our Savior did eat the Paschal Lamb. Scala Sancta, or the 28. steps of
white Marble, up which Christ was led in his Passion to Pilate's House, and
upon some of which are shown the marks of his blood, sent by Helena from
Jerusalem to Constantine. A Picture of our Savior, said to be begun by S.
Luke, and finished miraculously by an Angel, or (as others say) that S. Luke
preparing to draw it, and falling to his prayers to God, that he might draw his
Son aright, when he rose he found the Picture finished. The holy Crib of our
Savior. The Pillar at which our Savior was whipped.

At Venice these are shown.

Some of our Savior's blood, gathered up at his Passion, with the Earth it was
spilt upon. A Thorn of the Crown of Thorns. A Finger of S. Mary Magdalen. A
piece of S. John Baptist's skull. A Tooth of S. Mark: also one of his Fingers,
and his Ring with a Stone in it. A piece of S. John Baptist's habit. Some of
the Bl. Virgin's Hair. The Sword of S. Peter. A piece of Christ's white Robe,
when he was set at naught by Herod. One of the Stones, wherewith S. Steven was
stoned. To which you may add, the Hough (or breath) of S. Joseph, which an
Angel enclosed in a Vessel, as he was cleaving Wood, shown as a Relic in
France. And now methinks I wonder, it never came into their heads to pretend to
one Relic more, that would have been as considerable and miraculous as any of
these; viz. The Dust upon which our Savior wrote, with the Characters still
upon it, very fair and legible: but I hope, now they are put in mind of it,
they will take care to procure it. So I put an end to this long Digression.

But now it is fit we should return to our 3 Kings, whom we may seem to have
forgotten; If you look back again upon the prayer to them, you will find a
piece of old Rome's Heathenism Lud. Vives notis in Augustine. de civit. Dei.
lib. 8. c. 27. Edit. an. 1596. Multi Christiani in re bona plerumque percant,
quod Divos Divasq: non aliter venerantur quam Deum. Nec video in multis quid
sit discrimen inter eorum opinionem de Sanctis, and id quod Gentiles putabant
de Diis suis. This saying the Lovain Divines thought the Church of Rome so much
concerned in, that they censured it there, and it was left out of a Paris
Edition. an. 1613. It had as little kindness for them, as that part of the 10
Commandments, Thou shall not make to thy self a Graven Image, etc. Which
therefore they use to leave out of their Catechismes, and so it is left out of
the Manual of Godly Prayers, and the Institutio Christiana, before the Office
of the Bl. Virgin, omits it.
revived; I mean, in invocating them for success in Journeys. For every one
knows, that as they had their Tutelar Gods for Countries and Cities (wherein
too they have been seconded by this Churches practice of assigning particular
Saints to the Patronage of Places and Nations; as S. George for England, S.
James for Spain, S. Denis for Paris, S. Patrick for Ireland, S. David for
Wales, etc.) So also they appropriated particular Employments and Offices to
their Deities; and one was to be called upon in War; another in Sickness; one
was more powerful by Land, and another by Sea; one taught Eloquence, and
another Physic: only the superstition and folly of New Rome, is worse than
that of the Old in this regard, that they could content themselves with one
Aesculapius in all matters that related to Physic and Diseases; but these must
have almost as many Saints to invoke, as there are Maladies to be cured. One
Saint is good for sore Breasts S. Agatha.
, and another to help in the Toothache S. Apollonia.
; one for Fevers S. Sigismund.
, and another for Inflammations S. Anthony.
; and if they do give a more general License about Diseases, they will not
trust it in the hands of one alone, but he shall have a Fellow-saint joined
with him, and then Cosmus in Consultation with Damian, will not fail to help:
and so in the desperate case of the Plague, for the greater encouragement of
the Patients, S. Rocch is joined with S. Sebastian: In the pains of
Childbirth, S. Margaret no doubt can do as much as Lucina, and in the danger
of shipwreck, S. Nicholas as Neptune; but however it will do well to have two
strings to ones Bow, and the Bl. Virgin in both is to be called in at a dead
lift: in the latter case indeed, now that it comes into my mind, they had their
Venus orta mari, sprung from the Sea, to invoke; and now, not to be a whit
behind them, this Church sings, Ave maria maris stella, Hayl Mary the Star of
the Sea.

But let us hear a little farther their addresses to the three Kings; (for of
that great Queen we shall have occasion to speak more hereafter) Thus then I
find it, in the Hours of the Bl. Virgin on Epiphany day, January 6.

O Rex Jaspar, Rex Melchior, Rex Balthazar, rogo vos per singula nomina, rogo
vos per Sanctam Trinitatem, rogo vos per regem regum, quem vagientem in cunis
videre meruistis; ut compatiamini tribulationibus meis hodie, and intercedite
pro me ad Dominum, cujus desiderio exules facti estis: and sicut vos per
Angelicam nunciationem de reditu ad Herodem eripuit, ita me hodie liberare
dignetur ab omnibus inimicis meis visibilibus and invisibilibus, and a
subitanea and improvisa morte, and ab omni confusione mala, and ab omni
periculo corporis and animae. O King Jaspar, King Melchior, King Balthazar, I
entreat you by all your names, I entreat you by the holy Trinity, I entreat you
by the King of Kings, whom you had the honor to see when he was a crying
infant in his Cradle, that you would compassionate my tribulations this day,
and intercede for me to the Lord, for the desire of seeing whom, you became
exiles; and as he by the message of an Angel, preserved you from returning to
Herod, so may he vouchsafe to deliver me this day from all mine enemies,
visible and invisible, and from sudden and unforeseen death, and from all evil
confusion, and from all danger of body and soul. Thus it has pleased this
Church, to grace these 3 with the special Patronage of Travelers, and to use
their names, together with the Guardian Angel. Therefore in the forenamed Hours
of Sarum, we have this Direction given. When thou first go out of thy House,
bless thee, saying thus.

CRux Triumphalis Domini nostri Jesu Christi; ecce vivificae crucis Dominicum
signum; fugite parts adversae. In nomine Patris and Filii and Spiritus Sancti.

Amen.

DEus qui tres Magos Orientales, Jaspar, Melchior and Balthazar, ad praesepe
Domini stella duce conduxisti, conduc me ad loca proposita, sine totius
adversitatis impedimento; and qui eos conduxisti Angelo nunciante, reduc me
teipso auxiliante,

Per eundem Christum, etc.

Angele qui meus es custos, pietate superna,
Me tibi commissum serva, defend, guberna.
THe Triumphal Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ; behold the Lords sign of the
Life-giving cross; fly away all ye adverse powers; in the name of the Father,
and the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

Amen.

O God, who did lead the 3 Eastern Magi, Jaspar, Melchior and Balthazar, to
the cratch of our Lord, by the guidance of a star; conduct me without any
afflictive impediment, to the places I design to go to; and thou that did
conduct them by an Angels message, bring me back by thy help,

Through Jesus Christ, etc.

O Angel Guardian, unto thee my self I have commended;
May I by thy great kindness be kept, governed and defended.
Now I profess, such is the weakness of my small wit, that I cannot possibly
see how it follows, that because these 3, by a Divine direction, took a long
Journey, to visit the Newborn Savior of the World, that therefore we, without
any such direction should invoke their conduct in our Travels; [For I hope no
wise man will think this Invocation sufficiently warranted by the Tale of
Picardus (out of Erhardus Winheims Sacrarium Coloniae Agrippinae) concerning
one John Aprilius, who when he was hanged, implored the patronage of the holy
Magi (I suppose because of the long journey he was going to take, when he
should be turned off the Ladder) and after 3 days was found alive, Piccardi
notae in Lib. 2. cap. 8. N. ubrigensis.
and being taken down, came to Colen half naked, with his Halter about his
Neck, to return thanks to his Deliverers.] If there were any consequence in
this, I would fain know, why the 12 Patriarchs, or the 12 Apostles, who were
all very great Travelers, and went too upon God's errands, might not expect
this Honor, and have this Office as soon as they, and especially the latter
before them. But enough of the three Kings, proceed we to other Instances.

De S. Dionysio and Sociis.
Brev. Romans ad October. 9.
Oration.
DEus, qui hodierna die Beatum Dionysium Martyrem tuum atque pontificem virtute
constantiae in passione roborasti; quique illi ad praedicandum Gentibus gloriam
tuam, Rusticum and Eleutherium sociare dignatus es; tribue nobis quaesumus,
eorum imitatione, pro amore tuo prospera mundi despicere, and nulla ejus
adversa formidare.

Per Dominum.

Of S. Denis and his Companions.
The Prayer.
O God, who this day did strengthen thy Martyr and Bishop S. Denis, with the
virtue of constancy in suffering; and who did vouchsafe to join with him
Rusticus and Eleutherius for to preach thy glory to the Gentiles; Grant us we
beseech thee, in imitation of them to despise, for the Love of thee, the worlds
prosperities, and to fear none of its adversities.

Through our Lord.

NOTES.
This Saint, who is the great Patron of France, is supposed to be the same that
is mentioned in the Acts, under the name of Dionysius the Areopagite, though
there is great reason to believe the contrary, Severus l. 2 Hist. Sacr. cap. 46.
if we give any credit to Sulpitius Severus, who tells us, that under the Reign
of Aurelius the Son of Antoninus, tum primum inter Gallias martyria visa; the
first Martyrdomes in France were under his persecution; long before which the
Areopagite must have been dead; which testimony of Severus is so strong, that
even their own men have defended it, and pleaded for a distinction betwixt the
Parisian Dionysius, and the Areopagite; (see Joh. Lannoy his 3 Dissertations.)
But if they were right as to the person, yet the Breviaries have made a
fabulous story of him, which it would be too tedious to recite in all its
circumstances, but I Will give a taste, out of the Breviary of Sarum. He is said
to be sent into France, by Pope Clemens, to preach the Gospel, accompanied with
Rusticus and Eleutherius; and preaching with great zeal at Paris, in the time
of Domitian's persecution, they were laid hold of by the Roman Governor
Sisinnius, (the later Breviaries call him Fescenninus) who inflicted various
torments on them, and cast them into prison; where S. Denis consecrated the
Eucharist, and at the time when the Holy Bread was broken, so great a Light
shone upon him, that all greatly wondered. In this light Jesus Christ himself
came, and took the Bread, and gave it to him, saying. Take this, my dear Denis,
(chare meus) and encouraged him with the promise of great rewards to him and
his hearers in God's Kingdom. After this, he and his two Companions refusing to
sacrifice to the Heathen Gods, they were all beheaded in one and the same
moment, whose Tongues, after their Heads were cut off, did still confess the
Lord. And to declare the merits of the Martyr Denis, after he was beheaded, he
stood upon his Feet, and taking up his own Head in his Arms, he carried it to
the place where it now lies buried. Thus France glories in the Relics of this
Saint; yet Baronius tells us, that Ratisbonne in Germany has long contested
with them about it, Baron. ad an. 1052.
and show his Body there; and Pope Leo IX. set out a Declaration, determining
that the true Body of S. Denis was entire at Ratisbonne, wanting only the
little Finger of his right hand, yet they of Paris cease not their pretenses to
it; so that here are two Bodies venerated of the same individual Saint But why
not 2 Bodies as well as 2 Thumbs of one Saint: for the Virgins of a Nunnery in
Ireland, that were very desirous of Relics, found the Thumb of S. Senanus
lying on the ground by his dead Body, and yet (which was the miracle) neither
of his hands wanted a Thumb or a Finger. Oh the Thumb! Col^anus in supplement.
vi^. S. Senani. nu. 42.
: and both of them are mistaken, if they of Prague have not been cheated;
Bolland. Act. Sanct. in Append. ad Januar. 2.
among whose numerous Relics I find the Arm of S. Denis, the Apostle of
Paris, reckoned. A following Antiphona tells us, that a Multitude of the
Heavenly Host accompanied the dead Body of S. Denis, who carried his own Head,
praising God, and saying, Glory be to thee, O Lord. The Roman Missal also in
Folio ( Paris. 1520) tells the very same story in a long Prosa (where there is
mention of Sisinnius) of which take a few Verses toward the end.

Seniore celebrante
Missam, turba circumstante
Christus adest, comitante
Coelesti frequentia.
Specu clausum carcerali
Consolatur, and vitali
Pane cibat, immortali
Coronandum gloria.
Prodit Martyr conflicturus,
Sub securi stat securus,
Ferit Lictor, sicque victor
Consummatur gladio.
Sed cadaver mox erexit,
Truncus truncum caput vexit
Quo ferente hoc direxit
Angelorum concio.
Tam praeclara passio
Repleat nos gaudio.
Amen.
While round the saint in crowds the people stand,
As he the Mass devoutly celebrates,
Christ he himself appears, a glorious band
Of the Celestial Host upon him waits.
He cheers the imprisoned Saint with joys divine
His own hand feeds him with immortal bread;
He tries him now, but after does design
To set a glorious Crown upon his Head.
And now the Martyr bravely comes to fight,
Under the sharpened Axe he stands secure,
The Lictors blow, though 'twas directed right,
Did only make this Champions conquests sure.
He fell indeed, but presently arose,
The breathless Body finds both feet and way,
He takes his Head in hand, and forward goes,
Till the directing Angels bid him stay.
Well may the Church triumphantly proclaim
This Martyr's Death, and never dying fame.
The present Breviary also retains this ridiculous passage concerning his
carrying of his Head, Lesson 6.
and determines his walk more expressly to have been two miles. Ribadeneira in
his Life, adds, that he delivered his Head into the hands of a Woman called
Catula.

And now it may not be amiss to make a few farther Reflections upon some pieces
of his Legend; and I shall begin with that of Christ's miraculous appearing in
the Administration of the Eucharist. Now though I think no body need be much
concerned in relations of this kind, that are made by those who tell us that
People can speak when their Tongues are out of their Heads See the 2d. Lesson
of Longinus.
, or can carry their Heads in their hands; yet I find Mr. Cressy is very fond
of such passages; and I doubt he might take it ill, if I should pass over a
story he tells to the same purpose, and lays a great deal of stress upon it,
for the establishing his Catholic Faith. It is concerning S. Odo, Chapter Hist. l.
31. cap. 20.
who celebrating the Mass, in the presence of certain of the Clergy of
Canterbury (who maintained that the Bread and Wine, after Consecration do
remain in their former substance, and are not Christ's true Body and Blood, but
a Figure of it) When he was come to confraction, presently the fragments of the
Body of Christ, which he held in his hands, began to pour forth Blood into the
Chalice; whereupon he shed (Good Man!) tears of joy, and beck'ning to them that
wavered in their faith, to come near and see the wonderful work of God, as soon
as they beheld it, they cried out, O holy Prelate, to whom the Son of God has
been pleased to reveal himself visibly in the Flesh, pray for us, that the
Blood we see here present to our eyes, may again be changed, lest for our
unbelief the Divine vengeance fall upon us; He prayed accordingly; after which
looking into the Chalice, he saw the Species of Bread and Wine, where he had
left Blood. [To which may be added a story in the Festivale, which may make a
good Comment upon this of Mr. Cressy concerning these Miraculous Changes of the
Elements in the Sacrament. Fol. 52.
A Jew once went with a Christian man into a Church and heard Mass; when the Mass
was done, the Jew said to him. If I had eaten as much as thou have, I would not
be a hungered, as I trow, in three days. Forsooth said the Christian, I eat no
manner of Meat this day. Then said the Jew, I saw thee eat a Child, the which
the Priest held up at the Altar: Then came there a fair man, that had many
children in his Lap, and he gave each Christen man a child, such as the Priest
eat. The same also we are told of S. Wittekindus, that in the Administration of
the Eucharist, Bolland. in vitae ejus, ad Jan. 7. p. 384.
he saw a child enter into every ones mouth, playing and smiling when some
received him, and with an abhorring countenance, when he went into the mouths
of others, that is, Christ showed this Saint in his countenance, who were
worthy, and who unworthy receivers.] To let pass that which Baronius tells us
(which Mr. Cr. durst not mention, lest it should spoil the Saints credit)
concerning S. Odo, that when a Thief was brought before him, Baron. ad an. 936.
number. 13.
who had stolen a Horse in the Night Thus they have abused Macarius (who
deserved better) by telling us, that finding a Thief plundering his Cell, he,
as if he had been a stranger, helped him to load his Horse with his own goods,
saying these words of Job, We brought nothing into this World, and it is
certain we can carry nothing out, the Lord gave, and as the Lord pleases every
thing comes to pass, blessed be the Lord in all things. Of whom the Legenda has
left also this wise Memorial, that Macarius having on a time killed a Flea that
bit him, he was so penitent thereupon, that he went six Months naked in the
Wilderness, that the Fleas by biting him might have their revenge upon him at
full.
(though his Monk Godofred, who saw him do it, while he was reciting his
Canonical Hours, durst not cry out to take him, lest he should break his Rule
of Silence) S. Odo commanded, in stead of punishing him, Five shillings to be
given the Thief, in consideration that he had watched all Night, taken a great
deal of pains, and endured much hardship; which argues S. Odo not over-fit to
decide a greater controversy without a miracle. Waving this, I say, I cannot
be moved by this miracle, or twenty other fine stories that are told me about
this time, though it was a time mighty fruitful of Monkish wonders. For I
consider (as I intimated before in the case of Relics) that this Century was
remarkable above all others for Ignorance Baronius ad an. 900, has given us its
character at the beginning of it, thus; Novum inchoatur seculum, quod sui
asperitate and boni sterilitate ferreum, malique exundantis deformitate
plumbeum, atque inopia Scriptorum appellari consuevit obscurum.
, Sottishness and Superstition; wherein by reason of the Barbarism and
illiterateness of the Age, Lies and Fables must needs meet with a good Market
to put them off.

And the truth is, if my Faith were staggering upon the hearing Mr. Cr.'s
story, yet the very next Page to it, would settle it again; where he informs
us, that S. Dunstan saw the H. Ghost descending from Heaven in the likeness of
a Dove: and the Sarisbury Breviary edifies me still farther, telling me, that
he saw the Holy Spirit in this shape twice, Less. 6. Of S. Dunstan.
and heard the Angels chanting Kyrie Eleison in the praise of the Trinity; and
that his Harp that hung at the Wall, was by Angels hands made to sound that
Antiphona, Gaudent in Coelis animae sanctorum, which he only understood. And
Lesson 5, I hear more such wonders, which methinks sound as well as Mr.
Cressy's. How, when a mighty Beam from the Top of the Church, threatened the
destruction of many by its fall, S. Dunstan with his right hand, making the
sign of the Cross, lifts it up again Which may well be credited, when we read
of S. Aidanus, that his Cart and two Oxen laden with Wood, as he drove them,
falling down a high Rock into the Sea, he only made the sign of the Cross as
they fell, and received all safe and sound out of the Waters. And S. Maidoc did
the same to a fallen Cart-load of Ale: Colganus vit. S. David. 1 Martii. p.
427. and S. Maid. p. 210.
; and that as this Saint was praying one Night, the Devil assailes him in the
shape of a Bear, and endeavored with his Teeth, to snatch the Staff out of his
hands, upon which the Man of God leaned; he unaffrighted lifts up his Staff,
and followed the horrid Monster beating him, and singing these words; Let God
arise, and let his Enemies be scattered, and the ugly Phantasme vanished. And
no doubt from this Age of S. Odo's Miracle (for it could not so well be from
any other) came that Tradition to us from Father to Son, in Mr. Sergeant's sure
way, how S. Dunstan held the Devil by the nose with a pair of Tongs. Mr.
Cressy's miracle then shown in S. Dunstan's days, is like to do feats to
establish the Churches Faith concerning the Eucharist, to convince and confound
all Opposers, especially when S. Odo has to do in it, that known
Miracle-worker, who as Mr. Cr. records it, when the Roof of his Church was to
be repaired, suspended all Rain for the space of three Years, Chapter Hist. lib.
32. cap. 5.
that it should not hinder the Work. And now I have begun with Mr. Cr. about
this Argument, I will call him a little farther to account, for some of the
many wonders he relates.

A Brief Digression concerning some of the Miracles related in Mr. Cr.'s
History.
IT is an Ingenuous Confession, which is made by Melchior Canus, concerning the
Miracles of the Saints. We cannot deny, says he, that sometimes even the most
grave Men, Quanquam negare non possumus, viros aliquando gravissimos in Divorum
praesertim prodigiis describendis, sparsos rumores and excepisse, and scriptis
etiam ad posteros retulisse. Loc. Theol. lib. 11. c. 6. etc.
especially in describing the Miracles of the Saints, have both picked up
scattered rumors, and also related them in their writings to Posterity. In
which thing, it seems to me, they have either indulged themselves too much, or
at least the vulgar sort of Believers; because they thought that these would
not only easily believe, but also earnestly desired such Miracles: Therefore
holy Men have recorded several signs and prodigies, not as if they willingly
themselves believed them, but lest they should seem to be wanting to the wishes
of the faithful.

Mr. Cressy, I suppose, has a mind to be taken for a grave Author; and every
one that turns over his History, cannot but see that it was the great design of
it, to gather together whatever he could meet with, that was prodigious and
wonderful, relating to the English Saints. I have so good an Opinion of his
wit, that I cannot bring my self to believe, that he could possibly think half
that which he has related, to be measured truth; and I Will give him but one
Instance among many of this, in his Life of S. Suibert, which he has given us
out of Marcellinus: Chapter Hist. lib. 20, etc.
He might have easily known (if he had not rather chosen to follow Surius, and
his good Father Alford blindfold) how the learned Men of his own Church have
despised this History, some calling him Auctorem stramineum (as Labbe does)
others look upon it as a late Fable (as Holstenius) and if any one has a mind
to see the Arguments which cannot be answered, Recentius commentum.
to prove this Marcellinus to be a foolish Writer, and his Relation impossible
to be true, as contradicting both History and Chronology, Bolland. Commentar.
Historicus de S. Suibert. ad 1 Martii.
he may only look into Bollandus (who has also been so ingenuous as to leave
out, all that Mr. Cressy has foolishly inserted) and Colganus Colganus in notis
ad vit. Suitberti. page 436.
. It Is most likely then, that Canus has hit right, and that Mr. Cr. (as well as
others before him) has herein complied too much with the humor and desires of
vulgar Catholics, and resolved to serve his Church by the old way of pious
frauds, without any regret for the dishonesty of it. Yet however, methinks he
should have better secured the reputation of his discretion.

For I could not but imagine, that the foregoing story of S. Denis, was such a
stretcher, that no body would ever have had the confidence (not to say
conscience) to put a Man's faith to it, to believe that there was above one
Saint, that could endure his Head off as well as his Hat, or clap it under his
Arm and walk, as if nothing ailed him: and I was ready to comfort my self, that
this story was only calculated for the Frenchmen, and that an English Faith
was not much concerned in it. But alas! I found quickly that I was mistaken;
for there are two Englishmen, Capgrave and Mr. Cressy, that are resolved, I
think, that no French Saint should have the better of those of our own Nation,
in showing these Feats. Mr. Cressy has produced S. Clarus lib. 17. c. 3.
an English Hermit, S. Ositha l. 17. c. 5.
, S. Decumanus l. 21. c. 4.
, and S. Juthwera l. 23. c. 9.
, Chapter History.
who all carried their Heads in their Arms after they were smitten off: but if
he had left out all these, that one story he relates concerning S. Justinian l.
11. c. 8.
, may suffice to silence the same of S. Denis his adventure; who after he had
been slain, and his Head cut off, by the wicked rage of his own Servants, his
Body presently arose, and with his Head between his two Arms, walking thence to
the Sea, passed over to a Port called by his name, and fell down at a place,
where a Church is built to his memory.

I shall now make bold, in the name of Mr. Cressy, to challenge any Frenchman
of them all, to produce any Saint of theirs, that ever did the like: For alas!
their S. Denys's journey, as you have heard, was not above two Miles, and that
too upon plain firm ground, and what is that, I pray, to going over Sea without
ones head?

But I have a farther request to Mr. Cr. which upon this occasion, I think fit
to make, and methinks it is a very reasonable one: it is this. That he would
give us leave, without swaggering, to put upon the Head of several of his
Chapters, (instead of Gests) The Fables of S. Justinian and the Fables of S.
David, etc. as he himself has done to the famous Arthur: lib. 11. c. 16. Fables
concerning King Arthur censured. I dare say the Writers of these things he
calls Fables in Arthur's case, such as Geoffery Monmouth A grave Author with
Baronius in the case of the 11000 Virgins.
, and Matthew Westmonast. are of as good credit as his great Authors Capgrave
and Harpsfield; and these Acts too of his Chivalry, which he calls prodigious,
in the Conquest of so many Countries, are not near so incredible and
ridiculous, as his story of S. Alban (though mentioned by Bid) drying up a
River for this foolish reason, that People might more commodiously behold his
Martyrdom, or the Mountain rising under the Feet of S. David, Chapter Hist. lib. 6.
cap. 12.
(of which we shall say more afterward in his life) or this of S. Justinian's
going over Sea without a Head. He has given us some excuse for excessive
praises, in Arthur's case, from the custom of People to magnify Romantickly
some one of their Princes; as the Grecians their Alexander; the Romans their
Octavian; the English their Richard; and the French their Charles. But there is
no excuse for pretending to advance Religion, by telling incredible stories,
and for producing wonders as absurdly, as if this power were given, to enable a
Saint to show tricks of Legerdemain, or to alter the Laws of Nature in sport,
and without any apparent and considerable necessity. Magnum sit necesse est,
propter quod naturae leges exceduntur.

To come a little closer to Mr. Cr.'s History, by presenting him with a few
Instances of his own, to this purpose.

Can he answer it to his own reason, why a Saints bad memory in forgetting a
cloth, upon which he had consecrated the Eucharist, should, after he was gone
to Sea, be so far encouraged, as that the Divine power should enable him to
walk upon the Sea to fetch it, as he tells us of S. Birinus? Lib. 15. c. 4.
When any one else, I dare say, with his conceits about the Corporal, would
rather have expected, that this his carelessness should by a Divine hand have
been punished? I know not indeed how far another story of this Saint, after his
death, may invite us to believe the former in his lifetime. For Capgrave
relates, that a young Man that was born deaf and dumb, was cured by being
brought to his Tomb, and spoke English presently, and within three days more
spoke French perfectly as well. I read of Christ and his Apostles working
Miracles, to supply the pressing necessities of other Men; but I do not
remember any one instance, wherein they endeavored to engage the extraordinary
power of God, to help themselves merely, or that God did it for them, without
their requesting, when the thing might be done by ordinary ways. Was it never
heard that two Men in a hot Country took a long Journey, without a Screen to
defend them from the scorching of the Sun? Or, if it were necessary, was there
no way for them to procure a shade, but that God must send a mighty Eagle So we
are told of S. Lutwin, that lying along upon the ground asleep, an Eagle with
her shady Wings defended his Face from the hot scorching Sun. Bollandu^ in vita
S. Basim ad 4 Martii.
with her Wings to over-shaddow them, til they came to their Journeys end? Yet
thus, he tells us, it was done upon their Prayers, for Roger of Cannae, Li. 10.
c. 18.
and Richard of Andria, when they went to Siponto. Can any one be so foolish as
to think, that if Water could have been constantly supplied to the Children of
Israel, in their Travels through the Wilderness, by fetching it at the distance
of a Mile or two, that God would miraculously have made it follow them, to save
that pains? Yet Mr. Cr. writes, as if he would have us believe this following
story. That the Monastery of S. Eanswitha, Lib. 15. c. 8.
had only one incommodity, that being seated on the top of high Rocks, there
was a penury of sweet Water. The holy Virgin was sensible of this
inconvenience, and after she had by Prayer solicited our Lord, she went to the
Fountain more than a Mile remote from the Monastery; and striking the Water
with a Staff, commanded it to follow her: The deaf Element heard and obeyed the
Sacred Virgin's voice, and against the Inclination of Nature followed her
steps, till overcoming all the difficulties of the passage, it mounted up to
the Monastery, where it abundantly served all their uses: One particular more
increased the admiration of the Event, for this little Rivolet in the way being
to pass through a Pool (she must be supposed to do so too, because it was said
to follow her steps, but that is a small matter, for a Virgin in Capgrave's
story to tread Water) it flowed notwithstanding pure and free from all mixture.
Mr. Cressy might have told us also, that which immediately precedes this story
in Capgrave, how she triumphed over a King of the Northumbers, who courted her
for his Wife; by making this the condition of having her, (which he accepted)
that he should pray a great Beam three Foot longer than it was, (for so much it
was too short for the rest of the Timber that was prepared to build her
Oratory) which he failing to accomplish, after long invoking his Gods, he
departed from her ashamed, and she escaped him; but by her own Prayers,
immediately the Beam became a Yard longer Which is no great matter to believe,
when we read that S. Hildutus with his Disciples living in a strait Island,
they obtained by their Prayers, that the Island was enlarged and made bigger.
Colganus vit. Gildae Badonic. p. 182.
; and I suppose it may be every whit as fit to believe, that by another Prayer,
without the help of any Carpenters, all might be joined and framed into a House.

Neither can I see much need of a Miracle, in another story he tells us, about
the conveighing S. Cuthbert's Body from the Sea side: Lib. 28. c. 19.
where first he says it was told a Monk in a Vision, that upon a certain Tree
they should find a Bridle hanging, which if they held up in the Air, an Horse
would come to them of his own accord, to assist them! They did so, and a
Bay-horse presently offered his service, which they joining to a Wagon,
conveyed it away. The story tells us not a word how the Wagon came there;
and yet one would think it had been as easy to get a Horse without a Miracle
as a Wagon; but what need was there of either, when there were 7 Monks that
did attend it? and if they could not carry S. Cuthbert's Body, let him call
them what he pleases, I shall make bold to say they were lazy Lubbers; and a
Vision of a Whip for them, was rather needful, than of a Bridle for the Horse:
especially considering, that there is reason to believe, that S. Cuthbert was
no fat Man; which is easily collected, from what I find in Mr. Cressy, Lib. 15.
c. 16.
that he was very much given to fasting, even before he entered into the
Monastery, (much more you may be sure afterward) and that he took so little
care about Victuals, that in a Journey he was miraculously supplied with a
Meal, after having fasted all day, by means of his Horse; which pulled down
from the Roof of a House, half a Loaf of warm Bread, and a piece of Flesh,
wrapped up in a Linen Cloth.

I hope the Reader is not tired with these Relations, and therefore, with his
good leave, I Will add two or three more. My next shall be in S. Wereburga and
her Wild-geese: which story Mr. Cr. is much concerned for, Chapter Hist. l. 17.
cap. 17.
and takes it ill from Mr. Camden, that he should insinuate his unwillingness
to believe it. The substance of it is this.

The Steward of S. Wereburga's Monastery, complaining that in a Farm that
belonged to it, the Corn was much injured by Flocks of Wild-geese: S. Wereburga
commands the Steward to go and shut them all up together in a House. He, though
at first he wondered at the command, thinking (as any one else would have done)
that she had spoke those words in jest; yet perceiving her to renew her
command, he went to the Wild-geese, which were in great numbers devouring the
Corn, and with a loud voice commanded them, in his Mistress's name, to follow
him. They obeyed, and all in one Drove were shut up together; only one of the
Number was privily stolen by a Servant, with an intention to eat it. The next
Morning the Holy Virgin went to the House, and after she had chidden them for
usurping that which belonged not to them, she commanded them to fly away, and
not to return. Immediately the whole Army took Wing; but being sensible that
one of their Number was wanting, they hovering over the Virgins head,
complained of their loss: she hearing their clamours, understood by inspiration
the cause of it; and after search, made the Offender confess his theft, and
after the Bird was restored to her Companions, they all flew away, and not any
Bird of that kind was afterward seen in that Territory.

What fine circumstances are here to invite a Man to believe? The Saints
interest in this devoured Corn, which belonged to her own Monastery: The
sawciness of these Geese, that durst make so bold with her Corn: The great
charity of the Virgin, in giving the Geese so fair an admonition, to make them
sensible of their crime before she punished them: Their wonderful sagacity,
quite exceeding the pitch of that Fowls understanding in our days: The
seasonableness of an inspiration to advance her duller understanding, and make
her apprehend their Language, as well as they did hers before: Her honesty, in
restoring the stolen Bird to her Companions, and that rather than they should be
defrauded (if Malmesbury be in the right that the Bird was killed) restoring it
to life again by a Miracle: and yet her terrible severity toward them (which
may be a fair warning to all succeeding Geese that hear it, to take heed of
such trespassing) debarring not only that individual Flock, but the whole Race
of Geese, and not only for her life time, but for ever after, from being seen,
and so consequently never to make a Meal more, in that Territory. These
circumstances, I assure you, do so far obstruct my faith in this Miracle, that,
to be plain with Mr. Cressy, this one Flam of S. Wereburga, seems to me more
incredible, than all the Tales of K. Arthur, and his Knights; and for the sake
of her Wild-geese, I am inclined to disbelieve another story I meet with, Act.
Sanctor. Mart. 3. p. 251.
of a Tame-Goose in the Life of S. Winwalo^, whose Sisters eye being plucked
out, as she was playing, by a Goose; he was taught by an Angel a sign, whereby
to know that Goose from the rest about the House, and having cut it open, found
the Eye in its Entrails, preserved by the power of God unhurt, and shining like
a Gemm; which he took and put it again in its proper place, and recovered his
Sister; and was so kind also to the Goose, as to send it away alive, after it
had been cut up, to the rest of the Flock. I know Mr. Cressy may pick up out of
the Saints Lives Twenty parallel stories, how they have commanded Birds and
Beasts, and punished the injuries they have done to the Saints upon them: He may
tell us perhaps that of S. Brigid, Act. Sanct. in vit. Brig. ad Feb. 1.
who seeing Wild-Ducks sometimes swimming in the Water, and again flying in the
Air, she called them to her, who without any fear obeyed, and came to her hand,
who after she had stroked and embraced them a while, she let them fly away
again. Of S. Genulph, whom they bring in chiding a Fox, that had stolen one of
his Hens, Boll. Act. Sanct. in vit. Genulph. ad Jan. 17.
and commanding him to lay it down just in the place whence he took it, all
which the Fox performed; but could not so escape, but was miraculously punished
for his Theft, for as he was running away by the Door of his Church, he fell
down dead. He may tell us of S. Kierans admirable arguing the case with the Fox
too, that had stolen his Shoes, with a purpose to eat them; To whom the holy
Man said, Colganus. vit. S. Kieran. 5 Mart. p. 459.
Brother, why have thou done this ill thing, which it becomes not a Monk to do?
(he had several Beasts that served him tamely, besides this Fox, whom he called
by the Name of Monks) Behold, our Water is sweet and common, and our Meat is
divided in common among us all, and if thou had a mind according to thy
Nature to eat Flesh, God Almighty for our sake would have made it of the Barks
of Trees; which melting speech so wrought upon the Fox, that he begged his
pardon, did Penance by Fasting, eating nothing till the holy Man bad him. He
may instance in the Weasel, that for its sawciness in gnawing the Frock of S.
Peter the Abbot, Ibid. in ejus vit. ad Mart. 4.
was found dead upon it. But if he can be contented that the Saints should be
brought in foolishly treating Birds and Beasts, and discoursing to them like
rational Creatures, and that they should use a miraculous Power to punish them
as Transgressors, which for want of choice, are incapable of any other Laws
than their Natural Inclinations; yet we cannot so easily believe that God will
lend his Power to countenance such ridiculous and trifling designs.

Indeed such idle Tales we meet with, of wonderful Birds among the Heathen,
such as those which S. Augustine S. Augustine de civ. dei. lib. 18. c 16.
speaking concerning the story of Diomedes his Companions turned in Birds, and
frequenting his Tomb in Apulia, near to Mount Garganus; Hoc Templum aiunt,
circumvolare atque incolere has alites tam mirabili obsequio, ut rostrum aqua
impleant and aspergant; and eo si Graeci venerint, vel Graecorum stirpe
progeniti, non solum quietas esse sed and superadvolare; si autem alienigenas
vid erint, subvolare, and capita eorum tam gravibus ictibus, ut etiam perimant,
vulnerare; nam duris and grandibus rostris, satis ad haec praelia perhibentur
armatae.
, and Pliny Plinius Not. Hist. l. 10. c. 44. He tells much what the same story,
Alvenas Barbaros clangore infestant, Graecis tantum adulantur, miro discrimine,
velut generi Diomedis hoc tribuentes: aedemque eam quotidie plens gutture
madentibus pennis perluunt atque purificant, unde origo fabula Diomedis socios
in earum effigies mutatos. He says before, Eis esse dentis, oculosque igneo
color, caeter^^ candidis.
relate, concerning Diomedes his Birds, which abiding at his Tomb in Apulia,
courted and flattered the Graecians; but infested, and with their hard Beaks
killed strangers that were not of their race; that sprinkled and purified his
Temple with Water, which they brought in their Bills and Feathers, etc. If any
will be so kind to these stories, as not to look upon them as Fictions, yet he
need go no farther for satisfaction about them, than to S. Augustine, who in
the next Chapter, resolves them into the cheating Arts and Tricks of the Devil;
and thither I should refer Mr. Cressy's Wild-geese, if the matter of fact were
proved, since, as I said before, I cannot be persuaded, that God will lend his
Power to effect such ridiculous things.

Saint Ivo his appearing to the Abbot of Ramsey after his death, is told us in
another place; Chapter Hist. lib. 13. cap. 9.
how he seemed to draw on his Legs a pair of Boots, with care to make them sit
smooth and handsome, telling him that he must wear them for his sake, and that
they would last a good while; upon which the Abbot awaking, felt such horrible
pain in his Legs, that he was not able to walk or stand, and Fifteen Years he
remained in this Infirmity. A sad punishment, considering the offense, for
which it is said to be inflicted, which was, that this Abbot did not presently
give credit to the pretense of a Vision of S. Ivo, that required that his Body
should be translated to Ramsey, and cast out this hasty speech, Must we
translate and venerate the Ashes of I know not what Cobbler? He must have a
forward faith, that can believe, that the Saints departed are either so
sportive, or so spightful, as this story represents them.

In the next Chapter, Mr. Cressy gives us this account of S. Paul de Leon, That
on a time visiting a Sister of his, Lib. 13. c. 10.
who devoutly served God in a Cell, seated near the Sea of the British shore,
at her request he obtained of God by his Prayers, that the Sea should never
swell beyond the bounds marked by her, by placing a Row of Stones, by which
means the Sea was restrained the space of a Mile from his usual course, and
continues so to this day. In this story, (besides the prejudice I have against
it, as related by Capgrave, whom I cannot think of without a Pique against him,
for making so many Saints carry their Heads in their hands) there appears no
reason at all, why the Sea should be forced out of its ordinary road, only that
a devout Sister had toyingly placed a Row of Stones, and thought it pretty, if
this could be made a Sea-bank, and accordingly God's Power must be called in to
make good this fancy, which seems to be directly such a playing with Miracles,
as Boys play at Ducks and Drakes with Stones upon the surface of the Water; but
Mr. Cressy has omitted another wonderful circumstance which Capgrave mentions
concerning those Stones; that as he and his Sister returned home, they saw on a
sudden that those little Stones, by the Divine Power, were turned into Pillars
of Stone of a vast Magnitude; indeed all things done by this S. Paul de Leon
are so great, that they quite put down those of the Scripture Saint Paul; for a
Dragon of an Hundred and Twenty Foot long, is another kind of Beast, than that
he fought with at Ephesus; yet such a one this Saint (we are told in his life)
overcame, Polland. Act. Sanct. ad Mart. 12. p. 118.
and when he had done, made it to follow him to the Seaside like a Dog.
Bollandus indeed makes it a matter of his wonder, that it should be told of
almost all the Irish Saints, and those of Little-Brittany, Id. Ibid p. 110.
that they killed Dragons of vast Size; for my part, I believe there is no
difference at all in the Size of the Dragons of those Countries, from what they
are elsewhere; but the Invention of the Writers of the Lives is vast, and their
Conscience large, and the toyishness of their fancy in feigning wonders is
admirable indeed, and beyond all compare. Mr. Cressy is an argument of the one,
viz. the bulkiness of their Miracles, for though his swallow be as large as
most Men's I know, yet you may remember an Irish miracle (that about the Staff
of Jesus) stuck so vilely by the way, before it could get down, that I was
afraid it would have choakt him: And for an instance of their toying and
childish playing with Miracles, you may take that of S. Mochua; who, they tell
us, seeing a Company of Lambs running hastily to suck their Damms, as he was
walking by them and praying, Colganus. Vit. S. Mochuae Mart. 28. p. 780.
he suddenly stepped before them, and with his Staff drew a Line upon the ground,
which none of the Lambs, as hungry as they were, durst pass, but there stopped.
The like was done by S. Fintanus to the Calves, parting them and the Cows
asunder, Idem. vit. Fintani. p. 11.
only by the Interposition of his Staff. But the most excellent story I have
met with of this kind, is in the Life of S. Finnianus, where we find him, and
S. Ruadanus bandying Miracles as sportfully, Colganus vit. Finniani 23 Febr. p.
395.
as Tennis-Balls are tossed from one to another with a Racket. Thus it is
related: S. Ruadanus obtained this special favor of God, that from a certain
Tree in his Cell ( Tilia it is called) from the Hour of Sunsetting to Nine a
Clock the next Day dropped a Liquor, of a peculiar taste, pleasing to every
Palate; which then filled a Vessel, which sufficed for a Dinner for him, and
all his Brotherhood: and from Nine a Clock to Sunsetting, it dropped half the
Vessel full, with which Strangers were entertained. Upon the fame of this
Miracle, many of the Saints came to S. Finnian, desiring him to go along with
them to that place, and persuade Ruadanus to live a life common with others. S.
Finnian went with them, and when they came to the Tree that gave the admirable
Liquor, he signed it with the sign of the Cross, and after Nine a Clock the
Liquor ceased to flow. S. Ruadanus hearing that his Master S. Finian, and
several others were come to him, he called his Servant, and bad him prepare a
Dinner for his Guests; who going to the Tree, he sound the Vessel that stood
under it wholly empty, and told his Master how it was; who bad him carry his
Vessel to the Fountain, and fill it to the top with Water, which when he had
done, presently the Water was changed into the taste of that Liquor, that dropped
from the Tree: Moreover he found a Fish of a great bigness in the Fountain, and
carried all to the Man of God; who commanded him to set these Gifts before S.
Finnian. He seeing what was done, crossed the Liquor, and it was changed again
into common Water, and said, Why is this Liquor of a false name given to me?
The Disciples of S. Finnian seeing all this, desired their Master to go to the
Fountain and cross it, as he had done the Tree: (they had a mind to see more of
this sport) But S. Finnian answered them; My Brethren, do not grieve this holy
Man, for if he go before us to the next Bog, Ad vicinam grunnam: which Colganus
explains, not. 17. ad Vit. Maidoc. p. 216. Grunna al^^s grunda, capitur hic pro
terra humida and inaquosa in qua caespites and gl^bae effodiuntur, etc.
he will be able to do the same that he did in the Tree and the Water, ( i. e.
make such Liquor flow thence.) Wherefore S. Finnian, and the rest, all
entreated S. Ruadanus, that he would live as others did; which he yielded to,
and (not depending upon miracles) he held the common course of living.

Give me leave to mention one wonder more out of Mr. Cressy, Chapter Hist. l. 13.
cap. 18.
concerning Austin the Monk, who disputing with the British Bishops, about the
Observation of Easter, and arguing that they did not keep it in its due time;
when the Britains, after a long disputation, would not be moved to give their
assent, but would follow their own Traditions; Austin brought the Dispute to
this Conclusion, saying; Let us beseech our Lord, who makes Brethren of one
mind in the House of his Father, that he would vouchsafe by Celestial signs to
make known unto us, which of these Traditions is to be followed, and which is
the right Path leading to his Kingdom: Let some sick Person be here produced
among us, and he by whose Prayers he shall be cured, let that Man's faith and
practice be believed acceptable to God, and to be followed by Men. This
Proposition being accepted with much ado, a blind Man was brought before them,
and was first offered to the British Bishops, but by their endeavors and
Ministry found no cure and help: At length Austin, compelled thereto by just
necessity, kneeled down, and prayed to God to restore the blind Man his sight;
whereupon immediately the blind Man (upon his Prayer) received sight, and
Austin was proclaimed by all a true Preacher of Celestial Light; (and People
were afterward put in the right Path to Heaven, so far as concerned that
saving Point, of the time of observing Easter.) This story, though related by
Bid His own Mel^h. Canus has betrayed his doubting of the certainty of many of
his, and Gregory's relations. B^da in historia Anglorum, and Gregorius in
Dialogis, quaedam miracula scribunt, quae hujus praes r^iin seculi Arista ch^
incerta ^sse censebunt: Equidem historias illas probarem magis, si earum
auctores, severitati judicii curam in elgendo majorem adjunxisse^^. Loc. Theol.
lib. 11. page 337.
, cannot obtain my belief, that God thus decided this Controversy; because I
am sure that is false, which I read in the very story it self, that Austin went
to pray for this Miracle, being compelled thereto by just necessity: this was
well put in indeed, if it had been true (for I all along go upon this
Principle, that there must be a manifest and great necessity, for such great
alterations of the course of Nature) but there was no necessity at all, that
this Controversy (upon what Day Easter should be kept) should be decided,
where two contrary customs had long obtained, and both sides were agreed to
keep it: but the Eastern Church following S. John's practice, may determine the
time one way, and the Western following the Traditions of S. Peter, may in this
particular go another way, and yet both be pleasing to God. Mr. Cr. himself has
told us out of Bid, That this dissonance in the observation of Easter, Ch
Hist. l. 16. c. 16.
was patiently tolerated by all, whilst Bishop Aidan lived; because it was well
known, that though those who sent him, would not permit him to celebrate that
Feast otherwise than they were accustomed, yet he was zealous to perform all
Christian Duties of Faith, Piety and Charity, according to the Custom
prescribed by all God's Saints; and therefore he was deservedly loved by all,
even by those who differently celebrated Easter.

Besides it seems to me a ridiculous thing, and a tempting of God to go to
imitate Elijah (as it is plain in this thing Austin did, by proposing to have
it miraculously decided) when the case and necessity is no ways alike, of
bringing a People off from Idolatry, to worship the true God; and both
worshipping the same true God and Savior, to agree in an uniform observance of
a Day, or of a Ceremony. Yet a frequent practice this is upon any slight
occasion to tell miraculous stories of their Saints, bringing in any example of
the Scripture, that has any resemblance to them, and taking care commonly that
the Scripture-instance be outdone. To give a few Examples. A pleasant story
they give us of S. Gonsalvus, building a Bridge over the River Tamaca. And
first, Bolland. vita S. Gonsalvi. 10 Jan. p. 646.
they make the place where he should build it, to be shown him by the
revelation of an Angel; then how he got Money for his work, particularly of a
Gentleman, who passed by, of whom Gonsalvus asked his Charity toward it; who
upon his importunity wrote a Letter to his Wife, to whom he bid him carry it,
and she would give him his Alms: the Contents were, that she should give him
so much Money, as the weight of his Letter came to; which she looking upon as a
Jear, wished him to go his way; But Gonsalvus insisted that she should do as
her Husband required; and when she weighed the Letter, by a Miracle the weight
of it was so increased, that he got a considerable Sum of Money for his Work.
After this, wanting Provisions for his Workmen, upon his Prayers, and making
the sign of the Cross upon the Waters of the River, a Multitude of Fishes
covered the surface of it, and he taking up as many of them as he needed, sent
the rest of the Fishes away with his blessing, and thus he did more than once.
And as they were thus wonderfully supplied with Food, so also with Drink; for
as another Moses (says the story) he with his Staff brought Water out of a Rock
(I wonder why River-water might not have served the turn) which became a
perpetual Fountain; but now that Moses may be sure to be outdone, he brought
Wine also out of the Rock to serve their needs, but (as it is wisely put in)
that was dried up when the Bridge was finished. Another instance we have in S.
Endeus his going by Sea to the Island Aranu; He coming to the Seaside,
Colganus vit. S. Erdei. 21 Mart. p. 707.
and finding no Vessel to conveigh him over, he commanded 8 Friars, to take up
a great Stone that lay near hand, and put it in the Sea; and in the virtue of
him who walked dry-shod upon the Sea, he got upon that stone, and Christ
causing a fit Wind to blow, he was brought safe upon it to the Island. S.
Mochua is another example of the same nature; Bolland. Act. Sanct. 1 Januar. p.
46, 47.
who having a visit given him by S. Kyenanus, and 15 of his Clergy; in their
return, they came to an unpassable and impetuous River, and wanted a Boat;
whereupon S. Mochua spread his Mantle upon the Water, being mindful of Elijah's
Mantle that divided the River Jordan, and Kyenanus and his 15 Men were carried
over the River upon this Mantle, as safely as in a Vessel, and it returned back
to its owner, without wrinkle or wetting. After this Mochua going to the
Consecration of a Church Kyenanus had built, he saw 12 Hearts in a Mountain, and
brought them tamely along with him laden with Wood, and after that with Water
to boil their Flesh, upon which they feasted; only he commanded all their Bones
to be reserved: which the next Day he commanded (in the virtue of him that
raised Lazarus from the dead) to rise in their proper form, and they did so;
and were sent away by him alive into the Mountains. This, it is plain, which way
soever you take it, was a greater Miracle than the raising of Lazarus, for his
Flesh was neither new created Flesh, nor devoured: Nay, and upon the same
account, it is a greater Miracle, than the Resurrection of Christ from the
Dead, which is the main confirmation of the Christian Religion; and yet there
is no imaginable reason for this great Miracle of the Resurrection of the 12
Staggs. There was some little occasion for their coming along with the Saint,
to furnish the Consecration Feast; but that good work being done, there appears
no reason at all for that extraordinary Miracle afterward; unless it were to
prove the Immortality of Beasts, as the Resurrection of our Savior, and
others, was particularly designed to prove the Immortality of Men.

To instance only in one more; viz. S. Severus a Bishop in France, of whom they
tell in his Life this Wonder. As he was passing by the House of a poor Widow
in a Journey, Bolland. vit. Sanc. 1 F^b. p. 189, 192.
he heard her making sad moan; he stopped, and went in to inquire the cause;
which was this; That as she was setting Bread into her Oven, the Peel was left
in it, and was burnt; and she knew not how either to draw out the Loaves that
were already in, or put in those that were still out: upon which S. Severus,
without any dread, went into the hot Oven, and took in and placed in order the
remaining Loaves; and when they were all baked (for he stayed in the Oven till
then) he reached them all out to the Woman; and came forth, as the Three
Children out of the Fiery Furnace, untouched by the heat, either in his Body or
Clothes. This is such a Rapper, that I cannot but admire at the wanton fancy of
the Monks, those Fathers of Lies, in the invention of this and other Miracles.
Can any Man believe, that to save an old Woman's Batch of Bread, God Almighty
should work so extraordinary a Miracle, as in some circumstances of it, is
beyond that of the Three Children, wrought by him in Vindication of his own
honor against Idolatry? But, in the name of wonder, what need the Bishop stay
in the Oven till the Bread was baked? Besides, I doubt the Critics will have a
hard task to determine, whether of the two we are to believe, either that the
Oven was a very large one, or that the Bishop was very little. Herein then the
Three Children, and this Saint scarce stand upon equal terms; but in another
respect he far out-did them: for S. Severus was as miraculously preserved from
starving, as from burning (which we never read of them) For being shut out of
doors in a sad snowy Night, having nothing on but Drawers (for he had given
away the rest of his clothes) a Herd of Mares which he used to keep in the
Field, came round about him, and turning all their heads to him, by their
breath kept him warm all Night, and the Snow that came down, all fell without
that Circle.

But to conclude this Digression. I am sure there are Controversies of more
importance, depending betwixt us and the Church of Rome, than that forenamed
was, about the time of observing Easter: If Mr. Cr.'s Collection of Wonders,
upon far less occasions, were true; methinks we might, without any imputation
of sawciness, desire and hope, that when such showers of Miracles have fallen
in the Ages before us, which have made Mountains to spring up; we might but
have some few drops fall upon us, such as would produce at least a Molehill. I
dare say the English Protestants, though they have, I believe, more skill to
avoid being cheated, yet they are as willing to be determined by a real
Miracle, as the old British Christians were: I know not therefore what should
hinder it, unless the Prayers of the present Romish Saints, who are the great
Pretenders to Miracles, are not so acceptable and prevalent with Heaven as
heretofore; and I Will give Mr. Cressy leave to guess at the true reason of that.

De S. Georgio.
Antiphona.

Horae sec. us. Sarum.
GEorgi Martyr inclyte,
Te decet Laus and gloria
Praedotatum militia:
Per quem puella regia
Existens in tristitia,
Coram Dracone pessimo
Salvata est. Ex animo
Te rogamus cord intimo,
Ut cum cunctis fidelibus
Coeli jungamur civibus,
Nostris ablutis sordibus;
Ut simul cum laetitia
Tecum simus in gloria;
Nostraque reddant labia,
Lauds Christo cum gratia.
Verse. Ora pro nobis B. Georgi Christi miles.

Resp. Ut hosts visibiles and invisibiles, sint contra nos valde debiles.

Oremus.

OMnipotens sempiterne Deus; qui deprecantium voces benignus exaudis;
Majestatem tuam supplices exoramus, ut sicuti in honorem beati and
gloriosissimi Martyris tui Georgii, Draconem a puella superari voluisti; ita
ejusdem intercessione, hosts nostros visibiles and invisibiles, ne nocere
valiant, a nobis superari concedas.

Per Dominum, etc.

Of St. George.
(Translated by Dr. Heylin.)
GEorge Holy Martyr, praise and fame,
Attend upon thy glorious name;
Advanced to Knightly dignity,
The Daughter of a King by Thee
(As she was making grievous moan
By a fierce Dragon all alone)
Was freed from Death. We thee entreat
That we in Heaven may have a Seat.
And being washed from every stain
May there with all the faithful reign;
That we with Thee together may
Sing gladly many a sacred lay,
The gracious Throne of Christ before,
To whom be praise for ever more.
Verse. Pray for us S. George the Soldier of Christ.

Ans. That our enemies visible and invisible may be very weak in opposing us.

Let us Pray.

ALmighty everlasting God, who mercifully hear the requests of those that
pray to Thee; we humbly entreat thy Majesty, that as in honor of thy blessed
and most glorious Martyr George, thou would have the Dragon to be vanquished
by a Maid This I suppose refers to that in the Legend, mentioned in the
Festival^, f. 96. that when S. George had bore down the Dragon with his Spear
to the ground, he bad the Damosel to bind it with her Girdle about the Neck and
lead it into the City, which she did, and the Dragon followed after her as it
had been a Hound.
, so grant that by his intercession, our enemies visible and invisible may be
overcome by us, that they may have no power to hurt us.

By our Lord, etc.

NOTES.
I Need not meddle with the Controversy, whether S. George were an Imaginary
Saint, or an Arrian Heretic, concerning which you may see enough both of the
Opinions of Protestants and Papists, in Dr. Heylin's History of S. George. But
these things concerning the Dragon, and the King's Daughter mentioned in the
Prayer, are plainly taken out of the Golden Legend of Jacobus de Voragine Who
is called by Melch. Canus, homo ferrei oris, plumbei cordis, animi certe parum
severi and prudentis. Loc. Theol. l. 11. p. 337.
, as Baronius himself acknowledges in his Annotations on the Roman
Martyrologie, April 23. and (which is observable) the Breviary of Sarum, though
it abound with so many fabulous Legends, yet does not mention any thing in the
Lessons for S. George, about the killing of the Dragon; but tells a dull story
in comparison concerning him, as a Martyr of Cappadocia; And Baronius inclines
rather to make him a Symbolical Saint. And yet you see in the Prayer, that this
Fable of the Dragon is made the ground of that which follows, that by the
Intercession of this Dragon-killer (ejusdem intercessione) they may prevail
over their enemies visible and invisible; for they then thought, that no other
Saint or Martyr could do their work so well as he Maxim bellorum Rector, quem
nostra juventus Pro Mavorte colit. Mantuan. Fast. lib. 4.
, especially since their Great Enemy is so formidable, and is represented as an
old Dragon. Ribadeneira tells us, in his life, that Generals and Kings when
they go to the Wars, take him for their singular Patron; and that the Roman
Church invokes S. George, S. Sebastian, and S. Maurice, as the most powerful
Captains and Defenders, against the enemies of the Christian Faith. But a more
special honor was done to him here, when a Constitution was made by Henry
Archbishop of Canterbury, Tom. 12. Council. Labbe. p. 295.
an. 1415. that a great Festival should be kept to his Memory ( Sub officio
duplici, Et ad modum majoris duplicis festi, are the words) as to the special
Patron and Protector of the English Nation (and it was just at the time when
Henry V. begun his War in France) undoubtedly believing, Hujus namque, ut
indubitanter credimus, interventu, nedum gentis Angligenae armata militia,
contra incursus hostiles bellorum tempore regitur, sed and Cleri pugna
militaris in sacrae pacis otio, sub tanti patroni suffragio celebriter
reboratur. Ibid.
that by his intercession the Arms of the Nation would fare the better in time
of War, and the Clergy, its spiritual Militia, in times of Peace. To this
confidence in S. George, the Legends at that time, and the Relations of Visions
betrayed them. But long before this, even very anciently, we find that his
story had been corrupted with Fables, insomuch that Pope Gelasius, in the first
Roman Council reckons the Passion of George, among Apocryphal Writings. Tom. 4.
Council. Labbe. p. 1265.
And the 4th. Canon of Nicephorus the Confessor, requires the 2 Martyrdomes of
George not to be admitted, but rejected. But though all be in the dark, Tom. 7.
Council. Lab. p. 1297.
and uncertain as to the Acts of this Saint (and therefore the reformed
Breviaries have no special Lessons for him, nor any mention is made of his
Acts, because as Ribadeneira well observes, Ribadeneira in vit. Georgii. p. 170.
there is no truth appears in those that are extant) though his feats of Arms
prove all fabulous; yet however, Arms his Body had; and if they wrought no
Miracles while he lived, they cannot fail to effect wonders now he is dead: one
of them they have got at Paris in the Church of S. Vincent, and the other they
keep at Colen, Ribaden. Ibid.
where (says the Writer) many and great Miracles are wrought by it (as good a
place for it to do feats in, as any it could have been lodged at) His Head is
shown in Rome at a Church called after his Name; and it is great pity that they
have not told us of some place, where we might have seen too, at least a part
of the Dragon's Tail. For my part, till I see some better account of the
History of this Saint's Life, I shall content my self with the mysteries and
Moral Lecture, the Legend has given us upon his Name* (which is another Passion
of George and Martyrdom of Greek) Georgius comes from Geos, Legend. aurea de S.
Georg.
which signifies the Earth, and Orge to Till, as if you should say, one that
tilleth the Earth, that is, his Flesh. S. Augustine says, that good ground is
in the Altitude of Mountains, in the temperament of Hills, in the Level-ground
of the Fields: The first is good for green Herbs, the second for Vines, the
third for Fruits. Even so S. George was high by despising inferior things, and
therefore he had the greenness of purity. He was Temperate by discretion, and
therefore he had the Wine of inward jucundity. He was plain by humility, and
therefore brought forth the Fruits of good Works. Or thus, Georgius comes from
Gerar, that is Holy, and Gion, that is Sand, as if you should say, Holy Sand:
for he was Sand, because ponderous, by the gravity of his manners, and small by
humility, and dry (by abstinence) from carnal pleasure. Or else thus, Georgius
comes from Gerar, i. e. Holy, and Gion, which signifies striving; as much as to
say, Holy Combatant, because he combated with the Dragon, and the Executioner.
Or, (Lastly,) Georgius is derived from Gero, that is, a Stranger, and Gir, i.
e. precious, and Us a Counselor. For he was a stranger in his contempt of the
World, precious in his Crown of Martyrdom, and a Counselor in the Preaching
of the Kingdom. Thus far the Golden Legend, Printed at Argentine, an. 1502.
which has a Hundred more such pleasant accounts of Names Such as, Fabianus,
quasi Fabricanus, sc. fabricans beatitudinem supernam. S. Vincentius, quasi
vitium incendens. S. Gregorius, qu. Egrogorius, ab Egregius and Gore
praedicator. i. e. Egregius praedicator. S. Vitalis, qu. Vivens talis, sc.
qualis erat in cord. S. Euphemia, qu. bona femina, ab eu bonum and femina. S.
Francis was first called John, but after his name was changed to Franciscus, of
which one reason is, Quia ipse (...) se and per filios suos, multos servos
peccati and Diaboli debeat francos and liberos facere, etc.
, which because they were very edifying, they were brought after this into
Sermons; and the People were told that Vaspatian Festivale, fol. 99.
was named from hence, because he had a malady in his Nosthrils, and there
dropped out of his Nose Worms like Waspes. And the Sermon on the Day of
Pentecost begins thus. Ibid. fol. 43.
Good Men and Women, this Day is called Whitsunday, because the Holy Ghost
brought Wit and Wisdom into Christ's Disciples, and so by their Preaching
after into all Christendom. But enough of this.

Memoria de 7 Dormientibus.
Oration.
Breviar. sec. us. Sar. 27. Julii. and Missale Sarum an. 1554.
DEus qui gloriosos resurrectionis aeternae praecones septem dormientes
magnifice coronasti; praesta quaesumus, ut eorum precibus, resurrectionem
sanctam quae in eis mirabiliter praeostensa est, consequamur.

Per Dominum, etc.

The Memorial of the 7 Sleepers.
The Prayer.
O God, who did magnificently crown the 7 Sleepers, who proclaimed the
eternal resurrection; grant we beseech thee, that by their Prayers, we may
obtain that holy resurrection, which was wonderfully foreshown in them.

Through, etc.

NOTES.
To show the Reader, what great care the Heads of this Church had in those Days
of Men's Souls, how well they instructed them, and by what fine stories their
Devotions were then conducted; I cannot but translate the History of these 7
Sleepers, as I find it in the Salisbury Breviary in the forecited place: which
if it had been designed to entertain Youth, as the History of the Seven
Champions, it might have deserved a less severe censure; but this was read in
the Church to the People, as Chapters are out of the Bible, and divided into so
many Lessons, which take in English just as I find it.

1. Lesson.
Under the Reign of Decius the Emperor, when a grievous Persecution fell upon
the Christians, there were Seven Christians Citizens of Ephesus, whose Names
were Surius out of Metaphrastes, gives us but two of these names, viz. Denis
and John; the other five are, Maximilianus, Jamblicus, Martinus, Exacustadius
and Antoninus.
, Maximianus, Malchus, Martianus, Dionysius, Johannes, Serapion and
Constantine, who to avoid the fury of the Persecutors, hid themselves in a Cave
in Mount Celius; appointing Malchus Metaphrastes calls him Jamblicus.
, in the Habit of a Beggar, to buy them Victuals; in which Cave they slept for
many Ages.

2. Lesson.
At the end of Three Hundred Sixty two Years, in the Reign of the most
Christian Emperor Theodosius, Ribadeneira in their life, corrects this as a
mistake in Chronology, and makes it 177 Years.
there arose a detestable Heresy, that endeavored to root out the Faith of
the General Resurrection. These Saints then awaking, and thinking they had
slept only the space of one Night; they sent Malchus to the City, to buy
necessary Provisions for them; who seeing a Cross erected over the Gate of the
City, and all Men invoking the Name of God, began greatly to wonder; and when
he pulled out his Money, those that beheld it said, admiring, This young Man
has found a Treasure: and they brought him to the Proconsul of the City.

3 Lesson.
When the Proconsul inquired of him, where he found that Treasure, Malchus
falling at his Feet, said; I entreat you to tell me, where is Decius the
Emperor, for I and my Companions to avoid his Persecution, hid our selves in a
Cave of Mount Celius. Marinus the Bishop of the City, hearing this, said: Let
us go with him to the place; and coming to the Cave, they beheld the Servants
of God sitting, and their Faces were as fresh as a Rose. They adored them, and
sent for the Emperor, who when he was come, worshipped them and wept.
Whereupon they spoke thus to him: For thy sake our God has raised us up before
the Day of the Great Resurrection, that thou, without farther doubting,
might believe the Resurrection of the Dead. And when they had said thus,
they gave up the Ghost at God's bidding. Then the Emperor weeping, and kissing
their holy Relics, gathered together a great many Bishops, and others of the
Faithful, who made in the same place a worthy Memorial of them.

Thus far the Lessons.

Now though a great deal of this Stuff is to be met with in Greg. Turonensis,
de gloria Martyrum; yet if any have a mind to see the ground of the Prayer, and
this Legend of the Seven Sleepers confuted, he need go no farther, than to
Baronius his Notes upon the Roman Martyrologie, July 27. Where he shows, that
there was no Heresy about the Resurrection in the Days of Theodosius jun. And
that it was no Confirmation of the Resurrection, to say that these Seven were
raised from a long sleep, and yet were not truly dead; besides that none of the
Writers that lived in that Age, mention any such wonder, which it is no ways
likely they could have been ignorant of, if it had been true.

Memoria S. Davidis Episcopi and Confessoris.
Oration.
Brev. Sarum. 1 Martii.
DEus, qui B. Confessorem tuum atque pontificem (sc. Davidem) angelo nunciante,
trignita annis antequam nasceretur praedixisti; tribue nobis quaesumus, ut
cujus festivitatem colimus, ejus intercessione ad aeterna gaudia perveniamus.

Per Dominum, etc.

The Memorial of St. David Bishop and Confessor.
The Prayer.
O God, who by an Angel did foretell the Nativity of thy Bl. Confessor and
Bishop (S. David) thirty years before he was born; Grant to us, we beseech
thee, that we who celebrate his Festival, may by his intercession attain to
joys everlasting.

By our Lord, etc.

NOTES.
This Prayer is plainly grounded upon the story of S. David's Life; a short
account of which we have in the Salisbury Breviary: which we shall comment upon
out of Mr. Cressy, and Capgrave, who has given it more largely, with a great
many Wonders, which the Breviary pretermits. The Sum of the Lessons in the
Breviary is as follows.

Lesson 1, and 2.
S. Patrick returning from Rome into his Native Country of Brittany, he came
into a Valley called Rosina [which place, Colgan. 1 Mart. p. 425.
says his Life in Colganus, he beheld as fit for him to serve God, and to abide
in] To whom an Angel appearing, said to him; O Patrick, God has not provided
this Seat for thee, but for one that is not yet born, but shall be born 30
Years hence; so the Vale of Rosina was left by him for S. David not yet born,
as it was told him by the Angel. [ Capgrave tells us, that when S. Patrick
heard this Message he was grieved and angry, that God should choose and prefer
one not yet born, before himself, who had served him from his Infancy; and in a
peevish humor he was preparing to fly away and forsake Christ: but an Angel
was sent a second time to him, to smooth and flatter him Vt illum verbis
familiaribus blandiretur.
, and (just as crying Children are stilled with the sight of some fine gayes)
the Angel said, Rejoice O Patrick, for the Lord has sent me to thee, to show
thee all the Island of Ireland, and thou shall be an Apostle of all that
Country, etc. And when he had said this, lifting up his eyes from the place in
which he was (which was a great Valley in which was a Stone upon which he stood
Called Sessio S. Patricii, says his Life in Colganus.
,) he beheld all the Island. Which was a pretty Miracle, out of a Valley to
show him a whole Country, unless the Stone swelled into a great Mountain under
him, as we shall hear the place did, where S. David once preached.]

Lesson 3, and 4.
S. David before he was born, even while he was yet in his Mothers Womb, was
fore-shown by God how great a Preacher he should be: for when a certain Master
named Gildas, (sc. Albanius) was Preaching to the People, and the Mother of S.
David, great with Child, entered the Church; Gildas of a sudden held his peace,
and presumed not to Preach any farther. Who when he was asked by the People,
why he left off Preaching and was silent; he answered; that he could have
discoursed to them in common talk, but could not Preach; because that Woman,
which now by entreaty went out of the Church, came in by a Heavenly warning,
while I declared to you the Word of God, to demonstrate (by my being put to
silence) the excellency of her offspring. [This passage of Gildas his being
dumb, is farther explained by Colganus and Capgrave; how that when he could not
go on in his Preaching, he desired all the People to go out of the Church,
Colganus ut supra. Capgrave in vita Gildae Confessor.
and he remain within, and try whether then he could go on: The People did so,
but she alone lay hid within the Church, out of a desire to hear the Word of
God, or being detained by God for the showing the Miracle. But when the Man of
God endeavored to Preach, he could still do nothing; so that being amazed at
the Miracle, he cried out, saying: If there be any one that lies hid in the
Church, I adjure thee by God, that thou show thy self quickly to me. Then she
answered, Behold here I lie hid. Then said he, Do thou stand without Doors, and
let the People return into the Church; which being done, the impediment of his
Tongue was loosed, and he Preached as he was wont: and when upon his
questioning her, she confessed her self to be with Child; he by this sign
understood and foretold that the Child should be so eminent in Sanctity, that
none in those Parts should be comparable to him. Thus by childish and unlikely
circumstances, they make Prophecies as ridiculous, as they do their Miracles;
they intended some likeness in Gildas his dumbness, to that of the Father of
John the Baptist, as I conjecture: but it would have been a strange sign of his
Son's future Devotion, if Zacharias should have been able to talk of any affair
with his Neighbors, but should not have been able to speak at all, when he
came to say his Prayers; methinks they should have either made Gildas wholly
dumb, or raised his Oratory in Preaching above his common pitch, at the
Prefence of him that was to be so great a Preacher; especially since not being
able to go on in a Sermon, when a Man can otherwise speak, may be imputable to
other causes than a Divine hinderance. But the Monks will play at small Games,
rather than their invention shall hold out. Of which methinks we have a
remarkable instance in the story of S. Cuthbert, of whom Capgrave says,
Capgrave vit. S. Cuthbert. f. 69.
that when he was a Boy, he walked out with the Bishop that educated him, to
see his Cattle in the Field; and as he came by a Cow ready to Calve, Cuthbert
attentively beheld her and smiled; the Bishop asked the cause of it, and he
told him, I see a wonderful thing, for since this Cow is altogether black, it is
strange what hidden cause in Nature should prevail to conceive a Calf so
unlike, which seems to be of a reddish color with a white Star in its
Forehead: presently after the Cow calved, and brought forth such a Calf as the
Boy had foretold. This Prediction, as worthy a one as it was, I suppose was
intended, to be a sign too of Cuthbert's eminent future sanctity, contrary to
what might have been expected, considering, as we are told just before, that he
was begot on a deflowred Virgin.] But to go on with S. David.

Lesson 5.
When the Days wherein he should be born, according to the Angel's Prediction,
were fulfilled, S. David sprung from a generous Stock, was the Son of a Prince
of the Province of Leretica (it should be Ceretica) When he was born, Divine
Miracles were not wanting. [This is a very fair account of S. David, which the
Breviary gives; and any one that reads it alone, would conclude that he was the
Son of a Prince lawfully begotten. But Mr. Cressy has commented scurvily upon
this Passage. A Prince of the Region called Ceretica, Chapter Hist. l. 10. cap. 8.
traveling to Demetia, met by the way a Religious Virgin called Nonnita, of
great beauty, which he lusting after, by violence deflowred her: Hereby she
conceived a Son (which was this David) and neither before nor after ever had
knowledge of any Man; but persevering in chastity, both of Body and Mind, and
sustaining her self only with Bread and Water from the time of her Conception,
she led a most holy Life. I doubt all the commendations of the after abstinence
and chastity of the Mother, which Mr. Cr. gives, will not make an amends to the
Welch-men, whose great Patron S. David is, for telling them, what either they
never knew before, or had willingly, I presume, forgotten, that S. David was a
Bastard. Capgrave indeed has made some amends, by Miracles that concerned the
Mother: for in the place where she was deflowred, Capgr. vit. S. David, f. 83.
and at the very time of her conception, 2 great Stones, says he, appeared,
which were never seen before, the one at her Head, and the other at her Feet;
(though he leaves us to guess what they signified) and when she was in Labor
Thus they tell us that the Mother of S. Senanus, when she was in Travel held a
piece of dry Wood in her hand, which presently waxed green, and flourished with
leaves, and became a Tree which is seen at this day; (when the Wood of the
Altar S. Brigid touched waxed green, it was a sign (we heard) of her Virginity;
I wonder what this greenness of Wood upon a Mothers touching it will signify.)
Colgan. in supplement. vit. S. Senani. nu. 6.
, she leaned with her Hands upon a Stone which lay by her, which shows the
Print of her hands, as if it had been made in Wax, and by being divided in the
middle, the Stone did as it were condole with her in her Pangs: as certainly
true, as that of S. Aengussius, who when he had chopped off his left hand as he
was cleaving Wood, the Birds came flocking about him with a great and loud
noise, Colganus vit. S. Aengus. p. 580.
to testify their condoling the mishap that had befallen him, though they need
not have been so much concerned, for it was but taking his hand, and clapping
it on to the Wrest again, and he was perfectly cured without more to do.]

Lesson 6.
When he was Baptized by Elveus (called Relveus by Cambrensis) Bishop of
Menevia, as he returned out of Ireland, and then came just into the Port called
Gleys; at his Baptism a Fountain of clear Water flowed out, which was never
seen before. [Here is a material doubt, how this Relvius or Elvius, who by
Cambrensis, the Breviary and Anglican Martyrology is said to be the Bishop of
Menevia, could be so, when none sat in that Seat before S. David, and this
Bishop baptized him? Alford gives 2 Answers to this doubt (though Mr. Cressy
his Transcriber mention but one of them) the first is very ingenuous; Alford
Annal. Eccl. Britan. ad an. 462.
that there are many things that occur in the Lives of the Saints, which
deservedly stumble the Reader; for the Writers of those Lives, were so wholly
taken up in rehearsing their virtues and miracles, that they were little
sollicitous about other things that pertained to History ( i.e. they were more
concerned to set down their own fabulous inventions, than to take care how they
agreed with the truth of things) his second answer is, that instead of Relveus
of Menevia, we ought to read Aelbeus of Mumenia, because he finds a Bishop
there of that Name: but cites not one Author, who writes this story, that
agrees with him, and so may as fairly be rejected as proposed.]

Lesson 7.
A certain old Man blind from his Childhood, having a defect in his Nose,
which did not a little deform his Face, washed the Child at the Fountain; whom
as he held in his Lap, understanding the sanctity of the Infant, he took the
Water in which he was three times dipped, and therewith sprinkled his face
three times, and presently he wonderfully obtained the sight of his eyes, and
the intireness of his Face. [Such another wonderful cure of eyes, Capgrave
relates, he wrought upon his Master Paulens (or Paulinus) who through too much
grief having lost his sight, he desired every one of his Scholars to look into
his Eyes, and bless them: all the rest did so, but in vain; but when S. David
touched and blessed them, he recovered his Eyes: by the same token that he
desired to be excused from looking into them, for such was his excessive
modesty, that for 10 Years space he never once had the confidence to look him
in the Face. Yet so powerful was his blessing, that, coming to the Town of
Bath, Capgrave in ejus vit. fol. 83.
he bestowed by his Benediction a perpetual heat upon those Waters there,
making them fit to bath in, which before were mortiferous.

Lesson 8, and 9.
Thus the Child grew, being full of the Holy Ghost; and being addicted to the
study of Learning, by the quickness of his sharp wit he made proficiency,
beyond all his equals in age: for he was so replenisht with grace, that his
School-fellows testified, they often saw a white Dove So the Disciples of S.
Ambrose of Sena, affirmed that they saw a Dove at his ears as he preached,
Act. Sanct. 20. Mart. p. 192. as if they had a mind to justify the Fable of
Mahomet's Pidgeon.
with a Golden Bill, as it were teaching him. His merits thus increasing, the
Saint being brought into Holy Orders, at last he was raised to the dignity of a
Bishop; and when he was almost an Hundred Forty seven Years old, after he had
received the Body and Blood of Christ, after the Christian manner, he rendered
his most holy soul to his Creator.

[This story of the Dove is told us with an admirable addition in Colganus,
Colganus in vit. David. p. 426.
how that his School-fellows saw the Dove often teaching him, and (which is
more) singing Hymns with Him. But there are a great many other remarkable
passages of S. David's Life, which the Breviary has overpassed, some of which
it may not be amiss here to insert. Such is that usage of S. David, which
Capgrave mentions, Capgrav^, ut supra fol. 84.
that presently after Mattens he went into cold Water, and by staying therein a
good while, he tamed the heat of his Flesh. A common practice I find this was
with the Irish Saints. S. Scutinus, we are told, when at any time he found any
lustful motions within him, Colganus vit. S. Scutin. page 9. sec. 4, 5.
he used to leap into a Tub of cold Water, and there continue in Prayer, till
he had almost lost all vital sense; but he was miraculously rewarded; for he
could tread water so well, that he was often seen to walk upon the Sea, without
any Vessel to carry him. S. Aengussius did the same, Idem. p. 579.
standing in cold Water, till he had repeated a third part of the Psalms: S.
Cuanna out-did him, Idem. in vit. S. Cuanna. p. 250.
who by Night used to go into a Fountain of cold Water, and there sing the
Psalter from the beginning to the end; but S. Fechinus had the advantage of
them all, who using this Cold-water Penance, Colganus vit. S. Fechini 20
Januar. p. 132. n. 17.
his Butler Pastolius had one time a mind to try it with him, but as soon as
his Body touched the Water, he began to shiver and his Teeth to chatter; but
upon his approaching nearer to Fechinus, and joining in Devotion with him, by
virtue of their fervent prayer, the Cold water was so intensly heated, that
Pastolius not being able to endure it, was fain in have to leave the Bath; whom
the Man of God charged, for the avoiding of vainglory, that he should not
discover it to any one whilst the Saint lived: (and he might tell what Lies he
pleased of him, wherein he was only a Witness, after he was dead.) But to
return to S. David. The most famed Miracle, (related by Colganus, Capgrave, and
Mr. Cressy) is that which happened at a Synod in Wales, met about the Pelagian
Heresy, where there was an Assembly of 118 Bishop; (I wonder where their Sees
were in Brittany) and an innumerable Multitude of Abbots and Clergymen, Kings,
Princes and People (says the Life in Colganus) so that they seemed to cover all
the Land; where they were greatly concerned, lest by reason of the Multitude,
which neither Voice nor Trumpet (in an ordinary way) seemed capable of reaching
all their ears, the People not hearing the Sermon (which was the way according
to this account of determining the Controversy) might still remain in Heresy.
It was therefore agreed, that raising a heap of Garments on high, one standing
upon them should begin to Preach, and whosoever obtained the grace to be heard
by all the People, ( Capgrave says, to be heard by all equally) he should be
all their Metropolitan and Patriarch. Then one of the Bishops began to Preach,
but was scarce heard by those that stood next him, by reason of the Tumult of
the People; and so it fared with a great many more; at last they agree to send
for S. David to preach at the Synod, who twice or thrice humbly refusing; at
length he consented to go thither, but not designing to Preach, only he told
them he would give them some assistance in Prayer. But when he came thither,
they prevailed with him to Preach; and commanding a Child which attended him,
and had been lately restored to life by him, to spread his Handkerchief under
his Feet, standing upon it, Sudarium suum.
he began (says Mr. Cressy) to expound the Gospel and the Law to the Auditory:
All the while that his Oration continued, a Snow-white Dove, descending from
Heaven, sat upon his shoulders; and moreover the Earth on which he stood,
raised it self under him, till it became a Hill, so that he was seen by all,
and his voice like a Trumpet was equally heard by all, both near and afar off;
on the Top of which Hill a Church was afterward built, which remains to this
day. By this Sermon he confounded Heresy, and established the Orthodox Faith,
and by the consent of all, was made the Archbishop of all Brittany. Thus far
the story. Which I think, as to this last part, needs not any comment to
proclaim it to be a Fable; that a Hill should here be miraculously raised, only
to serve S. David for a Pulpit: for though I deny not this to be a good
substantial Miracle, yet methinks a Man of Mr. Cressy's wit (if the rest had
none) should have found out a fitter place for it. Had S. David been to preach
upon Salisbury Plains, there might have been more reason for it; but it is not
easy to imagine how the wit of Man could have hit upon a more pleasant
absurdity, than to put God Almighty to the expense of a Miracle, for the making
up the want of a Hill in Wales.

After S. David's death, we are told by Capgrave; that a great Plague happening
in England, Capgr. ubi supra, fol. 85.
a Bishop of Menevia (or S. David's) brought with him the Arm of S. David
(after a fruitless trial of other Relics) which being washed in Water, the
Water appeared as if it were gilded with fat, and a Golden Cross upon it,
which he causing the People to drink, the Mortality presently ceased.

He also relates, that a Welch-man (together with an Almain) being taken
Prisoner by the Saracens, Capgr. Ibid.
and bound with an Iron-Chain, he invoked the Saint Day and Night in the words
of his Countrey-Language, Dewi wareth: i. e. David help; and he was suddenly
restored to his Country: His Fellow-Prisoner, remembering how the Welch-man
often repeated the words Dewi wareth, he resolved to say so too, though he
understood nothing of their meaning: He did so, and immediately he also was
snatched away from that place, and brought home, though how he was carried, he
could give no account. For producing which example, I expect the Romanists
thanks, since it is so very pat an Instance, to prove the Virtue of Prayers in
an unknown Tongue.

Ad undecim Millia Virginum.
Antiphona.

Horae sec. us. Sarum.
O Vos undena millia,
Puellae gloriosae,
Virginitatis Lilia
Martyriique rosae;
In vita me defendite
Praebendo mihi juvamen;
In morte vos ostendite
Supernum ferendo solamen.
Verse. Orate pro nobis Sponsae Dei Electae.

Resp. Ut ad vestrum confortium valeamus pervenire.

Oremus.

O Dulcissime Domine Jesu Christ, qui es Sponsus Virginum, praemium Martyrum,
and piissimus exauditor omnium Sanctorum tuorum; precibus and meritis
gloriosissimarum sponsarum tuarum, sanctissimae Vrsulae, sociarumque suarum
Virginum and Martyrum, concedere digneris mihi and omnibus eas venerantibus,
singulorum suorum peccatorum veniam, in adversis expedientem protectionem, in
prosperis congruam directionem, and gratiam conformandi ad tuam voluntatem;
inque fine vitae illarum visibilem consolationem, and cum illis transitum
securum ad gloriam sempiternam.

Qui tecum, etc.

Pater Noster. Ave Maria.

Oration.

Breviar. Romans reform. 21 October.
DA nobis, quaesumus Domine Deus noster, sanctarum Virginum and Martyrum tuarum
Vrsulae and Sociarum ejus palmas incessabili devotione venerari, ut quas digna
mente non possumus celebrare, humilibus saltem frequentemus obsequiis.

Per Dominum, etc.

Hortul. animae sec. us. antiq. Eccles. Roman.
O Praeclarae vos Puellae,
Nunc implete meum velle;
Et dum mortis venit hora
Subvenite sine mora.
In tam gravi tempestate
Me precantem defensate
A Daemonum injuria.
Verse. Pia Matter Vrsula, Sponsa Christi decora,

Resp. Cum tuis sodalibus semper pro nobis ora.

Oremus.

DEus, qui affluentissimae bonitatis tuae prudentia, Beatissimam Vrsulam cum
undecim millibus Virginum, triumpho Martyrii coronare dignatus es; concede
propitius, ut earum precibus ac meritis, cum ipsis in aeterna beatitudine
collocari mereamur.

Per Dominum.

To the Eleven Thousand Virgins.
ELeven Thousand Maids!
O glorious Company!
Ye fairest Lillies of Virginity,
Roses of Martyrdom; in life defend me,
And at my Death Celestial
Comforts send me.
Verse. Pray for us ye Elect Spouses of God.

Ans. That we may be able to come to your Society.

Let us Pray.

O Most sweet Lord Jesus Christ, who art the Spouse of Virgins, the reward of
Martyrs, and the most merciful Hearer of all thy Saints; by the Prayers and
Merits of thy most glorious Spouses, the most holy Ursula, and her Companions,
Virgins and Martyrs, be pleased to grant unto me and to all those that venerate
them, the pardon of all their sins; expedient protection in adversity,
convenient direction in prosperity, and grace to conform to thy will; and when
life is ended, their visible consolation, and a secure passage with them to
Eternal Glory.

Who lives, etc.

Our Father. Hail Mary.

A Prayer.

Grant unto us, we beseech thee, O Lord our God, that we may with uncessant
Devotion venerate the Palms (victory) of thy holy Virgins and Martyrs, Ursula
and her Companions; that so, whom we cannot celebrate with a worthy mind, we
may at least visit them often with humble observance.

Through our Lord, etc.

O Ye ever famous Maids,
To my wishes say no Nay,
When I enter Death's black shades,
Succor me without delay.
In that Tempests sad Alarm
Let no Devils do me harm.
Verse. Christ's lovely Spouse, blessed Martyr Ursula,

Ans. With thy Companions ever for us pray.

Let us pray.

O God, who in the wisdom of thine abundant goodness did vouchsafe to Crown
Bl. Ursula, and the Eleven Thousand Virgins with the triumph of Martyrdom;
mercifully grant that by their Prayers and Merits, we may merit a place with
them in Eternal felicity.

Through our Lord, etc.

NOTES.
IT was no doubt a very comfortable time in the Roman Church, when the
Inventions of the Monks could never run on so fast, in wondrous stories; but
the Faith and Devotion of the People could keep pace with them, nay rather run
before them: but the Later Ages have unluckily been given to examine matters
more than before, and by scrupling implicit faith, and bogling at
contradictions, have put the Writers of that Church to a great deal of
troublesome work; in defending impossible stories, and in setting a good Gloss
upon Fables, and countenancing long practiced Devotions, which in civility to
their Forefathers, they must not acknowledge to be either absurd or impious,
though they are really so. We have found it so in many foregoing instances; and
this of the Eleven Thousand Virgins is a very remarkable one. For if you call
them to an account about this matter, you will find little agreement among their
Authors, which way to make it look like a probable story; though all of them
would fain hold the Conclusion, and have it believed to be true. Harpsfield
complains sadly, That the injury of Men and Times, Harpsfi ld. Hist. Eccl.
Anglic. p. 35.
has deprived us of the accurate and exact knowledge of this matter, as well as
of many other things, instead of which, certain idle People, abusing their
leisure shamefully, and the too forward credulity of the Age they lived in (an
excellent character of the former Monks) have obtruded mere Fables, and those
too perfectly disagreeing one from another; and have forced us that live so
many Ages after, to follow not undoubted truth, but slender conjectures. And
yet (see the power of a strong faith above reason!) the same Author there
breaks out into this expression. Would to God that the History of Vrsula were
so certain and free from difficulties, as I easily and certainly persuade my
self, that she and her Companions are blessed Martyrs in Heaven. If the History
of them be not certain, then there is nothing left, but Tradition to ground his
certainty of Persuasion upon, that they were at all in being, or that they were
Martyrs; and if he is forced to rely upon Tradition for this which is the main
thing, why not for the rest too, without taking the needless pains of
conjecturing uncertainly about them? he was bound to it in civility, unless the
story that Tradition tells, prove impossible; and his not following it
throughout, argues that he thought it so: but any one instance of that nature
does our work; for a witness loses his credit in the whole, when he would
obtrude an absurd or impossible thing upon our faith. Whether the Oral
Tradition concerning these Virgins does not so, I shall examine afterward:
First beginning with the Historical account out of Authors, because this way of
proof must needs be more satisfying to any inquisitive Person.

Baronius tells us, that he took a great deal of pains to find out the truth of
their story, Baron. not. in Romans Martyrol. 21 October.
turning over the Books of the Vatican; and yet that whole Library did not
afford him a better Author to pitch upon, than our trusty Geoffrey of Monmouth:
for which he makes this Apology in his Annals; Baron. Annal. ad an. 383.
That though this Author has many fabulous stories, so that he must be read
with great care, yet being forced to sit as an Arbitrator, among the refuse of
Apocryphal Writers, he thought fit to choose the most probable story, and
therefore readily embraced the Relation of Geoffrey, because it was supported
by the most likely conjectures: but, says he, the other Acts of these Virgins
that are published, must appear to any prudent Man to be stuffed with abundance of
Fables. Baronius his account then out of Geoffrey, is this in short.

When Maximus the Tyrant in his Invasion of Gaul, had expelled the Inhabitants
of Armorica, he invites a Colony over thither of British Soldiers, and
settles them there, and thence it was called Little-Brittany: And now the next
care was, to get Wives for them in their own Country. Vrsula the Daughter of
Dionotus Prince of Cornwall, is designed for Conanus their Chief Leader, and
she and her 11000 Virgin-Companions were shipped at London, though unwillingly,
upon this design to go for Armorica: but a cruel Tempest drove them to the
German shore; where falling into a Navy of Pirates, under the command of Melga
a Pirate of the Picts, and Gaunus of the Hunns, they consulted to offer
violence to their Chastity; but by the persuasion of Vrsula, they chose all
with a Christian constancy to dye, rather than be deflowred, and so were all
barbarously slain together; and he fixes the time of this cruelty, An. Dom. 383.

This account Mr. Cressy can by no means allow, and gives these Reasons: (or
his Friend Alford for him.) Because Maximus his short Reign, Chapter Hist. l. 9.
cap. 20.
after his passing into Gaul, and his continual employments in War, could not
permit him to settle Colonies in Armorica, whither himself never went. Besides
the French Historians refer the erecting of a Principality of Britains in
Armorica to a much Later Date, when Meroveus was King of the Francks, which was
An. 448. As also because Dionotus the Father of Vrsula, is acknowledged by our
best Historians, to have lived long after the Emperor Gratianus his time, who
was slain by Maximus; so that Vrsula could not be alive, much less marriageable
in those days: neither lastly, is there any mention among Historians, of Hunns
so early infesting Germany, or exercising Piracy on the River Rhene, or the
Western Ocean. Indeed these Objections against Baronius, seem very hard to be
answered; and so we are fairly quit of him without more ado. Let us now see
what Mr. Cr. gives us in the room of it. He agrees with Baronius in the main
substance of the History; only differs from him in the following particulars.
He has placed their slaughter in the Year 453. when Attila King of the Hunns
wasted Italy, and the Western Regions: he makes it to happen in the days of
Maximus the Tyrant, but not of him who slew the Emperor Gratianus, but of that
Maximus who invaded the Empire, and succeeded Valentinian, and appointed Avitus
to oppose those Barbarous People. He has joined together two occasions, why
this numerous Company of Virgins departed out of their Country: the one was,
the forenamed design of Marrying their own Countrymen in Armorica, (or Little
Brittany) the other occasion was, the Cruelty exercised upon the Brittans by
the Saxons, who were first called in by Vortigern to assist the Brittans
against the Picts, but after making Peace with them, turned their Arms against
their Benefactors, and exercised all manner of cruelties upon them, and made
many fly the Land, among whom he supposes these 11000 Virgins. A very pretty
conjecture! but yet not strong enough to plead for the truth of their story,
nor to justify the Devotions of the Church to them. For as to the pretended
cause of their Voyage, from their intended Marriage in Armorica; their own
Harpsfield has plainly and honestly confessed, That he should easily acquiesce
in this Narration, but that they who are of this Opinion, bring no certain and
approved Author that testifies about this Marriage; Harpsf. Hist Angl. Eccles.
p. 35.
and, says he, though I my self have labored never so, I could never yet light
upon any, that has any testimony of Antiquity and fidelity; only I have seen an
Anonymous Brittan, translated by Geoffrey into Latin, that says some such
thing; but he is a man, who as in many other things, so in this Narration
concerning the affairs of Maximus, is guilty of more than one lie. [From
whence, by the way, one may conclude that the Testimony cited by some out of
Sigebert, Surius, and the old Romans Breviary.
concerning that intended Marriage, was not looked upon by him as an Authentic
Authority, but as an Interpolation Bishop Usher calls the Author of that
account of Vrsula, Sigebertini Chronici interpolator. (de Primord. Eccl. Br. p.
624, 631.) And he had great reason to say so; for in Miraus his Edition of
Sigebert, Antwerp. an. 1608. that story Surius mentions out of him, is in a
different character from the rest; of which Miraus gives this account, in his
Preface to the Reader: That what is so Printed in a small character, was either
not in the Codex Gemblacensis (which he calls the most ancient) or if it were,
was added by a Later hand; Qua in sunt, says he, quae a racematoribus plerunque
indoctis adjecta, aut ^x nugis ac quisquiliis Galfridi Monumetensis seu
Asaphensis, inspersa leguntur. And so it is expressly said in H. Steven's
Edition of Sigebert, an. 1513. Sigeberti Gemblacensis Chronicon, ab an. 381. ad
an. 1113. Cum insertionibus ex historia Galfridi and additionibus Roberti
Abbatis Montis, etc.
, especially since I find him, more than once upon other occasions, citing
Sigebert's Chronicon.] But Harpsfield (in the same place) has hit upon another
worse Objection, against the Marriage story, when he adds; Neque sane adhuc
video justam Martyrii in superiore narratione causam. He does not see in the
foregoing narration any just cause of Martyrdom: (and yet you know, the thing
that Church celebrates them for, is for their being Martyrs.) He was so wise,
as not to think that a Massacre merely made a Martyrdom, for then he knew that
Heretics (in his sense) might boast of numbers beyond Eleven Thousand, and
that one in his time at Paris, would then have out-vied Colen: and all the
account that the story he opposes gave farther, was only, that these
slaughtered Persons were Virgins; but that could not make them Martyrs neither,
because it will not alone make any one a Christian; and in this case, their
Virginity was the less considerable also, because they intended no longer to be
famed for that sort of Chastity, than till they could get good Husbands, which
they were now in Quest after. But Mr. Cr. seems to rely more upon the story of
the Saxons barbarous usage, which first gave occasion for the flight of these
Virgins, and after to the slaughter of them by the Hunns. But, whatsoever he
may imagine in his performance, I think he has no ways assoyled the Objections
that lie against this account too. For is it credible, that what is pretended
to be acted in the middle of an Age, should not so much as be mentioned by one
who lived in that very Age, and wrote about this very matter, concerning the
destruction of the Brittans by the Saxons, at the end of it? I mean by Gildas?
no nor afterward taken notice of by Beda in his History? I see indeed Mr. Cr.
endeavors to apologize for this omission, but so pitiful are the excuses he
makes, that I wonder he had the confidence to insert them. As for Gildas, he
says, his design being to bewail the general destruction of the British state,
Gh. Hist l. 9. cap. 22.
and to declare the horrible crimes that provoked Almighty God, to give them up
to the fury of a barbarous People; no wonder if he did not in so short a
narration, involve occurrents happening abroad. Not every occurrent, I grant,
that happened abroad; but such as were remarkably destructive, one would think
he might; especially such a one as this was, being a story, such as no Age, I
think, can parallel, either for the number of Virgins slain (Eleven Thousand in
one Day and Place) or for the barbarous fury of those that slew them (which he
confesses was one part of Gildas his design Tragically to express) nor any
particular occurrent that gave such a deadly blow to the British state; and he
must sure be in great have, and affect strange Brevity, that could not afford
the place of one Line in his Book for such a story, which though acted abroad,
yet not at that distance, but that the report of it would quickly arrive, and
ring aloud in the ears of those, that were so much concerned in it at home. But
Mr. Cr. would persuade us, that Gildas has general expressions that seem to
point at their story, Chapter Hist. l. 9. c. 20.
and he pretends to give you their express words that speak thus. Very many
passed over Sea into Foreign Countries, with grievous howlings and lamentation,
and in their Voyage by Sea, they jointly with mournful voices, repeated those
sad words of the Psalmist, Thou have, O Lord, given us up as Sheep to be
devoured, and have dispersed us among the Nations. This, says Mr. Cr. seems to
be a description most proper to the condition of the weaker Sex (he thought
that it could not be so proper for Men to run away and cry) which no doubt by
the provident care of their Parents and Friends, was in the first place secured
from the violence of their Barbarous Enemies; and those words, Thou have
dispersed us among the Nations, do most fitly suit to these Virgin-Martyrs,
whose sacred Relics have been dispersed among all the Nations of Christendom.

Excellently guessed! and well translated, by him that pretends to give us his
express words! as any one will see, when I give you Gildas his words in his own
Language, with a little more, which goes before that which he has cited. Thus
then Gildas. Itaque nonnulli miserarum reliquiarum So Beda, Lib. 1. Hist.
Eccles. cap. 15. Itaque nonnulli de miserandis reliquiis in montibus
comprehensi, acervatim jugulabantur. Alii fame confecti procedentes, manus
hostibus dabant, pro accipiendis alimentorum subsidiis, aternum subituri
servitium. Alii transmarinas regiones dolentes petebant: alii perstantes in
patria trepidi pauperem vitam in montibus, silvis, vel rupibus ardun, suspecta
semper mente agebant.
in montibus deprehensi (quo nimirum fugerant) acervatim jugulabantur: alii
fame confecti accedentes manus hostibus dabant, in aeternum servituri; si tamen
continuo non trucidarentur, quod altissimae gratiae stabat loco: alii
transmarinas petebant regiones, cum ululatu magno; ceu celeusmatis vice, hoc
modo sub velorum sinibus cantantes; Dedisti nos tanquam oves escarum, and in
gentibus dispersisti nos: alii montanis collibus, minacibus praeruptis,
vallatis densissimis saltibus, marinisque rupibus, vitam suspecta semper mente
credentes, in patria licet trepidi perstabant. These words of Gildas, follow
after the sad story he had told, concerning the destruction which the Saxons
made, depopulating Cities and Fields, destroying Priest and People with Fire
and Sword, whose Bodies lay mangled and unburied, a prey for Beasts and Birds.
Then, says he, of the miserable remnant (mark that) some being caught in the
Mountains (whither they fled) were slain on heaps, others went into Foreign
Regions, etc. I never thought before, that when one is dividing a remnant of
People, and describing the several miseries of them so divided, that Nonnulli
or alii, could be translated very many; rather of the two it might be Englisht
some few: but the other translation was necessary for his purpose, of Eleven
Thousand Virgins going away at once in one company. It was well guessed too, to
ascribe their voyage to the provident care of their Parents and Friends to
secure them in the first place, from the violence of their Barbarous Enemies,
by this sending them away: when Gildas rather, describes a company of People,
scattered, and at their wits end, not knowing which way to shift for their own
Lives. Besides, I observe another passage in Gildas, which, if you could
suppose a Body of so many Thousand Virgins gathered together, and by reason of
the feebleness of their Sex fit to be made a Sacrifice, yet implies, that it
was scarce possible to find so many, fit to make Martyrs of at that time: For
when he there tells us, of the Bodies of abundance of People, lying mangled and
unburied; he presently adds his doubt, that there were but a few pious Souls
among them fit to go to Heaven: (there was at that time such a horrid
corruption of manners among the Brittans, even worse than that of their Enemies
that butchered them.) Si^tamen multae inventae sunt (sc. sanctae animae) quae
ad ardua coeli, id temporis, a sanctis Angelis veherentur, etc. If there could
be found any number of holy Souls at that time, that were fit to be carried up
to Heaven by holy Angels: For, says he, Ita degeneraverat tunc vinea illa olim
bona, in amaritudinem; ut raro, secundum prophetam, videretur quasi post tergum
vindemiatorum aut messorum, racemus aut spica. i. e. The Vineyard that was once
good, was then so degenerate, that as the Prophet speaks, after the
Grape-gatherer or Mower, could scarce be found a Cluster, or an Ear of Corn.
But Eleven Thousand, would have been a pretty Cluster of Virgins. Wherefore I
conclude that Gildas in his story, never dreamt of any thing like such a number
of Virgin-Martyrs. I hope Mr. Cr. does not think there lies any strength in
those words he added, that when they mournfully cried out, Thou have dispersed
us among the Nations, this most fitly suits these Martyrs, whose Relics have
been dispersed all over Christendom. For why should he persuade us, that they
differed so much from other Saints, and sorrowfully pronounced that, which S.
Francis so much triumphed in? Who being cast into Prison by the Perusians, he
was so full of joy, Jac. de Vorag. Legend. de S. Franc.
that his Fellow Prisoners were offended at it; to whom he gave this account,
Ideo me exultare noveritis, quia adhuc Sanctus per totum seculum adorabor: He
leapt for joy, because after all this he should be worshipped for a Saint all
over the World Lest any should deny S. Francis to be the Author of this saying,
as not thinking Jac. de Voragine to be a competent witness; let the Reader take
notice, that the same is put among S. Francis his Prophecies, who is said to
speak thus to his Fellow Prisoners, who were offended at his pleasantness. Etsi
vestrae condoleam miseriae, magis tamen de propria exultandum est felicitate.
Humile quid de me cogitatis. Quem modo in carcere vinclu videtis adstrictum,
per totum mundum posthac agnoscite respiciendum. Prophetia 4. inter opusc. S.
Francis. p. 81. edit. Paris. an. 1641. per Joh. de la Hay.
; Why should we not believe that they had the spirit of S. Francis in them
while they lived, and rejoiced in the thoughts of that which they prophetically
foretold? especially when their stories tell us, that they are so hugely
pleased to have their Relics dispersed and venerated now they are dead? Two
of their Bodies that were dug up at Colen, Caesarii Dialog. did. 8. c. 85.
in Biblioth. patrum Cisterc. edit. an. 1662.
and translated to an Abbey in Thuringia, removed themselves back again to
Colen, because their Relics were in the other place neglected. And when a
Sister had a mind to some of their Relics, and pressed with her Knee upon a
great Stone that lay upon one of their Graves, Id. Ibid. c. 87.
the Stone, that six Men could scarce stir, gave way and opened the Grave to
let her put in her hand to take out the Bones, and then laid it self down again
in the place it was in before. Nay, when one of the Monks, having got some of
these Virgins Heads to his Monastery, washed them in Wine, and kissed them in
Devotion; Id. Ibid. c. 88.
one of them appeared that Night to him in his sleep, and embracing him, said,
Yesterday when you washed my Head, you friendly kissed it, and now I come to
repay your kindness, and saluted him; though when she offered it, he
considering his profession, to avoid the Maids kiss, drew back his Head. Who
can be of another mind, but that they now have just the same passions and
affections they had when they were alive, when he reads how that a Comb being
found together with one of the Bodies mentioned before, Ibid. cap. 85.
which Comb was secretly conveyed away by one Frederindis, who came by, as
the Body was digging up; the Night before the Body was to be removed by an
Abbot, the Virgin appeared to him in a dream, and refused to have her Body
removed; and when he humbly asked her the reason, she told him, because she had
lost her Comb which her Mother gave her, when she went out of her Country.
There is one doubt remains, which Mr. Cressy is concerned in, who talks so much
of the dispersing of their Relics over all Christendom, viz. What security
we can have that false Bodies and Bones, have not been scattered up and down
for theirs: I know that Caesarius of Heisterbach has told us a fine story,
Caesarius. Ibid. cap. 89.
how that when certain Monks were washing many of their Bodies and drying them,
there arose suddenly an intolerable stink; whereupon the Abbot Goswin
suspecting it to be a trick of the Devils, to extinguish the Friars devotion
toward their Relics, adjured the Devil to discover if he had any hand in the
stink; and immediately a great Horse-bone leaping from the midst of the
Relics, was thrown out of the place, as if it had been driven with a
Whirlwind. But I am a great deal more afraid of the Monks tricks to abuse Men
into their Devotion, than of the Devils to extinguish it; and I doubt that when
they design to cheat, the Bones will neither stir nor stink, to enable us that
way to discover it. But I have too long considered Mr. Cressy's foolish
pretenses out of Gildas. I shall be shorter in answering what he says for the
silence of Bid, who makes no mention of them neither in his History. It is no
wonder, says he, Chapter Hist. ut supra.
if Beda's History, intended only to relate the affairs of the Saxons, does not
recount such particular occurrents of the Brittans. Well reasoned again! What?
when the Saxon affairs at this time were Acts of Barbarous Cruelty, and the
Brittans were the subjects of it, is it no wonder if one pretend to give an
account of the one, and should leave out the other? This would be, just as if a
Carthaginian Historian had designed to give an account of the affairs of his
own Country, and should have said little or nothing of Hannibal and his Army
in Italy, or have passed over in silence that most famous Battle at Cannae,
never so much as naming the Roman General there, or the number of those that
were slain. Well, but says Mr. Cr. Beda in other Treatises, twice expressly
mentions the Celebration of Eleven Thousand Virgin-Martyrs, suffering for their
Faith and Chastity at Colen, to wit, in his Martyrologie, and in his Ephemeris.
It Is true indeed, if you look into Beda's Works, you will find in his
Martyrologie 12 Call. November. these words, In Colonia sanctarum virginum undecim
millium: and in his Ephemeris these, In Colonia sanctarum Virginum; but all
this will not do Mr. Cressy's work: For the Authority of these Books is very
slender, and the Interpolation and abuse of them certain and evident
Martyrologium quod Bedae nomen modo praefert, hand sincerum est, multorum
subinde additionibus locupletatum, ut ex praesatione Usuardi colligunt viri
eruditi. Phil. Labbe de Scriptor. Eccles. vol. 1. page 185.
: If I had no other way to know that there are Names of Saints in those Books,
which Bid never put in, I might be sufficiently assured of it, only by
examining the Persons there inserted for Saints and Martyrs. To give Mr. Cr. an
Instance or two, very near the place where the 11000 Virgins stand. In his
Martyrologie, 7 Idus November. Depositio Vuillibrordi Episcopi, de gente
Anglorum, viri sanctissimi and miraculorum gratia admodum insignis; qui a
Sergio Papa Romae ordinatus est, and in Germaniam ad praedicandum destinatus,
ibidemque requievit. In his Ephemeris, 8 Idus. Willibrordi Episcopi. I suppose
that Saints were not put into the Calendar before they dyed; and it would be
pretty if any one could believe that Bid should put into his Martyrologie the
death of a Saint who outlived him. But according to Mr. Cressy Ch Hist. l. 22.
c. 25. and lib. 23. c. 6.
, Bede's death is placed, an. 731. ( Calvisius Chronol. says 734.) and he has
placed S. Willibrords, an. 736. To add another: Bedae Martyrol. 16 Call. December.
Depositio beati Othmari Abbatis (in his Ephemeris 16 Call. Dec. Otmari
confessoris) who dyed (as both Surius and Calvisius agree) an. 761. that is,
according to Mr. Cr.'s account, 30 Years after Beda. But, what talk I of Thirty
Years? if you look into his Martyrology, 17 Calend. Januar. there you find,
Viennae, Bellarm. de Scriptor. Ec^les.
Beati Adonis Episcopi: and yet this Ado Vienrensis lived after Bid, above an
Hundred and Thirty Years. If all this will not yet satisfy Mr. Cr. but that he
still thinks no such tricks have been played with the 11000 Virgins, I then must
farther tell him, that in the most correct Martyrologie of Bid (Printed in
Bollandus his second Vol. of March, and which was set forth after comparing a
great many Ancient Manuscripts) I say in his Genuine Text, Printed in a larger
character, there is nothing to be found of these 11000 Virgins; but it is put in
a smaller character afterward, to show that that passage was inserted by
others since; and I must conclude too, that it was inserted a good while after
his time; since Vsuardus in his Martyrologie makes no mention of these Virgins;
nor Ado Viennensis in his, no nor in his Chronicon neither, though he there
takes notice of the sufferings of many other Martyrs, and had a fair occasion
to mention them; Adon. Chronic. i^ Biblioth. Patr. Tom. 7. page 353, 356.
for he speaks of Maximus his drawing almost all the armed Youth of Brittany
into France; and if Baronius his conjecture had been true, there sure he would
have mentioned them, if he had known any thing concerning them: and afterward
he takes notice of the Saxons destroying Brittany from the East, to the West
side of the Island with Fire and Sword (which is Mr. Cressy's time of placing
their flight and Martyrdom) and yet not a syllable of them here neither. And
if the Martyrologie of Bid does not say any thing about it, his Ephemeris
which is collected out of it in short, it it say more, may deservedly be
suspected: But he might as well (in this case) cite the Almanac for the Year
when he wrote his Book; for there he might find the name of S. Vrsula against
the 21 of October, but no such name in Bede's Ephemeris.

Thus we have seen the lame account and groundless conjectures, which they that
would make a formal History of these Virgins, go upon. Now, in the next place,
let us consider whether they that build their faith upon Oral Tradition, and the
current story that passes at Colen, where they are said to have been Interred,
have mended the matter.

Here first, it is worth observing, that the Late Romish Writers are much more
inclinable, I perceive, to follow the Traditional account, than the other:
(only excepting the Jesuit Alford, who writing a History thought it not so
proper to mention Revelations; and living, as he says, among Heterodox Persons
(being then in England) he thought that telling stories of Miracles, Alford.
Annal. Eccl. Brit. ad an. 453. p. 586. and p. 598.
unless they were vouched by Classick Authors, would not be a means to convince
them; for the Age he lived in was no ways favorable to them.) Therefore though
Ribadeneira, when he first put forth the Lives of the Saints in Spanish,
followed Baronius and our Geoffrey; yet when his Book was Printed at Colen in
Latin, an. 1630. they put out that Life of his, and inserted another, after
the Traditional way: For so the Reader, before that life, is admonished; that
instead of that, Ribud. Flor. Sanct. 21. October. p. 501.
They thought good rather to adjoyn another Narration, far more certain, which
was composed with great labor and diligence, out of several Monuments of the
Ancients, out of the ancient Tradition of the Church of Colen, and out of the
very footsteps of places that are to be seen both at Colen, and elsewhere on
the Rhene, by a Father of the Jesuits College in Colen. This Father was
Philippus Bebius, as Alford informs us; between whom there had some Letters
passed touching this matter: Alford. Ibid. p. 590.
in Bebius his Letter to Alford Alf. ad. an. 237. p. 228. 230.
he says, that he began to write the Life of S. Vrsula, and her companions in
the Latin and German Tongue by the command of his Superiors; and not living
perfectly to finish it, Hermannus Crombachius succeeded him in his work, and
opinion, (being for Tradition and Revelations) in a large Volume, entitled
Vrsula vindicata. This way therefore, having the greater countenance of the
Church, is now to be set down; and there is scarce any thing more needful, (it
looking all along so like a Romance) to confute it. We are told then, that in
the Year One Thousand One Hundred Fifty Six, See Bish. Usher de Britan. Eccl.
primord. p. 619.
there were found at Colen certain Inscriptions or Titles on Grave-stones (
Tituli Sepulchrales they are called) bearing the Names of diverse of the Vrsulan
Virgins, and of the Men that did accompany them: Gerlacus the Abbot of Tuitium,
who was present when the Tombs were opened, made an Index of their Names, which
is still kept there. This gave occasion the same Year to the Revelations of
Elizabeth of Schonaw concerning Vrsula, Elizab. Vision. lib. 4. c. 2.
and her Army of Virgins, as she her self says. Who speaking, how in several
Graves there were found Stones having Titles upon them, signifying to whom
those Bodies did belong; The Chief and most remarkable of them, says she, the
Abbot Gerlacus sent to me, hoping that something might be revealed to me, by
the grace of God, concerning them: for he had a suspicion of the finders of
those holy Bodies, lest for gain sake they might have craftily caused them to
be written. S. Elizabeth then understood, God revealing it to her by S. Vrsula,
and S. Verena, by whom and when these Titles were written and put into their
Graves. She says, Vid. Bebii vit. Vrsul. inter Flor. Sanctor. Ribaden. p. 504.
that at that time when the H. Virgins came from Rome to Colen, there was in
their company, one James Bishop of Antioch, who being divinely inspired, did
inquire into the names and state of the chief Persons of that Company, and
diligently noted them. This James, when the H. Virgins were slain, he hid
himself in a certain Cave that was in a Hill of that Field; but by the
Providence of God, the Enemies after the slaughter withdrew themselves, and the
People of Colen going out of the City to bury the Sacred Bodies, this Bishop
came forth to them, and showed them the Names of the chief Persons, to the end
that being cut in certain Stones, they might be placed together with their
Bodies in their Graves; who himself was slain by the same returning Enemies, on
the third Day after the common slaughter of the Virgins; just as he was giving
order for his own Name to be ingraved; from whence it came to pass, that in
Gerlacus his Catalogue of Names, there appears nothing for Him, but the bare
Name of James. A pretty story, and well hanging together I assure you! well may
the Jesuit that relates this, boast of the truth and certainty of these Colen
Relics, when such stones as these lie at the foundation to support their
faith; only I could have wished that these stones had been somewhat bigger than
I perceive they were: by the great noise of these Tituli Sepulchrales, I was
ready before to fancy, that they were stones laid over their Graves; but the
revelation has spoiled that conceit, by telling us that they were put into
their Graves; for now they might be such, for ought I know, as might be put in
ones Pocket, and I am not wholly freed from Gerlacus his jealousy of the
Diggers cheat. But I must not forget that besides these Revelations of S.
Elizabeth after her death, A. Bish. Usher, Ibid. page 631.
one Richardus Praemonstratensis had new Visions concerning these Virgins,
wherein by the admonition of the Bl. Virgin, and of Vrsula her self, many
defects of the former revelations were supplied; these happened An. Dom: 1183.
and these are they that make up the life of Vrsula, and the 11000 Virgins in
Capgrave; so that when I shall hereafter cite him for any part of their story,
you must remember that in time past, that went in the Roman Church for Vision
and Revelation; and indeed the whole story of Vrsula in the Colen way of
Tradition, and that which we have in the old Breviaries, is wholly beholden to
them, being borrowed from them. Nay, we are told out of Winheim, that the very
Church of S. Vrsula in Colen, Winheim. Sacrar. Agrippin.
was vulgarly called the Church of the Revelations, S. Elizabeth's Visions
having given such great credit to her story. Let us now see, what it is they
say; and I think the best way will be, to make the Lessons of the Breviary our
Text, and the other will serve to explain them.

Lesson 1.
Brev. Roman. Antiq. 21. October.
St. Vrsula the only Daughter of a most Noble and Rich Prince of the Brittans,
extreme beautiful, and of great wit, when she was Marriageable was demanded in
Marriage by a Son of the King of England; at which, seeing her most Christian
Father extremely troubled, as well because it was no ways consonant to Reason
to force his Daughter to marry who was devoted to God, as also because if he
did not consent to the Proposal, he feared the cruelty of the Pagan; She, being
divinely inspired, persuaded her Father to consent to the Tyrant, if he would
yield to these following Conditions. viz. That he the Son of the King of
England would deliver to her Ten Virgins, choice ones in Age, Form and
Parentage; and that as well to her self, as to each of the other Ten, might be
joined a 1000 Virgins more; and that 11 Ships being prepared according to their
number, he would grant her the truce of Three Years for the Dedication The
pretended Sigebert in Surius has it, ad exercitium virginitatis suae.
of her Virginity, and that this Young Spouse of hers in this 3 Years space,
should be instructed in the Faith. Vrsula used this new counsel of the H.
Ghost, that so either by the difficulty of the proposed condition she might
take off his mind from his design, or that by this opportunity she might
dedicate all her Virgins, together with her self, to God.

NOTES.
THis Lesson of the Breviary gives us no name of any of these Persons, save
only that of Vrsula, but the rest are sufficiently supplied out of the
Revelations, and elsewhere. As for the name of Vrsula, we are told, it was
prophetically given her in her Baptism (God so ordering it, who calls whom he
predestinates) because she should one Day choke the Devil, that Quia exemplo
David immanem ursum, sc. diabolum, quandoque suffocatura erat, Deo disponente
(qui quos pradestinat, vocat) a parentibus il^i in baptismate prasagum nomen
Ursula inditum est. Vit. Vrsulae apud Surium. 21. October.
great Bear, as David did. Her Mothers name, the Visions tells us, was Daria.
The name of her Father (whom the Breviary calls only a Prince of the Brittons)
is diversely given us: In the Visions of S. Elizabeth he is called Maurus; by
Others Dionetus. Jacobus de Vorag* calls him Nothus; but in the Cotton. MS.
Bish. Usher, ut supra. p. 618.
he is called Deonotus, and so it is in her life in Surius. Fuit in Brittaniae
partibus rex quidam Deonotus, tam vita quam nomine; which last words make it
incapable of a literal mistake for Dionetus: and so it is in the Breviary of
the Cistersians, Printed at Paris, 1516.

Deonoto fuit nata
Placens cunctis, Deo grata,
Ursula regalis:
Cujus mirae speciei
Plus mirandae and fidei,
Non erat aequalis.
Regi magno pulchra nimis
Desponsatur, dum instatur
Precibus and minis.
By a Prince called Deonot
Royal Ursula was begot,
To God and Men most dear.
Her face was wonderously fair
Her faith more admirably rare
In both she had no Peer.
This over-fair ones Spouse was a great King:
Who had wooed her both by prayers and threatening.
A very fit name, (whether his true one or no, it matters not) for one that
reigned God knows when and where. For there was scarce a greater contest about
what City it was (among 7) where Homer was born; than what Country try it was
(whether England, Scotland, or Ireland, be meant by Brittany) where he reigned.
S. Elizabeth calls him the King Britanniae Scoticae; Petrus de Natalibus, the
most Christian King of Scotland, and so the Verses in Wicelius, cited by Bish.
Usher. One Candidus Eblanius (in his Catalogue of Irish Saints) stands up
stoutly for his being a King of Ireland, so also does Phil. Bebius, who would
have Scotia to be understood of Ireland, the like does Crombachius in his
Vrsula Vindicata. But our Alford Alford. Anual. ad an. 453. p. 590, etc. and p.
597.
(and Mr. Cressy his Interpreter) has as stiffly opposed this, Vero similior
eorum opi^iio esse videtur, qui illam Scotiae majori seu Hyberniae adjudicant.
Bebius vit. Vrsulae apud Ribadeneir.
showing by a great deal of Critical learning, and by proofs from History and
Chronology, that Ireland never went under the name of Britany; that Ireland was
Heathen long after this time (for they place this story as the Breviary does in
the Year 237) and particularly insists upon that of the Roman Martyrologie,
concerning S. Patrick's Preaching the Gospel first of all in Ireland. In
Hibernia Natalis S. Patricii Episcopi and Confessoris, qui Primus ibidem
Christum Evangelizavit. Roman. Martyrol. 17. Martii.
As for Vrsula's Spouse; (who is called in the Lesson the Son of a King of
England) his Father's Name, Elizabeth says, was Agrippinus: The Son has three
Names; The Historians call him Conanus (as we heard before) but the Revelations
of Elizabeth and Richard call him Holofernes, though after Baptism he was named
Etherius; and we are certified from the Sepulchral Titles, that he was seven
years elder than Vrsula. There is nothing more need be added, to explain the
Lesson; unless it be that passage, of her being divinely inspired, to consent
to the Treaty of Marriage, and to propose those witty conditions. This was
done, says Capgrave, by an Angel, Capgr. vit. Vrs. f. 316.
that was sent from Heaven to persuade her; or in a Vision, as it is in Surius,
wherein by a Divine Revelation she was informed of the whole order of her Life,
of the number of her Fellow-virgins, and of the glorious Crown of their
Martyrdom.

Lesson 2.
Because this affair was carried on by the Lord, the young Man agreed to all
the Proposals, and persuaded his Father to do the same. And now this Spouse of
hers being baptized, commanded to hasten all things that were demanded, and
pitched upon the Virgins for Vrsula his Spouse. Then the Father of Vrsula
receiving the Virgin's Counsel, ordained that his Daughter should have Men for
her Directors Pater ordinavit quod vires, quorum solatio tam ipsa quam ejus
exercitus indigebat, in comitatu suo haberet. Jac. de Vorag. de 11000 Virgin.
, by whose suffrage she with the Virgins should be governed in Spirituals, and
in Temporal necessities. Abundance of People came together from all Places to
see this wonderful sight, even Bishops themselves: Among whom was Pantalus
Bishop of Basil; who conducted them to Rome, and returning with them from
thence suffered Martyrdom: Also S. Gerasina the Queen of Sicily, and the
Sister of Daria Mother of Vrsula, when she was informed of this thing, went to
them with her four Daughters, and her young Son Adrian, leaving her Kingdom in
her Sons hand, and accompanied them to Martyrdom.

NOTES.
THis Lesson mentions the Collection of the Virgins; but the Revelations have
formed them into an Army. The Dreamer Richardus tells us, that by the counsel
of the Bishops that were with her, and God's direction, she marshalled them
thus. Vid. Capgrav. and Usher. lib. citat. p. 632.
She appointed 5 Virgins to be Heads over the whole Army, whose Names were
these. 1. Vrsula her self, the King's Daughter, who was the Head and Princess
of them all. 2. Pinnosa, the Daughter of Ludrencus, a famous Duke, Vrsula's
Uncle. 3. Cordula, the Daughter of Count Quirinus. 4. Elcutheria, the Daughter
of Duke Eusebius, and of Josippa, S. Vrsula's Aunt. 5. Florentia, the Daughter
of King Aegidius, who was Cousin-Germane to Vrsula's Father. Under these Five,
she chose Eleven other Virgins, each of which was to govern a Thousand, whose
Names are these: 1. Jota, the Daughter of King Lucius, she had two Sisters
besides in the Company. 2. Benigna, the Daughter of an Illustrious Duke; she
had four Sisters besides among them. 3. Clementia, the Daughter of a powerful
Count. 4. Sapientia, the Daughter of Prince Herwicus, Uncle to Vrsula. 5.
Carpophora, the Daughter of a certain King, who was a good and religious Man.
6. Columba, the Daughter of King Anitus. 7. Benedicta, the Daughter of an
Illustrious Prince. 8. Odilia, the Daughter of a certain Count, who had two
Sisters with her, the one adult, the other a sucking Sister. 9. Chelindris,
whose Father was a Noble Count, her Mother Vrsula's Father's Aunt. 10. Sibilia,
the Daughter of King Firanus. 11. Lucia, a Kings Daughter, and Kinswoman to the
Spouse of S. Vrsula.

[Here I cannot but take notice by the way, that Mr. Cressy, after he, in one
place of his History, has railed against these Revelations concerning the 11000
Virgins, calling them Dreams, Chapter Hist. l. 5. cap. 9.
the Inventions of vain and idle wits, which gain no belief to themselves, and
disgrace truth reported by others, that deserve not to be confuted, but with
indignation to be rejected and contemned: Yet this very Mr. Cr. in another
place, has martialed this Virgin-Army, Chapter Hist. l. 9. c. 21. and 23.
just in the same order you here see it. He quotes indeed Vsuardus his
Chronicon for it, and talks of Martyrologies of Canisius, and of England; but
these are all but Blinds, for they all had them, it is plain from these
Revelations originally; and now when it serves his purpose (as indeed without
the Revelations, the Relics at Colen would want names) he has the conscience
to say, that it must be ascribed to a Miraculous Providence, or Revelation,
that their Names have not utterly perished. But sure there is all reason to
debar him from making any advantage of them in one case, if he will not allow
them to have any credit in others.]

What is farther said in the Lesson concerning Pantalus, and other Bishops that
came to them; S. Elizabeth pretends to explain it thus, from her Interpreter
Verena, (one of these Virgins that appeared to her) When we first begun to meet
together in our Country, Eliz. Vision. l. 4. cap. 2.
the holy fame of it was far and wide dispersed, and many came together on
every side to behold us; It happened also, God so ordering it, that certain of
the British Bishops were joined to us, and passing over Sea in our Company
came to Rome with us: In which Journey, Bl. Pantulus Bishop of Basil was our
associate, and brought us to Rome, and was a Fellow-sufferer with us. But
Richardus is more particular, and tells us by name of 5 British Bishops that
followed them. 1. Willelmus, Cousin-German to Vrsula's Father, and Brother to
S. James (the forenamed Bishop of Antioch) and Bl. Gerasina. 2. Columbanus, the
Son of S. Alexandria, an Illustrious Duchess, the Sister of Vrsula's Mother.
3. Ywanus, a very Aged Man, Uncle to Vrsula's Mother. 4. Eleutherius, Brother
to Count Eustace. 5. Lotharius, Cousin-German to Vrsula's Spouse. It would be
too tedious to give you all the rest of the Romantic story: I Will therefore
only give you his account of the Eleven Kings, which he says by a Revelation
from Heaven, he understood to have gone along with them. 1. Olofernes, the
Spouse of S. Vrsula. 2. Oliverus, the Son of the most Noble King Oliver, who
was converted by the Virgin Oliva his Spouse, who was the Daughter of the great
King Cleopatrus, Vrsula's Father's Uncle. 3. Crophorus, the Son of King
Pinnosus, Vrsula's Kinsman, whose Wife Cleopatra was in the company too. 4.
Lucius, the Father of Jota, Vrsula's Kinsman. 5. Clodoneus, who with his Queen
Blandina, was converted by his Daughter, Duchess Eugenia, and by her Husband
Duke Alexander. 6. Canutus, who traveled, leaving his Kingdom to Carolus one
of his Sons. 7. Pipinus, Vrsula's Cousin-German. 8. Odulphus, the said King
Pipin's Son. 9. Anitus, who followed his two Daughters, Columba and Cordula.
10. Firanus, who with his Wife Sibilia, followed his Illustrious Daughter
Sibilia, and her three Sisters. 11. Refridus, King of Denmark, who was
converted by his Wife Oliva, the Duke of Saxonies Daughter. It was very
seasonably added here at the conclusion of this Catalogue of Kings, that the
Relator of these things, walked in the path of pure truth, and hated lying; and
therefore ingenuously acknowledges, that these Kings had but Regna modica;
their Dominions were not very large. I believe their Territories were much what
of the bigness of Gerasina's, (mentioned in the Lesson) as she was Queen of
Sicily, which in that Age was no Kingdom at all. And some of them were Kings,
(particularly Pipin and Canutus) just in the same sense, that the Angli and
Walliones (of which Nations, there were several, he says, among these Virgins)
were a People, that is, they were to be such some Hundreds of Years after. But
to go on.

Lesson 3.
The Ships and Provisions being prepared, this most holy Society, departing
from Brittany, arrived at the City of Colen. And there it was revealed to S.
Vrsula by an Angel from the Lord, that they should go to Rome, and from thence
returning thither, she with her Spouse and all the Company, should come to
glory by Martyrdom. Coming therefore from the City of Colen to Basil by Water,
they went from thence to Rome a Foot. All which Company were received with joy
and honor by Pope Ciriacus and his Clergy, for he himself was of Brittany, and
had some Kindred among the Virgins; and to him who was himself a Virgin, it was
revealed, that he should obtain the reward of Martyrdom with them. When
therefore they had stayed some while there at Rome, Pope Ciriacus caused some
of them, that had not yet obtained the grace of Baptism, to be baptized. And
at length declaring his mind before all the Clergy, he renounced the Popedom,
after he had governed the Church one Year and about three Months, being the
19th. in succession after Peter the Apostle: which thing was taken ill by the
Clergy, who knew not the Counsel of God, that leaving the Seat of S. Peter, he
should go after that Multitude of Women. Therefore by common advice they chose
another called Antheros, removing this Ciriacus out of the Catalogue of
Bishops.

NOTES.
BEfore this glorious Company parted from Brittany, we are told that they spent
three Years in pretty Iudicrous exercises upon the Sea, Vit. Vrsulae apud
Surium.
which was hard by. Sometimes they imitated a Sea-sight, sometimes a Flight,
and ran up and down from one place to another, spending sometimes half,
sometimes the whole Day in these pastimes; at which the King and Peers of the
Realm were frequently present to behold them; and the common People laying
business aside, attended these sports of the Virgins, and applauded them. In
which there were two things very wonderful; that they were preludes to their
Martyrdom: and that they ended in the Conversion of all the Virgins to the
Faith: Cum multa jucunditate celebrato per triennium hoc Martyrii praeludio.
Surius.
(if we believe the Legend:) Prayers and Fasting, one would guess, had been
better preparatives for Martyrdom, than these sports and fooleries; only we
are to remember that this Church does its work by no common ways, and that fine
Sights and Pageantry have no small place (and upon Women and Children may have
no small effects) in the public exercises of its Religion. There is nothing
farther considerable that we are told of, before they set Sail for Colen, only
that Heavenly Angels came often to give them visits, and to confirm them in
their good purpose; Richardus praemon. apud Capgrav. p. 317.
and that evil Angels too were very busy among them, to persuade them to be
lawfully married, to incite them to evil works, and to fulfill the desires of
the Flesh; Nap^ias eis suadere legitimas. Ibid.
whom they did not hearken to. And now the Virgins by a Divine admonition are
required to begin their Voyage, which they dispatched in little time, in which
the most remarkable passage I meet withal is this: viz. That the sucking
Children, (of whom there was in the Company near Five Hundred) that used to be
fed with Breast-milk, Rich. pramonst. apud Capgr. p. 320.
now lived without it; for they only put their Fingers into their Mouths, and
immediately they sucked from their very Fingers a Dew ministered to them from
Heaven, by whose virtue they were sustained; neither did they ever in the whole
journey Nec sordebant se made facientes. Ibid.
be-piss themselves, as the manner of Children is, (much less do worse) nor by
their peevish crying disturb the Company: Troops of Angels presented themselves
to them, and appeared above and round about them; insomuch that the little
Infants that were carried in arms, admiring the Visions of Angels, and their
unusual and shining Effigies, pointing with their Fingers into the Air (and at
this sight no doubt they would leave sucking them) testified their wonder by
the pleasant noyses of Ha, Ha. (and it is hard methinks to forbear imitating
them upon the report of it.) You need not wonder if they made a quick Voyage,
when Angels thus attended them, though they went against the swift stream of
the Rhine, for that which would have cost others above Eight Days time, they
did it in two Days and an half, and came safe to Colen: but they stayed not
there; for upon a new Vision to Vrsula by an Angel, (which the Lesson mentions)
that they must go to Rome, and commend themselves there to God, and his Bl.
Mother, and to the Apostles, Richard. praem. in Capgr. p. 321.
whose Bodies and Relics rested there, with a promise by the Angel, that they
should upon their return to this City, there obtain the triumph of their
blessed Combat, and be Martyred, which the Virgins were very desirous of (says
Surius) they took Ship again, and in three days and a half more came to Basil:
From this place they all set forward on foot to Rome; in which Journey, they
mounted the Alps and the Tops of high Mountains, without the least weariness,
Richard. Ibid.
and they seemed all the while to walk upon plain ground; they passed Rivers
without Boat or Bridge; not one drop of Rain fell to incommode them in their
passage all the way: the Infants lived upon their old Diet, sucking their
fingers; and the other Virgins needed very little food, the grace of God
inwardly comforting and sustaining them; which need not seem incredible (says
the Dreamer) to him that reads the Saints lives, for he may find how S. Maria
the Egyptian was sustained Seventeen Years, only with two Loaves and a half of
Bread.

The next thing we are to remark, is, that all this Company came safe and sound
to Rome; where the Pope (Ciriacus) with his Cardinals and Clergy, Princes,
Matrons and Virgins, Citizens and common People, with great joy, and a Noble
Procession, Richard. Ibid. p. 322, 323.
worthily received them: where while they stayed, some of them, (that were new
Converts) were baptized, particularly, among the more Noble, S. Lucia and
Anastasia, two Kings Daughters, and both of Kin to Vrsula's Spouse. And now
they bethink themselves of their return to Colen. (after they had visited the
holy Places at Rome, and paid their Devotions there.) And here comes in that
passage, which has created much controversy and trouble to the Romish Writers,
concerning Pope Ciriacus, his laying down his Office, to accompany them; which
we are told, he was incited to do by a Vision of three Saints in white,
promising him if he did so, an Eternal Crown of Martyrdom, and threatening that
if he continued still at Rome, he should quickly dye. Whereupon (as S.
Elizabeth's visions inform us) he resigned the Popedom in the face of the
whole Church, all Men crying out against it, and gainsaying it, especially the
Cardinals, who looked upon it as a piece of madness for him to go after these
foolish Women ( as indeed any one would have judged, Deliramentum arbitrabantur
quod quasi post fatuitatem muliercularum declinaret.
that it was not gravely done of a Pope, to quit his Headship of the Universal
Church, together with his Infallibility, to ramble up and down with a number of
idle Girls, and as it were in the company of so many 1000 Gypsies) "but, says
she, they knew not the Divine admonition, which incited him to do it, and
therefore blotted his name in indignation out of the Catalogue of Popes; but in
truth (says Richard, her second) his name is ever written before God in the
Book of Life, among the precious Martyrs of Christ. That indeed will justly be
doubted by a great many, who think they have reason to believe, that no such
Person as this Ciriacus was ever in being, or at least possessed the Chair of
S. Peter; among whom is Baronius, who smartly urges it in these words. Nor are
those later Men to be regarded, who after Pontianus, Baron. Annal. ad an. 237.
s. 11.
introduce one Cyriacus as Bishop of Rome, concerning whom there is no mention
at all made in the Series of Roman Bishops described by the Latins, as in the
Book of the Popes (libro de Romans pontificibus) or in Optatus Milevitanus, S.
Austin, Cresconius, or other Index's of the Vatican Library; nor by the Greeks,
as Eusebius, or Nicephorus the Chronographer, or others: so that this Opinion
deserves no more words to confute it, because it is supported by no Reason, or
Testimony of the Ancients, but only fetched out of the fabulous Acts (he means
the Revelations and Colen Tradition) concerning the Martyrdom of S. Vrsula, and
her Companions. This is so shrewd a Censure and Objection, that the Colen
Jesuit Bebius, and others, are fain to make him Pontianus his Vicar, in the
time of his banishment; but this Vicarship has no Authority to countenance it.
I would therefore advise the Colen men to stand to their Tradition, and make
much of Revelations, and oppose those excellent Rithmes, against all the other
Men's Reasons and Authorities, which we are told may be read at their S.
Vrsula's Church. Bish. Usher. de primord. Eccl. Brit. p. 628.
At the entrance of the Church these.

Haec est Basilica excellens honor,
Ubi gens Hunica magno cum furore
Virgineos stravit choros.
This Church great honor does retain,
Where by the Hunns the Virgin train
Was barbarously slain.
Within the Church these Verses, to Pope Cyriacus.

Clemens Ciriace papatum renuis;
Ad nutum Vrsulae decedens strenuus
Triremibus ad Vbios.
Mild Cyriack matters not the Papal Crown,
At Ursula's call he lays his Office down,
And stoutly comes by Boat to Colen Town.
To Etherius, Vrsula's Spouse.

Dive Etherie digne fers annulum,
Nobilis Vrsulae optans connubium
Consummatum Agrippinae.
St. Etherius worthily carries the Ring,
All a gog to wed Ursula, fit for a King,
And at Colen concluded the thing.
As for Baronius, Mr. Cressy, and such others, as think that Cyriacus his Name
was never blotted out of the Catalogue of Popes, (judging that he was never in)
let them remember, that it is not long since his Name was expunged out of a new
Roman Edition of the Decretals (and why not heretofore, Bishop Usher. Ibid.
page 625.
may a Man of Colen say, as well as of late?) In the Ancient Editions of the
Sixth Book of the Decretals of Boniface the eight, in a gloss there, we find
these words ( speaking of the Popes power to renounce the Papacy, Sexti
Decretal. lib. 1. tit. 7. de renunciatione. cap. 1. Quoniam.
and lay his Office down:) There is a certain example of this in Pope Cyriacus,
concerning whom we read, that he suffered Martyrdom with Vrsula, and the 11000
Virgins: For it is written of him, that it was revealed to him that he should
receive the rewards of Martyrdom with those Virgins. Then gathering together
the Clergy and the Cardinals, before them all he renounced his Dignity and
Office, though all were unwilling, especially the Cardinals. But this Cyriacus
is not named in the Catalogue of Roman Popes, because it was believed by the
Cardinals, that he did forgo the Papacy, Propter delectamenta virginum papatum
dimisisset.
not for Devotion sake, but for the Delights of the Virgins. But I leave them
to scuffle it out among themselves, now that we have seen them engaged; only I
cannot choose but think how blewly they of Colen would look, (if their opponents
get the better of them) with their three silver Tombs Asservatur in tribus
argenteis deauratis gemmisque pretiose vestitis ac summo Altari incorporatis
tumbis tria corpora, viz. S. Cyriaci pontificis, S. Vrsulae, and S. Conani ejus
sponsi, quem alii Ethereum nominari volunt: quorum capita, mediis argenteis
statuis inclusa, in Aurea camera seorsim, cum multis aliis primariis capitibus,
reverenter sub firma clausura custodiuntur. Erhardus Winheim. in sacrar.
Agrippinae.
, gilt and richly adorned with Jewels, in which they pretend to keep the three
Bodies of Pope Cyriacus, S. Vrsula, and her Spouse; whose Heads also, put apart
in their Gilt-Chamber, they reverently (we are told) secure under firm Lock and
Key.

Lesson 4.
Whilst the aforesaid holy Company abode at Rome, two wicked Gentile Princes,
Maximus and Africanus, fearing lest from so great a Multitude of the Faithful
(to whom others also were joined) the Christian Religion should be too much
increased; and having learnt the Place whither they intended to go; they sent a
message to Julius their Kinsman, Prince of the Hunns, that as soon as the^
Virgins were got to Colen, drawing his Forces thither, he should kill all that
Multitude. Pope Cyriacus therefore going out of the City with the said Company
of Virgins and many holy Bishops their Associates, took his Journey toward
Colen. In the mean while Ethereus the Spouse of Vrsula, his Mother being made a
Christian, and his Father being dead, to whose Kingdom he succeeded, was
admonished by an Angel to go and meet his Spouse at Colen, and that there he
should suffer Martyrdom with her. And now this young Person, being made a
Christian, tasted so the Divine grace, that despising carnal marriages, he
longed for those that were Celestial, and thought it most desirable for him to
dye for Christ.

NOTES.
This Lesson is taken out of the Revelations of Elizabeth almost word for word.
See Bishop Usher de primord. p. 623.
Wherein she cunningly endeavored to make the slaughter of these Virgins agree
with the known Names of that Age. Pope Damasus, or Anastasius Bibliothecar. (in
Libro pontificali) says, that Anterus sat in the Chair when Maximinus and
Africanus were Consuls, and suffered Martyrdom by one Maximus the Prefect; at
which time Julius Maximinus was Emperor. In all probability she took occasion
from hence to make this wild jumble of Names; and to tell us, that the
slaughter of these Virgins was made by Julius Prince of the Hunns, by the
persuasion of Maximus (instead of Maximinus) and Africanus two wicked Princes.
But this is a foolish story, and many ways inconsistent both with History and
Reason. For (as we shall note afterward) the Hunns were of a Later date than
this time, and no mention made in History of any Julius, as Prince of them; and
Maximinus (as Alford shows) neither while he was Consul, or Emperor, ever saw
Rome. Alford. ad an. 238.
But nothing can be more ridiculous, than to make such a number as this in such
times of Persecution, either to come safely in such a Pilgrimage to Rome, or to
go quietly away in such a Body from thence; especially when we must not confine
the number precisely to a 11 Thousand; but are made to believe (if we will
hearken to Traditions and Revelations) that there were many more. Richard the
Dreamer, has reckoned up above 12000: In the Passion of the Ten Thousand
Martyrs crucified at Mount Ararath, whose Chief Leader was S. Achatius (not
Achabius, Apud Surium, ad Junii 22. p. 294.
as Bebius cites it in the Life of Vrsula, p. 503. and Bish. Usher out of him)
there we are told, that according to the Colen account, the number was above
14000, reckoning in many Men and Matrons, whose help the Virgins stood in need
of. But it seems at Colen they vary their story: for Guil. Caxton (or whosoever
was the Translator of the Golden Legend, Bish. Usher, ut supra. p. 635.
Printed at London, 1512.) says, that he had it at Colen, that together with
the Eleven Thousand Virgins, there suffered Fifteen Thousand Men, so then the
Company is made 26000. But this is too little still, if we believe Trithemius,
(cited by Mr. Cr.) who makes the Eleven Thousand Virgins to be all of Noble
blood; but says, that besides these, Chapter Hist. l. 9. cap. 21.
there were Threescore Thousand Women of inferior rank, partly Maids, and
partly such as had been married; so then the Number is vast indeed, amounting
to 71 Thousand Which if it were a true account, I pray what becomes of that
which Mr. Cr. said, that it is no wonder, though Gildas or Bid never wrote any
thing of them, who stood so thick as not easy to be overlookt? and what will
he say for his Church, that by putting in only the 11000 Nobler Maids, would
tempt one to doubt whether it thought that poor Maids and Widows could ever
make Martyrs?
, and one would think the Later Popes thought some of these accounts might be
true; because in their corrected Breviaries and Martyrologies, they define no
number of Virgins at all, but speak of Vrsula and her Companions, not naming
how many they were. But be this how it will, no old Wives Tale could ever be
more foolish, than that passage in the pretended Revelations of Elizabeth, for
the two Heathen Princes, Maximus and Africanus, to send a Message from Rome, to
their Cousin Julius, to slay this Company at Colen, when they themselves had
power to do it at Rome; for just at this time there was a Persecution against
the Christians, by the Emperor Maximinus, (reckoned by S. Augustine and
Orosius, says Alford, for the Sixth Persecution) who caused Pope Pontianus,
who had before been banished by Alexander, now to be beaten to death with
Clubs; who also the next Year after put Anteros his Successor (according to the
Catalogue of Popes) to death; and now how in the middle, between these two,
Cyriacus should be Pope, and escape with Life from this Tyrant; nay, which is
more, that all things should be so peaceable, that so many Thousands should
make this Progress without disturbance, and he with them, is not possible for a
wise Man to conceive. As for the Colen Jesuit Bebius, he was asleep sure, when
he wrote these words, Vit. Vrsula apud Ribaden. p. 502.
(speaking of the Journey of these Virgins) Erat tunc Imperium Romanum
pacatissimum, administrante illud Alexandro Severo, juris naturalis amantissimo
principe: i. e. The Roman Empire was in perfect peace, Alexander Severus
governing it, etc. For according to many excellent Chronologers Petavius,
Ration. Temp. Calvisius, Chronol. Labbe, in Indic. Imperat. in Apparat. ad
Council. etc.
, Alexander Severus was slain in the Year 235. according to Baronius (whom
Alford follows) An. Dom. 237. but neither way can Bebius be helped in his
account, for he tells us (a little before) that in the Spring of the Year, 237.
these Virgins set out of Brittany; and all make the Persecution I spoke of,
wherein Pontianus was slain, to begin in the first Year of Maximinus, who was
Alexander's Successor; that is, either two Years before, or the same Year that
the Virgins, according to him, began their Voyage and Travels.

Lesson 5.
Etherius resting satisfied in what the Angel informed him, God so ordering it,
he with his Mother and Sister Florentina, and the Bishops, Clemens and
Marculus, with a Niece, and many others, arrived at Colen one way; and Vrsula
with Pope Cyriacus, and the Eleven Thousand Virgins another way, at the same
time. When they were Landed, the Hunns that then besieged Colen, fell upon them
as so many ravening Wolves upon tame Sheep, and slaughtered all that Sacred
Company, which willingly offered it self to death for Christ's sake, and by
Martyrdom conveyed them to Heaven. When the Hunns had killed others of them,
coming to Vrsula, and being astonished at her beauty, they brought her to their
Prince alive; who being inamoured with her Beauty, and comforting her for the
slaughter of the Virgins, promised to marry her, if she would consent; but she
refusing the offer, the Tyrant in a rage directing an Arrow against her, made
her a Martyr.

NOTES.
THE Colen Tradition making the Hunns to be the Authors of this slaughter, An.
237, or 238, its defenders are sadly put to it to make this out; because the
Hunns were not known in that Age, but appeared long afterward. I Will only give
the Reader two or three accounts of this difficulty out of the Jesuit Bebius
(in the place often cited) One is, that they were indeed the Soldiers of
Maximinus that killed them, but because Maximinus his Father was a Goth, and
his Mother an Alan, therefore they are said to be destroyed by the Hunns, that
came out of the Gothish Nation. Another conjecture is, that the Sunici (an
ancient People in Germany, by the River Rhine) were they that slaughtered them;
and in following times (these being less known) the Transcribers of the story,
put the word Hunni, (a People more known) instead of Sunici. But there is
another fancy still, which he seems to lay more stress upon, that the Hunns in
Attila's time having destroyed all before them, their Name was so terrible in
the after Age or two, (for he would have their story in Surius to be written
between 6 and 700 Years after Christ) that all things cruelly and barbarously
acted, were said to be done by the Hunns: which is so clear a solution, that
it is pity any one should offer a word against it. You may easily imagine that
Vrsula the brave Leader of this Virgin-band, said a great many things to
encourage her Companions not to fear death; Alford has made a short speech for
her in his History; Alford. Annal. Eccl. ad an. 453. p. 581.
but a much larger Bonfinius has given us for hers, ( Hist. Vngar. decad. 1.
lib. 5. put at the end of Vrsula's Life in Ribadeneira) where at the end of her
speech she urges this Argument, to encourage them to Martyrdom; because Christ
had sent his Vicar Vt tutius Martyrium obeamus, nobis Vicarium suum delegavit,
qui me^tes nostras pro demandata potestate lustraret, ipseque nobiscum paria
stipendia meritus in astra reduceretur.
amongst them, (viz. Ciriacus) to absolve them, according to his Office and
Power, from their sins, and to dye a Martyr with them.

As for that which we are told at the end of this Lesson, that Vrsula was shot
to death with an Arrow, who can question the truth of it, when Erhardus Winheim
(in Sacraris Agrip.) tells us, that he saw in the Gilt-Chamber at Colen the
very arrow wherewith she was transfixed? where also he saw the fine Ivory
Coffers, in which Vrsula put the Relics she brought with her from Rome, and
the implements for adorning Women, which she used in her Journey; and there
too, he says, he drank (to his great comfort no doubt) in one of those
Water-pots, wherein Christ at Cana in Galilee, converted the Water into Wine.

Lesson 6.
But there was among those Virgins one called Cordula, who being overcome by
humane fear, remained that night in a Ship; but being comforted by God, the
next days she discovered her self, and was slain by the Barbarians. Who after
that appeared to a certain Person, and commanded that her Festival should be
kept the Day following. All whose venerable Bones, happy Colen (which
flourishes in singular grace by their merits) preserves honorably in a Church
they built. These Virgins suffered about the Year of our Lord 237, in the Days
of Pope Anteros, and of the Emperor Maximian.

NOTES.
THE Roman Church celebrates the Feast of S. Cordula, the Day after that of S.
Vrsula; and this Lesson gives the account of it, from a Vision of her self
commanding it should be so. I see the Saints while they were upon Earth were
very shy of seeking their own honor; but it seems by this story, that this is
one of the employments of Heaven, for glorified Saints to procure their own
veneration, and to advance their Name among Men; which is a new and strange
notion of Heaven, that it should improve its Inhabitants in self-love and poor
regards of fame, things that they despised in their imperfect state, and
counted it their imperfection at all to mind. But thus do these men disgrace
the Saints they profess to worship, and affix such passions to them, which a
good man here on Earth would be ashamed to own. To lie decently interred, is as
much as any wise Man need take care of while he lives; but that the separate
Souls of the Saints are so far concerned about their Bodies, I can hardly
think; much less that they matter who treads over their Graves: Yet upon such
trifling errands, they send the Saints to visit this World; and S. Walburg (or
Walpurg, as Surius calls her) is said to appear to Prior Otgar, Capgrav. vit S.
Walburg. p. 293. and Surius 1 Maii. p. 12.
and to make this foolish complaint; that she was trod upon by dirty Feet,
(Servorum, Surius adds) and pressed with vulgar steps. It happened once that
while Rome was in a great Tumult, no Divine Offices were performed either by
Night or Day, Baronius ad an. 1087. p. 586.
on the Festival of the great Apostle S. Peter in his own Church: they bring
him in now, appearing like one discontented, to want the great honor he used
to have at Rome, and seeking to have an equal share with other great Saints in
other places; for thus Baronius relates, That at that time certain Pilgrims
going to pay their devotions at the Monastery of S. Benet, they met an old Man
in Canonical Habit: They asked him who he was; He answered, I am the Apostle
Peter; they demanded whither he was going; He told them, to Brother Benedict,
that I may celebrate the Day of my Passion with him; for I cannot stay at Rome,
my Church there being tossed with many Tempests: which thing when they told
afterward to the Friars, they appointed that S. Peter's Day should be kept
with no less Solemnity than S. Benet's was: (for it seems before this, his Day
was not in any great regard among them.)

A Prior that denied to admit the singing of S. Nicholas his History, in his
Church, upon that Saints day, because it was a new thing: S. Nicholas appeared
terribly to him in the Morning, Durand. Rational. l. 7. c. 39.
drew him out of his Bed by the Hair, dashed him against the Pavement, and
beginning the Antiphona, O Pastor aterne, he sung it morosely to the end,
whipping him with terrible lashes of a Rod he had in his hand, and so left him
half dead; who, I suppose, did never whilst he lived, forget S. Nicholas, or
the Lesson he taught him. It Is pretty to observe what Originals some of the
great Festivals, in honor of the Bl. Virgin, had; even none but such idle
Tales of Visions and Voices, as this of Cordula. To mention only two; that of
her Conception, and of her Nativity.

The occasion of the first, we are told, was this. In the days of Charles King
of France, Dauroutii Catechis. Historical. Tom. 2. p. 809.
there was a Clerk a Kinsman of his, a great Lover of the Bl. Virgin, and one
who daily read her Hours devoutly, who by the advice of his Parents, consenting
to marry with a fair and noble Maid, and receiving the Nuptial Benediction from
the Priest, after Mass was ended, he remembered that he had not read that day
the Ladies Hours; wherefore making all go out of the Church, and sending his
Spouse home, he read the Ladies Hours hard by the Altar; and when he repeated
that Antiphona, Thou art fair and comely, O Daughter of Jerusalem, suddenly the
Bl. Virgin apeared between two Angels, with Christ in her Arms, saying to him;
If I be so fair and comely, wherefore is it that thou leavest me, and take
another Spouse? Am not I fairer than she is? Have thou seen any so fair? He
made answer, O my Lady, thy brightness excells all the beauty of the World,
thou art elevated above the Quires of Angels, What would thou have me to do?
She answered, If thou will forgo thy Carnal Spouse for my Love, thou shall
have me for thy Spouse in the Celestial Kingdom; and if thou will solemnly
celebrate the Feast of my Conception Yearly, upon the 6th. of the Ides of
December, and Preach the Celebration of it, thou shall be crowned with me in
the Kingdom of my Son; after which words, the Blessed Mother of Christ
vanished. The Clerk refusing to return home, became a Monk in another Country,
and after a short space of time, by the merits of the Virgin, he was made the
Patriark of Aquilegia, and carefully celebrated the Feast of her Conception,
and ordained it to be kept Yearly.

The other Feast of her Nativity, says Beleth, was occasioned thus. Johan.
Beleth de Divin. offic. c. 149.
On a time when a certain pious Man was praying by Night, he heard the Angels
singing in Heaven: This he heard many Years always on the same Night: Wherefore
he prayed to the Lord, that he would reveal to him, what the meaning of this
should be. To whom it was declared, that the Angels did rejoice in Heaven, and
as it were kept a Festival, because on that Night the Bl. Virgin was born. This
thing that the Man had heard, he relates it to the Pope, who when he understood
that he was a holy Man, and of great Authority, and believing that he spoke the
truth, he appointed that this Feast should be observed throughout all the
Christian World.

Neither need we fear, when Days are thus set apart in devotion to the Saints,
especially when they themselves desire it; that God will be wanting by as
miraculous ways to countenance them; rewarding the observers, and punishing the
Prophaners of such days. For when we are told, that a Man of great Devotion to
the Saints, and particularly to the Feast of All Saints, Dauroutius ut supra.
p. 8. 0.
preparing himself for it a Week beforehand, by Fastings and Penances, and
keeping it solemnly eigth Days together, when such a Person shall dye upon
All Saints day, as he did; Can any one doubt of his going to Heaven? especially
when he appeared to a Religious man, after his Death, in a Dream, telling him
that he was now associated to the College of Saints? Will any Day-labourer
hereafter grumble to desist from his work, being called to Devotion upon a
Saints day, when he remembers the story of the Mower, who when the Bell tolled
to Vespers, ^d. Ibid. p. 819.
on the Vigil of a Saint, went out of the Field, and left his work, and was
afterward derided by his Fellow Laborers, because he was much behind-hand
with them? but he was well rewarded for his Devotion, for he found, when he
begun his mowing again, a great Piece of Gold in the Grass, which had this
wonderful Inscription upon it. The hand of God made me, and bestowed me for a
gift upon a pour man, who did not profane the Saints day. Will it not shame any
ones negligence in this kind, when he is told, that upon S. Regulus his
Anniversary, the Hearts, and Fawnes, Act. Sanct. Bolland. ad Mart. 30. p. 825.
and Kids, laying aside their wildness, and mixing themselves freely among the
People, went with a slow pace to his Grave, and fell down prostrate on the
ground, expecting the Solemnities of the Mass? Was it not easy to understand,
that God would have S. Colman's day honored, and the Vigils of it kept with
Solemn Fasting, when he reads, how that upon his Vigil, one that venerated this
Saint, could cut no Meat at a Nobleman's Table, Colganus vit. Colmani. 3. Feb.
p. 247.
but what sprung out blood? and that when the Thrashers, not being contented
with Lenten-fare, at that time, had a mind to eat White-meats Lacticinia.
, those also were all changed into blood? When he that was Brewing Ale upon S.
Ludger's day, and the Fire would not burn as it was wont, but the Wood blazed
out in a moment like Straw; when the Liquor would not run freely, and that
which did, Act. Sanct. Bolland. 26. Mart. p. 356.
was bitter and good for nothing; when the Plows upon that Day were broken, and
the Oxen cast off their Yokes, it was pretty easy to collect, that Men should
give over working, and keep his Festival; and the like must be concluded for S.
Benedict's day, Idem ad 21 Mart. p. 339.
when we are told, that a Husbandman that was plowing upon it, his Hands clave
to the Plow-staves, and he could by no means release them, till he had vowed to
the S^^^t not to profane his Festival any more. I know not what other Saints
have directed to be done, by way of Devotion, for their honor; but one of
these Virgins was so kind, we are told, Apud Capgrav. fol. 326.
as to appear to a Religious man, who much venerated them, acquainting him with
this secret, when he was languishing and infirm; If, said she, thou will for
our love and honor, repeat the Lords Prayer Eleven Thousand times, thou shall
have our company to protect and solace thee in the hour of Death ( this is the
very story, no doubt, the Antiphona, at the beginning, harps upon. In vita me
defendite; in morte vos ostendite, etc.) He went presently to work with his
Pater noster's, and fulfilled his task; and then immediately sent for the Abbot
to give him Unction; which when it was over, he cried out, that every one
should quit the Room, and give place to the holy Virgins that were coming. The
Abbot asked him the meaning of this, and the sick Man told him in order the
Virgins promise; so all withdrawing for the present, and returning again a
little after, they found that he was gone to Heaven.

As for that which the Lesson says, that Colen preserves their venerable Bones,
and is happy and flourishing by their merits; I believe indeed, this fiction
has been many a Thousand Pound in their way; and that they have a mighty
advantage of other places, in these Relics, by reason of the numerousness of
them; for they are good chaffer at all times: What belonged to Vrsula alone;
her Ring, her Dressing-box, and all that was contained therein, might furnish a
pretty Pedlers Stall; and if People should grow weary, and look upon these as
stale commodities; it is but opening a fresh stone Chest, telling the People,
Here you have the ^ones of the admirable Gerasina, Queen of Sicily, King
Quintian's Wife, Elizabeth. Vision.
Sister to Dorotheus, King of Greece, and Vrsula's own Aunt: or, showing a
Miraculous Finger of one of those Children, that never whimpered after its
Nurses milk, but lived wholly upon Finger-juice, as they say, Bears do by
sucking their Toes; I warrant you, this will toll in fresh Customers, and every
one will be ready to give handsel. Colen, moreover, has their blood to show, as
well as their bones; a collection of which they have in a Well of SS. Machabees
Church: Ph B bius vit. Vrsul. p. 504.
but I would have the Colen faith shown for the greatest Miracle of all; that
they can venerate this, and never once question, whether the Priests may not
have played such tricks with this blood, L. Herberts Henry 8. p. 432.
as they did at Hales in Glocestershirae, with the blood pretended to be
Christ's, brought from Jerusalem, which was proved to be the blood of a Duck,
every Week renewed by the Priests, who kept this secret between them.

But to conclude this Romance. These Virgins suffered about the Year 237, says
this Lesson; which is, in effect, to give the lie to the Writings of Popes and
Kings, and to the Tradition of the whole English Nation, which all have agreed
to call S. Alban the British Protomartyr; but he dyed either at the end of this
Age, or beginning of the next; so that here are 11000 British Martyrs before
him. There is nothing now remains, but to know (if it be possible) what kind of
reception these Martyred Virgins met with, when they came to Heaven; It was
very great and honorable. They were first of all conducted thither by
Multitude of holy Virgins and Armies of Matrons, Richard, praem. apud Capgr. p.
324.
who went next to them: All the several orders of Angels, sent Thousands of
their Companions to meet them, except only the Thrones, who sent but a very
few, (not for want of civility, you may be sure toward them, but) because they
are so confirmed in the Presence of God, that they cannot easily be separated
from him: Then Heaven being opened, and they introduced, almost all the Saints
that remained in Heaven came to welcome them, brought them with singing and
jubilation into the Presence of Christ, and his glorious Mother; where they
were adorned with white stoles and glittering Crowns; placed in a Mansion by
themselves, separated from the rest of the Virgins; and on one side of them,
the Matrons that accompanied them had their appartment; where they for ever
rejoice.

De S. Katherina, Virgin and Mart. Alexandrina.
Missal. Romans de S. Kather. Paris. 1520.
VOX de coelis Katherinae redditur; veni sponsa gloriosa, veni sanctissima
virgo, accipe praemium tui certaminis inter choros Angelorum.

Hora sec. us. Roman.
Antiph.

VIrgo sancta Catherina, Graeciae gemma, urbe Alexandrina, Costi regis erat
filia.

Verse. Ora pro nobis beata Catherina.

Resp. Ut digni efficiamur promissionibus Christi.

Oremus.

Brev. Romans Antiq. and reformat.
DEus qui dedisti legem Moysi in summitate montis Sinai, and in eodem loco, per
sanctos Angelos tuos, corpus Beatae Catherinae Virginis and Martyris tuae,
mirabiliter collocasti; tribue quaesumus, ut ejus meritis and intercessione, ad
montem, qui Christus est, valeamus pervenire.

Per Dominum.

Missal. Romans ubi prius.
Percussa gladio dat lac pro sanguine collo,
Quam manus Angelica sepelivit vertice Syna.
Membris virgineis olei fluit unda salubris.
Post Communionem.

Ibid.
SUmptis Domine salutis aeternae mysteriis, suppliciter deprecamun, ut sicut
liquor, qui de membris Beatae Katherinae virginis and Martyris jugiter manat,
and languidorum corpora sanat, sic ejus oration cunctas a nobis iniquitates
expellat.

Per Dominum.

Of S. Catherine of Alexandria, Virgin and Martyr.
A Voice from Heaven came to Katherine; (saying) Come O glorious Spouse come
most holy Virgin, receive the reward of thy combat among the Quire of Angels.

Antiph.

THe holy Virgin Katherine, the Jewel of Greece, of the City of Alexandria, was
the Daughter of King Costus.

Verse. Pray for us S. Katherine.

Ans. That we may be made worthy of the promises of Christ.

Let us Pray.

GOD, who gave the Law to Moses on the top of Mount Sinai; and who on the
same place, by thy holy Angels, did wonderfully place the body of S.
Katherine thy Virgin and Martyr; Grant, we beseech thee, that by her merits and
intercession, we may be able to arrive at the Mount, which is Christ.

Through our Lord, etc.

The Sword that from her neck the head did chop,
Milk from the wound, instead of blood, did bring;
By Angels buried on Mount Sina's top,
From Virgin Limbs a Sovereign oil did spring.
After the Communion.

LOrd, after the receiving the mysteries of eternal salvation, we humbly pray
thee, that as the Liquor which continually flowed from the Limbs of S.
Katherine Virgin and Martyr, did heal languishing bodies, so her Prayer may
expel out of us all iniquities.

Through our Lord, etc.

In the Sarisbury Missal, at the end of a long Sequence, they pray thus to her.
VIrgo sidus honestatis,
Dux and decus probitatis,
Christi reos majestatis
Christo reconcilia.
Vas virtutum, via morum,
Flos odoris, odor florum,
Nos tuere, nos coelorum
Transfer ad palatia.
VIrgin, who art the star of honesty,
Of Probity the ornament and guide;
Though we offended have Christ's Majesty,
Now make us friends to him we crucified.
Vessel of virtues, wandering life's best way,
Thou flower of smell, sweetest of flowers that spring,
Defend us; and when Natures debt we pay,
Translate us to the Palace of Heavens King.
Neither are those rare Devotions to be forgotten which are mentioned by
Chemnitius, in his Examen Council. Tridentini, out of the Hora B. Virginis sec.
ordinarium Eccles. Hildensheimensis.
AVe virgo dei digna;
Christo prece me consigna,
Preces audi, praesta votum,
Cor in bono fac immotum,
Confer mihi cor contritum,
Rege visum and auditum,
Rege gustum and olfactum,
Virgo sancta, rege tactum:
Ut in cunctis, te regente,
Vivam Deo pura mente.
O beata Catharina,
Babylonis de sentina
Tutum mihi fer ducatum,
Plasmatorem fac placatum:
Esto mihi consolatrix,
Pro me sis interpellatrix;
Christum pro me interpella,
Salva mortis de procella;
Superare fac me mundum,
Ne demergar in profundum;
Ne me sinas naufragari
In peccatis in hoc mari:
Visita tu me infirmum,
Et in bonis fac me firmum:
Agonista Dei fortis,
Esto praesens in hora mortis.
Decumbentem fove, leva,
Et de morte solve saeva;
Ut resurgam novus homo,
Civis in coelesti domo:
Duplex mors ne me infestet,
Jesus Christus illud praestet,
Tua prece exoratus.
Idem parer, idem natus,
Idem utriusque flamen,
Qui vivit and regnat. Amen.
CAth'rine GOD's worthy Virgin, hail;
May thy Prayers to Christ consign me,
Hear me and let my vows prevail,
To good immovably incline me.
Bestow on me a heart contrite,
Govern my smelling and my taste,
Govern my hearing and my sight,
And guide my touch, O Virgin chaste.
That I, when thou do rule my Soul,
May live to God with purest mind.
Safe out of Babels sink so foul
Bring me, and make my Maker kind.
Be thou my comforter in need,
And interpose thy prayrs sweet breath,
For me with Jesus intercede,
And save me from the storm of death.
Let not the world ^'re me prevail.
To sink me in the Abyss profound,
Or shipwrackt be, while here I sail,
And in this Sea of sins be drowned.
Visit me in my feeble state,
To all good actions me impowr,
Since conquests on thy valor wait,
Stand by me at my latest hour,
Ease and refresh me in all sickness,
Dissolve death's bands, that shows no pity;
That rising in another likeness
I may be owned in the Heavenly City.
Christ Jesus grant to thy request,
No second death may me infest,
O Father, Son and holy Spirit,
In substance One, of equal merit,
To praise this God let all things sway men,
Who lives and raigns for ever. Amen.
All these wondrous Stories and Prayers, concerning S. Catherine, cannot well
be understood, without the help of the Roman Breviary, but the Lessons being
too tedious to set down at length, I Will only give the Reader the sum of them.

Lesson 1.

Brev. Roman. Antiq. ad November. 25.
In the Reign of Maxentius Caesar, there was in Alexandria, a beautiful Maid,
Twenty two Years old, called Catherine, the only Daughter of King Costus, one
who was very Religious and very Learned, both in Divine and Humane Philosophy,
and skilful in the Languages of several Nations, living, after her Fathers
death, in his Palace, seeking only to be espoused to Christ, and bestowing all
to the poor, save what was necessary to the maintenance of her Self and Family.
[Neither must that be omitted which Ribadeneira mentions out of Petrus de
Natalibus; (and I wonder how it came to be left out of this Lesson) that before
S. Catherine was baptized, she saw one Night in a Vision the Bl. Virgin with
Christ in her Arms, Ribadeneira flos Sanctor. in vit. S. Cath. p. 364.
who offering Katherine to her Son, he turned his face from her, as if he
abominated her, and denied her to be fair, that was not yet baptized. Whereupon
Katherine awaking, perceiving what she wanted, to make her acceptable to
Christ, was baptized. Then Christ appeared again to her in the same form as
before, and espoused her to himself before his Mother and a numerous company of
Heavenly Spirits, and gave her a Ring as a pledge of his espousing her, which S.
Katherine, awaking, found upon her Finger.]

Les. 2. Maxentius coming to Alexandria, commanded all Persons to offer
Sacrifices to the Gods. This Virgin being troubled to see many Christians,
through fear, not daring to confess Christ, boldly speaking to the Emperor,
discoursed to him against his false Gods, and concerning the Knowledge of the
true God the Creator of all things; who being moved by her reasoning, and more
amazed at her beauty, commanded her to be carried into his Palace.

Les. 3. Where upon discourse with her, finding himself unable to maintain an
Argument against her, he caused 50 Philosophers to be assembled, to dispute
with her: Who being encouraged by an Angel to undertake them all, she did so;
and was too hard for them in disputation: upon which the Emperor, in great
indignation, commanded them all to be burnt.

Les. 4. Who as they were led to Execution, humbled themselves before the
Virgin, confessing their sins in contradicting her sacred admonitions, and
professing themselves to be Christians, signed themselves with the Cross, and
entered the Fire; but God miraculously preserved their Bodies untoucht, as he
did the Three Children, and received their Souls. Then the Emperor attempted
her by flatteries, and large promises of making her a Queen; but she resisting
them all, he commanded her to be stripped of her cloths and chastized with
Scorpions, and to be shut up in a dark Prison 12 days without any food: but she
was comforted by the visit of an Angel, and a white Dove brought her provisions
to sustain her.

Les. 5. The Queen meanwhile, pitying the miseries she was condemned to, by
means of Porphyrius (the Chief Commander of the Militia) who bribed the Guards,
she with Porphyry give S. Katherine a visit in the Prison, and beheld her there
shining with inestimable brightness, and upon discourse she converted them both
to Christ.

Les. 6. After this, the Emperor caused four Wheels to be prepared stuck with
sharp Irons, (as we see in the Pictures of the Catherine Wheel) two of which
were to turn one way, and the other two the contrary way, and so tear her flesh
in pieces: but when she was brought forth thus to be punished, upon her prayer,
an Angel descending from Heaven, broke the Wheels in pieces, and slew 4000 of
the Heathens.

Les. 7. and 8. All which the Queen beholding, and desiring her Husband to take
notice, how powerful the God of the Christians was, He in great indignation to
see her made a Christian, commanded her Breasts to be torn off with Iron Hooks;
which she, being heartned by S. Katherine, cheerfully underwent, and both She
and Porphyry were beheaded.

Les. 9. Then when the Emperor found all means unsuccessful to move Katherine,
he commanded her also to be beheaded; who coming to the place, and obtaining
respite to make her prayers to God, she said thus. O Lord Jesu Christ, I desire
of Thee, that all Christians, who in any tribulation seeking my Patronage, cry
to Thee, that thou who art blessed for ever, would hear them. Then a Voice
coming from Heaven, said, Thy Prayer is heard; and so her Head was struck off,
on the 25 of November.

Immediately, in token of her pure Virginity, instead of Blood, Milk flowed
from her Body upon the Earth abundantly. Her Body was carried by Angels, and
placed on Mount Sinai, where many Miracles are wrought, upon the Invocation of
this Saint. For from her Grave a Fountain of Oil perpetually flows forth, with
which the Bodies of infirm People being anointed, to their great joy they are
restored to soundness.

[So far the Lessons.]
This also is all told in several Prosa's of the Roman Missal forenamed, of
which I Will only set down one.
COrdis oris digna laud
Catherina virgo gaude,
Summae consors gloriae.
Gaude quod ad viam lucis
Excoecatos tu reducis
Fumo Philosophiae.
Gaude dulcis Catharina,
Spreto rege fit Regina
Per te fide stabilis:
Mortem subit nec tristatur,
Et cum ipsa decollatur
Porphyrius nobilis.
Non te terrent flammae, rotae,
Nec evellit a Christo te
Rex prece nec pretio.
Lac effudit pro cruore
Aegros sanat a languore
Olei profusio.
In supremo Sina montis
Tu sepulta, very fontis
Quo frueris poculo.
Ut nos potes Christum ores
Et coronet nos minores
Hoc finito seculo. Amen.
O Virgin Catherin rejoice,
Worthy all praise of heart and voice,
Consort of glory high:
Thou did to the way of light revoke
Those that had lost their sight, through smoke
Of vain Philosophy.
By thee sweet Catherine, the Queen
No ways regarding The Emperors spleen
In Christian faith was stable:
Who bravely died without all dread,
And Porphyry with her his head
To lose thou did enable.
Neither Flames nor Wheels do fright thee,
Nor the King from Christ invite thee
Either by gifts or prayer.
Pure Milk from thee for blood does spring;
For oil that flows and health does bring
The sick to thee repair.
Thou buried lie on Sina's Mountain
There of all joys from the true Fountain
Delicious draughts thou have.
To Christ for us less-worthy pray,
That we may taste those joys, and may
Be crowned, when life is past.
NOTES.
ONE that reads this Formal story of a Saint, whose life is placed about the
Year 300 after Christ, might well expect that some of the ancient Writers
should have given us a fair account of a History so famous, and whose
circumstances, if they were true, are highly remarkable. But alas! Baronius has
spoiled all this expectation, Baron. ad an. 307. sec. 33.
where he complains that they were pretermitted by Eusebius; and, which is
worse, that her Acts were written largely by an uncertain Author, but less
faithfully than was meet; and gravely adds, Melius consulitur Ecclesiasticae
veritati, etc. They provide better for the truth of Ecclesiastical History, who
pass over in silence things that are uncertain, than such as tell any lie,
though never so specious, and mixed with some truths: for the mind rests
satisfied in those few truths, and by probable conjectures, leaning upon truth,
can conceive and meditate, and contemplate the rest: But in the other case, the
mind of the Reader being once offended with a lie (though but a little one)
becomes doubtful and wavering, and knows not where to fix a sure footing, but
having once stumbled upon a lie, suspects even truths themselves.

A very observable Memorandum this is for Protestants, who may therefore the
better be excused, having met so often in the lives of their Saints, not little
but loud untruths, if they be very cautious what they assent to, (and much more
when it comes to be a ground of their Prayers,) especially when the late Author
of Sure-footing, has so horribly miscarried in his Attempt to establish them by
Tradition. I think this of S. Catherine of Alexandria, is as remarkable an
Instance as any; which may well be looked upon, from the beginning to the end,
as a Fiction.

We need not go much farther than to their own Cassander to prove it; Cassandri
opera p. 278.
who shows, that the very Name of Catherine was not known to the Latins above
300 Years since at most; nor known to the Greeks (from whom the Latins derived
the veneration of her) much sooner. Eusebius that writ diligently the affairs
of Alexandria, and lived about the same time that her Acts are recorded, says
nothing of her, nor Nicephorus who lived after that, nor any of the Greek or
Latin Ecclesiastical Historians. All the Martyrologies, Kalendaries,
Ecclesiastical Offices of any Antiquity, are wholly silent in this matter. Even
Aldelm the Bishop of Sarisbury in the Books he writ on set purpose in praise of
the famous Virgins of both Sexes, has passed her over; which he could not have
done, if her fame had either been so great as now, or her Name known: neither
is she to be met with in S. Jerome's Calendar, or in Bede's Martyrologie.

Besides, the truth of History contradicts what is told of her: especially when
she is said to be put to death by Maxentius at Alexandria, whereas he passed
the time of his whole Reign, or Tyranny, at Rome. She is said to be a Kings
Daughter, whereas Alexandria, and all Egypt, from the time of Augustus his
Victory at Actium, was reduced into a Province.

The story of her Father Costus, how he was born at Constance, a City of
Germany, and warred under the King of Alexandria, and afterward when the King
dyed, was chosen to be King in his room; that he was called Costus, because he
came from Constance, which in the German Tongue is called Costnitz; these (says
he) are all so absurd, that they deserve no Confutation. See farther what
Cassander adds concerning the deriving of her Name and Worship to the Latins,
out of a certain Book, De ortu S. Catharinae; and that S. Catherine was first
put into the Martyrologie, by Pope John the XXII. who lived about the Year 1316.

As for the pretenses of Baronius, for the countenancing of her from Eusebius,
Baron. ad Romans Martyrol. Nov. 25.
and his Aecatharina which he finds in the Greek Menologies, they have been
all so shamefully baffled by our Joh. Reinold. l. 1. de Romans Eccles. Idolola.
c. 5.
Reinoldus, and so poorly defended by Serar. in Litaneut. 2.
Serarius; that it had been wiselyer ordered a great deal, to have put her with
S. George and S. Christopher, among the Symbolical Saints, (as Reynolds
advised) for then indeed it would have run well. S. Catherine would then (as he
says) have represented the Church, the Daughter of the King of Heaven, living
in Earth, as in Egypt, opposed by the powerful and wise Men of the World, but
conquering them, though passing through many afflictions, and at length
conveyed by Angels to Heaven after death.

Now let us farther observe, what work they have made since the Council of
Trent, in Reforming the Roman Breviary, as to this Legend of S. Katherine; from
whence we may better conjecture, how rarely Popes are wont to reform things
amiss. In the Breviary of Pius the V. Printed at Antwerp, 1580. the old Prayer
(Deus qui dedisti legem, etc.) is still retained, and all the substance of the
Legend, though not made so large; only the name of King Costus is left out, the
Queen is now named Faustina, Katherines prodigious Learning is determined to be
at 18 Years of Age; one Wheel is said to be prepared for her torments instead
of four; the 4000 slain by the Angel, the Milk and Oil flowing after her Death,
and the voice from Heaven, are left out: And as in other Lives, the Names of
the Authors are set down usually, at the beginning, out of which they are
taken; so here is prefixed, Eusebius, lib. 7. c. 26. That which has been done
since that time by succeeding Popes, is this; That in the present Breviaries,
the quotation of Eusebius, which was both false, and nothing to the purpose, is
omitted; (which, by the way, I observe is now generally practiced in most of
the Lives of the Saints; the Authors are not quoted out of which they are
taken, and it has this cunning in it, that now the falsities cannot so easily
be discovered) now also, after the diligence and observations of Baronius upon
the Martyrologie, in every place, instead of Maxentius, is put, the Emperor
Maximinus; the Name of Faustina is omitted; the number of Philosophers not
determined to be 50 as before; but instead of it is put many Philosophers: and
yet all the circumstances of the story, as it is in the old Breviary, have the
same Authority of Tradition, and long usage in the Church; which, in the
judgment of Mr. Sergeant, and his Brethren of the Scientifical way, is a
hundred times more Infallible than any Pope. And for my part, I look upon the
Milk and Oil as the most precious part of the story; nor can I altogether
excuse the Pope from rashness, in taking away three of the Wheels, for who
knows what mystery may be in them? However, this good use may be made of these
two great Examples, the Pope and Baronius, to believe as much of any Legend, as
every Man thinks fit.

Now though these alterations signify not much, yet in one particular, these
Popes may shame Mr. Cressy, if he be capable of it: viz. In their leaving out
the miraculous attestation of her chastity, the Milk when her Head was cut off
streaming from her Body instead of Blood.

If Mr. Cr. had been of the Council, he would by no means, I dare say, have
consented to this omission: for he has, in his Church History, commended some
for living like Virgins, and others for preserving even their Virginity, in a
state of Marriage. Thus Ethelfleda, he says, was of such chastity, Chapter Hist. l.
30. cap. 8.
that even in Marriage she lived as a single Woman, abstaining from the use of
it. For having at the beginning of her Marriage, had experience of the pains
and incommodities of Childbearing, she ever after abstained from her Husbands
embraces, protesting that it was unbecoming the Daughter of a King, to admit a
sensual pleasure, attended not long after with so great incommodities. Ibid.
cap. 14.
And again, Ethelfleda for the space of 40 Years after the Birth of Alwina her
only Child, always refused the embraces of her Husband.

Such another story, Surius affords us, concerning S. Matrona of Perga, who
after her Marriage, and the having had one only Child, resolved, for her
greater freedom in serving God, Surius Tom. 6. ad Nov. 8. ex Metaphraste.
to forsake her Husband; being encouraged to it by this Vision: A certain Man
seemed to run after her, and she to fly away from him, and hardly escaped,
being saved by certain Monks: which she interpreted in this sense, that she
must take upon her the habit of a Monk, to escape her Husband: This she did by
feigning her self to be an Eunuch, and changing her Name to Babyla: She had
like to have been discovered by a Monk, who observed her Ears to have been
bored through, where Jewels had heretofore hung. But the holy Abbot Bassianus,
had it revealed to him by a Vision, that she was a Woman in Man's habit, and
charged her with it: he proposed also a hard Question to her, how she could
satisfy her self, to have offered her mouth securely, to receive the This
refers to the custom of giving the kiss of peace mutually; which Polydore
Virgil explains, De inventor. rerum, lib. 5. cap. 11. Finito canone, dicitur
pax Domini; hic osculum pacis datur inter sacerdotes mutuo, quod Innocentii
primi inventum est.
salutation of peace from the Friars. Her answer was, that she looked upon
those to whom she offered her self, to be as incapable of any bad impressions
as the Angels. (and I suppose if one of them had embraced her, she would have
interpreted it according to the Gloss, that the Friar did this, hereby to Si
ergo Clericus amplectitur muli^rem, interpretabitur quod causa benedicendi tam
hoc faciat. Causa 11. qu. 3. ca. Absit. in glossa.
give her his Benediction.) And against the Objection, why she did not in
prosecution of her design go into a Nunnery rather among Women; she defended
her self by her Vision, and that in this Habit she might the better be
concealed from her Husband; and so she still remained there. I Will add but one
passage more, to show how finely they make these foolish persuasions, about
Religion, work. When S. Matrona's Husband after this pursued her, having learnt
how she had concealed her self; she fled again from him, and hid her self in an
Idols Temple at Beritus, choosing rather to fall among Devils, or wild Beasts,
than to be taken by her Husband: and an excellent Reason is given of it. For if
they should light upon her, they would only hurt her Body; But if her Husband
should take her, he would be more pernicious to her than Devils, or wild
Beasts, as one that could hurt her Soul Vt qui possit cum corpore animam
laedere, eam rursus ^rahens ad mundum, and tanquam suam uxorem vendicans. Ibid.
together with her Body, drawing her again to the World, and challenging her
for his Wife.

But a more famous Instance of this abstinence, countenanced even by Miracles,
is given us by Mr. Cr. in Ethelreda (or Saint Audrey) who in obedience to her
Parents consented to marry Prince Tombert, Lib. 16. c. 4.
though she before had fixed all her affections on Christ alone, and her desire
was to confine her self to a Cloister. And now her next design (and a worthy
one it was) is to obtain of her Husband a permission to preserve the integrity
of her Body; and to that end spared no Prayers nor Praises of Virginal Purity;
and her Husband admiring her Angelical chastity, he gave her hope of a
compliance with her desires: But not long after, reason being overcome with the
violence of An excellent comment this is, upon (...). Heb. 13.4.
corrupt nature, he yielded to his own desires, and required of her that right
which the Laws of Marriage allowed him. [and which, if S. Paul's discourse be
not foolish with these men, she could not without injustice, deny him, 1 Cor.
7. Where speaking of the (...), he says, (...), etc.] But when he came to
extort her consent to his impatient desires (now (...), to save the Virgin) God
prevented him, for he found the holy Virgin encompassed with a wonderful Light,
and a Celestial Flame, which dazeled his Eyes, and consumed the Fire of Lust
burning in his bosom; and so he continued for Seven, or Eight Years without
touching her, till he dyed. And now, as if all this were too little to
celebrate the fame of this Virgin, Mr. Cr. brings a second Scene of her upon
the Stage.

For, after Prince Tombert's death, Egfrid the Heir of the Northumbrian
Kingdom, invited by the fame of her sanctity and perfections, [and if this,
that has been related, was part of her holy fame, it was indeed a great
temptation to court her for a Wife] demanded her in Marriage, and by the
pressing importunity of her Parents, and the Nobles of the East Angles, her
resistance was conquered: so that once more for the common good, [and you may
well imagine what great good to the public, was to be expected from her
marriage] she was compelled to submit her self to a new servitude. And now she
uses her former Arts with this Prince Egfrid also, that there might be a
conjunction of minds only, with a separation of Bodies; and so successful they
were, that they lived together Twelve Years without any prejudice of S.
Etheldred's Virginity, and conversed together, as if they had been divested of
their Bodies. After which, all attempts proving in vain to change his Wives
purpose, he gave her Liberty to enter into a Monastery: But afterward,
repenting of his indulgence, he came by force to take her out thence: who upon
notice of it, fled with two Virgins up a high Hill, whither he pursued her: but
Almighty God, to preserve his Servants, had encompassed the Hill with deep
Waters from the Sea, which the King could not pass; and there Tradition informs
us, that they were sustained by God Seven Days on the Mountain, without any
corporal food; and traveling from thence, on a Night, laying her self down in
a commodious shade to sleep; she found when she awaked, that her Let Mr. Cr.
remember S. Patrick's Staff, and tell me, whether that story be not as credible
as this.
Staff, which she had fastened in the ground at her head, had taken Root, and
began to flourish with Leaves, and in succeeding times it became a very large
and tall Tree, and continues to this day (says the Hist. Eliens.) called
Etheldred-stow, or Etheldred's rest. When she was dead, (says Bid) the flesh
of this Saint, a long The Roman Martyrologie, Jun. 23. says, the body of
Ediltrudis (so she is there called) was found incorrupt undecim post annis: The
Breviary of S^rum says, Sexdecim annis.
time after she was buried, could not be corrupted, which was a sign (says he)
that whilst she was alive, she remained uncorrupted by humane touches. But
what is this number of Years to the Body of such a Virgin? Mr. Cressy has found
Vouchers, that almost 500 Years after this, (in the Year 1106, and her Life is
placed in the Year 660) She and her Sister Withburga, being both taken up to be
buried more magnificently, the Miracle of her Incorruption was publicly
manifested. Ch Hist. l. 16. cap. 6.
And concerning Withburga, Capgrave comes in with his Spring of pure Water
(which he scarce ever fails to tell us of) that issued from the place where she
had been first buried, and cured many Diseases. And for a farewell, Capgrave
adds, That one of the Monks adventuring to touch her Body, a lively blush
colored her Cheeks, as if she still had breath in her: To which Mr. Cr.
subjoyns in a different Character, Her dead Body expressing the same
shamefastness, which her self would have done when alive. And indeed I can
almost believe that the dead Body of this Virgin, might blush as soon as the
tellers of this story. Mr. Cr. is too old now, to have any of this color in
his Face; and the other Miracle-monger, I believe, never had so much grace in
all his life, as to feel the very motus primo-primos to any such thing. However
I have done my part to make Mr. Cr. ashamed, by showing him the Example of
several Popes, who all have consented to blot out the foolish story of S.
Katherine's Milk, and if they had been so good natured, might have done the
same to the translation of her Body from Mount Sinai, and the rest; for all
depends upon their pleasure, and Antiquity countenances one no more than the
other. They were ashamed of the unlikely change of blood into milk, though it
was to attest the snow-white chastity of a Virgin ( in signum nivei pudoris,
was the phrase in the old Breviary.) But here we must be engaged to believe, I
know not how many Miracles one after another, while she was alive, and when she
was dead, only to testify to the World, that S. Audrey was true to a wicked
and superstitious resolution, against the sense, not of the sensual (as he
phrases it) but of all sober Mankind, To the present sensual Age, this may
seem incredible. Cr^s. ubi supra.
and against the Faith and Covenants of Marriage, though no less with him than
a Sacrament. I would ask him, if either of her Husbands should have taken that
Counsel, which they falsely Father upon Luther, Si non vult uxor, veniat
ancilla; or when Egfrid upon her going into the Monastery, took (as Mr. Cr.
says) Ermenburga to Wife, whether the guilt of such supposed Fornication, or of
this Adultery, did not in great measure lie at her Door, for withholding the
debitum conjugale, notwithstanding all her superstitious veneration of
Virginity? and whether she did not better deserve to be served as that Man was,
who for leaving his Wives Bed, and withholding this debitum, Capgrave in vit.
S. Henrici.
though it was only in the time of Lent, yet was severely chid for it by S.
Henry the Hermit, and as a punishment of his presumption, found himself one
Night when he awaked, laid naked in a stinking Stable, under the Horses feet?
The truth is, I wonder that when so many Miracles are pretended to save her
Virginity, that no body, to free her from this blame, would coin one such
wonder for her Husband, as they report concerning S. Thomas of Aquin; Romans
Breviar. 7 Martii. lec. 4.
who in his Youth praying with bended Knees before the sign of the Cross, and
there falling asleep, he seemed in his sleep to feel his Loins fast bound by
Angels W^ are told in the Life of S. Severus, that he had a Wife, before he was
a Bishop, but after that, he did not use her, but she was turned into a Sister,
because of that thundering command of our Savior, Sint vestri Eumbi praecincti.
Bolland. 1 Febr. in vit. Severi. p. 86.
, from which time forward, Omni libidinis sensu caruit, He never had any
lustful inclinations more; or such a one as they tell of Father Elias, who
being vexed with fleshly temptations, upon his fasting and prayer, three Angels
appeared to him in a Dream, one held his Hands, another held his Feet, and the
third seemed with a Rasor to geld him, Dauroutii Flores Exemplor. Tom. 2. page
214. Capgrave. fol. 38.
and from that time, Nec pristinae tentationis scintillam sensit, He never felt
any spark of the old temptation: but the case was quite otherwise (as you
heard) with Egfrid.

Let the Roman Church therefore praise such examples of the Saints, as that of
Alexius; who the first Night of his Marriage, Romans Brev. 17 July. Les. 3.
Alexius propter eximium Jesu Christi amorem, prima nocte nuptiarum, relinquens
intactam sponsam etc.
for his singular love to Christ, left his Spouse untouched, and undertook a
Pilgrimage to visit the famous Churches of the World. Let Mr. Cr. boast as much
as he pleases, of the Examples of Princes, that have vowed abstinence after
Marriage. Let him vent his Gall against the Reformation, Chapter Hist. l. 10. c. 1.
as indulging the Flesh (who I am sure in their Principles allow no more in
this particular, than the Scriptures do, nor condemn any thing which that does
not) I shall not at all stick to assert, that it is a true Reformation of
foolish and impious Opinions in the Church of God, to forbid living in such
hatred of the Flesh (I use his own phrase) as this Virgin in her circumstances
unlawfully practiced, and he as foolishly applauds. It may be he is much taken
with that, which Pope Siricius urged upon the Clergy, as worthy, chaste and
honest, Epist. 3. inter Council. Labbe. Tom. 2. p. 1029.
that the Priests and Levites should not company with their Wives, because of
their daily necessary employment in Divine Ministrations; and because that they
that are in the Flesh, cannot please God, but ye (says he) are not now in the
Flesh, but in the Spirit. Indeed an admirable application of Scripture, and
worthy of a Pope! which may be matched with a suitable story of the Monks
inventing, how a married Priest, having Bedded with his Wife over Night,
Capgrave vit. S. Cuthbert. f. 76.
the next day when he came to receive the Sacred Mysteries, he saw the Particle
of the Body of Christ, which he had put in the Cup, changed into a horrid form,
of the color of Pitch rather than of Bread and Wine, and the taste as bitter as
Gall, which made him confess his fault to the Bishop, and resolve to live more
chastely and religiously afterward: (that is, I suppose, to forsake his Wife and
fornicate.) For the course which they tell us, Martyrol. Francisc. ad 25 Aug.
p. 367.
S. Lewis took before he companied with his Queen, to pray three Days and three
Nights together; even this would not have sufficed, to sanctify the
Marriage Bed to a Priest. As for Mr. Cressy's flurt against Luther's Marriage,
Chapter Hist. l. 10. c. 1. in fine.
(at the end of the Chapter) it only tempts me to question, whether possibly he
may not be of Cardinal Campegius his mind, who, as Sleiden Sleidan. Comment.
lib. 4. Quod sacerdot^s fiant mariti, multo esse gravius peccatum, quam si
plurimat domi miretrices alant, etc.
informs us, declared that it was a greater sin for Priests to marry, than to
keep many Whores. But as sensual as he would insinuate the Reformation to be, I
would fain have him tell us of any one in it, that ever appeared to justify
that which Johannes a Casa, the Pope's Legate and Archbishop of Beneventum,
did; (and one who gloried too, no doubt, that he was never married, as Luther
was) who wrote a Book in defense of that sin, Sleidan. Comment. lib. 21. page
652.
for which God destroyed Sodom. Let him show among us any such Legal exemption
for the encouraging of Fornication, as that in their Canon Law. He that has no
Wife, Decreti distinct. 34. ca. 4. Is qui non habet, uxorem; and pro uxore
concubinam habet, a communione non repellatur.
but a Concubine instead of a wife, let him not be driven from the Communion.
Let him show any such impure Doctrine among us, as that Gloss on the Canon Law.
Decreti distinc. 34. ca. 16. Vidua est: where the Gloss says. Meretrix est,
quae admiserit plures, quam viginti tria hominum millia.
She is a Wh^re, that has had to do with more than Three and Twenty Thousand
Men. I desire Mr. Cr. also, to parallel in the impure Reformation, the story
that is related by Matthew Paris; how when Pope Innocent IV. was taking his
leave of Lions in France, Cardinal Hugo made a farewell Sermon; Matthew. Paris ad
an. 1251. p. 819. Amici, magnam fecimus, postquam in hanc urbem venimus,
utilitatem and eleemosynam; quando enim primum huc venimus, tria vol quatuor
prostibula invenimus; sed nunc recedentes, unum solum relinquimus, verum ipsum
durat continuatim, ab Orientali porta civitatis, usque ad Occideutalem.
wherein, after he had saluted the Town in the Name of the Pope and his whole
Court, he added this Speech. Friends, we have brought much profit, and done an
act of great Charity to this City; for when we first came hither, we found
three or four Whore-houses; but now, at our departure, we leave only one; but
that one extends it self all along from the Eastern to the Western Gate of the
City.

Luther is a carnal Man for marrying a Wife; but here are your spiritual Men,
the Pope and his Attendants; who by this Cardinal's confession in a public
Sermon, had debauched a whole City, and turned it into a Stews; and yet, I
doubt not, but after all this, modest Mr. Cressy will wipe his mouth, and in
his next Book, rail against the carnal Protestants, with as good a grace as
ever. If any one suspect this Sermon of the Cardinals at Lions, as a light
Frolique, or expressing only the corrupt practices of that Church at that time;
he may do well to consult the Decretals Decretal. Gregor. l. 1. Tit. 20. ca. 6.
Sane postulasti per sedem Apostolicam edoceri, si Presbyteri, plu^es concubinas
habentes, bigami cens^antur; ad quod duximus respondendum, quod cum
irregularitatem non incurrerint Bigamiae, cum e^s tanquam simplici fornicatione
notatis, quoad executionem sacerdotalis officii poteris dispensare.
, and there he will find, but a few Years before, an Epistle of Pope Innocent
III. to an Archbishop of Lions, and his Legate, where he may be satisfied,
that the Opinion also of that Church, was more favorable to the Whoredom than
to the Marriage of Clergymen. Thou desire to be instructed, whether Priests
keeping many Concubines, are to be reckoned among the Bigames; [i.e. those that
had been twice married, who were thereupon incapable of Orders:] to which we
have thought fit to answer, that since these have not incurred the irregularity
of Bigamy, thou may dispense with them, as to the exercise of the Priestly
Office, as with those that are noted only with the crime of simple Fornication.
Where you see that second Marriage of Priests; is by this Pope accounted a more
heinous crime than the having many Whores. Nay even Adultery, as well as
Fornication, passed among them for lesser sins, as appears by the Decretal,
where we find that Pope Alexander III. orders, Decretal. l. 2. Tit. 1. ca. 4.
that Clergymen that were convicted of a crime before a Secular Judge, are not
thereupon to be condemned by the Bishop, but must be again convicted before
him, and punished by him (without sending him back to the secular Judge) or
deposed, unless he dispense with him; and then he adds, De adulteriis vero and
aliis criminibus quae sunt minora, potest Episcopus cum celericis post peractam
poenitentiam dispensare. i.e. But for Adulteries and other Crimes which are
lesser, the Bishop may dispense with Clergymen, after they have undergone
their Penance. The story of Cardinal Joh. Cremensis is sufficiently known from
our Historians; who came into England in Henry the First's time, to divorce the
Clergy from their Wives, and made a Canon in a Council at London, that
Clergymen should have no society with their Wives or Concubines, or any other
Women, save those that could not be suspected; but after he had made a fierce
declamation, to this purpose, in the Synod; the very Night following, the
Cardinal was found in Bed with a Whore. Baronius indeed would fain deny this
story, by supposing that Roger Hoveden and Matthew. Westmonaster. had it from
Hen. Huntingdon, Baron. ad an. 1125. p. 164.
the first Writer of it, and that he was a favourer of the married Clergy; And,
what then? perhaps one reason why he was so, was by seeing the baseness and
wickedness of the contrary Zealots. But Matthew. Paris has told the same thing of
him, Matthew. Paris ad an. 1125. p. 70.
and says, that Res notissima negari non potuit: i. e. It was so known a thing,
it could not be denied: and after so many witnesses that assert it, I think the
best way to have brought him off, would have been, to have told us that he
tried S. Colman's Girdle, Colganus de S. Colmano. 3 Febr. p. 246.
and it met about him exactly; whose virtue is known to be such, that he that
preserves his Virginity, though he be never so corpulent, it will upon trial
compass his body; but he that has violated his Chastity, though he be never so
slender and lean; can never gird himself with it. I shall only add this, that
the Romish Writers, do not upon any argument want a convenient confidence, but
in this Controversy about Marriage and Virginity, they are impudent even to
admiration.

I Might also here subjoyn another of their Saints, who is placed in the Roman
Calendar, upon the 13 of August; to wit, Hippolytus, (the Soldier, not the
Presbyter) who may well be ranked among the Fabulous ones. The Legend
concerning his suffering under Decius the Emperor, who condemned him to be
tied to wild Horses, and so drawn to death, seems to be taken from the Fables
of the Poets, concerning Hippolytus Vid. Euripid. in Phoedra. Senec. in
Hippolyto. Ovid Metamorph. l. 15. and Fastor. l. 3. and Fastor. l. 5.

Hippolyte infelix, velles coluisse Dionen,
Cum consternatis diripereris equi^.

(one of the same name) the Son of Theseus, who lost his Life in the same
manner. The Acts of S. Laurence, out of which his story is taken, by the
confession of Baronius Baron. ad Roman. Martyrolog. 10 August.
contain in them many things Apocryphal, and contrary to truth. In the Old
Breviaries, the Lessons make Decius the Emperor, after the death of S.
Laurence, to hear his cause as a Judge, and to deliver him to Valerian the
Prefect, to inflict the aforesaid punishment on him; whereas S. Laurence
himself suffered under Valerian, seven or eight Years after Decius his death,
as Baronius, in the forenamed place, confesses. The inquisitive Reader may more
fully satisfy himself, by consulting herein Joh. Raynolds de Romans Eccles.
Idololat. L. 1. cap. 5. sec. 23. to whom I refer him, without adding any more
about him, only this; that though his Body might have been torn into Forty
Pieces while he was dragged along with the wild Horses; yet, we are told by
Surius, that Colen has got the Body of Hippolytus, (and I do not read that it
wants there any one part) and it lies in the Church of S. Vrsula: Surius vit.
S. Laurentii. 10 August. in fine.
a very convenient place, where it is joined to very suitable company; and
where, if it had been as much for their interest, we might have met with the
Body of the Son of Theseus also.

AND now after I have given this account of so many of their Fabulous Saints,
and the many Fabulous reasons of worshipping the true ones; I cannot but give
them joy, before I part with this Subject, of that mighty comfort and
satisfaction, which such Devotions are able to afford them, and of the vast
advantages they have of us in this regard.

Oh how joyful, and how becoming the Devotions of Christians it is, to sing a
Hymn in praise of a Virgins beard; and to celebrate the fame of a man, that
walked two Miles with his Head off? How pleasingly, in a devout fancy, does the
Savior of the World, sit mounted upon the back of a tall Giant, while he
carries him safely over a dangerous River? And who can entertain a doubt
against the Resurrection, who contemplates in his mind the seven Sleepers in
their Cave, taking a comfortable nap of above three hundred Years long, and
then waking as young and fresh, as when they lay down; and thinking, that only
one common Night of time had passed over their Heads? What man dares open his
mouth to plead for Idolatry, after Longinus his glorious confutation of it? --
Who then, without all doubt, Spoke to good purpose, when his tongue was out.

See 2d. Lesson of Longinus.
Alas! what would have become of our Christianity, if these Traditions and
Revelations did not back and support it? How dully would Religion have been
conducted, as the Courtships of those Lovers are, that eat and drink as other
Men do, which now by virtue of these Spiritual Romances, may live almost in
perpetual rapture and ecstasy; be maintained I know not how long, by a sweet
glance from one of these Saints in a Vision; be carried almost up to Heaven, by
a sight of one of the Feathers that fell out of the Wing of Michael the
Archangel, and kiss it with a greater transport, than ever Romantic Lover did
the fallen Glove of his Mistress? need no other Physic in sickness, though one
lay gasping, as if he was taking his last breath, save only that of S. Gilbert
S. Gylbert on a time was near dead of the Quency, and when his throat was so
great, that he might not take breath, our Lady came to him and said: Gilbert my
Servant, it were evil do, that thy throat should suffer penance, that has so
often times gladded me with joys; and anon she took her fair pappe, and milked
on his throat, and went her way, and anon therewith he was whole, and thanked
our Lady ever after. Festivale f. 95.
, a little breast-milk from the fair pap of the Blessed Virgin; and one that is
troubled with imaginations of being deserted by Jesus, may with that wise Nun
seek him up and down the House, Casarius in Dialog. distinc. 6. cap. 31, 32.
and find him in a hole of the Wall; or as another weeping sadly in a like
distress, having lost her wooden Crucifix, heard Christ's voice, saying to her,
Weep not, Daughter, for I lie in a Bag under thy Bed-straw; and no Body,
without such a voice, would have looked for him there. We poor Protestants
thought we were well provided for by the mercy of God, after we had offended
him by our sins, when we heard how pleasing to God the Sacrifice of his dear
Son was, when he dyed upon the Cross, and that we should have this
compassionate Savior to be our Judge. But alas! these Men have discovered
another spring of comfort and way of pardon, that we never thought of, nor God
ever told the former World of, till these blessed Revelations came in vogue. We
hear now of a Queen as well as of a King of Heaven, and of a Mother, as well as
a Father of mercy; and what may we not now expect from this Patroness? If
Prayers to Christ himself be not speedily answered, here is a new course may be
taken, even that which the tempted Monk took, who said to him. Truly Lord,
Caesar. Dialog. distinc. 6. c. 30.
if thou do not deliver me from this temptation, I Will complain of thee to thy
Mother: This we should judge to be intolerable pride and sawciness; but, says
the Relator, Our Lord the Teacher of humility, and lover of simplicity, as if
he feared to be accused before his Mother, prevented his complaint, by
mitigating his temptation. The name of a Judge, that carries terror in the face
of it; but oh! the sweetness of these Mothers breasts. Is it not pity, that
any should call that Blasphemy, which Carolus Scribanius In Amphitheatro
honoris.
, being heated not so much with Poetic rapture, as with Devotion to the Bl.
Virgin, sang in her praises, in the words that follow; though they seem indeed
to prefer her before our Savior?

HAereo lac inter meditans, interque cruorem,
Inter delicias uberis and lateris.
Et dico, si forte oculos super ubera tendo,
Diva parens mammae gaudia posco tuae.
Sed dico, si deinde oculos in vulnera verto,
O Jesu lateris Gaudia malo tui.
Rem scio, prensabo, si fas erit, ubera dextra,
Laeva prensabo vulnera, si dabitur.
Lac matris miscere volo cum sanguine Nati,
Non possum Antidoto nobiliore frui, etc.
IN doubtful thought whether to choose,
The Virgin's Milk, or Savior's Blood,
Upon the sweets of both I muse,
And both do seem delicious food.
If to her Sacred Breasts I guide
Mine Eyes, those sweets I longing crave;
But if to Jesus wounded side
I look, those joys I h'd rather have.
I Will doubt no more; with my right hand
The Virgins breasts I Will gently press,
My left (without a countermand)
To Jesus wounds shall do us less.
I Will mix the Mother's Milk with the Son's Blood,
No other Antidote is half so good.
There is also another advantage, which they of the Church of Rome clearly have
of us; that, as they have ordered the matter, their way of Devotion, may be as
well exercised, and as comfortably, when a Man is asleep, as when he is awake;
nay, what if I say better, and more to a Man's content? For there is a certain
scurvy troublesome thing called Reason, which is wont uncivilly at other times,
to disturb the pleasing Visitations of those Imaginary and Chimerical Saints,
and to blaspheme the raised and rapturous fancies of the true ones: but in
Dreams of the Night, when reason is laid asleep, then is the season to
entertain sweet communion with them. And now the Soul may take an easy flight,
and advance as high as the Mountain, to whose top S. Katherine was conveyed
by Angels: That grace which before was as hard to be discerned as an invisible
Hair, may now as plainly be perceived, as the downy I hope the Catholic Reader
will pardon me, if I am mistaken in the description of her beard, having never
consulted their best Books about her, I mean her Pictures, wherein, possibly,
she may be repre^ented with great Whi^kers,
Beard that covered so gracefully the Lip and Chin of S. Wilgefortis. And those
cross-grained and knotty Vices, that had before blunted the edge of all the
keenest Sermons of Religion, may in one Night, without feeling any pain at all,
be quickly hewn down and destroyed, by the powerful Arm and Axe of the Blessed
Carpenter Joseph. It was no doubt, at one of these happy seasons of Revelation,
That the Woman that was defouled in Lechery (to give you the words of the
Festivale) after fell into despair, Festiv. fol. 69.
thinking of Christ's doom, and the horrible pains of Hell; but she bethought
her, how that Children, be they never so wroth, and show never so great
vengeance, how lightly they will cease and forgive; wherefore this Woman cried
to Christ, praying him for his Childhood to have mercy upon her, and anon she
heard a voice on high in the Air, which said, Thy Trespass is forgiven Thee.
And I would fain known, what Protestant ever had the wit, to make use of so
melting a Topic, to move the great God to forgiveness? Alas! how weak and
feeble would our Moral Arguments be, to prevail with a sinner inflamed with
unchaste desires, to slight that temptation, which offers them present
satisfaction? but in this Church we hear of a lascivious Nun, Caesarius Dialog.
did. 7. cap. 33. and Gononi Chronicon, p. 214.
going upon such an appointed meeting out of her Convent, that was stopped at
every Door she tried to go out at, by a Crucifix that opposed her passage; who
thereupon falling down before the Image of the Bl. Virgin to beg her pardon,
the Image struck her a good Box on the Ear, saying; Whither, fool, would you
go? get you into your lodging: and the effect was quick and powerful; she was
preserved from the sin, and never tempted any more: Here is sudden dispatch;
One Box of the Ear, doing that which a long course of Prayer and Fasting and
Mortification, perhaps would scarce have effected. Neither does this
compassionate Lady always deal with so much severity, or testify so much
displeasure, as this Example seems to express. Sometimes she has sweetly
courted sinners, and done the same in a more loving way. That Man found it so,
Caesar. ibid. cap. 32.
who having very bad inclinations toward his Master's Wife; the Bl. Virgin
appeared to him, as he was going on Horseback from a Church, where he had been
paying her some Devotions; she laid hold on his Bridle, and asked him, whether
he liked her Countenance? he answered that he never saw any one fairer: Then
replied she, would it suffice thee, if thou could have me for thy Wife? Any
King, quoth he, might be judged happy in so fair a Comfort. The Bl. Virgin made
Answer; then I will be thy Wife, come near and kiss me: And she compelled him,
and said: This is an earnest of our Nuptials, which shall be consummated such a
Day in the presence of my Son: by which expression he knew that she was the
Mother of our Lord; and from that Hour he was perfectly delivered from the
aforesaid temptation. Here is a comfortable way, by a chaste Kiss of the Bl.
Virgin, to be rid for ever of unchaste thoughts.

This gives me also farther occasion, to congratulate those great sinners, who
finding no comfort in our sullen way, where, after Men have sinned, serious
thoughts and hearty sorrow, and unfeigned repentance are indispensably required,
before we can promise them the forgiveness of their sins, have fled into the
bosom of Holy Church. Those Men had a blessed time of it, you will say, who once
found it as easy to be made good, Vita S. Bernardi, (inter ejus opera) lib. 1.
cap. 11.
as to drink; as those Soldiers did, who upon drinking S. Bernard's Ale, which
he called the Potion of Souls, were immediately converted; such powerful Liquor
I think the Church does not now pretend to have; but however, if it be now as
kind and good natured as heretofore, the same Revelations that have created
Saints out of nothing, may also bid fair to make such sinners happy after
Death, whose good actions were next door to nothing while they lived. For are
not these three (to name no more) comfortable stories, that heretofore were
preached to the People?

A Woman of evil living dyed, Festivale, fol. 81.
who had never done a good deed in her Life, but only found a Candle to burn
before our Lady: when she was dead, Fiendes came to her, and took her Soul; and
when they were going, there came two Angels and rebuked the Fiends, why they
were so bold to take the Soul without doom; then said they, there needs none,
she did never a good deed. Then said they, take and bring the Soul before our
Lady, and so they did. But when it was found that she did never a good deed,
she must needs go to Hell: Then said our Lady, she found a Candle brennyng
before me, and was ever her will while she lived, and therefore I will be kind
to her, as she was to me, and bad an Angel take a great Serge (Torch) and light
it, and set it before her in Hell; and our Lady charged and commanded, that
there should no Fiend come there-nye, but let it stand brennyng for evermore,
to comfort all that been in Hell: Then said the Fiends, they had lever leve the
Soul, than do so: Then bad our Lady take the Soul, and bear it to the Body
again, and so they did: and when she was alive, she bethought her on her
straight doom there as she was, and went and shrove her to a Priest, and lived
long after, and she amended her life, and was ever after a good Woman, and an
holy.

Neither is this second, any whit short of the former, which the same Book
gives us. Festiv. fol. 131.
A wicked Emperor dying, a Legion of Fiends went to fetch his Soul, and coming
by a Hermits Cell, made a great noise; who opening a Window, asked one of them
that came behind, in the name of God, what they were: He said, Fiends that were
sent to the Emperor that was dead, to look if they might have him for their
reward: Then the Hermit commanded him to come again to him, to know how he
sped; and he did so, and said; his sins were laid in the Balance, and he was
nigh overcomen; then came the brennynge Deken Laurence, and laid a great Pot in
the Balance, and it drew up all together: This Pot was a great Chalice, that
the Emperor made to worship S. Laurence withal. [The Reader may see a story
just like this, of one good work of a Priest, laid in the Balance against a
Multitude of his sins, Capgr. fol. 78.
and weighing them all down, in the Life of S. Henry the Hermit, in Capgrave.]
Is not that also very comfortable, which the same pious Book in another place
gives us?

Festival. fol. 92.
S. Brandon, as he sailed on the Sea, saw Judas sit upon a Stone, and a Cloth
hanging before him that lay in the Water, and often bette him in the face, and
he asked him in God's Name what he was. He answered, I am Judas, God's Traitor,
that have this place of God's great grace and courtesy; for it refreshes me
of the great heat I suffer within me, and for no merit that ever I did deserve.
Then said S. Brandon, why have thou that Stone under thee, and wherefore does
that beat thee on the face? Then said he, I laid this Stone in an Highway,
thereas the common People should go, and they were eased thereby, and this is
the cause that I am eased thereby now: This Cloth was not mine own that does me
this refreshing now; but and if it had been mine own, it should have refreshed
me much the more, for I gave it unto a poor Man: Then said Brandon, how long
have thou this ease and refreshing: Then said he, every Saturday from Even-song
till Even-song on the Morrow be done, and from Christmas day till the
Twelfth-day; and from Easter Day till Whit-Sunday; and on our Ladies Assumption
and Candlemass-day. Then Brandon thanked God, that he is so merciful and
gracious in all things. And is it not a consideration full of comfort, that the
Charity even of Judas, in giving a poor Man what was not his own, should meet
with such a reward? That his reward would have been much greater, had it been
his own, is an Argument to Men to be just, as well as charitable; but that he
was rewarded however, seems to me, to be a good gracious encouragement to
filching and stealing, in order to Charity.

But now, to be just on all sides, I cannot but observe one thing farther,
wherein apparently they have the disadvantage (I do not say of our Church, but)
of our Enthusiasts. For the Devotions and Belief of our Men are agreeable, and
all of a piece, that is, raised and improved nonsense and folly: But alas!
among them, the Mantle of those Elijah's that made the Lessons on their Saints,
never fell into the hands of the Makers of their Prayers, nor any jot of their
Spirit seems to be upon them. For it is plain, there can be nothing more
luscious food, than what is presented to us in the Legend, but the Prayers that
should spiritually improve them, are generally very dull and insipid. For, to
instance in S. Katherine; was there ever a more dull descant upon such a
Subject, as her being carried by Angels to be buried on the top of Mount Sinai,
than to pray, that we, by her Merits and Intercession, may come to the Mount,
which is Christ? And could the Romance of S. Denis, raise their requests to no
higher a strain, than such general desires, that we may imitate him, by
despising prosperity, and not fearing adversity? Or that, of Hippolytus his
being drawn to death by wild Horses, than, that his venerable solemnity may
increase both Devotion and Salvation? If our Men had been in their place, and
had felt their Devotions flagging and sinking in this manner; we should have
heard, to be sure, of their keeping Days, to humble themselves for the loss of
such precious opportunities, and for not thriving under such fatning
dispensations, bewailing their unthankfulness for Katherine mercies, and
Christopher mercies, and bemoaning their barrenness under them.

De S. Thoma Archiep. Cantuar.
Antiphona.

Horae sec. us. Sarum.
TU per Thomae sanguinem quem pro te impendit,

Fac nos Christ scandere quo Thomas ascendit.

Verse. Gloria and honor coronasti eum domine.

Resp. Et constituisti eum super opera manuum tuarum.

Oremus.

Ibid. and Brev. Romans 29 December.
DEus, pro cujus Ecclesia gloriosus Martyr and Pontifex Thomas gladiis impiorum
occubuit, praesta quaesumus, ut omnes qui ejus implorant auxilium, petitionis
suae salutarem consequantur effectum.

Per Christum, etc.

Brev. Sarum in Translat. Thomae 7. Julii.
DEus, qui nobis Translationem B. Thomae Martyris tui atque Pontificis
celebrare concedis; te supplices exoramus, ut ejus meritis and precibus a
vitiis ad virtutes, and a carcere transferamur ad regnum.

Ibid.
JEsu Christ per Thomae vulnera
Quae nos ligant relaxa scelera,
Ne captivos ferant ad infera,
Hostis, mundus, vel carnis opera.
Per te Thoma, post laevae munera
Amplexatur nos Dei dextera.
Ibid. Lec. 8.
NOvis fulget Thomas miraculis,
Membris donat castratos masculis,
Ornat visu privatos oculis,
Mundat leprae conspersos maculis,
Solvit mortis ligatos vinculis,
Of S. Thomas A. Bishop of Canterbury.
BY that same blood Thomas for thee expended,

Christ raise us thither, whither he is ascended.

Verse. With glory and honor, thou have crowned him, O Lord.

Ans. And have placed him over the works of thine hand.

Let us Pray.

O GOD, for whose Church the glorious Martyr and Bishop Thomas was slain by the
Swords of wicked Men; grant we beseech thee, that all they who implore his
help, may obtain the saving effect of their Petitions.

Through Christ, etc.

O God, who give us leave to celebrate the Translation of S. Thomas thy
Martyr and Bishop; we humbly beseech thee, that by his Merits and Prayers, we
may be translated from vice to virtues, and from the Prison to the Kingdom.

BY blessed S. Thomas wounds O Jesu please,
Sins cruel Chains which bind us to release;
Lest World, or Flesh, or Devil our sworn Foe,
Hurry our Captive Souls to Hell below,
Let Gifts of God's left hand, O Thomas, grace us,
And then, by thee, may his right hand embrace us.
NEW Miracles make Thomas shine,
The Gelt with Members masculine
By him are blessed; the blind with Eyes,
He the foul Lepers purifies,
And the hard Knot of death unties.
NOTES.
THE Breviary of Sarum, in the First Lesson on the Translation of Thomas, says,
That Pope Honorius III. granted such Indulgences, to those that came Yearly to
solemnize his Translation, as we never remember any Popes in former times to
have afforded. Which seems to me to give great suspicion, that Thomas was more
the Pope's Martyr than Christ's: for else, he might have found fitter occasions
for these liberal grants, from those many famous Sufferers for Christ, who made
a more glorious confession of him, than ever Thomas did.

But to make the evidence of this undoubted, and to show in this instance, not
only the Absurdity, but Impiety of the foregoing Devotions, it will be
requisite to give as short an Account of his story as I can; by presenting the
Reader (out of their own Authors, especially Baronius) with the first occasion
of the Quarrel betwixt him and his Prince; to what height the Contest was
afterward carried; the many Mediations for agreement, and the cause of their
being unsuccessful; and the Conclusion of all in the death of this Prelate,
whom (as the Prayer told us) they would make a glorious Martyr. And when all
this is done, we shall find, I believe, more of a Rebel in him than a Saint,
and see the most extravagant abuse in the Pope, of a pretended power to
Canonize, 1. The occasion of the Quarrel.
that ever was. For the first: 1. The occasion of the Quarrel between him and
King Henry the Second; Neubrigensis, who lived at this very time, tells us
expressly, that the Contest between them arose Super praerogativa Ordinis
Clericalis, Neubrig. de reb. Angl. l. 2. cap. 16.
about the Prerogatives of Clergymen. For the King being busied about the
Affairs of the Realm, and commanding Malefactors, without any difference, to be
extirpated, it was intimated to him by the Judges, that many Thefts, Rapines,
Homicides, against the public Discipline, were committed by the Clergy, whom
the vigor of Common Laws was not permitted to reach. Baronius acknowledges,
that a Priest that had committed Murder, Baron. Annal. ad An. 1163. p. 482.
was thrust into a Monastery, after he was degraded, but Thomas would not
deliver him to the Secular Courts. But Neubrigensis says, that it was declared
to the King, that more than a Hundred Murders were committed by the Clergy of
England. Neubrig. Ibid.
Thus also the rise of the Quarrel is represented by the Bishops and Clergy of
the Province of Canterbury, in their Letters to the Pope. Baron. ad an. 1167.
p. 546.
That the King finding the Peace of his Kingdom much molested, by the
outrageous excesses of some insolent Clerks, he referred their Crimes to the
Bishops, the Judges of the Church, that one Sword might assist another; but the
Bishops persisted in this judgment, that Murder, and any other like Crime,
should only be punished in the Clergy by Degradation; the King on the other side
being of Opinion, that this punishment did not condignly answer the Offense;
neither was it sufficient provision for maintaining Peace, if a Reader, or
Acoluthus, killing a Man famous for Religion or Dignity, should escape only
with the loss of his Order. Now I dare appeal to any honest Turk or Heathen,
whether in this first occasion of contending, the King had not apparently more
of the zeal of a Saint in him, than the Archbishop. For did ever any Saint
before this, put in for an exemption of any Men from Death in the case of
Murder? Can there be any pretense that their punishment should be less than
that of others, who committing the same enormous Crimes, yet deserve less
favor, because they must needs sin with greater malice, and by the example of
their Vices do greater mischief? If I have spoken evil, says our Savior
himself, bear witness of the evil. He was only concerned, Joh. 18.23.
that he might not be smitten when he was innocent; but if any plain proof,
either of his saying, or doing wickedly, could have been brought against him,
no doubt he would have made no exception against any Legal Court that had tried
him, though it had been any other than that of Caiaphas. I once read indeed of
an Apostle of his that appealed to Caesar, but of none in any case that ever
appealed from him. And I dare say, no true Martyr among the Primitive Bishops,
would have desired for any Priest under him, that had been a Thief, or a
Murderer, that he might have had the benefit of his Clergy. Neubrigensis in
this case, speaks not so much like a Politician (as Stapleton would traduce
him) as like a good Man that was sensible of the mischief of such exemptions,
Qui homo magis Politicus fuit, quam monachum, aut clericum, aut bonum
Christianum decuit. Stapleton de 3 Thomis. p. 26.
when he expresses himself thus. The Bishops whilst they are watchful rather to
defend the Liberties and Dignities of the Clergy, than to correct and cut off
their Vices, think they do God and the Church good service, when they defend
the wicked Clergy against the public Discipline, whom according to the Duty of
their Office, Neubrig. loc. citat.
they have either no mind or neglect to restrain with the vigor of Canonical
censure; whence it comes to pass, that Clergymen, who being called into the
Lord's Lot, ought in Life and Doctrine to shine upon Earth, as Stars placed in
the Firmament of Heaven, taking License and Liberty, through impunity, to do
whatsoever they please, reverence neither God, whose Judgment seems to linger,
nor Men that are in Authority; when the Episcopal care about them languishes,
and the Prerogative of their Holy Order shall exempt them from Secular
Jurisdiction.

2. To what height the Quarrel was carried.
2. Proceed we to show, to what height the Contest was carried, after this
beginning. The King being vexed at these Reports, demands of the Archbishop,
that such of the wicked Clergy, Baron. Ibid. p. 482.
after the inflicting Canonical Penance, might be delivered to the Secular
Court; which he refused to grant: whereupon the King, being very angry, asked
him, and the rest of the Prelates, whether they would observe his Regal
Customs, observed by Archbishops and Bishops, private and privileged
Persons, in his Grand-father's time: to which Thomas answered, that he would,
Salvo ordine suo, saving his Order; only Hilary Bishop of Chichester said, he
would observe them, bona fide, without that reservation. The King told Thomas
that his Answer was captious, and required him to promise absolutely without
any addition, which he refused. The Pope, being advertized of all these
proceedings by Thomas, wrote Letters to the Bishops, that by virtue of their
Canonical obedience to the Sea of Rome, they should not attempt any thing
against the Ecclesiastical Liberty, nor engage themselves in any Promise or
Oath, save that which Bishops use to make to their Kings; and that if they had
promised any thing of that kind to him, they should not observe but revoke it,
and reconcile themselves to God and the Church.

After this was a Meeting at Clarendon of the King, Bishops, and Lords of the
Realm, Baron. ad an. 1164.
where the Ancient Customs were produced, and Thomas having made a promise at
Oxford, to change the words that offended the King, was then challenged with
his promise, which at first he refused to perform; but after by the vehement
urging of some Bishops and Nobles, that he would not too stiffly oppose the
King, declaring the danger of it, he was persuaded to give his consent, Bona
fide, to observe the Regal Customs, and swore to it as the rest did; but yet
refused to set his Seal to it. This Oath very much troubled him after the
taking of it, being sensible how the Ecclesiastical Liberties were invaded by
it, and he resolves, as his Penance, to desist from the Exercise of his
Priestly Office. But the Pope quickly absolves him from his Oath, requiring Him
not to forbear Celebrating Mass upon this account.

But the King, Bar. Ib. p. 488.
upon his Refusal to Seal the Writing, was more incensed, sought by his
Messengers to the Pope to hinder him from being his Legate, which usually was
bestowed upon the Archbishop of Canterbury, and to confer it on the
Archbishop of York, and to persuade the Pope to confirm the Customs of
Clarendon. The Pope grants his request as to the Archbishop of York, but
refuses to confirm the other: and writes to Thomas to behave himself prudently,
and discreetly, and yieldingly to the King, and to do all to sweeten him, and
regain his favor, that was consistent with the honesty of his Ecclesiastical
Order. But the next news we hear of him is, that he is endeavoring to fly into
France without his leave, page 490.
though driven back at Sea by cross Winds. He is summoned to a Parliament at
Northampton, by the King: There in the Morning before the Meeting, he caused
the Mass to begin with the words proper to S. Steven's Day, (though it was not
his day) Princes sat, and spoke against me, etc. [a good beginning to sweeten
the King.] When he was called to give his answer to the charges against him, he
declined the judgment of the Court, appealed to the Pope, and so departed; who
as he withdrew, was followed with the cries of those that called him Traitor.
The Bishop of Chichester told him plainly, You were sometimes our Archbishop,
whom we were bound to obey; but, because you have sworn Fidelity to our Lord
the King, and to keep the Customs which he requires, and you endeavor to
destroy them, though tending to his Worldly Dignity and Honor; we therefore
pronounce you guilty of Perjury, and we are not bound any longer to obey a
Perjured Archbishop.

Thomas, after this, presently hies over into Flanders, and the King seizes on
his Revenues, and made severe Laws against all Persons that should hold any
correspondence with him, or receive any Letters of Interdict from him; all
which the Pope by his contrary Letters did abrogate: As he did also most of
those Customs established at Clarendon, which when Thomas appeared at Rome,
were produced and read before the Pope in the Consistory: They were 16. p. 499.
in Number, some of which he tolerated, but said none of them were good: those
which he condemned, were these that follow; (which I think no body besides the
Pope can find fault with: but no wonder that he did, when they plainly checked
his growing Usurpations over the Rights of our Princes.)

1. Controversies concerning the advowson and presentation of Churches, shall
be heard and determined in the King's Court.

2. Clerks cited and accused upon any Cause, being summoned to the King's
Court, shall appear and answer before the said Court; so as the Kings Bench
shall send into the Court of H. Church, to see upon what ground the cause shall
be there handled, and if the Clerk be convicted, or do confess, the Church
ought not any longer to defend him.

3. Archbishops, Bishops, and other Persons of the Kingdom, shall not depart
the Realm without the King's leave; and if they will depart, they shall give
security, if the King demands it, that neither in their going, staying, or
coming back, they will seek the hurt or Damage of the King or his Kingdoms.

4. No Man that holds of the King in capite, nor any of his Houshold-servants
shall be excommunicated, or their Lands interdicted, unless the King or his
Chief Justice be made acquainted with it, that he may determine right
concerning him; whereby such things as belong to the King's Court, may there be
determined; and what belongs to the Ecclesiastical Court, may be returned
thither, and there ended.

5. Touching Appeals, Men ought to proceed from the Archdeacon to the Bishop,
from the Bishop to the Archbishop, and from him, if he fail to execute
Justice, to the King in the last place, that by his commandment the
Controversy may be determined in the Archbishops Court; so as they shall not
proceed any farther, without the King's assent.

6. Any Person of City, Castle, Borough, or the King's Demesne Manor, being
cited by the Archdeacon or Bishop for any crime wherein he is bound to answer
him, and will not satisfy him upon the citations, it shall be lawful to
subject him to interdiction, but not to excommunicate him, before the King's
Chief Officer of the Place be acquainted with it, that he may adjudge the
Offender to make satisfaction, wherein if the King's Officer be defaulty, he
shall fall into the King's mercy, and then the Bishop may after punish the
accused with Ecclesiastical censures.

7. When an Archbishopric, Bishopric, Abbacy, or Priory of the King's
Dominions shall fall void, it ought to be in his Majesty's hand, and he shall
receive all those Rents and Revenues, as those of his own Royal Demeans; and
when the time comes to take care to fill the Church, the King ought to Summon
the Chief Persons of the Church, and the Election ought to be made in his
Chapel by his Royal assent, and by the Counsel of such Persons belonging to
His Majesty, whom he shall call about that affair; and there the Person
Elected, shall do his homage and fealty to our Lord the King, as his Liege
Lord, of Life member and earthly honor, saving his Order, before he be
consecrated.

8. Pleas about Debts, which are grounded upon Oath, as well as those which are
without Oath, shall be handled in the King's Court.

These are the most material Articles he condemned, to omit the rest.

The next Day Thomas resigned up his Archbishopric to the Pope, acknowledging
his entrance into it not to have been Canonical, but by intrusion, and the Pope
restored him again to it.

Ibid. page 502.
The King also publishes new Constitutions in Normandy, the sum of them was: To
punish them as Traitors, who carried into England the Pope's or the
Archbishop's Mandate, containing the Interdict of Christianity. To imprison
those Clerks that passed the Seas, or returned into England without the King's,
or his Justices Letters. That none should appeal to the Pope, or Archbishop.
That no Plea be held by their command, nor their Mandates be received in
England, nor any Mandate of Clerk or Layman be carried to them, upon pain of
Imprisonment. That if any defended their Sentences of Interdiction, they and
their whole Kindred should be banished, and their Chattels confiscated. That
Clerks that had Rents in England, and did not return into England to their
Rents within three Months time, their Rents should be seized into the King's
hand. That Peter's Pence should not be paid to the Sea of Rome, but be gathered
and disbursed at the King's commandment, etc.

Thus we see matters carried very high, but the heats were still increased,
when the Pope, the better to raise Thomas above his adversaries, and humble
them, made him Legate over all England, Baron. ad an. 1167. p. 536, etc.
excepting only the Province of York, and required by his Mandate delivered to
the Bishop of London, that those who had received by the King's Commandment the
Revenues of the Church of Canterbury, should within 2 Months make restitution,
or be anathematized; and that Peter's Pence should be gathered, and delivered
to such as he should appoint.

And here it may not be amiss, before I proceed farther, to observe, how much
Pride and strange Insolence Thomas expressed in this quarrel; (much of which
was the effect of his own temper, but more increased by the Popes forward
backing of him, and animating him against his Prince) which appears by his own
Letters, and the account others give of him.

In his Letter to the King, Baron. ad an. 1166. p. 524.
he speaks with such sawciness, as is unbecoming a Subject, and such silly
reasoning, as is unworthy a Divine. Expecting I have expected, that the Lord
would look upon you, and that being converted, you would do Penance, departing
from your perverse ways (a humble style for a subject) -- Bishops, whatsoever
they are, though as Men they do amiss, yet if they fall not from the Faith,
they neither can, nor ought to be censured by the secular power. -- Who makes
question, but that Christ's Priests are the Masters and Fathers of Kings and
Princes, and all the faithful; that it is a point of madness for a Son, or
Scholar to endeavor to subject his Father or Master to him, and with unjust
obligations to reduce him under his rule, by whom he ought to believe that he
may be bound and loosed These are the words of Pope Greg. VII. a great Oracle
no doubt with Thomas, which are cited, Decret distinc. 96. c. 9. Quis dubitet.
and just such a doughty argument, of another Pope you find in the same Distinc.
c. 7. Satis evidenter ostenditur a seculari potestate nec ligari prorsus nec
solvi posse pontisicem, quem constat a pio principe Canstantino Deum
appellatum, nec posse Deum ab hominibus judicari manifestum est: which words,
if he spoke any such (as may well be doubted, since Eusebius says nothing of
it, who was present in that Council where they are pretended to be spoken) are
falsely attributed to the Pope, since the Gloss confesses that he spoke them to
all the Clergy, Omnes clericos deos appellasse, and adds, Secundum hanc
rationem nec ab Episcopo p^ssent judicari Clerici.
, not only on Earth, but in Heaven also: (a learned argument! as if Alexander
had nothing to do to order Aristotle, if he had been a Traitor, because he was
his Master) -- "Yield therefore speedily with all humility, and all manner of
satisfaction. It is written A fine Saint this is, who quotes the words of Pope
Gelasius, (Decret. distinc. 96. c. 12.) as if they were Scripture; he may
deserve to be called the Pope's Martyr, whose sayings are as sacred with him as
the Bible.
that none ought to judge the Priests but the Church, nor does it belong to
Temporal Laws to sentence them. Christian Princes were wont to obey the Orders
of the Church, not to advance their power before them, to humble their Heads to
the Bishops, not to judge them, etc.

Ibid. p. 537.
And in his Letters to the Bishops of his Province, he begins thus. Most Beloved
Brethren, Why rise ye not with me against the Malignants? Why stand ye not with
me against the Workers of Iniquity? -- He tells them, that he had enough, and
too much forborne the King of England; -- That having endeavored to recall him
from his perverse purpose, it was now dangerous and intolerable to leave his,
and his Officers great excesses against the Church of God and Ecclesiastical
Persons In a Letter to the Bishop of Hereford, he had the insolence to say,
That Christ was again judged before the Tribunal of a Prince: reflecting upon
the charges laid against him; Baron. Ibid. p. 509.
unpunished; after Invocation therefore of the Holy Ghost, he condemns and
declares void the Customs of Clarendon, and excommunicates all Observers,
Counselors, Assistants, and Defenders of the same, and absolves the Bishops
from the promise they had made to observe them, and excommunicates several
Persons by name, and writes Letters to the Pope, to certify him what he had
done, wherein he complains of the King, that he grew worse and worse, and
threatens that he would shortly pronounce against him the sentence of
excommunication; telling the Pope, We have not yet pronounced our sentence
against the King's Person, but are likely to do it, unless he repent, and by
what we have done embraces Discipline.

In his Letters to William Cardinal of Papia, Baron. ad an. 1168. p. 562.
(who with Oddo were sent as Legates to compose matters) he tells him, That all
Men's eyes were upon them, expecting the conclusion of this negotiation,
according to which, the insolency of Princes will exalt its horns, or (as it
deserves) be suppressed, and would to God, by your coming, it may rather
sustain loss than recover strength.

In another to the Pope, he complains of the Bishops, Ibid. page 572.
that they gave Horns to the sinner, meaning the King.

All which expressions do tell us, that Thomas was a Man after the Pope's own
heart, the fittest Instrument he could ever meet with by his pride and
stubbornness, to carry on his design of bringing the power of the Empire, and
the Kingdoms about him under the slavery of the Papacy. And therefore we need
not marvel, that when upon his resignation of his Archbishopric to the Pope,
some of the Cardinals were of opinion, Baron. ad an. 1664. page 501.
that by the Election of another Bishop the King might be appeased, and Thomas
otherwise provided for; the Pope rather chose to follow their Counsels, who
told him, that if Thomas his cause were maintained, he would be a pattern to
others in like case for resisting Princes (a fine design for the pretended
Vicar of Christ to drive on) but if he were suffered to fall, all other Bishops
would fall after him, and none for the future dare to resist the power of
wilful Princes, whereby the state of the Catholic Church would stagger, and
the Pope's Authority perish.

And now he having given us such an abundant discovery of his own temper, we
may the better credit the reports of others concerning him, which I shall now
produce.

The Bishops that came on an Embassy to Rome, accuse Thomas before the Pope of
immoderation and imprudence, Baron. Ibid. p. 498.
and adhering too much to his own Counsels, his disturbing the Tranquillity of
the Church, and devotion toward the King.

The Bishops and Clergy of his own Province in their Letters, both to him and
the Pope, make the like complaints. In those to him they tell him, That they
had great hopes, Ibid. p. 541.
when they heard that he gave himself to Reading, Prayers and Fasting, etc.
That things would tend to a peaceable reconciliation; but their hopes were
dashed, when they heard he had sent a commination, wherein, passing by all
salutation, he rigorously menaced Interdiction or Excommunication to be
pronounced against him. -- They desire him, that setting threatenings aside, he
would embrace patience and humility, that he would commend his cause to the
Divine clemency, and himself to the grace and mercy of his Sovereign. They put
him in mind of the favors the King had conferred on him; the troubles the
Church now groaned under; the possibility, that by his bitter provocations the
King might revolt from the Pope; They tell him, they will not say, the King has
never offended, but confidently pronounce that he is ready to give satisfaction
to his Holiness. In their Letters to the Pope, they excuse the King, that not
out of any Ambitious ends, or designs to oppress the Churches Liberties, Ibid.
p. 547.
but for making a firm peace, he had searched and produced the Customs and
Dignities of his Kingdom, which had been anciently observed, and quietly
submitted to, by Persons Ecclesiastical in the Reigns of former Kings. -- If
there were any thing contained in them dangerous to his Soul, or ignominious to
the Church, he has sacredly promised to Reform the same by the Advice and
Counsel of the Church of his Kingdom. That these Contentions had been long
since quieted, had it not been for the bitter provocations of the Arch Bishop,
who had threatened the King with terrible Letters, unbecoming the Devotion of a
Father, and not savouring at all of the meekness of a Bishop; who had
excommunicated some of his Majesty's Liegemen and Intimates, the Chief Peers of
the Realm, by whom the Counsels and Affairs of the Kingdom were managed, and
this without citing them, or hearing their Defense; they instance in the Bishop
of Salisbury, whom absent and unconvicted, he had suspended from his Office,
which they call a preposterous and disorderly way of proceeding, etc.

3. Let us now see the 3d. thing I mentioned, viz. Mediations for agreement,
and what made them unsuccessful.
The many Mediations for agreement, and the cause why they were unsuccessful.

In the Year 1165. Baron. ad an. 1165.
there went several Messengers betwixt the King and the Pope, and they had
agreed a Meeting, but Thomas persuaded the Pope not to do it, unless he were
present, insinuating to the Pope the King's cunning and subtilty, which he was
best acquainted with; but the King (knowing the fury of his Spirit) would not
consent to a Parlee in his presence, and so the appointment came to nothing.

I mentioned before two Cardinals, William and Oddo, who were sent by the Pope
to compose matters betwixt the King and Archbishop. Baron. ad an. 1168.
It may be worth the while to take notice of the report they made to the Pope,
after they had examined matters. They tell him, that they found the
Controversy betwixt the Ibid. p. 568.
King and Thomas aggravated to a greater height than they could have wished.
That the King, and better part of his Followers affirmed, they had evident
demonstrations, that Thomas had incensed the King of France against him, and
induced his Cousin, the Earl of Flanders, to fall out with him, and raise the
most powerful War he could against him. That the King offered, that if any
Customs were added in his time, contrary to the Ecclesiastical Laws, he would
submit them to his Holiness, at his pleasure to be cancelled.

That they had appointed a Conference, and he somewhile put it off, and at last
would meet in no place, but where himself appointed. That when he came at last
to a Conference, and they exhorted him to behave himself humbly to the King,
who had been his singular Benefactor, he answered, that he had sufficiently
humbled himself to the King, saving his honor to God, the Liberty of the
Church, the reputation of his own Person, the possessions of the Churches, and
saving the justice due to him and his. -- We demanded whither he would submit
himself to our judgment, as the King and Bishops had before promised they would
do; to which he replied, that he had received no command from you to that
purpose, but if he and his might first be restored, he would then proceed
herein, according as he should be commanded by the Apostolic Sea; and so (say
they) the Conference ended, since his words neither tended to judgment nor
agreement, neither would he by any means enter into the matter; and we by your
Authority absolutely forbad the Archbishop (in regard he was restrained by
your Letters, and because they solemnly appealed) that he should not attempt
any thing to the grievance of the Kingdom, Persons or Churches of the Realm.

But we have a far better account from Oddo, concerning the King, Ibid. page
579.
of his inclinations to peace, and condescentions in order to it. For when this
Cardinal before he departed, seriously dealt with the King, that he would be
reconciled to the Archbishop; The King answered him, That for the love he bore
to the Pope and Cardinals, he would permit the Archbishop to return to his See
in peace, and dispose of his Church, and what belonged to it: and because there
had been long contests about the Customs, he said that he and his Children
would be contented with those, which it should be made apparent his Ancestors
enjoyed, by the Oaths of 100 Englishmen, a 100 Normans, and 100 Persons of
Anjou, and other Places belonging to him: That if this condition displeased the
Archbishop, he said he was ready to stand to the Arbitration both of the
Bishops of England, and those Beyond Sea, viz. of Roan, Bayon, and Cenoman. And
if this did not suffice, he would submit to the judgment of the Pope, with this
reservation, that he would not impeach his Childrens right, for during his own
life he was contented, the Pope should abrogate what he pleased. That he being
farther asked what restitution he would make to the Archbishop and his
Adherents, which was due and required of him; his answer was (swearing with
many and exquisite Oaths) that what he had received, he had bestowed it only
on the Churches, and the Poor.

The same Year the King of France interposed as a Mediator, Ibid. page 585.
and procures a conference betwixt the King and Thomas in his Presence. Where
Thomas fell down at the King's Feet, saying, I commit the whole cause, whence
the difference has risen between us, to your discretion, saving the honor of
God: Which last words the King was offended with, and said to the King of
France, Mark, my Lord, this Man, whatsoever shall displease him, he will say it
is contrary to the honor of God, whereby he will challenge not only his own,
but what belongs to me; but that it may appear that I oppose neither God's
honor, nor his, I make this offer. There have been many Kings of England
before me, of greater or lesser Authority than my self; and there have been
before him, many great and holy men Archbishops of Canterbury; whatsoever the
more eminent and virtuous of his Predecessors, have done to the least of my
Predecessors, let him do to me, and I shall rest satisfied. Whereupon followed
an acclamation on all sides; The King has sufficiently humbled himself. The
King of France added; My Lord Archbishop, will you be greater than holy men,
Will you be better than Peter? What Question make you? (for he remained a while
silent) Lo peace is even at the Door. The Peers of both Kingdoms were so
little satisfied with the return he made, that they were all against him; and
imputed the want of peace to his arrogance; one Earl openly protesting, that
since the Archbishop resisted the Counsel and determination of both Kingdoms,
he was not worthy hereafter of the assistance of either; so both Kings took
Horse without saluting the Archbishop; and the Courtiers that were Mediators
for peace, at their departure charged him to his face, that he was ever proud,
high-minded, wise in his own eyes, a follower of his own will and opinion;
adding, that it was a great mischief and damage to the Church, that he was ever
made a Governor of it.

Baron. al an. 1169.
The next Year the Pope sent two other Nuncio's, Gratian and Vivian, upon the
same pretenses of making peace and agreement. (That is, to try again whether
the King would be brought to condescend to part with his ancient Rights, for if
you observe it, there is no dispute all along whether they had been his Rights
or no, but the Pope and Thomas would either persuade or threaten him out of
them, and on their part offer nothing at all toward peace upon any other
terms.) These two had an ample Commission to exercise Ecclesiastical severity
on the King himself, or Kingdom, or any part of the Realm, as should be
expedient for the Church. They had a conference with the King, from which he
went very angry, grievously complaining of the Pope, p. 591.
that he would not yield to him in any thing, and swore that he would take
another course. To whom Gratian replied; Threaten not, my Lord, for we fear no
threats, for we belong to such a Court, which has been accustomed to rule over
Emperors and Kings. Many Conferences they had, but all came to nothing, for
the Nuncio's would not admit this clause, (which he would have inserted in the
agreement) saving the dignity of his Kingdom, and the King would not agree
without it. And now the Pope begins to thunder and lighten. p. 598.
For this Year he denounces the Sentence of Excommunication against all such as
received Investitures, or any Ecclesiastical Benefices from the hands of
Laymen, unless within 40 Days they resigned such Benefices and the Profits of
them, into their hands to whom they did appertain: And by two other Nuncio's,
Simon Prior of Gods-Mount, and Bernard de Corilo, he sends his Comminatory
Letters, telling him that he resolves no longer to tolerate the hardness of his
heart against justice, and the Pope's safety, nor to shut up any longer the
mouth of the A. Bishop, but freely permit him to execute his Office, and with
the Sword of Ecclesiastical Severity, to revenge the injuries offered himself
and his Church. This Embassy came also to nothing, because Thomas still used
the old reservations of The Honor of God, and Saving his Order, and the King
stood upon it, to have him observe, what his Predecessors had paid to former
Kings.

The next Year was the last of the Pope's Treating about Thomas with the King;
Baron. ad an. 1170. p. 606.
if I may call it Treating, and not rather sending commands to him, by the
Archbishop of Roan, the Bishop of Nivers, and the Bishop of Senon, his three
Legates. The demands they were to make were such as these. That Thomas should
return to his Church, and receive back all the Possessions taken away from it;
that those that had been exiled for his sake, should be restored to their own;
that the King should grant Thomas a full peace in a holy Kiss; and should
abolish the wicked Customs, contrary to the Churches Liberty, etc. which
things were to be performed in Forty Days time, and if within that time matters
were not agreed, they should presently interdict the Province on this side the
Seas, where the King then remained.

But while these things were transacting, another angry difference arose. For
the King declaring that he would have his Son crowned in his lifetime, and
that it should be performed in Thomas his absence by the Archbishop of York;
the Pope sent Letters to that Archbishop, and to the rest of the Bishops,
requiring them, upon the peril of losing their Office and Order, not to Crown
or Anoint him, while Thomas was in Exile; because that Office only belonged to
the Sea of Canterbury. Thomas also writ over his Letters forbidding the same.
Upon which the King was so moved, that he caused the Bishops to take an Oath,
not to obey the Constitutions of the Pope and Archbishop, forbidding the same.
Thus the young King was crowned by the Archbishop of York, other Bishops
assisting him; and presently after, the said Archbishop and the rest, were by
the Pope suspended from the execution of their Episcopal Function; and the Pope
sent threatening Letters to the King to tell him, that if the Peace betwixt him
and Thomas was not concluded in the prefixed time, Baron. ibid. p. 614.
he must then expect the same sentence, which he had pronounced against
Frederick the Emperor: which so startled him, that he promised his Legate to
perform what the Pope commanded. But before the Treaty began with the Legates,
Thomas rarely prepared them how to proceed with the King. Baron. ib. p. 615.
He tells them, that they could not easily discover the manifold deceipts of
that prodigy, and therefore whatsoever the King says, whatsoever shape he puts
on, they ought to suspect all as full of deceit, unless approved by his deeds:
for if he perceive that he can corrupt you with promises, or terrify you with
threats, he will scorn and contemn you; but if he see that he cannot bend you
from your purpose, he will counterfeit fury; first he will swear, then
forswear, and change shapes as Proteus did, and at last come to himself; and
then unless it be your fault, thenceforward you shall always be a God to
Pharaoh.

And now the Conference begins with the Legates, who brought Thomas along with
them; and after many debates, the King with a pleasing Countenance granted
Thomas his peace, patiently heard his reproofs, not insisting upon the
Customs. And Thomas himself says, that when he alighted from his Horse to
humble himself at the King's feet, he catching the Stirrup Matthew. Paris says,
the King held his Bridle twice: Cum autem Rex and Archiepiscopus in partem
secessissent, bisque descendissent and bis equos ascendissent, bis habenam
Archiepiscopi Rex tenuit, quum equum ascendisset. ad an. 1170. page 122.
of Thomas his Horse, enforced him to get up again. He also wrote into England
to the young King concerning the peace, and required him to restore Thomas, and
those that belonged to him to all their Possessions.

And now before I come to the last particular, A short account of the Progress
of the Pope's power.
concerning the Death of Thomas, I shall a little stop the Reader so long, till
I make a short reflection upon the Insolency of this pretended Head of the
Church; so I may well call this Pope, because such a power over Kings and
Emperors as he challenged and exercised, was in it self plainly an Usurpation,
having not the least countenance from Christ's example (whose Vicar he pretends
to be) who always refused worldly Rule when it was offered him, but never once
resisted the Rulers of the World; nor from any grant of his to S. Peter, or any
of his Successors, establishing any Temporal Monarchy in the Church. But
besides this, I add farther, that this Rowland (called Alexander III.) who was
the abetter of Thomas in resisting his lawful Sovereign, was himself an Usurper
of the Popedom, and that Octavian (called Victor) was the right Pope. For it
was decreed by the Roman Council under Adrian I. Decret. part. 1. distinc. 63.
cap. Hadrianus.
An. Do. 774. that Charles should have power to choose the Pope, and order the
Apostolic See, and that Archbishops and Bishops should receive investiture
from him. Decret. Ibid. ca. 23. in Synodo.
Which thing was also, after Adrian's example, afterward confirmed to the
Emperor Otho, and to his Successors for ever, in another Roman Synod by Pope
Leo VIII. Now according to this Rule of their own Canon Law, the Emperor,
together with a Council held at Papia (an. 1160) did declare Victor to be Pope,
against Alexander, who pretended to it. Yet this Intruder is he, who claims a
Jurisdiction over our King, Baron. ad an. 1160.
and exempts the Clergy from his known Laws and Customs of his Realm, and
whose Legate (as you heard) told him, that they belonged to such a Court, as was
accustomed to rule over Emperors and Kings. But a Legate of his Predecessor,
(if it was not Rowland himself, for he was one of the Legates) had like to have
lost his Life for asking this saucy Question, From whom had Frederick the
Empire, if not from our Lord the Pope? Baron. Annal. ad an. 1157.
For Count Otto had dispatched him with his Sword for this insolence, if the
Emperor had not interposed; and when the Pope himself had told him of the
benefits bestowed on him, having conferred on him the fullness of Dignity and
Honor, and the Imperial Crown; Frederick in his Letters answers, that the
Empire was his from God alone, by the Election of Princes, and it was a lie, to
say that his Crown was a Benefit or Donation from the Pope. The Pope's return
was very sneaking, Baron. ad an. 1158. p. 408.
and not like one accustomed to rule over Emperors, for he tells him, that by
Beneficium, he meant not feudum but bonum factum, and that the word contulimus
(which he had used concerning his Crown) signified no more than imposuimus;
plainly granting that he could not challenge the right of making him Emperor,
nor that he held the Empire in Fee of him: When the same Pope also a while
after, quarrelled with him, Baron. ad an. 1159. p. 412.
for not giving due reverence to S. Peter, and the holy Church of Rome,
because, forsooth, the Emperor in his Letters had set his own Name before the
Pope's, which he interpreted as a piece of insolence, if not arrogance: The
Emperor defends himself, and asks him, Whether Pope Silvester in Constantine's
time, was noted for having any Regalities? "Indeed, says he, by his pious
grants, Liberty and Peace was restored to the Church: but whatsoever your
Papacy has, it obtained it by the Donation of Princes. And indeed we may know
by the Language of the Popes of old, that the Emperors, not they, were the
Rulers. If your piety will vouchsafe to yield to our suggestion and
supplication, was the style of Pope Leo I. to Theodosius. Leo I. Epist. 9.
inter Labbei Council. Tom. 3. p. 1304. an. do. 449.
Neither did Gregory the Great hector Mauritius, though he had made a Law which
he did not like, (against receiving Soldiers into Monasteries, Gregor. 1.
Epist. 62. Lib. 2. in Tom. 5. Council. Labbe. p. 1133.
till they were discharged from the Wars) and commanded the Pope to publish it;
his Letter runs thus. As for me who speak these things to my Lords, what am I
but dust and a worm -- He is guilty before Almighty God, who is not pure in all
that he says or does to the Most Serene Lords, (i.e. the Emperors) he calls
himself, the unworthy Servant of his Piety; after this, he tells him that he
did not look upon this Law as agreeable to the will of Almighty God, yet, says
he, I being subject to command, have conveyed it through several parts of the
Earth; both ways therefore I have done my duty, having both yielded obedience
to the Emperor, and also on Gods behalf I have declared my opinion. The style
of Pope Adrian I. also is far from commanding, Epistola insertae Council. Nicen
2. Act. 2. vid. Council. Labbe. Tom. 7. p. 115.
when in his Letters to Constantine and Irene, he pleads for the restoring of
Images. I offer to Your Serene Majesty's the Testimonies of the Scriptures and
Fathers with all humility. Beseeching your clemency with a great fervor of
mind, as present upon my bended Knees, (...).
and rolling my self at your footsteps, I entreat you, etc. [Whence, by the
way, I suppose we may safely conclude that the Ceremony of kissing the Pope's
feet by Kings and Emperors, was not yet come into fashion; a practice derived
from that Monster of Men Caligula, who, as Seneca tells us, when he gave
Pompeius Pennus his Life, stretched out to him his left foot to kiss; against
which that Philosopher so severely declames, for changing thus the manners of a
free City, into a Persian slavery. Senec. de benefic. l. 2. c. 12. Invenit
aliquid infra genu^ quo libertatem detruderet, non hoc est civitatem calcare?
But our Thomas his Master, Alexander III. was not at all shy to receive the
honor, nor afraid of the Blasphemy that once attended it: For Baronius
relates, that when he came to Mompelier, a Prince of the Saracens coming before
him, kissed his feet; and kneeling down and bowing his head, Baron. ad an.
1162. p. 465.
adored the Pope, as the Holy and Pious God of the Christians; they that stood
by and saw this, wondered greatly, and they repeated among themselves that of
the Prophet, All the Kings of the Earth shall worship him, and all Nations
shall serve him.] My last instance shall be in Pope Agatho, who being required
by the Emperor to send three choice Persons to the Synod of Constantinople:
Council. Constantinop. 3. Act. 4. Epist. 1. Council. Labbe. Tom. 6. p. 634, 635.
The Pope answers thus, According to the most pious Command of your A deo
protegendae mansuetudinis vestrae.
Mansuetude to be protected of God, according to the obedience we owe, with
humble devotion of heart, we have taken care, etc. Afterward in the same
Epistle, This, your The Latin I am forced to put in the Margin, that every one
may translate it better for himself. Hoc Imperialis vestra benig^tas, clementer
jubens hortata est, and nostra pufillitas quod jussum est obsequenter implevit.
Imperial benignity has exhorted me to by your mild command, and our smalness
has obediently fulfilled your command. Alas poor Men! they little dreamed,
while they spoke thus humbly, of any such Superiority over the Monarchs of the
Earth, as their Successors have since claimed; they talked, as if they borrowed
all their power; and therefore often desire Emperors to command a Council to
be called in such a place, or to do such kindnesses for them: this lowly
courting of their favor plainly argues, that if the comparison of the two
Luminaries had been made in their days, they could have been contented with the
place of the Moon in the Firmament, and not with Innocent the III. Decret. l.
1. tit. 33. c. 6.
, have asserted themselves to be the Greater Light of the two. How undeservedly
alas! did Gregory and Leo (the first of each Name) bear the Title of Great: Let
it rather be given to our Alexander; who bravely trod upon the Neck of
Frederick at Venice (whatsoever Baronius pleads to the contrary Baron. ad an.
1177. p. 704.
, when so many good Authors attest it) adding those words of the Psalm, Super
aspidem and basiliscum, etc. Thou shall tread upon the Lion and Adder, the
young Lion and the Dragon shall thou trample under Feet: Ps. 91.13.
Give it to Coelestine I who sitting in his Pontifical Chair, and holding the
Imperial Crown between his Feet, Baron. ad an. 1191. p. 810.
the Emperor bending down his Head, received the Crown from the Feet of this
Pope; who immediately kicked it off with his Foot, and cast it to the ground;
hereby giving him to understand, (as Baronius adds) that the Pope could at his
pleasure give, keep, preserve, or take away the Empire, if he saw cause: and if
the gloss upon the Canon speak his sense, Gloss. in Decret. distinc. 40. cap.
6. si papa.
a small cause will serve the turn to lay him aside: For asking this Question:
For what fault may an Emperor be deposed? The answer is, For any, if he be
incorrigible, and therefore he may be deposed, if he be less profitable. The
World you see is finely mended with these Men; and such poor Kings as ours,
must not take it ill, if now they be called the Pope's Vassals and Slaves M.
Paris ad an. 1253. p. 872. None Rex Anglorum noster est Vassallus, and ut plus
dicam mancipium?
, and be used so; be whipped and beaten for their faults, as we shall see our K.
Henry was. If any of them should be so hardy, as not to tremble at his terrible
sentence of Excommunication, he has other ways to humble them; (unknown to the
former Popes I mentioned) for every King ought to think it honorable to be his
Executioner; and though his own Ambition do not tempt him, nor any injuries
against himself provoke him, to invade the Dominions of his neighbor Prince;
yet the Pope can oblige him to it, as Innocent the III. did Philip of France,
to expel K. John out of his Kingdom, by bidding him, In remissionem suorum
peccaminum hunc laborem assumere, as M. Paris tells us, Undertake it for the
remission of his sins. M. Paris ad an. 1212. page 232.
[A pretty way, by committing new sins, to get pardon for his old ones] And we
need not wonder at any of these things; for Erasmus tells us in his days, these
were Moot Paints, and disputed Pro and Con in the Schools; Whether the Pope
could abrogate that, Eras. Annot. N. Test. in 1 Timothy 1. v. 6.
which was decreed by the Apostles writings, or determine that which was
contrary to the Evangelical Doctrine, or make a new Article in the Creed.
Whether he has greater power than S. Peter, or only equal. Whether he can
command Angels. Whether he can wholly take away Purgatory. Whether he be a mere
Man, or as God, participates both Natures with Christ: Whether he be not more
merciful than Christ was, since we do not read that he ever recalled any from
the pains of Purgatory, etc. He spoke this sense very plainly, who called the
Pope the Worlds wonder Cited in the gloss upon the Proemium of the Clementines.
; and added, Nec Deus es nec homo, sed Neuter es inter utrumque,

That is, To call thee God, or Man, I Am loath,
You Are something Neither between both.


It may be some may look upon much of this I have now said, as the flattering
expressions only of foolish Parasites; who always fawn upon those that have got
Power into their hands; like that profane interpretation a Jesuit gives of our
Savior's words, Silvester Petra Sancta adv. Molinei Epist. cap. 8.
Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, etc. The Church, says he, has studiously
preserved God's Kingdom, and it has fallen out happily, that she has found that
Oracle verified, Seek ye first, etc. and all these things shall be added unto
you. For God has also bestowed upon her the Kingdoms of the World. But,
believe it, the Popes have given sufficient occasion for them, if we consider
either what they challenge to themselves, when they show the greatest respect
to Princes; or the Ceremonies of state and honor, which by settled practice is
used toward themselves. One of the greatest respects they show to Princes, is
the presenting them with a consecrated Sword: which when it is done, by Pope
Sixtus the IV. th's order, these words are said: This pontifical Sword denotes
the highest temporal power, Sacrar. Ceremoniar. lib. 1. sec. 7. f. 36.
conferred by Christ upon the Pope his Vicar on Earth; according to that, All
power is given to me in Heaven and in Earth; and in another place, He shall
reign from Sea to Sea, and from the River to the ends of the Earth. The
Ceremonies also of the Popes state, are such as plainly speak the same. When
the Pope makes a Feast, if a King be present, Sacr. Ceremon. lib. 1. f. 19.
he sits at the Table below the First Cardinal Bishop. The Emperor or King
bring in Water to wash the Pope's hands. Ibid. f. 20.
The most noble Prince carries the first Dish, whether he be the Emperor, or a
King. f. 22.
When the Emperor comes to Rome to be crowned, as soon as he comes in sight of
the Pope, uncovering his Head, he venerates him, his Knee touching the ground;
when he approaches farther to the steps of his Seat, he bends the Knee; and
after this he comes to the Pope's feet, and devoutly kisses them in reverence
to our Savior: the Pope cheerfully looking upon the Emperor, receives Him to
kiss his Hand and Mouth. Then the Emperor again bending the Knee offers a
Sum of Gold, at the Pope's Feet. An Empress is admitted to kiss his Feet and
Hand; a King to kiss his Hand and Mouth; all other Prelates and Nobles
belonging to the Emperor to kiss his Foot only. (Quite contrary to what was
practiced of old, for when Charles was crowned by Leo III. Baronius
acknowledges that the Pope met him at Numentum, and there received him with
great veneration: but several other Historians tell us, that Leo crowned and
adored Charles the Great. Vspergensis, Trithemius, etc. ad an. 801.
) The Pope gives reverence to no Mortal Man, by manifest rising up from his
Seat, or by bowing his Head, or uncovering it: indeed, after he has received
the Roman Emperor to the kiss of his Foot and Hand sitting, Sacr. Cerem. l. 3.
sec. 1. cap. 2.
he rises a little, receiving him graciously to the kiss of his Mouth, with a
mutual embrace of charity: and he does sometimes the same to great Kings; but
all other Princes and Prelates, he receives them to kiss his Mouth, not rising
up, but sitting.

When the Pope is going to be crowned, the Lay-person that is the most Noble,
Sacr. Cerem. l. 1. sec. 2. f. 12.
though it be the Emperor, or a King, carries up the train of his Garment.
(Pluvialis) After this, when he goes the Procession, and gets on Horseback, the
Chief Prince that is present, Ibid. fol. 17.
though he be King or Emperor, holds the Stirrup of the Pope's Horse, and
leads his Horse by the Bridle a little way. If there be two Kings present, the
greater holds the Bridle on the right side, the Lesser on the left. But if the
Pope does not go on Horseback, but in a Chair, four of the chiefest Princes,
although the Emperor be among them, ought to carry the Chair, with the Pope in
it, a little way, in honor of our Savior Jesus Christ. This stale pretense of
the Honor of Christ (which our Thomas wore threadbare) is extremely absurd
here, and it had been more agreeable to have said, in contempt of him: For the
Ceremonial tells us a little before, that in this Procession, the Sacrament is
carried upon a white Horse, Ibid. f. 16. Ducitur per familiarem Sacristae equtu
albus, mansuetus, ornatus, portans Sacramentum, habens ad collum tintinnabulum
been tinniens.
having at his Neck a well founding Bell, which Horse is led by a Servant of
the Sacrist. If this be done in honor of our Savior, Why does not the Emperor
or King rather lead that Horse by the Bridle, upon which (according to their
opinion) our Savior himself sits? A Servant of the Pope's Servant leads this
Horse, and Emperors must lead the Popes; nay, upon the shoulders of Kings he
must be carried, when Christ can have only a Beast to carry him: This is well
contrived for the Honor of Christ, and is just such honor as was done him by
their S. Jews the French King; Vid. Mart^rolog. Franciscan. ad 25 Aug. p. 372.
who was contented to leave the Eucharist (that is, his Savior) with the
Sultan for a pledge, till he redeemed it, by paying his ransom; according to
those Verses of the Epigram.

Accepit pignus Victor Saladinus Jesus,
Redderet ut regnis, te Ludovice, tuis.
That is, Lewis the Saint, when Prisoner he was taken,
His Liberty and Kingdoms to regain,
By the Victorious Saladine was drawn,
To leave in's hand his Savior for a pawn.


And as ridiculously altogether does that humility look, which the Pope
affects, in all the state of his Coronation. For when the Pope comes to the
Lateran Church, he is led to the Marble Seat, Ibid. fol. 17.
before the Principal Gate on the left hand, which Seat is called Stercoraria
See Platina's conjecture of the name, in the Life of Joh. 8. Sentio sedem
illam, etc.
, there they make the Pope sit down, or rather he sits in a lying posture; then
the Cardinals approaching honorably, raise him up, saying, He raises the poor
out of the Dust, and the needy from the Dunghill, that he may sit with Princes,
etc. The Pope also takes a handful of Money (it must be all brass Coin, by
reason of what follows) and he throws it among the People, saying, Silver and
Gold have I none, but such as I have give I to thee. Which last, is the most
profane and lewd personating an Apostle imaginable, by him that has much Money
as every one knows, but can work no Miracles, as he did that spoke those words.

Thus I have represented the slavish Homage, usurped Power, and insolent State,
the Later Popes have challenged, which Thomas did so stiffly maintain, and our
King Henry for a time resist, though not with that success the cause deserved.
I will only, for a Conclusion of this Digression, show, that what the King
contested in the case of Appeals, Homage, Investitures, Collation of Benefices,
and the like, was but the same that other Kings before and after him did, who
had due care to secure their own and their Subjects good, by opposing the
unjust Oppressions of the Roman See.

Gregory the VII. was the first great troubler of the Christian World, by a new
sort of Excommunications, in which he pretended to deprive Henry IV. of all
Imperial administration, and to absolve his Subjects from that Oath, Qu^ fidem
veris regibus praestare consueverunt, Vid. Platinam in vit. Greg. 7.
(as Platina speaks) whereby they used to assure their fidelity and allegiance
to true Kings: As if when he had pronounced his words of Excommunication, all
Kingship miraculously vanished, just as the Elements do, after the words of
Consecration; well might he that thus practiced upon Kings, say (what M. Paris
tells us he confessed to his Cardinals when he came to dye) that he had
grievously sinned in his Pastoral Charge, M. Paris ad an. 1086. p. 13.
and by the instigation of the Devil, had raised the anger and hatred of God
against Mankind. This Pope demanded Fealty of William the Conqueror, and the
Moneys that were used to be paid to the Pope. K. William granted the Moneys,
but the Homage he peremprorily denied. Fidelitatem facere nolui nec volo.
Fealty he neither had nor would grant him, Inter Epistolas Lanfranc. in
Biblioth. Cotton.
because, says he, I neither promised it my self, nor do I find that my
Predecessors have done that to your Predecessors; The money he speaks of, is no
doubt, that which was called Peter's pence, and was a voluntary gift, not any
sign of Homage, and therefore Hoveden says expressly, Denatius hic Eleemosyna
Regis est. Hoveden. Annal. part. 2 in Hen. 2. page 343.
This Penny is the King's Alms. And M. Paris tells us that KOffa gave it, to
maintain a School of Englishmen that flourished at Rome M. Paris, in vit.
Offae 2. p. 29.
, and to encourage those that came thither. In the Controversy, after this,
betwixt Anselme and K. Rufus, about appeals to the Pope, the King was angry at
the mention of the Pope's name, and told him that no Archbishop or Bishop of
his Kingdom was subject to the Roman Court or Pope. Matthew. Paris ad an. 1094.
p. 19.
And urged this, that he had all the Liberties in his Kingdom, which the
Emperor challenged in the Empire, Quod ipse omnes libertates haberet in regno
suo, quas Imperator vendicabat in imperio. Ibid.
and mentions it as a known case, that the Emperor had power to nominate whom
he pleased to be Pope; and therefore Anselme was accused by him as a Traitor
for seeking to appeal to him, to which, says Paris, most of the Bishops agreed.
He that has a mind to see this Controversy about Homage, menaged betwixt the
Pope and the French, may consult Marca de Concord. Sacerdotii and Imperii, lib.
6. cap. 33. Especially the Contentions betwixt Boniface the VIII. and Philip
the Fair. But that which he (I suppose) durst not mention concerning that King,
but is told us by many others, shows with what scorn the Propositions of owning
the Pope's Sovereignty were entertained by him. For when Boniface told him in
his Letter, that he was subject to him in Spirituals and Temporals, that the
Collation of Benefices and Prebends did not belong to him nor their profits in
their vacancy, and that whosoever thought otherwise he reputed them Fools, etc.
The King's answer to this was very smart, Sciat tua Maxima Eatuitas, in
temporalibus nos alicui non subesse. Apud Nich. Gillium in Philip. Pulchr.
citat. a plurimis scriptor. v. Catalog. T^st. verit. p. 1687.
which begins thus. Let your Great Foolishness (instead of Holiness) know, that
in Temporal matters we are subject to none: and goes on to tell him, that the
Collation of Benefices, and their profits in their vacancy did belong to him,
and those that were of another mind he accounted Fatuos and Dementes, Fools and
Madmen.

It would be too long, to discourse farther about Collation of Benefices, and
Reservations of Prebends, which the Pope used to bestow upon strangers. How
France complained of them to Jews IX. and how thereupon he restored to the
Bishops their Canonical Right, and prohibited the exactions herein of the Roman
Court, the Reader may consult the Learned Marca, de Concord. Sac. and Imp. l.
4. cap. 9. who adds, To this most glorious King is owing the first restitution
of Liberty The Liberties our Thomas so much talked of, were not Liberties of
the Church, but inslaving it and the Kingdom to the Pope.
, which by his Edict after the change of Discipline in the Collation of
Benefices, he procured in the Year 1268. under which one head were contained
almost all the Contentions between the Bishops and the Roman Court. In this
Author you may see the Constitution of Charles VII. and other Kings, against
all strangers, having any Benefices in France. See also Lib. 4. Cap. 12. Sec.
5, 6.

As for England, I refer the Reader to that remarkable Epistle of Rob.
Grosthead, Bishop of Lincoln, in Math. Paris, ad An. 1253. page 870. where you
find him vehemently opposing the Pope in his Claim of Conferring Benefices.

I Will only add, that this Bishop (as the same Author informs us) made up an
exact and punctual Account of the profits that strangers carried away by these
grants of the Pope, Math. Paris ad an. 1152. p. 859.
and it was found that the Sum came to above 70 Thousand Marks, and that the
mere Revenue of the King by computation did not arise to the Third part of it.

But it is more than time to come to the Fourth and Last Head.

4. Concerning Thomas his Death. 4. The Death of Thomas.
We left all things in appearance fairly agreed betwixt the King and Him, and
promising peace: but all was quickly disturbed by new Quarrels; For the Pope
upon the desire of Thomas, sends Letters to suspend the Archbishop of York,
and to excommunicate the rest that had a hand in the Young King's Coronation,
as also such as detaining the possessions of the Church, would not restore
them, unless within Fifteen Days they made full satisfaction; which Letters he
sent over before him.

And now Thomas went over into England, Baron. Ibid. p. 623.
and when he came to Canterbury, the King's Officers came and demanded in his
Name to take off from the Bishops their excommunication (for it is altogether an
unlikely story which Thomas told them, that what he did, was done Ipsius Regis
consilio and voluntate, by his counsel and will, Ibid. p. 621.
when he had employed them to Crown his Son.) This Thomas refused to do, unless
they would take an Oath to obey the Commandments of the Pope; which they would
not submit to, saying that such an Oath was not to be taken without the King's
consent, because it was contrary to the Princes Dignity, and the Customs of
the Kingdom.

Thus they parted, and the Bishops went over Sea to the King to acquaint him
herewith. [These are Saint-like qualities indeed, for one that had suffered 7
Years banishment, to have learnt no better to temper his passions by his
afflictions, but immediately to seek his private revenge, after his peaceable
restitution to his Church; for M. Paris tells us, M. Paris ad an. 1171. p. 124.
that even upon Christmas day, after he had preached to the People, he solemnly
excommunicated one Robert Broc, who had cut off the Tail of one of his Horses
that carried his provisions.] The King, upon hearing these complaints, was so
incensed, that he broke out into passionate words, expressing his wonder, that
none did revenge him of one Priest, who so disturbed his Person and Kingdom,
and sought to deprive and disinherit him of his dignities: Which speeches being
heard by Four Knights ( Will. Tracy, Hugh Morvill, Richard Breton, and Reginald
Fitz-Vrse) they interpreting his words in the worst sense, presently posted
over into England, and slew Thomas in his own Church, whose dying words were
these: I commend to God, our Bl. Lady, with the Saints Patrons of this Church
and S. Denis, my self and the Cause of the Church. Though the King seemed to
give occasion to his Murder by his speeches, yet he protested, as Almighty God
should judge his Soul, that it was neither acted by his will or consent, nor
wrought by any devising of his, and humbly submitted to any penance the Church
should enjoin him. The condition of the King's Absolution was, the granting
away all that he contended for all this while, Baron. ad an. 1172. p. 636.
and giving the Pope more power in England than he had before: For these were
the terms. To maintain 200 Knights in the Holy Land, for a whole Year, giving
each Knight 300 Crowns. To abolish the Statutes of Clarendon. To restore to the
Church of Canterbury, and to all Thomas his friends, all their possessions. And
if the Pope required it, to go into Spain to free that Land from the Pagans; to
all which he agreed, and both he and his Son swore to the Legates. But besides
all this, he crossed into England, and underwent such a penance at Thomas his
Tomb, Baron. ad an. 1174. p. 652.
after his Canonization, as became no King to undergo, nor any thing, but the
insolency of Monks to inflict. For as soon as he came within sight of the
Cathedral, where he was buried, stripping himself naked, save only that he had
one sorry Coat on, he went his pilgrimage barefoot in the sight of all the
people, through the dirty ways and streets; and continued all that Day, and the
Night following watching and fasting at Thomas's Tomb: Then the Convent being
called the next Day together, he received more than double the stripes that S.
Paul did from the Jews; for he received upon his naked Body Eighty Three Lashes
from the Monks, and beside was Five times slasht by the Bishops that were
present But Ribadeneira has much increased the number of his stripes, for he
says in his life, that there were more than 80 Bishops and Monks present, and
every one of them gave him three Lashes, and he was lashed by them distinctly
five times. Ribaden. Flos Sanctorum, page 640.

Matthew. Paris says, A singulis viris religiosis, quorum multitude magna
convenerat, ictus ternos vel quinos excepit. p. 130.

Harpsfield says, Virga ab Episcopis quinquies, a singulis monachis (quorum
numerus erat supra octoginta) ter caesus est. Hist. Anglic. p. 337.


: Quinquies ab Episcopis caesus.
and returned barefoot the Day following, without receiving any sustenance.

Thus we have given an account of this Canonized Prelate; the sum of whose
Merits living and dying was this, That he zealously asserted the Liberties of
the Church; But if you ask farther what those Liberties were; we shall find
them to be much of the same nature with those Liberties that the Pope
challenges for himself in the Decretal. Decret. 1 Part. distinc. 40. c. 6. Si
papa sua.
If the Pope be negligent of his own or others salvation -- though he lead
innumerable people by droves with him to hell, yet no mortal man presumes to
reprehend his faults; because he is the Judge of all men, and to be judged of
none, unless he be found to deviate from the Faith. These are Liberties, which
no old Saints I am sure ever contended for; but you see the Pope has enlarged
the Charter to the Saints of his own making; and one of his greatest Champions
has made all sure, when he tells us; Bellarm. l. 4. de Romans pontif. cap. 5. in
fine.
If the Pope should err by enjoining the practice of Vices, or prohibiting
Virtues, the Church is bound to believe those Vices to be good, and Virtues
evil, unless she will sin against conscience. In this way (and none else that I
know of) Thomas may be a Saint, but we must put out our eyes, before we can
believe it.

And if we have no evidence of his Saintship, we are then at a loss to
understand how he comes to be a Martyr: his being murdered in his own Church
will not do it, without the other; for how many greater Persons than he have
come to untimely ends, that yet were never put into any Martyrologie? We have
no concern to excuse or defend the murdering zeal of private persons, but
desire that such practices, as these upon him, may be for ever detested, though
designed to never so good an end. But we know there have been Popes, that have
excused such practices upon excommunicated persons (who yet many of them had
far more to show for their being Saints, than excommunicating Thomas) witness
Pope Urban the II. who in an Epistle, Decret. part. 2. cause. 23. qu. 5. c. 47.
says. Non enim eos homicidas arbitramur, etc. We do not think those to be
homicides, who burning with zeal toward their Catholic Mother, against the
Excommunicate, have happened to kill some of them. Let them have the brand of
barbarous murderers that killed him, but still I can see nothing of a Martyr in
him: The words he used at his death, have more in them, that looks like a
confession of his Faith, than hitherto I remember to have met with in his
story; but this commending of himself to the Patron Saints of Canterbury
Church, to the Virgin Mary, and S. Denis, tell us how he was abused by
superstition, more than that he had a true understanding of Religion. I think,
considering his former behavior to his Prince, such a confession would have
better fitted his Mouth, as Radolphus made when he was a dying, who lifting up
his wounded hand, spoke thus to those about him. Baronius himself confesses
that Vespergensis, Sigebertus, and others report, that he repented, at his
death, of his rebellion against Henry, and confessed that by God's just
judgment his right hand, with which he swore to the Emperor, was cut off.
Baron. ad an. 1080. p. 541.
With this hand I swore to my Lord Henry (the Emperor) that I would not hurt
him, Helmoldus Chron. Sclavon.
nor lay trains against his honor, but the Popes commands brought me to this,
that violating my Oath, I usurped undue honors to my self; and so presently
dyed. If Thomas had expressed more of such like penitence, and less confidence,
he would have looked more Martyr-like, unless he had suffered in a better
cause; but all things considered, I think it would not be more profane or
ridiculous, for a Man to pray, that he might ride to Heaven upon Father
Garnet's fabulous straw, than to pray, to be able to ascend thither by Thomas's
blood, which was, as you heard, a piece of their Devotions to him. It is very
observable, what Caesarius the Monk, who lived a few Years after his death, has
told us, Caesarii Dialog. distinc. 8. c. 69.
that after he was slain, there were presently hot disputations concerning him;
some saying he was damned, as being a betrayer of the Kingdom; others that he
dyed a Martyr, for defending the Church. This question was canvased, says he,
among the Masters at Paris: Master Rogerus swore, that he was worthy of death,
but not of such a death; judging the constancy of the blessed Man to be
contumacy; but Peter Cautor swore on the contrary, that he was a Martyr worthy
of God, having been killed for the defense of the Churches Liberty; but, says
Caesarius, Christ solved all the doubt, when he glorified him with many and
great signs; that is, after his Death, for he says before, that he shone with
no Miracles in his persecutions. Thus we are referred to Miracles, the last
refuge, and surest defense of any desperate cause in this Church; and now let
the probabilities be never so great to the contrary, let the Saintship of a
Person, with never so good reason be questioned, if the Pope once think fit to
make him a subject of peoples veneration, I Will warrant the Monks will fit him
with all sorts of wonders to countenance both his canonization, and the peoples
devotion. And they were not wanting here in Thomas his case, which come now,
for a Conclusion, to be considered.

Concerning the Miracles ascribed to Thomas.
A while after his death the World begins to ring with the noise of his
Miracles; so that Petrus Blesensis writes, Baron. ad an. 1173. p. 642.
that England need not envy the Indies; they had their Thomas the Apostle; we
have Thomas the Martyr; he shall suffice me, who has the name of an Apostle,
and does imitate him in Miracles, or overcome him. Now we are told, that by his
merits God raised the dead, Idem Ibid. p. 644.
gave sight to the blind, hearing to the deaf, and feet to the lame, cleansed
Lepers, healed the infirm, and freed those that were possed with Devils: but
these are common Themes, and it is a hard thing to find any Saint almost in this
Church, of whom the same has not been said, when they came to be canonized.
I Will present therefore the Reader with some rare and extraordinary particulars,
which I find are related concerning him, both in his lifetime, and after his
death, by which he may judge concerning this proof of his Saintship.

Gononi Chronicon SS. Dei parae, p. 177.
Thomas, we are told, from his Youth had vowed his chastity to the Bl. Virgin;
and being, on a time, among some of his Companions, (before he was Archbishop)
he heard them boasting of their Mistresses, and the special presents they had
received from them. Thomas told them, that they vapoured foolishly, for he had
a Mistress that far excelled all theirs; who had bestowed such a present on
him, that they never saw anything like it. All this he intended in a spiritual
sense; but, they urging vehemently that he would show them what he talked of;
he ran to the Church, and prayed the Bl. Virgin to pardon the presumptuous word
he had spoken of her. To whom she appeared in a Vision, and incouragingly told
him, that he did well to cry up the excellency of his Mistress; and she gave
him a very fine and very little Box; which his Companions snatched out of his
hand, and opening, saw something of a purple color, and taking it out, beheld
a wonderfully fine Casula. (a Garment which the Priests wear.) This story came
to the Ears of the Archbishop of Canterbury, who sent for Thomas and learnt of
him the truth of it, whereupon he secretly determined in his mind to make him
his Successor. But this favor of the Virgins in the present of a new Garment,
was not so wonderful, as another we are told of, that concerned an old one. For
when he was Archbishop, Gonon. Ibid. p. 176. and Wickman's Sabbatismus
Marianus. p. 73.
he used to wear a Hair-shirt next his skin on Saturdays, (a Day dedicated to
the Bl. Virgin) which being rent, Wickman tells us that the Bl. Virgin held his
shirt, whilst he stitched it; but Gononus reports it thus. There was an English
Priest, that daily said the Mass of the Bl. Virgin, because he had not skill to
say any other; who being accused, was suspended by Thomas from his Office, for
his want of skill: Thomas on a time had hidden his Hair-shirt under his Bed,
that at a convenient season he might secretly sow it: the Bl. Virgin appeared
to the aforesaid Priest, and commanded him to go to Thomas, and tell him, that
the Mother of God had granted leave to the Priest, that daily celebrated her
Mass, and was suspended, to officiate again; by this token, that she, for whose
Love he said Mass, had sowed his Hair-shirt that lay in such a place, and had
left the red Hair with which she sowed it. Thomas hearing this, was amazed, and
found it so as the Priest related, and gave him power hereupon again to
officiate.

Besides, the English Legend in his Life relates, that when he was at Rome,
upon a Fasting-day, a Fowl being provided for his Dinner, because no Fish could
be bought, the Capon was miraculously turned into a Carp. (rather than the holy
Man should break the Orders of the Church.) It may be perhaps a farther
strengthening to our Faith in this matter, to observe that the Irish Saints have
been very notable at these Conversions. S. Riocc entertained S. Aedus the
Bishop, and set a great Supper of Flesh before him: Colganus ad 6 Febr. in vit.
S. Riochi. p. 268.
But the Bishop would not eat Flesh, but blessing the Meat, it was turned into
Bread, and Fish, and Honey. And in the Life of S. Moedoc, we are told, that
when S. Molua had killed a fat Calf for to receive him, Colganus, Act. Sanct.
Hiborn. ad Jan. 31. p. 221.
hearing that S. Moedoc did not eat flesh, he blessed 8 Pieces of Flesh, and
they became 8 Fishes; but the Bishop knowing by inspiration how they were made
Fishes, he blessed them again, and they were turned again into 8 pieces of
flesh: which S. Molua seeing was displeased, for he had no other Fishes in his
Monastery; and therefore before them all he blessed them again, and they became
8 Fishes the 2d. time: and here this pretty contest ceased, and for the Honor
of S. Molua, he was contented to feed upon them, though I warrant you he could
have held play with him longer in these changes. But to return to our Thomas.
Polydore Virgil has told us a remarkable story how God miraculously vindicated
Thomas against his Enemies in his lifetime. Polyd. Virgil Angl. Histor. lib.
13.
For, says he, Thomas being accounted the King's enemy, began to be so
contemned, and hated by the common people, that coming to a Town called Strode,
the Inhabitants of that place minding to put an affront upon this good despised
Father, presumed to cut off his Horses Tail which he rode upon: but hereby they
brought a perpetual reproach upon themselves, for afterward it so fell out, by
the pleasure of God, that all the race of those Men, that committed this fact,
were born with Tails, like brute Beasts. (whence the Proverb comes of Kentish
Longtailes.) But this note of infamy is long since worn off, together with that
generation of Men that so sinned; (which was cunningly put in, to save the
credit of a lewd Fable.)

These you will say are pretty fair attestations of his Saintship, in the way
of Miracle, while he lived; but are nothing, to what we are told of the wonders
that proclaimed his fame after his death. The first sort, I shall mention, are
those that were shown upon his Murderers.

Hoveden. Histor. p. 299.
Hoveden tells us that all men shunned their company, and none would eat or
drink with them; they cast the fragments of their Meat to the Dogs, and when
they had tasted them, they would eat no more of them: so manifest was God's
vengeance, that they who contemned the Lord's anointed, were contemned even by
Dogs.

S. Antoninus says, Antoninus Hist. Tom. 2. p. 706.
that of those who killed him, some with their Teeth gnawed off their own
Fingers by pieces, others had their Bodies flowing with corrupt matter, others
were dissolved by the Palsy, and others miserably dyed of madness: (though any
body else, besides this Canonized Historian, would wonder, how these Four sorts
of Judgments could destroy above one a piece, when there were but four Men to
be destroyed by them.)

As for Thomas himself, if Visions and Revelations, and lying Miracles can do
him any kindness, there are good store pressed in his service; A little before he
returned out of banishment, it was revealed to him, Antoninus Ibid.
that a few days after his return he should go to Heaven, by dying a Martyr;
and we are told, that while he was praying at the Monastery of Pontinia^,
Harpsfield Hist. Ecel. Angl. p. 334.
he heard a voice from Heaven, saying, O Thomas, Thomas, my Church shall be
glorified in thy blood. A certain young Man being under an infirmity, his Soul
went out of his Body and returned again; and he said that he had been rapt into
Heaven, and saw an empty Seat mightily adorned, placed among the Apostles; and
when he asked for whom that magnificent Seat was prepared; an Angel answered,
it was reserved for a certain great Priest of the English Nation; which was
understood of S. Thomas. Heraclius also, the Patriarch of Jerusalem, coming
into England, related this Vision. Capgrave in the Life of Thomas, f. 292.
A certain Friar was sick to death in a Monastery of the Holy Land, the Abbot
desired him to certify him of his state after death, which he promised, and
dyed. A few days after he appeared to the Abbot, and told him that he enjoyed
the Vision of God, and that you may not doubt of my happiness, know, says he,
that when I was carried by Angels into Heaven, there came a great Man with an
unspeakably admirable procession following him, of Angels, Patriarchs, Prophets
and Apostles, etc. This Man stood before the Lord as a Martyr, all his Head
being torn, and the blood seeming to distill from the clefts of his wounds. To
whom the Lord said: O Thomas, thus it becomes thee to enter into the Court of
thy Lord; and added, I will give no less glory to thee, than that I have
bestowed on Peter: and the Lord took a mighty Golden Crown and put it upon his
wounded Head. The Friar added, know for certain, that Thomas of Canterbury is
slain about this time, mark my words and observe the time: and so he vanished.
This the Abbot told to the Patriarch, who related it in England. As soon as
Thomas was slain, Lord Herbert Henry 8. p. 438.
the Monks shut their Gates, and persuaded the people that the Bells rung of
themselves. Before he was buried, as he lay in the Quire upon the Bier, in the
Morning lifting up his right hand, Hoveden Hist. p. 299.
he gave his Benediction to the Monks. They made a great stir about the Water
of an adjoining Well, which they said appeared bloody by Miracle: Lord Herbert
Ibid.
which I suppose is that which the Sarisbury Breviary refers to in their
Rithmes, Brev. Sar. Lec. 9. in Trans. Thoma Jul. 7.
Aqua Thomae quinquies varians colorem
In lac semel transiit, quater in cruorem.
Ad Thomae memoriam quater lux descendit,
Et in sancti gloriam cereos accendit.


That is, Five times his Water changed color quite,
Four times blood-red, and once not Milk more white;
And that S. Thomas fame might never dwindle,
Four times did Light descend, and Torches kindle.


As for the Relics of Thomas, they have done mighty feats; for a Monastery of
S. Martin in Arthoise, having got his Rochet, and part of his Hair-shirt, (with
his blood sprinkled upon them, so as never to be washed out) his Ring, and some
other things; they have upon Record a Catalogue of 67 Miracles wrought by them;
nay, some that had visited his famed Relics at Canterbury, Stapleton de 3
Thomis, p. 108, 109.
and found no benefit by them, had relief here at this Monastery.

The worst is, that there is some reason, one would think, to question those
wonderful relations, (of Miracles wrought by his Relics) as forgeries* since
there was so plain a cheat about his Relics; for the most sacred of them was
so apparently. A piece of his Crown that was pared off by his Murderers, was
pretended to be kept as a Relic in the Church of Canterbury in one place, and
Erasmus says that the whole face of Thomas being set in Gold, Colloq. Peregrin.
religionis ergo.
was kept in a Chapel behind the high Altar, and they told him that the rest
of his body lay in his shrine; but when Henry VIII. caused his shrine to be
defaced, they found an entire body complete within the same, says Lambert,
Lambert peramb. of Kent. p. 248.
as some alive then present can testify. But be that how it will, we are come
to this fine pass at last, that Caesarius has pleaded, that even the pretended,
but false Relics of this Saint can work Miracles. Caesarius Dialog. did. 8.
c. 70.
For, says he, a certain Soldier, a great lover of Thomas, was inquiring every
where how he might get any of his Relics; which a crafty Priest hearing, at
whose house he sojourned, said to him; I have by me a Bridle which S. Thomas
long used; which the Soldier hearing, gave him the Money he asked for it, and
received the Bridle with much devotion. And God, to whom nothing is impossible,
willing to reward the faith of the Soldier, vouchsafed to work many Miracles
by that Bridle in honor of his Martyr; which the Soldier considering, built a
Church in honor of Thomas, and instead of Relics, put therein this Bridle of
the cheating Priest.

And now who is there, after all this, but will expect that mighty wonders
should be told us were wrought for the relief of those, who in their distresses
did invoke him? Of this kind two or three Instances will serve for a Conclusion
of my Discourse about him.

There was a Bird, says the Festivale, that was taught to speak, and could say
S. Thomas; Festiv. fol. 80. and Antoninus loc. citat. p. 707.
it happened that this Bird sitting out of his Cage, a Spar-hauke seized on it,
and was ready to kill it; but the Bird crying, St. Thomas help, the Spar-hauke
fell down dead; His inference is very strong, that if he heard the Bird of his
great grace, much more will he here a christen Man or Woman, that cry to him
for help and succor. King Lewis of France, you will say, Lambert's peramb. of
Kent. p. 143.
was extraordinarily heard, who coming over, to offer at his Tomb at
Canterbury, and praying for a safe passage, he obtained (I suppose by some
voice that assured him) that neither he, nor any other from thenceforth, that
crossed the Seas between Dover and Withsand, should suffer any loss or
shipwreck. (Credat Judaeus apella.)

But the finest contrivance, methinks, is that wonder for a special Friend of
Thomas, Antoninus ibid.
who being under an infirmity, came to the Tomb of the Saint, to pray for the
recovery of his health, which, says the story, he received to the full. But
being returned home, he thought within himself, that perhaps that infirmity was
inflicted on him for his salvation, and was for the greater profit of his Soul,
than health was; and therefore returning to the Sepulcher of the Saint, he
prayed, that what should most conduce to his salvation, whether sickness or
health, that Thomas would obtain it for him of the Lord. Whereupon his
infirmity returned again upon him. And it was very friendly done of him, to
impute the return of his distemper, to the Saints foresight of the danger of
his continuing in perfect health. Some there were also, whom S. Thomas would
not cure, in civility to other Saints, (though you may be sure he could have
done it himself.) So Capgrave tells us, that a Clerk, Capgr. vit. S. Cuthbert.
fol. 78.
having been troubled with vomiting, and a Bloody Flux, and a pain in his Eyes,
that he was almost blind; this Man Fifteen Days together had implored the
Martyrs help at Canterbury: To whom Thomas at last appeared; and bid him rise
quickly, and go to Durham to S. Cuthbert, and by his merits he should obtain
mercy and health. For (said he) I will have my languishing Patients and
Servants go to him for Cure, and his come to me; and the first day he came
thither he was cured. It Is very observable, that this Clerk had served Thomas
before his exile, and so could less take it ill, to be sent on his errand so
long a journey. But the most shameful fiction is that which is told us in the
History of the Monk of Canterbury, De miraculis Thomae; concerning one
Eilwardus, who, in his Drink, V. Fox Martyr. T^m. 1. p. 293.
broke into a Man's House, and stole some of his Goods, who laid such an action
of Felony against him, that he was condemned to have his Eyes put out, and his
Privities to be cut off, which sentence was executed upon him; and he being in
danger of Death by bleeding, was counseled to pray to S. Thomas; in the Night
he had a Vision of one in white Apparel, who bid him watch and pray, and put
his trust in God, and our Lady and holy S. Thomas; The next Day the Man rubbing
his Eyes, (to be sure he did his forehead that wrote it) they were restored;
and a little after rubbing the other place, his Pendenda (as he calls them)
were also restored, Principio quidem valde parva, sed in majus proficientia,
very small at the first, but growing still greater, which he permitted every
one to feel that would.

This very story, no doubt, is that which the Verses at the beginning refer to,
Membris donat castratos, etc. And which the old Roman Breviary points at, when
it says thus. Thomas stretched out his powerful hand to unusual and unheard of
wonders; Brev. Roman. antiqu. Lect. 9.
for even they that were deprived of their Eyes, and of those parts by which
Mankind is propagated Membris genitalibus privati.
, by his merits had the favor to receive new ones. I dare trust this miracle
with any Reader to believe it if he can: But methinks it had been better
contrived, if the circumstances of the last story of Thomas his Friend, had
been reserved for this wonder: it had been enough to declare the power of the
Saint, to have received a full recovery of these parts; but it might, and ought
to have been referred to his discretion, whether it would not be more for the
health and profit of the Patients Soul, to return presently into his castrated
estate, wherein this fomes peccati would be extinguished, and his after
chastity better secured; and more perhaps for the good of the World, it should
be so; since it might be hazardous, what kind of Race might spring up from a
drunken Thief, thus miraculously enabled to propagate anew.

The Reader has seen a pleasant part the Monks of Canterbury have played, in
setting up Thomas for a Saint and Martyr: and they did it so successfully, that
we are told of a Hundred Thousand People, W. Sumner. Antiq. of Canterb. p. 249.
that in some Years have come to pay their Devotions to his Shrine: nay more,
that their zeal toward him was so hot, as sometimes they seemed to have but
little consideration of the Bl. Virgin her self, and none at all of Christ. For
there being three Altars in the Church of Canterbury, one dedicated to Christ,
another to the Virgin Mary, Cited by Foulis, Hist. of Popish Treasons, etc.
page 17.
and a third to Thomas; we are told out of an old Leger-book of that Church,
that one Year the Offerings at the Shrine of Thomas amounted to 954 l. 6 s. 3
d. when those to the Bl. Virgin came only to 4 l. 1 s. 8 l. and to Christ
nothing at all.

I wonder not that these things were countenanced and promoted by the Pope,
whose Slave he was, as well as his Saint; but it is strange methinks, that all
Christian Kings should not be concerned to vindicate the abuse to them all, in
the most vile usage of our K. Henry, such as no example in any Age can
parallel; by obtaining at least, that such a Rebel to his Prince should be
blotted out of the Calendar of Saints, and no longer publicly venerated as a
Martyr.

Concerning Patron Saints; or, Devotions to Particular Saints, in particular
Distresses.
To S. Apollonia for the Toothache.
Horae sac. us. Sarum. f. 80.
Antiphona.

VIrgo Christi egregia
Pro nobis, Apollonia,
Funde preces ad Dominum
Ut tollat omne noxium;
Ne pro reatu criminum
Morbo vexemur dentium
Vel capitis torquentium.
Oremus.

OMnipotens and sempiterne Deus, spes and corona omnibus tibi fideliter
servientibus; qui B. Apolloniam gloriosam Virginem and Martyrem, excussionem
dentium pro tui mominis fide passam, in coelestibus collocasti; tribue,
quaesumus, omnibus memoriam ejus pie colentibus, perpetua pace gaudere, and a
periculis tam animae quam corporis liberari.

Per Christum, etc.

GReat Virgin Apollonia,
To God our Intercessor prove,
That he, when thou requestest, may,
All noxious things from Us remove;
Lest our great crimes be punished
With vexing pains of Teeth or Head.
Let us Pray.

ALmighty and everlasting God, the hope and crown of all that faithfully serve
thee; who did crown in Heavenly places blessed Apollonia that glorious Virgin
and Martyr, who suffered the beating out of her teeth for faith in thy name;
Grant, we beseech thee, that all who piously venerate her Memory, may rejoice
in perpetual peace, and be delivered from all dangers both of Body and Soul.

Through Christ, etc. Amen.

But this matter is still more express, in the Horae B. Virginis sec. usum
Romanum, p. 140.
Antiphona.

BEata Apollonia grave tormentum pro Domino sustinuit; primo, tyranni
extraxerunt dentes ejus cum malleis ferreis; and cum esset in illo tormento,
oravit ad Dominum Jesum Christum, ut quicunque nomen suum devote invocaret,
malum in dentibus non sentiret.

Verse. Ora pro nobis beata Apollonia.

Resp. Vt digni efficiamur promissionibus Christi.

Oration.

OMnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui Beatam Apolloniam, Virginem and Martyrem tuam,
de manibus inimicorum suorum liberasti, and ejus orationem exaudisti; te quaeso
per intercessionem ejus, and Beati Laurentii Martyris tui, simulque omnium
Sanctorum and Sanctarum, ut dolorem a dentibus meis expellas, sanum and
incolumem efficias, ut tibi gratiarum actiones refer valeam in aeternum.

Per Dominum, etc.

Apud Bollandum de S. Apollonia ad Feb. 9. p. 282.
O Sancta Apollonia, per passionem tuam impetra nobis remissionem omnium
peccatorum, quae dentibus and ore commisimus per gulam and loquelam; ut
liberemur a dolor and stridore dentium hic and in futuro, and diligendo cordis
munditiem per gratiam Labiorum, habeamus amicum Regem Angelorum.

Amen.
BLessed Apollonia sustained great torment for the Lord; First of all, the
Tyrants drew out her Teeth with Iron Hammers (a new way of drawing teeth) and
when she was in that Torment, she prayed to the Lord Jesus Christ, that every
one that should devoutly invocate her name, might feel no pain in their Teeth.

Verse. Pray for us, O Blessed Apollonia.

Ans. That we may be made worthy of the promises of Christ.

The Prayer.

ALmighty everlasting God, who did deliver S. Apollonia thy Virgin and
Martyr, from the hands of her Enemies, and did hear her Prayer; I entreat
thee by her Intercession, and the Intercession of S. Laurence thy Martyr,
together with that of all the He and She-Saints, to expel pain from my Teeth,
and to make me safe and sound, that I may return Thee my Eternal thanksgivings.

By our Lord, etc.

O Saint Apollonia, by thy Passion obtain for us the remission of all the sins,
which with Teeth and Mouth we have committed through Gluttony and Speech; that
we may be delivered from pain and gnashing of Teeth here and hereafter, and
loving cleanness of heart, by the grace of our lips, we may have the King of
Angels our Friend.

Amen.
NOTES.
THis last Prayer (out of an Vtrecht Manuscript) Bollandus thinks, was not
recited in the Divine Service, for this reason; because it is not directed to
God. But we found in others before, formal Petitions made to her immediately;
and the falsness of his observation is apparent, in abundance of Instances
which I have given all along; and we shall meet with many more, when we come to
the Devotions directed to the Bl. Virgin: The Reader may do well, as to this
particular, to consult the Learned Dallaeus, (in his Book, De Latinorum cultu;
especially Lib. 3. c. 12.) who has given us abundance of Examples out of their
proper Masses. And why should any one believe, that they should be shy in
directing their Prayers to the Saints, when we find that they have joined God
and them together in their praises, and in the same Gloria's? Of which take
this instance at present, in a Hymn upon S. Lewis Bishop of Toulouse, Brev.
Romans antiq. 19 August.
immediately before the first Lesson; where at the end of the Hymn is this
Gloria.

Trino Deo and simplici, digna laudum praeambula
Sint; and tanto Pontifici, per infinita secula.
That is, To God that is Three, and yet but One,
Give all the praises that are fit;
To Lewis, let the same be done,
Through Ages that are Infinite.


I observe here farther, upon what slight occasions, the Roman Church has
advanced their superstition in the Invocation of Saints. Eusebius in the sixth
Book of his History, Chap. 41. (edit. Valesii) has told us a very short story
concerning her; how a Year before Decius his persecuting the Christians, (which
Baronius places an. 252.) in a Tumult raised at Alexandria against the
Christians, among others that suffered, they laid hold on the Admirable
Apollonia, an Aged Virgin ((...)) and struck out her teeth, and ^indling a Fire
in the Suburbs, threatened to burn her alive, unless she would pronounce certain
impious words with them; she made a little demur, as if she deliberated with
her self, and then suddenly leapt into the Fire and was burnt. Upon this plain
Song, it is very pleasant to observe what descant the Makers of the Roman
Breviaries have run.

They have told us of the Noble Race she came of; of her chastity and humility
in her younger Years; her Fastings, Prayers and Alms; her Examination before
the Heathen Prefect with his Questions, and her Answers, which you may see in
Bollandus, Loc. citat.
who cites a great many old Breviaries: but the Breviary of Vtrecht has done
their work, and made it very reasonable, that all should apply themselves, when
they are afflicted with the Toothache, when it brings in the Virgin praying for
those that were in that distress, and that a voice came from Heaven, saying, O
Spouse of Christ, thou have obtained those things thou have asked of God. And
now there is nothing further needful to excite the Peoples Devotions, save only
Relics and Miracles. For Relics, none can be more proper than her Teeth,
and the parts about her Mouth; and here they are well furnished in abundance of
places. (though the Saint lived so long ago.) At Rome, besides her Head and
Arm, one Church has part of her Jaw, and four or five Churches I know not how
many of her Teeth. At Volaterrae in Etruria, there is preserved her Mouth, part
of her Jaw, and one of her Teeth. At Bononia, in several Churches they have her
Teeth, and in one her Lower Jaw, which is solemnly venerated on the 9th. of
February, by the Legate or Vice-Legate. At Antwerp they show a part of her Jaw,
by which frequent Miracles are wrought. At Mechlin they have part of a Tooth,
and at several places in Flanders whole ones: At two places in Artois a
remarkable portion of her Lower Jaw. At Colen, one Monastery has four of her
Teeth, another has a Rib, and a Tooth, and Shoulder Blade; the Carthusians her
Jaw, S. Maurice's Church a Tooth, and S. Albans in the same City her Lower Jaw.
At Lisbon in the Church of S. Roch, one of her Teeth, and other Relics of
her. At Placentia in Spain are two Relics preserved of her, and there this
Prayer is also recited.

DEus qui B. Apolloniae in tenero Here they forget what Eusebius says of her
Age, and suppose her, as Mantuan does, to be, Viridi vix nubilis a^vo, a young
Virgin.
and puro corpore dira tormenta vincere tribuisti; da quaesumus, ut carnis
illecebris superatis, nulla mundi adversa formidemus.

Per, etc.

O God, who did enable S. Apollonia in a tender and pure body to overcome
grievous torments; Grant us, we pray thee, that overcoming the allurements of
the flesh, we may be afraid of none of the Worlds adversities.

Through our Lord, etc.

Now though after this Catalogue of Relics, one would have thought it strange
that any Saint should have had more Jaws than two, or an old Virgin be
furnished with such a number of Teeth, as they presume to show for hers; yet we
are farther told by Chemnitius Exam. Council. Trid. part. 4. page 12.
, that a grave and learned Man, one Andreas (Abbas Amelunxbornensis) used to
relate, that King Edward was once troubled with the Toothache, and commanding
that the Teeth of S. Apollonia should be sent to him, which were every where
preserved in his Kingdom; There were, says he, heaped together so many Teeth
of Apollonia, out of the Relics of one Kingdom, that several great Tunns
could not contain them.

As for Miracles; that which Bollandus recites in the forenamed place, (though
he dares not either affirm, or deny the truth of it) will serve in stead of a
thousand, to fright the Living people into devotion toward this Saint, when
such a mark of displeasure for neglecting her, was inflicted upon the Body of
the Dead Bishop Ernestus; who suffering an edifice dedicated to her to run to
ruin, when he was dead, all the Teeth of his Head were struck out, so that not
one remained in his Mouth; that it might manifestly appear, that he was
punished in that, in which she was wont to relieve all those, who did not blot
her out of their memory.

To St. Anthony the Hermit, for Inflammations, commonly called S. Anthony's
Fire.
Antiph.

Hor. B. Virg. se^. us. Romans p. 138.
VOx de coelo ad Antonium facta est; Quoniam viriliter dimicasti contra mundum,
ecce ego tecum sum and faciam te in toto orb nominari.

Oration.

DEus qui concedis, obtentu B. Antonii confessoris tui, morbidum ignem
extingui, and membris aegris refrigeria praestari, fac nos propitius ipsius
meritis and precibus a Gehennae incendiis liberatos, integros mente and corpore
tibi foeliciter in gloria praesentari.

Per Dominum.

Missal. Sarum. Verse.
O Antoni Pastor inclyte,
Qui cruciatos reficis,
Morbos sanas and destruis,
Ignis calorem extinguis;
Pie Pater ad Dominum
Ora pro nobis miseris.
Secreta.

Sacrificium nostrum, quaesumus Domine, benignus intend; quo sicut B. Antonii
precibus cruciatus temporales sanare non desinis, ita exui misericorditer
impetremus ab aeternis.

Per Dominum.

A Voice came from Heaven to Anthony, saying, Because thou have fought manfully
against the World, behold I am with thee, and will make thee famous in all the
Earth.

The Prayer.

O GOD, who by the means of thy Confessor S. Anthony, do vouchsafe the
extinguishing of the Fiery disease and refreshments to sick Members; mercifully
grant, that we being freed by his Merits and Prayers from the flames of Hell,
may be happily presented sound in mind and body to Thee in glory.

Through our Lord, etc.

SAint Anthony, thou Pastor great,
To the tormented thou giv'st ease,
Heal'st and destroyest their Disease,
Extinguishing all Fiery heat;
Pray for us wretches, holy Father, we entreat.
WE pray Thee, O Lord, graciously to look upon our sacrifice; that as by the
Prayers of S. Anthony thou ceasest not to cure torments that are temporal, so
we may obtain to be mercifully freed from those that are Eternal.

Through our Lord, etc.

NOTES.
HE that had a mind to dispute about the truth of those Miracles, which
Athanasius has told us were wrought by S. Anthony, in his Life; might think
some of them justly liable to be questioned; as that which he tells us of his
being beaten by the Devil, till the greatness of the pain took away both all
his motion and speech, and that he was so cruelly handled, that he was at one
time just a dying: and that other story, how when he was going into a Ship, he
complained to his Companions of a grievous stink, and presently one possessed
with a Devil, cried out; whereby they gathered, that he perceived the Devil by
his smell: (as Bollandus in his notes upon the place, says, S. Pachomius knew
by the stench the presence of an Heretic.) But my business is not to detract
from the Saint, or to lessen his due esteem: Only one thing I observe, that he
seems in his lifetime to have had a more than ordinary care, to prevent all
that after-veneration of his Relics, which is now practiced in the Roman
Church, which we know both gives life to their Devotions, and raises
expectation of his help in those that apply themselves to him for relief in
their distresses. For the forenamed Father tells us, that he gave a strict
charge to those that attended him when he dyed, that they should not carry his
Body into Egypt, lest they should reserve it in their Houses Athanas. in vit.
Anton. p. 503.
, which he explains a little before, that they did not commit the Body to the
Earth, but wrapped it in Linnings, and putting it in a Bed, kept it in their
Houses, thinking thus to honor the Dead; (which is neither lawful nor pious)
this, he says, he had blamed, and dehorted from the usage of it. (and no doubt
he would have blamed the present Roman customs as well as the old Egyptian;
for why is it worse to keep those Remains in Beds above ground, than to place
them upon Altars, or keep them in Boxes?) Bury therefore, says he, my Body, and
cover it with Earth, and observe this charge that no man but you alone know the
place of my burial: which they did, says Athanasius, and no man hitherto, save
those two Persons that ministered about him, knows where he was buried. But the
Roman Trade cannot be driven with this Secrecy of Interment, many a good Market
would thus have been spoiled: Dug therefore he must be out of his Grave, and
if the Monks be so sullen, as not to discover where the place is, Visions and
Revelations will not fail to do it; and though it was near 200 Years before a
discovery was made of it, yet Colen that got the three Kings, has got too S.
Anthonie's Beard; and we are told of a wonderful translation of his Body into
France, which deserves relating: In Histor. Aymere Falconis apud Bolland. ad
Januar. 17.
One Joceline was engaged by the Testament of his dying Father to go in
Pilgrimage to Jerusalem: which he neglecting to perform, in a Battle he was
sore wounded, and carried for dead into a Chapel of S. Anthony's; where when
he began to revive, a Multitude of Devils appeared to him, and for not
performing his vow of the Pilgrimage, were preparing to drag him to Hell, and
one of them casting a Halter about his Neck, was ready to strangle him: In this
strait S. Anthony the Guardian of the place, appeared, and chid, and drove away
the Devils; commanded him to go his Journey to Jerusalem, and after that, in
requital of his kindness, to carry his Relics away, out of the Eastern, into
the Western parts of the World; because there Christ would have him to be more
highly venerated in time to come; all which he performed, and begging the Body
of S. Anthony of the Emperor, brought him from Constantinople into France
(though how his Body was brought to Constantinople, we are yet to learn.) But
we are not to think that his whole Body was brought thence by Joceline; for in
the Year 1231. Lambertus from the same place brought part of his Arm to Bruges:
At Colen (as was said before) they show S. Anthony's Beard, and a remarkable
part of his Hand: they have some part of him at Tourney, and the Jesuits have
two of his Relics at Antwerp. At Rome one of his Churches is famous for his
Sackcloth, and some others for pieces of his Garment of Palms, artificially
weaved, which S. Anthony wore on high Days, and some say belonged before to
Paul the Hermit: but the most part of that famous Garment, we are told, is
preserved and shown at Vienna in France.

These Remains of his, we are informed, have wrought mighty Miracles for the
Curing that Fiery Disease, which like a Pestilence swept away so many in
France: nay (as Aymerus relates, loc. citat.) his Relics being dipped into
Wine, the Wine so sanctified, proved a present Remedy against that Disease; and
therefore the Pope gave a Patent to the Monastery of S. Anthony, where his
Relics were kept, that they should make that sanctified Wine, and none else.
Neither did this benefit, by the intercession of S. Anthony, accrue only to
Men, but to Cattle also; and from hence, we are told, the custom arose of
picturing this Saint with a Hog at his Feet, because, as the same Author says,
on this animal, God wrought Miracles by his Servant; and in honor of his
memory, they used in several Places to tie a Bell about the Neck of a Pig, and
maintain it at the common charge of the Parish, from whence came our English
Proverb of Tantony Pig.

To St. Sigismund for Fevers, or Agues.
Brevlar. and Missal. sec. us. Sarum.
OMnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui per sanctos Apostolos and Martyrs tuos,
diversa sanitatum dona largiri dignatus es; da quaesumus, ut praesentem famulum
tuum N. qui a febrium vexatione fatigatur, per intercessionem famuli tui
Sigismundi regis and Martyris, tua medicina erigat ad salutem, and ad sanitatem
pristinam clementer revocare dignetur.

Per Dominum, etc.

Secreta.

OFferimus tibi Domine munera sancta in nomine electi tui Sigismundi Regis and
Martyris tui; ut a praesenti aegroto N. febrium ardores repelli jubeas, and
exinde tuo semper in omnibus muniatur auxilio.

Per Dominum.

ALmighty everlasting God, who by thy holy Apostles and Martyrs have vouchsafed
to bestow diverse gifts of healing; Grant, we beseech thee to thy Servant N.
here present, who is wearied with the vexation of Fevers, that by the
intercession of thy servant Sigismund King and Martyr, thy Medicine may raise
him to health, and mercifully vouchsafe to restore him to his former soundness.

Through our Lord, etc.

WE offer unto thee, O Lord, holy gifts in the name of thy elect Sigismund the
King and thy Martyr; that thou would command Feverish heats to be repelled
from this sick Person N. here present, and that also he may always be defended
in all things by thy help.

Through our Lord, etc.

NOTES.
BY these Prayers any one would be apt to think, that this King had made some
glorious confession of Christ, before the Opposers of his Religion, which he
had sealed with his Blood, and thence had obtained the style of King and
Martyr: but when we examine the short story of his Life, which is given us by
Baronius out of Gregory Tur^nensis, Baron. Annal. Eccles. ad an. 509. p. 600.
we shall see but little reason to venerate him for a Martyr, or to have any
great expectations from his Patronage. He was converted, Id. ad an. 526. p.
120, 121.
we are told, from Arianism to the Catholic Faith, by Alcimus Avitus Bishop of
Vienna, in his Fathers Lifetime. After his Death, he and Godomarus his Brother
reigned over the Burgundians. He had one Son by the Daughter of K. Theodoric,
called Sigericus, but she dying, he married a second Wife; who, upon a great
falling out with this Son, persuaded Sigismund, that Sigericus sought to
possess his Kingdom, and without making him away he could not be secure;
whereupon one Day commanding him to lie down and sleep when he was drunk, he
caused him to be strangled; for which fact he afterward was extremely
penitent: But the Divine vengeance presently followed him. For K. Clodomerus
making War against him and Godomarus, they were overcome by him, and Sigismund,
with his Wife and Children being taken Prisoners, he together with them was
slain, and his Body thrown into a Pit. This Death of his, which was a just
retaliation of his former crime, can scarce, one would think, amount to
Martyrdom. But now, so acceptable was his repentance, that his Body being
taken up out of the Pit, and buried in the Monastery of Agaunum, it was
presently famed for working Miracles. For now, says Gregory, if those that are
afflicted with Agues, Greg. Turon. de glor. Martyr. c. 75.
do devoutly celebrate Masses in honor of him, and offer an oblation to God
for the rest of his Soul, presently their shakings cease, their Fevers are
extinguished, and they are restored to their former health. But this is not the
first Fable that he (and you may put in his Contemporary, Pope Gregory) has
took upon trust, and reported from common fame; and I am the more suspicious of
it, because these Masses to be said in honor of him, and Oblations for the
rest of his Soul, look as if a Trade were going forward to be menaged by the
Monks inventions. But methinks they were ill-advised in these doubtful
circumstances, to pitch upon him for a Patron in the case of Fevers, when
there was an elder Saint, and a more unquestionable Martyr, already in the
office before him; I mean S. Pantaleon: For thus I find it in the Hours of
Sarum.

De Sancto Pantaleone Martyr.
Anaphona.

SAncte Pantaleon Martyr Christi
Militari ordine fuisti, quo praeeminuisti,
Domum Heremeticam vitam acquisisti.
Tu vero Hydropicum sanum reddidisti.
Missus in equuleo ungues perdidisti.
Costas cum Lampadibus adustus fuisti.
Collum subdens gladio pronus pertulisti.
Fundens lac pro sanguine vitam sic finisti.
Cunctas febres dilue a plebe tam tristi,
Qui coelestis gloriae regna meruisti.
Verse. O Sancte Pantaleon ora pro nobis.

Resp. Ut ab omnibus liberemur febribus.

Oremus.

DEus qui humilium vota respicis, ipsorumque cernis preces; adesto plebis tuae
precibus auctor ipse pietatis; and praesta, ut qui beati Pantaleonis Martyris
tui memoriam agimus, ab omnibus febrium generibus efficaciter liberemur, and ad
gaudia aeterna te ducente pervenire mereamur.

Per te Jesu, etc.

Of S. Pantaleon Martyr.
CHrist's Martyr blessed Pantaleon
Was first in Arms, and honor won.
Poor Hermits life at length he chose,
By Dropsie's cure more famous grows.
By tortures rackt, his Nails he lost,
With burning Lamps his ribs they roast.
He bowed his Neck to the fatal blow,
Milk from the wound for blood did flow.
Cure all their Fevers, who to thee complain,
Thou that in Heavenly glory now do reign.
Verse. O Saint Pantaleon pray for us.

Ans. That we may be freed from all Fevers.

Let us Pray.

O God, who have respect to the bows of the humble, and beholdest their
Prayers; be present to the prayers of thy People, thou that art the Author of
pity; and grant, that we who celebrate the memory of Bl. Pantaleon thy Martyr,
may be effectually delivered from all sorts of Fevers, and by thy conduct may
merit to come to the joys that are Eternal.

Through Jesus, etc.

To St. Sebastian for removing the Plague.
Horae B. Virg. sec. us. Romans
EGregie Christi Martyr Sebastiane, princeps and propagator sanctissimorum
praeceptorum; ecce nomen tuum in libro vitae coelestis adscriptum est, and
memoriale tuum non delebitur in secula.

Verse. Ora pro nobis B. Martyr Sebastiane.

Resp. Ut mereamur pestem Epidemiae illaesi pertransire.

Oration.

OMnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui meritis B. Sebastiani Martyris tui
gloriosissimi, olim pestem Epidemiae generalem omnibus mortiferam revocasti;
praesta supplicibus tuis, ut qui pro simili peste revocanda sive cessanda, sub
tua confidentia ad ipsum refugiunt, ejusdem meritis and precibus, ab omnibus
nocumentis venenosis, nec non ab omnibus corporis and animae periculis; ac a
subitanea and improvisa morte, and ab omnibus inimicis visibilibus and
invisibilibus singulis diebus, horis, atque momentis, liberemur.

Per Dominum.

Prosa.

Missale Romans antiqu. and Missal. sec. us. Sarum.
OMnes una decantemus
Et Martyris personemus
Laudem Sebastiani;
Hic a deo est electus,
Per quem morbus est ejectus
Languoris pestiferi.
Nam se Christo totum vovit
Qui vult nos hunc venerari,
Christus eum nunc promovit
In patria coelesti:
Cunctis hic subvenit maestis,
Statim est sedata Pestis
Sui causa meriti.
Ipsum si nunc deprecemur
Nomen quoque veneremur
Martyris sanctissimi,
Morbus iste non nocebit,
Sed mortiferum delebit
Populum qui tenuit:
Nos pro nostris tantis malis
Jam absorbet pestis talis
Quod tota gens gemuit.
Sancte Martyr Sebastiane
Salva nos a morte Epidemiae:
Nostra gravia ob peccata,
Terra ista desolata
Non sit pie quaesumus;
Sed nos considera
Et in nobis cessa
Pestem jam te petimus.
Ista per te gens sit tuta,
Et ne noceat acuta
Febris hac in patria.
Ex quo nostra spes est tota
In te Martyr, nunc remota
Sit pestis mortifera.
O Sancte Sebastiane
Nostrae gentis sero mane
Conservator and tutor sis;
Et Dominum deprecare,
Ut a nobis revocare
Valeat vesana pestis.
Ex tua sancta prece
Ne sit morbus nobis nece,
Sed recedat ab hac domo.
Amen dicat omnis homo.
O Sebastian thou famous Martyr of Christ, the Prince and Propagator of most
holy Precepts; behold thy Name is written in the Book of Heavenly Life, and thy
memorial shall not be blotted out for ever.

Verse. O Bl. Martyr Sebastian pray for us.

Ans. That we may merit to pass through the Plague unhurt.

The Prayer.

ALmighty everlasting God, who by the merits of thy most glorious Martyr
Sebastian, did in time past remove a general Pestilence deadly to all; grant
to thy suppliants, that we who for the recalling or ceasing the like Plague,
fly to him, confiding in thee; by his merits and prayers we may be delivered
from all poisonous harms, as also from all dangers of Soul and Body, and from
sudden and unforeseen death, and from all enemies visible and invisible, each
Day, Hour and Moment.

Through our Lord, etc.

SEbastian the Martyr's praise
Let Us sing aloud, by God elected,
Through whom the languishing decays
Of deadly Plagues should be corrected.
He to Christ himself devoted,
Christ would have our worship grace him,
Whom he has so far promoted,
As in Heavenly Seats to place him.
Our sorrows all by him are eased,
Sebastian's Merits were so great,
He once a raging Plague appeased;
And if we now his help entreat,
His name will prove sufficient charm
To keep us from this threatening harm.
The Pestilence now gives no Quarter
All the sad people in despair
Groan and cry, O holy Martyr,
Now save us from the infected Air.
Let not our crimes our ruin prove
As for our guilt they justly may,
But think on us, with speed remove
This heavy Plague, we humbly pray.
May we from this sharp Feaver's rage
Safe and unhurt hereafter be,
Whose deadly influence assuage
Since all our hopes are placed in thee.
Be thou our early Guardian Saint,
Shield us from mischiefs when it is late,
Entreat Heaven graciously to grant
A revocation of our Fate.
Let this disease when thou do plead
Obtain no farther leave to slay men,
But conquered from each house recede;
To which let every Man say,
Amen.
NOTES.
THis last is a rare piece of Devotion; and if you observe it, most admirably
accords with what we find, Psalm. 50.14, 15. Offer unto God thanksgiving, and
pay thy vows unto the most High, and call upon me in the day of trouble, I will
deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Here is calling upon a Saint in
trouble, expecting deliverance from a Saint, praising and glorifying a Saint,
without any taking notice of God at all, only that he would do it for them. I
would fain know, whether if all this had been said to Aaron by a Jew, it would
not then have been accounted deservedly Idolatry; and if so, What makes it a
less sin, or none at all in a Christian? I am sure Idolatry is now condemned by
the New Testament, as well as by the Old; and I would fain understand where our
Savior, or his Apostles have given us a new notion of it, different from what
Men had of Idolatry before.

But here again, we are sent to Visions and Revelations, and they must bear out
the worship of this Saint, though never so absurd, and set him up for a
powerful Intercessor in the case of the Pestilence. For Baronius has made us
understand the secret, out of Paulus Diaconus, ad An. 680. number. 58. Tuncque
visibiliter multis apparuit, quia bonus and malus Angelus, etc. (speaking of
the terrible Plague at Rome and Ticinum.) "Then it appeared visibly to many,
for a good and a bad Angel by Night went through the City, and by the command
of the good Angel, the bad, who seemed to carry a Hunting staff in his hand, as
often as he smote with his Staff the Door of any House, so many People dyed out
of that House, the Day following. Then it was said by Revelation to a certain
Person, that this Plague would not cease, till the Altar of S. Sebastian was
placed in the Church of S. Peter ad Vincula; which being done, and the Relics
of S. Sebastian brought to Rome, presently upon the placing the Altar in the
said Church, the Plague ceased. Baronius adds, that the Altar it self remains
yet entire, as also the Image of the said holy Martyr in Mosaic work. And from
hence this piece of Religion is propagated to Posterity, that in time of the
Plague, by way of vow, the Image of the said S. Sebastian, is wont to be
painted in diverse places, and Altars to be erected to his memory, yea and
Churches to be built.

We are also farther informed by Bollandus (ad Januar. 20. in vit. S. Sebast.)
what rare vows were made to him by those of Milan, in a great Plague, An. 1575.
They chose him for an especial Saint to implore, not only because he had
conferred like benefits heretofore in other places; but chiefly because his
Mother was of Milan, and there also he was educated; and they vowed, if he
would succor them, to build a new Church in Honor of this Martyr, and settle
a maintenance for daily offices to be performed in it; to celebrate his Annual
feast, with a Fast the Day before; to bring solemn oblations to his Church
yearly, on the Day of this vow, (viz. on the Ides of October) and also on the
Day of his Feast: to offer a precious Vessel, to be a decent receptacle for the
Martyrs bones; and several other things of like nature, which you may be sure
were so obliging to him, that they could not fail of the desired success.

Neither does the Church want his Relics, or they their miraculous effects;
for though he lived so long ago ( viz. An. 287.) that hinders not, but that in
several Countries and Cities, they have got remarkable portions of his Body;
nay, more than one of those very Arrows with which he was transfixed at his
Martyrdom, are shown at this day. We are told, that in a Church of Capua, this
Saints Relics sanctify Water (as we heard before S. Anthony's did Wine)
which is preserved for the infirm, and is so often called for, that they are
fain thus to Consecrate it, more than once a Year: at Ebersberg in Bavaria they
have the Top of his Scull, which is venerated with great Religion all over
Germany, and is a certain amulet against the Pestilence; it being so included
in Silver, that People may drink out of it, and in it Arrows are Consecrated,
which are great preservatives against the Plague.

To S. Rocch in time of the Plague.
Horae B. Virg. sec. us. Sarum.
O Quam magnificum est nomen tuum Beat Rocche, qui tuis intercessionibus
multitudinem languentium nosti salvare, and omnibus nomen tuum gloriosum
commemorantibus, te propitium exhibere; veni and salva nos a morbo Epidemiae,
and aeris temperiem nobis concede.

Oremus.

OMnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui meritis and precibus Beatissimi Rocchi
Confessoris tui, quandam pestem generalem revocasti; praesta supplicibus tuis,
ut qui pro simili peste revocanda, ad ipsum sub tua confugiunt fiducia, ipsius
gloriosi confessoris tui precamine, ab ipsa peste Epidemiae and ab omni
perturbatione liberentur.

Per Dominum, etc.

Antiphona.

O Blessed Rocch, how magnificent is thy Name, who by thy intercessions know
how to save a Multitude of languishing People, and to show thy self propitious
to all that commemorate thy glorious Name; come and save us from the Plague,
and grant to us a good temperature of Air.

Let us Pray.

ALmighty everlasting God, who by the Merits and Prayers of the most Blessed
Rocch thy Confessor, did remove a certain general Plague; grant to thy
Suppliants, that they who for the removing the like Plague, fly to him,
confiding in thee, by the prayer of this glorious Confessor, they may be freed
from the Pestilence, and from all perturbation.

Through our Lord, etc.

But more fully in the Horae Sec. us. Romans and in the end of the office of the
Bl. Virgin, Paris 1615.
Anaphona.

AVe Roche sanctissime, nobili natus sanguine,
Crucis signaris schemate sinistro tuo latere:
Roche peregre profectus, pestiferos curas tactus,
Aegros sanas mirifice, tangendo salutifere.
Vale Roche Angelicae vocis citatus famine,
Qui potens es Deifice, a cunctis pestem pellere.
Oremus.

DEus, qui Beato Rocho per Angelum tuum, tabulam eidem afferentem promisisti,
ut qui ipsum pie invocaverit, a nullo pestis cruciatu laederetur; praesta
quaesumus, ut qui ejus memoriam agimus, ipsius meritis and precibus, a
mortifera peste corporis and animae liberemur.

Per Dominum, etc.

ALL hail St. Rocch, to noble blood allied,
Marked with the sign o'th'cross on thy left side;
Plagues felt thy virtue in a foreign Land,
The sick were cured, touched by thy saving hand.
Farewell great Saint, whom Angels greet, we may,
Whose power, like Gods, does drive all plagues away.
Let us Pray.

O God, who did promise to blessed Roch, by an Angel that brought a Table to
him, that he who piously invoked him, should be hurt by no tormenting Plague;
grant we beseech thee, that we who keep his memory, by his merits and prayers
may be freed from the deadly Plague both of Soul and Body.

By our Lord, etc.

NOTES.
THe Legend upon which these Prayers are founded, is set down in a large Prosa
(as they call it) in the Mass de S. Roccho, which we find in the old Roman, and
Salisbury Missals and Breviary, which begins thus. In honor salvatoris sancti
Rocchi confessoris agatur memoria.

Where it mentions his being born with the sign of the Cross on his left side;
and that, as a token of his future Sanctity, when he was a Child, on Wednesdays
and Fridays he would never suck but once a day, (so keeping these as fasting
days, by which we may guess at the likelihood of the rest of the story, as)
that he cured Men of the Plague, by only making the sign of the Cross upon
them; and how a little Dog brought him Bread, and an Angel healed him himself
of the Plague: And then follows the story of his being in Lombardy, where he
dyed, and how an Angel delivered him a Table, written in Golden Letters by Gods
own hand, with the name of S. Rocch in it, and a promise that whosoever did
commemorate this Saint, should be delivered from, or cured of the Plague, and
it ends thus.

Tu qui Deo es tam charus,
Et in luce valde clarus,
Sana tuos famulos;
Er a peste nos defend,
Opem nobis ac impende
Contra mortis stimulos:
Vir tam potens, tam beatus
Cum honor collocatus
In coelesti curia,
Voto, voce veneretur
Ut per ipsum nobis detur
Christi frui gloria.
Amen.
O thou great Saint, who art to God so dear,
And brightly shin'st in light above so clear;
Heal us thy servants, and from Plague defend us,
Against its killing Darts thy succor lend us.
Well may we venerate a man so great,
So blessed, with honor placed in heavenly seat;
Our vows and prayers we make to him, that we
Hereafter may by him Christ's glory see. Amen.
This Saint is venerated upon the same account with S. Sebastian, for
delivering many Cities of Italy from the Plague by the sign of the Cross; and
you may well think there was something more than ordinary in his signing, when
Surius (in his life) tells us, that to preserve a Cardinal from the Plague, he
made a cross upon his Forehead, and the impression of it pierced his skin, as
if the cross had been burnt in with a hot Iron. His veneration was decreed with
great solemnity, by the Order of a General Council. For so Baronius informs us,
(upon the Roman Martyrologie, Aug. 16.)

In the Year 1414, (about an 100 Years after his death) the Fathers of the
Council of Constance, for the driving away a Plague that was begun, decreed
that the honors due to the Saints, should be bestowed on him; for with solemn
pomp they brought his Image through the City, all the People accompanying it,
which being done, the Plague presently stayed. And from thence was the example
taken, that every where his venerable Images, Altars, Chapels, and lastly
Temples were erected.

To St. Marguerite for Women with Child.
THere is a famous Legend of this Saint in the old Roman and Sarisbury
Breviaries. (on the 26. of July.) In which these passages are remarkable. She
desired of God, that she might have a conflict face to face with the Devil,
that hitherto had been her secret and hidden enemy. Then the Devil appeared in
the terrible shape of a Dragon, and swallowed her up: but she presently arming
her self with the sign of the Cross, the Dragon burst asunder, and the Virgin
came unhurt out of his Belly. Afterward she saw another Devil, like a black
man sitting, whom she catching by the Hair, threw him to the ground, and put
her right Foot upon the Crown of his Head, and bid him tell her what he was.
The Devil said, lift up your Foot from my Crown, that I may speak: Then he told
her, that he was one of those Spirits which Solomon shut up in a brazen Vessel,
and the Babylonians coming, and thinking to have found Gold in it, broke it,
and so we flew away. She also made him confess his arts of fraud and
wickedness, and why he so miserably tempted the Christians; Et pedem virgo
sublevans, mox velut fumus evanuit, and lifting up her Foot, presently the
Devil vanished like smoke. [This was a notable trick of S. Marguerite, thus by
putting the Devil to pain, to make him confess the Secrets of his own Trade and
Rogueries; but S. Bernard made a worse fool of him, and cunningly overreached
the Devil, to the discovery of a secret which concerned Men's salvation, and
such a Secret, as no good Angel ever told any Man, out of his own pure good
will, the like. For thus I find it in a Rubric of the Salisbury Hours. ( fol.
123.) When Saint Bernard was in his Prayers, the Dyuell said unto him; I know
that there be certain Verses in the Sawter, who that say them daily shall not
perish, and he shall have knowledge of the day that he shall dye. But the Fend
would not show them to S. Bernard: Than said S. Bernard, I shall say daily the
hole Sawter. The Fend consideringe that S. Bernard shall do so much profit
and good labor; so he showed him this Verses. The Verses are there set down,
which begin thus, O bone Jesu. Illumina oculos meos, etc. Before every Verse,
as if it was intended for a charm, is set commonly, a hard name of Greek or
Hebrew; as, O Adonai. Locutus sum, etc. O Heloy. Periit fuga a me etc. And so
before others, O Emanuel, O Agyos, O Raby, O Tetragrammaton: and there also,
among the rest of the precious Devotions, (which were all taught him I suppose
by the Devil, for I find no distinction mentioned) is that unintelligible and
nonsensical Prayer, (which was mentioned at the beginning of the Book) Peto
Domine Jesu, etc.] When she came to dye, she prayed of God, that whosoever
writ, read or heard of her passion, might obtain pardon of his sins, and
whosoever would build a Church to her honor, and minister Candles out of his
just labor for her service, might have whatsoever he asked that belonged to
his salvation: and in a more especial manner (signanter) she prayed for Women
in Labor, that when they invoked her Patronage, they might have a speedy
Delivery, and escape the Danger, and that the Infant might be born without any
defect of its Members. When she had done praying, there was a great Thunder,
and a Dove came from Heaven, saying, Blessed art thou Margaret, the Spouse of
Christ, behold, thy Petitions are granted thee by Christ, come into the rest of
the Heavenly Country.

If these Requests and Answer can be supposed to be true, Saint Marguerite, for
my Money; I see no need of any other Saint to pray to: and indeed I must
commend the wisdom of the Later Popes in leaving all this out of the present
Breviaries; for this one story would else have been enough to have spoiled the
Market of the other Saints.

If any one have a mind to see this at large, and much more, let him consult
her Life, written in French Verses, at the end of the Office of the Bl. Virgin,
Printed at Paris, 1615. To which also the Women with Child are beholden, for
furnishing them with a Prayer to her, though the Public Offices of the Church
are very sparing herein, being willing, I suppose, that the Bl. Virgin should
have all the custom in this case, as you may hear more hereafter. The Prayer
is this which follows, which I will not trouble my self to translate into
English Meeter, because so many now adays understand the French.

Oraison de S. Marguerite, a dire pour les Femmes grosses.
MAdam Saint Marguerite,
Digne vierge de Dieu eslite,
Qui le servis des ta jeuness,
Plein de grace and de sagesse;
Qui pour l'amour de Dieu nostre sire,
Souffris tourmens and grief Martyr;
Qui le Dragon parmy Fendis,
Et du Tyran te deffendis;
Qui vainquis l'ennemy d'enfer
En prison fermee de fer;
Qui a Dieu fis mainte request
Quand on te voulut couper la test,
Et par speciale, que Femme
Gross d'enfant, qui a toy Dame
De coeur devot retourneroit,
Et qui ton aid requerroit,
Que Dieu de peril la gardast,
Et de l'aider point ne tardast.
Si te supply Vierge honoree,
Noble Martyr and bien heuree,
Par ta piteuse passion
Et ta Saint petition,
Que Dieu vuelles pour moy prier
Et doucement luy supplier,
Que par pity, il me conforte,
Et douleurs qu'il faut que je port,
Et sans peril d'ame et de corpse
Face mon enfant yssit horse,
Sain and Sauf, et que je le voye
Baptize a bien and a joye;
Et si de viure il a espace
Il luy doint son amor et grace
Parquoy si sainctement il serve
Que la gloire des cieux desserue;
Et aux autres en cas semblable,
Soit par toy amy favorable.
Ainsi soit il.
There is one thing I must farther remark, which we meet with not only in this
story of S. Marguerite, but in Twenty other Lives of the Saints beside: viz.
The Admirable Petitions they made to God before they dyed, together with the
promises and privileges they obtained in answer to their requests. God was
very free, you will say, in a grant he made to S. Oringa; when he communicated
to her one of his own properties, Bolland. ad 10 Januar. page 651.
viz. The knowing peoples thoughts, as a reward of her modesty and chastness,
and this too without her asking: (that we read of) For, we are told, that God
promised to her, that because she had never cast her eyes upon the face of any
man, she should (for the future.) be able to see into the inmost secrets of the
heart of any Man whose face she would look upon. But commonly the Privileges
they boast of given to the Saints, were in answer to their Petitions; though
most of them are such, as are no ways becoming any Saint to ask, nor God to
grant. To instance in a few here: (passing over many that have been named
already, and others which we may have occasion to mention afterward.) We are
told of four Petitions that S. Maidoc made to God, which according to the plain
sense of the words, express either little Piety or Charity, but all of them, a
great regard that he had to himself: and yet these Petitions are said to be
made, Colganus vit. S. Maidoc. 31 Jan.
after that he had fasted Forty Days and Nights, without tasting any food.

The 1. Petition was, That whosoever of the Kingly race of the Lagenienses,
especially of the Seed of Brandubius, should sit in the Seat of Maidoc, and dye
in it, might not be with him in Heaven. This sitting in the Seat of Maidoc,
Colganus explains, by violent seizing upon the possessions of his Church at
Fearna, and holding them in possession without repentance to his death; he
prays that such a one might not be saved: which is either a very foolish
Prayer, or very uncharitable. To pray that a Sacrilegious Person, dying in
impenitency, may not come to Heaven, is like praying that a stone may not fly
upward into the Air: the weight of such a ones sins will depress him, without
any other hinderance to keep him down: but if the Prayer refers to such a
severe punishment of his crime, that he may never have the grace to repent, and
be saved; this is not becoming any Christian to desire toward his greatest
enemies; much less fit for this Saint to wish it, toward the race of this
King, who (as his Life tells us) was his mighty Benefactour, and had bestowed
upon him that Land, whereon he built his Monastery.

The 2d. Petition breaths the same fiery spirit; That whosoever of his Monks
should deny him, and prove a fugitive from him, such a one, in like manner,
might not be with him in Heaven. The 3d. Request was; That Hell might not
imprison those after the Day of Judgment, who should be buried in his
Churchyard. This, says Colganus, is to be understood of Catholics, devoutly
desiring to be buried there: but, by his favor, the words are so general, that
I cannot see, but that an Heretic may have as much benefit by this grant as
any other Person; especially since the rule of interpretation in this case is,
that Favores sunt ampliandi, Favors are to be understood in the largest sense;
and it is to be hoped, that S. Maidoc, if he had any foresight in him, took care
before he dyed, to Consecrate a good large burying place; since, without doubt,
if this was a known grant, there was like to be great crowding hither from all
parts, and People would not be more careful, in their last Will and Testament,
to commend their Souls into God's hands, than to commit their Bodies to be
buried in this sacred ground: Only I observe one good help in this case; that
the same privilege, totidem verbis, Colgan. vit. S. Kieran. 5. Mart. Number. 38.
was granted to S. Kieran, another Irish Saint; whose Churchyard, I suppose,
had as much holiness and virtue in it, as this of S. Maidoc's had, and so might
have as much custom.

The 4. Petition was, That he might every day deliver one Soul out of
Purgatory, until the Day of Judgment. This was a pretty request for a Saint to
ask, that he himself might do it; and argues that he had no mean opinion of his
own merits, but thought that he was furnished with a full stock and treasury of
them, that Souls might spend upon them thus daily, even till the last day: S.
Kieran was a little more modest in another request that he made Colganus, ibid.
, (because the favor depended upon a condition, and was not absolute, as this
was) viz. That whosoever honored the Festival of his Birthday, might be rich
in this World, and obtain rest in the World to come. But who can believe, that
God was as free in his Grants, as these Saints were foolish in their asking? I
may then believe, that all the Irish Devoto's to this last Saint were saved,
when I can be persuaded that they were all rich; but till then, the Defender of
these ridiculous stories, must not think that he has made them good, when he
has told a great many others like them. It may not be amiss however to relate
some of those special Privileges, Colgan. in notis ad vit. Maidoc. ad number. 33,
34.
that we may a little better understand to what heights of folly superstition
may advance. We are told then, that Gregory Turonensis mentions Christ's Grant
to S. Laurence, that every Friday he should deliver one Soul out of Purgatory
pains. The Cistersians boast, that it was granted by the Intercession of the
Bl. Virgin, that the Devil should have no power over any one, who at his death
was clothed in their habit: and we are informed, that it had like to have cost
a Monk of that Order very dear, Bibliothec. Patrum Cisterciens. p. 171.
who by the indiscretion of his Attendants, who did not consider sufficiently
Monastici habitus Sacramentum, the Sacrament of his Habit, had pulled off his
Cowl, to give him some relief in the heats of his Fever, and so he dyed
unhabited: who though he was conducted very civilly by good Angels, to the
Gates of Paradise, yet the Keepers that stood there, refused to give him any
entrance; no not though his conducting Angels urged much his good Life and
strict Devotion, yet all this would not do; for it was answered, that by an
Eternal Law it was established, that no Monk should enter in at those Gates
without his Hood; and so the Gates being shut upon him, he stood trembling
without, expecting every moment to receive the sad sentence of damnation; Only
Christ the Judge was so merciful, that he restored him to life again, for so
long a time, till he repenting of this neglect, might be habited in his Cowl,
and so be fit without impediment to enter into Paradise. To insinuate the
better, how safe a Man is, and secure of going to Heaven, when he is habited
aright; they bring stories, to persuade people, that the Devil watches, as a
Cat does for a Mouse, to find any one throwing off his habit, that he may have
then a prey of him. For thus I find Thom. Cantipratanus (Lib. 1. de Mirac. sui
temp. cap. 7. s. 4.) telling such another Fable as this. How a Monk in the
heats of a great Fever, had put off his Cowl; and suddenly such a noise and
crack was heard, as if the whole building was tumbling down; which a ho y Man
hard by at his prayers, being terrified with, the Devil appeared to him,
saying: I raised this great noise in indignation, because thou hinderedst me by
thy Prayers, from snatching that Monk bodily to be tormented, who had thrown
off the Habit of his Order. So little wit these Inventors of Lies have, to
bring in the Devil too, discovering secrets to his own prejudice, when he need
not; for any one may see, that this appearance and discourse of his, would for
the future prevent all his opportunities of seizing upon such careless People
at unawares.


The Carmelite Friars also, are this way as well secured of their salvation, as
they can wish: for in the Year 1250. one Simon Stock an Englishman, Gono^^^ in
Chron. SS. Deiparae. p. 256.
and General of their Order, did daily supplicate the Bl. Virgin, that this
Order which was honored with the special Title of the Virgin, might be guarded
by some singular privilege of her donation; and he daily repeated with great
devotion these words,

Flos Carmeli, vitis florigera,
Splendour coeli, virgopuerpera Singularis.
Matter mitis, sed viri nescia,
Carmelitis da privilegia Stella maris.
Thou flower of Carmel, and thou flowring Vine,
Whose glorious Face makes Heaven brighter shine,
Virgin and Mother both, without compare.
A Mother mild, who yet no Man did know,
On us poor Carmelites deign to bestow
Some special boon, who art the Sea's bright Star.
This Devotion was so pleasing to the Bl. Virgin, that she appeared after this
to him, accompanied with a multitude of Angels, holding the Scapulare (a
Garment) of that Order in her hands, and said: This shall be a privilege to
thee, and to all Carmelites, Whosoever dies in this habit shall escape Eternal
Fire, whosoever dies in this shall be saved. There is also another famous
privilege granted to the Carmelites Scapular, Colganus, ut supra citat.
that Whosoever should be buried therein, should not be held in Purgatory
pains, beyond the Saturday next after the day of his death.

This privilege was approved and confirmed by several Popes. John XXII. in his
Bull from Lions, March 3. and in the 6th. Year of his Popedom, has these
words: I by the power I have received do confirm this indulgence on Earth, as
Christ for the Merits of the Bl. Virgin has granted it in Heaven. This was also
afterward confirmed by Pope Alexander V. by Clement VII. Sixtus V. Gregory
XIV. and Clement VIII. The Bull of Pope Clement the VII. dated May 13. 1528.
(which begins thus, Dilecti filii, etc.) has these words in it. Mary the
glorious Virgin and Mother of God, on the Saturday (which is the Virgins day)
after the death of such Persons (so habited) will visit them, and free their
Souls from the pains of Purgatory. Where by the way we may make one new
discovery, that though, for ought I know, Sunday may be a good day of the Week
to be born on; and may be a very comfortable day whilst one lives; yet it is,
according to this, a very sad and ill day to dye on: For, let a Man have never
so much favor showed him, you see he must lie almost one whole Week in Flames,
if he chance to go out of the World on that Day.

But there is nothing of this nature, has made so great a noise, as the
privileges granted by our Savior's own mouth to Seraphical S. Francis. As 1.
That whosoever shall love his Order in his heart, Colganus ut supra.
how great a sinner soever he be, he shall find mercy from the Lord. 2. That
none in the Habit of a Franciscan, can make an ill end, and that whosoever
shall choose to live ill in that Order, shall not be able to continue in it
long. The 3d. is more known than any of the other, viz. The Privileges granted
by Christ to his Church near Assisium in Italy, called S. Maria de Angelis, or
Portiuncula; and in memory of the grant, a Festival was appointed on the 2d. of
August, which even after the reformation of the Breviary by Pope Pius V. was
allowed by him to be still observed by the Franciscans; and has a place at the
end of his Breviary in the Proprium Festorum ordinis Minorum, under the Title
of Festum Consecrationis Ecclesiae S. Mariae de Angelis, quod appellatur Festum
Portiunculae. The story is worth the setting down, out of the Lessons of that
Feast, and out of Gononus his Chronicon, where the circumstances are given us
more at large; which is as follows.

Gononus in Chron. p. 217.
In the Year 1221. as S. Francis one Night was praying for sinners, an Angel of
the Lord appeared to him, commanding him to go to the Church aforesaid; for
there Christ with his Mother, and a Multitude of Angels expected him. The
Message filled him with incredible joy, and he presently arose and went to the
Church, whither when he came, and saw Christ and his Mother standing on the
right hand, with fear and reverence he fell flat upon his face, unto whom
Christ spoke thus, as he lay prostrate. O Francis, thou and thine are very
sollicitous for the salvation of Souls; therefore I give thee leave to ask
something of me, for the common consolation and salvation of Souls, and for the
honor of my Name; for thou art given for the salvation of Nations, and for the
reparation of my Church: S. Francis being a while in a rapture, at the
contemplation of so great Majesty, when he came to himself, he prayed thus. O
our most holy Father, I miserable sinner beseech thee, that thou would
vouchsafe to bestow this grace upon Mankind, that all and every Person that
comes to this place, and enters this Church, may obtain an Universal Pardon and
Indulgence of all their sins, which they shall make confession of to the
Priest. I also entreat the Bl. Virgin thy Mother, the Advocate of Mankind, that
for the obtaining this request, she would vouchsafe to intercede with thy most
glorious Majesty. The Queen of Heaven being moved by the Prayers of her Servant
Francis, began immediately to pray to her Son in this manner. O most High and
Almighty God, I intercede with thy Deity, and humbly beseech thee, that thou
would vouchsafe to grant the requests of this poor Francis. The Lord Christ
presently replied; Brother Francis, it is a great thing thou have asked, but
thou shall obtain greater. Know therefore that I admit thy Petition; but I will
have thee to go to my Vicar, who has the power of binding and loosing in Heaven
and Earth, and require this Indulgence of him in my Name. On the morrow after
S. Francis went to the Pope, laid open before him Christ's mandate, entreating
him, that what pleased Christ, Lect. 6. in Fest. consecr. S. Maria de Angelis.
whose place on Earth he held, and whose person he represented, that that might
not displease him. The Pope at first did not think his request reasonable,
because it was altogether free, that is, without any oblations; it was the
greatest request, and also absolute and perpetual. He said, that it was
requisite, that he who would obtain pardon of his sins, should some ways
deserve it; and the Pope denied that ever the Roman Court was wont to grant
such an Indulgence: The Cardinals also that were present, opposed the grant;
saying, That the consequence of it would be, that the Indulgences of the Holy
Land, and of the Holy Apostles, S. Peter and Paul, would be neglected. But the
Pope at length understanding, that it was the Divine pleasure it should be so,
he granted to S. Francis a plenary and free and perpetual Indulgence; but it
was to take place only on one natural day of every year, that is, from, the
Vespers of the Calends of August, to the Vespers of the next day, which was the
Anniversary day of the said Churches consecration.

By this one Revelation to S. Francis, here are so many doubtful Points
determined, (concerning Indulgences, the Authority of the Pope, as Vicar of
Christ, the necessity of private confessions to the Priests, the intercession
of the Bl. Virgin) that may well give us Protestants just cause of suspicion,
that the Pope had a greater hand in this grant, than Christ had. As for those
of this Church, who are bound to believe the truth of that, which has been
confirmed by 15. Popes (and which one of the later of them, Martyr. Francis.
page 334.
viz. Urban VIII. an. 1624. gave so much credit to, that in a Year of Jubilee,
when he suspended all other Indulgences, this was declared by his Letters, to
be excepted and left untouched) I can only pity the wretched temptation, which
the common people especially are perpetually exposed to, by such grants, of
laying as much stress upon the keeping of a day, visiting an Altar, or a
Church, dying in such a Habit, and being buried in such a place, to procure the
pardon of their sins, and to promote their Salvation, as upon inward moral
goodness, and purity of heart and life. In the former cases, Miracles and
Revelations are rung in their Ears, to give a mighty reputation to those little
and easy observances; and the defects of the Later are pretended to be
supplied by the use of the other, as the imperfection of Attrition by the
Sacraments of the Church: but when were they told, that a balking of these
usages, would not prove dangerous to a person otherwise studious of piety? No,
no; the contrary is the business of this Church; amidst a great looseness of
manners, which they connive at and tolerate, they furnish the People with
frightful stories, to oblige them to all the exactness and care imaginable,
about postures and habits, and trifling rules of Orders. Here now, a Convert
did but happen in the hot Summer time, to sleep in a posture not modest enough
(though no body saw it till afterward) and the Devil, Caesarius Dialog.
distinc. 5. c. 33.
they are told, appeared in the shape of a Nun, and while he so slept, took him
about the Neck and kissed him, whereupon he presently fell sick, and dyed
within three days after. At another time, they are informed, that the Bl.
Virgin went round all the Monks Beds, and blessed them all save only one, Id m
ibid. did. 7. c. 14.
whom she neglected, and did not care to look upon (a grievous offense, one
would imagine, this Monk had been guilty of; alas no) the business was, he lay
in his Bed irregularly; either his Girdle was laid aside, or he had put off his
Hose, or unloosed his Coat, the Relator could not tell which, but one of them
it seems it was, and a fault so great, as to deserve to lose the Bl. Virgins
blessing. Another, who in the judgment of all was thought a very fit Person to
be preferred, Biblioth. Patrum Cisterc. Tom. 1. distinc. 4. c. 25.
and by common consent was just ready to be chosen an Abbot, the choice of him
by a Divine revelation was forbidden, only because one time he had presumed to
sleep with his Stockings off. But this punishment was but a small one, in
respect of another which was inflicted (in another Stocking story) upon a
Convert, who in one of the Granges of Claraevall Abbey, Ibid. cap. 24.
presumed to wash his stockings without his Masters leave (the miserable Man,
says the Relator, not considering how grievously they offend, who in the least
things do violate the purity of the Sacred Order; it seems the purity of his
Order was nastiness, if it was a crime to wash his stockings) but as the Man
was doing this, he heard a Voice cry, Smite him, Smite him; and immediately he
felt two grievous blows given him, one on his Head, the other on his Feet;
whereupon he returned pale and trembling to his place, confessed humbly his
fault, and described his invisible strokes, how that both of them crept
inwardly along, one from his Head, and the other from his Feet, and that he
should dye, when those strokes were joined in his heart; and so it proved, for
he dyed of them in a short time. These and 20. other such ridiculous stories
they tell; the effect of which is, the frighting Men into silly and
superstitious fears and observances, whilst the undoubted commands of our
Savior are more neglected, and lie unregarded.

To S. Cosma and S. Damian, for success in taking Physic.
Horae sec. us. Roman.
Anaphona.

INclyte Cosma vale, salveque sacer Damiane,
In quibus enituit gloria Martyrii.
Sumite nostrarum petimus jubilamina laudum,
Et nobis medicam ferte salutis opem.
Oremus.

INfirmitates nostras, tam mentis quam corporis, respice quaesumus Omnipotens
Deus; and dignare intercedentibus sanctis Martyribus tuis Cosma and Damiano,
cunctis nostris mederi languoribus.

Per Dominum, etc.

GReat Cosma and blessed Damian, all Hail;
Whose Heads are graced with Martyrs glorious Bays;
Receive the Tribute of our joyful praise,
And bring your Medicines, healing every aile.
Let us Pray.

ALmighty God, look we beseech thee upon our infirmities both of mind and body,
and vouchsafe upon the Intercession of thy holy Martyrs Cosma and Damian, to
heal all our diseases,

By our Lord, etc.

NOTES.
THe great credit of these Saints to help in this manner, was built partly, I
suppose, upon their profession, being both Brothers and Physicians, (as the old
Roman Breviary tells us) who might the more willingly be still employed in the
Art they were so well versed in before, and have a natural inclination to look
after sick Patients, that addressed themselves to them: but especially, upon
the Miracles that are said to appear at their death. As, that when they were
chained together, and thrown into the Sea, Brev. Romans antiq. Lec. 3.
an Angel loosed their Bonds, and delivered them; after this, they were thrown
into a great Fire, but upon their Prayers, Lec. 4.
the Fire lost all its power to hurt them: then they were hanged upon a cross,
and command given to stone them, Lec. 5.
but the stones rebounded back upon those that threw them: and so in like
manner, when Arrows were shot at them, they received no harm at all, but many
of those that shot them, were thereby slain. Most of which stories are still
retained in the present Roman Breviary, and seem to be taken out of Vsuardus,
or Ado's Martyrologies, who lived in the 9. Century, the proper Age (as I told
you before) for rappers. The worst is, that Baronius himself, upon the Roman
Martyrology ( Sept. 27.) is forced to confess, that there are abundance of
their Acts extant in Simeon Metaphrastes and Surius, which abound with
falsehoods, and ridiculous stuff: and if he would have been sincere, he could
have told us, that it was not an easy matter, to determine which were true,
and which false: but it is all one, Lies have set up many a Saint to good
purpose in the Church of Rome.

To S. Nicholas in dangers especially at Sea.
Horae Sec. us. Sa^um.
Antiphona.

BEatus Nicolaus adhuc puerulus, Multo jejunio macerabat corpus.

Verse. Ora pro nobis, etc.

Oremus.

Brev. Romans Dec. 6.
DEus qui Beatum Nicolaum Pontificem tuum innumeris decorasti miraculis; tribue
quaesumus, ut ejus meritis and precibus, a Gehennae incendiis liberemur.

Per Dominum, etc.

Brev. Sarum. Dec. 6.
DEus bonitatis Author and bonorum dispensator; concede propitius, ut qui Beati
Nicolai Confessoris tui atque Pontificis Solennitatem veneramur, ejus
Patrociniis atque suffragiis Majestatis tuae propitiationem consequamur.

Per Christum, etc.

Ibid.
O Per omnia laudabilem virum, cujus meritis ab omni clade liberantur, qui ex
toto cord quaerunt illum.

S. NIcholas with much fasting did begin,
Though but a Child, to make his Body thin.
Verse. Pray for us, etc.

Let us pray.

O God, who did grace thy Bishop S. Nicholas with innumerable Miracles;
vouchsafe we pray thee, that by his merits and prayers we may be delivered from
the flames of Hell.

By our Lord, etc.

O God, the Author of Goodness, and the Dispenser of good things; mercifully
grant, that we who venerate the solemnity of thy Confessor and Bishop S.
Nicholas, by his Patronage and suffrages may obtain the propitiation of thy
Majesty.

Through Christ, etc.

O Man, in all things praiseworthy, by whose Merits they are delivered from
all destruction, who seek him with their whole heart.

NOTES.
THere is no great difference in substance, concerning the Acts of this Saint,
betwixt the Old and the Reformed Breviaries. Only the ancient ones, say more
miraculous things concerning him, the new fewer. But we are likely to be
excellently informed about him, when Simeon Metaphrastes has a hand in his
story; concerning whom Bellarmine himself has passed this censure, De Scriptor.
Eccles. ad an. 850.
Illud observandum, a Metaphraste scriptas fuisse historias de vitis sanctorum,
multis additis ex proprio ingenio, non ut res gestae fuerunt, sed ut geri
potuerunt. i. e. Observe, that the Histories of the Saints Lives were written
by Metaphrastes, many particulars being added out of his own head, not as the
things were done, but as they might possibly be done. And a little after, He
has added many and great Miracles, of which there is no mention among the
ancient Historians. I think we may well reckon in this number, that which is
mentioned in the first Antiphona, and is still retained in the Breviary (Les.
4.) When he was an Infant, though on other days he sucked his Nurses milk
frequently, yet on Wednesdays and Fridays he would suck her but once These
sucking Miracles, I perceive they are much pleased with, for thus they tell us
that S. Katherine the Swedish Virgin, as a sign of her after chastity, refused
with cries and tears to suck the milk of incontinent Women, as if it had been
Wormwood. In vit. ejus apud Bolland. ad Mart. 24.
, and that in the Evening, which custom of Fasting he always observed the rest
of his Life: which thing is also mentioned in the Prosa of the old Roman and
Sarisbury Missals; Qui in cunis adhuc jacens servando jejunia,
A papilla coepit summa promereri gloria.
Who yet in Cradle rockt, obtained the praise
Of strict observing usual fasting days;
An early Saint! not half so much in Love
With Nurses milk, as with the joys above.


We need not therefore think it strange, that a Saint who began so early to be
famous, should grow in wonders with his Age, and at last come to be invoked as
an Universal Deliverer from all dangers. I confess, when I read the first
Prayer, which is the proper Collect both in the Breviaries and Missals for this
Saint, it seemed to me a very cross-grained one, that when by the story that is
told of him, his Talent, one would imagine, had lien peculiarly in helping and
saving Men out of the distresses of Water, he should here be invoked to free
them from the Fire of Hell: But I quickly corrected my fancy, when I
considered, that nothing need seem impossible to the prayers of him, who fasted
in his Cradle twice a Week, especially when it was (as you heard) upon
Wednesdays and Fridays; for no Astrologer could have erected a Scheme of the
Heavens more propitious for Miracles, than these two days are; (as we found
before in S. Roch, of whom the same is affirmed.) Besides too, there is this
affinity betwixt the Sea and Hell, that they are each of them a great Abyss;
and it is so common and Proverbial to express all dangers by Fire and Water,
that it was great pity, that he who had such great command over the one,
should have no stroke in matters that related to the other. Passing therefore
over other things which the Breviary mentions, (as his miraculous Election to
be Bishop of Myrea, not by the intervening of Lots, as in the choice of
Matthias, but by a voice from Heaven, bidding them make him Bishop, who first
entered the Church next Morning, telling them his Name should be Nicholas,
which he first did, as if sent by God) Let Us only see, whence his fame arose
for a Deliverer in distresses at Sea. Thus then the Legend informs us. Brev.
Sar. lec. 7. and Brev. Romans antiq. Lec. 9.
Certain Mariners being in great danger by a sudden Tempest that arose at Sea,
they began to cry out; O Nicholas the Servant of God, if those things be true
which we have heard concerning thee, now succor us; that so being delivered
from this danger, we may render thanks to God and thee. While they spoke these
words, one appeared, saying to them; Behold I am here, for you called me; and
he began to help them in ordering their Cables and Sails and other Tacklings;
and a while after, all the noise of the Sea was quieted, and the Tempest ceased
The same is set down in a Prose of the Old Roman Missal. 1520.

O beat Nicola,
Nos ad portum maris trahe de mortis angustia;
Trahe nos ad portum maris
Tu qui tot auxiliaris
Pietatis gratia.
Dum clamarent nec incassum
Ecce quidam dicens, Assum ad vestra praesidia:
Statim aura datur grata
Et Tempestas fit sedata
Quieverunt maria.

: The Mariners when they came to shore, presently inquired where Nicholas was;
and when they learnt that he was in the Church, they went in thither, and,
which is wonderful to be related, they immediately knew him, without any bodies
showing, though they had never seen him before; and falling prostrate at his
Feet, they paid their thanks to him, relating how by his suffrages they had
been delivered, when they were even at the brink of Death.

And now I hope, after this story, none will wonder, when he hears of that
Prayer to this Saint, (though otherwise it might seem a strange one) which we
find cited by Chemnitius, out of the Hours of the Church of Hildensheim, in his
Examen Council. Trid. Part. 3.

CRedo pie Sancte Nicolae, tuis me precibus esse salvandum, ideo ad te clamo,
and te precibus meis licet indignis pulsare non desisto, ut te intercedente, ab
imminentibus periculis, a peccatis and offensionibus meis, quibus quotidie
affligor, merear liberari: Salva me supplicem famulum tuum, amice dei Nicolae,
de praesentibus angustiis and tribulationibus, quia in te confidit anima mea,
ut per te me salvet qui te sibi elegit. O Pious S. Nicholas, I believe that I
shall be saved by thy Prayers, therefore I cry to Thee, and cease not to
importune thee by my prayers though unworthy ones, that I may merit by thy
intercession, to be delivered from imminent perils, from my sins and offenses,
wherewith I am daily afflicted: Save me thy supplicating Servant, O Nicholas,
thou Friend of God, from present straits and Tribulations, because my Soul
trusts in thee, that he may save me by thee, who has chosen thee to himself.
Who need boggle now at the words of the Hymn mentioned by the same Author, and
also by Cassander, p. 252. of his Works?

O Venerande Pontifex
Pius nec tardus Opifex
Cunctis, qui cord credulo
Te quaerunt in periculo;
Aufer mortis dispendia,
Confer vitae stipendia,
Quo post carnis exilia
Tecum simus in gloria.
S. NIcholas thou venerable Bishop,
Inclined to pity and to help not slack,
When dangers threaten thou never failest his hope
Whose forward faith about to thee does tack.
From Deaths expensive losses us defend,
The pleasing gains of life unto us give;
That when the crosses of this flesh have end,
With thee we may in Glory ever live.
How edifying and Spiritual is the Application of all that is said of this
Sea-Patron, which the Prosa in the forecited Roman Missal gives us?

Nos qui sumus in hoc mundo
Vitiorum in profundo
Jam passi naufragia,
Gloriose Nicolae,
Ad salutis portum trahe
Ubi Pax and Gloria.
We that in this World impure
In Seas of vice are almost drowned,
Blessed Nicolas bring to Port secure,
Where Peace and Glory's to be found.
To S. Barbara, for to be Confessed, and to receive the Eucharist, before Death.
Horae sec. us. Romans
Antiph.

VIrgo fide sana
De stirpe creata profana
Gaudia mundana
Postponit and Idola vana.
Ora pro nobis, etc.
Oremus.

Ibid. and Horae sec. us. Sar.
INtercessio quaesumus Domine Beatae Barbarae, Virginis and Martyris tuae, ab
omni adversitate nos protegat, ut per ejus interventum, gloriosissimum
Sacrosancti corporis and sanguinis Domini nostri Jesu Christi Sacramentum, ante
diem exitus nostri, per veram poenitentiam and puram confessionem, percipere
mereamur.

Per Dominum, etc.

THis Virgin sound in Christian Faith,
Though sprung from race that was profane,
All worldly joys despised has,
And undervalued Idols vain.
Pray for us, etc.
Let us Pray.

WE pray Thee, O Lord, that the Intercession of S. Barbara, thy Virgin and
Martyr, may protect us from all adversity; that by her means we may, by true
repentance and pure confession, merit to receive before the day of our death,
the most glorious Sacrament of the most holy body and blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Through our Lord, etc.

NOTES.
THere is scarce any Saint in the Calendar, of whom more incredible things are
told, than of S. Barbara, in the old Roman Breviary; nor indeed more ridiculous.

Les. 1. She is said to be the only Daughter of One Dioscurus a Heathen, in the
Reign of Maximianus (or, as Baronius will have it, of Maximinus) and is placed
in the Year 230. and said to be instructed in the Faith by Origin (though it is
strange so famous a Martyr should be pretermitted by Eusebius, who in his
Ecclesiastical History (lib. 6.) mentions several Women, whom Origin converted
to Christianity, but does not so much as name her among them.)

Les. 2. Her beauty was so great, that to defend it, her Father built a Tower,
only with two Windows, and a place to Bath in, curiously contrived and adorned,
where she was put.

Les. 3. There, while she was in Meditation, an Angel stood by her, and
explained to her all things belonging to the Catholic Faith; and when the
Angel opened the Mystery of the Incarnation, to her great joy, Jesus appeared
in the shape of a Child. And now being more strong in faith, in the absence of
her Father, she commands the Workmen to make a third Window in the Tower
toward the East, she being a worshipper of the Trinity, saying, That only by 3
Windows (so it is in Metaphrastes) every one that comes into the World is
enlightened: and this she said, signifying the Majesty of the H. Trinity (as
Metaphr. has it) and when her Father was angry at this talk of hers, and at the
addition of the third Window, she pointed with her Fingers, and said, Behold
the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. [A fine discovery this is of the Trinity, by
one that had been newly instructed in the Catholic Faith by an Angel: Like to
which is that blasphemous Picture, in the Salisbury Hours, where the Trinity is
represented by 3 Heads upon one Neck of a Man's Body. And with the like
profaneness and folly, the Festivale Festiv. in die Trinit. which is taken out
of Durandus, who giving a reason why the Bell tolls thrice, at the death of a
Man; says, It is because the Trinity was first found in Man: Primo enim
formatus est Adam de terra, deinde Mulier ex Adam, postea homo creatus est ab
utroque; and ita est ibi Trinitas. Durand. Rational. lib. 1. c. 4. s. 13.
discourses: Adam our Fore-father that came out of the Earth, one Person; and
Eve of Adam the second Person; and of them both comes the third Person, as
their Child; thus the Trinity was found in Man. But methinks the Nuns have
found the Trinity better than thus in Womankind. Apud Ribadeneir. inter vit.
Extra- vag. p. 261.
For in the Life of S. Clara de monte Falconis, we are told, that in her heart,
when it was opened, were found the impressions and marks of the passion of our
Savior, viz. a Crucifix with three Nails, the Spear, Sponge, and Reed on one
side; and on the other, the Whips, Rods, Pillar, (at which he was scourged) the
Crown of Thorns; and these signs of our Savior's passion, did consist of
strong and hard Nerves. But (which I cite it for) they found that which was
still more wonderful, three Balls in her Gall, as it were three Filberts, of
equal weight, color and bigness, which (says her life) was a plain Testimony
of the H. Trinity, to which this Virgin was wholly devoted: Which is more fully
expressed by Bernardinus de Bustis Cited in the Martyrolog. Franciscan. 17 Aug.
p. 352.
, whose words are these; In her heart was found a Crucifix ingraved, with all
the Mysteries of the Passion; and in her Breast were found three little Balls,
one of which does weigh as much as two of them, nay as much as all three
together; and all three together weigh no more than one alone; by which is
signified, that she had a continual remembrance of the passion of Christ, and a
perfect belief of the Unity of the Divine Essence, and of the equality of the
three Divine Persons. (Which I take it is the most mysterious Relic that ever
was found in Flesh, if any one can believe it.)

The Festivale, a little after, explains the Trinity by Water, Ice and Snow,
which three, says he, be diverse in substance, yet all is but Water. fol. 47.
The Water is so full of might, that is to understand the Father: by the Son
Jesu Christ, ye shall understand Ice, that is, Water congealed hard and
brittle; that is Jesu Christ very God and Man, that took the substance and
frailty of Mankind: by the Snow, ye shall understand the H. Ghost; for right as
Snow is but Water and Ice and Light in the Air, but how, no Man can tell, so
comes the H. Ghost from the Father and the Son. Capgrave also gives us a
Narration, Capgr. in vit. Egberti, f. 122.
how when France was troubled with the Arrian Heresy, that Error was
reproved; and that God in three Persons, was of One and of equal substance, was
shown by this plain Miracle of three drops clearer than Crystal, that fell upon
the Altar, as it were from the Roof of the Church, which drops were of equal
magnitude, and being joined together, made one most fair Gemm.] But to go on
with the story of S. Barbara.

Les. 4. Upon the Marble of the Bath, she made the signs of the Cross, which
remain to this day: ( Metaphrastes says more expressly, That she made the sign
of the Cross with her Finger on the Marble, which made a remaining Impression,
as if it had been graved with Iron) and in the Bath, God so ordering it, upon
her Prayer she was wonderfully baptized by John the Baptist.

Les. 5. Her Father perceiving, by the alterations she had made in the Tower,
and by her discourses, that she was a Christian; drew out his Sword, in
indignation, to slay his Daughter: but upon her Prayers to God, a great Stone
opening it self, received her into its Cavity, and attended Tecum virgo lapis
volat. Prosa in Missal. Roman. Antiqu.
her to a Mountain full of Caves, where she thought to have hid her self, but
was discovered by a Shepherd, who was punished for it miraculously, he himself
being changed into a Marble Statue, and all his Sheep into Locusts, (or, as
Metaphrastes says, into Beetles) which to the perpetual accusation of the
crime, continually fly about her Grave.

Les. 8. She was, after this, brought before the Heathen President, who after
Scourgings and beating with Clubs, commanded her Breasts to be cut off, and to
be led naked through all the City. But upon her Prayers, that her naked Body
might not be exposed to the Pagans, an Angel came and covered her with a white
Garment, and so healed the wounds of her Body, that not so much as a Scar
appeared.

Les. 9. After this, her Father cut off her Head with his own Hands, and was
severely punished for it; for as he went down the Hill where the Murder was
committed, Fire descended from Heaven, and so consumed him, that not so much as
any Dust of his Body remained. (Thus far the Lessons.)

I cannot omit here the relating an extraordinary Miracle brought to confirm
the efficacy of Prayers to S. Barbara, for obtaining the Eucharist and
Confession before Death. Surius in vit. Barbarae 4 December. mentioned also by
Ribadeneira in her life.
It is recorded by Surius thus. In the Year 1448, at a Town called Gorcum in
Holland, one Henry Kock by an accident of a Candle that fell into the Straw,
had his House set on Fire in the Night, and he himself hardly escaped in his
shirt, which began to burn in two places: but he remembered that he had left
Money in the House, and would return into it again to save it; but before he
could come to the place where it lay, the House fell upon his naked Body: when
apprehending present Death, though the scorching Flames tormented him, yet he
was more afflicted, because he had not been fore-armed against Death, by the
Sacraments of the Church; and in this distress, he betook himself to S. Barbara
for Soul-remedies, praying thus. O S. Barbara, succor a miserable wretch, and
one dying in his sins, which thing thou art now able to perform by thy Spouse:
Let that be done by thy Prayers in me, which was of old promised by Heaven to
thee, as thou wast a dying for Christ: Let thy Spouse be mindful of thy rosy
and Virgin blood, let him remember thy chaste and Virgin love, that my Soul may
not go out of my Body, till it be purged by the Sacrament of Confession, and
fore-armed with the saving Viaticum.

Thus you must believe he prayed, (though it seems to be too long a Prayer for
one whole Body was actually burning in Flames) but see the effect; S. Barbara
being thus invoked, immediately presents her self, in such a form as she used
to be pictured within Churches; and with her Garment, she quenched presently
the Globes of Fire, and with her white Hand, brought him through the
Straw-roof, and setting him in a safe place, spoke thus to him. Because thou
have often offered acceptable Dev^tions to me, and now implored the Divine
mercy by my Patronage know that by my means thy life shall be prolonged till
Morning, in which time thou may be confessed, and receive the Sacraments of the
Eucharist and extreme Unction. After which words, S. Barbara disappeared: all
was performed as she said, though Henry was so burnt, that scarce any Flesh was
left on his Bones unconsumed, and that which remained was as black as a
Negro's; only his Eyes, Tongue and Heart, remained untoucht. Testified by
Theodoric the Priest that confessed him; a credible Witness no doubt. Such
another foolish story the Golden Legend gives us in her Life; that a Man that
was thought to be starved to death, and by a Rope cast about his Neck, was
drawn to the top of a Tower, and thrown off from thence, when he came to the
ground, he rose up upon his feet; and gave this account to those that wondered
how he was alive (having so long continued without any Meat) and how he could
be preserved in his fall; he told them that S. Barbara preserved him in all his
straits; and in his fall from the Tower sustained him with her holy hands, and
that he could not dye till he was confessed, and received the Eucharist and
extreme Unction.


This story puts me in mind of another miraculous one, concerning the
Communicating of S. Brigid before she dyed. It is thus. Colganus vit. S.
Nennidii ad 18 Januar.
S. Brigid told Saint Nennidius, a Convert of hers, that on the day of her
death, she would receive the Eucharist from his hand. He answered her, Would to
God you might live till that come to pass: she replied, that so it should be.
Upon which when Nennidius was gone from her, he provided for his hand (with
which he was to give the Eucharist) a strait Brass Glove (some say a Silver
one) with a Lock and Key for it, lest it should touch his Body, or his Hand be
touched by any unclean thing: And farther, believing what S. Brigid told him,
and being willing to prolong her life for the common good many Years, he
undertook a Pilgrimage to Rome; and entering a Ship, he threw the Key of his
Glove into the Sea. But there is no wisdom nor counsel against the Lord: for
some while after, returning into his Country, he was admonished by an Angel,
that the day of S. Brigid's death was at hand, and that he must give to her,
her last Viaticum: The Night following lodging at a Fisherman's House, his
Landlord found a Key in the Belly of a Fish, that he had opened, which Saint
Nennidius knew to be the very same he had thrown long before into the Sea; and
so understanding that it was the will of God he should go over to S. Brigid, he
did so; and found her almost expiring, to whom he gave the Eucharist before she
dyed.

To St. Marus Bishop of Triers, for Palseys and Convulsions, etc.
Brev. Eecl. Trev. apud Bolland. ad 26 Janauar.
DEus, qui S. Mari Confessor is tui atque Pontificis intercessione, homines
ipsum invocantes, a quavis morbida corporis membrorumque contractione, atque
Paralysi liberare praeservareque dignaris; concede nos ejusdem Sancti meritis,
sic corporalis vitae sanitate potiri, ut aeternae animarum salutis remedium in
coelestibus inveniamus.

Per Christum, etc.

O God, who by the intercession of S. Marus thy Confessor and Bishop, do
vouchsafe to preserve and deliver Men that invoke him, from any diseased
contraction of the body and members, and from the Palsy; Grant that we, by the
merits of the same Saint, may so enjoy health of bodily life, that we may find
the remedy of the eternal salvation of our Souls in Heaven.

By our Lord, etc.

S. Blasius for removing Bones that stick in the Throat.
THe Salisbury Breviary informs us, that when this Saint came to be beheaded,
he prayed to God in this manner: Brev. Sar. Lec. 3. S. Bl^sii ad Feb. 3.
O God, hear me thy Servant, that if any one remembering me, shall fall down and
worship Thee; if any Fish-bone, or any other Bone shall stick in his Throat; or
if he fall into any Infirmity, Tribulation, or Danger, receive, O Lord, I
beseech thee, his request. The Lord said, I will fulfill all thy Petition. The
Invocation of this Saint, is a present remedy in such cases, prescribed by a
Greek Physician, Ribadeneira 3 Febr. p. 90.
says Ribadeneira, who also directs, that taking such Persons by the Throat,
these words should be pronounced aloud: viz. Blasius the Martyr, and the
Servant of Christ says, either come up or else go down.

S. Emetherius and S. Celedonius, for allaying Hail-storms and sudden Tempests.
THese two Saints are venerated in Spain, as having great power to allay
Hail-storms. For, we are told, that in such cases, Bolland. Act. Sanc. 3 Mart.
p. 234.
the Clergy of the Place, where their Chapel is, make a solemn Procession
thither; they put lighted Candles upon their Altar, and after they have sung
the Hymn with the Antiphona, they subjoyn the praises of these Saints, and the
desired Calm follows. The truth is, by that time all these things are done,
especially if the Priests do not cut short the praising work, but give these
Saints their due commendation; a violent Tempest of Hail may cease naturally,
without the help of them, or any other Saint besides.

S. Venisa, for the Green Sickness, and pro Ordinandis menstruis, and Bloody
Fluxes.
THis Saint has a Chapel dedicated to her in a Village hard by Roan in France,
and a Feast kept to her Memory, the day before Ash Wednesday. And at
Valentianae in Hannovia, there the Women implore her Patronage in the forenamed
Cases; binding themselves about, for 9. days together, with Purple or white
Swathes, according to the several proper kinds of this Disease; when they are
cured, they hang them up near the Statue of S. Venisa; and by reason of the
Multitude of those that frequent the place, the heap of such Oblations does so
increase, that they are fain to remove them. The Women do the like at Tourney,
and other places. Bolland. de S. Veronica. 4 Febr. p. 454.
Some conjecture with probability, that this S. Venisa (or Venica) is the same
with S. Veronica, only her name contracted; and that all this Devotion comes
from the common Opinion, that she was the Woman, whom Christ in the Gospel
cured of the Bloody Flux. There are many other Saints whose Patronage they
implore, besides these I have named, as S. Lucy, for sore Eyes; S. Leonard, for
Prisoners and Captives; S. Hubert, for biting with mad Dogs, or any venomous
Beasts, etc. whose stories, I shall for Brevity omit, and only add one more.

S. Anthony of Padua, for the recovery of lost Goods.
THis is the last Example, I shall mention, of Patron Saints; but his
veneration is so great in the Church of Rome, his Preaching and Miracles so
famous, that it will require something a larger Discourse than I have bestowed
upon the rest. He was a Contemporary and Disciple of S. Francis, to whom he was
so dear, that he used to call him his Bishop (as Trithemius tells us.) The
present Breviaries have only three short proper Lessons for him, Jun. 13. and
the following Collect:

ECclesiam tuam, Deus, beati Antonii Confessoris tui solennitas votiva
laetificet; ut spiritualibus semper muniatur auxiliis, and gaudiis perfrui
mereatur aeternis.

Per Dominum, etc.

O God, let the much desired solemnity of Bl. Anthony thy Confessor glad thy
Church; that so it may be always defended with spiritual aids, and may merit
the fruition of eternal joys.

Through our Lord, etc.

But the Franciscans, even after the Reformation of the Breviary, by Pope Pius
V. obtained from him the privilege of having Proper Offices for some famed
Saints of their own Order, which were Printed apart, at the end of his
Breviary; among which, this S. Anthony has a large place, where I find Twenty
Lessons of the old Breviary concerning him, still retained without alteration;
and I hope the following Popes have not been so unkind, as to debar them from
rehearsing those pleasant and beloved stories of S. Francis, and his great
Followers, nor contracted their Devotions into a narrower room than that
Reforming Pope did. I leave the Reader to consult the Hymns there, which they
sing in Honor of him; and come to the business of his Patronage in the case of
lost goods.

This is affirmed by many Authors. Guillelmus Pepin Citat. inter Elogia
praefix. vit. S. Anton. apud Joh. de la Hay.
, a Paris Doctor, says; This Saint has a privilege from the Lord, in reference
to lost goods; which by his merits are often recovered, which I my self have
frequently experienced. Pelbartus, a Franciscan, says the same; That God, as he
made him wonderful in his life, by giving him the grace to be able to recover
lost Souls; so now he is in Heaven, he has granted Men the favor wonderfully
to recover by his merits lost goods. But none I meet with, has given so
particular an account of it, as Ribadeneira, whose words are these; Christian
piety does implore the Patronage of S. Anthony, Ribaden. vit. S. Anton. 13 Jun.
especially when afflicted with the loss of Goods, and his merits work
wondrous effects in this Case. The Original of this Devotion seems to be this:
A certain Franciscan Novice, throwing off his Habit, ran away from the
Monastery, (in which the Saint lived) and stole away with him a Psalm Book,
written with S. Anthony's own hand, and explained with Marginal notes, which S.
Anthony often used, when he privately expounded the Scriptures to the Friars.
As soon as Anthony perceived his Book to be stolen, he falling down on his
Knees earnestly prayed God, that he would restore the Book to him again. In the
mean time the Apostate Thief having his Book with him, as he prepared to swim
over the River, met the Devil; who with a drawn Sword in his hand, commanded
him immediately to go back again, and restore to S. Anthony the Book he had
stolen from him; threatening to kill him, unless he did so: The Devil required
this with so terrible an aspect, that the Thief being astonished, presently
returns to the Monastery, restores to the Saint his Book, and continued in a
religious course of life ever after.

I see the Church of Rome will never be at a loss for ways to promote this
their Superstition. The most common Method we have heard of hitherto, has been
Revelations and Voices, pretending gracious grants from God, to the merits of
such and such Saints, that Persons in their particular distresses should find
desired relief, when they did invoke them: this seems to be a pretty plausible
encouragement, and to require only satisfaction in one doubt, how to be
secured, that God spoke such words; for if he did, who will not readily
determine his practice, by the plain significations of his heavenly will and
pleasure? But as for the occasion here mentioned, there are, methinks, a great
many discouraging circumstances in the story; so that the greater opinion a Man
had of this Saint, the less expectation should he, in all reason, have of
recovering his losses by the choice of this Patron, if this be all that can be
produced to assure him, that his addresses to him in this case shall not be
unsuccessful. For, 1. Few Men's losses are of that importance, that S. Anthony's
Psalter was, especially with his admirable Divinity noted in the Margin: And
again, few Men's merits, if all be true that is told of him, could equalize his;
and why then should every one presume that their Prayers shall be
extraordinarily heard, because his were? To which may be added this main doubt,
that I believe that this is one of the first instances that can be given of the
Devils threatening, and frighting any one into honesty, and into Devotion; and,
considering his interest, it is very likely to be the last of the kind: and for
any one now to tell us (as Pepin did) that he has found the success and benefit
of such addresses, would be only to set all the cunning Men, and all the
Astrologers a laughing (whose trade for discovering lost goods, seems to be
threatened, by setting up this Saint for a Patron) for they would be ready, I
dare vouch for them, to forswear their Art, if S. Anthony had ever helped so
many to their lost goods, as they will tell you they have done.

But it may be, it is not so much this foolish story which Ribadeneira has
pitched upon, (or at least not this alone) as the mighty fame of S. Anthony,
and the reputation he has got in the Roman Church, partly as a powerful and
prophetical Preacher, and partly as a worker of Miracles, that has invited them
to a strange veneration of him; and then you may give them leave to choose what
way to express it in; and so many having been possessed before him of other
Offices, this might fall to him of course.

That which I shall therefore do farther, shall be to give the Reader some
account of the admirable things that are reported of him in his life; which
Ribadeneira has given us more concisely, and Surius more at large; and more
lately ( an. 1641.) Joh. de la Hay, (who has given us S. Anthony's works) has
put that Life in Surius before them, with some additional Miracles after his
Canonization, and has divided it, for the Readers greater case, into Chapters,
whom therefore I shall cite all along in the following Discourse. To pass over
other less material things concerning S. Anthony. I shall only consider what
relates to his preaching and miracles.

The first occasion of his being noted for a Preacher (who was before accounted
an illiterate person, Concerning S. Anthony's Preaching.
and to have no farther skill than to say the Church-offices, Ribaden. in vit.
Anthon. 13 Jun. p. 247. Et in vit. ejus apud Joh. de la Hay, c. 6.
and had submitted to the mean employments in the Kitchen, of washing Dishes,
and scowring Kettles, and used to sweep the Friars rooms) was, when he took
sacred Orders with certain Dominicans, who being put upon it to Preach at that
time to the People, excused themselves that they were altogether unprovided of
a Sermon; whereupon S. Anthony was entreated to Preach (though it was ex
tempore) whatsoever the spirit should suggest to him: His modesty was such that
he also would fain have declined it, telling the President (who urged it) how
little Learning he had, and that having been condemned to such humble Offices,
he was better acquainted with Potts and Besomes, than Scholastical Subtilties;
all this would not bring him off, but Preach he must: At the beginning of his
Sermon he spoke to them simply and plainly; Orsus est simpliciter ad eos dicere.
but in the progress of his discourse, he used such elegancy of words, such
heights of mystical sentences, that rapt all his Auditors into admiration,
especially because it was beyond all their expectation.

And now the next thing we hear of him is, that he receives commission from the
Minister General to Preach abroad; In vit. Antonii. cap. 7.
and he is so busy in this new work, that he runs up and down from one City
and Town to another: The Churches were not sufficient wherein to spend his
Zeal: but Camps and Streets and Fields are the Places where he chooses to Preach
in; which course of his the Jesuit Lorinus would fain countenance, Lorinus in
Act. 2. v. 6.
from something he fancies like it in the Apostles; but the resemblance is far
greater betwixt him and our Quakers; who are a restless Generation,
troublesome, and furious in their heats, of an ill-guided Zeal, and
endeavoring to be popular by the pretenses of extraordinary humility.

He preached at Rome one time before the Pope so much to his content and
wonder, Vit. Ant. c. 8.
that he called him Arcam Testamenti, the Ark of the Testament: and well might
he call him so, (says the Author of his Life) for he had the Scriptures so
fastened in his Memory, that he could from thence have wholly restored them, if
all the Books of Scripture had been lost. But whether the Pope had any great
skill in Sermons or no, to be sure S. Francis had: and we are told that when S.
Anthony was preaching one time upon the passion of our Savior, Ibid. c. 10.
S. Francis, though he was far distant in another Country, yet he appeared to
his Children after a wonderful manner in the Air, for he seemed to stretch out
his Arms across, as it were approving Anthony's Sermon, and showing what the
Friars ought to imitate, and blessing them, he made the sign of the Cross over
them.

But we hear of a wonderful approbation of him for a Preacher, which was given
him by the Inhabitants of the Sea, more astonishing than this Apparition in the
Air. Ribadeneir. p. 247. Francis. Mendozius inter Elogia praefix. vit. S.
Antonii.
For as he was preaching at Ariminum, which was a Nest at that time of
Heretics, and few or none regarded his Doctrine, he went out of the City, and
sat him down by the Seaside, and called to the Fishes in this Language. Do you
at least lift up your heads, in regard to my words, since the Heretics deny
to hearken to me. He had scarce left off speaking, when a Multitude of great
and little Fishes thronged to the shore where he sat, lifting up their heads
out of the Water, as it were to signify their attention to his words. Then the
Holy man, after he had saluted them by the name of Brethren, (a complement he
learnt from S. Francis) he rehearsed to them the benefits for which they were
indebted to their Creator, what gratitude they owed Him, and what serviceable
offices they might perform toward him. (What pity is it that this edifying
Sermon should be lost, and since his skill was so great, that he did not leave
a Treatise behind him upon this Subject, concerning The whole Duty of Fishes
toward God?) When he had concluded his Sermon, the Fishes bended their heads,
as if they asked his blessing, and went back into the Sea. And now it is no
wonder to tell you, that the People were astonished at the Miracle, that the
Heretics that were present, were struck as mute as Fishes, as to any farther
opposition and contradiction; only they fell at his Feet, declaring their
embracing the Orthodox Faith, and their Conversion. We are farther informed
that a Prophetic Spirit accompanied his Preaching, of which they tell this
story.

S. Anthony preaching at the Funeral of a certain Usurer, took that place for
his Text, Vit. Anton. cap. 19.
Where your Treasure is, there will your Heart be also. In his Sermon, among
other things, he said. This Rich man is dead, and is buried in Hell: Go to his
Treasure, and you shall find his heart in the middle of it, though his Body be
buried: The Parents and Friends of the Man, went and searched, and they found
his heart yet hot in the midst of his Money.

It will be now, after all this, no strange thing to be told, that all People
were very desirous to hear such a Preacher, or to find him frequently engaged
in this Work, Ibid. cap. 12.
when he is so much admired, that sometimes Thirty Thousand People, or more
were present at one of his Sermons. When he preached a Lent course, the Church
could not hold the Number of his Auditors, so that he was fain to hold forth in
the open Fields. Thither from all Quarters People flock in crowds to hear him;
They rise before Day, and strive which shall get first to the place, where the
Sermon was to be: There you might see Soldiers and Noble Matrons, and such as
used before to lie long in Bed, running in the dark, and watchfully expecting
the Preacher. The Tradesmen would not open their Shops, or sell their Wares,
before his Sermon was over. The good Women in devotion, cut off pieces of his
Clothes with their Sizzers, laying them up for Relics, and he counted himself
happy that could but touch the Hemm of his Garment. It was admirable to observe
in this great Concourse of People, Ibid. cap. 13. and 21.
no ill behavior, no laughter, no Children crying, no disturbing noises; all
their Ears were attentive, their Eyes perpetually fixed upon the Man of God,
all waited to hear him with untired patience, and much devotion, as if not any
Man, but an Angel descended from Heaven spoke to them. The fervor of the
Preacher was such, that his speech came from his Mouth, as from a hot Furnace;
the effect was, that he wonderfully affected his Auditory, penetrated into the
very marrow of their Souls, raising in them much devotion and compunction,
hatred and detestation of their Vices: so that People were heard to say one to
another, with much sighing; Ah miserable wretch that I am I who never till now
thought such a thing to be a sin, and if I had known it to be such, would never
have committed it: they excited one another to make confessions, to undertake
Religious Pilgrimages, to fast on certain days in honor of the Mother of God,
etc. He sent so many of both Sexes to confess their sins, that neither the
Friars nor Priests, though many did attend him, were enough to hear all their
Confessions. Then first Men began to go in Procession by Troops, beating
themselves, and singing pious Canticles Ribadeneira (p. 248.) says, that the
People at Padua, upon his Preaching at the time of the Spring-East, were so
melted into sorrow and tears, that in great Companies unbaring their backs in
the very streets, they severely whipped themselves, Crying out to God, Mercy,
Mercy.
; and this laudable custom proceeding from such an Author, increased more and
more; so that almost in all the parts of Italy, it is strictly observed to this
day.

And now I cannot but fancy, after this huge noise concerning such an Angelical
Preacher, it will be a very seasonable Gratification of the Reader, to acquaint
him with S. Anthony's way of Preaching: That he may understand, Quid dignum
tanto feret hic promissor hiatu;
If his strong sense by charming Tongue applied,
Makes good what Fame proclaims with mouth so wide.


And since it has fallen out so luckily that S. Anthony's Sermons have
outlived him, and have been put forth as great Jewels and Rarities by their
own Men; I shall only do the part of a Rehearser; not engaging my self to give
you every word of the Sermons I mention, for (notwithstanding all that has been
said in their commendation) I am sure the dullness of them would tire and cloy
the Reader; nor shall I add any thing of my own, but faithfully translate his
words, that no Man may object that I have played tricks with him. And since I
find Trithemius has commended his Sermones de Tempore, upon those words, Erunt
signa in sole, etc. And his Sermon de Sanctis, as most elegant and ardent
discourses; I Will choose to give the Reader a taste of each: And though they are
all of a piece, yet since it may be presumed that the first Sermon in his
Works, is not the worst, I Will begin with that.

S. Anthony's Sermon on the 1. Sunday in Advent.
Luc. 21. v. 25. There shall be Signs in the Sun, and in the Moon and Stars;
and on Earth distress of Nations.
HEre are Four Things observable, according as there are Four Advents, viz.
Into Flesh, into the Mind, to Death, and to the final Judgment. 1. The coming
into Flesh, and this is the Assumption of humane Flesh, in those words, There
shall be Signs in the Sun; for the Sun is the Son of God. The 2d. (Advent) is
into the Mind spiritually; and this is the purgation of our Mind, or protection
against Sin, or bestowing Virtues on us. In these words; There shall be Signs
in the Moon. The 3d. is, In Death, which is the division of Soul and Body: in
these words, And in the Stars. The 4th. is, in the end of all things, when
there shall be a discussing of Merits, and punishing of Vices: in these words,
And on Earth distress of Nations, etc.

There shall be Signs in the Sun.] The Sun (so called because it shines alone,
Sol quod solus luceat) is Christ, who dwells in Light inaccessible: in compare
with whose sanctity and brightness, all that of the Saints suffers diminution:
Therefore it is said, (Esa. 64.) We are all become unclean, and all our
Righteousnesses like menstruous Clothes. This Sun (as it is Revel. 6.) is
become black as Sackcloth of Hair. For with the Sackcloth of our Humanity, he
covered the Light of his Divinity. I have made Sackcloth my clothing; (Psalm.
68.) And what has the Son of God to do with Sackcloth? With this Garment, not
God, but the sinner; not the Creator, Non Deus sed reus, non Creator sed
peccator.
but the offender ought to be clothed. It is the Garment of the Penitent, not
of him that forgives sin. What have thou therefore to do with Sackcloth? It was
very necessary for sinful Man: because it repents me that I have made man,
that is, I am punished for the sake of man. Poenitet me secisse hominem, i. e.
Poena tenet me pro homine.
Hence (Esa. 43.) Ye have made me to serve with your sins, etc. The Sun
therefore was black as Sackcloth of Hair. Under the Sackcloth of Flesh, the
brightness of Eternal Light hid it self. Concerning whom it is said, (Esa.
45.15.) Verily thou art a God that hidest thy self. And, Esa. 53. His face was
as it were hidden. And well is it said Hidden. For the Hook of the Divinity,
was hidden in the Bait of Humanity. That (as Isa. says, cap. 27. v. 1.) He
might slay the Whale, (that is, the Devil) which is in the Sea, (that is, in
the salt and bitter world.) Hence it is said, Job 40. In his eyes, In oculis
ejus quasi hamo capi^t cum. vulg. Latin.
as with an hook he shall take him: that is, Behemoth. The humble takes the
proud; our little Infant, the old Serpent. Therefore it is said, Isa. 11. The
sucking Child shall play on the hole of the Asp, and the weaned Child shall put
his hand on the Cockatrice Den Our Infant wrapped in swaddling Bands, laid in a
Cratch, by his powerful hand draws the Asp and the Cockatrice, that is, the
Devil, out of his Hole and Den, that is, the conscience of a sinner. The Sun
therefore became black, as Sackcloth of Hair: O the first! O the last! O the
high one, and yet humble and vile! And we (says Isa. 53.) counted him as a
leprous Person, smitten of God and humbled. Concerning whose humbled sublimity
speaks Isa. 6. I saw the Lord sitting upon his Throne, high and lifted up.
Observe, what his sitting is, what the high Throne, what the sign of the Lord
lifted up. His sitting Thus in another Sermon (page 454.) Christ's sitting upon
a She-ass, when he rode to Jerusalem, is interpreted, his assuming our Flesh.
In the She-ass (as it is in the Margin) is put for humane nature. Asina pro
humana natura.
, is the humble inclination of the Divinity in the Humanity. Thus Ecclesiastic.
38. v. 19. The Potter sitting at his work, and turning the Wheel about with his
Feet, is always carefully set at his work. The Potter is the Son of God;
concerning whom (Psalm. 32.) it is said, Who fashioneth their hearts one after
another. He sits in flesh, to wit, he humbled himself to ( i. e. for the sake
of) his work: i. e. our Salvation. Hence Isa. 28. That he may do his work, his
strange work, etc. Greg. He shall come into the World, that he may do his work,
that is, redeem Mankind. But it is his strange work: for it was not agreeable
to the Divinity, to be spit upon, whipped, crucified. He with the feet of his
humanity turns about the Wheel of our Nature, which before ran to death; that
to whom it was said before, Earth thou art, and thou shall go to Earth; now it
may be said to him, Blessed art thou, and happy shall thou be. The Gospel
plainly enough declares, in what solicitude he always was the space of 33.
Years, for the perfecting of his Work. Whence Psalm. 61. it is said, I ran in
thirst. For he ran to the Cross with such eagerness, Cucurri in siti. vulg. Lat.
as to a Furnace, for to strengthen and consummate his work there, that he made
no answer to Pilate, lest the business of our salvation should be hindered.

The Throne, (so called from its solidity) is the Humanity of Christ, Solium,
quasi solidum dictum.
which leaning upon Seven Pillars, remains every ways constant and solid. Hence
it is said Isa. 4. In that day seven Women shall take hold on one Man, saying:
We will eat our own Bread, and wear our own Apparel: only let thy name be
called upon us, take away our reproach. The seven Women are the seven gifts of
the H. Ghost; they are called Women, because no Man is begotten to God, but by
the H. Spirit. The Man is Christ; one man, i. e. one alone, without sin; whom
the seven Women shall take hold of, i. e. the seven gifts of the H. Spirit,
that they may firmly hold him, and not let him go. These all pass unto Christ;
they lay hold on none else, for there is no other Man that sins not; in all
others the Spirit has the lodging of Tribulation, not the mansion of Rest: for
the Spirit was in the Prophets, and other just Men, but because they were Men,
and therefore sinners, it was in them, but did not abide in them. Whence it is
said only of Christ, John 1. Upon whom thou shall see the H. Ghost descending
and abiding, he it is that baptizeth with the H. Ghost. They shall take hold of
one Man, saying, We will eat our own Bread, etc. There the Gloss, He that has
bread and clothing, needs nothing. We will eat our own bread, and wear our own
apparel; it signifies, that the H. Ghost possesses all things equally with the
Father, and is not in want of any thing. Let thy name be called upon us, that
is, let them be called Christians from thee, who desire to enjoy thine
Incarnation. Take away our reproach; lest by the stench of Vices being expelled
out of Men's hearts, we be farther often forced to change our Lodging.

The Humanity therefore of Christ, (in which the Divinity sat, as in a Throne,
i. e. humbled it self, was high and lifted up. High, in the incomparable
sanctity of his life. Hence, Joh. 3. He that comes from above is above all,
viz. in excellency of Life: and lifted up, that is, on the Tree of the Cross.
Whence, Joh. 12. If I be lifted up, I will draw all Men unto my self, viz. by
the Hook of the Cross. In which our Sun being covered with Sackcloth, was
signed with five Signs. Therefore it is said, There shall be signs in the Sun:
which signs were the five wounds in the Body of Christ. These are the five
Cities which are spoke of, Isa. 19. In that Day there shall be five Cities in
the Land of Egypt, speaking the Language of Canaan, etc. One shall be called
the City of the Sun. Egypt is, by interpretation, sorrow, or darkness. The Land
of Egypt, that is, the flesh of Christ was in sorrow. Heb. 5. Offering with
tears and strong crying, etc. In this Land were five Cities, that is, five
wounds, which are Cities of refuge, to which whosoever flees, shall be
delivered. -- It follows, Speaking the Language of Canaan; The wounds of Christ
cry to the Father for mercy, not vengeance. -- It follows, One shall be called
the City of the Sun. The wound of his side is the City of the Sun: For, in the
opening of the Lords side, the Gate of Paradise was opened, through which the
splendour of Eternal Light shined to us. The Naturalists say, that blood drawn
from the side of a Dove, clears the Eyes of blemishes. Even so, the blood of
Christ drawn by the Soldiers Lance from the side of Christ, illuminated the
Eyes of such as were born blind, that is, of Mankind.

Thus far the Explication of Signs in the Sun. 'It follows,

There shall be signs in the Moon.] Concerning which it is said, Apocal. 6. The
Moon is become all as blood. And, Joel 2. The Moon shall be turned into blood.
God made two Luminaries, the greater Luminary and the lesser. The greater is
the Angelical Spirit, the lesser is the Soul of Man. Whence it is called the
Moon, as if you should say, one of those that shine. Dicitur luna, quasi
liuentium una.
For the Soul of Man was created for this end, that relishing heavenly things,
it might praise the Creator, as one of those blessed Spirits, and joyfully sing
with the Sons of God. But by reason of its too great nearness to the Earth, it
has contracted blackness, and has lost its clearness: therefore it is
necessary, if it would recover its brightness, that it should first be wholly
turned into blood: which blood is contrition of heart: Of which it is said, Heb.
9.19. Moses taking the blood of Calves and Goats, with Water and scarlet Wool
and Hyssop, he sprinkled both the Book and all the People. -- Moreover he
sprinkled likewise with blood both the Tabernacle, and all the Vessels of the
Ministry: and almost all things are purged with blood, and without
bloodshedding there is no remission: Behold how all the Moon becomes as blood.
But what does Moses signify? What the blood? What the water? What the scarlet
wool? etc.

When the merciful and pitying Jesus Christ comes into the mind of sinners,
then Moses takes the blood. Moses is a sinner, now converted from the Waters
of Egypt, who ought to take these Five things.

'Viz. The blood of sorrowful contrition. The water of weeping confession. The
wool of innocence and purity. The scarlet of Brotherly kindness. The hyssop of
true humility.


With these he ought to sprinkle the Book; that is, the secret of his heart,
and all the people of his Cogitations; and the Tabernacle, that is, his Body;
and all its Vessels, that is, the five Senses. By the blood of Contrition, all
things are cleansed, but still with a purpose of Confessing: But without
Contrition there is no remission of sin. Let it therefore be said, There shall
be signs in the Moon. By the outward signs of the Penitent, are discovered the
inward signs of Contrition. When Chastity shines in the Body, Humility in deed,
Abstinence in food, Vileness in clothing, they are the forerunners of inward
sanctification.

Hence it is, that the Lord promises these four to a Penitent Soul: Isa. 60.13.
The glory of Libanus shall come unto thee, and the Fir Tree, the Box-tree, and
Pine Tree together, to beautify the place of my holiness. The glory of Libanus
is the chastity of the Body, of which the Soul glories, Ecclus. 24.13. I am
exalted as a Cedar in Libanus, which signifies by interpretation, whiteness.
The Cedar Tree drives away Serpents by its smell. In Libanus therefore, that
is, in a chaste Body the Soul is exalted, as a Cedar Tree; because by the Odor
of an holy Conversation, it drives away the Serpents of Demonaical suggestion
and carnal concupiscence. -- The Fir Tree which grows higher than other Trees,
signifies Humility, which lifts up it self higher than other Virtues. -- The
Box-tree, which is of a pale Color, signifies abstinence in Meat and Drink: Of
which, Isa. 30.20. The Lord shall give thee scant Bread, and short Water: And
Verse. 24. The young Asses (that is, the Penitents) which till the ground (that
is, afflict their flesh) shall eat commixtum migma, mingled food. Migma (in the
vulgar Latin) is Barley with the Chaff, whereby is signified hard fare. The
Pine Tree, out of which pitch is drawn, signifies meanness of Apparel, etc.

I cannot methinks proceed farther with such silly mystical stuff, upon the
other Heads of his Sermon, concerning signs in the Stars, and distress of
Nations; but shall leave the Reader to consult it. Proceed we now to the other
commended Instance of S. Anthony's Sermons upon the Saints: Of which take that
one, Page 443.

SERMON II. Concerning all the Saints.
Animae justorum in manu Dei sunt. Sap. 3. The Souls of just Men are in the
hand of God. Wisd. 3.1.
NOte here, that Noble Persons are wont to carry Seven Things in their Hands:
viz. a Ring, Gloves, a Hawke, a Looking-glass, a Rod to correct, a Flower or
Apple to smell to, and a Scepter to show their dignity. The Souls of just Men
are in the hand of God, like to all these.

1. As a Ring, by faith: Ose. 2. I will betroth thee to me in faith. The ring
of just Men, is hope of Heavenly things founded in Faith: but because faith
without works is dead, and availes not to life Eternal, therefore it is said,
Jerem. 22. If Jeconias were the Ring on my right hand, I would pluck him
thence; because he did not perform the worthy works of faith.

2. The righteous ought to be in Gods hand as Gloves, by works of mercy: for he
covers the Lords hand, who freely gives Alms to the Poor, and leaves it naked,
who is unmerciful: for what thou put in the hand of the poor, thou put
in Gods hand: Matthew. 25. What ye have done to one of these my little ones, ye
have done to me. The five fingers of this Glove, are five things that are
required in Alms. 1. That it be speedy. 2. Large. 3. Of the best and choicest
things. 4. Of Goods lawfully gotten. 5. Discreet: to those that are indigent.
Concerning these five, Zacchaeus said, Luc. 9. Behold half of my goods I give
to the poor. Behold, there is his readiness; half, there is the largeness; goods,
there is the best things; my goods, there is his property in them: to the poor,
there is discretion. But because works of mercy profit little, unless they be
done in Charity; Therefore,

3. They ought to be in the hand of God, as Hawks, God's Hawke is a heart full
of Charity. Thence it draws to it self with the foot of affection all the good
and evil of its neighbors, and makes advantage thereby, delighting in their
good, sympathizing with their evils, and bearing those that are inflicted on
it. Deuteronomy. 11. Every place where your foot shall tread, shall be yours. The two
feet of Charity, are patience, whereby it suffers evil things, and benignity,
whereby it loves their good: 1 Cor. 13. Charity is patient, is kind. Note, that
some are Kites and Crows, that fix only upon entrals and carcasses: Lament. 4.
They have embraced dung. But the Hawke only seizes upon a noble prey. Also
note, that a Hawke ought not to be carried without Gloves, because charity
without the expression of good works, viz. works of mercy, outwardly, is worth
nothing; for the proof of affection, is action: 1 John 3. He that has this
Worlds goods, etc. And because charity ought to proceed from a pure heart, and
a good conscience, 1 Timothy 1. Therefore,

4. Thou must be in the hand of God, as a Looking-glass, by purity of
conscience; that thy Soul may be the Daughter of Sion, which is by
interpretation a Glass, a glass of God's Majesty without spot, and the Image of
his goodness; Wisd. 7. in which it may see God plainly by his image and
likeness. But observe that there are several things that hinder the reflection
of an Image in a Glass: viz. the dust of pride; the inspection of a menstruous
Woman, that is, of carnal concupiscence; the dirt of avarice; the rust of
rancor and anger; the breath of detraction, etc.

Also because from a conscience purified from sin, a Man arises to the joy of
contemplation, for Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God,
Matthew. 5. Therefore,

5. We ought to be in the hand of God, as a Flower or Apple to smell to. For a
sweet smell goes forth from the Soul, as from a Flower or Apple, and all its
affection, cogitation and delight, rests in God; so that it says with the
Psalmist, O Lord, all my desire is before thee. And that Cant. 1. When the King
was at his Table, my spikenard gave its smell: We will run in the savor of thy
Ointments. Concerning such a Soul the Spouse may say that Cant. 3. Who is this
that ascends like a Pillar of smoke of perfumes? And, Cant. 4. The savor of
thine Ointments is better than all Spices. And, Cant. 7. The smell of thy mouth
is as the smell of Apples. And, Genesis 27. Behold the smell of my Son is like the
smell of a Field, which the Lord has blessed.

But because some are so wholly intent upon contemplation, that they neglect
the care of their neighbors; therefore the Soul is raised from contemplation,
to be

6. A Rod in the Lord's hand, to correct others. As Paul says, 1 Cor. 4. Will
ye that I come to you with a rod, or in love and the spirit of meekness? But
note, the rod is turned into a Staff and a Serpent, as Moses his Rod was,
while he that corrects, exceeds his measures: Isa. 10. Woe to Ashur the rod of
my fury, and a Staff is he, etc. Because he that ought to have been a rod, was
become a staff. Now the Saints are like a soft and tender twig, while they
reprove sinners with meekness; but in the Day of Judgment they shall be a Rod
of Iron, judging the reprobate without mercy, when the Saints shall judge the
Nations.

Who if they be now in the Lord's hand as a Rod, they will be hereafter in the
Lord's hand,

7. As a Scepter to show their dignity: Esa. 62. Thou shall be a Crown of Glory
in the hand of the Lord. Psalm. 2. The Scepter of thy Kingdom is a right
Scepter. Matthew. 19. Ye shall sit upon twelve Seats, judging the twelve Tribes
of Israel. Thus the Souls of righteous Men are in the hand of God.

And well is it said, that righteous Men are in Gods hand: for as that which is
contained in ones hand is a small thing, so the blessed are small in number,
compared with the reprobate: Matthew. 20. Many are called, but few are chosen.
Eccl. 1. The number of fools is infinite. Also a thing in hand is always in
readiness, and is carried at the pleasure of him that holds it, so the Saints
conform their will to the Divine will: thence in the Lords Prayer, Thy will be
done. And Jer. 18. As Clay is in the hand of the Potter, so are you, O House of
Israel, in my hand. Also as things in hand, are in perpetual remembrance, so
the Eyes of the Lord are always upon the just: Esa. 49. Can a Woman forget her
sucking Infant, etc.

This is the whole of S. Anthony's admirable Discourse upon this Subject, and
sure it needs no comment to show the ridiculousness and impertinency of it.

It were easy to make a Volume, to show how this famed Preacher has by his
mystical Expositions, and straining of similitudes, spoiled the sense of Scr.
in a hundred places, and talked more childishly concerning the gravest and most
serious Arguments, than any Schoolboy would have done. For what Man of
understanding can with any patience hear one trifle with such a noble Subject,
as that, Matthew. 11. Take my Yoke upon you, Sermon. 8. de Apost. page 428.
etc. He begins his Sermon with this Question. What are the Apostles then Oxen?
And the most of his Discourse is to show that the Apostles are Oxen; for seven
Reasons. Some of which are these. 1. Because the Apostles were sent by pairs
like Oxen: Act. 13. Separate to me Saul and Barnabas, etc. 2. Because an Ox is
a strong and laborious animal. So S. Paul says, He labored more abundantly
than they all. 3. An Ox spends little, though it labors much: and one of the
Apostles says, 1 Timothy 6. Having Food and Raiment, let us therewith be content:
but some Prelates in our time are Palfreys, that spend much, and labor little.
4. Because an Ox has two Horns: and that which answers in the Apostles to
these two Horns, is Doctrine and Life. Whence that Preacher is an Unicorn, who
has but one of these: With this Horn Preachers ought to blow, that is, with
good Doctrine in preaching; which yet often profits little, unless it be
accompanied with the other horn, that is, good life. Another reason is; because
there is nothing in an Ox unprofitable; so neither in the life of the
Apostles: Of the Hide of the Ox shoes are made, and from the conversation of
the Apostles an example is taken, which fortifies the affections, as a Shoe
does the Feet; Cant. 7. How beautiful are thy goings in Shoes. Quam pulchri
sunt gr^ssus tui in calcea mentis. vulg. Lat.
The Flesh of Oxen affords food. The Flesh of the Apostles are their carnal
words and deeds: as Peter said carnally, Matthew. 16. Far be this from thee, O
Lord. Also because they loved him too carnally: By these we are nourished to
caution. Besides, with the dung of Oxen the earth is fatned. The dung of the
Apostles is their sins before conversion and after: as S. Peter's denial, etc.
By which we are fatned to hope of pardon.

In another Sermon upon this Text, Their sound went out into all the Earth.
Sermon. 2. de Apost. page 420.
The whole Discourse is spent in comparing the Apostles to three things that
sound loud, and are heard afar off, viz. Thunder, Trumpets and Bells; and upon
the last he is very large; and all that can be thought of about Bells, the
Mettle they are made of, and whence it is dug, the Fire they are melted in,
the Mold they are put into; The properties of their sound; The uses they are
put to; to raise from sleep; to allay tempests; to quench fires; to cover
fires, and give notice of Bedtime; to call People together; to give warning of
death; to signify the approach of Persons of honor, etc. All these are
applied with horrible straining, and absurdity to the Apostles preaching.

But it were well if this were the worst in S. Anthony's Sermons, that he
talked foolishly concerning the Apostles and Saints; for I know not how he can
be excused from this charge, in reference to God and our Savior. Upon those
words, Luc. 11. If I by the finger of God cast out Devils, etc. He descants in
this manner, Sermon. Domin. 3. in Quadrag. p. 179
so as I think no body ever had the confidence to do before him. Christ by the
Finger of God cast out Devils. The Finger of God notes the difference of his
work. For the hand signifies work, and the fingers placed in the hand are the
difference of works. But now because the Lord either has wrought, or will work
for the future with all his fingers; it is to be noted, that as there are five
fingers, so there are five works of God. The first is called the Thumb, in
which the strength of the hand consists: by virtue of this finger the Lord
wrought in the Creation of the World, and the dispersing of Men, in the time of
the Deluge, in the working of Miracles in Egypt, and therefore the Magicians
said, The finger of God is here, Exodus 8. The 2d. finger is the forefinger,
called Index, ab indicando, from pointing, and to this wisdom is attributed:
with this God wrought in the giving of the Law, when he wrote it with this
finger in Tables of Stone, Deuteronomy. 9. The 3d. is called the middle-finger, and
this is the finger of clemency and mercy, whereby God's revenge is deferred,
and which joins God with the Creature: with this Finger God wrought, when he
drove out the Devil by it. Whence S. Augustine upon Matthew says, With the
finger of God, that is, by the Holy Ghost. For the Father is the Arm in which
is power, the Son is the hand in which is industry; and as the hand works by
the fingers, and the Arm by the hand, so the power of the Father by the Son:
Joh. 1. All things were made by him. Mark also the difference in the fingers,
which signifies difference of Graces, though it be the same spirit. The 4th.
finger is the Ring-finger, that is, the promise of Glory: So, Luke 15. Put a
Ring upon his hand; i. e. on his Finger. With this finger he now works by his
promise, and at the end of the World will work by bestowing of Glory. The 5th.
is the little or Ear-finger. (auricularis.) This is that, which makes the Ears
tingle: 1 King. 3. Behold I do a work in Israel, which whosoever hears, both
his Ears shall tingle. This is the Finger of Judgment hereafter, and of
threatening at the present. With this finger Christ stooping down, wrote on the
ground, Joh. 8. But when he shall descend to Judgment, he will write in every
ones heart a sentence against them: This is that Little-finger thicker than his
Father's Loins, 3 King. 12. In the Loins of the back the virtue of generation
does consist, and it signifies the kindness bestowed by God the Father upon
ungrateful sinners, but the Judgment that is given to the Son shall exceed all
those.

What Divinity they of the Roman Church will call this, I know not, but one
might expect sure as good as this from every Kitchen; and if these be the
admirable strains of his Preaching, I think S. Anthony had better have kept to
his old employment of washing Dishes, and scouring Kettles there, than ever
have entered into a Pulpit. For I think never any Man before him took such
starts from the Scripture to let loose a number of foolish fancies, which he
had not the discretion to restrain, even when they bordered upon Blasphemy.

Upon those words of S. Mark, cap. 7.33. where our Savior cured the deaf and
dumb Man, Sermon. Domin. 12. post Trinit. p. 365.
by putting his fingers into his Ears, and spitting and touching his Tongue; we
have such another descant upon the five fingers, on the hand of Christ the Word
incarnate. The Thumb in his Conception, which because it is shorter than the
rest, does signify the humility of the Son of God, who shortened himself in the
Womb of the Virgin. The forefinger in his Nativity, for then the Angel did, as
with a finger, declare salvation, saying, To day is born a Savior, and this
shall be a sign, etc. The middle-finger in his preaching. The 4th. finger
(called annularis and medicus) in the working of Miracles. The little-finger
(auricularis) in this Days Miracle, viz. of curing the deaf Man.

But upon that which follows, of Christ's spitting and touching his Tongue,
never any Man had the impudence before him, to talk of the Saliva divinitatis,
and Sputum Dei: For these are his words, Sputum namque Dei est sapor divinae
sapientiae, quae dicit, Ecclus. 24. Ego ex ore Altissimi prodii.

I should tire my self and the Reader, if I should set down the thousandth part
of his Allegorical and Mystical Divinity, which one may every where (let him
dip where he will) meet withal; and such as I could scarce believe, upon
report, any Man of sense would ever have fastened upon the Scripture, (so
prodigious is their Absurdity) if I did not read them with these Eyes.

A few instances more of this kind shall conclude this Discourse about S.
Anthonie's preaching.

Upon those words of the Gospel, Joh. 2. There were there six Water-pots of
Stone, Sermon. in Domin. 2. post Epiph. p. 116.
(viz. in Cana of Galilee) holding two or three measures a piece. He discourses
thus; In Cana of Galilee, that is, in a Soul, which by the zeal of love has
passed from Vice to Virtue, there are six Water-pots: Contrition, Confession,
Prayer, Fasting, Alms, and forgiveness of injuries; these are they which
purify the Jews, i. e. Penitents from all sins: -- Then afterward he
concludes. Behold six Water-pots of Stone cut out of the Stone which the
Builders refused, which is cut out of the Mountain without hands. How full they
are unto the brim with saving Water, holding two or three measure a piece. In
the two measures is signified the Love of God and our Neighbor. In three
measures the Confession of Faith in the Holy Trinity, which in all the
forenamed things is necessary: Mark therefore these six Water-Pots.

S. Matthew, c. 8. tells us, that Jesus entered into a Ship, and his Disciples
followed him. S. Anthony begins his Sermon thus. Sermon. in Domin. 4. post Epiph.
p. 120.
That Ship is the Cross of Christ, this is a Merchants Ship, in which he keeps
his Marts, setting forth his glorious Wares; viz. Patience, Indulgence,
Meekness, suffering wrongs and reproaches, etc. Hence it is said, Prove. 31.14.
She is like a Merchants Ship, bringing her Food from far. By the help of this
Ship we come to the shore of the Heavenly Country. -- Note, that to the
government of a Ship, Four things are necessary; viz. the Mast, the Sail, the
Oars and Anchor. In the Mast is signified contrition of heart. In the Sail,
confession of the mouth; for as the Sail is fastened to the Mast, so confession
ought to be tied to contrition. The Oars denote works of satisfaction, to wit,
Fasting, Prayer and Alms. The Anchor, remembrance of Death. -- Whosoever
therefore would pass over from the shore of Mortality, to that of Immortality,
that is, would come to Jerusalem, let him go into such a Ship of Repentance.

Upon those words of the Gospel, Matthew. 23.2. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in
Moses Chair, all things therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe
and do, but after their works do not. He has this excellent comment. The
Pharisees are so called from a word that signifies Division, Sermon. Fer. 3.
Hebd. 2. in Quadrag. p. 166.
and may denote those sins that divide and separate us from God. Isai. 59. Your
iniquities have divided betwixt you and God.

But here arise three doubts: 1. How sins are called Scribes. 2. How they are
said to sit in Moses Chair. 3. How we ought to do according to what they bid us
observe. It Is worth hearing how this rare Casuist determines it. As for the
first, Isaiah answers, cap. 10.1. The writers have writ unrighteousness, that
they might oppress the poor in judgment. Also there are Books, and Letters, and
Writings against a Man in the last Judgment. -- Sins therefore may be called
Pharisees, not only as they divide, but as they condemn; and also because they
inroll a Man into the Family of the Devil. Thence in Revel. 19. they are
called, The mark of the Beast.

As for the 2d. Doubt: How they are said to sit in the Chair, it is plain
enough. The mind of man may signify the Chair of Moses, in which the divine
Law ought to sit. -- The Soul of the just man is the Seat of Wisdom: Or else
we may say, that they sit in Moses Seat, whilst by sin they kill the divine
Law; Esa. 14. I will sit in the Mountain of the Testament, that is, in the
height of the perfection of the Divine Law.

As for the 3d. How we ought to do all that they bid us. That of the Gloss, is
to be noted. All things, viz. which are profitable to Salvation: for we are to
do all such things, but we must not do according to their works. For we must
know that every vice commends its opposite virtue: ex. gr. Anger commends
Patience, Gluttony Temperance. Therefore though the works of vices are evil,
(and so ought not to be done) yet they commend the contrary virtues, as
appears, because every vice would cover it self under the cloak of virtue, as
appears in Pride. Thus therefore, Whatsoever they say unto you do, but do not
after their works, etc. Sin condemns it self, and yet does not cease to infest
the Soul, and therefore it follows well, They bind heavy burdens, etc.

Was there ever such a wild nonsensical fancy, as he has pinned upon those
words of the Prophet to the Widow of Sarepta? 1 Kings 17.13. Fear not, go and
do as thou have said, but make me a little cake first, etc. For the meal shall
not wast, nor the cruise of oil fail, till the Lord sends rain upon the Earth.

Sermon. in fer. 2. Hebd. 3. in Quadrag. p. 182.
This is his mystical sense. Go, return, viz. into thy conscience. Take Meal
from the Barrel, that is, thoughts from the heart, which are ground between two
Mil-stones hope and fear; and take the Oil of Devotion, and make me the Bread
of repentance baked under the ashes, viz. of humility; and then afterward thou
shall make for thy self and thy Son, because feeding God with the food of
repentance, thou shall feed thy own Soul and Body in Life Eternal. Fear not,
for if thou do this to God, that is, to Divine Reverence, it shall never fail
unto the Day of Rain, that is, of Glory.

I cannot omit another pleasant interpretation of those words, Matthew. 4. Jesus
was led by the Spirit into the Desert. Sermon. 2. in Domin. 1. in Quadrag. p. 270.
Upon which, according to his usual way, he discourses thus.

We are to consider morally what that Desert is, and by what Spirit we are to
be led into it. The Scripture mentions a 7. fold Desert.

1. Desert is Heaven; because it was deserted by Apostate Angels. This is that
Wilderness, Luc. 2. in which the Heavenly Shepherd left the 99. viz. the
Company of Angels, that he might seek the lost Sheep, that is, humane nature,
etc.

2. Desert, is the heart of man, because it is deserted of Angels, and
inhabited by Beasts, that is, bestial cogitations: this is the wilderness of
Cades, which is by interpretation, the fountain of judgment; Psalm. 28. The
voice of the Lord shakes the wilderness of Cades; which is, when the heart in
the preaching of the word is made contrite by compunction.

3. Desert, is that of penitence: both because sins are here deserted, as also
because there ought to be here as in a desert, rest from disturbing thoughts,
hard clothing, dry diet, etc. John the Baptist was in this desert, clothed
with Camels hair.

4. Desert, is Religion, in which the world is deserted by the vow of poverty,
the flesh by the vow of chastity, and the active will by the vow of obedience.
Concerning this, Cant. 8. Who is this that comes up from the wilderness,
leaning upon his beloved? For he that perfectly forsakes the world, leans only
upon God.

5. Desert, is the cross of Christ; in which all deserting him fled away. This
is the desert of Ziph, which is by interpretation, flourishing, because the
cross bore the florid body of Christ the Nazarene, i. e. flourishing: Here the
desert flourished by the blood of Christ, as it were with roses; by the
humanity of Christ as with Violets, and by his purity as with Lilies.

6. Desert, is the world, forsaken by every good man, 'in which the Children of
Israel wander and are afflicted.

7. Desert is Hell, deserted of all hope of freedom; for in Hell is no
redemption. These ways desert may be taken in Scripture.

Now to the purpose; by what Spirit ought a man to be led, and into which of
these deserts ought he to enter? The answer is, there is a sevenfold Spirit
which is mentioned Isa. 11. The spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit
of Counsel and fortitude, the spirit of knowledge and pity, and the spirit of
the fear of the Lord: By every one of these a man ought to be led into one of
those deserts forenamed. Into the 1. Desert, that is Heaven, a man ought to be
led by the Spirit of wisdom, by the contemplation of celestial things. Into the
Second, (viz. the heart) man must be led by the spirit of understanding, by the
consideration and discussion of his sins. Into the Third (viz. of penitence) he
must be led by the spirit of Counsel, because penitence is to be had by the
counsel of the Priest; Matthew. 8. Go and show your selves to the Priest. Into
the Fourth Desert, that is, of a Religious profession, men enter by a difficult
way, therefore it is said to such professors: Be valiant in battle. Into the
Fifth, that is, the Cross, men must be led by the spirit of pity and
compassion. Lament. 1. O all ye that pass by, behold if there be any sorrow,
etc. Into the Sixth Desert, that is, the world, a man must be led by the spirit
of knowledge, that he may see how he ought to walk cautiously in the midst of
an evil and perverse Nation. Into the Seventh, that is, into Hell, a man must
be led by the spirit of fear, that so he may consider, that there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

I dare say the Seven wise men of Greece would never have found out these Seven
Deserts, if the Bible had been their study all their life long. But S. Anthony
had a peculiar Gift, (which I am sure none of the seven Spirits forenamed
helped him to,) to bring any thing out of any thing. Such is his searching
invention, that he can find a figure of the day of Pentecost in Noah's ark,
Sermon. in die Pentecost. p. 312.
because we read, Genesis 6. that the Ark was 50. Cubits in breadth: He can find
the five senses of man, in the five chambers of this Ark: The first of which
shall suffice, to show how refined this preachers inward sense was. The first
chamber of the Ark was called Stercoraria, Ibid.
where the dung lay; this is the tongue of the mouth, through which in
confession we ought to send forth all the dung of our sins. This is the
dung-gate mentioned Nehem. 3.14: The mind of man being infected with the Devils
ordure (stercore Diaboli) is to be purged by the gate of confession, etc.

But, that I may not be endless, one instance more shall conclude this
discourse about S. Anthonie's Sermons. Upon those words, Cant. 6.2. Sermon. in
Domin. 20. post Trinit. p. 399.
My beloved is gone down into his garden, to the beds of spices, to feed in the
gardens, and to gather Lilies. He comments thus. The garden of the beloved, is
the Soul of a righteous man, in which are two beds of spices, that is, humility
the procurer of other virtues; and Lilies, that is, double continence, and
therefore he descends into such a garden and feeds there. Note, that there is a
fourfold Garden, viz. of Nuts, of Apples, of Vines, and of Spices. There are
also seven gifts of the Spirit, (which he reckons as we heard a little before.)
The Soul of a righteous man, by the spirit of fear, becomes a Garden of Nuts,
which have three things in them, viz. bitterness in the husk, hardness in the
shell, and sweetness in the kernel: The Garden of Nuts is repentance; which has
bitterness in the flesh, hardness of tribulation in the long-suffering of the
mind, and the sweetness of spiritual joy, in expectation of a reward. Also by
the spirit of knowledge and pity, the Soul becomes a garden of Apples, which
has the sweetness of mercy. Also by the spirit of counsel and fortitude, it
becomes a garden of Vines, having the fervor of charity. And by the spirit of
wisdom and understanding, it becomes a garden of Spices, sending forth its
sweet smell in the Gates.

I hope the Reader by this time is pretty well assured that S. Anthony was no
Conjurer, as to making of Sermons: That whomsoever he took to imitate in his
mystical and moral expositions of Scripture, he was the dullest and the most
nonsensical certainly that ever appeared in this way. That the way it self of
his preaching was childish beyond measure, mere toying with the word of God;
had nothing in it to make any one a jot the wiser, nor fitted to move any thing
scarce within a man, save only his spleen: that it is an unpardonable impudence
in the writers of his Life, to cry him up, as if he was an Angel in the Pulpit,
when there is not one page among all his Sermons worth any wise man's reading,
and every line almost gives them the lie. That though there is no defense to be
made for the foolish preaching of our own Enthusiasts at home, and the Papists
may think they have a mighty advantage against us when they object it: yet this
I will say, that there is not one of our men so ridiculous in Print, let them
choose where they please, but may be played for any wager against their S.
Anthony, and will come off better.

But it is more than time to proceed to the other Head, of his Miracles:
Concerning S. Anthonie's miracles.
half of which, I think at least, seeing they concern his preaching; (being
either tricks the Devil played to discourage and disturb his Sermons, or
wondrous things God wrought, to give credit both to him and them:) We have
gained thus much by producing his Sermons, that sure no wise man can believe a
word of those stories, but will look upon them as Idle Tales and fictions;
since he may see by the spirit and strain of them, that they have no tendency
to do the Devil much harm, nor God any considerable service. If the evil Spirit
receive any contentment from the impertinency and silly discourses of a
preacher, I cannot but imagine that some of S. Anthonie's have been like Nuts
and Apples to him: but I have met with nothing likely to put him into any great
chafe, unless it were the slovenly similitude, we lately noted, of the Devils
dung For thus they tell us, that the Devil was mightily vexed, becauses Painter
used to draw him in a most ugly shape under the feet of the Bl. Virgin; and as
he was at this work one time upon his Scaffolds in a Church Porch, the Devil
brought such a whirlwind, that threw down all the Scaffolding, and the Painter
had broke his neck, if the Image of the Bl. Virgin had not seasonably stretched
out its hand, and kept him from falling till help came. Gononi Chronic. page
136.
: Ribaden. vit. Anton. p. 249.
So that when I am told, that once as he was preaching, the Devil tumbled down
the cover of the Pulpit, with a great force and noise; I am ready to conjecture
that the Pulpit was set up in some haunted place, (for we heard before that S.
Anthony did not always preach in Churches) and that the Devil was disturbed in
his usual walk: only one circumstance speaks it rather to be a fable, when it is
said, in the story, that the fall of it neither hurt nor so much as frighted
any body; for S. Anthony had forewarned his Auditors, that they should not be
terrified, if they should chance to hear any noises; and it was an
extraordinary speech indeed, that could prevent, when this happened, the women's
frights and fears. But we are told of a worse accident, that through the Devils
spite, happened to himself at the beginning of Lent; Ribad. ibid. and in vit.
Ant. cap. 12. Brev. Romans Antiq. ad Jun. 13. Lect. 8. and 9. infra Octav.
for after he was wearied with his labors, and had laid him down to sleep to
refresh himself; the Devil set upon him cowardly, and griped him so fast by the
throat, that he had almost choked him; till invoking the Bl. Virgin, and
making the sign of the Cross, and (which was the hardest work when the Devil
had him fast by the throat) singing the Hymn, O gloriosa Domina, etc. he saw
his cell filled with the brightness of Heavenly light, which the Devil not
being able to endure, departed. One would wonder at the many spightful and
Dog-tricks which, they tells us, the Devil served many of their great Saints.
The other S. Anthony the Hermit (as we heard before) was almost beaten to death
by him. S. Benedict had a Bell which was tied to a cord, Brev. Romans Ant. ad
Mart. 21. Lec. 4.
by which bread was let down into his Cell, and gave warning to him when to
receive it; this Bell, by throwing a stone at it, the Devil broke in pieces,
thinking (I suppose) to starve the Saint. S. Bartholomew the Monk, as he was
intent at his prayers, the Devil leapt upon his feet and legs, Capgrav. vit.
Bartholom. f. 32, 33.
and at last throwing himself wholly upon him (as he dealt with our S. Anthony)
got him fast by the throat and held him so long, till he was almost dead by the
load that oppressed him; at another time he drew him along by his Cowl, and
threw him a great way into an entry; and when the Monk took up a stick to
strike him, he stood and laughed at his blows. S. Ethelwold was severely handled
by him, Ribadeneira vit. S. Ethelw. Aug. 1.
when envying his zeal for the promoting the worship of God, as he was intent
upon the building of a Church, the Devil by casting a Beam upon him threw him
down headlong, so that (though he was not killed outright, yet) he broke one
of his ribs. But S. Godrick was as much abused by his tricks, as any Saint I
read of. One time the Devil mocked him when he was singing Psalms, Capgr. vit.
God^^^c H ^emit. f. 159, 160.
and calling him Clown, told him he could sing as well as he: When he was upon
his knees at his Prayers, the Devil entering the Oratory, sought to disturb him,
but S. Godrick would not so much as look toward him. Then the Devil threw the
Pix at him, which had the Hosts in it; after that spilt a horn of Wine upon
him, then threw a pitcher of water at him and a piece of wood with a Cross upon
it; but when thus all night abusing him he moved him not at all, he departed
from him; only he lest such a stink behind him, as could scarce be endured by
man: Another time, as he fate by his fireside, the Devil gave him such a box
on the ear, that almost felled him flat to the ground. Another bout they had,
when S. Godrick (suspecting he was no man, though he appeared in that shape)
catechized him, and asked him whether he believed in the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, and bid him worship the Bl. Virgin: The Devil surlliy bid him not to
trouble himself about his belief; and told him that he had nothing to do to
inquire into it. Then Godrick took out his book which had the pictures of
Christ, Bl. Mary, and of S. John in it, and clapping it hastily to his mouth,
bad him if he believed in God, to kiss devoutly those pictures: The Devil not
being able to endure any longer, did, as it were, spit upon the book, and
disappeared mocking of him. He also another time abused him in the shape and
habit of a Hermit, and choused him of his bread and money; Capgrav. ibid. p.
162.
and prayed him to touch his ulcerous body, for he hoped he should have ease
thereby: the Saint in great compassion touched his Body; which felt just like
the body of a Goose with the Feathers off. But (though we are beholden much to
him for that discovery, yet) this touch so inflamed him with obscene
temptations, that it had like to have cost him the loss of his Chastity. But
nothing grieved the Saint more, than that he had bestowed his gifts on the
Devil, and he had carried them away with him; which cost him many tears, and
great penances. He also much wondered that he stood the sprinkling of Holy
Water, yea and kneeled down and prayed with him, and entered into the Church.
But the Devils business was, not to be overlong godly; for the next appearance
to him (as he was gathering Apples) was as filthy, as this was devout; Capgr.
ibid. f. 163.
for he went away in a stink, showing him his posteriours, and something else
besides, which was so horrid, that it made the good Man's hair all stand up on
end, like Hogs bristles. But the most terrible assault, was when the Saint lay
in his Bed, and could not, through Age, raise himself up in it without help:
then the Devil stood by him, and crying out, brandished a flaming Weapon
against him; Ibid. f. 164.
out of his Mouth proceeded Fire, as out of an Oven, and the breadth of his
Eyes exceeded the measure of two Cubits: but such was the Saints courage, that
he rose alone to fight with him; the noise of their skirmish might have been
heard a great way off; and this single combat lasted, from One to Nine a Clock;
the Devil, we are told, thrice assailed him, and thrice he was overcome by this
Soldier of Christ.

But the Devil has been often paid home in his own Coin, and served trick for
trick. The forenamed S. Bartholomew made him run into a corner, Capgr. in vit.
Barthol. f. 33.
by the sprinkling of Holy Water, and at last casting a Basin of that Water
full in the Devils face, made him turn into diverse forms and vanish away. S.
Vodalus made quick dispatch with him, when he cast him out of a possessed
Person, Bolland. in vit. S. Vodali. 5 Febr. p. 692.
only by giving him a box of the ear. S. Cuthbert, being molested by the Devil,
took a great Club in his hand, and persecuted the enemy from place to place,
till he drove him headlong (to the endangering his neck) from the top of a
mountain; Capgrav. vit. Cuthbert. f 69.
there to this day remain the impressions of both their footsteps to be seen
in the stones; where the Devils tread is broad and crooked; great and
distorted; which place no woman may enter without hazard. And it was a pretty
trick of S. Bertholdus, when the Devil came down the chimny in the form of a
Hog, Surites in vit. B^rthold. 27. Julii.
to drive him away only with a wisp of straw. S. Lupus too, I think, was even
with him, when the Devil came and disturbed his singing one night, Surius vit.
S. Lupi S^nonens. 1 September.
and afflicted him with a sore thirst; he called for a pot of water, and
perceiving the Devil busy about it, watching his opportunity, he clapped a
cushion (signed with the sign of the Cross) upon the mouth of the vessel, and
shut the Devil in; who all night continued there howling sadly, till the Sun
was up; and then he that came to tempt him, was let go, and departed very much
ashamed. But never was the Devil so handled, nor came off so shamefully,
Breviar. Romans antiq Febr. 16. Lec. 2, 3 and 6.
as when he came to tempt S. Juliana, in the form of an Angel of Light, and
persuaded her to avoid farther torments, by sacrificing to the Gods: upon
which, in indignation she laid hold on him, and threw him to the ground, held
him howling a whole night; and after dragging him along with her through the
Marketplace, though he begged hard, and hung back very much, yet she threw him
into a Privy hard by: He could never forgive this usage, you may be sure; and
therefore when she came to the place of her suffering, the Devil incited them
not to spare her: Les. 6.
and yet he was so frighted with what had past, that when she heard him say so,
and looked upon him; he cried out that he was undone, for she would catch him
again; and so ran away and vanished out of sight.

But to return to S. Anthony. As I cannot believe, that his Sermons were of
such a strain, as to provoke the Devil to owe him a greater spite, than other
preachers; so much less that God did ever give such wonderful attestations to
the truth and excellency of his doctrine, as they would bear us in hand he did
(though we should abate for the silliness of many of the stories.) Can any man
of sense be persuaded, that the Pentecost miracle showed upon the Apostles when
they spoke with diverse tongues, should be renewed, that people might
understand the Trifles and Toys of his Sermon? Yet we are told, that when an
innumerable company of people of diverse Nations came to Rome to obtain Easter
Indulgences; the Pope put S. Anthony upon preaching a Sermon to those
strangers: The Grace of the H. Ghost did o instruct the Tongue of the holy man,
Vit. S. Anton. cap. 15. and Ribodan. p. 248.
that every one heard and understood the language of his own country wherein he
was born; which seems to say, that in one Sermon S. Anthony spoke all those
languages at one time; and then indeed the miracle was greater than of the
Apostles at Pentecost, for there were more than one to speak those several
languages, and none of them spoke more than one language I suppose at the same
time. Ribadeneira indeed would have it, that he spoke but one language in his
Sermon, but the Sermon was as well understood by all the hearers, as if he had
preached in the language of their several Nations; and so considering the
effect, this gift was equal to that of the Apostles: But in another respect he
far out-did them: for though they spoke with many tongues, yet I never read
that their tongues were louder than other men's: (for the two sons of Thunder
were called so for another reason, Marc. 3.17.
than because of their loud voices.) But, they tell us, that a good woman that
would fain have followed S. Anthony out of the City to hear him preach, was
hindered by her husband; which so grieved her, Vit. Anton. cap. 17.
that she could not be satisfied, till she went to the top of her house, and
viewed however out of a window the place appointed for the Sermon: and though
the place was two miles distant, yet there she heard him preach distinctly;
which occasioned a longer stay there than her husband could bear, who chid her
for it; but when he understood the miracle, he also went up, and was a partaker
of the same happiness, and from that day, neither of them were ever absent from
his Sermons. Another noble Matron, Ibid.
as she was crouding among a multitude of people going out of Town to hear him
preach in the fields, fell into thick dirt, being apparelled in new and costly
clothes; but in her fall, commending her self to God and to S. Anthony, she
arose again, with her clothes unsoiled, to the great wonder of all. And as we
are to believe such wondrous preventions of ill accidents that might have
hindered peoples devotion from hearing him; so a great many more preventions of
misfortunes in hearing him. For as he was preaching another time in the open
fields, suddenly the Heavens gathered blackness, Vit. Anton. c. 18. Ribaden. p.
248.
and great thunders and lightnings threatened a mighty storm of rain, so that
the people were preparing to go away to save themselves from it. But S. Anthony
bid them not to stir, for not a drop of rain should touch them; whereupon,
believing him, they all stayed; and the fierce shower of rain and hail, left
them untouched, and did not so much as wet the place where they stood, though
it seemed to compass them round like a wall Thus they tell us, that S. Anthony
going a journey to Vicentia, a great shower of rain fell; and he having nothing
to defend him from it, he put his Rosary upon his head, and prayed to the Bl.
Virgin; and as if the Rosary had been turned into an house, it so covered him,
that not one drop of rain fell upon him all the way. Gononi Chronic. p. 244.
. And that nobody might complain that they lost any thing afterward, by
attending upon S. Anthonie's Sermons; we hear of a woman, who disliking the
wine that the good people had sent in to S. Anthony after his preaching, ran
home to fetch better; she was in such haste that she left the vessel open,
bringing the Spigot along with her in her hand, and the wine, when she
returned, was all run out in the Cellar: but she trusting in the merits of the
Saint, Vit. Anton. ibid.
she put the Spigot into the vessel again, and it was presently filled with
wine, that it ran over: which is more Romantic, than the story of the Sister,
that was drawing wine, who being hastily called by S. Adelheidis, Bolland. 5.
Feb. p. 719.
her obedience was so quick, that she ran with the Spigot in her hand, and yet
when she returned, not one drop of wine was run out: It being easier to stop
the wines running, than to fill the emptied vessel anew till it run over.

These apparent forgeries and Fables hitherto mentioned, concerning S.
Anthonie's preaching and miracles relating thereunto, must needs take away all
credit from other stories told of him, if nothing else did: for he that will go
about to deceive me with his lies, in a matter where I can easily detect him,
deserves to be disbelieved in other things, where his cheats cannot so plainly
be discovered, but yet is carrying on the same design.

Such are the stories of this Saint about Confession. As when they tell us,
that he used in his lifetime to appear to persons as they lay in their beds,
and say to them; Arise Martin, Vit. Anton. cap. 21.
arise Agnes, go to such a one, and confess to him this or that sin, which thou
did commit in such a place, to which none is privy but God only. Also, that
of a man of Padua, who among other things confessed to S. Anthony, that he
kicked one time his mother to the ground: which when the Saint heard, he said
to him in great zeal; Ibid.
That foot which smites a father or mother, deserves presently to be cut off,
The simple man construing his words amiss, presently went home, and cut off his
foot, which being told to the Saint, he goes to the man, and after he had
prayed and made the sign of the Cross, he joined his foot to his leg, and
immediately it was whole again. For the same man to perform several offices at
the same time in distant places, is no easy matter to be credited; yet thus we
are told, that S. Anthony preaching at Mompellier, after he had begun his
Sermon, Vit. Antor. cap. 16.
he remembered that it was incumbent upon him, to bear a part in the singing
Service, in another Church, and he had forgot to speak to any one to supply his
place; at which being troubled, he covered his head with his Cowl and leaned
back in the Pulpit, making a stop in his Sermon for some while: at which time
he appeared in that other Church, and performed his office there, and then
coming to himself again (you must suppose he was in the Pulpit as in a trance)
he went on where he left, with his discourse. S. Antoninus in his History
relates this story also; Part. 3. Tit. 24. c 3. sec. 2.
and concludes, that because a man cannot be at the same time in more places
corporally, we must understand, that he that sang the office in the other
Church, was an Angel, not Anthony. But Marturus the Jesuit in his notes upon
this passage of Antoninus, tells us, that it is a doubtful Question among the
Divines, whether by the Divine power the same body may not be in several places
circumscriptive. S. Thomas indeed, he says, is of Antoninus his mind. Sotus
seems to leave both parts of the question equally probable: But Scotus, Biel
and others, are for the affirmative, proving that it implies no contradiction,
because the body of Christ may be in diverse places, as they prove from its
existence in the Eucharist. Sanctesius, he says, is of the same mind, for this
reason (and it is worth the naming) because in controversies of Religion that
ought to be looked upon as the more probable opinion, which depresses sense and
nature, and on the contrary advances God (as this does) if so be the Scripture
in no other place opposes it, (as it does not.)

This I mention by the way to show that there is no foolish fable told in that
Church, though never so improbable, but they have Divines with as foolish
reasons ready to dispute for it, and defend it. But whether S. Anthony could be
in two places or not, at the same time; yet we are to believe that he was in
two very far distant places, in less time than any would imagine. For when his
Father, who dwelt at Lisbon, was clapped into Prison with his whole Family, upon
suspicion of Murder, Vit. Anton. cap. 20.
because a Youth that was slain, was found buried in his Garden; the Spirit
gave him notice of it, and in one Night he was carried from Padua (the place
where he was) to Lisbon, and appeared before the Judge the next Morning,
desiring him to let go those innocent Persons; which he refusing, he then
prayed to let the Body of the slain Youth be brought to him; which being
granted, he commanded him to rise up, and tell whether his Parents murdered
him, or no: the dead Body hereupon arose, and said, that they were all innocent
of his slaughter; and so they were released, and the next Day he was brought
back to Padua by the Ministry of an Angel. We are to suppose that this was a
good Angel, whose Ministry he used; but methinks, considering how scurvily the
Devil had before used S. Anthony, it had been better if they had told us, that
he sadled the Devil for this Journey; Vincentii Speculum lib. 19. cap. 3.
as he was served once by S. Antidius. who having business with the Pope, got
upon the Devils back, and made him carry him to Rome, and there attend at the
Pope's Gate, till he had dispatched his affair; and then made him carry him
back again to the place from whence he came. But the hardest thing to be
believed, in the foregoing story, is, that rather than the Parents of this
Saint, should suffer unjustly, (though it has been the fate of many as good Men
before them, both as to their good Names and Lives) a dead body must be raised
to life, to clear their Innocence, and to discover the truth. The Writers of
the Lives of the Saints, I observe, are very Liberal of Miracles in such cases;
and he that can give credit to them, shall have my leave to do the same to this
of S. Anthony. We are told, that a poor Man complaing to S. Vedastus, that one
had stolen a Sheep from him, and he could not find out the Thief: the Saint
first took this course, Bollandus ad 6 Febr. p. 813.
to admonish the People of it, when they met on Sunday at Church; but he that
was the guilty Person being present, and yet, notwithstanding Vedastus his
admonition, not confessing the fact, suddenly the Gloves in his bosom (which I
suppose were made of that Sheeps skin) bleated in the Peoples hearing, and he
was discovered thereby. S. Mel lying under a suspicion, that he had too great
familiarity with his Kinswoman named Lupita, Colganus vit. S. Melis. 4 Febr. p.
261.
he cleared himself this admirable way before S. Patrick, by fishing and
catching Salmons in the furrows of plowed ground: and she removed all
jealousies on her part, when she took hot burning Coals into her Lap, and yet
did not hereby singe her Clothes. A Noble Matron of Sardinia, having brought
forth a Child like a Blackmore, when she and her Husband were both fair, was
suspected of Adultery with her Servant that was a black: Guillelmus a
Speluncato, a famous Preacher there, discovered the true Father thus. He caused
the married couple, the Child, Martyrol. Francisc. 17 November. p. 542.
and the Blackmore, all to stand forth before the People; Then from the Pulpit
he commanded the Child in the Name of Christ, that without any help it should
go to its true Pather; immediately hereupon the Infant, though otherwise
incapable of walking As incapable as a Child is of understanding, and speaking
at 40 days old, yet S. Amandus catechized one no older, and it pronounced
clearly the word Amen, and was baptized by him. Bolland. ad 6 Febr. p. 856.
(it being scarce a Month old) leaving the Blackmore, went to the Woman's
Husband, whereby he was freed from his jealousies, and she from the suspicion
of her crime; and not without great reason sure, the Child being so wise at
that Age, as to know his own Father. But the worst is, so free the Monks were
of their wonders in former days, that we read of as great a Miracle as any of
these, of which I can see no other end, but to conveigh a false persuasion into
Men's minds, for it served to clear no truth in Question. It is that which
Capgrave relates concerning the Mother of S. Kentigern; who admiring the Bl.
Virgins fruitfulness without the knowledge of any Man, Capgrave vit. S.
Kentigern, f. 208.
rashly prayed to God daily, to be like her both in conceiving and bringing
forth: a while after she was found with Child, and magnifying God, simply
believed that her desires were fulfilled; for she often asserted, yea and
swore, that she knew not by whom, nor when, nor how she became with Child: and
the People of S. Kentigern's Diocese to this day assert, that he was conceived
and born of a Virgin. He calls them indeed Fools for saying so; but I think he
was as great a Fool, for proclaiming the following wonder, which if true, might
well confirm the People in their belief. He says then, that the King her Father
coming to inquire of her, both by threats and fair words, who got her with
child, she again protested with an oath, that she never had the company of any
Man. At which the King being offended, would have the Law in this case to pass
upon her; in which it was of old ordained in that Country, that a Maid
committing fornication in her Fathers house, and proving with Child, she should
be cast headlong from the top of a Mountain, and he that corrupted her should
lose his head: This Law he commanded to be executed upon her, (with a design I
suppose chiefly to find out him that had dared to corrupt the King's Daughter,
which it might well be imagined she would confess before she dyed.) She was
placed then on the brow of the Mountain called Dunpelder, and thrown headlong
down from thence; (without confessing any thing.) She descended to the ground
with a pleasant easy sliding, and not any Member of her Body was broken, or so
much as hurt. The Pagans (Capgrave says) ascribed this to Magic, and therefore
with the King's consent put her into a little Vessel made of Leather, and
having brought her some Miles off from shore, they committed her alone to
fortune and the Sea, for there were no Oars, or Men to help to guide it: but
notwithstanding this danger, she did not miscarry; for her Vessel went faster
than if it had had the benefit of Sails and Oars, and she was brought safe
into the Port. What could a Christian think of this double Miracle, but that
she was innocent of what was laid to her charge, that she had neither
fornicated, nor was forsworn? But then what becomes of the truth of what is so
often said and sung in the Roman Church, (and owned by all Christians) that the
Mother of our Savior only had this privilege, and that she was Virgo puerpera
singularis? I am afraid it will prove a hard task to bring this off well. But
to return to S. Anthony.

After all these miraculous things that are told concerning him, who can doubt,
but that his sanctified breath might work such a wonder, as we hear he wrought
upon a Religious Novice; Ribaden. ibid. p. 149.
who being frequently tempted by the Devil to forsake his Order, and
discovering it to the Saint, he only opened his mouth and blew into it, saying,
Receive the Holy Ghost, and immediately he was freed from all his temptations,
and persevered in the Religious course he had undertaken. Another Monk that
could not extinguish lustful heats, by fasting or prayers, Idem ibid.
or the use of the Sacraments, complaining of it to S. Anthony; he only made
him put on his Coat, and thereupon all his evil desires were extinguished, and
he never felt them more all his Life. Thus they still take care, that their new
Saints, not only may equalize, but outdo the old ones, nay even Christ and his
Apostles. I gave some instances of this kind before page 89, 90, etc.
, and here we have another such. It was a mighty Virtue that went out of our
Savior, which cured the Woman of her Twelve Years distemper, who only touched
the Border of his Garment: but that garment was upon the body of our Savior
when it wrought the cure; Luke 8.43, 44, etc.
this garment of S. Anthonie's did so, when it was put upon another, and taken
off from his body: That touch removed a bodily infirmity; this must be supposed
to have influence upon the Soul, to correct a depraved fancy, and stop the
course of imagination, and dry up the spring of evil desires; a harder thing by
much than to stay a flux of blood. We read of S. Paul, that from his body were
brought unto the sick Handkerchiefs or Aprons, and the diseases departed from
them, Act. 19.12.
and the evil spirits went out of them. But we are informed, Martyrolog.
Franciscan. p. 414.
that the very Chord of S. Maria de Turribus (which touched not her body but
her clothes) dispossessed Devils: and even one thread unripped out of the
Garment of S. Leobinus Bolland. ad 14. Mart. p. 353.
, that was new mending, casts out an evil spirit. Nay farther, the very water
in which S. Francis's Chord was dipped, cured abundance of diseases: Insomuch
that one of their famous preachers, Ludovicus Granatensis, comparing S. Paul's
Handkerchiefs and S. Anthonie's Chord, gives the preference to the latter for
wonder. Verum hic aliquid video mirabilius, See Martyrol. Francisc. p. 644.
etc. Here I see something (says he) more wonderful, for the Lord not only
bestowed such virtue (of curing diseases) upon the Saints Chord, but also upon
the water, that had touched his Chord. A man would imagine that Christ bore as
tender a love as possible to his Disciples whom he conversed with upon earth,
and gave them very good assurances and pledges of it, after he was ascended up
to Heaven; but I do not read that they ever received such sensible tokens of
it, as these new Saints have done: For though S. Paul indeed speaks of
espousing the Corinthians to Christ as to their husband; 2 Cor. 11.2.
yet which of them ever received by his hands, Bolland. ad 6. Mart. p. 555.
a gold Ring, as S. Coleta did by the hands of John the Evangelist, 1 Pet. 1.8.
as a pledge of Christ's love to her, and of his espousing her? S. Peter tells
us of their loving him though they saw him not, and of their wonderful
rejoicing, but it was by believing, when he was not present: but these new
Saints, by their ardent love, bring him down from Heaven again, and he presents
himself not to their minds only, but to their bodily eyes and other senses:
insomuch that we read of two Sisters, S. Ethnea and S. Sodelbia, whose
affections to him he rewarded, Colganus 29. Mart. p. 785.
by appearing to them in the form of a most lovely Infant, putting himself into
their bosoms to be embraced and kissed by them. Nay, our S. Anthony too had
these caresses, Ribadeneira Ibid. p. 249. S. Antonin. loc. citat. p. 734.
(though I thought before I met with the story, that they had been the peculiar
entertainments only of the Melancholy Nuns:) for his Landlord where he one
night lodged, peeping into his chamber at a secret window, he saw Jesus in the
form of a beautiful Child, first sitting upon his book, and from thence
creeping into his Arms, whom the Saint embraced and kissed uncessantly, while
Jesus smiled upon him, and with pleasing looks beheld him; but this was so
Divine a favor (says Ribaden.) that when he understood by inspiration, that
his Host was conscious of it, he begged of him, that he would not reveal it to
any mortal man whilst he was alive; but, it is likely, when the inquiry was
made into his miracles after his death, in order to his Canonization, this was
then first produced. And that you may see that S. Anthonie's miracles from
first to last, are all of a piece: we are told, Vit. S. Anton. c. 28. Ribaden.
p. 251.
that on that very day when the Pope Canonized him, this wonder happened at
Lisbon (where he was born) that the men and women came out of their houses and
sung and danced in the open streets, and all the Bells of the City rang out
merrily of themselves, no hand moving them; neither could the people contain
themselves from this mirth and dancing, though no body knew any reason for it,
(and therefore admired the hidden cause) till certain Friars came thither from
Italy, by whose relation and comparing circumstances they understood, that on
that very day of their unusual joy, Anthony was put into the Calendar of Saints.

And now a great many fine stories are told us of miracles after his death, to
convince some that doubted of the wonders that he was said to work in his
lifetime: One man would not believe, Vit. Anton. cap. 29.
unless a glass which he had in his hand remained unbroken, after he had thrown
it against a stone pavement; which he tried, and it received no more damage,
than if it had been a hard Flint. Another chose this way for his satisfaction;
finding a dried stalk of a Vine in the drinking-glass, Ibid.
he would believe, if he could fill his glass with Wine, pressed from the
Grapes that should grow upon that stalk; immediately it flourished with leaves,
brought forth Grapes; and when he saw all done that he demanded, this miracle
gave him a full and firm belief of all the rest. Nay, the senseless passions of
a woman, which ended in a mad and foolish resolution, must be countenanced at
the expense of a miracle, because S. Anthony must never fail any one that does
invoke him. For as a woman in the company of her husband and several others was
going to Padua, Vit. Anton. ibid.
being transported too frolickly (as he thought) at a promise he had made her,
of taking her along with him in a pilgrimage he was going; he, to curb her
extravagant mirth, made as if he had now altered his resolution, and would not
go the journey; upon which his wife was so exasperated, that she threatened,
unless he would perform his promise, to drown her self in the name of Christ
and S. Anthony, in the River that ran by. Which her husband looking upon as a
copy of her countenance, and calling her fool for talking so, and telling her
he would persist in his new resolve; the presently invoking the name of S.
Anthony, cast her self headlong into the River: The women that were in
company, being amazed and seeng her float in the waters, forgetting the danger,
ran after her into the River, laid hold of her, and brought her to land; where
it was wonderful to see them all wringing upon the shore their wet garments,
and not one thread of her clothes was in the least wetted, as if the waters had
never touched them. This action (says the relator) though it ought to be
ascribed rather to her folly than virtue; yet the merits of this Holy Father
prevailed so far with God, that he who was always a friend to true simplicity,
preserved this simple woman, though a fool (but I should count him a greater
that believed it) unhurt in the midst of the waters. I cannot but here mention
a concatenation of such wonders, which I meet within the life of S. Sedonius,
upon as trifling an occasion as this altogether, Colganus in vit. S. Sedon. 10.
Mart. p. 573.
and in consequence of worse passions than this woman expressed. S. Sedonius
then, seeing one day a woman washing her Child's clouts in a Fountain belonging
to the Monastery, cried out to his fellow S. Libernus, of the shamefulness of
this fact, that she should thus defile that Fountain, from whence they fetched
the waters they used about the tremendous mysteries of the sacrifice of the
Mass. This moved such a holy indignation in these Saints (though some may judge
it exceeded its bounds) that they imprecated the Divine vengeance against the
woman and her offspring: The Child of this woman, as it was playing upon an
high bank of the Sea, suddenly fell into it, where it was swallowed up
presently and appeared no more. Upon this misfortune, the Mother comes crying
and howling to S. Senanus (whose disciples these two angry Saints were)
complaining how upon their curses her Child was drowned. When Senanus heard
this, he severely chides his sons, as guilty of murder: and he commanded
Libernus to go and stand upon a rock, placed in the neighboring Sea, and there
do his penance: As for Sedonius, he bad him go look for the drowned Child in
the Sea, and not desist his search till he had found him and restored him to
his Mother: They both of them obey this rigid sentence of the holy Father.
Sedonius in his quest after the Child in the midst of the Sea, finds it (after
it had lain there twenty four hours) safe and sound, playing in the waters and
beating the waves with the palms of its hands, and so brought it to S. Senanus;
who bad him go and fetch home Libernus from the rock, saying that he had found
a very favorable judge; as indeed it proved, for the waters of the Sea that
used to cover that rock at other times (by the rising of the tide) did not dare
to touch him, but kept off the length of his staff round about him.

Thirty two years after S. Anthonie's death, his body was translated into the
Church where it now rests at Padua; Vit. Anton. c. 30 Ribaden. p. 251 S.
Antoninus ubi supr p. 738.
there when they came reverently to examine and bring forth the holy Body out
of the Coffin in which it had laid so long, they found the rest of his members
turned to dust (says Mendozius Inter El gia praefixa vit. S. Anton.
) only his Tongue was still fresh, and full of juice and blood, as if he had
been alive: This S. Bonaventure, who was present, taking into his hand, broke
out into these words. O blessed tongue, which always did bless God, and taught
others to bless him, now it appears of what merit thou wast: After these words
he reverently kissed his tongue, and then delivered it to the Magistrates of
Padua to be laid up in a repository worthy of it. If they had told me that he
was of so great merit, that he enabled the Fishes to use their tongues to bless
God, as we heard before he taught them in a Sermon how much they were beholden
to him; I should have as soon believed that the Fishes spoke, as that his
Tongue alone remained incorrupt when the rest of his body was perished. Loco
citat.
The forenamed Mendozius indeed gives us some pleasant reasons, not only that
it was so, but why it was fitting and ought to have been so, that his tongue
should remain incorruptible. One is, to give his Countrymen a sure pledge
hereby that his intercession for them should never cease, but that his voice
and prayers should be always employed for their salvation: (by which reason all
the tongues at least of the Patron Saints should have been preserved from
corruption as well as his:) Another is, that the Tongue of S. Anthony was a
preacher of truth, therefore it ought eternally to remain; for as S. Ambrose
says rightly, those things that are true are eternal: which I shall then think
to be a good argument, when I am certified that all those preachers tongues
never rot in their Graves, which tell no lies in the Pulpit: But having heard
before the little sense this tongue spoke in Sermons, and how much he corrupted
the true meaning almost of every Text of Scripture he meddled with, I hope we
may be pardoned, if, notwithstanding this reason, we believe this story to be a
lie.

I have but one thing more that concerns S. Anthony to trouble the Reader
withal, which I have reserved to be spoken to (though somewhat out of its due
order) in the last place, because it is the most famed story that is told of
him; mentioned by all the later Writers * of his Life: Antoninus, Surius,
Ribadeneira.
and particularly insisted on by Bellarmine, for the proof of the opinion of
the Roman Church, concerning the Presence of the Body of Christ in the
Eucharist; and it is called by him miraculum insigne, Bellarmin. de Sacr^m.
Euchar^st. lib. 3. cap. 8. prope finem.
a notable miracle. I Will give it you in Bellarmin's words, as he pretends to
relate it out of S. Antoninus and Surius. As S. Anthony was disputing
concerning the truth of the Lord's Body in the Eucharist, with a certain
Heretic in the parts of Toulouse, (for at that time the Albigenses vexed the
Church, and they with many more were infected with this error) the Heretic
required of Anthony this sign, knowing him to be endued with the gift of
miracles: (which last words are Bellarmines addition, not to be found in his
forenamed Authors; and a foolish one too, for if he knew him to have that gift,
why was he not of his mind, without any farther trial?) Says the Heretic, I
have a Mule Jumentum, which I translate so, because both Antoninus and Surius
call it afterward Mulus.
, to which I will give no meat these three days: After the three days end, come
thou with the Sacrament, and I will come with my Mule, and will pour out
Provender before it; if the Mule leave his Provender, and come and venerate the
Sacrament, I will believe. These conditions were accepted, and after three
days, S. Anthony being accompanied with a multitude of the faithful, and
holding the venerable Sacrament in his hand, spoke thus to the Mule. In the
virtue and name of thy Creator, whom I, though unworthy, truly hold in my hand,
I require and command thee O Animal, that thou immediately approach humbly
after thy manner, and show reverence to him; that so by this, Heretical pravity
may understand, that every creature is to be subject to his Creator, whom the
Priestly dignity daily handles at the Altar. Upon the saying of which words,
the Mule forgetting his Provender that lay before him, and his hunger, went
toward the Saint; and bowing his head, and bending his knees, adored the Lord
as well as he could, and confuted the Heretic.

Though such ridiculous stuff as this deserves no Confutation, the very
relation of it being sufficient to blast its credit: yet the Relator being of
so great fame; for his sake, i will a little enquire into its Age; for I believe
we shall find, that this story (though by their later Writers more talked of
Aldrovandus has put it among the Histories concerning the Mule: Lib. de
Quadrupedibus Solidiped. c. 4. tit. Historica.
than any of the rest, yet) was either not so old, or not so much credited
heretofore, even in their own Church, as some other things they relate
concerning him.

If this had been as current a Miracle in S. Anthony's time, as it pretends to
be public, and to be a triumphant victory after a challenge, and a set dispute
with a Heretic; I am apt to fancy, that Caesarius who picked up all miraculous
reports about the time he lived, would have met with it, and delivered it down
to us in his Dialogues This I think not improbable, because he wrote his
Dialogues so little a while before Anthony's death, for he tells us that he was
writing them, an. 1222. (and the Saint dyed 1231.) Caesarius lib. 10. cap. 48.
, especially since his Ninth Book contains more such examples than one,
concerning bruit creatures venerating the Eucharist. But if this could not come
to his notice (as I am not peremptory in it) yet I am sure it might to another
Writer of the same Age with Anthony, viz. Thomas Cantipratanus Suffragan to the
Bishop of Cambray, who collected in the same manner the Miracles and memorable
examples of his Time, Placed by Bellarm. an. 1265. de Script. Ecclesiast.
and yet says not one word of this Miracle, though he also mention some of the
same nature. But because this may seem too to have less force in it, since he
says not a syllable of S. Anthony that I observe; I therefore add, that another
Frenchman of this Age too, sc. Vincentius Bishop of Beauvais, Placed an. 1250.
Bellarm. ibid.
whose Speculum Historiale, (libr. 30. cap. 131, 132, 133, 134, 135.) has a
large account of S. Anthony; who also mentions his reasoning with Heretics,
and his converting an Arch-Heretick; yet he is wholly silent as to this of S.
Anthony's Mule, though said to be done in his own Country; which is a plain
sign that this was not a story then in being, but coined since; for if it had
been done in his days, it could neither have escaped his knowledge, nor been
omitted in his History, since it was the most remarkable thing that belonged to
it. Which is still more confirmed, by another observation, that among six and
thirty Lessons of the old Roman Breviary (where so many fine things are told of
him) this is not to be found; though in one of them I meet with these words.
Les. 3. infra Octav.
Anthony confuted the perverse Opinions of Heretics, by the most congruous
reasons; for at Ariminum (a City in Italy) he converted many Heretics to the
soundness of Christian faith; among whom he reduced to the light of truth, an
Arch-Heretick called Bonovillus, who for 30 Years space had been blinded with
the darkness of Pestilent error. Where, by the way, you may correct either the
wilful or ignorant mistake of Ribadeneira, who in the Life of Anthony, Ribaden.
p. 247.
makes the disputation, wherein the Mule acted such a wondrous part, to have
been betwixt the Heretic Bonovillus, and S. Anthony; whereas all that mention
the veneration of the Mule, say expressly that this happened in partibus
Tholosanis; and all that speak of Bonovill's story, determine it to have been
at Ariminum; that is the one was in Italy, and the other in France; and his
Life in Surius, mentions both of them distinctly.

The sum of all I have now said put together, amounts to this. That if all
those Writers of his Life, had agreed in the mention of this Miracle about the
Eucharist, it would not have been a sufficient proof of its Truth; (since they
are all known to abound with lies:) But so many of them omitting it, especially
those of that Age, wherein it is pretended to be done, and whose design such a
story would singularly well have served, argues that then it had not so much as
the credit of a common, or a current Fable. S. Antoninus who lived above 200
Years after Anthony (for ought I can find) was the first Writer that mentions
it, Flornit an. 1445. B llarm. de Scrip. Ecclesiast.
and others seem to have taken it from him; so that nothing remains but Oral
Tradition to help them out, which how fairly it has brought them off, we have
seen in S. Vrsula, and several other Instances named before.

I have but one thing more to Remark, which must not be omitted, and then I
have done with this Saint. That is, the prodigious License they of this Church
take to entertain the People with strange Miracles, in this of the Sacrament of
the Eucharist, above all other Subjects. They have espoused the belief of a
Doctrine contrary to the reason and sense of all Mankind, and it must be
maintained in the same way that it was made. No mortal Man can invent any thing
so extravagant and foolish, which they can pretend reason to boggle and stick
at, who have once made Transubstantiation an Article of their Faith: I have no
hopes therefore to make them ashamed in the least, by what I shall now say; yet
however it may be useful to others who have not inslaved all their faculties,
or committed themselves blindfold to the conduct of their pretended unerring
Guide, to know what Diet their faith lives upon, and what hard morsels it must
swallow down without any chewing at all. It were endless to enumerate the
wonders they produce in the lives of Saints, and in Sermons, to procure
veneration in Men's minds to the Eucharist; I shall content my self with giving
a few Instances of Miracles that they tell us, have happened at the presence or
celebration of it.

We know there is a certain time in the Mass, when they lift up the Host, and
show it to the People, in order to their adoration of it. As S. Ivo was
elevating it, a Globe of Light of wonderful splendour encompassed the Body of
Christ, Brev. Romans ant. Maii 19. Lec. 7.
and also the Chalice, and after the elevation of both presently disappeared.
Catherina Gonzales, though employed at a distance in the Bakehouse, often saw
the Host when it was elevated by the Priest, Martyr. Francisc. p. 39.
(I suppose, that she might not lose the benefit of the adoration) though there
were many Walls between to intercept her sight. But, which is still more
strange, S. Sibyllina though she was blind, yet knew when the Host was elevated
by her inward sense; Act. Sanctor. ad 19 Mart. p. 70.
and one time as the Priest presumed to carry an unconsecrated Host to a sick
Person, when through his negligence he wanted one consecrated, at the sound of
the Bell as it came along, she worshipped it; but not finding that inward
pleasure in her Spirit, she was wont to have, upon her examination of the
Priest, she made him confess, that he did not carry the Body of Christ; and
thus, they tell us, when a piece of the Wood of the Cross was given her, before
she would adore it, she applied it to her heart, and by a wonderful agitation
she found there, she knew it to be a true piece of the Cross, and not
counterfeit. It was a singular favor (you will say) that was showed to S.
Bonaventure; Brev. Romans ant. Jul. 14. Lec. 4. infra octav.
(who for several days through his great humility and fear had abstained from
receiving the Communion) as he heard the Mass, and was meditating upon the
passion of Christ, God having regard to his humility, mercifully put into his
mouth a particle of the consecrated Host, which an Angel took out of the hand
of the Priest. But it was a greater that was shown him, when he was near his
death, and by reason of his weakness vomited up every thing he took. He was now
in a great strait what to do, Martyrol. Francisc. Julii 14. p. 288.
having a great desire to receive the sacred Viaticum, and yet durst not, out
of reverence to it, and the danger of bringing it up again: However he resolved
to have the Lord's Body brought to him; that he might dye more comfortably when
it was in presence: he applied the Pix, in which it was carried, to his side,
showing hereby his desire to receive it; and there his side opened in the form
of a red Rose, at which place Christ's Body starting out of the Pix, went in to
his very heart, and his side closed again, without any remaining sign of its
having been opened. This very thing is finely told under another name in these
words of the old Homily. There was an Earl of Venice, called Sir Ambright, that
loved the Sacrament of the Awter passing well, and did it all the worship and
reverence that he might, so when he lay sick and should dye; he might not
receive the Sacrament for Castyng; then was he sorry, and made do^e; and then
he let make clean his right side and to cover it with a fair clothe of send all
and laid Gods body therein, and said thus to the host: Lord thou know that I
love thee with all my heart, and would feign receive thee with my mouth and I
durst, and because I may not, I ^ay thee on the place that is next to my heart,
and so I show thee all the Love of my heart that I can or may; wherefore I
beseech thee good Lord, have mercy on me: and even therewith in the sight of
all the People that were about him, his side opened and the host went there
into his side, and then it closed again, and so anon after he dyed. Festival.
in die corp. Christ's, f. 52.


I had thought that the Eucharist had been designed only for the food of Souls,
and that it never became a common repast of the Body: Act. Sanctor. in vit.
ejus. Mart. 22. p. 411. and 429.
Yet S. Nicholas de Rupe it seems found it so, for we hear that he lived 20
Years without humane food, save only by the Eucharist received every Fifteen
Days, and his Meditation on Christ's passion: (that is, upon the accidents of
whiteness and roundness, etc. for the substance being, according to them,
Christ's Body, can never nourish.)

But perhaps it may seem more proper to the instance before us of S. Anthony's
Mule, to hear a little more, concerning the strange effects its presence has
produced upon bruit Creatures. An ancient Priest as he was carrying the
Sacrament out of Town to a sick Person, met a Company of Asses laden with Corn
in a very narrow, Caesa^ii Dialog. Did. 4. cap. 98.
and deep miry way. He that went before him with the Lantern, with much ado,
thrust by them. But the Priest seeing this, and considering his age and
weakness, began to look pale and tremble; and fearing that he might be tumbled
into the Mire with the Sacrament by the Asses, he cried out to them; O Asses,
what is it that ye do? what, do you not consider whom I carry in my hands?
stand still, fall down and give honor to your Creator, for I command it in his
Name: Behold, says the Relator, the wonderful obedience of these Animals. They
all stood still, and fell down together; and, which added to the wonder, though
the Asses could not fall down but with much difficulty, yet not one of the
Sacks of Corn did slide off from their backs. This fact is famous to this Day
in the City of Colen. (a City as famous as the story.) Saint Coleta had a Lamb
that showed the same respect, and used, without teaching, Act. Sanct. ad Mart.
6. p. 554.
to kneel at the Elevation of the Eucharist, and to rise when it was over. The
Plowman that early in the Morning was at work in the Field, and on a sudden
with all his whipping could not make his Oxen stir a foot, and cried out, that
the Devil was in them; quickly found his mistake, when looking about him,
Caesarius in Dial. did. 9. c. 7.
he saw the Pix (with the Sacrament in it) lie before the feet of the Oxen
(which some Thieves, that had broken open the Church, had stolen away and
scattered there) and they in admiration stood still, and would go no farther;
which veneration of theirs might well occasion, as we are told, the Priest of
the Parish, and a great Multitude with Him to come into the Field, and with the
Cross, censor of incense and wax lights, carry Christ's Body back again into
the Church. The next story to it, of the Bees, must not be forgotten; Caesar.
ibid. cap. 8.
A Woman who kept Bees that did not thrive, but dyed apace, was counseled to
place the Lord's Body in the Hive, and that would stop the Plague that was
among them; she went therefore to the Church, and receiving the Communion from
the Priest; as soon as she went away from him, she took it out of her Mouth,
and put it in one of the Bee-hives. But oh the wonderful power of God! the Bees
acknowledging their Creator, built a Chapel to this their sweet Guest of an
admirable structure, where they erected an Altar, and put the most holy Body of
Christ upon it; and God blessed their works. All this mystery appeared when the
Woman took up her Hive; for then in great fear she ran and confessed to the
Priest what she had done, and what she saw; who coming thither with the
Parishioners, drove away the Bees that flew about, and humm'd the praise of the
Creator; and admiring the Chappel-walls, Windows, Roof, Steeple Aldrovand. de
insectis l. 1. cap. 1. Historica de apibus.
( Aldrovandus adds Bells) door and Altar, they brought back the Lord's body
with praise and glory. Lib. 2. de mirac. sui temp. c. 40. p. 398.
Thomas Cantipratanus relates a parallel fable concerning Bees, how they had
lodged the Sacrament in their Hive, in a Pix made of purest Wax; and how the
owner of them saw in the night the whole Air brightned above them: only these
Bees were more contemplative than the former, for they left off working, and
gave themselves to singing, which they ceased not to do even in the nightime,
contrary to their custom.

But I Will pursue these follies no farther, only that we may make a good
conclusion, I Will set down out of one of the Homilies of the Festival (so often
cited before) the story of the Black Horse, which far exceeds that of S.
Anthonie's Mule, and all the rest I have named: and I Will give it you in the old
English style as I find it.

Festival. in die Corp. Christ. fol. 53.
In Devonshyre beside Exbridge was a woman that lay sick and was nigh deed, and
sent after a holy person about midnight, to have her ryghts. Than this man in
all haste he might arose, and went to the Church, and took Gods body in a box
of Ivory, and put it into his bosom, and went forth toward this woman. And as
he went through the Forest in a sayre mede that was his next way, it happed
that his box fell out of his bosom to the ground, and he went forth and wist
it not, and came to this woman, and herd her confession. And than he asked her
if she would be houseled, and she said, ye Sir. Than he put his hand into his
bosom and sought the box, and when he found it not, he was full sorry and sad,
and said, Dame I will go after Gods body, and come again anon to you, and
so he went forth sore weeping for his symplenes. And so as he came to a wylowe
free, he made there of a rod, and stryped himself naked, and bette himself so
that the blood ran down by his sides, and said thus to himself: O thou
simple man, why haste thou lost thy Lord God, thy maker, thy fourmer and
Creator: And when he had thus bette himself, he did on his clothes and went
forth, and than he was ware of a pyller of fire that lasted from earth to heven,
and he was all astonyed thereof, yet he blessed him and went to it; and there
lay the Sacrament fallen out of the box into the grass, and the pyller shone
as bright as the sun, and it lasted from Gods body to heven; and all the
beestes of the Forest were comen about Gods body, and stood in compass
round about it, and all kneled on 4 knees save one black Horse that kneled
but one knee Than said he, if thou be any be that may speak, I charge thee
in Gods name here present in form of breed, tell me why thou knelest but on
one knee. Than said he, I am a fend of hell, and will not knele and I might;
but I am made against my will; for it is written, that every knelynge of heven
and of earth shall be to the worship of the Lord God. Why art thou like a horse?
And he said, to make the people to stele me, and at such a town was one
hanged for me, and at such a town another. Than said the holy person, I
command the by Gods flesh and his blood, that thou go into wilderness,
and be there as thou shall never disease christian man more. And than he went his
way, he might no longer abide, and than this man went forth to the woman and
did he ryghtes, by the which she was saved and went to everlastynge salvacyon.
To the which he bring us, our blyssed Savyour Ihesus.

A Summary of some Wondrous Legends of the Saints, taken out of the Lessons of
the Breviaries.
HAving thus given the Reader an account of their many Fabulous Saints; and
several Fabulous reasons of their Devotions to the true ones: having seen also,
in so many foregoing instances, their admirable addresses to Patron Saints,
whom they invoke in particular cases and distresses; It is now time to draw
toward a conclusion of my task: and though I have met before with several
occasions, to mention the absurd Histories of the Saints, from several Lessons
of the Breviaries (which being publicly read to the people as the Scriptures
were, they intended sure, that they should believe them to be true.) I Will sum
up here a few more of these Legends, without questioning the Saintship of those
of whom they are affirmed; and afterward add a few more of their Devotions to
the Saints.

S. Lucy. December. 13.
The Reformed Breviary says of her, That when the judge Paschasius commanded
her to be carried to the Stews, Les. 6.
and her chastity there violated, they could not move her from the place where
she stood by any force. But the old Roman Breviary gives a more particular
account of it, telling us, Les. 7.
That the H. Ghost fixed her with such a weight, that when many tried to thrust
her forward, they could not stir her: then they tied ropes to her hands and
feet, and endeavored to draw her all together, but she was unmovable as a
mountain. Then the Magicians and Southsayers tried their skill upon her, but
all in vain: After this they brought many yoke of Oxen, whose drawing neither
could prevail to move her. At which Paschasius wondering, said, What is the
reason that a tender Virgin drawn by a Thousand men cannot be removed out of
her place? Lucy answered, Though thou should employ ten thousand men, thou
shall hear the H. Ghost speaking for me, A thousand shall fall at thy side, and
ten thousand at thy right hand.

After this a great fire by his command was kindled about her, Les. 8, 9.
and they cast Pitch and Rosin and scalding Oil upon her, the sooner to
dispatch her, and yet she remained unmovable and unhurt. At last they thrust a
Sword into her throat, yet she stirred not in the place, nor gave up the Ghost,
till the Priests had given her the mysteries of the Sacrament, and all the
people answered, Amen.

S. Martina. Januar. 1.
When they brought her into Apollo's Temple by the Emperors command to
Sacrifice: Brev. Romans antiq. Les. 1, 2.
upon her Crossing her self and praying, by a great Earthquake the whole City
was shaken, and the image of Apollo broken in pieces. The Devil that inhabited
that Idol, rolling himself in the dust of it, cried out with a great voice: O
Virgin Martina, handmaid of the great God, thou leavest me naked, and showest
me deformed, and drivest me out of my habitation, in which I have dwelt now
ninety eight years, having under me 472 most wicked Spirits, that upon my
command offered daily to me the souls of men; And so with a great noise he
departed.

At another time S. Martina was brought to him as an Inchantress, Les. 4.
and refusing to sacrifice, she was commanded to be stripped, and her flesh to
be slashed with swords, but the snow-white body of the Virgin by the dazeling
splendour of it, dimmed the eyes of the beholders: out of her wounds milk flowed
instead of blood, and dispersed a fragrant odor, like that of Spices; And when
after this, by the command of the Emperor she was beaten with clubs; those whom
he employed cried out, their strength failing them, and beseeched him, saying,
Deliver us from this Virgin, for the Angels of God do strike us again with Iron
bars, and our flesh and bones are all on fire: But when the Emperor would still
have the strokes continued, all they that beat her died. Then was she put in
prison, and when one Limineus sent by the Emperor opened the door, Les. 5.
he saw a great light shining round about her, which as he entered compassed him
like lightning, so that for fear he fell to the ground; and scarce being able
to arise and enter, he saw S. Martina sitting in a glorious seat, and a
multitude of men in white about her, holding a golden Table, in which was
written; Thy works are wonderful, O Lord, in wisdom have thou made them all:
All which he related to the Emperor.

The rest of the Lessons are all such Romantic stuff, of Diana's Temple by
fire from Heaven consumed to ashes, together with her Priests. How a fierce
Lion kept three days fasting, and set upon her to devour her, fawned upon her,
and falling at her feet kissed them. How being thrown into a great fire she
received no harm, but the flame dispersed it self and burnt those that stood
round it, etc.

S. Sebastian. Januar. 20.
As S. Sebastian was speaking, one saw an Angel descend from Heaven, Brev. Romans
Antiq. Lec. 4.
and hold a book before him, and all his speech flowed from the reading that
book.

S. Agnes. Januar. 21.
When she was by the Command of the Prefect stripped naked to be carried openly
in that manner to the Stews, Brev. Romans Antiq. Lec. 6, 7.
God gave such a thickness to her disheveled hair, that she seemed better
covered therewith than with her clothes. And when she entered into the Stews, an
Angel compassed her with such a wondrous light, that none could touch or see
her by reason of the splendour; and there appeared a white Garment before her
eyes, with which she clothed her self, and it so exactly fitted her body, that
none doubted that it was prepared by an Angel, (who no question if he undertake
it, will shape a garment more exactly than the best Tailor.) The son of the
Prefect thinking to violate her chastity, ventured to enter into that light,
but before he touched her, he was choked by the Devil, and fell down dead.

S. Dorothy. Feb. 6.
When she went to be beheaded, one Theophilus jearingly said to her, Brev. Romans
antiq. Les. 5 and 6.
Thou spouse of Christ; send me either Roses or Apples from his Paradise; which
she promising to do, and praying, behold a most beautiful Child, that seemed
not to be above four years old, brought to her three Roses and three Apples,
which she bid him carry to Theophilus; as he was deriding her promise, the
Child comes and offers the promised presents, who receiving them was converted
to the Faith; for they were sent in February. [Bollandus tells us, That in
memory of these Apples, Vit. Doroth. Februar. 6. p. 773.
at Rome, where the body of Dorothy is preserved, there is a solemn benediction
of Apples (on the 6th of February) which the people run to receive. Just such
another story as this we meet with in the life of S. Kentigern, how he produced
a fresh dish of Mulberries in Winter, only because a foolish fellow made this
request to the King, Capgr. in vit. Kenteg. fol. 211
and would receive no other present at his hands; and this Saint thought the
King's credit lay at stake, and would not have the other go away from him
unrewarded.]

S. Tiburtius and Valerian. April 14.
An Angel brought two Crowns from Paradise made up of Roses and Lilies, Brev
Romans Antiq. Lec. 1, 2.
and gave one to Valerian, and the other to Cecily his new married wife; the
Angel added, Because Valerian thou have consented to the counsel of chastity (
having been persuaded by Cecily not to violate her Virginity The account of
this matter is given us in the said Breviary, in the Life of S. Cecilia, Nov.
22. Lesson 2. On the marriage night when Cecily and her Spouse Valerian were
alone together in the Bedchamber, she spoke thus to him. O sweet and most
loving youth, I have a f^^n to confess to thee, if thou will swear not to
reveal it. Which Valerian swearing to, she said, I have an Angel a lover of
mine, who with the strictest jealousy keeps my body, he, if he in the least
perceives that th^^ touchest me with polluted love (an excellent character of
the marriage bed) he will presently stir up his sury against thee, and destroy
the flower of thy Youth: but if he know that thou love me with a sincere and
immaculate love, and preservest my Virginity whole and untouched, he will then
love thee as well as my self, and will express his favor to thee. Valerian
replied: If thou would have me to believe thy words, show me the Angel, and
if I find that he is indeed an Angel of God, I will do as thou say; but if
thou lov^st any other man better than me, I will sl^y with my sword bo h him
and thee. So persuading him to become a Christian and be bap^iz^d, she showed
him the Angel.
) Christ has sent me to thee to give thee leave to ask any petition of him.
Valerian hearing this adored, and begged that his brother Tiburtius might
become a Christian. Tiburtius afterward coming into the house, he smelt the
odor of the Roses and Lilies, but saw nothing; who as he was wondering whence
it came, Valerian told him of their Crowns which he could not see as yet, but
if he would become a Christian, he should see both them and the Angel of God
also: whereupon he consented to be baptized, and thereupon obtained the grant
of all which he had asked of God, and saw the Angels every day.

S. John of Beverley. May 7.
S. John after he was well instructed in Learning, was made Bishop of York:
Brev. Sarum, Les. 2.
He was praying one day in the Porch of S. Michael, and a certain Deacon
peeping in, saw the H. Ghost sitting upon the Altar, excelling in whiteness a
ray of the Sun, whose face was burnt by the heat of the H. Spirit. The Bishop
adjured him, that whilst he lived he should discover this vision to no man.

[ Capgrave, who mentions this story in his Life, Capgr. de S. Joh. de Beverl.
f. 190.
tells us that this Deacons name was Sigga, and that it was his face that was
burnt, and the skin of his cheek shrivelled up by the heat of the H. Spirit;
and that his face was healed by the touch of the Saints hand. Church Hist. l.
22. c. 10.
Mr. Cressy has passed over this miracle, though he has given us a great many
others concerning him; particularly this out of Malmsbury, that the fiercest
Bulls, as soon as they are brought into his Churchyard (at Beverley)
immediately lose all their fury and fierceness, and become gentle as Lambs,
though before they endangered with their horns all that came near them: He
might have added another remarkable one out of Capgrave; Capgr. ibid.
that when the K. of Scots made war against K. Ethelstan, Ethelstan prayed to
God that through the intercession of S. John of Beverley, he would show some
evident sign whereby both the present and future Ages might know, that the
Scots ought of right to be subject to the English: The King with his Sword
smote upon a rock hard by Dunbar, and to this day it is hollowed an Ell deep by
that stroke.]

S. Aldelme. May 25.
The fame of S. Adelme coming to Rome, Pope Sergius by his Letters called him
thither, Brev. Sarum, Les. 7.
and there received him honorably, whom God glorified with miracles; for on a
certain day as he celebrated Mass in the Lateran Church, he reached his Casula
(one of the Priests Garments) behind him, thinking to deliver it to one of the
Attendants; but none being present, a Sunbeam breaking through the window,
held it up from falling a long time in memory of the Saint. [Just such another
ridiculous story as this, is told us in the Life of S. Gudila, who as she was
praying in the Church, the Priest chanced to espy the naked soles of her feet;
and in compassion to her, took off his Gloves, and putting them under her feet,
went his way; which she after taking up, as if she had been injured by this
kindness, threw them away from her; but the Gloves instead of falling on the
ground, miraculously hung in the Air; and Surius says, that they hung so the
space of an hour. Bolland. Act. Sanctor. ad 8. Januar. p. 516.]

It happened also at Rome, Les. 8.
that a Child being born of an incestuous Mother and uncertain Father, the
Pope's fame was injured: which Aldelme understanding, he commanded that the
Child which was but twenty days old, should be brought forth; whom S. Aldelme
charged to confess, whether Pope Sergius was to be accounted guilty of incest.
The Child answered, That he was innocent.

S. Christina. July 24.
She was bound to a Wheel, and roasted at a Fire; Brev. Romans ant. Lec. 2, 3.
and as they poured on Oil the flame broke forth, and slew a thousand of the
Heathens. She was again put in prison, and by an Angel that visited her was
healed and refreshed. Then she was cast into the Lake Vulsinus, a great
stone-weight being fastened to her body, but the Angel freed her from drowning.
Upon her prayers the Image of Apollo, which she was commanded to worship, was
suddenly reduced to ashes; by which miracle three thousand were converted to
the Faith of Christ. After this she was put into a burning Furnace, where she
remained five days unhurt, etc.

** S. Helena's Legend of the Invention of the Cross. May 3.
When the Emperor Constantine had obtained a victory over the barbarous people,
Brev. Sarum, Les. 1, 2, 3.
by the sign of the Cross showed him from Heaven; he after sent his Mother
Helena to Jerusalem to find out the wood of the H. Cross. Who when she
admonished the Jews to choose those that knew the Law; they said, For what cause
does the Queen impose this task upon us? Judas one of them answered, I know the
reason, she will make inquiry about the wood of the Cross, upon which our
Fathers hanged Jesus: see therefore to it, that none confess the matter to her.

Zacheus my Grandfather did foretell this to my Father, and my Father when he
died told it me, saying; Observe Son, when inquiry shall be made after the wood
of the Cross, to which our Ancestors condemned the Messiah, manifest it before
thou be tormented. Then I said to him; Father, if they knew him to be the
Christ, wherefore did they lay hands on him? He answered me, Hearken my Son, I
never was of counsel with them, but because he reproved them, they crucified
him; and after he was buried, he rose again the third day: Upon which my
brother Stephen believed, and was stoned. Others of them said, We never heard
these things before.

When they were called before the Queen, and she commanded them to be burnt,
they out of fear delivered Judas to her; to whom the Queen said; Show me the
wood of the Cross. Judas answered, I know not so much as the place where it is,
for I was not then in being. Upon which she commanded to cast him into a Pit
without water, and that there he should remain without food. When seven days
were past, Judas cried out of the Pit, saying, Draw me out, I entreat you, and
I will show you the Cross of Christ. When he was drawn out, as he was going to
the place, he said, O Lord God, if it be thy will that the Son of Mary shall
reign, cause that from the same place a fume of Aromatic odours may ascend:
After he had prayed, the fume of Odours did ascend. Then Judas said, In truth,
O Christ, thou art the Savior of the world.

[The present Breviaries have now left out all this stuff, and their Lessons
are perfectly the same with those of the Breviary of Pius V. who first reformed
it after the Trent Council; and gives us a story, that has more Authorities to
back it, but I question whether much more truth in it than the former. His
Lessons tell us of Helena's being admonished by a Dream to go on this errand to
Jerusalem; that there she found in the place of the Cross a Marble Statue of
Venus. That when the ground was dug, they found three Crosses, and also the
Title that was once fastened to the Cross of our Lord, but now was fixed to none
of them, but lay by it self apart from the crosses; so that they knew not to
which of them it did belong. But that doubt was quite taken away by a Miracle,
for a Woman almost at Deaths door, through a grievous Disease; when two of them
were applied to her by Macarius Bishop of Jerusalem, and she received no
benefit at all, when the third was applied she was presently cured. Jacobus de
Voragine here says; that when the Cross was thus discovered, the Devil with a
loud voice cried in the Air, O Judas, Why have thou done this? so contrary to
what my Judas did: for he by my persuasion betrayed him, and thou against my
mind have found his cross: by him I gained many Souls, by thee I seem to lose
those I had gained: by him I reigned over the People, by thee I shall be
expelled out of my Kingdom. But I Will be even with thee, etc.
It is also further observable, how Pius in his Reformation of the Breviary,
took care to prevent all suspicion, that by putting in those new Lessons, the
old ones should be looked upon as fabulous; for in his corrected Breviary, after
the Lessons, I find the substance of the old Legend still retained in several
Antiphona's. For ad lauds, and per horas, these short sayings are mentioned.
Helena the Mother of Constantine, went to Jerusalem. Alleluiah. Then she
commanded them all to be burnt with Fire, and they in a fright delivered Judas.
Alleluiah. Death and Life are set before thee, if thou do not show me the
Cross of Christ. Alleluiah. When Judas ascended out of the Pit, he went to the
place where the holy Cross lay. Alleluiah. Judas prayed, O God my God, show me
the Wood of the holy Cross. Alleluiah. Ad Benedictus. Antiph. S. Helena said to
Judas; Fulfill my desire, and thou shall live upon the Earth: that thou show me
the place which is called Calvary, where the Lord's precious Wood is hid.
Alleluiah.

It would be too tedious to discover the follies and contradictions of their
stories about the Invention of the Cross, as it is very easy to do; and as for
the Authorities they bring in, of Sulpitius Severus, Ruffinus, Paulinus, S.
Ambrose, Socrates, Sozomen, Theodoret, etc. which I know are urged in this
matter; I shall only in short oppose against them, the silence of Eusebius, and
the censure of Pope Gelasius. The first mentions Helena's Journey to the Holy
Land, and building two Churches, Eusebius de vit. Constant. lib. 3. cap. 42, 43.
the one at Bethlehem, the other at Mount Olivet, (as I noted heretofore) but
says not one syllable about her finding of the Cross, or seeking after it; and
yet none can well imagine that he should not be acquainted with it, or that he
should have balked this, if there had been any such thing done, or talked of in
his days. The other ( viz. Pope Gelasius) he must needs know all that was said
by the other Authors I named, who wrote of this matter after Eusebius his time;
and yet thus he speaks in his Decree about Apocryphal Books.

Council. Romans 1. in Tom. 5. Council. Labbe. ad an. 494. p. 1263.
Also the Writings concerning the Invention of the Lord's Cross, and other
Writings concerning the Invention of the head of John the Baptist, these are
certain novel relations, and some Catholics read them: but when these shall
come into the hands of Catholics, let that sentence of the Bl. Apostle Paul go
before; Prove all things, hold fast that which is good: which plainly intimates
his suspicion of the truth of them. For a conclusion of this; I cannot but give
the Reader the pleasure of understanding, how the old Homilies represented this
matter heretofore to the People, by giving him the beginning of a Sermon upon
this Subject. Thus I find it.

Good friends, Festival. de invent. Sanctae crucis. p. 100.
such a day ye shall have the invencyen of the holy cross; ye shall not fast
the even, but come to God and to holy Church as christen people should do, in
worship of him that dyed on the cross. Than ye shall understande, why it is
called inventio sanctae crucis, the finding of the holy cross; the which was
found in this wise as I shall tell you. When Adam our first fader was seek
for aege, and would feign have been out of this World; Adam sent Serh his sone
to the Angel keeper of Paradyse, prayenge the Angel to send him the oil
of mercy to anoint his body therewith when he were deed. Than went Seth to
Paradyse, and said his message to the Angel. Than answered the Angel, and
said that he might not have it till the years were fulfilled. But have this
branch of the tree that thy fader sinned in, and set it on his grave, and
when it bears fruit than shall he have mercy and not erste. Than took Seth
this branch and came home, and found his fader deed: than he set this
branch on his faders grave, as the Angel badde him do; the which branch
growed there till Solomon was king, and he made to fell it down, for it was
fair to the work of his Temple, but it would not accord with the work of his
temple. Solomon made to cast it down into the earth and was hid there to the
time that the Bishop of the Temple let make a wayre in the same place thereas
the tree lay, to wash in sheep that were of^red to the Temple. Than when this
wayre was made, they called it in their Language Probatica piscina. To the
which water came an Angel certain times fro heven, and did worship to the
tree that lay in the ground of the wayre, and meved the water; and what Man
or Woman that came to the water next after the Angel was made hole what
sekenes that ever he had, by virtue of the tree; and so endured many wynters to
the time that Christ was taken and should be done upon the cross. Than this
tree by the ordinance of God swamme upon the water, and when the Jews had none
other tree ready to make the cross of, for great haste that they had, they took
the same tree and made thereof a cross, and so dyed our Lord thereon, and than
the tree bare that blessed fruit Crystes body, of the which welleth the oil
of mercy to Adam and Eve, and all other of their offspringe. But when Christ
was deed, and was taken down of the cross, for envy that the Jews had to
him, they took the cross and two other crosses, that the theves were hanged on
either side of Christ, and buried them deep in the earth, for Christian people
should not wit where they were done, for to do it worship; And there it lay a
year and more unto the time of Eleyna, etc. That which follows, is the story I
set down before out of the Breviary of Sarum, which I will not repeat.

The Feast of S. Peter ad Vincula, or in Memory of S. Peter's Chains. August. 1.
Brev. Sarum, Les. 1.
Dear Brethren, we are to mark, wherefore the Feast of S. Peter (as it is
called) ad vincula, is celebrated upon the Kalends of August. This is said by
some to be the cause of it. A certain Roman Captain called Quirinus, had a
Daughter whose name was Balbina, who had a disease in her Throat Gutturonosam.
, ( Surius in the Life of S. Alexander, May 3. says she had a Wen in her Neck.)
This Captain kept S. Alexander the Pope shut up in Prison. This Maiden (his
Daughter) went often to the Prison, where Bl. Pope Alexander was kept bound in
Chains; Les. 2.
and she kissed the Chains wherewith the Saint was bound, which she did, hoping
to recover health thereby. To whom Bl. Alexander said, My Daughter, do not kiss
these Chains; Les. 3.
but go and seek the Chains wherewith S. Peter was bound, and kiss them, and
thereby thou shall be cured. She immediately came to her Father, and told him
what she had heard from the aforesaid Pope. Which when her Father heard, he
sent Messengers, to enquire for the Prison, Les. 4.
where the Apostle had been bound, and from thence to bring with them S.
Peter's Chain; which they did; and the said Maiden kissing them, was presently
perfectly recovered. After this Bl. Alexander coming out of Prison, Les. 5.
appointed this solemnity to be kept on the Kalends of August, in honor of S.
Peter, and in his Name built a Church, which is called Petri ad Vincula. In
which solemnity also, they say that his Chains are devoutly kissed by the
People, through the help of our Lord Jesus Christ, who with the Father, and the
holy Spirit, lives and reigns God throughout all Ages. Amen.

[These are taken, we are told, out of the Gests of S. Alexander: but excepting
this last Period of the Peoples devoutly kissing that, which they call at Rome
S. Peter's Chain, (which Ribadeneira assures us they do) I know not whether
there be any jot of truth in all the rest. For Surius, in the place forenamed,
and Baronius Baron. ad ann. 132.
tell us quite contrary, to what is in the 3d. Lesson, that it was not S.
Peter's, but Pope Alexander's Chain, that cured the Daughter of Quirinus.
Baronius will assure us, Baron. ad an. 439.
(contrary to the 4th. Lesson) that S. Peter's Chains were not found in S.
Chrysostom's time (and therefore denies that Encomium which Surius gives (
Aug. 1.) of those Chains, to be Chrysostom's) much less in Pope Alexander I.
time: And also that not this Pope, but Eudoxia built the Church at Rome called
Petri ad Vincula. Let us now see how the Present Breviary mends the matter,
since it has altered all the foregoing story, or rather quite discarded it.
Brev. Romans Les. 4, 5.
Thus then we are informed. In the Reign of the Emperor Theodosius jun. when
his Wife Eudocia came to Jerusalem to pay a vow, there she had many presents
made her; but above all the rest she received the gift of an Iron Chain,
adorned with Gold and Jewels, which they affirmed to be the very same,
wherewith the Apostle Peter was bound by Herod. Eudocia piously venerating the
Chain, sent it afterward to Rome to her Daughter Eudoxia, who brought it to the
Pope: And he again showed her another Chain, wherewith the same Apostle was
bound, when Nero was Emperor. Whilst the Pope was comparing the Roman Chain,
with that which was brought from Jerusalem; it happened that those 2 Chains
were so joined together, that they seemed not to be two, but one Chain made by
the same Artificer. By which Miracle, so great an honor began to be paid to
those sacred bonds, that thereupon Eudoxia's Church (which she built) was
dedicated in the Exquiline Mountain, by this name of S. Peter ad Vincula, and
to its Memory a Festival was instituted on the first of August.

I am apt to think that we were as well before with our Salisbury story, as
with this new one of Eudocia. For granting that she sent it for S. Peter's
Chain to her Daughter Eudoxia, and that she received it for such at Jerusalem.
Yet when I remember what other fine knacks she sent from thence, it abates much
the credit of these Chains with me. For Nicephorus, Hist. Eccles. Niceph. lib.
14. c. 2.
though he mentions nothing of this Chain of S. Peter, (which yet is strange,
when the Lesson informs us it was the greatest present to her) yet he tells us
of other great rarities she sent from Jerusalem to Pulcheria, to be kept for
her; such as the Divine Image of the Bl. Virgin, which Luke the Apostle left
drawn in a Table, and her Divine Milk, (...).
and her holy Distaff (or Spindle) and the Swathes of our Savior. As for the
miraculous joining together of the two chains into one, if you examine Baronius
about it, who gives us the whole story, Annal. Eccl. ad an. 439. p. 682.
instead of citing any Authorities, he refers us only to the Ecclesiastical
Tables; which though they may be as Sacred to him as the twelve Tables were to
the Ancient Romans: yet till I know more of their Authentickness, they will not
have much more credit with me, than the Table (now mentioned) S. Luke left
behind him with the Blessed Virgins picture upon it.

I know indeed that S. Gregory in his Epistles talks wondrous things of these
chains, and sent some filings of them to King Childebert for a mighty present;
Epist. Greg. 1. lib. 5. Ep. 6.
but his own wretched superstition about them, is as remarkable as any thing
else: For thus he says in his Epistle to him. We have directed to your
excellency the Keys of S. Peter, in which something is included taken off from
his chains, which being hanged at your neck, may they defend you from all
evils. So in another Epistle to Dynamius. We have sent the Benediction of the
Bl. Apostle Peter, a little Cross, Lib. 2. Ep. 33.
into which is put in some benefits from off his chains, which bound his neck
for a time, but may they loose your neck for ever from sins. Thus in another.
Lib. 1. Ep. 29.
I have sent a most holy Key to you, from the body of S. Peter the Apostle,
which is wont to shine with many miracles upon the sick; for it has within it
something taken off from his chains. Those chains therefore which bound his
neck, may they sanctify your neck being hanged there. In all these instances
you may observe something joined (a Key or Cross) to the chains, so that the
miraculous virtue seems to be divided between them. But in another Epistle to
Theotista, Lib. 6. Ep. 23.
I find him speak of a miraculous destruction of a person that would with his
knife have cut in pieces the Golden Key of S. Peter; for being possessed with
an evil Spirit, he says he stabbed that knife into his throat, and so sell down
dead; and he thus concludes to him: This Key I have taken care to send to your
excellency, by which Almighty God show that proud and perfidious man, that by
it you, who fear and love him, may obtain present and eternal salvation. But I
think S. Gregory in another place, has told us a more wonderful story
concerning S. Paul's chain, than I find any where in him of S. Peter's; for
thus he writes to Constantina, Lib. 3. Ep. 30.
(or Constantia) the Empress. I will make haste to send to you some part of the
chains, which S. Paul the Apostle carried on his neck and hands, and by which
many miracles are showed on the people, if so be I can prevail to take any off
by filing: For since so many frequently come begging a benediction from the
chains, that they may receive a little of the filings thereof, therefore a
Priest is ready with a File: and when some persons petition for it, presently
in a moment something is filed off for them from the chains: but when some
others petition, though the File be drawn a great while through the chains, yet
cannot the least jot be got off from them.

And now methinks one may have leave to ask, Why should not this miraculous
chain of S. Paul have a Festival appointed in memory of it, as well as that of
S. Peter? Baron. in Mar. Romans ad Aug. 1.
you may take Baronius his answer to it, till you can meet with a better. Truly
the bonds of S. Peter seem not without reason to be worshipped, though the
bonds of the other Apostles are not; for it is but fit, that since he has the
chief power in the Church of Binding and Loosing other men's bonds, that his
bonds also should be had in honor of all the Faithful.

S. Donatus. August 7.
S. Donatus was brought up by S. Pigmenius the Presbyter, Brev. Sarum, Les. 1.
and instructed in Divine and Humane Learning: With whom Julian be ng ordained
a Subdeacon This story of Julian is exploded by Baronius. Notis in Martyrol.
Aug. 7.
rejecting this degree, aspired to the Empire; who keeping Pigmenius in custody
at Rome, slew with the sword the Father and Mother of S. Donatus.

One Eustasius came in great perplexity of mind to Donatus, Brev. Romans ant.
Lec. 3, 4.
because in his absence his wife Euphrosina had hid a great deal of public
money, and she was dead before he returned, and the Officers came upon him for
it. Donatus standing upon the Grave of his wife, cried with a loud voice:
Euphrosina, I conjure thee by Christ Jesus that was crucified, that thou tell
us what is become of this money. She answered immediat^ly out of her Grave. The
money thou seek after, lies buried in the entrance of the house: and so the
money being paid, Eustasius was fre^d from all calumny.

[This is pretty fair, to make one speak audibly in her Grave. Sp^c. Historial.
l. 14. cap. 36.
But Vincentius (and after him, S. Antonine and Ribadeneira) has told us of a
greater miracle still; of one raised by him to life; and the occasion of it
also a money matter as the last was. For as a certain man was carrying out to
be buried, another came and stopped the Funeral, having a writing in his hand,
saying, That the dead person was ind^bted to him twenty shillings (as that
paper showed) and till he had his money he should not be buried. Whereupon
there arose a great murmuring in the company: but some that saw Donatus at a
distance, counseled the widow to run and speak to the man of God. She falling
at his feet, told her case to him, and assured him that the money had been paid
by her Husband, only the Creditor had not delivered him in his Note. S. Donatus
coming to the Bier, and taking the dead man by the hand, said to him, Arise and
plead thine own cause, for this thy Creditor forbids thee to be buried.
Immediately he rose up, and convinced the Creditor of his knavery, in denying
the payment of the money, and taking his Note out of his hand, tore it in
pieces: then he begged of Donatus that he would suffer him to die again, who
granted it, bidding him go to his rest.

S. Clara. August 12.
One day in the Monastery of S. Clare, when meal-time came, Brev. Romans ant.
Lec. 8.
she was told, that there was but only one loaf of Bread (and that no great
one, says Ribaden.) to serve them all. Notwithstanding this, she commanded half
of that loaf to be given in Alms to the Friars, and the other half reserved for
her Nuns, to be divided into fifty parts, according to their number: This
command, though a strange one, yet was humbly obeyed by her servant; and by the
Divine gift these small portions did so increase in the hands of every one that
brake them, that every one in the Convent had enough. [Though this is not
formally made a Lesson now in the Proper offices of the Franciscans for S.
Clare, yet the substance of it comes in among one of the Responses just before
the Lauds.

De pane pascit unico turbam sororum pauperum:
Claret signo mirifico virtus signorum veterum:
Dum cibat ex tam modico magni conventus numerum.
S. Clare's poor Nuns fed largely to their mind,
When with one loaf she the whole Convent dined.
And former powers in this new wonder shined.]
When the hour of her departure out of the world drew near, Offic. propr.
Minorum in fest. S Clarae, Lec. 4.
behold about midnight a troop of Virgins enter in clothed in white garments,
having golden Garlands upon their heads; among whom one was fairer than the
rest, and her brightness such, that she turned night into day: for it was the
Virgin of Virgins, the Mother of our Lord and Savior. This Queen of Heaven
drew near to the bed, where the spouse of her Son lay, and inclining her self
lovingly over her, gave her a most sweet embrace; the other Virgins (in her
company) brought forth a wondrous rich Mantle (Pallium) wherewith they covered
the body of Clare the Virgin, and adorned the room as if it had been a Bride
chamber.

S. Elizabeth Widow, the King of Hungarie's Daughter. November. 19.
On a time a noble Matron giving her a visit, Brev. Romans ant. Lec. 6.
it happened that a comely Young man, too fashionably habited, came along with
her; whom S. Elizabeth admonished to despise the pride of the world. The young
man made answer: Madam, I beseech you pray for me. To whom she said, If thou
would have me pray the Lord for thee, go thou and do likewise. So as they
prayed together at some distance, the young man not being able to endure the
flame of her prayer, nor the fervor of so great devotion, he began to cry out
aloud, That she should wholly desist from praying, otherwise he should be
destroyed by the fire of such a prayer, and immediately breath out his last. S.
Elizabeth's maidens then running to the young man, found him so all on fire,
that they could not hold their hands upon his clothes, but were fain hastily to
withdraw their hands with which they laid hold on him, by reason of the too
great heat with which he burnt. But when S. Elizabeth had done praying, the
young man not suffering the heat within him to cool again, he went into the
order of the Franciscans.

[We heard before ( page 108.) how cold water was made so scalding hot, only by
the prayers of S. Fechinus, that his Butler not being able to endure it, was
fain to fly the Bath. Here is another, whose clothes are too hot to be touched,
only by the fervor of devotion. The lying Spirit comes in so powerfully at
certain seasons into the Monks inventions, that you may as well stop the
current of a tide as the progress of their fictions: and though you may guess
in the other case how high the water will flow, yet it is impossible here to
know when a Fable is advanced to its height. An Anchoret did once make a vow
never to see a woman in the Island where he lived; Bolland. vit. S. Brigid ad
Feb. 1. p. 129.
A man (and his wife) comes over into this Island to inhabit, and would not be
persuaded either by him or S. Brigid to depart thence. I see no offense in all
this, since the Island was big enough to hold them both, and it is to be hoped
the woman was so civil as not to come and disturb him in his Cell against his
mind: It was but either going farther from them, or keeping more close at home,
which would have saved the Monks vow, if it was necessary to be kept. But now
their fancies work higher than thus, and bring in a mighty wind that blew him
and his over Sea unto the next Port Town; and bring him upon his knees
confessing his fault, and devoting himself after this Miracle to God and S.
Brigid, promising never to enter the Isle more without the Anchoret's leave.

For some soft and tender hearted Saint to have the gift of weeping is no such
great wonder; Ribaden. in vit. ejus. 3 Nov. inter Extravag. p. 325.
but to be able to communicate it to another, by touching, as one would give
the Itch, that is a pretty feat; and yet thus S. Malachias gave that gift to
one, by laying his Cheek to his. It Is very possible for the consideration of
Christ's passion to draw many tears from a devout Penitent: but to bring in an
Angel gathering into a Vessel two Pound weight of tears, Bolland. ad Januar.
13. page 892.
that fell upon that occasion from the Eyes of S. Veronica, is such a
stretcher, that no Romance ever ventured upon the like.

S. Kentigern had a singular way too of kindling Fire, which I could never have
hit upon; who being in have to light the Candles for Vigils, Capgrav. vit;
Kentig. f. 208.
and some having in spite to him put out all the Fire in the Monastery; he
snatched the green bough of an Hasel, and in the name of the Holy Trinity he
blessed it, and blowed upon it, and immediately, by a Fire sent from Heaven,
the Bough produced a great Flame; but when he had lighted the Candles, the
Light appeared no longer in the Wood. (whence, by the way, we may probably
conjecture that Tinder-boxes are of a later invention than S. Kentigern's
days.) But what will you say, if the Monk's invention may be scrued up still
one peg higher? I think I have met with a Saint that out-did all this, viz. S.
Berach: who when he came to the King's Palace about a cause that was to be
determined before him, Colganus 14 Febr. in vit. Berach, p. 342.
his Adversary a Magician, being in better Clothes, was admitted in; but S.
Berach being despicable and poorly habited, the Gate was shut upon him, where
seeing a great heap of Snow, as he stood without, he called upon the name of
God, and blowing upon the Snow, immediately the Snowy Pile kindled with a
vehement flame, as if it had been dry Wood, insomuch as the Houses near the
Gate, began to be set on Fire. If you can believe that this angry Prayer of
this Saint could make Snow burn, you shall then have my leave to believe, that
the more charitable Prayer of S Elizabeth might set the young Man's clothes
into such a heat, as not to be endured. But I must not forget to tell the
Reader, that upon farther examination of the matter, we shall find, I doubt,
that no Bodies clothes were burnt, sa^e only S. Elizabeth's; and that too, not
by the heat of her Devotion, but as any ones clothes besides might be burnt, by
a Coal of Fire falling upon them. For Vincentius who lived in the same Age with
her, (and S. Antonine after him) tells us indeed, Vincent. Spec. Hist. lib. 30.
cap. 136.
that she was so intent one time at her Prayers and Contemplation of Heavenly
things, that a Coal of Fire fell upon her own Garment, and burnt a great Hole
in it, which she never perceived, till one of her Maids smelling Fire ran in,
and extinguished it, and by her cry made the Saint come to her self, and see
her misfortune; which says he, she as carelessly repaired, by setting an
ill-favored patch upon it with her own hands: but he says not one syllable of
the young Man's burning, or of his clothes being singed by her servent Prayer;
this was invented afterward, and came by Oral Tradition, I suppose, to the
later Writers, such as Jac. de Voragine, Surius, and Ribadeneira.

And now I should have here inserted the admirable Legends, which the
Breviaries gives us, of S. Mary Magdalen, and S. Martha, of S. Francis and S.
Dominick, and some others; but that, to the Readers great advantage, I have
been happily prevented herein by the late Second Discourse of the Learned Dr.
Stillingfleet, concerning the Miracles of the Roman Church; whose known
exactness, as well as vast Reading, gives him an easy Triumph over the Calumny
of those Ignorant Zealots of the Party, who have had the Confidence to charge
him with false Citation of Authors; but will not give us the pleasure, I doubt,
of seeing them so much as attempt such a public Discovery of it, as he has
mad^ o their Cheats; but will have more wit in their rage, than to start this
New Controversy, whether we have the same Books and Eyes with theirs, since it
is to be hoped we may challenge at least equal honesty.

From all that has been said, methinks we need not beg much favor to conclude,
that we in this Kingdom have been much beholden to God Almighty for the
Reformation, concerning which some Men speak so contemptuously: for since that,
no attempts have been made, with any show of Authority, upon our Faith by lying
Impostures; no doubtful Saints put into our Calendar, and commanded to be
venerated; no religious worship paid to any thing but to God alone; no dreaming
Revelations in any credit with us, nor any pass for current ones, but such as
are on all hands unquestionable; no Temptation laid before Men to infidelity,
by seeing the Public Devotions conducted by incredible stories, and invented
Fables; these mischiefs we know the Reformation has delivered us from: and I
dare say, it could not be possible to allure and entangle us in those former
snares again, if Religion were Men's concern equally with other matters, which
they charge themselves soberly to menage.

For what wise Man that has due care of his health, will forsake the safe
practice of a skilful and honest Physician, to run after every Mountebank that
sets up a Stage, will listen to the idle stories he tells all day of his
miraculous cures; or if he needs none of his Physic, yet throw up his Glove
(as I have seen foolish People do) to receive Balls that shall take out all
spots and stains out of their Garments, or things in the fashion of Hearts to
procure Love; or countenance the pretended Doctor, by gaping upon the tricks of
his Jack-pudding. Our Devotion is sober and safe; has no tricks in it, but much
Honesty. We are besotted, if we shall attend to the Romish Legends, or value
their Beads and Rosaries, if we trade with them for their Indulgences and
counterfeit Relics, or be taken with the Pageantry that commonly in that
Church takes place at the time of the Navity, Good Friday, and the day of the
Resurrection.

I Will add no more, save only that sharp, and no less true censure of their own
Cassander (in his Consultatio de meritis and interces. sanctorum. Oper. p.
971.) Est and hic error haud infrequens, etc. This is also a common error, that
the vulgar sort of People, neglecting almost the old and known Saints, more
largely and ardently venerate those that are new and unknown; concerning whose
Sanctity the evidence is more obscure, and some of them are become noted only
by Revelations; so that one may deservedly doubt concerning some of them,
whether they were ever yet in being; whose Veneration the Fictions of
Histories, and the Impostures of Miracles have wonderfully increased, which
Fictions have defiled the Histories, even of the acknowledged Saints, etc.

More Instances of their Devotions to Saints.
THat Cassander judged aright, in every tittle of the foregoing censure, he
that doubts of it, may quickly be satisfied, by a Prayer I find among the
Devotions of the famous Church of Salisbury; the Preface to it shows, that they
laid more than ordinary stress upon it; and yet (which is strange) there is no
mention made of any Apostle or Evangelist, no not so much as of the Virgin
Mary; but obscure and Romantic Saints we have good store. The Rubric to it
says thus.

Whosoever shall devoutly and frequently say the following Prayer, whatsoever
he shall duly and justly ask, he shall obtain.

Antiph. The Saints by Faith overcame Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness, Horae
sec. us. Sar. fol. 99.
obtained the Promises.

Verse. Let the righteous rejoice before God.

Ans. And delight themselves in gladness.

Oremus.

OMnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui sanctorum tuorum Dionysii, Georgii,
Christophori, Blasii, Egidii, Antonii, Eutropii, Pantaleonis, Livini,
Eustachii, Leonardi, Nicasii, atque Cyrici, sanctarum virginum and matronarum
Katharinae, Margaretae, Barbarae, Marthae, Honorinae, Dorotheae, Wenefredae,
Christinae, Fredeswidae atque Julitae, and december millium martyrum, and undecim
millium virginum patrocinia invocantibus, tuum in angustiis promisisti
succursum; tribue nobis, quaesumus, eorum intercessione salutarem nostrae
petitionis effectum, and auxilium in cunctis necessitatibus opportunum.

Per Christum, etc.

Pater noster. Ave Maria.

Let us Pray.

ALmighty everlasting God, who have promised thy succor in straits to those
that invoke the Patronage of thy Saints Denis, George, Christopher, Blase,
Egidius, Anthony, Eutropius, Pantaleon, Livinus, Eustachius, Leonard, Nicasius
and Cyricus, and of the holy Virgins and Matrons, Catharine, Margaret, Barbara,
Martha, Honorina, Dorothy, Wenefrid, Christina, Fredeswide and Julita, and of
the ten thousand Martyrs, and the eleven thousand Virgins; Give us, we beseech
thee, by their intercession, the saving effect of our Petition, and seasonable
help in all our necessities.

Through Christ, etc.

Our Father. Hail Mary.

That which I shall now farther do, shall be to give instances of their
Devotions, immediately addressed to Saints; which cannot admit that pretense,
whereby they of the Roman Church endeavor to excuse themselves, that they pray
only to Saints departed to pray for them, though that also is more than they
have any encouragement to, from the Scriptures.

A Prayer to S. Erasme (or Erasmus.)
Horae sec. us. ptures. Sarum.
SAncte Erasme Martyr Christi pretiose, qui in Die Dominico Deo oblatus fuisti,
and de eo magnam laetitiam suscepisti; Suscipe hanc orationem pro salute
corporis mei and animae meae; ut Deus per tuam orationem dignetur mihi tribuere
victum and vestitum; in hora mortis meae veram confessionem, contritionem, and
salutare sacramentum cum unctione olei sancti, in bonis operibus
perseverantiam, cum recta fide and intention been moriendi, cum illis quae Deo
and tibi placita sunt ad laudem and honorem, mihi autem ad consolationem. Modo
sancte Erasme tibi commendo corpus meum and animam meam, ut Deus per tuam
orationem dignetur mihi tribuere gratiam: and commendo tibi omne consilium
meum, omnes actus meos, and omnia mihi subjecta; ut eruas me ab omnibus
inimicis meis visibilibus and invisibilibus, qui mihi cupiunt adversari; ut non
possint mihi nocere in aliquo, vel ullum damnum infer animae meae vel corpori
meo, turpiter vel dolose, occulte seu manifest: Quia tibi deus promisit, ut
quicunque nomen tuum invocaverit, quicquid petierit firmiter impetrabit.
Suscipe me Sancte Erasme in tuam sanctam fidem and gratiam, and conserva me ab
omni malo per hos octo dies; and praesta mihi illos peragere cum recta fide and
omni prosperitate and gratia, ad finem vitae meae; ut non proficiat in me ulla
inimicorum voluntas, tibi ad laudem and honorem, mihi autem ad consolationem
and gratiam. Tibi Sancte Erasme commendo corpus meum and animam meam, and omnes
mihi confessione and oratione vel consanguinitate conjunctos, and omnes actus
meos, ut vivam cum omni prosperitate, pace and gaudio nunc and in perpetuum.

Amen. Pater noster. Ave Maria.
O Saint Erasmus the precious Martyr of Christ, who wast offered to God on the
Lords day, which was an occasion of great joy to thee; Receive this prayer for
the salvation of my body and my soul; that through thy prayer God may vouchsafe
to give to me food and raiment; in the hour of my death true confession,
contrition, and the saving Sacrament with the unction of holy oil;
perseverance in good works, with a right faith and intention to dye well, with
those things that are pleasing to God and thee, to thy praise and honor, and
to my consolation. Now, S. Erasme, I commend my body and soul to thee, that God
by thy prayer may vouchsafe to give me grace: And I commend to thee all my
counsel, all my actions, and all things subject unto me; that thou may
deliver me from all mine enemies visible and invisible, which seek to oppose
me; that they may not be able to hurt me in any thing, nor bring any damage to
my soul or body, basely or craftily, secretly or openly: For God has promised
thee, that whosoever shall call upon thy name, whatsoever he shall ask, he shall
certainly obtain. Receive me S. Erasme into thy holy faith and grace, and
preserve me from all evil all these eight days; and grant that I may pass them
with a right faith, and all prosperity and grace, unto the end of my life; that
no desire of my enemies may be accomplished against me, to thy praise and
honor, and to my comfort and grace. To thee, S. Erasme, I commend my body and
my soul, and all those I am bound to, by confession and prayer, or
consanguinity, and all my actions, that I may live in all prosperity, peace and
joy, now and for ever.

Amen. Our Father. Hail Mary.
Devotions to Saint Claudius.
Horae sec. us. Romans 6 die Junii.
O Desolatorum consolator, captivorum liberator, resurrectio mortuorum, lumen
caecorum, auditus surdorum, mutorum eloquium, tutor naufragantium, impotentium
and languidorum sanator, medicinae refugium, via errantium, salus omnium in te
sperantium; Sancte Claudi, benign confessor Christi, ora Deum pro nobis, qui
te tot and tantis illustravit miraculis; nam pro tua sanctissima vita, quam tam
pie and devote gessisti in hac valle miseriae, vana hujus seculi spernendo and
coelestia sectando, pro tuis merit is ad superna polorum gaudia collocavit, and
innumeris decoravit miraculis.

Verse. Ora pro nobis beat Claudi.

Resp. Implora apud Deum pro nobis auxilium.

Oremus.

DEus, qui per donum sancti spiritus, in beatum Claudium, gloriosum confessorem
tuum atque Pontificem, tantam gratiam and beatitudinem effundere dignatus es,
quod per illam fere totus orbis Christianorum, pro suis necessitatibus ad ipsum
affluit; and quicunque eum pie and devote quaesierit, desolatus non remanebit:
da nobis, quaesumus Domine, justa desideria postulare; ut quae just
postulaverimus, suis meritis and intercessionibus, apud te jugiter valeamus
obtinere. Per Dominum, etc.

O Thou comforter of the desolate, deliverer of captives, resurrection of the
dead, light of the blind, hearing of the deaf, speech of the dumb, tutor of the
shipwrackt, healer of the impotent and languishing, the refuge of medicine, the
way of the erring, and the salvation of all that hope in thee; O St. Claude the
bountiful Confessor of Christ, pray to God for us, who made thee famous by so
many and great miracles: for by reason of thy most holy life, which thou did
lead so piously and devoutly in this vale of misery, despising the vanities of
this world, and following after celestial things, for thy merits he has placed
thee in the joys of Heaven above, and graced thee with innumerable miracles.

Verse. Pray for us Blessed Claude.

Ans. Implore Gods help for us.

Let us Pray.

O God, who by the gift of the H. Ghost, did vouchsafe to power forth so
great grace and blessing into Blessed Claude thy glorious Confessor and Bishop,
that thereupon almost all the Christian world runs to him for the supply of
their necessities; and whosoever seeks him piously and devoutly, shall not
remain desolate: Grant to us, O Lord, we beseech thee, that we may request just
desires; and those things which we justly ask, by his merits and intercessions,
we may continually be able to obtain from thee. Through our Lord, etc.

A Prayer to the Holy Innocents.
Hor. sec. us. Sarum.
OMnes Sancti Innocents, orate pro nobis. O beati pueri, flores munditiei,
gemmae coelestes, consortes agni immaculati qui tollit peccata mundi. Respicite
famulum (vel famulam) sanctitatis vestrae; and ostendite super me vestra
tenerrima praecordia pietatis; ut vobis intercedentibus, cum pura conscientia
Domino praesentatus (vel praesentata) merear vobiscum laudare Dominum Jesum
Christum in secula seculorum. Amen.

O All ye Holy Innocents, pray for us. O blessed boys, flowers of purity,
celestial gems, the consorts of the immaculate Lamb, that takes away the sins
of the world; look upon the servant of your sanctity; and express toward me
your most tender bowels of pity; that upon your intercession, being presented
to the Lord with a pure conscience, I may merit to praise the Lord Jesus Christ
with you for evermore. Amen.

A Prayer to the Apostles and Disciples.
Ibid.
OMnes sancti Apostoli and electi Discipuli Domini, orate pro nobis. O
venerandi Patres Ecclesiae, fidei Christianae doctores and mundi luminaria,
quorum praedicationibus miraculis and exemplis, Christi nomen gloriosum
magnificatum est in gentibus. Per ipsum vos deprecor quem tanto fervore
dilexistis and secuti estis, me gratiose solventes a vinculis peccatorum,
perducatis ad patriam civium supernorum. Praestante eo qui vivit and regnat.

Pater Noster. Ave M.

O All ye holy Apostles and elect Disciples of the Lord, pray for us. O ye
venerable Fathers of the Church, the Teachers of Christian faith, and the
Lights of the world, by whose preaching, miracles and example, the glorious
name of Christ is magnified among the Gentiles. I pray you by him, whom with so
much zeal ye loved and followed, that mercifully loosing the hands of my sins,
you would bring me to the Country of the Citizens above. He performing it, who
lives and reigns.

Our Father. Hail Mary.

A Prayer to the Martyrs.
Ibid.
OMnes Sancti Martyrs, orate pro nobis. O fortissimi milites Christi,
Principes and Duces exercitus Domini; quorum vita mirabilis erat and mors
speciosa; per illam charitatem insuperabilem qua Deo conjuncti estis, vos
deprecor, ne me patiamini perire in peccatis meis; sed in omni necessitate
atque periculo sitis mihi advocati and defensores, ut passionum vestrarum
intervenientibus meritis, particeps esse valeam aeternae felicitatis. Quod ipse
praestare dignetur, qui vester amor est, vita, salus and praemium, Jesus
Christus Dominus noster. Amen.

O All ye Holy Martyrs, pray for us. O ye most valiant soldiers of Christ, the
Princes and Captains of the Lords Hosts, whose life was wonderful and death
honorable; by that insuperable love, whereby ye are united to God, I entreat
you, that ye would not suffer me to perish in my sins; but in every necessity
and danger, you would be my Advocates and Defenders; that by the intervening
merits of your sufferings, I may partake of eternal felicity. Which he
vouchsafe to effect, who is your love, life, salvation and reward, Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

To the Confessors.
Ibid.
OMnes sancti Confessores, orate pro nobis. O Patres, praecipui flores
Ecclesiae, specula virtutum, imitatores Christi, and tabernacula Spiritus
Sancti; in quorum mentibus abundavit charitas, in verbis veritas, in actibus
pietas cum omni morum honestate floruit: Ecce ad vos confugio miserrimus ego
peccator and indignus, vestram clementiam humiliter interpellans; ut mihi
vestris precibus impetrare dignemini gratiam vere poenitendi, in bono
perseverandi, and ad vestrum consortium gloriosum finaliter perveniendi.
Praestante Domino nostro Jesu Christo: Qui vivit and regnat in secula
seculorum. Amen.

O All ye holy Confessors, pray for us. O Fathers, the chiefest flowers of the
Church the mirrors of virtues, imitators of Christ, and Tabernacles of the H.
Ghost; in whose minds charity did abound, in whose words truth, in whose
actions piety with all honesty of deportment did flourish: Behold I miserable
sinner and unworthy fly to you; humbly imploring your clemency, that by your
prayers you would vouchsafe to obtain for me the grace of true repentance, of
perseverance in goodness, and finally to come to your glorious fellowship. Our
Lord Jesus Christ performing it: Who lives and reigns throughout all ages.
Amen.

To the Holy Virgins.
Ibid.
OMnes sanctae Virgins and Matronae, orate pro nobis. O sacratissimae mulieres
Christi sponsae matres and filiae; propter amorem and vobis innatum gratissimam
pietatem miseremini mei peccatoris; and lapsum carnis fragilis benigna
compassione recolentes, impetrate mihi a Domino Jesu, dilecto vestro and
Salvatore meo, delictorum veniam, vitae munditiam, and gloriam in futuro. Amen.

O All ye holy Virgins and Matrons, pray for us. O all ye most holy women,
mothers and daughters, the spouses of Christ; for your love sake, and your most
acceptable innate pity, be merciful to me a sinner; and calling to mind with
gracious compassion the easy slips of frail flesh, obtain for me of the Lord
Jesus, your Beloved and my Savior, the pardon of my sins, purity of life, and
glory hereafter. Amen.

A Prayer to all Saints.
O All ye blessed Saints of God, Primer in English in Queen Marie's time, Land.
1555.
and blessed Spirits Angelical, whom God with his mellifluous countenance and
blessed presence makes joyful and everlastingly glad, pray ye for me: I salute
and honor you; I give lauds and thanks unto our Lord, which has chosen you,
and has prevented you in his Benedictions: O obtain for me forgiveness, obtain
for me grace, and to be made one with God. Amen.

A Prayer to all the He and She Saints.
Horae sec. us. Sarum.
O Vos omnes Sancti and Electi Dei, quibus Deus praeparavit regnum aeternum a
Principio; vos precor per charitatem qua dilexit vos Deus, succurrite mihi
peccatori miserrimo, antequam me mors rapiat; conciliate me antequam infernus
me devoret. O beata Maria, matter Dei, Virgo Christi, peccatorum interventrix,
exaudi me, salva me, custodi me; Obtine mihi, pia Domina, fidem rectam, spem
certam, perfectam charitatem, veram humilitatem, castitatem, sobrietatem, and
post cursum vitae meae societatem perpetuae beatitudinis. Tu etiam sancte
Michael, cum omnibus millibus Angelorum, ora pro me, ut eripiar de potestate
adversariorum meorum; Adjuva me, obtine mihi amorem Dei, cordis decorem, fidei
vigorem, and coelestis gloriae jocunditatem. Vos quoque Sancti Patriarchae and
Prophetae, poscite mihi a Deo indulgentiam, poenitentiam, continentiam,
sanctamque perseverantiam, atque vitam aeternam. O beati Apostoli Dei, solvite
me a peccatis, defendite me a poenis inferni and de potestate tenebrarum,
confortate me and ad regnum aeternum me perducite. Precor eiam vos Sancti
Martyrs Dei, ut detur mihi a Deo charitas sancta, pax sincera, men's pura, vita
casta, and peccatorum remissio. O gloriosi Confessores Dei orate pro me, ut per
vos mihi tribuatur a Deo coelestis concupiscentia, and morum reverentia, and
criminum ablutio. Similiter and vos rogo omnes sanctae Virgins Dei, adjuvate
me, ut habeam bonam voluntatem cordis, corporis sanitatem, humilitatem,
castitatem, and post cursum vitae meae societatem perpetuae beatitudinis. O vos
omnes Sancti and Sanctae Dei, vos deprecor quoque and supplico, subvenite mihi,
miseremini mei misericorditer, and orate pro me instanter, ut per vestram
intercessionem tribuatur mihi a Deo conscientia pura, compunctio vera, and
vitae consummatio laudabilis; quatenus per merita vestra pervenire valeam ad
aeternae beatitudinis patriam. Praestante Domino nostro Jesu Christo. Qui cum
Patre, etc.

O All ye Saints and Elect of God, for whom God from the beginning has
prepared an Eternal Kingdom; I entreat you by that charity wherewith God has
loved you, that you would succor me a miserable sinner, before death snatches
me away; reconcile me (to God) before the Grave devours me. O blessed Mary, the
mother of God, the Virgin of Christ, who intercedest for sinners, hear me, save
me, keep me; Obtain for me, merciful Lady, a right faith, a certain hope,
perfect charity, true humility, chastity, sobriety, and after my life is ended
the society of endless blessedness. Thou also, S. Michael, with all thy
thousands of Angels, pray for me, that I may be delivered from the power of my
adversaries: Help me, obtain for me the love of God, comeliness of heart, a
vigorous faith, and the jocundness of celestial glory. Also ye Holy Patriarchs
and Prophets, beg for me of God pardon, repentance, continence, and holy
perseverance, and eternal life. O ye blessed Apostles of God, loose me from my
sins, defend me from the pains of Hell and from the power of darkness, comfort
me and bring me to the everlasting Kingdom. I pray to you Holy Martyrs of God,
that God would give me holy love, sincere peace, a pure mind, a chaste life,
and remission of my sins. O ye glorious Confessors of God, pray for me, that by
you God may grant me heavenly concupiscence, reverence of behavior, and the
washing away of my crimes. In like manner I entreat all you Gods holy Virgins
to assist me, that I may have a good will of heart, soundness of body,
humility, chastity, and after my life is ended the society of endless
blessedness. And all ye He and She Saints of God, I pray also and beseech you,
to be aiding to me, that you would mercifully pity me, and pray earnestly for
me, that by your intercession, God would give me a pure conscience, true
compunction, and that I may commendably finish my life; so that by your merits
I may be able to arrive at the Country of Eternal blessedness. Our Lord Jesus
Christ performing it. Who with the Father, etc.

Now for a Conclusion of these Devotions, I Will only add (besides a Litany) one
instance more; but it is such a one, as can hardly be paralleled: It is the
commemoration of Etheldreda (an English Saint) which is given us by the
Salisbury Breviary; Brev. Sarum, fol. 100.
where we have Three Lessons, consisting wholly of prayers to her, in a Latin
style so unusually-fine, and so full of Courtship, as would tempt one to think,
that the Monk (or whosoever he was) who composed them, had some fair Mistress,
that strongly possessed his fancy, all the while before his thoughts; They are
these.

Lect. 1.
IN praesentis vitae and fluctuantis seculi naufragio constituti; ad tui portum
praesidii confugimus virgo piissima atque celeberrima Etheldreda; ut tuae circa
nos pietatis sentiamus viscera, qui de tua jugiter gratulamur presaentia.
Respice igitur pia Matter and Domina pio intuitu ad exiguum (sed devotum) nostri
famulatus obsequium: and quos premit humanae fragilitatis immensitas, tuae
virginitatis (quae sponso virginum placuit) relevet ac sustentet veneranda
sublimitas. Credimus enim atque confidimus, te ab eodem sponso tuo qui speciem
tuam concupivit, quicquid petieris impetrare; quam in thalamo regis aeterni
collocatam, cum virginum choris de palma virginitatis certum est exultare.

Lec. 2.
SUccurre Domina, succurre Matter misericordissima Etheldreda nostrae miseriae:
suffragiis precum tuarum, scelerum nostrorum maculas absterge; tibique
famulantes tales effice, ut tuae integritati purae valiant deservire. Gregi tuo
tuae sollicitudinis atque protectionis semper assit custodia; ut sicut tui
sacratissimi corporis incorruptione jugiter gaudemus atque praesentia, sic and
de tua subventione gaudeamus assidua. Protege igitur matter filios, domina
servos; ut qui se tuae memoriae ac venerationi profitentur obnoxios, tuae
largitatis and pietatis beneficia se gratulentur adeptos.

Lec. 3.
REspice benignissima virgo Etheldreda ad nostras angustias, quas nostris
meritis sustinemus; and per tuae sanctitatis merita and intercessiones, and
iram judicis placa quem offendimus, and veniam impetra quam non meruimus. Tuis
precibus ad misericordiam inclina justitiam districti (sed justi) examinis;
quia agni qui sponsus est virginum vestigia quocunque ierit virgo sequeris.
Repraesenta quaesumus supernae clementiae gemitus nostros atque suspiria, ut
divinae miserationis per te suscipiamus incrementa, quo tecum in aeternum
gaudere mereamur; te petente, illo largiente, qui te integritatis coronavit
gloria, per cuncta seculorum secula. Amen.

WE who are placed among the dangers of this present life and uncertain world,
that threaten to shipwreck us; do fly to thy safe port, most pious and famous
Virgin Etheldrede, that we may feel the bowels of thy compassions toward us,
who do congratulate always thy presence among us. Look therefore thou
compassionate mother and Lady with a pitiful eye upon the poor (but devout)
obsequiousness of our service: and those who are oppressed with the immensity
of humane frailty, let the venerable sublimity of thy virginity (which has been
acceptable to the spouse of Virgins) relieve and sustain them. For we believe
and are confident, that from that spouse of thine who has desired thy beauty,
thou can obtain whatsoever thou shall ask; since we are sure thou art placed
in the bride-chamber of the eternal King, and do triumph with the Quire of
Virgins in the prize of virginity.

SVccour, O Lady, succor, O Etheldrede, our misery thou mother of mercy; by
the intercession of thy prayers, wipe off the stains of our sins; and make
those that wait upon thee such, that they may be able to serve thy pure
incorruption. Let the safeguard of thy care and protection always defend thy
flock; that as we continually rejoice in the incorruption and presence of thy
most sacred body, so we may also rejoice in thy daily aid. Protect therefore, O
mother, thy children, O Lady, thy servants; that they who profess themselves
devoted to thy memory and veneration, may rejoice in having obtained the
benefits of thy bounty and compassion.

LOok O most gracious Virgin Etheldrede upon our troubles, which we deservedly
sustain; and by the merits and intercession of thy holiness, both appease the
anger of the Judge whom we have offended, and obtain that pardon which we have
not deserved. By thy prayers incline to mercy, the justice of his severe (but
just) examination; because thou that art a Virgin shall follow the steps of the
Lamb, who is the spouse of Virgins, whithersoever he goes. Represent, we pray
thee, to the Divine clemency our sighs and groans, that by thee we may receive
more of the Divine pity, whereby we may merit evermore to rejoice with thee;
thou asking and he granting, who has crowned thee with the glory of
incorruption, throughout all ages. Amen.

A LITANY.
EVery one that is acquainted with the Common Litanies of the Roman Church,
knows that they are stuffed with the names of Saints, whom they desire to pray
for them; and are larger or shorter, according as more or fewer Saints are
inserted: and there being little or no difference besides between the Older
Litanies and the Later, I shall give the Reader one that was in use here in
England, as I find it in a Psalter Printed at London 1503. Whereby he will
understand what a pretty number of Saints (and some of them very odd and
strange ones) they invoked in those days, and applied themselves to in their
Prayers. After the usual invocation therefore of God and the Holy Trinity, it
goes on thus.

Saint Mary, Pray for us. Holy Mother of God, Pray for us. Holy Virgin of
Virgins, Pray for us. S. Michael, Pray for us. S. Gabriel, Pray for us. S.
Raphael, Pray for us. All holy Angels and Archangels, Pray for us. All holy
Orders of Blessed Spirits, Pray for us. S. John Baptist, Pray for us. All holy
Patriarchs and Prophets, Pray for us. S. Peter, Pray for us. S. Paul, Pray for
us. S. Andrew, Pray for us. S. John, Pray for us. S. James, Pray for us. S.
Thomas, Pray for us. S. Philip, Pray for us. S. James, Pray for us. S. Matthew,
Pray for us. S. Bartholomew, Pray for us. S. Simon, Pray for us. S. Thaddeus,
Pray for us. S. Matthias, Pray for us. S. Barnabas, Pray for us. S. Mark, Pray
for us. S. Luke, Pray for us. All ye holy Apostles and Evangelists, Pray for
us. All ye holy Disciples of the Lord and Innocents, Pray for us. S. Stephen,
Pray for us. S. Linus, Pray for us. S. Cletus, Pray for us. S. Clemens, Pray
for us. S. Fabian, Pray for us. S. Sebastian, Pray for us. S. Cosma, Pray for
us. S. Damian, Pray for us. S. Prime, Pray for us. S. Felician, Pray for us. S.
Dionysius, with thy companions, Pray for us. S. Victor, with thy companions,
Pray for us. All ye holy Martyrs Pray for us. S. Silvester, Pray for us. S.
Leo, Pray for us. S. Jerome, Pray for us. S. Augustine, Pray for us. S.
Isidore, Pray for us. S. Julianus, Pray for us. S. Gildarde, Pray for us. S.
Medarde, Pray for us. S. Albinus, Pray for us. S. Eusebius, Pray for us. S.
Swithine, Pray for us. S. Birinus, Pray for us. All ye holy Confessors, Pray
for us. All ye holy Monks and Hermits, Pray for us. S. Mary Magdalene, Pray for
us. S. Mary the Egyptian Pray for us. S. Margaret, Pray for us. S. Scholastica,
Pray for us. S. Petronilla, Pray for us. S. Genouefe, Pray for us. S. Praxedes,
Pray for us. S. Sotheris, Pray for us. S. Prisca, Pray for us. S. Tecla, Pray
for us. S. Afra, Pray for us. S. Editha, Pray for us. All ye holy Virgins, Pray
for us. All ye Saints, Pray for us. S. Sixtus, Pray for us. S. Cornelius, Pray
for us. S. Cyprian, Pray for us. S. Marcellus, Pray for us. S. Vitus, Pray for
us. S. Modestus, Pray for us. S. Adrian, Pray for us. S. Nichasius, with thy
companions, Pray for us. S. Eustachius, with thy companions, Pray for us. All
ye holy Martyrs Pray for us. S. Gregory, Pray for us. S. Ambrose, Pray for us.
S. Remigius, Pray for us. S. Donatian, Pray for us. S. Eligius, Pray for us. S.
Audomarus, Pray for us. S. Sulpitius, Pray for us. S. Paternus, Pray for us. S.
Patrick, Pray for us. S. Dunstane, Pray for us. S. Grimbaldus, Pray for us. All
ye holy Confessors. Pray for us. All ye holy Monks and Hermits, Pray for us. S.
Felicitas, Pray for us. S. Perpetua, Pray for us. S. Columba, Pray for us. S.
Christina, Pray for us. S. Eulalia, Pray for us. S. Euphemia, Pray for us. S.
Eugenia, Pray for us. S. Ghertrudis, Pray for us. S. Ragenfledis, Pray for us.
S. Batildis, Pray for us. S. Anastasia, Pray for us. S. Etheldrede, Pray for
us. All the holy Virgins, Pray for us. All the Saints, Pray for us. S.
Laurence, Pray for us. S. Tiburcus, Pray for us. S. Valerian, Pray for us. S.
Prothus, Pray for us. S. Jacinthus, Pray for us. S. Abdon, Pray for us. S.
Sennes, Pray for us. S. Timothy, Pray for us. S. Apollinaris, Pray for us. S.
Saturninus, Pray for us. S. Maurice, with thy companions, Pray for us. S.
Gereon, with thy companions, Pray for us. All ye holy Martyrs Pray for us. S.
Hilary, Pray for us. S. Martine, Pray for us. S. Brice, Pray for us. S.
Amandus, Pray for us. S. Vedastus, Pray for us. S. Germanus, Pray for us. S.
Ausbertus, Pray for us. S. Arnulph, Pray for us. S. Wulfrane, Pray for us. S.
Silvinus, Pray for us. S. Taurinus, Pray for us. S. Cuthbert, Pray for us. All
ye holy Confessors, Pray for us. All ye holy Monks and Hermits, Pray for us. S.
Agatha, Pray for us. S. Susanna, Pray for us. S. Brigid. Pray for us. S.
Barbara, Pray for us. S. Marina, Pray for us. S. Martina, Pray for us. S.
Felicula, Pray for us. S. Julita, Pray for us. S. Sapientia, Pray for us. S.
Fides, Pray for us. S. Spes, Pray for us. S. Charitas, Pray for us. All ye holy
Virgins, Pray for us. All ye Saints, Pray for us. S. Vincent, Pray for us. S.
Gervase, Pray for us. S. Prothasus, Pray for us. S. Timotheus, Pray for us. S.
Simphorianus, Pray for us. S. Felicissimus, Pray for us. S. Agapitus, Pray for
us. S. Alban, Pray for us. S. Gorgonius, Pray for us. S. Achilles, Pray for us.
S. Hippolitus, with his companions, Pray for us. S. Lucianus, with his
companions, Pray for us. All ye holy Martyrs Pray for us. S. Nicholas, Pray for
us. S. Audoen, Pray for us. S. Romanus, Pray for us. S. Laudus. Pray for us. S.
Machutus, Pray for us. S. Samson, Pray for us. S. Placidus, Pray for us. S.
Columbanus, Pray for us. S. Anthony, Pray for us. S. Macarius, Pray for us. S.
Richarius, Pray for us. S. Adelwolde, Pray for us. All ye holy Confessors, Pray
for us. All ye Saints, Monks and Hermits, Pray for us. S. Cecily, Pray for us.
S. Fidis, Pray for us. S. Austreberta, Pray for us. S. Emerentiana, Pray for
us. S. Potentiaena, Pray for us. S. Oportuna, Pray for us. S. Sophia, Pray for
us. S. Juliana, Pray for us. S. Beatrix, Pray for us. S. Crescentia, Pray for
us. S. Walburg, Pray for us. S. Ermenildis, Pray for us. All ye holy Virgins,
Pray for us. All ye Saints, Pray for us. S. Quintin, Pray for us. S.
Christopher, Pray for us. S. Lambert, Pray for us. S. George, Pray for us. S.
Marcellinus, Pray for us. S. Theodore, Pray for us. S. Valentine, Pray for us.
S. Grisogonus, Pray for us. S. Felix, Pray for us. S. Audactus, Pray for us. S.
Boniface, with thy companions, Pray for us. S. Kylianus, Pray for us. All ye
holy Martyrs Pray for us. S. Benedict, Pray for us. S. Maurus, Pray for us. S.
Maiolus, Pray for us. S. Egidius, Pray for us. S. Wandregesile, Pray for us. S.
Wolmarus, Pray for us. S. Filibert, Pray for us. S. Bertinus, Pray for us. S.
Winnoc, Pray for us. S. Judocus, Pray for us. S. Petrocus, Pray for us. S.
Botulph, Pray for us. All ye holy Confessors, Pray for us. All ye holy Monks
and Hermits, Pray for us. S. Lucy, Pray for us. S. Catharine, Pray for us. S.
Sabina, Pray for us. S. Justina, Pray for us. S. Euphrasia, Pray for us. S.
Fausta, Pray for us. S. Monegundis, Pray for us. S. Aldegundis, Pray for us. S.
Benigna, Pray for us. S. Wilgefortis, (so I put it instead of Walburg, because
I find her placed before Radegundis, in another Litany) Pray for us. S.
Radegundis, Pray for us. All ye holy Virgins, Pray for us. All ye Saints, Pray
for us. S. Calixtus, Pray for us. S. Urban, Pray for us. S. Magnus, Pray for
us. S. Menna, Pray for us. S. Rufus, Pray for us. S. Valerius, Pray for us. S.
Processus, Pray for us. S. Martinianus, Pray for us. S. Marcus, Pray for us. S.
Gordianus, with his companions, Pray for us. S. Pancratius, with his
companions, Pray for us. All ye holy Martyrs Pray for us. S. Aldelme, Pray for
us. S. Anianus, Pray for us. S. Euurcius, Pray for us. S. Basil, Pray for us.
S. Maurilius, Pray for us. S. Germanus, Pray for us. S. Mamertus, Pray for us.
S. Authbert, Pray for us. S. Willibrord, Pray for us. S. Leonard, Pray for us.
S. Athanasius, Pray for us. S. Oswalde, Pray for us. All ye holy Confessors,
Pray for us. All ye holy Monks and Hermits, Pray for us. S. Agnes, Pray for us.
S. Benedicta, Pray for us. S. Martha, Pray for us. S. Helena, Pray for us. S.
Euprepia, Pray for us. S. Candida, Pray for us. S. Basilissa, Pray for us. S.
Cordula, Pray for us. S. Vrsula, Pray for us. S. Victoria, Pray for us. S.
Corona, Pray for us. S. Sexburgis, Pray for us. All ye holy Virgins, Pray for
us. All ye Saints, Pray for us.
The rest of the Litany that follows these names of Saints, I forbear to set
down, because it consists of good and wholesome petitions, which it is not my
business to reprove; but rather shall commend one among the rest in particular,
where they pray, Vt obsequium servitutis nostrae rationabile facias.
That God would make their service to him rational. This request, considering
how absurd their Devotions are, was a very needful one, and was for some while
continued in their Litanies; (for I find it in one of them, among the Hours of
Sarum, printed 1530. and also in a Litany in Queen Marie's Primer, printed
1555.) but they perceiving that it was never likely to be heard, because they
were never likely to amend their follies to any purpose, they have since very
wisely omitted it, and it is left out of all the new Litanies.

It would be also too tedious to examine the foregoing Catalogue of Saints
names. Fides, Spes, and Charitas, which were mentioned together, you must
believe the Roman Martyrologie that they were Saints, and not the Graces of
Faith, Hope, and Charity. But I cannot so easily grant this of one, which just
goes before them, viz. S. Sapientia; for I cannot meet with her in the Roman
Martyrologie, nor in that of Ado, or of Vsuardus: only Mr. Cressy, I find, has
put her among the Vrsulan Virgins; but their names (as we heard before) are
most of them known only by those Revelations which he discards. It Is well
therefore if in this case there has not been such a mistake committed, as the
sorry Priest, according to the story, was guilty of, who bad Sol in Cancro,
which he found in Red Letters in his Almanac, for an Holiday: and there too
you may find O Sapientia set down, nine days before Christmas. But that refers
to no Saint, but to certain Antiphona's, which are required to be used on those
days; the first of which begins with, O Sapientia quae ex ore Altissimi
prodiisti, etc.

But if you ask me farther, what is the meaning of so vast a number of Saints
put into this Litany? I can give no better answer than this, That they seem to
have had the same fancy, which their old Homily admirably expresses thus.

On Alhalowen day, Festival in fest. Omn. Sanct. f. 148.
our prayers shall be sooner herd than any other day: for this day all the
Saints in Heven come together to pray to God for us; and therefore we may well
know, that all coming together, shall be sonner herd, than if they came but by
one or two by themself.

Hymns to the Saints.
HEre I shall wholly wave those Hymns, which are the most exceptionable, that
are composed to the Bl. Virgin, till we come to treat of their Devotions to
her; and only set down some of the many rare strains of Devotion to the other
Saints, which sufficiently show, what thoughts they have of their power now, to
confer both temporal and spiritual blessings on them, and what expectations
they have from them, upon their addresses to them.

To S. Venantius, May 18.
Officia nova Sanct. 1672.
Bellator o fortissime,
Qui perfidis tortoribus
E caute praebes poculum,
Nos rore irriga gratiae.
Ibid. ad Lauds.
Nunc Angelorum particeps
Adesto votis supplicum:
Procul repelle crimina
Tuumque lumen ingere.
Brave Warrior, of courage true,
Who to thy Torturers athirst
Made Water from a Rock to burst,
Water our Souls with grace's dew.
Now thou do Angels bliss enjoy,
Readily answer, when we pray;
Expel the Crimes that Us annoy,
Thy light into our minds conveigh.
To S. Teresa, Oct. 15.
Brev. Romans
O charitatis victima!
Tu corda nostra concrema,
Tibique gentes creditas
Averni ab igne libera.
O thou that art Love's victime rare!
Pure flames into our hearts inspire;
Deliver from infernal fire
The Nations trusted to thy care.
S. Petrus de Alacantara, October. 19.
Offic. nov. Sanctor.
NUnc preces audi, gemitusque nostros,
Integros nobis sine labe mores,
Et tuos nostris animis salubres
Ingere sensus.
bid.
Decus Minorum suscipe
Lauds precesque supplicum;
Tuos ab alto mitius
Pater beat, respice.
Now hear us when we sigh and pray,
Preserve our Lives in innocence,
And thine own good and virtuous sense
Into our hearts conveigh.
Franciscan's Ornament, receive
The Prayers we make, and Lauds we give;
Blessed Father, with a gracious eye
Behold thy Children from on high.
S. Hermenegildus, Apr. 13.
Brev Romans
Nunc nos e superum protege sedibus
Clemens, atque preces dum canimus tua
Quaesitam nece palmam
Pronis auribus accipe.
Now from the Heavenly seat thou have obtained
Protect us graciously, and while we join
To sing thy victory by dying gained,
Thy ready Ear unto our Prayers incline.
S. John Baptist, Jun. 24.
Brev. Romans
Nunc potens nostri meritis opimis
Pectoris duros lapides repelle;
Asperum planans iter, and reflexos
Dirige calls.
Now thy rich merits do thy power raise,
The stony hardness of our hearts subdue,
Make plane the rugged, and our crooked ways
Direct and make 'em true.
S. Peter and Paul, June 29.
Brev. Romans
Beat Pastor Petre, clemens accipe
Voces precantum, criminumque vincula
Verbo resolve, cui potestas tradita
Aperire terris coelum, apertum claudere.
Egregie Doctor Paul, mores instrue,
Et nostra tecum pectora in coelum cape.
Peter! blessed Shepherd! graciously
Receive our Prayers, our bonds of sins untye
By thy sole word, to whom the power is given
To open wide, and shut the Gate of Heaven.
Great Doctor Paul! our manners rude instruct,
And snatched from hence, our hearts to heaven conduct.
St. Peter is also called in another Hymn, Janitor coeli, the Porter of Heaven.

S. Genouefa, Januar. 3.
Horae sec. us. Romans
Nunc Genouefa virgo clemens te precantes respice:
Toll pondus culpae, prementes hosts and clades abjice;
S^num corpus and cor mundum semper nobis tribue;
Et pugnantes in agone coelesti junge curiae.
Look favorably toward those
Blessed Genouefe, who thee entreat;
Take off sins heavy load, our foes,
And their intended harms defeat.
A healthful body, and a heart
That Is clean and pure to us impart;
And when our combat here is past,
Unite us to the Saints at last.
To S. Agnes.
Missal. Romans antiq. f. 51.
Agnes agni foemina
Nos intus illumina
Radices extermina
Peccatorum.
Singularis Domina,
Post mundi gravamina,
Transfer ad agmina
Beatorum.
Agnes who art the Lambs chaste Spouse,
Inlighten thou our minds within,
Not only lop the spreading boughs
But root out of us every sin.
O Lady singularly great,
After this state with grief oppressed,
Translate us to that quiet seat
Above, to triumph with the Blessed.
S. Clare, Aug. 12.
Offic. nov. Sanctor.
Jamjam in regno Luminum
Patri (sc. Francisco) conregnas filia;
Da te sequentem agminum
Recta fore vestigia.
Ibid. ad Magnific.
Salve sponsa Dei, virgo sacra planta Minorum;
Tu vas munditiae, tu praevia forma sororum:
Clara tuis precibus duc nos ad regna polorum.
Now Daughter in the place of light
Thou do with Father Francis reign;
We pray thee to direct aright
The steps of all thy following train.
Hail thou fair spouse of Christ thou sacred Nun
Under that Rule S. Francis first begun;
Vessel of purity and pattern great
Whom cloistered Sisters ought to imitate;
At length by thy prevailing prayers, S. Clare,
Bring us to Heaven, where all the Blessed are.
But I Will a little rest my self from Rhithming, as the Latin does in some that
follow; giving you for variety a little Blank Verse, till the Latin begins to
chime again.

To S. Martina. Jan. 30.
Brev. Romans
Tu natale solum protege, tu bonae
Da pacis requiem Christiadum plagis;
Armorum strepitus and fera praelia
In fines age Thracios.
Et Regum socians agmina sub crucis
Vexillo, Solymas nexibus exime,
Vindexque innocui sanguinis hosticum
Robur funditus erue.
Tu nostrum columen, tu decus inclytum,
Nostrarum obsequium respice mentium;
Romae libens vota excipe, quae pio
Te ritu canit and colit.
Do thou protect thy Native soil, and give
A peaceful rest to all the Christian Lands;
The noise of Arms and cruel Battles drive
Into the Turkish Coasts.
Under the Cross unite the Troops of Kings,
The Holy Land from slavery redeem,
Revenge the blood of slaughtered Innocents
And Hostile powers destroy.
O thou our stay and chiefest Ornament,
Regard the ready service of our minds;
Rome's vows receive, which in devoutest sort
Does praise and worship thee.
In Festo omnium Sanctorum. Hymnus.
Breviar. Roman.
Placare, Christ, servulis
Quibus patris clementiam
Tuae ad Tribunal gratiae
Patrona virgo postulat.
Et vos beata per novem
Distincta gyros agmina
Antiqua cum praesentibus
Futura damna pellite.
Apostoli cum vatibus
Apud severum Judicem
Veris reorum fletibus
Exposcite indulgentiam.
Vos purpurati Martyrs
Vos candidati praemio
Confessionis, exules
Vocate nos in patriam.
Chorea casta virginum,
Et quos Eremus incolas
Transmisit astris, coelitum
Locate nos in sedibus.
Auferte gentem perfidam
Credentium de finibus;
Ut unus omnes unicum
Ovile nos Pastor regat.
Deo Patri sit gloria,
Natoque Patris unico,
Sancto simul Paraclito
In sempiterna secula.
Amen.
On the Feast of all Saints. Hymn.
Be reconciled, O Christ, to us
For whom the Virgin Patroness
Does beg before thy gracious Throne
T'obtain the Fathers clemency.
And ye, O blessed Company
Into nine ranks distinguished,
From ills past, present, and to come
Most graciously deliver us.
Ye holy Prophets and Apostles,
Prevail with God the Judge severe,
That we indulgence may obtain
Who wash our selves in briny tears.
Ye Martyrs who have shed your blood,
Ye Confessors that walk in white
Call us from our long banishment
Unto our most desired home.
And ye, O Quire of Virgins chaste
And Hermits that to Heaven are come
From solitary Wilderness,
Place us in those blessed Mansions.
Remove perfidious people far
From th'habitations of the just
That in one fold Christ's sheep may lie
By that great Shepherd governed.
To God the Father glory be,
And also to his only Son,
And to the holy Paraclet,
Now And for evermore.
Amen.
Another Hymn.
Ibid.
Salutis aeternae dator
Jesu, redemptis subveni:
Virgo parens clementiae
Dona salutem servulis.
Vos Angelorum millia,
Patrumque coetus, agmina
Canora Vatum; vos reis
Precamini indulgentiam.
Baptista Christi praevius
Summique coeli claviger,
Cum caeteris Apostolis,
Nexus resolvant criminum.
Cohors triumphans Martyrum,
Almus Sacerdotum Chorus,
Et Virginalis castitas,
Nostros reatus abluant.
Quicunque in alta siderum
Regnatis aula Principes,
Favete votis supplicum
Qui dona coeli flagitant.
Virtus, honor, laus, gloria
Deo Patri cum Filio,
Sancto simul Paraclyto
In seculorum secula.
Amen.
O Jesu, who eternal life
Do give, help thy redeemed ones;
O Virgin full of clemency,
Thy poor distressed servants save.
Ye Myriads of Angels, and
Assembly of the Patriarchs,
Ye Prophets, pray for guilty souls
That we indulgence may obtain.
Let John the Baptist, Christ's forerunner,
And the great Keeper of Heavens Keys,
With all the Apostles, break the bonds
Of sin, wherein we fettered lie.
And let triumphant Martyrs, with
The goodly Quire of Sacred Priests,
And Virgins holy chastity,
Wash our polluted Souls from guilt.
All ye that with the eternal King
As Princes reign above the Stars,
Favor the prayers of suppliants,
That humbly beg the boons of Heaven.
All power, honor, glory, laud
To God the Father and the Son,
And to the Holy Paraclete,
Both now and evermore.
Amen.
A Hymn common to any Martyr.
Brev. Romans
Invicte Martyr, unicum
Patris secutus filium,
Victis triumphas hostibus,
Victor fruens coelestibus.
Tui precatus munere
Nostrum reatum dilue,
Arcens mali contagium,
Vitae repellens taedium.
Soluta jam sunt vincula
Tui sacrati corporis,
Nos solve vinclis seculi
Dono superni numinis.
Deo Patri sit gloria, etc.
Unconquered Martyr, follower
Of Christ, the Fathers only Son,
Triumphing over thy vanquished foes
As victor thou to Heaven art come.
By mediation of thy prayers,
Wash off the guilt of all our sin;
It Is sad contagion too prevent
And tedious griefs of life repel.
Thy sacred body's bonds uneasy
Are loosed, and thou at liberty,
Now by the grant of God above,
From this worlds fetters set us free.
To God the Father, etc.
A Hymn for any Apostle.
Brev. Romans
Exultet orbis gaudiis,
Coelum resultet laudibus;
Apostolorum gloriam
Tellus and astra concinunt.
Vos seculorum judices,
Et vera mundi lumina,
Votis precamur cordium
Audite preces supplicum.
Qui templa coeli clauditis,
Serasque verbo solvitis,
Nos a reatu noxios
Solvi jubete, quaesumus:
Praecepta quorum protinus
Languor, salusque sentiunt,
Sanate mentes languidas,
Augete nos virturibus.
Ut cum redibit Arbiter
In fine Christus seculi;
Nos sempiterni gaudii
Concedat esse compotes.
Let all the Earth now leap for joy,
And let the Heavens with praise resound;
The glory of the Apostles name,
Both Earth and Stars together sing.
You that are Judges of the world,
And its true Lights that brightly shine,
With heartiest wishes we entreat,
Our humble supplications hear.
Ye that do shut Heavens Temple gates,
And by your word unlock the same,
Our guilty souls from punishment
Release, we pray, by your command.
For in an instant your commands
Sickness and health do both perceive;
Heal therefore our diseased minds,
And every grace in us increase.
That when our Savior shall return
When time is past to judge the world,
His sentence may award to us
Those joys that never shall have end.
For the Apostles.
Missal. Romans antiq. in fine.
Coeli cives digni dici,
Christi Fratres and amici,
Confessuri judices.
Quando dies erit ire,
Date nobis non sentire
Flammas culpae vindices.
Ye that are citizens of Heaven above,
Christ's Brethren and the Friends whom he does love.
And shall together Judges sit.
When death our Souls shall from our body sever,
Secure us from the avenging flames, that ever
Torment men in the infernal pit.
[But the most fulsome Courtship of Saints I meet with, are those strains that
are directed to the Relations of our Savior according to the flesh; of whom
the Scripture speaks very little, (I except here the Bl. Virgin, whom I at
present pass over) it neither tells us any thing of the piety of some of them;
nor advances any of them in excellency or interest with God, above the rest of
the Apostles and Disciples of Christ; you cannot but observe, that their
unseasonable interposing in matters that related to the office of our Savior,
was repressed by him, rather than at all encouraged; as appears by his answer
to his Parents that found him in the Temple; Luke 2.49.
his answer to the people, Luke 8.21.
that told him that his Mother and his Brethren desired to see and speak with
him; Joh. 2.4.
and his answer to the Bl. Virgin her self, at the Marriage Feast at Cana, when
they wanted Wine. Yet such is the boldness (I may say profaneness) of these
worshippers of Saints, that they represent to God and them, as mighty
prevailing arguments, the relation and kindred they had to our Savior, and
upon that account ask the greatest boons. I Will instance only in those to S.
Joseph, and to Joachim and Anna the Parents of the Bl. Virgin.]

To S. Joseph.
Offic. Nova Sanct. 19. Mart.
Coelitum, Joseph, decus, atque nostrae
Certa spes vitae, columenque mundi,
Quas tibi laeti canimus, benignus
Suscipe lauds.
Ibid. ad Lauds.
Ergo regnantem flagitemus omnes
Adsit ut nobis, veniamque nostris
Obtinens culpis, tribuat supernae
Munera pacis.
Her. B Virg. sec. us. Romans
Salve Joseph, salvatoris.
Sancte Pater nomine;
Locum tenens tunc Tutoris,
Cum Maria conjuge;
Virgo custos es uxoris
Vicem gerens gerulae;
Sponsus testis es pudoris
Sponsae tantae gratiae.
Ad te Patrem putativum
Dolens fundo gemitum,
Ut me factum abortivum
Ad tutum ducas exitum.
These last Verses I have not left out here, though I occasionally mentioned
them at the beginning of the Book.
Cum securi, faber sancte,
Excide in me vitium,
Ut sim lignum adoptivum
Ad coeli Palatium.
Joseph, Heavens ornament, the hope
That stays our hearts, the world's sure prop,
Receive those praises graciously
We gladly sing to thee.
We therefore pray, now thou do reign,
Be present with us, and obtain
Forgiveness of our sins, never cease
To give Heavens gifts of peace.
All Hail to thee, Joseph, our Saviors Father,
Father in name thou art, but not in truth;
Thou had the charge, or thy wife Mary rather,
To be the careful Guardian of his Youth;
Thou Virgin Keeper of a Virgin wife,
Who did like an officious Nurse stand by;
Thou strict observer of this Fair-ones life,
And faithful witness of her chastity.
To thee that art Christ's Father styled,
My sad and doleful sighs I send,
That me forelorn abortive child
Thou may conduct to happy end.
With Axe, O Carpenter so good,
Cut down my vices forward spring,
That I may prove adopted wood
Fit for the Palace of Heavens King.
Suitable to this, I find in the old Roman Missal, upon the Feast of the most
Holy Joseph our Lord Jesus Christ's Foster-father, (Nutricii) this following
Prayer.

DEus qui dedisti nobis regale sacerdotium; praesta quaesumus, ut sicut Beatus
Joseph, unigenitum tuum, natum de Virgin Maria, suis manibus reverenter
tractare meruit and portare; ita nos facias, cum cordis munditia and operis
innocentia, tuis sacris Altaribus deservire.

Per eundem, etc.

O God, who have given to us a royal Priesthood; grant we beseech thee, that as
Bl. Joseph merited reverently to handle and bear in his hands thy only begotten
Son, born of the Virgin Mary; so thou would make us with cleanness of heart,
and innocence of deed, to serve at thy sacred Altars. By the same, etc.

It is also observable, that as in the Breviary, there is a set Office on
Saturdays for the Virgin Mary; so also at the end of Diverse Litanies printed
at Colen, 1643. there is a Weekly Exercise (Exercitium Hebdomadarium the Title
is) collected by an English Priest, and set forth with License and Approbation;
there you have for Sunday an Office of the H. Trinity: for Monday an Office of
the H. Ghost: for Tuesday an Office of the H. Name of Jesus: for Wednesday an
Office of the Guardian Angel: for Thursday an Office of the H. Sacrament: for
Friday an Office of the H. Cross: and for Saturday an Office of S. Joseph,
which is furnished with Hymns and Prayers, and the Devotions divided among the
seven Canonical Hours; and it concludes with this Recommendation to him.

Has Horas Canonicas cum attentione
Dixi, sancte Joseph, tui ratione:
Ut sis memor mei in oratione,
Ut vivamus simul in coeli regione.
I do these Hours Canonical repeat
For thy sake, Joseph, with attention great:
That in thy prayers I may remembered be,
And in Heavens glory ever live with thee.
To S. Joachim.
In the old Roman Missal, (Festo S. Joachim) they make this address to him.

Verse. O Joachim sanctae conjux Annae, Pater almae Virginis, hinc famulis
confer salutis opem. O Joachim husband of S. Anne, and Father of the Bl.
Virgin, from hence bestow saving help on thy servants. Then follows a long
Prosa, as they call it, which concludes thus.

Vale Pater inclyte,
Placa regem gloriae
In hanc valle miseriae:
Clara Dei facie
Da frui in requie
Sanctorum Sanctae curiae.
O Pater Reginae coeli nos adjuva. Amen.
Brev. Romans ant. de S. Joach. Mart. 20.
O Pater summae Joachim puellae,
Quae Deum clauso genuit pudore,
Promove nostras Domino querelas,
Castaque vota.
Scis quot hic saevis agitemur undis,
Triste quos mundi mare defatigat;
Scis quot adnectat Satanas caroque
Praelia nobis.
Jam sacris junctus superum catervis,
Immo praecedens, potes omne, si vis;
Nihil nepos Jesus merito negabit,
Nil tibi nata.
Farewell great Father,
Heavens blessed King appease,
In this sad vale of tears and misery:
Grant Gods bright face hereafter we may see
In Heaven where happy Saints have rest and ease.
O Father of the Queen of Heaven help us. Amen.
Joachim, Father of that blessed Maid,
Who brought forth God, yet Virgin did remain;
See our chaste vows we make to God, be paid,
And all our prayers promote, when we complain.
Tossed in this Sea with many a cruel wave,
Thou know we weak and weather-beaten are;
Thou know what combats we are like to have,
Which flesh and Satan our sworn foes prepare.
And now you are placed among the blessed so high,
Thou can do every thing thou art inclined to;
Thy Nephew Jesus sure will not deny,
Much less thy Daughter, what thou have a mind to.
To S. Anna.
As they have thus advanced the Father, so I find them in a like strain,
courting this Mother of the Blessed Virgin; of which I Will only give a brief
instance or two, and conclude these Hymns.

Brev. Sarum ad Jul. 26.
O vas coelestis gratiae,
Matter Reginae Virginum,
Per te precamur anxie
Remissionem criminum.
Memento Matter inclyta
Quam potens es per filiam;
Et nobis prece solita
Procura Dei gratiam.
O vessel of celestial grace,
Blessed Mother to the Virgin's Queen,
By thee we beg in the first place
Remission of all former sin.
Great Mother, always keep in mind
The power thou have by thy sweet Daughter;
And by thy wonted prayer let us find
Gods grace procured to us hereafter.
In another Hymn, after high commendations of S. Anne, they conclude thus.

Ibid.
Ergo te rogamus
Rogantes supplicamus,
Ut quod potes, velis,
Prece da nos coelis;
Placans nobis natam
Mundo per te datam;
Illa Natum suum,
Tu Nepotem tuum.
Therefore still asking we remain,
And thy unwearied suitors are,
That what thou can, thou would obtain,
And give us Heaven by thy Prayer.
Do thou appease the Daughter thou did bear,
She her own Son, and thou thy Nephew dear.
Devotions to Angels.
THat the Devotions may be continued, and not interrupted by any large
Discourse, I shall here go on, with such as I meet with, in their Books, that
relate to Angels; and reserve what I shall say concerning the worshipping of
Angels, to the Conclusion.

A Prayer to all the Quire of Angels.
Horae sec. us. Sar. f. 92.
O Inflammati Seraphim ardentes dilectione. O illustrati Cherubim lucentes
cognitione. O summi throni judicantes Dei sessione. O supernae dominationes
dominantes divina largitione. O inclyti principatus aliis praefecti
gubernatione. O mirandae potestates daemones arcentes dei jussione. O clarae
virtutes miracula facientes pro fidelium illuminatione. O sancti Archangeli
magnis majora nunciantes. O boni Angeli curam hominum continuam habentes.
Intendite ministerium vestrum ad custodiam nostram; dirigentes cogitatus verba
and actus nostros in viam salutis and prosperitatis; ut mandatorum dei
voluntarii cultores, numerum vestrorum ordinum (qui casu Luciferi diminutus
est) valeamus divina largiente misericordia feliciter adimplere.

O Inflamed Seraphims burning with love. O Illustrated Cherubims shining with
knowledge O high Thrones, judging in the session of God. O supreme Dominations,
bearing rule by the Divine gift. O famous Principalities, set over others in
governing. O wondrous Powers, driving away Devils by Gods command. O admirable
Mights, doing Miracles for the illumination of the faithful. O holy Archangels
telling greater things to great persons. O ye good Angels, having continual
care of men. Mind your ministry for our custody; directing our thoughts words
and actions into the way of salvation and prosperity; that so we being willing
worshippers of the commands of God, we may be able happily to fill up the
number of your Orders (which is diminished by the fall of Lucifer) the divine
mercy granting it.

Another Prayer to the Holy Angels.
Ibid.
OMnes sancti Angelorum ordines, orate pro nobis. O felices incolae patriae
coelestis, spiritus immortales, astra maturina, rectores orbis, amatores
hominum, and summi Ministri divinae voluntatis: qui de pestifero Dracone
potenter triumphantes, ipso corruente manetis in gloria perpetuae felicitatis.
Vos, inquam, deprecor, ut me vestrae gratiae conservum ab hostium incursu
piissime protegentes, misero morienti consolatores adesse dignemini; ne
spiritum in an gustiis haerentem violenter opprimat turba malignorum; sed ex
omni part vestro fultus praesidio, finaliter requiescam in Deo salutari. Cui
est honor and gloria and imperium in secula seculorum.

Amen.
O All ye holy Orders of Angels, pray for us. O ye happy Inhabitants of the
celestial Country, ye immortal Spirits, morning Stars, Governors of the World,
lovers of Men, and chief Ministers of the Divine pleasure; who powerfully
triumphing over the pestilent Dragon, though he tumbled down, yet you abide in
the glory of perpetual felicity. To you, I say, I pray, that mercifully
protecting me, who am a fellow servants of your grace, from the incursion of
enemies, you would vouchsafe to be present to comfort me miserable man when I
am dying; lest the troop of Malignant Spirits violently oppress my spirit
sticking in those straits; but on every side being supported by your
safeguard, I may finally rest in God my salvation. To whom be honor, glory,
and dominion, throughout all Ages. Amen.

Another Prayer, wherein Angels are invoked, promising mighty things to those
that use it, as appears by the following Rubric, in the Hours of Sarum.
This Prayer was showed to S. Augustine, by revelacyon of the H. Ghost, and who
that devoutly say this prayer, or hyre read, or bears about them, shall not
peryshe in fire or water, another in batyll or jugement, and he shall not dye of
sodyne death, and no venym shall poysinne him that day; and what he asks of
God he shall obtain, if it be to the salvacyon of his soul, and when thy
soul shall depart from thy body it shall not enter to Hell.

Oration.
DEus propitius esto mihi peccatori; and custos meus sis omnibus diebus ac
noctibus vitae meae. Deus Abraham, Deus Isaac, Deus Jacob miserere mei; and
mitte mihi in adjutorium Sanctum Michaelem Archangelum, qui me defendat and
protegat ab omnibus inimicis meis. Sancte Michael Archangele defend me in
periculo, ut non peream in tremendo judicio. O Sancte Michael Archangele, per
gratiam quam meruisti te deprecor, and per unigenitum filium dei Dominum
nostrum Jesum Christum; ut eripias me hodie a periculo mortis. Sancte Gabriel,
Sancte Raphael, Omnes Sancti Angeli and Archangeli Dei, succurite mihi. Precor
vos omnes virtutes coelorum, ut detis mihi auxilium and potentiam, ut nullus
inimicus me condemnare possit in via, nec in aqua, nec in igne, nec subitanea
morte me, nec dormientem, nec vigilantem opprimat aut laedat. Ecce crucem
Domini, fugite parts adversae: vicit Leo de Tribu Juda, radix David. Alleluja.
Salvator Mundi salva nos, qui per crucem and sanguinem tuum redemisti nos.
Auxiliare nobis te deprecamur Deus noster. Agios O theos, agios ischyros, agyos
athanatos, eleison ymas. Sancte Deus, sancte fortis, sancte and immortalis
miserere nobis. Crux Christi salva nos. Crux Christi protege nos. Crux Christi
defend nos. In nomine Patris and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti.

Amen.
The Prayer.
O God be merciful to me a sinner, and be thou my Keeper all the days and
nights of my life. God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob, have mercy upon
me; and send me Saint Michael the Archangel to my help, who may defend me, and
protect me from all mine enemies. O Saint Michael the Archangel defend me in
danger, that I may not perish in the dreadful judgment. O Saint Michael the
Archangel, I pray thee, by the grace thou have merited, and by the only
begotten Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ; that thou would deliver me this
day from the danger of death. O S. Gabriel, S. Raphael, all ye holy Angels and
Archangels of God, succor me. I pray you, all ye powers of Heaven, that you
would give me help and power, that no enemy may be able to condemn me in the
way, nor in water, nor in fire, nor may oppress or hurt me by sudden death,
neither sleeping nor waking. Behold the Lord's cross, fly away ye adverse
powers. The Lion of the Tribe of Judah the root of David has overcome.
Allelujah. O Savior of the World save us, who have redeemed us by thy cross
and blood. Help us, we pray thee, O our God. Holy God, holy strong, holy
immortal, have mercy upon us. Holy God, holy strong, holy and immortal, have
mercy on us. O cross of Christ save us. O cross of Christ protect us. O cross
of Christ defend us. In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost.

Amen.
At the end of another Prayer to Christ they conclude thus.

Hora. sec. us. Sar. f. 83.
Sancte Michael esto mihi lorica. Sancte Gabriel esto mihi galea. Sancte
Raphael esto mihi scutum. Sancte Vriel esto mihi defensor. Sancte Cherubin esto
mihi sanitas. Sancte Seraphin esto mihi veritas. Et omnes Sancti Angeli and
Archangeli me custodiant, protegant and defendant; and ad vitam aeternam me
perducant.

Amen.
Saint Michael, be thou my Coat of Mail. S. Gabriel be thou my Helmet. S.
Raphael be thou my shield. S. Uriel be thou my defender. S. Cherubin be thou my
health. S. Seraphin be thou my truth. And may all the Holy Angels and
Archangels keep, protect and defend me, and bring me to eternal life.

Amen.
A Litany, concerning the Holy Angels. After their Addresses to God, the Bl.
Trinity, and the Virgin Mary, it proceeds thus.
Litania varia. Colon. 1643. cum Approbat.
S. Michael, who have always defended the People of God. Pray for us. S.
Michael, who did thrust down Lucifer with his rebellious accomplices from
Heaven. Pray for us. S. Michael, who did cast the Accuser of our Brethren
into the depth of Hell. Pray for us. S. Gabriel, who did open the Divine
Vision to Daniel. Pray for us. S. Gabriel, who foretoldest the Birth and
Ministry of John the Baptist. Pray for us. S. Gabriel, who wast the Messenger
of the Incarnation of the Divine Word. Pray for us. S. Raphael, who did
conduct and bring back Tobias in safety. Pray for us. S. Raphael, who did
expel a Devil out of Sara. Pray for us. S. Raphael, who did recover the
sight of Tobias senior. Pray for us. O ye holy Angels. Pray for us. Pray for
us. Ye that stand upon the high and elevated Throne of God. Pray for us. Ye
that continually sing to God, Holy, holy, holy. Pray for us. Ye that illuminate
our minds, dispelling their darkness. Pray for us. Ye that declare Divine
things to Men. Pray for us. Ye that have received from God the custody of Men.
Pray for us. Ye that always see the face of the Father which is in Heaven. Pray
for us. Ye that rejoice over one sinner that repents. Pray for us. Ye that
smote the Sodomites with blindness. Pray for us. Ye that brought out Lot from
the midst of sinners. Pray for us. Ye that ascended and descended on Jacob's
Ladder. Pray for us. Ye that delivered the Divine Law to Moses on Mount Sinai.
Pray for us. Ye that brought tidings of joy to Men, when Christ was born. Pray
for us. Ye that ministered to Christ in the Desert. Pray for us. Ye that carried
Lazarus into Abraham's bosom. Pray for us. Ye that sat by the Sepulcher of
Christ in white Garments. Pray for us. Ye that when Christ ascended into
Heaven, appeared to his Disciples. Pray for us. Ye that shall go before Christ
with the sign of the cross, when he comes to Judgment. Pray for us. Ye that
shall gather together the Elect at the end of the World. Pray for us. Ye that
shall gather all things that offend out of Christ's Kingdom. Pray for us. Ye
that shall separate the bad from among the just. Pray for us. Ye that bring the
requests of them that pray, unto God. Pray for us. Ye that assist dying
Persons. Pray for us. Ye that conveigh to Heaven the Souls of the Just, that
are purged from all stain. Pray for us. Ye that work Wonders and Miracles by
the Power of God. Pray for us. Ye that are sent to minister to those that long
for the inheritance of salvation. Pray for us. Ye that cure Babylon, and depart
and leave her when she will not be cured. Pray for us. Ye that are constituted
Rulers over Kingdoms and Provinces. Pray for us. Ye that have often dispersed
the Hosts of Enemies. Pray for us. Ye that have often delivered the Servants of
God from Prisons, and other dangers of Life. Pray for us. Ye that have often
comforted Holy Martyrs in their Torments. Pray for us. Ye that are wont to
cherish with a peculiar care the Prelates of the Church, and Princes that are
Foster-Fathers of the same. Pray for us. O all ye holy Orders of blessed
Spirits. Pray for us. From all dangers, by thy Holy Angels, Deliver us O Lord.
Pray for us.
The rest that follows is common with other Litanies, and therefore I omit it:
but this is enough to show, how they court the H. Angels, and think to gratify
them very much (I suppose) when they tell them of their famous acts, and the
noble Embassies they have been employed in.

You may also take notice, that they have singled three by Name, out of all the
Angels, Michael, Gabriel and Raphael (whom they call, in other Offices, all
Archangels) peculiarly to invoke; and I find in the Salisbury and old Roman
Missals, particular Offices and Masses to these three. To give a few instances,
how they address themselves to each of them.

To S. Raphael the Archangel.
In the old Roman Missal, and also in the Missal of Sarum, I find a proper Mass
of Raphael the Archangel: with the following Rubric by way of Preface to it.

The following Office of Raphael the Archangel, may be celebrated for Pilgrims
or Travelers; that as he conducted and brought back (in his Journey) Tobias
sound and safe, so he would bring back those for whom the Mass is said. It may
also be said for all sick People, and such as are possessed with the Devil,
because he is a Medicinal Angel, who restored sight to Tobias, and dispossessed
a Devil out of Sara his Sons Wife.

Oration.

DEus qui Beatum Raphaelem Archangelum Tobiae famulo tuo properanti praevium
direxisti, and inter hujus vitae ac viae varietates atque discrimina, donasti
custodem: da quaesumus, ut ejusdem protegamur auxilio, quatenus and vitae
praesentis vitemus pericula, and ad gaudia valeamus pervenire coelestia. Per
Dominum, etc.

Verse. Angele Medicinalis, mecum sis perpetualis; and sicut fuisti cum Thobia,
ita sis mecum semper in via.

Secreta.

MItte Deus Archangelum tuum Raphaelem cum medicamine opificem; qui sanitatem
mentis reportet and corporis, misericordiaeque coelestis donum infundat, and
quae in nobis sunt adversa deponat; ut qui nostra iniquitate tabescimus, de
tua, quam non meremur, pietate laetari concedas. Per Dominum.

A Prayer.

O God, who did direct Bl. Raphael the Archangel to go before thy servant
Tobias hastening (in his journey) and gave him to be his Keeper, amidst the
varieties and dangers of this life and way: grant, we beseech thee, that we may
be protected by his aid, so that both we may shun the dangers of this present
life, and may be able to come to the joys of Heaven. Through our Lord, etc.

Blessed Angel, who art styled Medicinal,
Give us thy company perpetual:
And as thou wast a Guide to good Tobias,
So in our way, let no ill chance come nigh us.
O God, send thy Archangel Raphael a skilful worker with his medicine; who may
bring health of soul and body, and infuse the gift of celestial mercy. and may
put away those things that are contraries in us; that so we who wast away in
our iniquities, thou would vouchsafe to comfort us with thy pity, which we
do not deserve.

Through our Lord.

A Prayer to S. Raphael.
Hor. sec. us. Sarum, f. 92.
AUxiliare mihi and tu Princeps obsecro eximie Raphael, animarum corporisque
optime Medicator, and qui corporeos Thobiae oculos praesentialiter medicando
illuminasti, meos quoque spirituales and carnales oculos illustra, and cunctas
mei cordis and corporis tenebras amputare coelitus orando ne deseras.

Pater noster, etc.

Ave Maria, etc.

I Entreat thee also, do thou assist me O excellent Prince Raphael, thou best
Physician of soul and body, and thou that did presently inlighten the bodily
eyes of Tobias by curing them; do thou also inlighten my spiritual and carnal
eyes, and do not cease by thy heavenly prayer, to cut off all the darkness of
my heart and body.

Our Father, etc.

Hail Mary, etc.

A Prayer before we take in hand any journey.
O Good God, Manual of godly Prayers, at the end, 1610.
whom it pleased to direct Abraham, Jacob and young Tobias in their
peregrinations, and brought them in health and safety into their Country;
Grant, I beseech thee, to be my director in this journey, which I would in no
wise undertake (much less follow and finish) if I knew it any way contrary to
thy holy will. Therefore, O Lord, give me Raphael for my conductor, to whose
custody I may be delivered, and thereby be brought with happy success to the
accomplishing that work, whereunto I prepare and dispose my self. Direct my
understanding, O Lord, to the end that my feet no where stray from the
observations of thy holy commandments. In the name of thy beloved son Jesus
Christ our Redeemer, who with thee, etc. Amen.

To S. Gabriel the Archangel.
Though I find no proper Office in the present Reformed Breviaries for S.
Gabriel, yet there is a large one for him in the Old Roman Breviary, with Hymns
and Lessons (and a proper Mass to him in the old Roman and Salisbury Missal)
there you have this Prayer at the beginning.

ILlumina, quaesumus Domine, mentes nostras fidei claritate; ut beati Gabrielis
annunciatione jocunda, and omnis militiae coelestis interventione continua in
tuo semper amore crescamus.

Per Dominum.

O Lord we beseech thee, inlighten our minds with clearness of faith; that by
the pleasant Annunciation of Bl. Gabriel, and by the continual intercession of
all the Heavenly militia, we may always increase in thy love.

Through our Lord.

At the very end of the Office we have this Antiphona.

Ad nos veni Praeco pie
Gabriel Dei coelorum;
Ave dulce dic Mariae
Tecum ducens coeli chorum;
Nosque serves in hac die
Ab insultu peccatorum;
Ambulemus ut in die
Per profectum meritorum.
Come Gabriel Gods holy Crier,
And thy sweet Hail to Mary say;
Bring in thy train the Heavenly Quire;
Save us from sin's assaults this day:
That daily we may progress make
In virtues meritorious track.
The old Roman Missal has a great many admirable strains in a Prosa de S.
Gabriele; of which take a few Verses.

Missal. Romans antiq. f. 52.
Nunc laetetur plebs fidelis
Recolendo Gabrielis
Lauds and praeconia;
Omnis homo omni die
Gabrielis and Mariae
Poscat beneficia.
Ex his manet fons virtutis,
Dulcor vitae, spes salutis
Et diffusa gratia.
-- Ab aversis nos evelle
Sana morbos and expelle
Pestes and Doemonia.
Gabriel qui descendisti
Cum salute, servos Christi
Ducas ad coelestia.
Now let the Saints be joyful whilst they tell
The praises and renown of Gabriel.
Thou that would ask good boons and not miscarry,
Make thine address to Gabriel and Mary.
These are the spring whence virtue flows a pace,
Heavens hope, life's sweetness and diffused grace.
Then it follows a little after,

Heal our diseases, all afflictive evils
Remove, and rout both Pestilence and Devils.
To earth thou came salvation to proclaim,
To Heaven conduct us to enjoy the same.
A Prayer to S. Gabriel.
Hor. sec. us. Sarum.
PRecor and te o Princeps egregie, Gabriel fortissime, agonista certantium;
exurge mihi in adjutorium adversus malignantes: esto mecum contra adversarios
meos, and contra omnes operantes iniquitatem: detege versutos hosts and
contere violentos; ut omnes adversantes mihi tuo opitulatu victi fugentur;
favente Domino nostro Jesu Christo. Who with the Father, etc.

Pater noster. Ave Maria.

I Pray also unto thee, O excellent Prince, most valiant Gabriel, the champion
of those that contend; rise up for my help against the malignants: be thou with
me against my adversaries, and against all that work iniquity: detect the
crafty enemies and break in pieces the violent; that all mine adversaries may
be driven away, being overcome by thy help. Our Lord Jesus Christ favoring. To
whom, etc.

Our Father. Hail Mary.

To S. Michael the Archangel.
Anaph.

Hor. sec. us. Romans Sept. 29.
PRinceps gloriosissime Michael, dux exercituum, susceptor animarum, debellator
malorum spirituum, Ecclesiae Dei, post Christum, dux admirabilis grandis
excellentiae and virtutis: omnes clamantes ad te ab omni libera adversitate;
and in cultu Dei facias proficere tuo pretioso officio and dignissima prece.

Anaph.

Alia Hor. sec. us Romans
MIchael Archangele, Paradisi praeposite, veni in adjutorium populo Dei, and
velis nos defendere a potestate inimici, and tecum ducere in societatem Domini.

Let us pray.

Hor. sec. us. Romans 1570.
OMnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui saluti humanae naturae ex summa clementia tua
gloriosum principem Ecclesiae tuae beatum Michaelem Archangelum mirabiliter
deputasti; concede propitius, ut ejus salutari subsidio, hic mereamur a malis
actibus efficacissime tueri; and in futuro nostro obitu, ab omni tentatione
liberari, and tuae excelsae majestati beatifice praesentari. Per Dominum.

MOst glorious Prince Michael, the Captain of (Gods) hosts, the Receiver of
Souls, the vanquisher of evil spirits, the Admirable General, next to Christ,
of God's Church, of great excellency and power: deliver all that cry unto thee
from all adversity; and make them to advance in the worship of God by thy
precious office and most worthy prayer.

O Michael the Archangel, chief officer of Paradise, come to the help of Gods
people, and be pleased to defend us from the power of the enemy, and bring us
with thee into the society of the Lord.

ALmighty everlasting God, who out of thy great clemency, have wonderfully
deputed the glorious Prince of thy Church, blessed Michael the Archangel for
the salvation of humane Nature; mercifully grant, that by his saving aid, we
may merit to be most effectually defended here from evil actions; and when we
shall dye, to be freed from all temptation, and beatifically presented before
thy high Majesty. Through our Lord, etc.

A Prayer to S. Michael for the defense of the Church.
Manual of Godly prayers, 1610. with License.
O Warlike Prince, S. Michael Archangel, who have gloriously triumphed over the
infernal Dragon, and have hitherto valiantly defended the Church of God, come
unto the aid and succor of the Catholic people, and procure to the Church
Militant, victory against the furious beast of Infidelity and Heresy: prevent
and quite overthrow all their machinations and subtle devices, and drive them
out of all Christian Kingdoms: and likewise defend us both in our life and
death, against the assaults of the Devil; and bring our souls after death, to
the place of everlasting repose: Through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior.
Amen.

In the reformed Breviary of Pius V. upon the 29. September, on the Feast of S.
Michael, I find this Hymn following, (to which I Will annex their own Translation
in Meeter, for a taste of their English Poetry, as we have it in the Manual of
Godly Prayers, 1610. p. 388.

Tibi Christ splendour Patris,
Vita, virtus cordium,
In conspectu Angelorum
Votis, voce Psallimus,
Alternantes concrepando
Melos damus vocibus.
Collaudamus venerantes
Omnes coeli milites;
Sed praecipue Primatem
Coelestis exercitus,
Michaelem in virtute
Conterentem Zabulum.
Quo custode procul pelle
Rex Christ piissime,
Omne nefas inimici;
Mundo cord and corpore.
Paradiso read tuo
Nos sola clementia.
Gloriam Patri melodis
Personemus vocibus;
Gloriam Christo canamus,
Gloriam Paraclito.
Qui trinus and unus Deus
Extat ante secula.
Amen.
Thy Fathers brightness Christ to thee,
Life and virtue of our hearts:
In goodly view of Angels all,
In vow and voice we sing our parts,
Sounding in ensuing course,
Music to our speech imparts.
In worshipping at once we praise,
All the host of Heaven high;
But Michael as the chiefest
Of the Heavenly company,
Who Zabulon his strength destroyed
With great forces utterly.
Under whose guard expel away
Of our foes each wicked thing,
With our hearts and bodies cleansed,
O our holy Christ and King.
Vouchsafe by thy good grace alone
Us to Paradise to bring.
Let us the Fathers glory sound,
With well seeming melody;
And let us glory unto Christ
Also yield in harmony;
And glory to the holy Ghost,
Ever God in persons three.
Amen.
But besides all this, they have dedicated Feasts to S. Michael, upon the most
fabulous stories imaginable, of his wondrous Apparitions, and revelations to
particular persons, requiring them to build Churches to his Honor. The
ridiculous original of one of his Feasts upon the Eighth of May, when he
appeared to the Bishop of Siponto and the Drovers upon Mount Garganus, has been
set down already, out of the Breviary, Idolatry of the Romans Church, c. 4.
by Dr. Stillingfleet in his Book of the Idolatry practiced in the Roman
Church. And that you may see how one Fable propagates and spawns more of the
kind, the Breviary of Sarum has given us another perfectly like it, of an
Appearance of Michael upon Mount Tumba, and a Festival appointed for the memory
of it, upon the Sixteenth of October. The story is told in short, by
Vincentius; Vincent. Spec. Hist. l. 23. c. 137
but is finely enlarged by Jacobus de Voragine (de S. Michaele) and out of him
the Salisbury Breviary seems to have taken it: which because it is very
extraordinary, I shall transcribe the Lessons.

Lesson 1.

After that the French Nation being converted to Christianity, Brev. Sarum
October. 16.
had brought under the necks of the proud, through Provinces far and wide:
Michael the Archangel, the chief officer of Paradise, who aforetime had showed
that he would be worshipped in Mount Garganus; he showed also by many signs how
he was to be honored in this place, which by the inhabitants is called Tumba.

Les. 2. This place was heretofore shut up by a dark Wood, but afterward was
reduced to the form of a Sandy shore by the waters of the Sea that surrounded
it. Yet the Sea withdrawing it self, does twice a day afford a passage to
devout people to go to the Church of Michael the Archangel.

Les. 3. Now let us see how this place was dedicated by the Revelation of the
Angel. After that Authbertus Bishop of the said place and beloved of God, had
been twice admonished in his Dream to build a Church to the honor of S.
Michael on the height of that place; it happened that the Bull of a certain man
was hid there for a time by a Thief: The Bishop was warned a third time more
sharply, to build a Church in that place, where the Bull was secretly tied.

Les. 4. And when he desired to be satisfied concerning the largeness and
quantity of ground (for his building) he received an answer in his dream, that
the measure of his building should be that path which the Bull had worn in
circuit with his feet, and he was commanded to see the Bull restored to his
owner.

Les. 5. Then the Bishop being assured of the Vision, went to the foresaid
place, and caused it to be cleansed and levelled. But in the middle of it, two
Rocks stood out; which when they could not remove by the labor of many
Workmen; a certain Man named Bayno, by a divine warning, came to the said place
with his Twelve Sons, and by the help of S. Michael, he removed the Rock, of so
great magnitude, so that there seemed to be no weight there.

Les. 6. When the Bishop doubted still about the bigness of the Fabric, at
Midnight there fell a Dew upon the top of the Mountain, but where the
Foundations were to be placed, there it was altogether dry. And it was said to
the Bishop, Go, and as thou see it signed, lay the Foundations.

Les. 7. Then the Bishop giving thanks to God, built the Fabric on the top of
the Mountain, round like a Vault, capable of holding, as is judged, a Hundred
Men, after the fashion of that in Mount Garganus.

Les. 8. After this, by the advice of Bl. Michael, Messengers were sent to
Mount Garganus, to fetch thence Tokens (pignora) of Bl. Michael; who being
honorably received by the Bishop and Abbot of the place, they humbly declared
the cause of their coming.

Les. 9. The things they came for were delivered to them: viz. part of a red
Mantle, (or short Cloak, pallioli) which Bl. Michael himself laid upon the
Altar, which he built with his own hand; and also part of a Marblestone, upon
which he stood, whose footsteps to this day remain in the said place. Then the
Bishop Authbertus, honorably receiving the said Gifts, finished his work; and
appointed the Offices of Twelve Clergymen there; giving them two Villages out
of his Bishopric, for to sustain them.

You see from this Legend, that when People are mad with superstition, any
story of a Cock and a Bull, will serve their turns to found a Festival upon,
and to give occasion for the further Veneration of a Saint, or an Angel, though
the circumstances are never so improbable. This of removing the Rock is a
pretty stretcher, and is more plainly told in the Festival, the Names only
varied. Also Michael appeared to another Bishop, Festival de S. Michaele, f. 144.
and badde him go to an hill top unto the Mount of Gardell, and there as he
found a Bull teyed, he should make a Church in the worship of God and Saint
Mychaell. Than were there two roches of stone on either side, that the work
might not up. Than Saint Mychaell appeared to a Man that hight Haymo, and badde
him go and put away the roche and dread no thing. So this Man went thither and
set to his shoulders, and badde the roche goo utter in the name of God and
Saint Mychaell and so the hills went utter as much as neded to the work.

And now that this work is thus wonderfully finished, you may be sure that S.
Michael will not be wanting to give countenance and encouragement to his
worship here, by his miraculous works. Jacobus de Voragine has recorded one
fitly matched with those that have gone before. Voragine de S. Michaele.
When a great Multitude were going to this Church (for twice a Day, as we were
told, the Sea that encompasses the Mount gives the People a passage) it
happened that a big-bellied Woman, and near her time, went along with them: And
behold the Sea returned with a mighty force, and all the Company in a great
fright fled to the shore again; only the Woman with Child, not being able to
fly, was overtaken by the Waves of the Sea: But Michael the Archangel preserved
the Woman unhurt; so that she brought forth her Child in the midst of the Sea,
(which was a fine lying in) and taking her Child in her Arms there gave it
suck; and the Sea making her a way, she came forth rejoicing with her Child.

I hope also that the precious piece of S. Michael's red Cloak is forthcoming,
if any have the curiosity to inquire for it, (as who knows but many a one may,
especially those of Jersey Island, to whom this Church is so near) which they
might be the more encouraged to, if those other remains of the Archangel (for
his Relics are since increased) his Dagger and his Shield, are to be seen;
for so they were at the beginning of this Age; though one of their Historians,
See Dallee de object. cult. Relig. l. 4. c. 18. page 683.
Lescarbotus, who describes his Journey to Michael's Mount (which is the same
with our Mount Tumba) says that five Years before he came thither (which was in
the Year 1607) the Bishop of Auranches had forbidden his Shield to be any more
showed: but who knows but some of the succeeding Bishops may have been better
natured, and not have denied this gratification to the desires of their gaping
Devoto's.

To the Guardian-Angel.
THe Guardian Angels had a place in the old Roman Breviary, upon the first of
March, but the Office was not so formal, with Prayers and Hymns, as it was
since made by Pope Paulus V. who set out Officium Angeli custodis, an Office of
the Guardian Angel, which was Printed at Colen, 1613. and there was joined to
it a Treatise, de Angelo custode, concerning the Guardian Angel, composed by
Francis. Albertinus, a Jesuit, fitted for the younger Wits, which are
infinitely desirous to know the conditions of those spirits above, but (as the
Preface tells us) were not to be trusted, or counseled to lanch into the deep
Sea, or to try to ascend the inaccessible Mountain of Scripture to find out
their Nature, but must be condescended to by the method of humane
interpretation, (to use his words.) And indeed the Scripture could never have
furnished him with such bold and presuming speculations about this matter, as
their Schoolmen could do; for howsoever some places may seem fairly to
countenance this in the Scripture, and make it a probable opinion; that at some
particular Seasons at least, there have been particular Angels deputed to
preside over a Country or Province; and so also that they have had the charge
of particular Persons; yet the evidence of it there, is not so cogent, as that
it should be put as an Article of Faith into Sums of Divinity, or that Prayers
and Offices should be made to them, and they religiously courted and worshipped
under that notion. To determine, as this Author does, that every Church and
Temple has a peculiar Angel to guard it, to tell us the like of Monasteries and
Colleges, cap. 2.
and of every Family; nay, that every Altar, as soon as it is consecrated, is
committed to the custody of a particular Angel; cap. 20.
To know that Adam had such a Guardian Angel in innocence, and that his
Posterity would all have needed such, cap. 4.
if he had never fallen; that Antichrist shall have one, to keep him from doing
greater mischief, cap. 8.
and that Christ only neither needed, nor had one; to be able to understand to
what Hierarchy those Angels belong, cap. 5.
that are Guardians; whether any, or how many of the Orders are exempted, that
the Angel that comforted our Savior in his Agony in the Garden, as well as
that which admonished Joseph not to forsake the Bl. Virgin, and to fly with the
Child Jesus into Egypt, was a Seraphin, and of no other Order of Angels. To
know that the number of Archangels is greater than that of Angels; and to know
how many times the number of Angels exceeds the number of all Mankind; These
are things which the useful plainness of Holy Writ meddles not with, cap. 3.
but the impertinent curiosity, and trifling subtilty of the Schools is busy
and forward to determine; and some of them are vouched by Revelations, of those
whom they call Prophetic Women; as the last I named by S. Brigid, whom our
Author cites in these words. If all the Men that have been born since Adam, to
the last Man that shall be born in the very end of the World, should be
computed; there would be found more than Ten Angels for every single man. (By
which manner of speaking, this Prophetess, who is so exact a Computer, would
have us, I suppose, to conclude, that it would be a great mistake to think that
the number of Angels was either 9, or 11. for one of Men.) These are fine
Institutes to season Youth withal, to whom the Bible would be a dangerous
Book. After a great deal more such stuff as this, he pretends toward the
conclusion to instruct us, Cap. 20, 21, 22.
by what means a Man may enter into a holy familiarity with his Guardian Angel
(which I leave the Reader to consult him about) and at last gives us an example
of addressing to this Angel, p. 221.
which he calls Colloquium ad Angelum custodem, which take in his words thus
translated.

O most holy Angel, my Companion and Guardian, I give thee thanks from the
bottom of my heart, (who after God and his blessed Mother art to be loved by
me, with the highest affection of mind) I give thee thanks, I say, for all the
benefits bestowed on me, from that moment, in which thou undertookest the care
of my Body and Soul: I also beg pardon for my forepast life, because I cannot
hide the innumerable and shameful crimes, which I hitherto have committed
before thine, and our God's most pure eyes; Humbly beseeching thee, that out of
the Treasury of the Divine Goodness, thou would vouchsafe to obtain for me
readiness and fervor in things spiritual: for being so illuminated, I will
begin a new life, and persevere in a conversation acceptable to God, and not
unworthy of thy Presence. Amen.

This is a pretty improvement, you will say, in devotion, and acceptable talk to
an Angel; and this familiarity does increase daily, so that now the learned Men
dedicate Books, as I remember Schottus the Jesuit does a Book of Mathematics,
to the Tutelar Angel. You cannot well imagine how this profaneness should arise
higher, unless it be in one case, which this Author a little after advances to,
which relates to the Bl. Virgin, in a Form of Oblation of ones self to her,
which I Will only add.

O Most holy Virgin Mary, the Mother of God, p. 224.
I N. though most unworthy every ways, to be received into the number of thy
servants, yet trusting in thy admirable pity, and being strongly moved with a
desire of serving thee, I choose thee this day, in the presence of my
Guardian-Angel, and all the Celestial Court, for my peculiar Mistress,
Patroness and Parent; and do firmly purpose to follow thee, to serve thee, and
to endeavor, that others also may serve thee. I therefore humbly beg of thee,
O mother of all clemency, by that most sacred blood, which Jesus Christ thy Son
shed for me, that thou would vouchsafe to admit me into the number of those,
who have devoted themselves to thee, to be thy perpetual servant: and do thou
obtain for me Grace from God, that in all my thoughts, words and actions, I may
so behave my self, that nothing from me may at any time displease either Gods
eyes or thine; and be thou mindful of me at the hour of my death. Amen.

But it is high time to return into the road of their more public Devotions to
the Guardian-Angel.

A Hymn.
Brev. Romans reform. Offit. Angel. Custod.
Custodes hominum psallimus Angelos,
Naturae fragili quos Pater addidit
Coelestis comites, insidiantibus
Ne succumberet hostibus.
Nam quod corruerit Proditor Angelus,
Concessis merito pulsus honoribus;
Ardens invidia, pellere nititur
Quos coelo Deus advocat.
Huc custos igitur pervigil advola,
Avertens Patria de tibi credita
Tam morbos animi, quam requiescere
Quicquid non sinit incolas.
Sanctae sit Triadi, etc.
The praise of Angels Guardian we sing,
Whom God, our Natures frailty pitying,
Has given for our Companions, to oppose
The power and skill of our insnaring foes.
For since the Rebel Angel fell; from Heaven,
And granted honors there, so justly driven;
He seeks from Heaven to drive, inflamed with spite,
Those whom Gods goodness thither does invite.
Thou watchful Guardian hither therefore fly,
And from that Country, where thy charge does lie,
Divert what ere may prove their minds disease,
And what disturbs the peoples quiet peace.
To the blessed Trinity, etc.
And in the Antiphona at the end of all the Office, they speak thus to the
Angels.

SAncti Angeli custodes nostri, defendite nos in praelio, ut non pereamus in
tremendo judicio. O Ye holy Guardian-Angels defend us in battle, that we may
not perish in the dreadful judgment. I observe also that in the Proper Offices
for the Church of Lisbon, granted by Pope Sixtus V. there is an Office for the
Guardian-Angel of the Kingdom of Portugal, with a Mass to the same, after it,
printed at Lisbon 1625. Also in the Proper Offices for the Order of the H.
Trinity, for redemption of Captives, there is another Office and Mass for the
Guardian-Angel of that Order, printed at Lisbon 1621.

In the Roman Ritual, a dying person is taught to pray thus.

Ritual. Romans in visitat. infirm.
SAncte Angele Dei mihi custos assiste. Omnes sancti Angeli and omnes sancti
intercedite pro me, and mihi succurrite. O Holy Angel of God, assist me as my
keeper. All ye holy Angels and all ye Saints intercede for me, and succor me.
A Prayer to the proper Angel.
English Primer used in Queen Mary's days, 1555.
O Aungel which art my keeper by Gods merciful providence, preserve, defend
and govern me committed to thy cure: O thou sweet Aungel which remainest with
me, though bodily thou speak not to me, save me both body and soul, I
beseech thee; for that is the only office committed to thy charge.

The Versicle. O blessed Aungel the Messenger of our God.

The Answer. Direct (or rule) my doings, according to the will of the highest
God.

Let us pray.

O God whose pleasure is, to have certain of the holy Angels beningly
appointed to thine assistance, and certain here in earth mercifully to minister
unto men, grant, I beseech thee, that the Aungel committed to keep me, may
direct me in goodness, may stir me up still unto virtue, and most mightelie
deliver me from the pit of sins, in that at the straighte judgment when
there shall be but one fold or shepecote of men and Angels under that mighty
shepherde, I may be found worthy to be counted amongst the sheep of his
flock. Through our Lord Jesus Christ thy son, which lyveth and reigns
with thee very God, world without end. Amen.

Let us pray.

O Holy Aungel of God, the minister of the heavenlye empire, unto whom
Almighty God has committed and deputed the keeping of me: humbly I beseech
thee for his majesty and pities sake, preserve my body and soul and all my
senses, from all wickedness and unlawful desiers, from all hurtful vayn and
unclean thoughts, from all illusions of evil spirits, from defyling of body
and soul, and from the deceites of all my enemies, as well visible as
invisible, which seek destruction of my soul. And be thou my sure protector
and governoure, wheresoever I go day or night, tide or time. Conserve and keep
me in clennes and purity, strengthen me in fear and love of Jesus Christ with
all holy desires: and after this miserable and britel life, carye my soul unto
eternal felicity; where with God and all Saints I may joy world without
end. Our Lord Jesus Christ granting this: to whom be honor and glory for
ever and ever. Amen.

A Brief Conclusion concerning the Worshipping of Angels.
As the design of this Book is to acquaint the Reader with the plain matter of
fact, what kind of Worship and addresses they of the Roman Church make to
Saints and Angels, rather than to enter into the large field of Controversy,
and formally to state and dispute these things; there being scarce any thing
more requisite to confute the usages of that Church, than plainly to expose
them to a full view: So in this particular especially, concerning Worshipping
Angels, less one would imagine should be needful to be said about it, when the
Scripture has so plainly and punctually determined this case, both by express
precept and example: So that I count it a vain and foolish thing to talk or
argue with that man, who will maintain an opinion so directly cross to as full
an evidence as can well be desired in the case: for it is certain he must act
the part of a perverse Sophister, whose wit only serves him to shift off and
evade the force of that truth that stares him in the face, and is never likely
to examine any thing fairly and heartily. What can be a more plain caution
against this Worship, than that of the Apostle? Col. 2.18. Let no man beguile
you of your reward in a voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels,
intruding into those things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his
fleshly mind. Not holding the head, etc.

I do not wonder to hear Baronius, who defends the Worshipping of them, Baron.
ad an. 60. Sec. 15.
to cry out, that this place is a very difficult one, not easy to be
understood, and the difficulties cannot be overcome without an exact skill in
the affairs of those times: and after a long inquiry into the opinions of the
Jews, and Simon Magus, Cerinthus and the Philosophers; the great comfort is,
that they have found out men that had such opinions about Angels, which the
Romish Church has not, and such Worshipping of them as is far more infamous and
superstitious than any thing can be charged against them. Whereas the text is
plain against all Worshipping of Angels, and that others are more guilty, is no
argument that they are innocent. No more than because that the Egyptians or
other Heathens thought that the very things they worshipped were Gods,
therefore the Israelites were not guilty of Idolatry in the matter of the
Golden Calf, in offering Incense to the Brazen Serpent, or in sacrificing to
the Calves at Dan and Bethel, in which it was impossible that they should have
such low and vile thoughts of God, or such high thoughts of those Images
themselves, as the other had of theirs; but just such as the Roman Church has,
who think they acceptably worship God by them. The truth is, the Church of Rome
seems to be many ways concerned in that place to the Colossians about
Worshipping Angels, and to be condemned by several things there spoken, (though
we should grant, that the Apostle might have some Heretics or Philosophers in
his eye, when he spoke them, who practiced what he there condemns.) The learned
Grotius (whom no body accounts too severe against their opinions) seems to give
as plain an account of them as any, in his Comments upon the place. Intruding
into those things that he has not seen] i. e. says he, Penetrating into those
things which he has not known; taking liberty to talk about unknown things:
They set Angels over what affairs they pleased, they put names upon them, and
distributed them into Classes (and every one may know that the School Divinity
about Angels, is very peremptory and presuming in this kind; telling us in what
place they were created, resolving whether the number that stood was equal to
that of those that fell; the way whereby they understand, and the way how they
communicate their thoughts one to another; how many orders of them there are,
and the names that belong to each order, etc.)

Not holding the head] i. e. Not holding himself to Christ, whom God has
therefore given to be head to the Church, that by it we might bring our desires
to him. Those many commenders easily give occasion to Schism, the Church
retains unity. There is one God and one Mediator, 1 Timothy 2.5. But to come to
the main thing.

Humility and Worshipping of Angels.] i. e. Humility in Worshipping of Angels.
It has a show of modesty, not to dare to approach to God, but to bring ones
prayers to Angels in order to their being brought to God: by which color the
Philosophers defended Polytheisme, which also Celsus did, as we learn from
Origin. (From whom also Grotius cites several places, to show that the Jews did
not worship Angels.) Which is also the very sense of Theodoret. They, says he,
(...). Theod. in Colos. 2.18.
persuaded them to do this ( i. e. pray to Angels) using the pretense of
humility, saying, That the God of the Universe was invisible and inaccessible
and incomprehensible; and that it was fit we would procure Gods favor by
Angels. So also the same Father, upon those words, Coloss. 3.17. -- do all in
the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by him: He
Comments thus: Because they commanded men to Worship Angels, he enjoyneth the
contrary; that they should adorn their words and deeds with the remembrance of
Christ the Lord; and send up thanksgivings to God and the Father by him, says
he, not by Angels. The Synod of Laodicea also following this Law, and intending
to cure that old Disease, decreed that they should not pray to Angels, nor
forsake our Lord Jesus Christ. This Law of the Council of Laodicea Theodoret
also takes notice of in the place forcited (in Col. 2.18.) in these words.
(...), etc. This vice (of worshipping Angels) has continued a long while in
Phrygia and Pisidia; for which cause also the Synod assembled in Laodicea, a
City of Phrygia, forbad them by a Law to pray unto Angels. And even to this
present are to be seen Oratories of S. Michael (the Archangel) among them and
their borderers. Which last words, Baron. loc. ant. citat.
(notwithstanding all that Baronius has said in favor of those Oratories, from
the wonderful prodigies which Metaphrastes mentions, were showed at Colosse by
S. Michael;) are the more remarkable, because that which Theodoret calls here a
vice in them, is now a common practice in the Roman Church to dedicate Churches
to the honor of S. Michael, and to worship him as a great Protector, as the
Devotions we have set down have told you. The Law which Theodoret speaks of, is
the Five and Thirtieth Canon of the Council of Laodicea, (...) (which Theodoret
called before (...). Pandectae Canon. Council. Laod. Can. 35.
whose words are these. Christians ought not to forsake the Church of God, and
depart aside, and name (or invocate) Angels, and make meetings, which are
things prohibited. If any man therefore be found to give himself to this hidden
Idolatry, let him be Anathema, because he has forsaken our Lord Jesus Christ,
and has approached to Idolatry. Aristenus his words upon this Canon are
remarkable, who after he had mentioned the Heresy of the Angelici, who said
that the world was created by Angels; he after this takes notice of some that
taught, as S. Paul in his Epistle to the Colossians had shown, that Christ by
reason of his Greatness was not so fit to bring us to God as Angels, which,
says he, is a renouncing the Divine Economy under the show of humility (and if
the Romanists do not balk him wholly as too great, yet the joining of this
worship of Angels to that of our Savior, argues as bad an opinion of him as
they had, that is, that he is less good, not merciful and compassionate enough
to be trusted alone in his mediation to God for us.) He therefore, says he, who
joins himself to them, and says that the world was created by Angels, or that
says that by Angels we are brought to God and the Father Zonarus upon this
Canon, in like manner interprets the words of S. Paul. The crime he describes
thus; (...) which humility he explains, (...).
, let him be Anathema, as one that relinquishes our Lord Jesus Christ the Son
of God, and approaches to the opinion of Idolaters. He that would see more of
the sense of the Fathers in this matter of worshipping Angels, may consult the
learned Annotations of Mr. Beverege upon this Canon.

And now though we seem, one would think, to be pretty well secured both of the
meaning of S. Paul and of this Council; yet our Adversaries have attempted to
weaken the force of both, by pretty sleights both of wit and knavery. By the
latter (for I can give it no softer name) they thought to prevent all mischief
this Canon could do their Church, who in the late Latin Collections of the
Canons, instead of Angelos put in angulos, there being but one letter
difference between Angels and corners in the Latin tongue: wherein they showed
their good will to cheat the world; and if there had been no Greek Canons to
discover it (where this trick can have no place, there being no affinity
between Angels and corners in the words of that Language) it might have gone
off with more credit, and have passed at least for a fine conjecture. But this
has been exposed sufficiently by the Reverend Primate of Ireland, in his Answer
to the Jesuits Challenge, page 470, etc. Their Great Cardinal Perron, thought
to have done as much for S. Paul by his wit: for he had invented an
interpretation wherein none went before him in the conjecture, which yet if he
could have made it good, had quite enervated the force of all Arguments from
that place to the Colossians, against Worshipping Angels. His conceit is this.
Du Perron Repliq. l. 5. c. 6. p. 909.
That S. Paul in this phrase Religion of Angels ((...)) takes the Genitive
Angels not objective, but originaliter; so that by that word he understands not
the Religion that is paid to Angels, but that which is received and delivered
by Angels, viz. the Jewish Religion, which the Apostle says, was ordained by
Angels in the hand of a Mediator (Gal. 3.19.) and the word spoken by Angels,
(Heb. 2.2) So that according to this interpretation, the Apostle gives a
Caution against no Religion or way of Worship, save only that of the Jews. But
this fancy of the Cardinal has been as shamefully baffled as the former, by the
great diligence of Monsieur Dallee; who as he has showed the Novelty of it
(having no countenance from the ancient Fathers to back it) and that it has
been exploded by the Learned of his own Church: So also shows, Dallee de
object. cult. relig. adv. Latinor. tradit. lib. 3. c. 31.
that the Genitive of (...), is never taken in his sense, but always in the
other. Thus Wisd. 14.27. The worshipping of Idols ((...)) not to be named, is
the beginning, the cause, and the end of all evil: Infandorum Idolorum cultura.
Vulg. Lat.
Where the worship of Idols, cannot signify (in his way) the worship delivered
by Idols, but the worship given to them. So Jam. 1.26. If any man bridle not
his tongue, (...), his Religion is vain, not the Religion he institutes, but
which he exercises: and Acts 26.5. after the most strict Sect (...) of our
Religion, that is the Jewish, and that not the Religion that they were the
Authors or deliverers of, but that which they practiced. But I leave the Reader
to consult him in the forecited place, who has said a great deal more, to show
the absurdity of Cardinal Perron's interpretation.

But if there should seem any difficulty in the Apostles words considered alone
(though they are plain enough one would think till men begin to play tricks
with them, and by that way any Law, though never so clear, may have some mists
cast before the face of it, which may render it seemingly obscure till they be
dispersed.) Yet now that the Scripture has given us precedents in the case, I
mean examples of this adoration refused, even by those Blessed Spirits to whom
it is pretended to be due: what can any one desire more for his satisfaction?
The places are known to this purpose. Revel. 19.10. And I fell at his feet to
worship him; and he said unto me, see thou do it not. I am thy fellow servants
and of thy Brethren that have the Testimony of Jesus, worship God. And Rev.
22.8, 9. I fell down to worship before the feet of the Angel that showed me
these things; then said he unto me; see thou do it not; for I am thy
fellow servants, and of thy Brethren the Prophets, and of them which keep the
sayings of this book: worship God. Where you see the thing prohibited twice;
and not only barely prohibited; but by the abrupt manner of the Angels
speaking, (...), in the Greek, he shows his hasty concern to prevent it; and
that too with a reason annexed; I am thy fellow servants, etc. which plainly
concludes, that it was not the courtesy of the Angel, but the necessity of the
thing, that made him so shye of accepting the proffered honor; and if this
reason holds good as to Angels themselves, then much more forceably does it
conclude against the religious worship of any Saint, who are all in a much
stricter sense our fellow servants than Angels are: Nay farther, if not only
for this reason it be undue to them, but also unjust and sacrilegious as to
God, the invading one of Gods properties, as the Angels last words imply,
Worship thou God; (for if religious adoration were not such a peculiar of his,
and not to be communicated to any other being, these words of the Angel might
have received this easy answer; worship God? Yes, so I intend always to do,
yet give me leave too to worship thee.) I say, if all this do not give
satisfaction in this Question to an honest mind and plain-meaning person, it is
hard to guess what will; and methinks it should do so in reason to our
adversaries also, who professing to venerate Angels, ought to revere their
determinations and judgment of things; and not to be so uncivil as to argue
Pro, when an Angel is on the other side, and determines Con. But neither man
nor Angel can stop the mouth of a cavilling Sophister, but something he will
have to say, though little to the purpose.

It is so here in our case, we have another Cardinal (viz. Bellarmine) that is
as busy with his fine Quirks and Sophistry, as the former was, to stop the
mouth of these Texts from speaking one syllable against worshipping Angels; nay
farther, (which is a bolder enterprise than that of Perron's) he would make us
believe that they speak for it. For these are his words. Bellarm. de Sanct.
Beat. l. 1. c. 14. ad Quartum dico.
To the fourth example (which is this of S. John and the Angel) I say, it makes
for us. For either John thought him, that appeared to him, to be God, or an
Angel. If he thought him to be God, he was deservedly reproved: (Say thou so,
great wit? If he in thy opinion deserves to be reproved, who worships that
which is not God, even when he thinks him to be God; pray what do thou
deserve, who art for worshipping that which is not God ( viz. a Saint or Angel)
even when thou confessest that he is not God?) "If he thought him to be an
Angel, and yet adored him; why are we reproved, who do what John did? Do the
Calvinists know better than John, whether Angels are to be worshipped? There is
none I dare say, whether Calvinist or not, that is advanced any thing
considerably above a Natural, who can be in danger of being hurt by this Horn
of his Dilemma. For instead of asking, why are we reproved for doing what John
did? One would think it is a more material question to ask, Why was John himself
reproved by the Angel for doing this, if it was, as you say, no fault, taking
him to be an Angel, to worship him? Why do you worship Angels, knowing them to
be such, when John by an Angel was prohibited? What? do Cardinals know better
than Angels, whether Angels are to be worshipped?

One of these Questions, the Cardinal thinks fit to take notice of. Why John
was reprehended? His first answer was considered before, which is, that perhaps
he esteemed him to be Christ. Bellarm. ibid.
The second is more peremptory. I say that John did well to give due worship to
the Angel, as he remembered his Ancestors Abraham and Lot had done, (which is a
great mistake, as Origin sufficiently proves against Celsus, if he means it of
any higher adoration, than was what customarily paid in those Eastern Nations
by prostration to great persons,) "but the Angel prohibited it, in reverence to
Christ's humanity: for Angels before Christ's coming suffered themselves to be
adored by men; but after that God was made man, and that all the Angels began
to adore man in Christ, the Angels would not now be adored by men, and
especially by the Apostles and other great men. [Well, however one would think
we had gained thus much, by this discourse of the Cardinal, that now since the
coming of Christ, all the old worship of Angels (if there was any) is at an
end, and ought no more to be used; no such matter, for he adds,]
Notwithstanding it does not follow that we do ill if we adore Angels; for we
both rightly adore them, and they rightly refuse to be adored. A strange
Conclusion! If S. John at first did well in offering to adore them (before he
knew that reason from our Saviors Incarnation, and the alteration of the
Angels minds as to their willingness to be adored thereupon.) Yet he could not
be said to do it (as he did) a second time rightly (when it is to be hoped, he
knew that reason as well as Bellarmine, and the Fathers he cites) nor we, after
that, to do it rightly, when the same reason still holds, and we may presume,
that the Angels have not taken any toy, and changed their minds once more.

But the secret of it (which is all I shall add) is plainly this: That the
reprehension which the Angel gave to Saint John, according to the Cardinal, was
but a copy of his countenance, and only a great complement: And all that the
Angel said to him in the forenamed Texts, comes but to thus much, if I may have
leave to put it into other words, not injuring the Cardinals sense.

John, I see you understand the excellency of our Natures, and know how to
address your self to persons of our Birth and Quality; but at this time (under
favor and with submission to your judgment) it is a little unseasonable to
make these reverences: for we have all made an agreement, out of our particular
respect to Jesus (whom we worship, and your nature in him) to wave all
ceremonies of this kind from those of the same nature with him, and especially
from you, that have had the honor to be of his Family and Attendance. Besides,
it is no time for us to insist upon these Formalities, being now busy with you
to advance his name, while you carry the Testimony of Jesus to the Gentiles:
when his Religion is established among them, then our Prince Michael will make
some glorious appearances on Mount Garganus, Tumba, and some other places, and
leave some precious remains to indear his and our memory to the world: then it
will be a better season to renew these complements; and of the punctual time,
you, if you live so long, however the Church shall infallibly have due notice,
from a General Council, or, which comes all to one, from the Pope: when they
will be also directed, to prevent mistakes and scandals, to reserve the worship
of Latry for the Holy Trinity, and of Hyperduly for the Blessed Virgin, and for
the Humanity of Christ, and to pay to us Angels the worship of Duly and no
more: In the interim, for once be ruled by me and forbear; and desire others to
do so, and to pay their worship, where, in the present circumstances, it is
more seasonable. Let it suffice, good John, that we accept the will for the
deed, till that time come, when it will be your Duty to worship your
Fellow Servants.

THE END.
An Index of Saints, etc.
Whether forged or abused by the Authors of those Fabulous stories and
Superstitious Devotions, that are considered in this Book.

Those of more special Note are Printed in a Different Character.

A.
ADelheidis. 315 Adon. 36 Aedus. 221 Aengussius. 105. 108 Agnes. 46. 339. 385
Aidan. 74. 89 Aldelme. 341 Alexander. 1. P. 348 Alexius. 170 Ambrose of Siena.
107 Anastasia companion of Vrsula. 138 Anne, Mother of the Bl. Virgin. 46. 64.
397 Antony the Hermit. 235 Antony of Padua. 280 Antoninus, the sleeper. 99
Apollonia. 229 Audoen. 35 Audrey. 166 Austin the Monk. 88
B
Babcaria, compan. of Vrsula. 35 Babyla. 165 Bado. 36 Baldred. 37 Balthazar.
17. 66 Barbara. 271 Bartlemew, Monk. 309. 311 Benedicta, companion of Vrsula.
132 Benigna, compan. of Vrsula. 132 Bennet. 151. 309 Berach. 357 Berthold. 312
Birinus. 78 Blasius. 278 Bonaventure. 325. 331 Brendan. 182 Brigid. 36. 83.
105. 276.
C
Carpophora, companion of Vrsula. 132 Catharine. vid. Katharine. Cecilia. 340
Celedonius. 278 Chelyndris, companion of Vrsula. 132 Christina. 343
Christopher. 5 Ciriacus. P. 135 S. Clara de monte Falconis. 273 Clara, the
Franciscan. 354. 386 Clarus, the Ermit. 77 Claudius. 364 Clementia, companion
of Vrsula. 132 Coleta. 322. 333 Colman. 44. 150 Columba, companion of Vrsula.
132 Columbanus, companion of Vrsula. 134 Constantin, the sleeper. 99 Cordula,
companion of Vrsula. 34. 132. 146 Cosmus. 264 Cuanna. 108 Cuthbert. 80. 104.
312
D
Dadon. 36 Damianus. 264 Daria, compan. of Vrsula. 35 David. 77. 78. 101
Decumanus. 77 Denis, Areopag. 68 Denis, the sleeper. 99 Donatus. 353 Dorothy.
339 Dunstan. 39. 74
E
Eanswitha. 99 K. Edmund, Martyr. 38 Eleutheria, companion of Vrsula. 132
Eleutherius, companion of Denis. 69 Eleutherius, companion of Vrsula. 134
Elias. 170 Elizabeth of Schonaw. 126 Elizabeth, Widow. 355 Emetherius. 278
Endeus, Monk. 59. 90 Erasmus. 362 Etheldred. 166. 371 Ethelfleda. 164
Ethelwold. 310 Etherius, Vrsula's spouse. 140 Ethnea. 322 Exacustadius, the
sleeper. 99
F
Fanchea. 59 Fechinus. 44. 108 Fingar. 44 Finnian. 87 Fintanus. 86 Florentia,
companion of Vrsula. 132 Florentin. 44 Florina, companion of Vrsula. 34 Francis
of Assize. 121. 259. 260 Fursey. 44
G
The Angel Gabriel. 401. 408 Genouefe. 385 Genulph. 83 George. 93 Gerasina, Q.
of Sicily. 132 Gilbert. 176 Gildas Albanius. 102 Godrick. 310 Gonsalvus. 89
Gudila. 242
H
Haseca. 37 Helen, mother of Constantin. 343 Henry, the Hermit. 169
Hermenegild. 384 Hildutus. 80
I
Iamblicus, the sleeper. 99 James, Bishop of Antioch. 127. 134 Jaspar, one of
the three Kings. 17. 66 Indract. 44 Innocents. 365 Joachim, father of the Bl.
Virgin. 395 John the Baptist. 384 John of Beverley. 341 John, the sleeper. 99
Joseph, husband to the Bl. Virgin. 46. 56. 393 Joseph of Arimathea. 29 Jota,
companion of Vrsula. 132 Juliana. 312 Ivo. 85. 330 Justinian. 77 Justus the
Hermit. 42 Juthwara. 77
K
Katharin, daughter of K. Costus. 153 Katharin of Siena. 46 Kentigern. 319.
340. 357 Kienan. 90 Kieran. 83. 256 3 Kings of Colen. 17. 66
L
Laurence. 256 Leobinus. 321 Lewis, Bishop. 232 Libernus. 324 Longinus. 11
Lotharius, companion of Vrsula. 134 Lucia. 336 Lucia, companion of Vrsula. 133.
138 Ludger. 150 Luke. 60. 64 Lupus. 312 Lutwin. 79
M
Macarius. 73 3 Magi. 17. 66 Maidoc. 74. 255 Malachias. 357 Malchus, the
sleeper. 99 Margaret. 251 Mary the Bl. Virgin. 148. 149 Maria de Turribus. 321
Martian, the sleeper. 99 Martina. 337. 387 Marus. 277 Matrona. 165 Maximianus,
a sleeper. 99 Maximilian, a sleeper. 99 Mel. 318 Melchior. 17. 66 Michael the
Archangel. 401. 410 Mochoemoc. 44 Mochua. 86. 90 Moedoc. 222 Molua. 222
N
Nennidius. 276 Nicholas, Bishop. 265. 148 Nicholas de Rupe. 332
O
Odilia, companion of Vrsula. 132 Odo, Archbishop of Canterbury. 35. 72 Ositha.
77 Othmar. 124
P
Pachomius. 236 Panefredis, companion of Vrsula. 34 Pantaleon. 241 Pantalus,
Bishop of Basil. 132 Patrick. 42. 101. 318 Paul de Leon. 85 Peter and Paul. 384
Peter ad vincula. 348 Peter the Abbot. 84 Peter of Alcantara. 383 Pigmenius.
35^ Pinnosa, companion of Vrsula. 132 Prisca. 64
R
Radon. 36 The Angel Raphael. 401. 404 Regulus. 150 Roch. 248 Ruadanus. 87
Rusticus, companion of Denis. 68
S
Sapientia, companion of Vrsula. 132 Sapientia. 380 Scutinus. 107 Sebastian.
242. 339 Secundus, companion of Vrsula. 34 Sedonius. 324 Semibaria, companion
of Vrsula. 35 Senanus. 105. 325 Serapion, the sleeper. 99 Severus, Bishop. 91.
169 Sibilia, companion of Vrsula. 133 Sibyllina. 330 Sigismund. 239 Simon
Stock. 258 The Seven Sleepers. 98 Sodelbia. 322 Suibert. 76
T
Teresa. 383 Theliau. 36 S. Thomas Apostle. 17 Thomas Aquinas. 169 Thomas
Becket. 184 Tiburtius. 340 Tresan. 45
U
Valeria, companion of Vrsula. 34 Valerian. 340 Vedastus. 318 Venantius. 382
Venisa. 279 Verena, companion of Vrsula. 127 Veronica. 35 The Eleven Thousand
Virgins. 110. 33 Vrsula. 110. 33
W
Walburg. 147 Wereburga. 81 William of Speluncato. 318 William, companion of
Vrsula, Bishop. 134 Wilgefortis. 2 Willibrord. 124 Winwaloe. 82 Withburg. 168
Y
Ywanus, companion of Vrsula. 134
A TABLE Of the Principal CONTENTS.
THe absurdness of much of the Roman Devotions, the best reason why it should
continue in Latin. Page 1, 2. Their Fabulous Devotions; such as to S.
Wilgefortis, from her miraculous Beard. 3. Instances of foolish allusions in
their Prayers. 4 Devotions to S. Christopher. 5, etc. Mr. Cressy's reviving the
old Legend of S. Winefrid, who lived after her beheading. 9 Devotions to S.
Longinus: with his Legend. 11, 12 His Relics, with several others at Prague.
14 Of their corrupting the Gospel Text. 14, 15. Their lewd Comments upon
diverse places of it. 16, 17 Devotions to the three Kings of Colen. 17, 18,
etc. A reproof of the positiveness of their prayers, as to their number, names,
and being Kings. 21 A digression concerning Relics; their Legend how the
three Kings bodies came to Colen. 23 This Legend confuted. 24, 25 The Follies
of Mr. Cr.'s History about Relics. 25, 26 Of the Spear and Nails of the
Cross. 27, 28 Of Christ's blood sent, and brought hither by Joseph. 29 Of the
Praeputium of our Savior. 30 The School-mens Opinion about the blood of Christ
hypostatically united to the word. 32 Of the Relics of S. Ursula, and the
11000 Virgins. 33 Mr. Cressy's instances, concerning Saints bodies. 37 Of the
speaking Crucifix and moving Images. 39 The Gentile Religion boasted such
Miracles. 40 Story of the staff of Jesus given to S. Patrick, and the good use
of Mr. Cr. doubting about it. 41 Fine stories of the staves of Irish Saints,
and how the wood of S. Colman's Tree is a strange preservative. 44 The famous
controversy about the Bl. Virgins Ring. 45 Other places pretend to it, and
Miracles by it. 56 The ancient Hebrews used no Ring in Espousals. 57 Abuses of
Scripture to countenance their Fables. 59 A cheat discovered about the Body of
S. Luke. 60 The measure of the Bl. Virgins foot. 61 Cheating with counterfeit
Relics. 61, 62 A Catalogue of such Relics out of Lassels. 63 Their Patron
Saints an imitation of Heathenisme. 65 The three Kings of Colen invoked by
Travelers. 67 Devotions to S. Denis, and his Legend. 68, 69, etc. Of the
appearances of Christ in the Eucharist. 72 Stories of S. Dunstan. 74 A
Digression, about the Miracles in Mr. Cr.'s History. 75 That he knowingly
cheated, in his History. 76 His story of S. Birinus, walking on the Sea. 78 Of
an Eagle over-shaddowing two Saints in a journey. 79 His story of S. Eanswitha.
ibid. Of S. Cuthbert's body. 80 Of S. Wereburga and her Wild-geese. 81 Of
Saints commanding and punishing Birds and Beasts. 83 Diomedes his Birds, a
parallel story. 84 Of S. Ivo, and S. Paul de Leon. 85 Foolish toying and
playing with Miracles. 86 The Miracle of Austin the Monk considered. 88
Scripture Miracles exceeded upon trifling occasions. 89 Devotions to S. George,
and the Fables of his Acts. 93 Pleasant account of his, and other Saints names.
97 A prayer to the 7 Sleepers, and their Legend. 98 Confuted by Baronius. 100 A
Prayer to S. David, and the Lessons of his life. 101 Gildas at a stand in his
Sermon, at the entrance of S. David's Mother into the Church. 102 How a Dove
taught S. David, and sang Hymns with him. 107 Of Saints reciting their
Devotions in cold water, and S. Pechinus his heating it by his Prayers. 107 Of
a Hill rising in Wales under S. David, as he preached. 108 Devotions to Ursula,
and the 11000 Virgins. 110 The Historical account of them out of Authors
confuted. 114 Gildas and Bid no witnesses in their case. 118 The pretenses of
Oral Tradition about them confuted. 125 Reflections upon the Lessons of the old
Breviary about them. 128 Saints departed not concerned for their own
veneration. 147 Tales of Visions and voices gave rise to some Festivals. 148
Feigned Miracles to countenance the worship of Saints. 150 Devotions to S.
Catharine of Alexandria. 153 The Legend of her out of the old Breviary, etc.
157 Cassander's censure of it as Fabulous. 162 How her story is reformed in the
late Breviaries. 163 Occasion taken from thence to reprove Mr. Cr. 164 S.
Etheldred's preserving Virginity after marriage. 166 Their base reflections upon
a married estate. 166, 170 Marriage of Priests of worse account than keeping
whores. 171 Of S. Hippolytus; his Legend seems to be taken out of the fictions
of the Poets. 174 Reflections upon the foregoing Romances, and upon their easy
ways of pardon and overcoming temptations to sin, and being saved by one good
work. 176 Their admirable Legends seconded with dull Prayers. 183 Devotions to
Tho. Becket A. Bishop of Canterb. 184 The occasion of the Quarrel betwixt the
King and him. 186 To what height the contest was carried. 188 Mediations for
agreement, and why unsuccessful. 197 A short account of the Progress of the
Pope's power. 203 The humble style of ancient Popes, an argument that they
claimed no Temporal Power over Emperors. 205 Examples of the Insolency of
later Popes. 207 Their state above that of Emperors and Kings. 209 Ridiculous
pretenses of the honor of Christ, and humility. 210 Homage from Kings demanded
by them, and denied. 212 Concerning the death of Thomas. 215 The Kings strange
penance at his Tomb. 216 Thomas no Martyr. 218 A full account of his Miracles
after his death. 220 His worship obscured that of Christ and the Virgin. 228
Devotions to Patron Saints, as to S. Apollonia for the Toothache. 229 Her
numerous Relics, especially those of her Teeth. 233 To S. Anthony the Hermit,
for Inflammations, etc. 235 His opinion was against Relics, as appears by his
charge to bury him where none should know. 237 His Relics used to sanctify
Wine as a preservative. 238 To S. Sigismund for Fevers or Agues. 239 The sorry
account they give of his being a Martyr. 240 S. Pantaleon a Patron for Agues
before him. 241 To S. Sebastian for removing the Plague. 242 Their Devotions to
him Idolatrous. 246 To S. Roch, in time of the Plague. 248 Some particulars of
his Legend noted. 250 To S. Marguerite, for Women with Child. 251 Her
vanquishing, and S. Bernard's overreaching the Devil. 252 Strange Petitions of
Saints and privileges thereupon. 254 Privileges to the Scapular of the
Carmelites. 258 To S. Francis and his Church called Portiuncula. 259 More
stress laid upon Habits, keeping Days, and visiting Altars and Churches, than
upon moral goodness. 262 Devotions to S. Cosma and Damian in taking Physic 264
Devotions to S. Nicholas, in dangers at Sea. 265 To S. Barbara, to receive the
Eucharist before Death. 271 Concerning her wondrous Legend. ibid. Profane
representations of the Bl. Trinity, with absurd discourses and Miracles
concerning it. 272 Of miraculous preservations by invocating S. Barbara. 275
Ridiculous story of communicating S. Brigid. 276 To S. Marus, for Palseys and
Convulsions, etc. 277 To S. Blasius, for bones in the Throat. 278 To S.
Emetherius and Celedonius, for allaying Tempests. Ib. To S. Venisa, for the
Greensickness, etc. 279 To S. Anthony of Padua, for recovering lost goods. 280
Concerning Saint Anthony's preaching. 283 The Popes calling him the Ark of the
Testament. 284 His preaching to the Fishes. 285 Above 30000 People present at
his Sermons. 286 What effects his Sermons had upon his Auditors. Ib. and 287
Instances of his foolish way of preaching; his first Sermon upon Luc. 21. v.
25. 288 Another Sermon concerning the Saints, upon Wisd. 3. 294 Upon Matthew. 11.
Take my yoke upon you, etc. where he compares the Apostles to Oxen. 298 Another
comparing them to Thunder, Trumpets and Bells. 299 His profane discourse,
about God's five fingers. 300 His descant also upon the five fingers of Christ.
301 His blasphemy of the Saliva Divinitatis, etc. 301 His Allegories upon the
six Water-pots. 302 And upon Christ's entering a Ship, Matthew. 8. 302 Upon Matthew.
23.2. The Scribes and Pharisees sitting in Moses Chair. 303 His mystical sense
of the Prophets words, 1 Kings 17.13. 304 Upon Jesus being led by the spirit
into the Desert. ibid. Upon Cant. 6.2. My beloved is gone into his Garden. 307
Concerning S. Anthony's miracles. 308 The spightful tricks the Devil has served
the Saints. 309 How the Devil has been served in his kind by them. 311
Instances of more miracles to attest his preaching. 313 His appearing in more
places at the same time. 316 And in far distant places in very little time. 317
Admirable Miracles to clear doubts. 318 S. Anthony's miracles preferred before
S. Paul's. 321 Christ in form of a Child putting himself in his Arms. 322
Strange story of S. Sedonius and S. Libernus. 324 The miracle of the
incorruption of Anthony's tongue. 325 The boasted Miracle of the Mule
venerating the Eucharist in St. Anthony's hand, examined and confuted. 326
Their prodigious License to coin Miracles concerning the Eucharist. 330 Story
of the Host entering into S. Bonaventure's side, told by the Festival of an Earl
of Venice. 331 More instances of Miracles upon bruit Creatures at the presence
of the Eucharist. 332 The story of the Black-horse out of the Festival. 334 A
summary of wondrous Legends in the Breviaries. 336 Of S. Lucy. ibid. Of S.
Martina. 337 Of S. Sebastian, S. Agnes, and S. Dorothy. 339 Of S. Tiburtius and
Valerian. 340 Of S. John of Beverley. 341 Of S. Aldelme. 342 Of S. Christina.
343 Of S. Helena's Invention of the Cross. ibid. Account of the Invention of
the Cross out of the Festival. 347 Of the Feast of S. Peter ad Vincula. 348 St.
Paul's Chain. 64. 352 Of S. Donatus. 353 Of S. Clara. 354 Of S. Elizabeth, the
King of Hungarie's Daughter, and her setting a young man on fire by her
prayers. 355 A wind blowing a man and his wife over Sea. 356 S. Kentigern's
admirable way of lighting Candles. 357 S. Berach's making snow burn. ibid. More
instances of Devotions to Saints. 360 A prayer to S. Erasmus. 362 To S.
Claudius. 364 To the holy Innocents. 365 To the Apostles and Disciples. 366 To
the Martyrs and Confessors. 367 To the holy Virgins. 368 A Prayer to all the He
and She Saints. 369 Three Lessons of admirable courtship to S. Etheldreda. 372
A Litany, wherein a number of Saints are invoked. 375 Their leaving a good
petition (that God would make their service rational) out of the new Litanies,
that was in before. 380 A collection of several Hymns to the Saints. 382
Fulsome courtships of the Relations of Christ, viz. S. Joseph, Joachim and
Anna. 392, etc. Devotions to Angels. 398 A Prayer to all the Quire of Angels.
ibid. Another Prayer to the holy Angels. 399 Another, wherein Angels are
invoked, with a Rubric before it, promising mighty things. 400 A Litany
concerning the H. Angels. 403 A Mass of Raphael the Archangel, 405 A Prayer to
S. Raphael. 407 To S. Gabriel the Archangel. 408 A prayer to S. Gabriel. 410 To
S. Michael the Archangel. Ib. Another Prayer to him for defense of the Church.
412 The Legend of his apparition in Mount Tumba. 414 The ridiculous Relics of
him they have shown. 417 To the Guardian Angel. ibid. The subtle speculations
of the Schools in this matter. 418 An instance of a Colloquy to this Angel. 419
Also of a profane oblation of ones self to the Bl. Virgin. 420 A Hymn and
Prayers to this Angel. 420, 421, etc. A conclusion, concerning worshipping
Angels. 424 The plain caution of the Apostle (Col. 2.18) against it. Ib. The
exposition of Grotius and Theodoret. 425 The 35 Canon of the Laodicean Council.
427 The cheat of some Latin Collectors of the Canons, putting angulos for
angelos. 428 Card. Perron's Novel Interpretation of Col. 2.18. 429 The instance
of S. John forbidden by an Angel to worship him, urged. 430 Card. Bellarmine's
Sophistry to evade the force of those places in the Revelations. 431 His
strange conclusion set down, and exposed. 432, 433.
THE END.
A Brief Catalogue of Books newly Printed and Reprinted for R. Royston
Bookseller to his Most Sacred Majesty.
THe Works of the Reverend and Learned Henry Hammond, D. D. containing a
Collection of Discourses chiefly Practical, with many Additions and Corrections
from the Author's own hand; together with the Life of the Author, enlarged by
the Reverend Dr. Fell Dean of Christ-Church in Oxford. in large Folio. Nova and
Vetera: Or, a Collection of Polemical Discourses addressed against the Enemies
of the Church of England, both Papists and Fanatics, in large Folio, by
Jeremiah Tailor, Chaplain in Ordinary to King Charles the First of Blessed
Memory, and late Lord Bishop of Down and Conner. The Christian Sacrifice, and
the Devout Christian, and Advice to a Friend, these last three Books written by
the Reverend S.P. D.D. in 12.

