A TESTIMONY TO THE Lord's Power AND Blessed Appearance In and Amongst
CHILDREN: Wherein is expressed the great Love of God to them, who, as Young and
Tender, have tasted of his good WORD and heavenly LIFE.

Published for the Use of Friends, and to prevent various Reports, that they
may have a True Account in the following Testimonies, given forth by Faithful
Witnesses.

Here are also added to what was before Printed, several precious Testimonies
and Epistles, which are as the Effects of the Appearance and Opperation of that
great Power and Wisdom of God in and amongst them.

Printed in the Year 1679.

Dear Friends;
WHEN I consider the great Love of God in this Day extended so largely both to
small and great, it is to my great admiration, and especially the hand of God
reaching abundantly toward Children, how wonderfully he has appeared to them,
that in their Generation they may be God's Faithful Witnesses, as we have been
in our Day, as the Lord has kept us Faithful.

Some of the Openings of that Life in them, and Pratlings of their Lips, as
tender Babes in Christ Jesus, are here presented to be read in the Additional
Epistles and Testimonies to what was before Printed.

Many other precious Epistles and Testimonies we have by us, which were written
to their Unconverted Friends and Relations, which at this time we thought not
so meet to be published.

C. T.

OH! dear Children, into whose hands this Book may be recommended, whether in
the Truth or out of the Truth; but I hope it may meet with many that are in the
Truth; a word is put into my Heart to Encourage you that fear the Lord and walk
in his Way, and an Invitation to you that fear him not: And when this comes to
your hands, take this holy Exhortation, and enter into your Closets, and with
Seriousness and Godly Fear read this Book, which was at first put forth at that
time when that Hellish Report was raised of us, That the Devil arose amongst
us. This Book, I say, was put forth then to take away the Reproach; and now
many other things are added unto it of the Effect of that Great and Notable
Day, and the pouring forth of the Lords blessed Power and Spirit, poured forth
upon our Children; a Holy Day indeed! Forever let it be had in remembrance of
us, and of all those that truly fear the Lord; a Notable Day indeed! Verily the
Devil Roared at it, and stirred up his Instruments to Blaspheme this his holy
Work; but in the Name of the Lord, We Defy him and them.

Ah! dear Children, what may we say unto you? of some of ours that live in the
House with us, that were once wild and disorderly, as well as others, but the
Lord has made them to Lament for their Sins, and I know they have repented of
them, and the Lord has been pleased to show Mercy unto them, and now they love
his Righteous Ways; and the Lord has filled their Hearts with his holy
Praises; and has also constrained them to write to their Relations that live
in Sin, and do earnestly beseech them, To Repent of their Evil Ways, and Defy
the Devil, who is the whole Cause of the Misery and Sorrow that falls upon the
Sons and Daughters of men, for transgressing the holy Law of God that is
written in their hearts. Oh! how do they Lament over them, that they may come
to Fear the Lord, and walk in his Way with them, that they may be blessed with
them forever. And many blessed things are amongst them, too large here to
relate.

This greatly exercised me this Morning, and I could have no Rest until I had
it writ down, and then God's Peace confirmed me, that I had done his Will.
Frances Tailor.
The 29th of the 11th Month, 1679.
A Testimony to the Everlasting Power of God, (which in Ages past has
wonderfully appeared in Sons and Daughters) which has been Despised, Mocked
and Evil spoken of by the Wisdom which is from below, that sees it not, nor can
know it; which heavenly Power has appeared in our Days, and has wrought
wonderfully in and upon the Hearts of many, even to the amazement of many; and
it has met with the same Spirit of Opposition now as formerly, calling it
Madness, Witchcraft and Diabolical Delusion. It was prophesied of Old, That
the Lord would work a Work, which some should not believe if it were told them:
This in part has a Remnant seen in these Days, and even of late, as hereafter
is mentioned.
UPon the 4th day of the Month called June 1679. at a Meeting in the Town
called Waltham-Abby in Essex of the People called Quakers, where was present
about Forty or Fifty Young Boys and Maidens; God's heavenly Power brake forth
in some Maids and Young Girls, it begun with Three or Four at first, broke them
into Tears and Melting of Heart, continued so a small time, then it reached two
or three of the Younger Boys, which melted them into Tears; and in a very small
time, reached all the Boys and Young Girls, many of them being but about Eight
or Nine and Ten Years old, the Power was so mighty that they were all broken
into Tears, some into Trembling, and at last it reached unto the Elder People,
so that all in the Meeting was broken by the Power into Tears and Melting,
which did continue for about one Hour, until the Meeting was ended: This I was
an Eye and Ear Witness of, and felt God's Power wonderfully, to the gladding of
my Heart, and answering the Breathings of my Soul, which I have many a time had
in a Travail to the Lord, for the Children, That the Lord might visit them in
their Young Days: after which Meeting I had this Hope and Faith raised up in
my Soul, which to some I did declare, that God had a Work to work with some of
these Children, which he would bring forth e're long. And several signal
Testimonies hereof has the Lord brought forth since, as hereafter appears
from other Eye and Ear Witnesses thereof. And although Men in the Fallen Wisdom
see not, understand not, not believe that this is from the mighty Power of God,
yet there is a Remnant gathered by this Power, and have Experience of the
Operation thereof, how it has wrought in them, even in some when they were
Young; these are God's Witnesses that this is his Work, yea, it is fealed to
them by his Spirit: And let all the Mockers know, God's Work in our Day will be
too heavy for them* and except they will Repent, will be a Stone of stumbling,
upon which they will fall and be broken to pieces; yea, those that slight and
neglect the Day of their Visitation, until it be too late, this same Power
they stumble at, will fall upon them, and Grind them to Powder.

This is from one who Travails and Breaths to the Lord, that his Everlasting
Power may be more and more revealed in the Hearts of the Sons and Daughters of
men, that many may be gathered out of the Full, unto Christ Jesus that never
fell; that they may feel themselves growing up in his heavenly Life as living
Members of him the blessed Head, then will they come to understand that these
Things are from the Lord; when the inward Eye and Ear is opened, they will with
me hear their Testimony, That these things are of the Lord.

The 6th day of the 5th Month 1679. G. LAWRY.

A Copy of a Letter to A. P.
DEar A. P. etc. I cannot omit but certify somewhat of our last Nights's
Exercise in our Meeting, in our Family, how mightily the Power of the Lord
appeared amongst us; first breaking in upon Two Young Lads, and so passed
through the rest, with such Dread and Power, that there was an exceeding great
shaking and tenderness amongst them, rather more than on that notable Fourth
day; so that it was not without difficulty to bring several of them into
stilness again: But at the last, it being late, they went to Bed, and there
many of them lay Crying, Weeping and Lamenting for two or three Hours together:
Others in a diverse Exercise; some who had been sober, and formerly good
conditioned, meek and gentle, the Power was meek with them, and overcame them
in a most blessed manner; so that they were filled with heavenly Praises,
uttering such words as sweet-conditioned Souls are wont to do when they are
sealed by the Lord's Spirit: Others most bitterly Lamenting their Conditions,
especially one of the aforesaid Lads for about three Hours together in his Bed,
exceeded and cried out for Mercy, so Dreadfully, that I never (as I remember)
heard a more Terrible Exercise from small or great: When I told him how
patiently his Bedfellow lay besides him; he answered, The reason was, because
he had not been so Wicked as himself had been. If I could but write down the
Speeches of the poor Children, under their various Exercises, I may well say,
it would be as a wonderful Thing, and such a Lesson as many Hearts would be
broken to read; but what shall I say, but admire the Love and Mercy of the Lord
in these Things! C. was blessedly disposed on, and was truly refreshed in his
Soul; and with him, and several others, there was a secret inward Harmony from
a feeling Sense of God's pure Visitation; and some more dreadfully feized on,
and broken in upon by the Authority of the Power, so that it was admirable to
behold the varity of the Exercises suitable to the subject Matter, Condition
and Disposition of every Child.

This is a hint to thee of the matter, who I know dearly loves us, and will be
refreshed at any time to hear of our Welfare. So leaving the rest to W. C. who
was with us in the Meeting, if thou please to enquire of him, with mine and
my Wife's dear Love to thee and thy dear Wife, etc. I rest, thy dearly loving
Brother in the Fellowship of God's Truth,

Waltham-Abby, the 24th of the 4th Month, 1679. C. Tailor.

A Copy of a Letter to T. T.
DEar Brother, etc. the 24th of the 4th Month, 1679. we sitting toward
Evening with the Family and Children, being in all about Fifty, the Lords sweet
and tender heartbreaking Power was with us in a shower of abundance of Love,
Mercy and Gentleness thorowout, which caused abundance of melting Tears, and
great Soul-gladness, like unto the Love and Tenderness of a most tender Father,
in Forgiveness and Mercy, after Correction and Submission under the same, I
mean especially as to such who had been more stubborn: And the more mild and
gentle-conditioned were under the pure sense of the same Power in pure Love and
sweet Tenderness, with an increase of what had been poured out before at the
other Meetings: so that the whole Meeting and Family at that time was, as I may
truly say, overpowered with Divine comfort, in the sense of God's pure Love;
nothing else from God declared to them, but that they should admire his sweet
Love and Mercy, and how good the Lord was, how gentle, kind, and most tender
over them, together with the great admiring of the same Love, being filled with
it; so that the heavenly Flame of it drowned all manner of Sorrow at that time,
and conquered all sense of Terror and Judgment, nothing but Love, at that time,
and Mercy appearing and overcoming all; so that it was wonderful to behold the
great Gravity and Sense of the Children in such an Exercise, there being such a
general Heartbreaking Power over powering them in such a manner with Gods
blessing throughout declared amongst them all. And now I may say, that there is
not one who has been of the worst Temper and Disposition hoar at present, but
in pleading with them about their Conditions, in the sense of God's Truth, have
been broken into a sensible acknowledgment with weeping Eyes; so far has the
most blessed Power of the living God appeared in this place, a Day much groaned
and longed for to see, Glory to the Lord forever. And certainly the living God
will bestow more of his heavenly Blessings upon us, by the still pouring forth
of his heavenly Spirit, as we are dear and tender before him, and of his Glory,
Amen.

So dear Brother, admire with us the excellency of God's pure Love* and pray
with us, that we all may be kept in the sweet and humble acknowledgment of all
his most tender Mercies: And oh! that we may never give the least occasion,
whereby the Lord may withdraw the sense of such great Love and Mercy from us,
Amen, Amen.

So dear Brother, if I could tell thee I would, how full of sweet Melody my
Soul is at present from the sense of this his pure goodness, and how full of
Joy and Gladness, and heavenly Praises: Oh! the glorious heavenly Power of the
Lord God, how, when he pleases, it most wonderfully overcomes the Hearts and
Souls of his beloved and tender Children! Oh dear Brother! feel, feel what my
Soul can admire, but my Tongue far unable to utter, neither lawful for any man
to do in this earthly Tabernacle, in which we reach unto thee dearly, and to
thy dear Wife.

And I am thy dear Brother, C. Tailor.

The following Testimonies are from the Teachers of the Children.
A testimony concerning the Goodness and Mercy of God our heavenly Father in
Christ Jesus, manifested to the Children of our Family.
IN the sense of the great Love and tender Mercies of the Lord God, who has
often graciously visited and livingly refreshed my Soul in our Evenings or
Family's Meetings, I can and do bear this living and faithful Testimony, That
at a Meeting the 23d of the 4th Month, called June, in the Evening, the great
God and Father of Mercy, in a special and wonderful manner, did abundantly pour
forth of his good and holy Spirit of Life and Grace upon our Spirits, through
Jesus Christ our Savior, by which our Souls and Spirits were broken and melted
before him; That Waters did gush out of of the Rocks, Springs were opened in
dry places, and the very Depth did utter forth its Voice. I my self was so
overpowered and overcome with this heavenly Life, Virtue and Power of God, that
I did shake and tremble before Him the mighty God of Heaven and Earth, who by
his quick and powerful Voice shakes the Wilderness, and breaks the Cedars of
Lebanon, at whose appearance and look the Earth Trembles, and at whose touch
the Hills Smoke: This his great Love and powerful Operation upon my Heart and
Spirit, being livingly refreshed and comforted by it, did cause my Soul to
magnify the Lord, and my Spirit to rejoice in God my Savior, singing and
making sweet Melody in my Heart to the Lord, because he did so graciously
answer the Desire of our Souls, and powerfully break in upon the Hearts and
Spirits of our* Children, revealing himself in his great and Almighty Power
among them, in and through which their Hearts were broken, their Spirits
melted, and their Souls humbly-bowed before him, as the alone searcher of the
Heart, and tryer of the Reins, making known to every one his state and
condition, and bringing to Light the hidden things of Darkness, and Counsels of
the Hearts, which brought Sorrow and Trouble upon them, and caused many of them
to lament and cry out before the Lord. Oh! who can appear and stand before the
great Judge of the Quick and Dead, and not Tremble at his Word, and not Howl
and Cry as under the Sense of his Judgments, till they be brought forth unto
Victory, and the Soul comes to feel Redemption from Sin and Iniquity, through
the Blood of Jesus Christ!

We are living Witnesses of this great and powerful Work of the Almighty God in
and amongst the Children of our Family, by which he has begun to work out
their Salvation with Fear and Trembling, and to turn their Minds from Darkness
to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto himself, that they may receive
Forgiveness of Sins, and Inheritance amongst them which are sanctified by Faith
in Christ Jesus, to the great comfort and satisfaction of our Souls, who was
thus graciously pleased to appear and reveal himself in and among us, in his
heavenly Power and Authority; for my Soul has often been poured out before the
Lord on their behalf, that he would be pleased to reach unto their Hearts in
his heavenly quickening Power, that at length they might come to experience in
themselves what hath-often been declared to them by others, that so in the
sense of this Heartbreaking Power they might learn to fear him their Creator in
the days of their Youth, and their Souls might be engaged and constrained to
love and obey him.

Now the Lord has heard our Cry, and answered our Desire; he has manifested
his great Love, Favor and Mercy unto them and us, in the sense whereof my Soul
did and does rejoice, praising and glorifying his Name on their and our behalf;
I can bear my witness in Truth, that the sense of the goodness of the Lord did
rest upon my Spirit all the Night long, that after I awaked my Eyes were full
of Tears, and my Soul full of holy Praises and Thanksgiving unto the Lord,
because of his tender Mercies and great Love toward us, breathing to the Lord,
that he in his heavenly blessed Power would carry on his great Work of
Regeneration, that he has begun in and upon our Spirits, and to Bless us daily
more and more with all Spiritual Blessings in Christ Jesus, to the Praise and
Glory of his Grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the Beloved, according
to the Riches of his Grace, wherein he has reached and abounded toward us, to
declare unto our Souls that he has pardoned our Sins, and received us into his
Fatherly Love and Care.

What shall I say of the next following Meeting? I am not able to express the
sweet refreshing Life, Virtue and Power of our heavenly Father arising in us
with healing under his Wings. For as the Evening before, Fearfulness and
Trembling came upon many, and Horror had overwhelmed them, so now at this time
the sweet Love of a most tender and merciful Father, embracing their Spirits,
did sweetly and livingly refresh and comfort their Souls; he healed the broken
in Heart, and bound up their Wounds with the Balm of his heavenly Life, Virtue
and Power, to the great comfort and satisfaction of our Souls, who partook of
the Water of Life, that the Lord poured forth and made us to drink of; in and
through which the Spirit of the Humble was quickened, and the Heart of the
Contrite Ones revived.

Now as the Lord in those two Meetings has appeared and revealed himself in
and to us in a most special, gracious and powerful manner, so his Sweet and
Heart-melting Love and tender Mercies have hitherto followed us from Meeting to
Meeting sensibly and livingly, Refreshing, Comforting, Strengthening and
Confirming our Souls in his Love, Life, Virtue and Power, until this very Day,
Praises, Praises, Praises, Glory and Honor be to our God, henceforth, forever
and forever.

Moreover, it is sealed to my Spirit by the holy Spirit of the Lord God, That
We shall be Monuments of his Tender Mercies and Fatherly Love and Care (These
are the Words which livingly arose in my Heart, as we were lately gathered
together, and arise again as I am writing this Testimony for God) I say, We
shall be Monuments of his tender Mercies and fatherly Love and Care, if we keep
Low, Humble, Meek and Tender before him, he will instruct us, and teach us in
the Way, which we shall go, and guide us with his Eyes, if we always Fear and
Dread his holy powerful Name, which he has revealed unto us, and poured forth
in and among us, as a good and precious Ointment, which causes us to be glad
and to rejoice in him, and to love him with all our Heart, Soul and Mind.

In the sense of this great Love and tender Mercies of the Lord God, my Soul
desires that I and every one of us, especially our dear Children, that have
with us tasted of the good Word and Power of the World to come; by which our
Souls have been quickened and livingly refreshed and comforted, may be always
kept in a living sense of the Lovingkindness and Goodness of the Lord toward
us, that so we may walk in Humility, Righteousness and Holiness before him, who
has reached to our Souls, and made us sensible of our inward State and
Condition, and also of his Love, Grace and Mercy, that we may walk worthy of
this his great Love, and Dread and Fear him in our Hearts, always having the
Eyes of our Mind toward him, that in his Light, shining in our Souls. we may
see even the least appearance of Evil, and waiting in it we may receive Power
to be kept and preserved out of it, lest by entering in or consenting to it we
should offend the Lord, and cause him to withdraw his sweet Love, and to hide
the Light and Favor of his Countenance from us, which would bring Sorrow,
Anguish and Destruction upon our Souls. Oh! let us walk worthy of this great
Love, let every one of us be circumspect in our Lives and Conversations, that
our Enemies, who Reproach and Blaspheme the holy Name and powerful Work of the
Lord God, who has graciously and gloriously appeared in and among us, may
behold our Holy, Innocent, Upright Life and Conversation, and by it may be
reached and convinced, that not the Devil, but the Lord God in his holy Life,
Virtue, Power and Spirit has appeared in and among us, by which he has
wrought a new Heart, and renewed a right and holy Spirit in us, the blessed
Effect whereof is Holiness and Righteousness; which Work is not of Man, much
less of the Devil, but of the Everlasting, Pure and Holy God, who in his
Everlasting, Holy, Pure and Quickening Power has begot us again into the
heavenly Image of his dear Son Christ Jesus, which consists in Holiness, and
Righteousness, and Truth, which the Devil is out of.

Having therefore received Grace and Mercy, Life, Virtue and Power of God, let
us cleanse our selves from all Filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, perfecting
Holiness in the Fear of God, that we may show forth the heavenly Virtue and
Power of him that has called and translated us from Darkness into his
marvelous Light, and turned from Satan's Power to his own Holy, Pure and Living
Power, in which we are enabled to do good Works, new created of God in Christ
Jesus unto good Works, that we may walk therein, in which if we are found
walking and doing the Works of God, we shall never fall again; for so an
entrance shall be ministered unto us abundantly, into the Everlasting Kingdom of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who is the true Light, which lights every
man that comes into the World, in which heavenly and divine Light, we daily
receive Life, Virtue and Power, to escape the Corruption that is in the World
through Lust, and to live Soberly, Righteously and Godly in this present World,
to the Honor and Praise of him that has called us to Glory and Virtue. For
this is the very end of the heavenly, living, powerful Appearance of our God in
the midst of us, that in and through the heavenly Power of his Son Christ Jesus
revealed in us, in his divine, heavenly Light, Life and Spirit, he might redeem
us from all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar People, zealous unto
good Works; and that so out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings he may
perfect Praises for his Name. Let us therefore always be found in Well-doing,
that our Light may shine before men, that they may see our good Works, and
glorify our Father which is in Heaven, who dwells in the Light, and is Light,
in which, if we walk therein, we have fellowship with him, and one with
another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son, which cleanses us from all Sin,
is inwardly known and felt, and the true Fellowship with the Father, and his
Son Jesus Christ comes to be witnessed, Righteousness and Holiness is shown
forth in our Lives and Conversations, by which our heavenly Father comes to be
praised and glorified. For herein is our heavenly Father of his Children
glorified, when ^hey bring forth much Fruit of the Spirit, which is in all
Goodness, and Righteousness, and Truth, always proving and doing what is
acceptable unto the Lord; to whom be Glory and Honor, Praises and Hallelujah,
Wisdom and Dominion from my Soul, in the living Sense of his great Love and
tender Mercies, now, henceforth, forever and ever, Amen, Amen.

The 5th of the 5th Month, 1679. Testified by me J. M.

When I consider the Goodness, Mercy and Love of Almighty God to the Sons and
Daughters of Men, so largely manifested, and suited to every Capacity and
Condition to this end and purpose, that all, even from the least to the
greatest, may be made sensible and living Monuments of his wonderful Work,
which he has been carrying on in all Ages less or more; but now in this latter
Age of the World, is cutting the Work short in Righteousness; I see it clearly
in the Light of the Lord; for which my Soul and Heart is overcome with Praises
and Thanksgivings to him, who (I see) takes pleasure to dwell with the lowly in
Heart, and that are willing to follow him whithersoever he in his Requirings
may lead; Glory to his blessed Name forever.

I say, the consideration of the Lord's wonderful Dealing with people, but more
especially with the young Ones in our Family constrains me at this time to open
my Mouth, in my small Measure, to declare of his Wonderful and Soul-ravishing
Virtue, livingly witnessed to, in my measure, and also am an Eye and
Ear-Witness; but which is more, I find it sealed in my Heart, that the Lord
has begun a blessed Work in and among the Younger sort, so that I can say in
Truth, The Lord has been here, the blessed Effects whereof do sufficiently
declare it: Oh! how is my Soul overioy'd when I see that wild Nature, which
bore rule in some, changed and brought under, so that I may justly say with the
Prophet, and do witness the same, both in my own particular, as also I declare
it on the behalf of the Children, That in some I see instead of the Tkorus
comes up the Fir Tree, and instead of the Bryar comes up the Myrtle-tree, and
it is for the Lord a Name, for an Everlasting Sign that shall not be cut off.
This has been the End and Tendency of all the Upright-hearted Ones in their
Labor and daily Exercise in this Family, who are more nearly concerned in
them. And Oh! let all Hearts join with me at this time, and at all times, to
Praise and Extol the God of all Goodness, who in his Love has given us an
Earnest of our Desires, which is more to us than Thousands of Silver or Gold.
This the Lord has been bringing to pass for several years past by his Almighty
Power and Outstretched Arm invisibly in the Hearts of the Young Ones, and now
is more manifestly begun to show forth his Power, to the melting of the
Rocky-hearted, and tendering of them into Tears, which was livingly witnessed to
by many, who felt the Power of the Almighty to overshadow them, in a Wonderful
and Soul-ravishing manner, at our fourth day's Meeting in Waltham-Abby; so that
in the Sense of the goodness of the Lord tendered to my Soul, and the Souls of
the Children there present, I was broken into Tears, having a deep sense of the
Work of the Lord in my own particular to work in my Heart; as also I was
overcome with Joy to feel the Lord's Power so wonderfully to work on the
Childrens Minds, that they were melted and broken, to the Amazement of many
there present, who never saw such a Day, nor witnessed the Lords Power to
change them in their Minds: Oh! but what Joy? what Comfort? what Satisfaction
unutterable was ministered to them, who waited upon the Lord for this, to see
their Expectation answered in this Matter? what greater Joy could be afforded?
surely none.

I can truly say, it was more to me (I hope to my dying Day never to forget it)
then all Visible or Created Comforts whatsoever. And so as the Lord did in a
wonderful manner break forth in his Living Power upon the 4th day, being the
4th day of the 4th Month, so we have witnessed since, and do witness daily
(Praises to our God for it) the same Arm of Power to work in our
Family-Meetings; so that for some Nights we have gone to Bed with the Tears in
our Eyes, being filled with the Love of so tender and merciful a Father, who
thus had visited us in his love, and filled our Hearts with unexpressible Joy:
And this I say more on the behalf of the Children, that some have been so
livingly refreshed in our Evening-Meetings, that after they have been in Bed,
their Sleep has been taken from them for several hours together, and their
Souls have been ^^lled with Praises and Thanks-givings more then could be
uttered.

This I was constrained to say for the Lord, that he is no hard Master, that he
takes no pleasure in the Death of Sinners, but thus even in our day, as of Old,
so fatherly, tenderly, and condescendingly he deals with People, even with the
renderaged, as to accommodate himself in his appearance, to their Capacities,
that they may feel him at work in their inward parts, who works all his
Childrens work in them and for them, to the everlasting renown and praise of
his worthy Name forever.

Now let all be invited hereby to bow and submit their Necks to the Yoke of
Christ, and let them be made willing to take it upon them; for truly it is
light to them that are made willing in the day of his mighty Power. Further,
let me entreat all who have been sharers with me in this late and continued
Heartbreaking Power, to walk worthy of the same, that we together may pass the
time of our sojourning here in fear, that in the end, when we shall lay down
these Tabernacles, we may be admitted unto the full Fruition and complete
Enjoyment of his favor, who has called us, and that very early, whose favor
is better then Life, whereof of late we have had a large Earnest, to the
refreshing of our Souls, and the establishing of them in his fear, Everlasting
Praises, Glory, and Renown, be sounded forth unto our bountiful Lord and Master
Christ Jesus, World without End, Amen.

A. PATERSONE.

Here follow several Living Testimonies given forth by the SCHOLARS.
Dear Father and Mother;
MY Duty is remembered unto you both, with my dear Love to my Brother and
Sisters, and unto the rest of the Family, hoping you are all in good Health, as
I am at this present. I have sent you a Book, whereby you may know the State
and Condition our Family is in at present, how wonderfully the Lord has
wrought amongst us; for as he has begun a blessed Work in the Hearts of many
in these latter Ages, to destroy and break down the Power of Darkness, and to
set up his own Kingdom, so he will go on in his mighty Power and Strength, and
will make his Arm bare for the bringing back of the Outcasts of Israel: For as
he promised, That Righteousness shall cover the Earth as the Waters cover the
Seas, so will he perform it in its appointed time, which now in some measure is
begun. I am constrained to tell you what the Lord has done for my Soul, how
day after day he has followed me with tender Mercy, willing me to turn from my
Wickedness and vain Imaginations, and to obey and worship him the Creator of
all things. I being troubled and vexed in my Conscience, by the grievous
Terrors and Judgments of God, did often times lie Howling and Crying in my Bed
for one or two Hours together, so that sometimes I could scarce sleep, but as
if I had been Tormented in the very Depth of Hell, and forever cast out of the
sight of God, never to receive Mercy from him; but the Lord, full of Mercy and
Love, did by degrees help me, and delivered me out of the Claws of the Enemy;
and so by waiting more and more upon him, I became yet more sensible of my
State and Condition, and did pray unto the God of Heaven, That he would teach
me his Way wherein I should walk before him in Singleness and Uprightness of
Heart, and would always preserve me in his holy Fear. For as it is said, A
bruised Reed will he not break, nor the smoking Flax will he not quench, until
he send forth Judgment unto Victory; this have I witnessed in my particular.
And again, They that wait upon the Lord renew their strength; this also has
the Lord made me a witness of: for sometimes sitting down in his Fear and
Dread, with my Mind only staid upon him, and waiting for his presence, he has
melted my Heart and bowed down my Spirit before him, by the blessed in-breaking
and overpowerings of his tender Love, that so I could not but praise him and
honor him, that in such a gracious and bountiful manner has appeared unto me,
and in abundance of Love manifested himself unto me, and I have gone to my rest
in Peace with he has brought me out of Egypt, wherein I was a Captive and a
Bond-slave under the Prince of the Power of Darkness, with a desire never to
return back into Egypt; for it is said, They that go down into the Deep see
the Wonders of God: So the Lord before whom I stand, knows I have a living
Desire, that I may always be kept in his Fear, and walk worthy of the Love
which he has manifested unto me, and obey him, that so what I am, I may be to
him, and always may be kept Low and Humble before him, giving him the Praise,
Glory, Honor and Renown, unto whom it belongs, now, henceforth and forever,
Amen. So I rest,

Your Dutiful Son, James Claypoole.
Waltham-Abby, the 5th Mon. 1679.
Dear Mother;
I Received a Letter, by which I understand it has been the Will of the Lord
God to take away my Father out of this World, for which I am very sorry; but
since it has been the Will of the Lord I am sati^fied, for the Lord is
merciful; O! his Mercies have been very great, and his Kindness unutterable to
me, who can say so; who brought me to the place where he would have Mercy. O!
where he would make himself manifest: O! in bringing me out of the Pit of
Darkness; the Saying is fulfilled; I was found of them that sought me not; I
was made manifest to them that asked not after me. So, dear Mother, I would
desire and beg of thee, that thou would send my Brother hither: O! Mother,
the Lord is here; here he has been pleased to make himself manifest: Therefore
Mother, I would desire thee to send my Brother hither, lest he perish in his
Sins and Iniquities: I am persuaded if he came hither, the Lord would have
Mercy upon him, as he had upon me, who was an Abominable Sinner. So this is all
at present, but my Master and Mistress remember their Love to thee; and I would
desire thee to salute my Sister in my Name, with my Love to my Brother. I rest,

Thy Obedient Son, Philip Dymond.
Written in the 10th Month, 1679.
OH! the Love of the Lord, who can express it? Oh! when the mighty God pours
out of his Water of Life into our Souls, we are even constrained to sing
Praises to his Name. Oh! how can I in any measure express the Love of the Most
High, through his Son Jesus Christ. Oh! the Most High does draw us with the
Cords of his infinite Love. Oh! our God is a God of Mercy, a God of infinite
Love: When I consider, when I was in Aegypt's Bondage and a Captive to the
Devil, how many times would he call me out, but I knew not that it was he; yet
at last he made his Arm bare to me, and drew me out of the Pit of Darkness with
the Cords of his Love. And it is now my Testimony for the Lord, That he is
coming to teach his People himself: And Woe to the Teachers that take Tithes,
and are like AEgypt's Taskmasters, for the Wrath of the Lord is kindled
against them, that he will neither leave them Root nor Branch; But let us fear
the Lord and be Valient for his Truth, and he will certainly bless us with his
Blessings from above. So unto him do I commit my Soul, with the Souls of all
his People, to whom be all Honor, Renown and Dominion, who is worthy of it,
God blessed forever and evermore.

From one that desires the Prosperity of his blessed Truth, and in some measure
has felt the Operation of it. Philip Dymond.
Written the 29th of the 11th Mon. 1679.
Dear Father and Mother;
MY Duty is remembered unto you, hoping you are in good Health, as I am at this
present writing, Praises be to the God of Heaven and Earth, who of his
Loving Kindness has appeared unto me in the day when I went astray and
rebelled against him, running apace to my own Destruction, in that day it
pleased God to give me a sight of my Sin; so that I certainly know, that my
Redeemer lives; Praise, Honor and Glory be to the Lord God of Power, who has
so plentifully visited my Soul with his Love and Kindness. So thinking meet to
accquaint you with my present Condition and Exercises, having no more at
present, I recommend you to the Lord, the Father and Maker of all good things.
I rest,

Your Dutiful Son, John Weight.
Written in the 9th Mon. 79.
Dear Friend A. P.
MY dear and true Love salutes thee, desiring thy Welfare: I have at this
time writ a few Lines unto thee, which I hope may find thee in good Health.
Forasmuch as when thou wast with us, the mighty Power of the Lord broke in
amongst us, and tendered our Hearts, so also it has continued with us unto
this day, which I desire may never depart from us: I can really say, The
preserving Hand of the Lord is time after time witnessed to keep us and
preserve us; and his intent is to do our Souls good, so that in him may be our
Peace and Salvation; for sometimes waiting upon him, in his blessed Light for
his appearance, he does so lovingly and fatherly appear, that he overcomes our
Souls, so that we cannot but Praise and Glorify him, that so graciously should
visit us in his Love; as he said, In the Day of my Power, my People shall be a
willing People: And even at the writing of these Lines he has broken my Heart
before him: O! how is the Lord found of them that seek after him? How beautiful
is he in his Arisings? How does he fill them that hunger and thirst after him?
Now are the days of Comfort come, even now are the days of Rejoicing and
being Glad in the Lord approaching unto our Souls; for he that wounded us, has
in some measure healed us; he that made our Hearts sad, has now caused us to
rejoice in him the Creator of Heaven and Earth; for who were we or our Fathers
Houses, that the Lord should have respect unto us! but in his Mercy has he
done it; therefore it is my Desire, that we may all be faithful unto the Lord
in that he has committed unto us, so shall we have more. Much might be written
in the Openings of the Lord, but this is sufficient, as I think, to acquaint
thee how it goes with us. Farewell, and be saluted

From thy dear Friend, James Claypoole, Junior.
Waltham-Abby, the 19th of 10th Month, 1679.
WHen in the Fear of God I consider the wonderful Care that he has of the
Children of men, and how he strives with them by his Spirit to work out their
Deliverance, and that both in Old and Young, my Heart is melted within me; for
in the Consideration of these things he has often exercised me, even in the
Consideration of his Kindness toward the Children of Men, even toward those
who are but of young and tender Years: O! when I consider how plentifully he
has poured forth of his Spirit in and among Children, and how my Soul, with
many others, has been overcome by the living Sense of the Holy and Heavenly,
Living and Eternal Power of the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, that has
appeared amongst us, to the comforting of our Souls, and how his heavenly.
Presence has and does still follow us from time to time in our Assemblies, to
our great Joy, I cannot but thank the Lord and praise his holy Name, for his
care that he has had over me, in bringing me amongst them to be made a
Traveller with them in that heavenly Truth which he reveals unto us time
after time, in and through his Son Christ Jesus.

For although I had some sense of the Power of God before, and was really
convinced in my Mind, that the Way wherein I have been brought up was the Way
to Eternal Life to those who were Possessors of that Truth which they did
profess, and I did in some measure seek after the Possession of the same; yet
when I came into this Family, and amongst those Children, among whom God does
so wonderfully appear, I was made to confess before the Lord, that all that I
had done was but very little in comparison of that wherein I saw others
exercised; and under the sense of the same Power did I secretly cry unto the
Lord, That I also might be made Partaker of that Power that did so fill their
Hearts, and that he would forgive me my Sins, and blot out mine Iniquities,
that I had hitherto committed; and that I might feel his Saving Arm to redeem
me from the Bondage of Corruption, wherein I felt my self deeply entangled.
Which Cry I do really know was of the Lords own begetting, because he has
answered it in some measure; and in his Love has wonderfully appeared unto me,
and refreshed my Soul many a time since the day that I came among these
Children; and under the sense of that Love of God has my Heart often been
broken.

O! how is my Soul tendered, when I think of the Lords Love to my Soul, and how
he has delivered me from the Snares of the Enemy, who has often sought to
captivate my Soul, and to hinder the motions of the Spirit of the Lord that
would sometimes arise in me! for then was he busy to draw away my Mind from
the Power of God, lest I should lay hold upon it, and thereby be delivered from
him. Oh! when I consider these things, and how I have been made to cry in the
bitterness of my Spirit, when no Mortal Eye could see, Who shall deliver me out
of this Thraldom? how the Lord yearned toward me with Bowels of tender
Compassion, whereby he made me sensible, That he had laid Help upon one that is
Mighty, even upon his Beloved Son, the Lord Jesus Christ, who is come a Light
into the World, that all might believe in him and have Eternal Life: And that
if I would but give up to him he would Deliver me. Blessed be his Name forever.
For by the Working of his holy Power has he constrained me to give up unto
him, and to cast my self down at his Feet, that so I might be saved by him: For
even as he healed those of their outward Infirmities, in the days of his
Flesh, who were cast down at his Feet, and who humbled themselves before him,
so does he arise in this Day, to those who are willing to be humbled before
him, and to give up truly unto him, with Healing in his Wings, to heal their
Backslidings, and to cure their Infirmities; and it is those only who Humble
themselves before him, and who are willing to be content with that Measure that
he is pleased to bestow upon them, how little soever it be, that he does
Nourish, and that he does Refresh, even as he did those two Women of Old, one
whereof was willing to be content with the Crumbs that did fall from the Table,
the other was willing to be content if she could but touch the Hem of his
Garment: How was the Lord moved with Compassion toward them! and how did he
Refresh them, and give them the Desire of their Hearts! and indeed so he does
to all those in this Day who despise not the Day of small things, but are
willing to wait upon him in the least of his Appearances, although it be but as
a Grain of Mustard Seed, the lest of all Seeds; yet if it be given way unto, it
will come to be great, and it will become a Teacher that cannot be removed into
a Corner, but will always be with those both Day and Night to Reprove them for
Sin and Evil, and to give them Victory over the same, that lay hold upon it;
and by Virtue thereof they will even grow from strength to strength, until they
become Perfect men in Christ Jesus, who said, Be ye therefore Perfect as your
Father which is in Heaven is Perfect.

Waltham-Abby, the 8th of the 11th Month, 1679. David Barclay.

WHen I consider how Merciful, Loving and Kind the Lord has been unto us, and
how he does graciously appear, and time after time manifest his Love amongst
us, my Heart is filled with Praises, and my Soul does magnify his Power and
rejoice in God my Savior; For I do truly believe, that the cause of my coming
to this place was of the Lord; for as before I was Wicked and Disobedient unto
God, running hither and thither seeking rest for my Soul, but could find none:
But Praises be to God forever, he did at last hear my Cry and answer the desire
of my Heart, and did pluck me as a Brand plucked out of the Fire, and set my
Feet upon a Rock, where he did make known unto me the thing which had been long
hidden from me, and did also show me the Darkness and Obscurity which I was
plunged into; such was the Mercy of God, which I hope I shall never forget unto
my dying Day, and I can truly say, that the Lord does still abide with us, and
does time after time appear unto us, healing the Wound which before he had
caused; for we do certainly know that he is both able to wound and also to heal.

Oh! I cannot but admire the Loving Kindness of God, that he should so appear
and abide as he does; but it is true as it is said, With those that are meek
and lowly, and of a contrite Heart will God abide, and with such is he
well-pleased; for in my measure I can witness, that God is a God of Love and of
Long-sufferance, and desires not the Death of a Sinner, but would rather that
he should live (for I have known it so) therefore is my Mouth opened at this
time to the Praise of God, and that the Ages to come may know of the Wondrous
Works of the Lord even amongst Children, and those that are but young in Years,
for he indeed has looked upon us with an Eye of Pity and Compassion, and it
has pleased him to appear unto us, and to show us the gross Errors and
Pollutions which we have been addicted to: Therefore in the sense of the Mercy
and Loving Kindness of God my Soul is even overcome and does magnify and
praise his Name, desiring that both I and all those whom he has in any wise
made sensible of their States and Conditions, may be kept in his fear and dread
unto the end of our days, that so in the End we may lay down our Heads in
Peace, and enjoy his presence for evermore.

And also, that while we live, we may live to his Praise, and be kept humble
and low, that so in the consideration of his Love we may be even constrained to
love him again; for what were we or our Fathers House that he should appear
unto us, who have been so Wicked and Disobedient unto him: Oh! this is great
Love indeed, that for all this the Lord should be so merciful, for he has
opened our Eyes, that we can clearly see and discern that the end of the Lord
in this matter is to do us good, and that we may perfect his Praise, as it is
said, Out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings will I perfect Praise.
Therefore we cannot but praise him, who is worthy of all Praise, henceforth
forever and forever more, Amen.

Waltham-Abby, the 23d of the 11th Mon. 1679. Sam. Sweeting.

To his quondam Schoolmaster.
Loving Master;
MY Love salutes thee with the rest of thy Household, remembering my
School-fellows and Landlords, hoping that you are all in good Health as I am at
this present writing, by the Grace of God, who is the preserver of all mankind,
and by whom we live and breath, and have our being: O! when I remember at any
time thee or my School-fellows, I am moved with compassion unto you because of
my former Acquaintance, and because of the Love which I bear unto you; O! how
am I cast down when I think of things which were done there with thee in my
time! O! when the Lord gave me a sight of the Vanities thereof, O how Naked I
saw my self in the sight of the Lord! for even I was as Naked as Adam when he
had eaten of the forbidden Fruit; yea, when the Lord called unto me, saying,
Where art thou? I was afraid, and was ready to hide my Face; but if I had
called never so often to the Hills and Mountains to hide me, still I should
have been as Naked as ever I was: and he that cannot first witness these things
with me, can never witness a new Birth; and if he cannot witness a new Birth,
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; for Paul said while he was upon
Earth, Flesh and Blood cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. O! when I
remember the Pride of the Pharisee, he who is counted the Shepherd of the Town,
when as I once went down the Town, and did not put off my Hat to him, how he
complained unto thee: O! but he never considered when he was Drunk himself, and
when he lay in Babylon even to the Day and Hour he was to feed his Sheep: O
that thou might but think upon these things with consideration, then
would thou not wink at these things any longer. And so no more, but thy

Loving Friend, Ralph Fretwell.
Waltham-Abby, the 19th of the 11th Month, 1679.
My beloved Brother;
MY dear Love, in the Unchangeable Truth of the Lord our God (wherewith my
Heart at this time is overcome) saluteth thee; so that in the feelling Sense of
the Heart-ravishing Love of a Tenderhearted Father, witnessed toward my Soul,
am I constrained at this time to write a few Lines unto thee, showing thee how
wonderfully, and how powerfully the Lord has made bare his Arm of Eternal
Salvation, and has stretched it forth toward our Souls in this Place; in the
Sense of which my Heart at this time is broken, so that I cannot forbear, but
must needs acquaint thee with that which I have seen with mine Eyes and heard
with mine Ears, and my Hands have handled of the good Word of Life, since I
came into this Family. Oh! my Mouth cannot speak these things which I have
livingly felt and experienced in mine own particular, neither can I express
those things wherein I have seen others exercised, since I came amongst them:
for I have felt the Almighty and Powerful God at work in me, to the rooting
out, in some measure, of that Spirit of the crooked Serpent that has so long
possessed the House; but now have I felt the Cleansing Power and Purifying
Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, who is come as a Refiner with Fire, and as a
Fuller with Soap (and who has determined, That he will have a Pure and
Undefiled People to Worship him) to purify and to cleanse my Soul, in some
measure, from the Polutions of Sin and Iniquity.

Oh, my Brother! my Soul cannot express the wonderful Loving Kindness of the
Lord God Almighty, which he has handed forth unto me, in and through his
beloved Son, who is come indeed that his Children might have Life, and that
they might have it more abundantly: Oh! the flowings forth of his heavenly Life
is felt in this Day to refresh the Hearts of those that wait upon him, and his
heavenly Peace is witnessed to comfort their Souls, which is more than
Thousands of Gold and Silver; and indeed, as one said, A Day in his Court is
better than a Thousand elsewhere.

Oh! this is the Day of glad Tidings indeed unto a Remnant, whom he has
reached unto by the Operation of his blessed Power, which works wonderfully
in the Hearts of his little Ones, and of his tender hearted Babes, whom he
tendereth before him, whereby they come to witness the Times of Refreshment and
of sweet Consolation to run down their Souls as a place of broad Rivers. Oh! my
Soul at this time is sensible of his Consolating and Refreshing Presence,
whereby he has often comforted me (to his Praise I can say it) and I know
assuredly, that he withholds nothing that tends to the good of those that love
him and that delight to run the Way of his Commandments, and to follow him in
the Regeneration, but he enables them and endews them more and more with Power
from on High, and he renews their Strength from time to time; so that indeed
they can run the Race that he has set before them, and not be weary, and walk
in his Heavenly Way and not faint.

Oh! my Soul is so filled, at this time, with the pure Life of Jesus, that I
cannot but admire his Holiness, who so fills the Hearts of his Children with
heavenly Praises and melodious Songs, whereby he makes them to praise and
magnify his Name in the Land of the Living. Oh! how can those who are sensible
of this his blessed Power, and of the Dawnings of his heavenly Day upon their
Hearts and Souls, but forever praise and magnify his Name for his blessed
Appearance, and for the Revelation of his holy Power, whereby he has turned
their Hoarts from their former Lovers, and from their former Idols, unto the
Love of him and of his Truth, who is over all, worthy to be loved and waited
upon. So having no more at present, I do remain

Thye Loving Brother, D. Barclay.

A Testimony of one of the Teachers.
BLessed be the Name of the Lord our God forever and evermore, who in this Day
has made his People sensible of his Redeeming Arm of Power, stretched forth
for their Deliverance out of the Bondage and Slavery of Satan, to serve him in
the Liberty of his own holy and blessed Spirit, and to praise his Name in the
Land of the Living, who is their God and their King, their Captain and their
Leader, who goes out and in before his Children, his Sheep, his Babes, his
little Ones; whose Hearts he has tendered by his heavenly Power, and thereby
he does over shadow them from time to time, and makes them to grow in the sense
of his Love and Goodness to their Souls: Thus the Lords Love is extended in
this his heavenly Day unto many, and the Arm of his Eternal Power is revealed
in many for their Deliverance, whereby they are come to know a blessed Change
wrought upon their Hearts; and as their Minds are staid upon him, they do
always feel him near unto them; and he is never wanting to administer Comfort
and sweet Consolation unto them, when they do truly and in Uprightness of Heart
wait upon him: O! the flowings forth of his fatherly Love and heavenly
Everlasting virtuous Life that my Soul, with the Souls of others, has been
many time sensible of in our Family Meetings in this place; And I can truly
say, I have been made to admire the Love of God in my Heart, when I have been
sensible how he has condescended in reaching unto the Capacity of several of
the Children, whom I have really felt to be reached and blessedly tendered by
the Power of an Endless Life: Yea, and the Lords Glory has shined, and does
many times shine amongst us, so that sometimes it has been in my Heart, That
the Lord has begun to build up his Sion among us, as to the Educating of
Children: for we can say to his Praise and Everlasting Glory, That he has done
more in a short time for some Children here, than ever any Teacher could be
able to do. Glory be to his Name, who is the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
and of their Seed; for he is known to be the God of his People in this Day (who
are in the Faith of Abraham) and of their Children also, as they walk in his
heavenly Way which he has again revealed in this his glorious holy Day: O! the
riches of his Love and the infinitness of his Kindness toward all the Sons of
men; but more especially toward them whom he has gathered into the knowledge
of his ever-blessed Truth, and in whom he has revealed his Son, who are his
Witnesses on the Earth, whom he has loved with a singular Love in his Son
Christ Jesus, and given him unto them to be their Leader and Commander; and not
only so, but he has begun to visit many of their Children in their Young and
Tender Years, which cannot but be unspeakable Joy unto all Upright-hearted
Parents, to see and feel their Children visited with the same holy Arm of
Power, wherewith they were visited when they were gone far astray from the
Lord; which to feel in themselves is now their chiefest Joy: How much more then
will their joy abound to fell it operate in their Children while they are Young
and Tender!

And now for the Encouragement of all who rejoice to hear of the Prosperity of
God's Eternal Truth; I do testify for the Lord, and to the Praise of his great
Name, That the Lord our God has not withdrawn the Sense of his Power and
Heavenly Presence, (as to the General) from us, in this Family, but at all
times many of us are sensible, as we are retired in our Minds, that the Lords
Love is toward us; and we do always feel his Power in our Meetings, whereby
our Souls are refreshed, and we are thereby confirmed from time to time, and in
the Faith and Belief of the Prosperity of the Lords Work which he has begun
amongst us: For notwithstanding that the Enemy may work at times in some of the
Children, to draw their Minds into Wildness and Disorder, yet the Lords Power
is over all, and that contrary Spirit is much chained and kept down by the
Revelation of Gods Heavenly Power, whereby a Remnant are kept in a blessed
Measure, since the first time that they were thoroughly reached thereby, and do
grow in Weightiness daily, and in the experience of the work of Truth in their
Hearts, which is indeed great cause of joy unto all those (of the Lords People)
who are concerned in them.

And so that the Lord God of Heaven and Earth may carry on this his Glorious
Work among the Children and Offspring of his People, not only in this Nation,
but in all Nations and Islands where he has gathered them, is the Desire and
earnest Breathing of my Soul.

From one who travails for the Prosperity of God's Truth in the Earth, and at
present is exercised among the Children in the School of Waltham-Abby;
Alexander Seaton.
Written the 17th of the 11th Mon. 1679.
OH! my Dearly Beloved Friends, when I was alone, and my Mind exercised in the
Truth, this Cry came through me, That the Lord has heard our Cries, and has
bottled up our Tears, and has answered our Desires in a Blessing upon the
Children, and has broken the Wills of many, that they fear before him; and now
is he fulfilling his Promise, and that blessed Saying; That Righteousness shall
Cover the Earth as Waters the Seas; that is, all over; for verily it cannot be
said, all over, except Young as well as Old come to know the Lord. And this is
my Testimony, That the Time is at hand; for a blessed Day have we seen of the
Lords pouring forth of his Spirit upon Young and Tender Children, that they may
know him and fear before him. And I can say of a Truth, That we have of our
Family, Children that truly fear the Lord, and do truly hunger after
Righteousness.

O! how does the Lord appear to us, in our Family Meetings, that we are
overcome with his wonderful Presence, and our Childrens Hearts broken before
him, that they cannot contain from Praising his holy Name: His Glory does so
arise upon us, that our Meetings are indeed to Admiration: The Lord does so
follow us from Day to Day, and from Meeting to Meeting, as our dear Friends can
witness with us; holy Praises says my Soul, be to our God forever. Do we not
read in the Scriptures of Truth, That Children in the days of Old have
Blasphemed the Name of the Lord, and Scoffed at his People and Servants, and
were Cursed forever? But now, blessed be his Name, he is appearing in his Love
and Mercy unto Children, that he may Bless them forever.

Ah! what the Lord has done a few Months and Weeks past, that the like has
scarce been heard of in many Ages or Generations amongst Children: My Soul
desires, that the Sense of it may ever remain amongst us, for we can never be
able to speak it forth* how Unutterable indeed are his Mercies unto us, and his
Ways past finding out* Oh! the Sense of this overcomes me, that all within me
is constrained to praise the Lord, and magnify his holy Name, for he is
Worthy, Worthy, Worthy, says my Soul. O! how has he broken in amongst us in
our Meetings like a mighty Man of War, that nothing has been able to stand
against him, but we have fallen down before him, with Praises and sweet Melody
in our Mouths, that sometimes we could scarce know how to depart to go to our
Natural Rest: And when we have been in our Beds, sometimes our Eyes could take
no Rest for several Hours, we have so admired the Lord's doings with us.

The Lord has Determined, That this His Blessed Work in this His Day shall be
a President to the Ends of the Earth, that the Generations to come may Magnify
his Holy Name, who lives forevermore.

Written in the 11th Month 1679. Frances Tailor.

THE END.

