THE Door Of Salvation, OPENED: OR, A Voice from Heaven, to unregenerate
Sinners.

Plainly showing the necessity of opening your hearts to Christ, or else he
will open Hells mouth to devour you.

With many sweet invitations to come to him, that they might have life, and be
hidden from the wrath of God, which is worse then death.

Together with the dreadful condition of the stubborn and hard-hearted Sinners.

Dealing impartially with their souls, propounding blessing and cursing, life
and death; Salvation if you open to Christ, Damnation if you refuse Christ.

By T. P.

Mat. 4.1. For the day is coming that shall burn as an Oven, and all the proud,
yea, and all that do wickedly shall be as stubble: and the day comes that
shall burn them up, says the Lord, and shall leave them neither root nor
branch. Printed for Tho. Passinger on London Bridge.

THE Door of Salvation opened.
Rev. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice,
and open the door, I will come into him, and sup with him, and he with me.
IT has pleased the most Wise Disposer of all things, out of the riches of his
free Grace, to tender Jesus Christ to poor lost and undone sinners; and also it
pleased the Lord Jesus, not only to dye for sinners, to redeem them from
Death, and the Curse of the Law, that he might open the way for poor lost
sinners to return to God, but he is also pleased to stand knocking at the door
of their hearts, to woo, to beseech, and entreat poor souls to be reconciled
to God.

These words now read, are very full of matter, and upon each word might almost
be written an entire Volume, but my narrow scantling will not permit me to
explain the terms, only come to the main intended. I might hence raise many
observations, but I shall name but one, and ensist on it.

Doct. That Jesus Christ waits, and calls long upon Sinners, and earnestly
labors with them for admission, he stands at the door and knocks.

A hundred and twenty years waited he upon the Old world, thirty years upon the
Jews, forty years in the Wilderness by signs and wonders: these one hundred
years well nigh has he waited upon England; twenty years he waits upon one
sinner, forty years upon another: how often does he say to us, Open to me my
Sister, my Love, my Dove, my undefiled, for my head is filled with dew, and my
looks with the drops of the night, Cant. 5.2. Mat. 23.27. How often would I
have gathered thy children, as a Hen gathers her chickens, but ye would not:
What do these passages hold forth, but the love of Christ? but to enlarge a
little*

1. Christ gives not sinners over, though they have given him no answer at all,
though they lie in the bed of ignorance, and mind not the dignity of his
Person, nor the heavenlinesse of his voice, nor the excellency of his
salvation; and though he call louder and louder, and knock harder and harder,
Romans 13.11. It is high time to awake out of sleep, the night is far spent, the
day is at hand, yet Christ waits still to be gracious.

2. Christ has continued knocking, and calling, though sinners have made light
of his invitations: though the soul be lazy, and has put off his Coat, and
cannot put it on: and has washed his feet, and is loath to defile them, yet
for all this Christ puts his hand by the hole of the Door.

3. Christ has not given over knocking, though sinners have opened their
mouths against him, and reviled him, yet he stands thrusting at the posts of
sinners hearts, and he waits and labors much to reconcile the soul to God, he
sends his Ministers, who entreat, and exhort, though all to no purpose.

But to give you the Reasons why Christ is thus pleased to wait, to be gracious
to such graceless souls.

Reas. 1. Christ continues knocking at the sinners heart, that he might
glorify his free Grace, and rich Love, in converting some poor soul to
himself, that the soul might be thereby brought to see the tender care of
Christ, and his vehement desire to bestow himself upon him, that he might at
length see the free bounty of Christ, in his long calling: Open to me, open to
me: that it might see Salvation to be had no where else; that the heart at
length sees it must open to Christ, or else it must perish, that it might see
its lost condition without Christ, that it might see Christ's travelings and
sufferings, torments and tortures, and all to redeem and save him, who was lost
for ever without him.

Reas. 2. Christ continues knocking and inviting, that in the end he might gain
the soul to esteem him as the only and desirable object in the world, that
the sinner at length may confess, it is better to let Christ in, then so keep
Christ out: that the soul may see him whom he has reviled, yea, crucified all
his life; see him to be the sweetest Savior, and the loveliest object in the
world, and delight in him; and, as it were, be ravished with his Excellenctes.

Reas. 3. Christ knocks long at the door of sinners hearts, that thereby he
might magnify the glory of his Justice in their utter ruin and destruction:
for now, Oh soul, will thou be left without excuse, thou stout Rebel, that
stood'st it out against the Lord, that though he called again and again, thou
wast resolved thou would not hear, though mercy were upon his knees before
thee, and begged thee to give admission to the Lord of life; yet impenitent
thou were, and impenitent thou would be: miserable thou were, and miserable
thou will be: Therefore will be magnify the glory of his Justice upon thee,
and make thee smart to purpose, because thou would not hear the voice of the
Charmer, though he charmed never so wisely: now you have no longer any cloak
for your sins: now take what falls, expect a reward according to your works:
For the righteous Lord loves righteousness, but the wicked his soul hates; as
it is in the 11. Psalm, 5, 6, 7. Verses. No marvel now if the Lord rain fire
and brimstone, and an horrible tempest: for this shall be the portion of their
Cup, who have despised the rich grace of God, and abused his Patience and long
suffering toward them; Mal. 4.1. For the day is coming that shall burn as an
Oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall be as stubble, and
the day comes that shall burn them up, says the Lord, and shall leave them
neither root nor branch. But to proceed to Application, the main thing
intended: the Uses I shall make are these three.

1. Exhortation to Sinners. 2. Terror and affrightment. 3. Encouragement: and
then close all with some directions
Use 1. Of Exhortation, to exhort, and stir up, if it be possible, every secure
sinner, to stand it out no longer, but to set out your hearts, that the King of
glory may enter in. Oh sinner, now Christ is standing, and calling to thy soul,
If thou will hear and open, I will come in unto thee: now Christ is saying: I
know thy works, I know well enough what thou have been, and what thou have
done: I know thou have been a Blasphemer, or a Drunkard, or a Whoremonger, or a
Thief, or a Sabbath-breaker, and a Scorner: yet I stand at thy Door this day
and knock, I will receive thee unto mercy, I will forgive thee all thy sins, I
will accept, I will heal, I will save thy soul, if thou will open thy heart
this day unto me, and let me in: Oh brethren, for Christ his sake refuse not
Christ, do not reject nor neglect so great salvation, so ample a salvation, so
waiting a salvation, lest you perish.

1. Consider the necessity you have of him* Give me Children, or else I dye,
says Rachel: Oh give me Christ, or else I perish for ever. Can you be saved
without Christ? and if you may have Christ but for opening the Door: Then while
it is called to day, hear and open to him: if the door of Grace should be shut,
because the door of thy heart is shut, thou would be shut up with a
vengeance for ever.

2. Consider what answer thou will be able to make at the great day, if thou will harden thy heart and not open, why, what will thou? why, what can thou
plead for thy self at the day of Judgment? Will thou say, the Gospel never
offered thee Christ? Why, thou have heard this day, If any man will hear and
open, I will come in and sup with him: Will thou say, I would have opened my
heart had it not been for the love of sin, or of ease, or of Liberty, or
Honor, or Friends, or Companions: Oh how will Men and Angels hiss at thee:
this is the Person who for Lusts sake forsook his mercies, who for a little
vanity rejected his own Salvation: Oh how will thou curse thy self, that for
nothing, nay, for that which is worse then nothing, thou have put off Christ
and his Salvation: therefore, men, brethren, and Fathers, hearken unto me; as
Moses said to the Israelites, so this day propound I unto you, Blessing and
cursing, life and death, Salvation if you will open to Christ, and damnation if
you refuse Christ: Oh, for the Lords sake, choose not cursing, but blessing;
choose not death but life: choose not Hell but Heaven: choose not Sin but Christ:
though you have formerly slighted him, if yet you will regard; though you have
formerly contemned him, yet if you will prise him, though you have formerly
resisted, if yet you will yield, if yet you will consent, if yet you will
become willing to open unto Christ, Christ will be yours, Mercy will be yours,
and Salvation will be yours: and what would you have more? What, will not all
this do? will not mercy allure you? will not love constrain you? then give me
leave to reprove you, and affright you, if it be possible, out of those depthe
of Satan into which you are fallen: however, I am resolved whether you will or
no, and the Lord fasten it upon your souls.

Use 2. Of terror to you who have no communion with Christ, that have refused
to let in the king of Glory: Oh seriously lay to heart your unspeakable misery
for ever. And here I know not how to begin: if non-communion with the Church of
God, be so direful a curse, that makes Cain cry out: Thou have driven me out
this day from the face of the earth, and from thy face shall I be hid, I shall
be a fugit ve and a vagabond on the earth, and every one that finds me will
slay me, Genesis 4.14. Oh then what is non-communion with Jesus Christ? Luther did
profess that he would not be in Heaven if God were not there, but he would
rather choose to dwell in Hell if God were there. Oh soul, where will thou abide
after death? let me beg thee to ask thy soul these Questions following.

1. In the bowels of love and mercy, let me beg thee to ask thy soul this
Question: How long will this life, and the comforts of it last? thy soul is
immortal and must never dye, but it must have being somewhere to all eternity:
this worlds happiness, is it everlasting? no surely, thy Money, and thy Corn,
and thy Land, will do thee no good in the great day: Oh what have thou done for
hereafter? what have thou laid up for the world to come? is the door of thy
heart open to Christ? Alas, is thy poor soul unmarried all this while?

Q. 2. What will become of thee, when this life and the comforts thereof are
gone? Oh thou hard-hearted sinner, this broad way which thou walk in, will
never lead thee to the promised Land, thy gold and silver key, will never open
heavens gate for thee, thy care for this worlds good, will not plead for thee
before the Judge: all thy careful friends and acquaintance with whom thou have
spent so many jolly hours, their good word will stand thee in no stead: then
thou will be ready to cry: Oh where is the Christ that I have despised? O where
is the Jesus that I have resisted; will he plead for me? No surely, but go to
the Gods whom thou have chosen: Oh, what will become of me? must I not dye? Oh
whither will death carry me? into which of the Regions of the world will my
death land me? either of light or darkness? to which of these two Regions am I
now traveling? certainly the way of pleasure or worldly profit, the broad way
of the world, it is not the way to transport me to heaven, and everlasting
happiness: say, Oh sinner to thy soul, what, must I be taken from all my glory
and greatness: from all my delights and dalliances, and be thrown like
Lucifer, son of the Morning, from all my brightness, into blackness of darkness
for ever: when death has closed my eyes, must I awake in everlasting flames? I
sinner, thou shall without remedy, unless thou open to the Lord Jesus Christ.

Q. 3. Ask thy self on which hand thou art like to stand in the day of
Judgment: on the Right hand, or on the left, among the Sheep, or among the
Goats: if thou will not hear and open now: if thou will not open thy heart now;
be assured the Devil will open Hells mouth for thee: what will be the end of
those joys, which now so make glad thy heart? you who are in the broad way to
destruction, and utter separation from Gods presence for ever: thy pleasures
here we may judge of: Oh, but who can tell the thousandth part of those fiery
torments, to which thou art liable in the other world: whilst thou live here
thou art a cursed sinner; and when thou dyest thou shall be a Damned Creature:
whilst thou live, thou art fed like a Beast, by common Providence, and art a
mere stranger to saving Promises: if thou look upwarde, God is frowning, and
his wrath is revealed from Heaven against thee, Romans 1.18. The Heavens and
their Hosts are ready every moment to discharge Gods curses, like Thunderbolts
against thee: if thou look downwards, thou may see Hell gaping and opening
its mouth to swallow thee up quick, many dangers attend thee every day, many
miseries every moment, Legions of Devils stand about thee, watching for thee,
and waiting only for leave from God, to drag thy soul into the Lake of Fire:
Ah, when thou dyest man, what must thou then do? when that Captain death
strikes, whole Armies of Wolves will fall upon thee: look to it, and remember
thou wast once warned, for if thou dyest naturally, before thou live
spiritually, thou dyest eternally; Saint Augustine's Prayer was, O Lord, hack
Me, hew Me, burn Me here, but spare Me hereafter: as long as thou refusest to
hear Christ's voice, thou have a Hell upon earth: it is not the multitude of thy
Companions that go thither, shall any whit lesson thy torments, but rather
increase them; thy life, that has been full of worldly joy, shall end in
deadly woe.

All you into whose hands this little Book shall come, Oh let me beg you to
consider in those bowels of love you have to your own souls, how your hearts
can endure to think of being shut out of Heaven, out of blessedness for ever:
Ask your hearts these questions: Can I burn? can I endure the vengeance of
eternal Fire? Will boiled Oil, burning Brimstone, scalding Lead, a glowing
Oven, a scorching Furnace, be an only Lodging for me? Oh why, oh my soul, wilt
not thou now be persuaded to repent? is there too much pain in that? thou art
ready to say, thou can not bear a Cross, or an affliction, a Scoff or a
Reproach: talk to thee of Crucifying the flesh, of parting with thy Lust, with
thy worldly Companions, of entering in at the Straight gate; O these are hard
sayings, who can bear them? but how will thou do to dwell with devouring fire?
how will thou dwell with everlasting burnings? whatsoever thou think now,
think what Hell will be, when the day comes thou must descend into it; thou
can now drink or laugh away the fear of it, but what will it be to thee when
thou feel thy self wrapped up in the flames of it, and not a drop of water
left to cool thy tongue; think on hell, oh Soul, and then think on Christ, and
consider if a Redeemer from such misery be not worth the accepting: think on
Hell, and then think on Sin, and Carnal Pleasures and Delights: and consider
how they will relish with thee, when thus salted with everlasting fire: are
these the price for which thou sellest thy soul to Hell: Oh bid these lusts and
pleasures be gone: bid your Companions in sin be gone, and though you loved
them well, yet tell them you must not burn for them, that you will not damn
your souls to please your flesh.

Having thus as briefly as may be, laid down the use of terror, which I hope
will awaken some poor soul out of the depth of security: I proceed to the last
use of encouragement: to encourage poor Sinners to venture to lay hold on him,
before it be too late.

Use 3. Oh poor soul, have thou kept Christ out a long time, and art thou not
yet resolved to open thy heart to him? what shall I say to thee? let me say
this, Christ waits still for thee: Christ is willing still to receive thee:
then why will thou undo thy self by neglecting so great salvation? let the
consideration of the Message Christ brings you, of the errand he comes on, it
is not a dismal word he brings? is it not a dreadful errand if Christ had come
to destroy thy soul? could he have had less welcome then you give him? Oh for
your souls sake receive him, entertain him, for there is great comeliness in
him: O ye fools, when will ye be wise? come unto Christ, and he will have mercy
on you, he will heal all your backslidings, and love you freely. But some poor
soul will be ready to say, I have a desire to come to Christ, but I am afraid
Christ will never receive such a wretched sinner as I, who has stood it out so
long against him. For answer to this, give me leave to give you some few
Directions.

1. Ah poor soul, art thou willing to come to Christ? then will Christ in no
wise cast thee out: if thou come to him poor, miserable, blind and naked; Oh
sinner come not to him in thy own strength, but come thus, and say: O Lord,
here is a poor soul, not worth a farthing: Oh Lord make me rich in Faith; Oh
Lord here is a miserable soul, Lord show mercy to me: Here is a poor blind
soul, Oh Lord enlighten me from above: here is a poor naked Wretch: O Lord
cloth me with thy Sons Righteousness: Oh Lord help me, Oh Lord save me, lest I
perish, for I cannot help my self.

Direct. 2. Come to Christ by believing in him; Ah when thy poor soul is
sinking headlong to Hell, and thou see no way to escape the fearful wrath of
God hanging over thy head, catch thou then at such a time, fast hold on Christ:
O then apprehend and apply all his benefits to thy poor soul: come this way and
grasp him in the arms of thy faith, and say: O Lord I believe on thee, help
thou my unbelief: and the answer which the Lord will give thee, will be this:
Be it according as thou will. Let Christ be in your hand, and the promise in
your eye, and no doubt, though thou have been a Rebel, and Traitor, yet Jesus
Christ having received gifts for the Rebellious, will show mercy to thee, and
receive thee.

Direct. 3. Come to Jesus Christ by repenting, and forsaking all thy sins, thou
can never come to the Wedding Supper without the Wedding Garment; the old man
must be done away, before all things can be made new, Jer 4.14. Oh Jerusalem,
wash thy heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved, Ezekiel. 18.31. Make you
a new heart, for why will you dye? Act. 17. Says St. Paul to the Iaylor,
Repent and be Baptized, and thou shall be saved, and thy house. Christ will
never enter into an unclean heart: Oh get thy heart washed by the tears of true
and hearty repentance, and then Christ will come in and dwell with thee.

By this time I hope you see your absolute necessity of closing with Christ,
and of opening the door to him; and having given you some directions suffer me
now in the conclusion, to persuade you by all the bowels of love and mercy,
which Christ does exercise toward you: if Christ had come to destroy your
souls, he could not have had less welcome: will not you believe Christ? Will
you neither believe his Messengers? If the Ministers of the Gospel had been
Messengers sent up from the bottomless pit to deceive Nations, to destroy
souls, to drag them down to everlasting darkness, there could hardly have been
a greater hate and outcry against them: Oh, has Jesus Christ sweat, and
groaned, and traveled, and labored in pain, and all to bring forth a Lie: Did
he dye to purge, and cleanse, and wash his people, and when all comes to all,
it is but a cheat? what do you mean sinners by your wilful neglect? see what is
the reason of this abuse of Gods grace, and mercy, and patience, comes it not
from sin? Oh it is sin has made men Devils Devils against God, Devils one
against another, there is not one sinner, but if God should pull up the sluices,
and let his wickedness have its full course, he would do his utmost to damn all
the world: Oh friends, let me beg you to consider that sin has done: go to
Mount Calvary, and see what it has done there: what was it that slew the Lord
of Glory, that put Christ to death? was it not those sins which were laid upon
him? These were his betrayers, his Murderers: these were the thorns, the nails,
the spear that wounded him: let the sweat, the cries, the groans, the blood,
the soul that was pressed and poured out by sin, let these speak. Turn aside
from Mount Calvary, and go down to the Valley of Hinnom, lay your ear to the
mouth of Tophet, and hearken: Oh poor soul, what work sin has done there: What
is it that has filled Hell so full already? What sent down Cain, Judas, and
Ananias and Saphira, with those millions of damned souls that are already
tormented in those flames: stand and admire, Oh that thou art not there to bear
them company: it is merely the mercy of God, that spares thee: Oh therefore be
not high-minded but fear: Did God damn so many souls for nothing or for a
trifle, inflict so great torments for so small offense: what was it that cast
them thither? was it their righteousness, or rather was it not their
iniquities? If you step down to those Chamb^rs of death, and ask those wretched
creatures; Friends, how came you in hither? what would they answer? Oh it is
our sins brought us into this place of torment: O says one, 'twas my
covetousness brought me hither, Oh says another 'twas my lying brought me
hither: O says a third, 'twas my Pride, and Wantonness, and Sloathfulness: Oh
sin, sin, sin: this is that for which we burn, we roar, we rave, we dye, we dye
eternally: Oh therefore sinners, despise the riches of his grace no longer,
lest his wrath break forth, and he tear you in pieces, and there be none to
help: but let me beg you to open the door of your hearts, that the King of
glory may enter in: take the Yoke of Christ upon you, for that is easy, and
his Burden, for that is light: Wash your heart from your iniquities, that you
may be saved: Oh how long shall vain thoughts lodge within you? And my prayer
to God for you shall be, That the God of peace would sanctify you wholly: And
I pray God, That your whole Spirits, Soul and Body, may be preserved blameless,
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Now the God of Peace make you perfect in every good work, to do his will,
working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight: that after you have
run with joy, the Race that is set before you, you may possess a Kingdom, and a
Crown, which is incorruptible, which fades not away, reserved in Heaven for
you.
T. P.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, These Books following are sold by Tho. Passinger, at the
three Bibles on London Bridge.
THe Wise Merchant: Or, The Peerless Pearl* By T. Calvert, Minister of Gods
Word in the City of York. The Christians Combat: or, His true Spiritual
Warfare. By C. Love, late Minister of Gods Word in the City of London. The Book
of Graces, with Prayers for Morning and Evening: All but three pence a piece.
The Sinners Warning-piece: Or, Heavens Messenger. By Tho. Robins B of D. Man's
Chief guide to Salvation. By T. R. B. of D. The Scholars Winter Garment: Or,
The Garment of Righteousness. By T. R. Bachelor of Divinity. A wonder of
wonders: Or, Gods People the Worlds wonder. By R. Hough. Englands Golden
Legacy: Or, A brief description of the Mercies of God bestowed upon England. By
L. P. Gods Message from Heaven to Sinners on Earth. By T. P. B. of D L. The
School of Learning: Being Prayers for Morning and Evening for every day in the
week, with Graces before and after Meat, and a short Catechism for Children.
The Virtuous wife is the glory of her Husband; Being a new Book, showing the
rare qualities of the truly virtuous woman. Christ upon the Cross suffering for
sinners, By S. S. Now or Never: work out your Salvation with fear and
trembling, etc. Gods call to unconverted sinners. The School of Patience.
These twelve last are but twopence a piece, and very seasonable for these
sinful times in which we live.

FINIS.

