A PERFECT COPY OF A LETTER SENT FROM DUBLIN Relating the true Condition of
IRELAND As it now stands. With two PROCLAMATIONS Published by the States there.
Brought over by the last Post. January, 18. 1642.

Printed by the Printed Copy, First Printed at Dublin. And Reprinted at
London, by G. C. 1642.

A true Copy of a Letter from Dublin.
Mr. C.
I Have no time to write largely for this sudden sending, for fear to lose
the opportunity. By the next you shall hear further: I landed here upon
Thursday.

Fifteen hundred men landed on Sunday under Sir Simon Harcolts command; and
when they came near Land, the Rebels did make fire on the top of Hills and
Castles, to give the rest notice of the English coming.

There is within three miles round about Dublin above twenty thousand of Rebels.

A great many of the Poor that were robbed in the City, die for hunger, ten,
fifteen, twenty in a day; and God he knows without we have present help,
what will become of us.

These fifteen Hundred that came over, went to the Mass Houses, and took
thence there Pictures and broke them al to pieces.

The Friars Priests, and many Papists are gone out of the City, I believe to
the Rebels. So in great haste, with my best wishes, I rest

E. V.

THere are Laws, and Ordinances of War established for the good Conduct of
the Soldiers die JAMES ORMOND and OSSORY, Lord Viscount THVRLES, Lord Baron of
ARCLE, Lieutenant General of his Majesty's Forces, and One of the Lords of his
Majesty's Privy Council in IRELAND. Which Laws and Orders every Captain in
the Army is to cause to be read in the head of their several Companies
forthwith, and the chief Officers of every Regiment must see to the careful
performance and observation as well of the Direction, as of those Laws and
Orders.

By the Lords Justices and Council.
W. Parsons. Io. Borlase.

WHereas by the frequent Concourse of people to this City of dublin, the
Country is deprived of Defense, and left open to the spoil of the Rebels now
in Arms in this Kingdom, the poor of those parts are distitute of succor
and relief, and diverse other inconveniences do and may thence arise, unless
some timely remedy be applied thereunto, we therefore do hereby in his
Majesty's name charge and command all and all manner of persons (other then
such as have necessary cause to Dub in) such as we the Lords Justices, or our
very good Lordl James Earl of Ormond and Ossory, Lieutenant General, of his
Majesty's Army in this Kingdom, or Sir Charles Coote Knight and Baronet,
Governor of the Fortes in the City of Dublin, shall approve, and other then
such as shall bring Corn, and other provisions of Victuals to this City to be
sold, that they forbear coming to this City or Suburbs upon pain of Death.
And whereas diverse Cornemasters within fifteen miles of Dublin, taking
advantage of these times of disorder do raise the rates and prices of their
Corn to very excessive and unreasonable rates, for reformation whereof, and
withal to provide so as those Corne-masters may have a reasonable price for
their Corn, we do hereby in his Majesty's name strictly charge and command
them at their extreme perrils* that they be careful to send their Corn to
this City to be sold, at the rates, viz. Wheat, pease and beans at twenty
shilings a Dublin peck, and Oats at six shillings eight pence a barrel, beyond
which rates we require them not to sell, and above that rate we require all men
not to buy, and according to that rate and proportion the Bakers are required
to make their size of bread, And in case the Buyers or Sellors of Corn, or the
Bakers, or any of them shall transgress herein, they shall receive such severe
and exemplary punishment as is due to wilful contemners of his Majesty's
authority. And in case any Cornemasters within the said limmit do forbear
sending their Corn hither to be sold, other then so much whereof as may be
needful for substenance of themselves and their family, we, will take such a
course as shall be fit as well for punishment of their neglects, as for
preventing the Rebels from making use of the said Corn.

Given at His Majesty's Castle of Dublin. Orm^nd Ossory. R. Dillon. Ad Doftus.
Cha. C^ote. Rob. Meredith. I. Temple.


God save the King.
By the Lords, Justices. A Proclamation for the Prorogation of the PARLIAMENT.
W. Parsons. Io. Borlase.

WHereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty by his Commission under the great
Seal of England, bearing date at Westminster the fourth day of January, in the
sixteenth year of his Majesty's Reign, has given full authority unto Us the
Lords Justices jointly, either to continue and hold the present Parliament by
prorogation, or otherwise for such longer time, or to determine the same as we
should think meet. And whereas the said Parliament is prorogued to the
eleventh day of Jannuary next, Now we taking into our serious considerations
the present estate and condition wherein this Kingdom now stands, weighing the
manifold dangers and inconveniences that might happen by so great a Concourse
of People to this City of Dublin from all the parts of this Kingdom, as that
Assembly of Parliament would necessarily draw together at that time, And also
the great danger of his Majesty's loving Subjects in traveling hither from
many parts of this Kingdom, whereby also they should be drawn from the
defense of their habitations and estates, have thought fit and resolved to
prorogue, and we do hereby prorogue the said Parliament from the said eleventh
day of Iannuary unto the one and twenty day of June next following, And to the
end that as well the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, as the Knights, Citizens
and Burgesses of Parliament may spare and forbere their attendance accordingly,
we the Lords Justices for their case have thought fit by this Proclamation
according to the authority to us given by his Majesty's said Commission, to
publist and declare the same, so that they need not to appear the said
eleventh day of Iannuary at the Castle or City of Dublin, but shall be
discharged thereof against his Majesty. Nevertheless we the Lotds Justices do
will, charge and command them, and every of them, and all others to whom in
this case it shall appertain, That they and every of them do personally
appear, and be present upon the said 21. day of June next coming at his
Majesty's Castle of Dublin, to treat, consult and conclude upon such matters,
as in the said Parliament shall then and there of the common Council of the
Realm* by Gods favor happen to be ordained.

Given at Hls Majesty's Castle of Dublin.

