-- Ad Testimonium.

A SERMON ON THE KING's Day, February the 6th 1685/6.

At St Katharine Coleman's, LONDON.

By S. P

LONDON, Printed by J. Leake, for Henry Bonwike, at the Red Lion, in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVI.

A SERMON ON THE KING's Day.
PSALM lxxij. the latter part of the 15. verse. Prayer also shall be made for
him continually, and daily shall he be praised.


THESE Words have in them a double Energie, both of Prayer and Prophecy; they
had likewise a double Completion both in Solomon and Christ. In the Prayers of
all Holy Men, there is something of Prophecy, they utter nothing but the Will
of God; so God hears and ratifies their requests: The Words likewise of dying
Men are esteemed more Prophetic than ordinary, and these are supposed to be the
last Words, i. e. as ye have it in the 20. verse. the last Prayers of this
Religious King, made, it seems, at that time when Solomon, by David's
appointment, (that is by God's appointment, for David herein observed the Will
of God) was Proclaimed King.

The particulars of Solomon's Inauguration are at large in the First Chapter of
the First Book of Kings. We find there that in the latter part of King David's
Reign, Adonijah, the Son of Haggith, exalted himself, and put in for the
Succession; not that he believed himself that he had a Title to the Crown, as
he afterward confessed, Chap. ij. verse. 15. but Joab and Abiathar, and some
such troublesome Men, had put it in his Head; and that not for young Adonijah's
sake, as Solomon wisely observes in the 22 verse. but for their own Ambitious
Ends. One would have thought, that that Declaration of King David to his Privy
Council, 1 Chronicles. xxviij. had been sufficient to blast all pretenses of
Usurpation.

But these Disturbances not only gave him new occasion of declaring God's will
in Solomon's Succession, but of giving express Command for his Inauguration
before his own death; he resigned rather than bequeathed his Kingdom to him,
and recreated his dying hours with the public Joy and Acclamations of the
People.

David was well pleased with the Complement that his Nobles made to him,
saying, 1 King. i. 47.
God make the Name of Solomon better than thy Name, and make his Throne greater
than thy Throne. These Courtiers are said to bless King David, and in such a
sense he took it; for he bowed himself upon the Bed, (...), he worshipped at
those auspicious words, he nodded, he bowed, he worshipped, and then he fell to
Prayer and Prophecy.

I hope King David was no Flatterer, or Court-Parasite, when he filled his
Mouth with Prayer and Praise, and expressed so much pleasure and satisfaction
at his Son's Accession to the Crown. In those days it was no crime to be
Zealously Loyal, to Worship toward the East, and Adore the rising Sun: He was
not then esteemed an Enemy to David, or to the present Government of Israel,
that strewn Aves and Welcomes in the new King's way, and forgot to think of
any thing but the expectation of new Blessings.

David by his own example had discountenanced all intempestive Grief at the
death of his first Child by Solomon's Mother, and that without the Comforts of
another to succeed in his Affection; and now at his own death he will not
suffer 'em to be unmannerly in their Sorrow; but teaches the people to forget
him and look up toward his Son; and so they did as heartily as the King could
wish, for they blew the Trumpet, Verse. 39, 40.
and all the people said, God save King Solomon: And all the people came up
after him, and played upon Flutes, and rejoiced with great Joy; so that the
Earth rent with the sound of them. It was as if the whole Earth had opened its
mouth and sang for Joy too; and all this so long before King David was cold in
his Grave, that he himself was one to make up the Chorus. They blew the Trumpet
and he Prayed, they Rejoiced and he Prophesied; he prays to God for the
Prosperity of his Successor, and desires that all his people might pray for it
too; and that not only for his Successor's but for the People's sake; and so he
begins, He shall judge thy People with Righteousness, Verse. 2.
and thy Poor with Judgment.

And indeed this Psalm is not only a Prayer to God, but an Admonition to the
People; it is their Cause which he Pleads, and therefore they must come in with
their endeavors: God has performed his part in giving 'em a just and
righteous King to succeed David; and now it is their parts to pray to God
continually for him, to pray that God would continue him amongst 'em, that so
their Happiness might continue for many Years; so likewise they are to Offer up
Praises, they are to Praise the King daily, that is in effect, to Praise God
for the King.

This is the Peoples Duty at all times, and this is our present Duty; it is the
most particular business of this Day; we come here to pray for the King, we
come to praise him and to praise God for him; it is the subject of the Text,
and the subject of the Day; Prayer and praise: The only two principal parts
into which my Text can be divided. Prayer also shall be made for him
continually, and daily shall he be praised.

First, Of Prayer; which is a duty incumbent upon all Subjects for all Princes,
pro omnibus Imperatoribus, without any distinction. My method shall be this:

First, To give you some Reasons why this Duty should be performed. And,

Secondly, I shall offer at some Directions in the performing it.

I. The Obligations which Men lie under of Praying for their Sovereign Prince
are Natural, and Political, as well as Divine.

The Laws of Nature teach us to look upon Kingly Government, Non adulatione
vana adducti, 1 De Clem. 14.
as a Paternal Function. Every Prince paramount is Father of his Country, so we
call them, says Seneca, not by way of Flattery: So we find him making long
Prayers for Nero, Ad Polyb. 31, 32.
even when he was disgraced and exiled by him. Nothing being more Natural than
for Children to Pray for the Prosperity of their Parents; from our Natural
Parents we derive our Natural Life, so from our Political Parents, our
Political Life: 1 De Clem. 4.
The King is not only Caput and Animus Reipublicae; sed etiam Spiritus vitalis,
the vital Spirit, the very Life of the Kingdom; so that to pray for the King,
Quod bonum faustumque sit tibi domuique tuae Caesaer Auguste, (sic enim nos
perpetuam felicitatem reipublicae and laeta huic praecari existimamus,) etc.
Suet. Aug. c. 58.
is most correspondent to the First great Law of Nature, Self-preservation; for
hereby we pray for our own and the Kingdoms safety; so the Wise Senate of Rome
reckoned, when they prayed for their Emperor Augustus: Nor do we read of any
Nation or People, tho never so Barbarous, but their regard to their Prince,
has been the same as of Children to their Parents, the reasons being the same.
For,

First, It is from the King that we have our Origination: For as amongst the
Jews to beget a Child, was not essentially necessary to be the Father of him,
some being the Legal Children of one Man, which was the best and most Excellent
Title, although the Natural Children of another: So our Savior was the Legal Son
of Joseph and of David, tho by Nature the Son of Mary, Episcopius Institut.
Lib. 3. Sect. 4. l. 11.
who perhaps was of another Tribe: In like manner, tho we have a natural
obligation to those Parents which begot us; yet we were Born legally from the
influence of Government, we were born Children from natural Parentage, but Sons
only from political Authority. It is from the Laws, i. e. from the King, the
Fountain of Laws, that we are Legitimate, without which every Man is but Filius
populi, the Son of the people. So that every Rebel seems to Bastardize his own
Children, in resisting that Authority by which they call him Father; for tho
the institution of Marriage is an ordinance of God; yet the Circumstances of
its Solemnization are by Magistratual Appointment, whereby we are to remember,
that the King is our first Parent.

II. Secondly, it is from the King we have our daily Maintenance and Support;
it is his Wisdom and Power, that protects us from violence and wrong: Our
Estates, our Lives, our All is under his Guardianship. Of the truth of which
some of you here present are living Witnesses. You remember the sad time when
there was no King in Israel; but it was worse with you, than with the Old
Isralites, for they did every Man what seemed good in his own Eyes; whilst they
that Sequestered your Estates, Plundered your Goods, and drove you into Want and
Exile, committed such Villainies as even out-dared their own Consciences. It Is
you can best tell, whether all that you at present enjoy is not owing unto the
King's safety, he is so much more than a Father, that without the Preservation
of his Royal Person, it is not in your power to keep your own Children from
Starving; and therefore great reason have we, both to pray for him our selves,
and to teach our Children to pray for him too.

III. Thirdly, It is the King's Life and Preservation that protects our own.
The Shadow of his Wing is a Buckler to all his Subjects, a Buckler against all
Foreign Violence, and Domestic Blood-thirstiness: So was the Regal Authority
unto the Isralites of old, as we have frequent instances in the Book of Judges;
for those Judges were all Kings in Jeshurun as well as Moses, Deuteronomy. 33.5.
although not Anointed no more then he. So when there was no Judge amongst 'em, it
is said, There was no King in Israel, as that dismal Story of the Levite's Wife
is Prefaced; Judge. 19.1.
which one is a sufficient instance of Domestic Villainy and Barbarity. So every
now and then we read of Invasions, and such Public Calamities, as must needs
happen to a Nation without a Head; there must needs be much Wrong either done
or suffered, where there are no Eyes to see, nor Ears to hear, but Hands to
pull down Ruin, or Feet swift to shed Blood.

And now, sure here is worth and subject enough for a Prayer, that God would
protect that Person by whom our Lives and Fortunes are protected. It is a Duty,
and a very modest one too, to pray for Kings. Whereas some very wise Heathens
made a mistake and prayed to 'em: But Nature, Reason and Tradition, are not
Perswasives strong enough to Men of corrupt practices, to bring 'em over to
their Duty; let us see then how far it is encouraged, or rather commanded, in
Holy Writ, for the People to pray for their Kings; tho some Men cannot find any
such thing as Monarchy its self in the Scriptures, without an Opprobrium by way
of Appendix to it: For all that is there said in the behalf of Monarchy, is not
a sufficient Balance to the Eighth Chap. of the First Book of Samuel, for from
thence they infer, That God Almighty was angry with the Israelites for desiring
a Monarchical Government: Whereas the whole Current of Scripture proves this
and no other to be jure Divino, even in the interregna, which were Governed by
One only Prophet, or Seer; so that from Adam to Saul, and forwards, the whole
Government was purely Monarchical. The Seventy Elders being no other than
Justices or Counselors, and therefore God was so far from being angry at their
desiring of a King, i. e. for desiring of one, Menasseh Ben Israel Conciliator.
Q. in Deuteronomy. 6.
that as the Jewish Rabbin tells us, they were commanded by God, That they
should do so, Statuendo statues super te Regem, Deuteronomy. 17.15. Their Crime was in
the manner, the time, and the ends of their asking one: They asked with
murmuring and mutiny, they asked importunately, rather demanded than asked; and
that for the Idolatrous end of being like other Nations; therefore God said to
Samuel, Not thee but it is me that they reject: they were better pleased with
their Viceroy Samuel, Verse. 11.
then with their Emperor God; and it was but a Pretense for 'em to find fault
with the Government, when it was the Religion that they would alter; and there
is no question, that if they had not had such base purposes in their Heads,
that God would have given 'em a King long before, without asking; that blessing
was so long delayed, because God saw they were not Capacitated for receiving
it. And when a Nation is not capable of Government (we have had the sad
experience) God gives 'em up to Anarchy. A people must be ripe for Blessings
before they can expect 'em, and then they must put 'em to a good Use, if they
desire their Continuance: And amongst all the blessings that God has promised
his Church in this World, I take one of the greatest to be, That Kings should
be its Nursing Fathers, and Queens its Nursing Mothers. I am persuaded, that
hitherto it has been the greatest blessing. And so those Christians would have
told you, that lived under the Reigns of Constantine, Theodosius, Arcadius, and
those good Emperors; each of which did more good to Christ's Church in some
respects, than all their Predecessors had done it Mischief: They Nursed it, and
Clothed it with Beauty and Glory, which before had lain in Rags and Nakedness,
exposed to Contempt and Danger, like Moses among the Rushes. But St. Paul did
not look so far as Constantine the Great, when he exhorts the Christians, in
the 2 Chapter of the 1 Ep. to Tim. That prayers and intercessions, and giving of
Thanks be made for Kings: He does not say, I exhort you that about Three
hundred Years hence, ye shall begin to Pray for Kings; no (...), i. e. if we
make a Critical search into the Word for the Emperors, for what else can it
signify? Who were Supreme then but Emperors? And St. Peter expressly names the
Supreme; (...), 1 Pet. 2.13.
and again 'twas, Fear God, Honor the Emperor; for it is the singular number,
(...), Verse. 17.
so this cannot be understood of Governors as Christians, much less of the
Reformed Religion, when at that time there was no such denomination; but St.
Paul and St. Peter meant, That they should presently pray for the Emperor in
being, and the Emperors in succession, as such: For Nero as well as
Constantine, for Dioclesian as well as Charlemaign, for Mahomet the IV. (had he
been Emperor of the World) as well as for JAMES the II. in Great Britain and
Ireland.

Now since the Roman Empire is broken, this Exhortation belongs to us; because
every King in his Kingdom is Emperor, and JAMES the II. (whom God preserve)
wears the Imperial Crown of this Realm. Nothing can bar Prayer no more than
Allegiance: it is part of our Allegiance, and a most indispensible Tribute. He
that defrauds the King of his Prayers had better defraud him of his Coin;
saving that such a Man's Prayers would not do him so much good: This is God's
Due, and this is Caesar's Due; our Prayers to God, and for the King: So that
with one Mite we may pay both Tributes. What remains then, but that we should
bethink our selves how to pay it; which leads me to the second Undertaking, i.
e. To give you some Directions how Prayers are to be made for him.

There are Two Qualifications necessary to all Prayers, heartiness and
sincerity; the third is constancy, expressed here in my Text, by the word
continually; so we are to pray for our King heartily, sincerely, and
continually.

First heartily, We are not to come to Church on such days as this for
fashion-sake, to avoid singularity, or a bad reputation; every good Man must
bring a Zealous Heart along with him; a Heart full of Affectionate Duty and
Loyalty, with Love and Hope in his Breast, and Joy in his Eyes: He must
petition God for the King, as he would petition the King for himself; with all
the Elegancies of Entreaty, as if he would petition for a Kingdom: And then
sure he would mix a few Vows with his Prayers, something or other to
distinguish 'em from common Petitions; at least ways we should pray with such
an emphasis, as if we thought our selves quite undone, if God did not hear our
Prayers, and so we may well think; for if God will not hear our Prayers for the
King, it is a sign he will not hear 'em at all. Let us have a care that those
Prayers be not lukewarm, for when God spits them out, he commonly spits 'em
into the Cup of Indignation, that is the Cup of Anarchy, when the Prince and the
Priest go off together; and then comes the Kingdom of Antichrist: Treatise of
resisting the lawful Magistrate.
For the Pious and Learned Dr. Hammond proves every stubborn Subject to be a
Limb of Antichrist, who exalts himself above all that is called God. But,

Secondly, We are to pray for the King sincerely, i. e. without any mental
reserves, or mixed equivocations: We must pray for the King in that sense that
the Church prays for him, in that sense that the Primitive Church of Christ is
wont to pray for their Emperors. Apologet. and ad Scap. c. 2. n. 11.
Tertullian gives us a taste of those Prayers, by which we may guess at the
rest. First their Manner, We pray, says he, for our Kings with our Hands
stretched forth, because they are Innocent, they were never lifted up against
'em; 2. With bare-Heads, because we are not ashamed, our Consciences do not fly
in our Faces, and reproach us with Hypocrisy. 3. Without any humane order or
prescription, because we pray willingly and from the bottom of our Hearts. Now
follows the form: Vitam illis prolixam; a long Life, a secure Throne, a safe
Abode, a potent Army, a faithful Senate, a Conscientious People, and a
peaceable Empire: This was a sincere and honest Prayer, such a sort of Prayer
as we come here to make, without Parsimony and without Fraud. Let me then give
you Three short and general Directions in praying for the King.

First, To Pray for him as you would have others pray for you.

Secondly, To Pray for him as if you prayed for your selves; and

Thirdly, Let the Subject Matter of your Prayers be as sincere and liberal as
when he prays for you; we may know how that has been by the effects: Be sure
they are such Prayers as David and Solomon put up, the effects have been the
same: Peace is within our Walls, and Prosperity within our Palaces.

Besides, methinks we are all grown better of late; a New Genius ascends the
Horizon. No doubt but from some new Cause, from our new King's prayers, For
thou, O God, Psalm. 61.
have heard his Vows; thou have given him the heritage of those that fear thy
Name. Then let us all join in the Chorus: Thou will prolong the King's Life;
and his Years as many Generations. He shall abide before God for ever: O
prepare mercy and truth, which may preserve him. So will we sing praise unto
thy Name for ever, and daily perform our Vows.

Thirdly, We are to pray for him continually. Prayer also shall be made for him
continually: So that we come here to Day, but to learn what we are to do all
the Year after. This is but a solemn Remonstrance of what we resolve to do all
the Days of our Life; and reason good, if we continue to expect the blessed
Effects of such Prayers. Not that some Men's Omission of Prayer, (no nor their
Curses) can do the King, and his Loyal Subjects, any harm: For God can rain
down Blessings upon the Fleece, and let the Barren Ground remain dry; and so
God can rain down Curses upon the Ground, and yet Gideon's Fleece shall escape,
every lock and hair of it. If some will not continually pray for the King, yet
God will continually bless him for their sakes that do; at least if the King
prays for the People, God will return his Prayers upon his own Head: Thus much
for Prayer.

The second part is Praise: This is a more particular Duty, incumbent only for
particular Reasons: Prayers for their Kings is the Duty of all Nations, but
Praise only belongs to Solomon, and such Kings as Solomon was; and yet there is
this Duty incumbent upon all Mankind, which is, To praise the Government, when
they cannot praise the Person. The Character of a King, in the person of one
Prince, is as Laudable, Divine, and Sacred, as in the person of another. They
are all of them, In Luke 1.21.
as Calvin tells us, the Sons of God; they are so ex Officio, and Praise is as
just a Debt to their Office, as Honor to their Persons: Indeed there can be no
Honor without Praise. Praise is the result of Liking and Approbation; without
which, Honor is no better than Mockery. But in this place the Holy Psalmist
does not speak of that Praise and Honor, which is universally due to all
Princes, but of that extraordinary Praise, which his Successor King Solomon,
and all such Princes as he, may justly claim. So here we are to consider the
Character of a Prince who is praiseworthy.

And here I have a fair opportunity of entering into a Panegyric upon that
Glorious Prince, whose Praises we come hither to Celebrate, as well as to offer
up our Prayers for him: But I would willingly avoid all Invidiousness, as well
of the malevolent, for my Ambition, as of the Censorious, for my Presumption,
and yet I fear neither. But because it is so co-incident with my Text, and most
appropriate to the undoubted Sense of it, I shall give you a short Character of
that Prince for whom 'twas first made; that not only ours, but all Princes of
those Excellencies, may come in for their Dues.

First, He was a Prince of the most Celebrated Wisdom and Understanding in the
World, this was his Natural Talent; which because he had so well improved, God
Almighty at his request added to it: He was mature for Government, and well
qualified for Empire; so that God sent him to the People with a Blessing in his
Hand. It is the King's Wisdom that is the Peoples Safety; and therefore when
God in Isaiah threatens 'em to give 'em Children to be their Princes, Chapter 3. v.
4.
and Babes to rule over 'em; the Consequences of such a Government follow in
the next verse. Verse. 5.
And the People shall be oppressed every one by another, and every one by his
Neighbor.

Secondly, He was a most industrious Prince; he made his Duty his business, and
very Conscientiously considered the great Charge committed to him; he was
always employed for the Peoples good, Vigilant and Active upon all occasions.
We read indeed, that in all his Reign the people had little else to do, 1 King.
4.25.
But to sit down every Man under his Vine, and under his Fig Tree, from Dan
even to Beersheba, Eating and Drinking and making Merry; it was well for them;
but you will find the good King otherwise employed: His greatest pleasure was, to
see his People safe, and to be the Author of all those pleasures and comforts
that they enjoyed, and which they could not enjoy, but by his pains and care.

Thirdly, He was a King very eminent for Justice; which was one great effect of
his Wisdom. It Is Solomon's own Maxim, That a Prince that wants Understanding is
a great Oppressor; but a Prince of Understanding and Wisdom, will never do, nor
suffer Wrong. The Lawyers tell us, That the King cannot wrong his Subjects; and
our Divinity-Books tell us, Quia enim Deus vult honorari Superiores, vult etiam
ut ipsi honorem suum tueantur. Pareus Corp. Doct. p. 3. Q. 104. Lib. 2.
That he ought not to wrong himself. The King is as responsible to God for his
own Honor, as for the peoples Safety: And that the rather, because it is God's
Honor as well as his; but yet he had much of David's Clemency and Mercy. I am
sure Paterculus would have thought so, if he had lived in his Reign; for he
looked upon it as a thing even incredible, Quod humanam excedat fidem: That
Caesar, who was but an Usurper, Afranius, Faustus, Scylla, Filia Pompeii.
Florus. Suet. Dio. Cass.
should spare those that were of Pompey's Faction; and yet we read of some
great Persons Executed upon that account, even L. Caesar, his Kinsman, contrary
to due form of Law.

Fourthly, He was a Prince of great Constancy and Resolution; he met with many
difficulties in coming to the Crown, and even at his first Accession, he was
forced to encounter with an unnatural and dangerous Rebellion: It was a
difficult Juncto, and required a steady Hand of Government. Tranquillo quilibet
gubernator est; Adag. Vet. Sen. Ep. 86.
every one can Sail in a Calm Sea, but Storms and Tempests make a proof of the
Pilot. Sal. Orat. ad Caes. 2.
It might be said of him, as it was of Caesar, His mind was greater in
Adversity than in Prosperity. David was not afraid to leave him amongst so many
of his Enemies; 1 King. 2.9.
Thou art a Wise Man, says he, and know what thou ought to do: 1 Chr.
28.20.
Be strong only and of good courage: That is, strengthen thy self, and be
resolute: It was verbum sapienti; he did so.

Lastly, He was a Man of extraordinary Piety and Devotion; in this he showed
himself to be the true Son of Holy David.

We are not to enquire, whether Solomon served God with the same Circumstances
of Religion as David his Father: For so it is said, 1 King. 3.3.
That Solomon loved the Lord, walking in the Statutes of David his Father. It Is
true, from the Particle (...) following, some Learned Men have inferred, That
the outward circumstances of his Worship, were not altogether so laudable,
Deuteronomy. 12, 13, 14. 2 Chr. 1.3. (...) Targ. Jonath.
as his inward Sincerity and Devotion; because, whereas there was but one legal
High-place of Worship ordained by Moses, he did nevertheless, in imitation of
the Ancient Patriarchs, Diodat. in 1 King. 3.3.
permit their use in the plural number. But leaving this Dispute to the more
Learned, I here only take notice, That as this was not sufficient to obstruct
God's Indulgence, and great Love toward him; So it could be no bar to his
people's Prayers and Praises: For as Solomon loved the Lord, so the Lord loved
him; and blessed him with immensity of Wisdom and Justice; and this appears
from the following passage, to be the undoubted Reward of his exemplary Piety.

And now, to sum up all: This incomparable Wisdom, this indefatigable
Industry, this Justice, Resolution, Constancy and Piety, might well deserve the
Acclamation and daily Applause of his people: And if Solomon did justly deserve
his peoples Praise, behold this Day a Prince not inferior to Solomon.

The Wisdom of this One Years Reign will equal all the History of that Eastern
Prince. And as for all those other Qualifications, which I have mentioned, it
is but too plain, that I have strained the Character of Solomon to make it bear
some proportion with that of our King, and still the faint Lines come short of
a Resemblance: But if undaunted Courage and Bravery in Battle, (a virtue that
never was experienced in Solomon;) the voluntary Exposing of his Royal Person
for the Good of his Country; the repeated instances of his Love and Affections
to it; and such other his more peculiar and Characteristical virtues, were to
be insisted upon; it would require such Sentences as Solomon's to declare his
Worth.

But I come not here to usurp upon Fame's Province; his Name is already spread
as far as Solomon's, and shall continue as long as his, as long as the World
shall endure.

But sure the Obligations of his Subjects to him are far greater than any
People ever lay under, and ought therefore to be paid in the most dutiful and
solemn Manner: That great Tribute of Praise as well as of Prayer.

Give me leave likewise herein to offer you some few Directions, and so I Will
conclude. The Church directs us to praise God, not only with our Lips, but in
our Lives, we may take the same instruction in Praising God's Vicegerent. He
best praises the Lawgiver, who lives most conformable to his Laws; and the
greatest Panegyric upon Caesar is, To Obey his Commands; they are the only
Flatterers, whose Hearts and Tongues do not go together; and it is our Duty to
praise our Prince, and not to Flatter him. Nothing can be grosser than to
praise the King's Wisdom, and yet at the same time to prefer our own above it:
My Lord the King, says Mephibosheth, is as an Angel of God: But then he
thought so as well as said it; and therefore resigned all he had in the World
to the King's dispose. All Distrust and Jealousy is inconsistent with Praise;
for this must proceed from Love, and Love casts out Fear. We have a Prince,
that of all Mankind ought the most to be trusted; because it is not in our
powers, to provoke him him more to break his Word than we have done. Our
Provocations have been so great, That nothing but his Sacred Word could stand
between us and his Anger. But this must not encourage us to use him ill; for
tho the Decree for our Good is gone out of the King's Mouth, yet it is not
ratified by God, without good Conditions. We have been grievous Delinquents,
and are now but upon good Behavior; and Lives, as well as Hearts, are in God's
Hand.

Conc. Lat.
Bishop Andrews terms Kings the treasures of the People: If so, we at present
have a most inestimable Treasure. But then he bids us remember, 2 Cor. 4.7.
That we have these Treasures in Earthen Vessels: Let us have a great care, and
use it tenderly, that we, together with our Prince, may see our Childrens
Children, and peace upon Israel.

Our Blessing is to us but a new Comer: we hardly know yet what it is that we
enjoy. Consider but one Particular, That the English Nation, for this last
Year, has been a greater Terror abroad, than for some Ages before; at
least-ways, it is in our power soon to be so; only by this, in not being a
Terror to our selves. Let but the English Praise and Love their King, and all
the World will soon stand in awe of him. Not that he trusts in his own
strength, or in the Arm of Flesh, but in his God; in his Right, and in his
Innocence. Witness that one Act of his, whereby in the Assembly now in being,
he would not (what others would perhaps) have Excluded his Exclusioners.

But there is no occasion to be loud and importunate in our Praises, they will be
best understood by our being still and quiet. Let us all (...) make it our
Ambition to be so. It should be our Ambition, 1 These. 4.7.
because it is our Interest; nay, we see it is to no purpose to be otherwise:
It is but a folly to resist so often, the plain and visible Hand of Providence;
the Injuries and Affronts that are done to Majesty still turn to Blessings.
And, as to our Prince in particular, God has as plainly and manifestly
protected him from all his Enemies; as if with our own Eyes we had seen him
guarded with a Flaming Sword, or resting his Head under an Angels Wing. God
Almighty has given him so many and such signal Deliverances, that we should be
even Faithless, if we did not believe, that it can never be in the power of Men
or Devils to hurt him. So that God will Reign, and the King will Reign, be the
People never so unquiet.

God has Judged the King, Ps. 43.1.
and has pleaded his Cause against an ungodly Nation: He has delivered him
from the deceitful and unjust Man. Ps. 18.20.
The Lord has rewarded him according to his Righteousness, according to the
cleaness of his Hands, has he recompensed him.

And now, the King will be sure to live Peaceably and Quietly himself. He is
resolved to stand fast like a Rock in the midst of his Ocean; neither the
Raging Waves of the Sea, nor the Madness of the People, (...). Hom. II. l. 1.
shall ever remove him from his Center. He is resolved to deserve Praise, and
to have it too, if not from his People, yet from his God.

To conclude then with the Words of this Psalm.

His Name shall endure for ever, his Name shall be continued as long as the
Sun, and Men shall be Blessed in him.

Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only does wondrous things: And
Blessed be his Glorious Name for ever. Amen, and Amen.

FINIS.

