(...) OR, SELECT POEMS: BEING A Compendious and Methodical Remonstrance of
such Passages in England, as have been most remarkable, as well before as since
His GLORIOUS MAJESTY'S Most Happy and Joyful RESTORATION.

By J. P. Cantabr.

-- rediviva Monarchia floret
Quippe Britannorum Jubilaeus adfuit Annus.
LONDON, Printed by T. Child, and L. Parry, for Edward Thomas at the Adam and
Eve in Little Britain, 1661.

To the Reader.
THough I have journey'd (as each harsh line tells)
Scarce through the Suburbs where choice learning dwells,
Yet since men's fury and our Plagues do cease,
And Love does blossom on the stems of Peace,
Let these distilled extracted dews engage
A relish in the palate of this Age;
Till larger Vyols full be brought at last,
Whereof this piece is served up for a taste;
It Is the Primitiae of mine unripe years,
The tree is known best when its fruit appears.
J. P.

A brief Relation of many horrid passages of the Rebels, and distress of Loyal
Subjects, since the beginning of the late Wars in England; and likewise of
the National Changes before his Gracious Majesty's providential and happy
Restoration.
UNpolisht lines show not those splendent Rays
Of Britains glorious State, (that is) before the Wars.
in former days,
Nor can I show, since fate did cloud our bliss,
Englands most dismal (that is) since the Wars began.
Metamorphosis;
I cannot define those cruel Murderers
Unless I write in bloody Characters,
I must implore Melpomene to come
To act a part and write those Traitors doom,
To point out marks and then survey the bounds
Of each man's Conscience filled with blood and wounds.
Our Joy the fates to brinish tears did turn,
When judgment perished then 'twas time to mourn;
Men raged like wolves in every field and grove
Waiting for blood, without a spark of love
Which would enkindle friendship, and increase
United spirits in the bonds of peace.
What Is piety, said some! we will now possess
The Land by force, or by perfidiousness:
What perjured villains treach'ry could not bring
Their swords accomplished, made their Martyred King
Like a John Baptist; Englands bleeding heart
When Englands head was off, did feel the smart:
Our fruits were blasted, brambles grew alone
Instead of Cedars, in our Lebanon.
Vineyards and palaces lay desolate,
No pen could write, no tongue our grief could rate;
As fountains flow, blood gushed from our wounds,
Grief knew no limits, Sorrow knew no bounds.
Our Church defaced, divested of its beauty,
As if men's zeal obliged them and their duty,
Forced them to assume that monstrous privilege,
Abhoring Idols, but not Sacrilege.
In The midst of tortures, and distracting cares
They stroy'd each page of all our public prayers,
Hoping to bring our souls into a thrall;
But yet in private with a silent call,
Each prayer went up to The Heavens, and did cause
Our David saved from Bears and Lions paws.
What foul corrupt and treacherous disguise
Did cloak their horrid acts? what villainies
Did lurk within them, varnished ore with many
Fine gilded words? Nay there remained not any
Of that base crew, which did not always bear
In one part Honey, and a Sting elsewhere.
They most rebelliously did disinthrone
Their Sovereign King: in him they have plucked down
True Honors staff, Religions prop and gem,
His Scepter ruined, and his Diadem.
They butchered him, they brought him to the Bar,
As if he would been some Thief or Murderer.
The Royal Prosapie they quite exiled
When Charles the First was martyred, and then styled
Angliae Tyrannus. I may fitly call
All smooth-tongu'd Traitors, Honey mixed with Gall.
How could men act such horrid things? We see
What treacherous Infidels these worldlings be.
Base rebels ruled the Land, all that seemed good
Lay then entombed in Sepulchers of blood.
Thus Naboths blood was treacherously shed,
And cursed Ahab after he was dead
Enjoyed his vineyard, but it is well known how
Providence soon rang the changes here below
And whispered cheerful tidings to the world;
Cromwell that perjured Ahab was soon hurld
Into the earth, a place prepared of old
To tame his rage, and keep his fury cold.
Our proverb here, as 'twas in Babylon,
Shall be, How is the Oppressor ceased and gone?
Then we perceived that place fulfilled, which says,
No bloody man shall live out half his days.
Cromwell dies and his sons usurp the Kingdoms.
No sooner the old one dies but young ones come
To take possession in their Fathers Room,
But England still did want its lawful King
Some rise, some fall, and thus the changes ring.
Then there was a Democracy, such a Government where many rule.
When those were ruined, then some had, we know
A Common Wealth but we a common woe.
Thus we see Plagues and Wars are but the keys
Unlocking doors to further Miseries.
Meaning Sir George Booth, Sir Thomas Middleton, etc.
* Then did a Blazing Star in the West appear
Whose splendid luster made our hemisphere
Almost a Paradise: some thought the Sun
Exchanged his wonted course, and had begun
Ith West to rise; all they that loved the Crown,
Rather then have the True old Cause go down,
Jointly resolved they would for it live and die;
For Earls, Lords, Knights, the whole Nobility
Were gathered to a head, in hopes to tame
The rebels fury and so win the game,
But their swords edge was turned, all hopes did fail,
No strength, no prayers, no wishes could prevail.
Justly might daily bread be given to none
That cannot truly say, Thy will be done.
Our grief over night was sent to give us warning
To be prepared to meet joy in the morning.
For then the blustering North wind cold and fierce
Shaking the pillars of our Universe
Did drive the storms and dissipate each cloud, The Lord General Monk Duke of
Albemarle did then rise in Scotland.

Wherein the bloody Rebels sought to shroud:
When trouble came in metamorphiz'd times,
But Heaven no longer would permit their crimes.
No sooner clouds dispersed but there appears
A star in the North then we cast off all fears, That is the Lord Monk.

And by it guided straitway go to meet
Charles wayne with joy, all the noble fleet:
Our glory in the West did set with the Sun,
What Zephyrus could not Boreas has done.
Now this rebellious crew in vain may call
For Atlas or Mount Gargarus to fall
And cover them, can man himself defend?
If sin begins sorrow makes an end.
A thousand worlds, what is that? can that condole,
Or pay a ransom for a Traitors soul?
They cannot convey themselves from Heavens view
In spite of all that Hell or Earth can do.
Each one reproacht by the open world appears
Perplexed with grief and labyrinths of tears,
Their present bliss did future woe portend,
They were but fatted for a slaught'rous end.
The sword was furbusht, and the trumpet sounds
Blood, blood, and death by terrifying vvounds,
And when they have received their fatal doom
Judge you what Epitaphs will fit their tomb;
They that escape the thunderbolts of woe
Will follovv them on earth where ere they go;
The darts of envy, stings of all disgrace
And vengeance ushers them in every place.
The time will likewise come at last when they
Shall to the wandering fouls become a prey,
Though their fields were not like Mount Gilboa
Accursed, nor turned into a Golgotha;
Ezekiel. 21.26, 27.
Yet was their Crown * thrice overturned, and then
Restored again unto the best of men,
Whose right it is; although none other things
Could quench their thirst, unless the blood of Kings,
And banishment to recompense their Love,
Although the Serpent snared the modest Dove,
Though England was like a Jerusalem,
A second Sodom, though our Diadem
Lay dashed upon the ground, we made their food
That built their Cities up with sacred blood;
Yet now once more we will shout for joy, and sing
With Lute and Harp; since CHARLES our gracious King
Hastes to the British shore, let Organs play,
Let Trumpets sound, Bells ring, keep Holy Day.
This Monarchy the world cannot parallel,
All candid virtues, Love and Friendship dwell
In every corner of the perfumed Earth
Garnisht with all the quintessence of mirth,
Which even as Cordials do revive men's hearts,
And all their faculties: Here is no darts
Of hatred, malice, and of treachery
Shot to each other; But realitie
And true affection is the spotless Robe
Which decks this polisht, and effulgent Globe;
Each Loyal Subject renders just and true
Tribute to Caesar, Honor where it is due.
Thus in due time the Almighty, when he pleases,
Heals all our wounds, and cures all our diseases:
He has accomplished our desires in peace,
Now does the Rebels rage and our woe cease.
I knew our sorrows to our gain would tend,
As means accomplishing an happy end;
Floud-gates of joy are opend, and we know
Streams of felicity on us shall flow.
England through bribes was ruined, but once more,
Our King by judgment shall our bliss restore.
The foregoing Copy PARAPHRAZ'D Into a most Compendious Rapture
IN a Charybdis lay this fatal Realm,
A bloody Ocean did it overwhelm;
We were made slaves to please men's crooked wills,
Which said they would heal us all with wholesome pills,
And we, what game so ere was played, should win,
But yet their sweet baits had sharp books within.
Those horrid Plot-contrivers pleased to term,
Their Agents Saints, and they themselves to affirm
The Keepers of our Liberties, it is true
They kept them close, nay, imprisoned them too,
So we could not enjoy them; they profess
They walked in paths of truth and righteousness;
Yet had of Justice neither branch nor root,
Walk in it, that is, they tread it underfoot.
Most horrid villainies were in our City
Wrought by a dangerous, yet called Safe Committee.
Each Supreme Head was like the cunning fox,
Wolves were made sheepherds to oversee the flocks.
What strange game's this that Kings must not stay in it?
How is it possible that we should win't,
When nothing's left but packs of crafty Knaves,
Pikes, clubs to kill's, and spades to dig our graves.
We that escaped all in Booths did dwell,
When they were ruined by each infidel,
Then we no longer could inhabit here
Till Monck did like a Star in the North appear
Inlightning England, which so long had been
Dark as a dungeon, like a jayle within.
That Blazing Comet which did soar so high
Seemed to portend our future misery,
But turned to ignis fatuus at last,
The rav'ning pack of bloodhounds being fast
Linked up with chains, and others nooz'd with cords;
Thus ends the Glory of their upstart Lords.
That grand Sorites of those mercies we
Received from heavens liberality
Should ravish all our thoughts, and wean our joys
From trivial objects, and inferior toys.
Now tyranny shall cease, and peace shall reign
The wheel's turned round, and in its place again;
For now their Land-Lord's come to's pleasant Mount,
The Steward calls the Rebels to account,
And since none dare his Majesty control
Perfumes of pleasure do dilate my soul,
Filled with delight; an Exstasie of joy
Shall make men cry aloud, Vive Le Roy.
Upon His GLORIOUS MAJESTY'S Most Happy Retire into ENGLAND.
Let Us bid adieu to that black dismal age
Wherein did murder and Rebellion rage,
(that is) In Cromwell.
Mars, Nero, Judas centered all in * one
Who would have Britain made a Babylon.
But now our stormy Winter's overpast,
Our sighs and tears turned into joy at last,
Our confused Chaos brought to a right line,
Our clouded bliss does now begin to shine,
Our figtrees bud, our clust'ring vines increase,
England first blossoms, then yields fruits of peace.
Our Jubilee returns, our Glorious Lamp
Spreads its effulgent beams and does encamp
Our rural plains, which the right Heir inherits;
These cordials add life to our dullest spirits.
Each glittering Star, whose aspects like darts pierse
Our foggy air and cloudy Universe,
Ushers the Sun in its Horizon, going
To meet Charles Waine with glory overflowing.
Hark how each Trumpet joyful triumphs sounds,
Since Peace inhabits our rich Edens bounds
The silent Fishes wanton in the deep,
Wild beasts wax tame, all fury's laid asleep,
The chirping Birds do with their warbling throats
Give such an Emphasis to their sweet notes
As ravish Souls, all former hideous cries
Are changed into harmonious melodies,
Perfumed with pleasure, sugared with delight,
Since Britains Glory now enjoyes his Right.
The florid Spring with liberal increase
Augments our joy once more revived in peace;
The lofty Mountains, Valleys, our whole Globe,
Completely decked with a Majestic Robe;
All things do smile, since virtues sacred gem
Revives our late oppressed Jerusalem.
In which few lines I must acknowledge this,
There Is no Auxesis but a Meiosis.
Natures whole frame resolves to welcome home
Charles our Great Monarch, Joy of Christendom.
Whose merits claim an everlasting story,
Which is his own and also Englands Glory;
His Coronation day we will solemnize
With joyful triumphs and Doxologies.
Heavens prosper him with trophies of renown,
Then turn his earthly to a celestial Crown.
An Elegy upon the Death of that most eminent and Gracious Prince HENRY Duke
of GLOUCESTER
APproach Melpomene, I must implore
Thine aid to assist me to unlock the door
Of my imprisoned Genius, cold, benumbed,
And slumbering in my half dead Corpse entombed.
My brain's so frozen that it stops the stream
Of my affections, and an Icie cream
Does Christallize my tears; I sigh, I mourn,
And melt away as metals in an urne,
Perish I must like carcases enshrined
In monuments, unless I speak my mind.
Phoebus withdraws his beams, his race is run,
His course is finished, and no more our Sun
Sends forth its candid aspects, but does call
The lesser lights to attend his funeral.
Then pardon weakness, I must beg supplies
To be my conduct at such obsequies,
To guide my steps, whose infant years do want
A crutch to hold by; I am bound to grant
That my dumb lips and tongue-tide wit affords
Nothing but folly and abortive words,
Therefore my Muse assist and help to rouz
My drowsy faculties, and randivouz
My frozen fancy and disbanded spirits,
Because he is dead whose vast unfathomed merits
Invite thy help to show them to the world,
That they may be recorded, and enrold
In everlasting registers, for he
Did nere deserve a blot of Infamy;
Woe mixed with tears would move an Adamant,
Burden our souls which as in travail pant.
My mind's blockt up with grief, I cannot restrain
My soul from sorrovv, nor my heart from pain;
For we were guided by that sparkling Star
As Cynosures direct each Mariner
But ridged fate deprived us of those rays
But yet we still can whisper out his praise.
He was a modeled pattern so divine,
That all might square their actions to his line,
His heart bedeckt with flourishes of Grace
And beauties picture limned in his face;
Nursed with the milk of sacred Eloquence,
In's brain lay treasured wit; the quintessence
Of heavenly gifts was centered in that Gem
Whose virtues claimed a costly Diadem.
My tongue must needs interpret all my fears,
Mine eyes are limbicks to extract my tears.
Since pale faced Death surpised and snatch away
A Jewel decked with wise Apollo's ray;
Judgments Grand Atlas, and support; but sure
That famous structure cannot long endure
Whose chiefest Pillar's fallen; how soon are we
Almost astonished and amazed to see
The hungry Earth swallow up the best of Men,
All things that smiled begin to mourn again,
The busied fovvls began to build their nests,
But now they shrovvd their heads within their breasts,
Each lesser bird recalls her pleasing note,
And bids it harbor in her silent throat,
Under each branch they rest, and there they grieve,
Lament, and seem to wish they could relieve
Englands necessity, and want of him
Whose death brought sorrow and made each eye dim,
Drowned in tears; what soul would it not pierce
To view a ruined Land, a Universe
Clouded with folly? Reason being dead
Our blessed estate is metamorphosed.
Youogest die first, Nature and reason jarre,
Hysteron proteron seems irregular.
Nay all things chang their wonted course, the woods
Cast of their florid vestures, and the floods
Do sometimes rage, and then stand still to view
How Phoebus is eclipsed, the earth would show
It self unwilling to interr him whose breath
Was stopped i'th'morning of his age, by death,
How pale the Mountains look? how fierce and grim
The craggy rocks appear? me thinks they seem
To burst into a sweat; Had I my will
I Would dye with grief like Niobe, and fill
Thy tomb with tears; or had I Argus eyes
Each one should help to weep thine obsequies;
Thus men shall say, and give thee but thy due
Here lies great Caesar, and Mecenas too.
Though Nature strives to make me cast an oar
Into my boat, and lanch out from the shore
Into a Sea of tears, yet Reason says
The unruly waves shall cease, the fates shall raise
No more shipwracking storms; but shall conspire
To make that brinish raging Sea retire.
We Will not be still in Sorrow's bounds confined,
Though some were martyred, some the earth inshrin'd
Yet most choice souls still uphold the name
Renowned and Crowned with sempeternal fame.
Britains bright splendour shall not melt away,
After a shower comes a clearer day,
Retreats sometimes Death-like a trumpet sounds,
And is most tragical with blood and wounds;
But he whom we lament did live in peace,
And so he died whose bliss may never cease,
For he that sent him will to him apply
A Crown of Glory to Eternity.
Shall we say, Stay, when Heaven bids him come?
Or shall we murmur if Heaven calls him home?
Oh no! forbear, for he is not dead, but gone
TO inhabit life and true perfection;
Here upon earth each ecchoing Bell does toul,
And sounds a farevvell to his pious soul;
In heaven Cherubims with svveet Anthems cry
Welcome Choice soul, we will sing thy Lullaby.
Shall we be grieved or sorrovvfull at this,
Because he is crovvn'd with everlasting bliss,
And freed from this perverse worlds slavish fears,
From anguish, sorrovv, and distracting cares?
Shall we despair? cannot Providence afford
Blessings more choice by speaking half a word?
No fears shall therefore my firm hope destroy,
Neither anticipate my future joy:
Blame me not, Reader, if I rather choose
To close this Poem with a cheerful Muse.
AN EPITAPH Upon the most Illustrious Prince HENRY Duke of GLOUCESTER.
WIthin this Monumental fabric lies
A pearl whose rays did dazzle each man's eyes.
Whose vigorous Luster did extract and draw
The subtle Vapors from our heads, and thaw
Each Frozen brain, whose Icie drops did turn
To tears, to fill each Vacuum of this Urne.
In him was Virtues microcosme heapt,
In him Austrea Courts of Justice kept:
'Cause his unparalled endowments were
Perfumed with Heavenly odours, and too rare,
Too great, too good to beautify this Nation,
Therefore did he remove from's Earthly Station,
To dwell amongst Cherubims, that Glorious Train,
For he that sent him, called him back again.
Palma repressa resurgit. AN ELEGY Upon the Death of that most Renowned and
Virtuous Lady MARY Princess of AURANGE.
OUR flashy sparks of joy are quenched with tears,
My soul embarkt with grief, like Atlas, bears
A Firmament of sorrow; we will no more
Anchor our leaking Vessels near the shore,
But rush into the gulf, and there shall lie
The Muses flames of Ingenuity,
Striving with boyst'rous waves; yet if Heaven please
To fuel them with Faith which may appease
All wrath, and make us unto bliss arrive,
Then shall triumphant joy once more revive.
But since my tears are broacht, I cannot refrain
From sighs, it is hard to bridle and restrain
The course of Nature, Is the Phoenix gone
From our Arabia, leaving us alone
Like Pelicans in deserts? she is inshrin'd,
But leaves her fragrant spices still behind.
There was in her a pearly Cabinet,
A costly Treasury in order set
With pure refined sweets, enricht with gems,
And garnisht with enameled Diadems.
I mean her sacred gifts, transcendent merits,
Who now eternal joy and bliss inherits:
We Will keep the records of her memory,
And own all virtue as her Progeny.
Me thinks I hear the thundering Heavens groan,
The whispering air does breath sighs, and bemone
The worlds lamented loss: methinks I hear
Each groan with echoes doubled in mine ear.
A Cloudy darkness over shades our Globe,
The sky divested of each Starry Robe,
Each spangled dazzling Lamp, in black appears,
Heaven seems to mourn, and showers down its tears.
The more I weep, those tears which I effuse,
Water the Garden of my doleful Muse;
And all my dried up faculties do nourish,
('It Is known all watered Plants will spread and flourish)
Therefore I Journey further, and my Quill,
Though weary, makes a further progress still.
I cannot detract my thoughts, I must retain
A true Idea of her in my brain;
Whose dust shall be dissected into pure,
Nay golden Atoms; who amongst men can cure
Great Britains wounds, or bring a remedy
To a diseased Widdow'd Monarchy,
Whose feeble head can scarce bear up the Crown;
Two branches of our Laurel are blown down
By Heavens breath, which does another bring
Out of that flock where blooming virtues spring.
Thus we see how the scales of Providence
Weigh out each mortals fate, which humane sense
Cannot foresee: all honors, riches, health,
Consume and vanish as it were by stealth;
Fame is a shadow, each accomplishment
Is but a separable Accident.
Therefore let us trust in him who can turn gall,
VVoes, Plagues, and chast'nings to a cordial;
We Will Wave the Ocean of grief and fears,
The flux and reflux of this Sea of tears,
For now methinks the circled Rainbow says,
Our tears shall not another deluge raise.
She wading through a Brinish Sea, went where
She now does shine in a Seraphick Sphere;
She passed the lower Olympic Pyramid,
To the Empyreum with transcendent bliss;
Let Us with Sabaean incense Crown her Hearse,
Whose spreading fame perfumes the Universe.
A POEM Concerning those Fanatic Contrivers of the late Horrid and Bloody
Plots against his SACRED MAJESTY, etc. Being Providentially discovered and
prevented.
WHat still perplexed with Rebels? what? still bound
In sorrow's chains? lay balsome to the wound,
And fix a period to our soul piercing woe;
Can florid Roses bud, or Cedars grow
Where thorns and brambles are? the choking weeds
Devoured the Crop, and spoiled the choicest seeds.
But now we will fan and winnow Chaff from Corn,
None but selected Flowers shall adorn
Our Polisht Eden; all the spurious race
Shall be cut off, or banished with disgrace.
We from a British, they a Brutish line
Deduce their Pedigree; we must refine
Such drossy metals; It a hazard were
For us to dwell where Asps and Scorpions are.
Though you pretend, and Piety profess,
Your Actions say you're gilded Rottenness.
You seemed to be adorned, as if you were
Gods Servants, with his Livery, but are
Like Hypocrites with Leopards spots, and blurs,
Like whited walls, and painted Sepulchers.
Thieves, Rebels, Murderers, will soon be ganging
To ruin those that saved them first from hanging:
Ungrateful Worldlings! did our teeming Earth
Give to this sordid Hell-bred crew a Birth?
Could you expect your fury long should last,
Whose Wind-mill-brains are turned with every blast?
And like the Weathercock with every wind;
Who for your wavering and unconstant mind,
With all your Treacherous dealings, i will compare
To Janus, and Chamelions in the air.
That Honor which you to your King profess,
Your hearts allow not, but your tongues express:
How can you Plot such cursed Villainy
Against him, when none's so merciful as he?
Is this the requital you on him bestow,
Who might have looked with a severer brow?
But scorns revenge, obeying him that says,
Vengance is mine, I Will recompense their ways.
Methinks I see in your fierce Cruelty,
Insulting Herod's bloody Tyranny.
You Swear you will ruin Church, and State withal,
Never were Murd'rers so Tyrannical.
Slaying Men, Women, Children, who but them
Should make the world a stroy'd Jerusalem?
So they might but their Sovereign dis-inthrone,
They Would cross the torrid, and the frozen Zone.
They Would fear no swallowing gulfs, nor blasting winds,
No storms nor tempests should disturb their minds;
They Would bridle Fortune, and beat back the thunder,
Batter stone walls, burst iron chains in sunder.
But Providence, and Heavens impartial eye
Would not bring us to such Adversity:
Their fiery darts are Quenched, each Temple stands
Not yet destroyed by Sacrilegious hands.
Their horrid Plots are crossed, cursed and confounded,
Their hopes are Shipwrackt, all their Forces wounded*
This dismal, Hellish Plot that is now betrayed,
Was but a noozing snare which they had laid
To catch themselves, who now may weep and houl,
Like Perillus in's Brazen Bull; their soul
May grieve to think how all their winged fame
Is fled away, and now their Noisome name,
Odious to all men, must for ever be
Branded with Characters of Infamy.
When Overton is Overtur'd, and all
The rest that have been most Tyrannical,
Then we will rejoice in truth and peace, we will render
True Loyalty to our true Faiths Defender.
In reditum Serenissimi Regis nostri CAROLI II. Felicissime reducis.
AUreum tandem properavit aevum,
Quisque prestanti procreatur astro,
Fata subrident meliora nobis
Front polita;
Dissipat Sidus Boreale nubes,
Turpium crassos scelerumque nimbos,
Stricta vaginis latitant atrocis
Tela ruinae.
Lauriger Phoebus radias micantes
Sparsit in cunctos alacres Britannos;
Interit Sevus Nero: jam crueris
Flumina stagnant.
Sponte, Neptunus pelagi furentis
Rector, Inspicet fidei tenaci,
Turbidis nondum Gelidae tumescant
Fluctibus undae.
Nostra Regalis fugiat carina
Prorsus ingentes scopulos; nec ipse
Naufragus sit Rex Carolus serena
Gloria mundi.
Dirigat Nautam Cynosura fulgens,
Obrutus nec sit graviore Sylla,
Mersa nec forsan rapida Charybdi
Inclita puppis.
Aeolus ventos reprimat minaces,
Voce diffundant tacita susurros;
Affluat nobis pretiosa velis
Aura secundis.
Sit throno noster Carolus beatus,
Aureum dextro positumque sceptrum;
Sit stolis cultus, caput and corusco
Stemmate cinctum.
Pace tunc omnes placida triumphent,
Quisque tunc plaudens statuat trophaea:
Belluae gaudent volucresque amicti
Gramine montes.
Terra, florentes inarata fruges
Pinguis, ut gramen segitemque fundet,
Incidat Nemo miseri cruento
Gurgite damni.
Splendidus nunc sol nitide resurgit;
Nobiles sane merito remordent
Perfidos, ut pax modo Gente nostra
Florida regnet.
Est Deus in monte.
TUrgida cum rapidos commovit turbatumultus,
Iran cum fastu stygiam vomuere tumenti,
Dextram protendit Rector radiantis Olympi,
Fulmina fortunae jactans, rutilisque sagittis*
Vulnere dispersos fatali perdidit hosts;
Nec pestes patitur posthac, regnante tyranno.
Est Deus in Monacho.
STellato Numen Monachum splendore coronet,
Quod, quae decrevit, peragit miracula, Coelum;
O mihi post nullos haeros memorande! manebit
Prorsus in aeternum merito Indelebile nomen.
Stridula vivaces cantabunt organa lauds,
Laurigeri stirpis nunquam monumenta peribunt.
Est Deus in Monarcho.
VIvat Rex, regnet Carolus quasi Magnus Apollo;
Ac vigeat sceptrum, vortex Diademate cinctus
Fulgeat; Et Libani fructus, floresque virescent;
Florida purpurei frondescent gramina veris,
Aurea profundis jactantur munera gazis
Quippe tryumphantem decoravit Gloria REGEM.
Upon his GRACIOUS MAJESTY'S Most Joyful and Glorious CORONATION.
WEre my lips sweld in drops of Helicon,
And deluged in those streams, this Theme alone
Would drink the watery dews, though they were all
Gloss'd with their tincture and Rhetorical.
Now since our tedious gloomy winters frowns,
And storms of woe are gone, the springtime Crowns
Our works with vernal smiles; the day is come
That gives Great Britains Crown a welcome hope
TO its Royal Seat, with such pomp, luster, glory,
As the amazed world may ground each lofty story
Upon that Thesis, which I cannot erect
Within the confines of mine intellect.
Much less expressly show what Gallantry
Ushers and Guards his Sacred Majesty,
At this great days Solemnities; each gem
And rubie shines in's pearly Diadem.
Attendants do their brandishments display,
As if they had surpised Jove of 's array;
How can my mean endeavors then aspire
The Culmen of that richly wrought attire?
Nor can my towering thoughts span those vast bounds
Of this days matchless splendour, which redounds
To Englands Glory; my Quill cannot explain
The radiant luster of that Noble Train,
But should my barren pasture yield no fruit,
Well might I be recorded for a Mute.
Showers ore night cleared Heavens face, A Description of the weather.
that then
It might send brighter aspects unto men;
As soon as night took vving and fled away,
The morn avvak'd and budded into day,
Then the early Larks, and all the vvarbling Quire,
Did sing melodious Anthems, and inspire
With harmony that Great days timely birth,
Whose shrill-tongu'd echoes over-flow'd the Earth.
Then did Aurora with her morning smiles,
Open her Rosy casements to these Isles,
And in the Peoples Universal view,
Unlockt her Cabinet of Rubies too.
Then Sol (whose heat and vigor ratifies
The mislie fogs, and clears the cloudy skies)
Shot all his rays to crispe the frizled air,
All that day long he rode in's stately Chair.
The sky did need no beauty-spots to grace
Add show the luster of its smiling face;
Nor did it vvear a Mask, but when 'tvvas late,
Jove called a Synod, and the Heavens sat
In Counsel, then immediately did join
In triumphs with us, and the cheerful Nine;
The Olympic spears were put in tune, to shovv
How thunder ansvver'd our great guns below,
Whose intermixed Volleys, and shrill tones,
Were not like doleful murmurings and groans;
Lightenings were Heavens Bone-fires to our view,
All things did triumph, and had Trophies too.
Since Supreme providence has made Peace rise,
Let not the Adamantine destanies
Send us Usurping Tyrants any more,
To gild their Swords in Royal Blood and Gore.
If Iron Scepters come to rule again,
Svvords points must write the Tragic Dooms of men.
But Heavens grant those days may never come,
To lead our Christian Kings to Martyrdom.
Now we will wipe all our floating tears away,
Shall their drops count each minute of the day?
No, nor impetuous Rebellion rage,
Nor swell hereafter, for our golden age
Yields bloomy joys; that day of Coronation
Shall be observed throughout each Generation:
The rest I leave for others to rehearse,
Gracing the Fabric of the Universe.
FINIS.

