A Pastoral Letter FROM THE Four Catholic Bishops TO THE LAY-CATHOLICS of
England.
EPiscopal Authority, Dear Brethren, of which You and your Catholic Ancestors
have been long deprived, being lately, by a merciful Providence of God, and the
Piety of His Majesty, restored unto you; and Our Persons, though unworthy of such
a Dignity, made choice of to bear the Weight, and undergo the Solicitude
annexed to it: We have judged it proper, before We separate Our selves in order
to a discharge of Our Duties in the respective Counties committed to Our Care,
to join in a common Address unto You All, hoping that what comes thus directed
by an united Application, will make a deeper Impression on your Minds, and
dispose you to an easier Compliance with the Fatherly Admonitions which every
one in his particular District shall think fit to be made unto you.

Your Condition for many years past has been such, as enabled you to manifest
a stedfastness in your Religion, rather by suffering for it in your own
Persons, than by contributing actively toward the planting it in the Minds and
Hearts of your Fellow Subjects. The Exercise of it has been private and
precarious, tending rather toward the Preservation of it in your selves, than
a Propagation of it in others. But now you are in Circumstances of letting it
appear abroad, and of edifying your Neighbors by professing it publicly, and
living up to the Rules prescribed by it.

We need not tell you what Obligation you lie under on this Account, and how
unjustifiable your Behavior will be in the Judgment of God and Men, if it be
not conformable to those Rules, if the Liberty you enjoy of professing your
Religion be not improved into Practices suitable to the Sanctity thereof, and
if the Truth of your Faith be not manifested by an Exemplarity in your Lives.

Charity, which the Apostle declares to be the End of the Law, 1 Timothy 1.
is the Virtue by which your Faith is to operate, and be kept alive: Your
Understandings may be united without it, but your Hearts cannot. This latter
Union is that which maintains the former, and renders it useful toward
obtaining the End for which it is bestowed upon you.

We cannot mind you of this important Duty with words more expressive of what
We desire, than those which the same Apostle made use of to exhort the
Ephesians: Ephesians. 4.
We conjure you, as he did them, to walk in a manner worthy of the Vocation by
which you are called, with all Humility and Meekness, with Patience supportin
one another in Charity, sollicitous for maintaining the Unity of Spirit in a
Bond of Peace.

You see of how great Concern this Unity of Spirit is unto you, by the care
which the Apostle takes to have it well guarded. You likewise may observe the
quality of the Guard which is set to secure it. The employment of ordinary
Guards is to secure Peace, but here Peace it self is appointed to be the Guard:
Peace in the first place with God, by an entire submission to the Orders of his
Divine Providence; from which connaturally follows a Peace within your selves,
and a Peace with your Fellow Subjects.

As Peace is a secure Guard to the Spirit of true Religion and Piety, Gal. 5.
so it is by the Apostle ranked in the third place amongst the Fruits of the
Spirit. The Soul centers in God by Charity, and finding there an entire
Satisfaction, rests in Peace.

Our Intention in exhorting you to a Practice of Charity, is not that it be
confined to persons of your own Religion: Such confinement would be a
destruction of it; for true Charity has no Bounds. You must love those of your
Religion, because they are so; and others, that as they profess themselves to
be Christians, they may become Members of the Catholic Church. You must
evidence your Love toward these, by an inoffensiveness in your Behavior.

The memory of past hardships which you have suffered from some amongst them,
may be apt to create provoking Animosities, and the Liberty you now enjoy may
possibly tempt you to insult over those who formerly abridged you of it: But it
must be your care to prevent or suppress all such irregular Motions. You must
endeavor to tread in the Footsteps of our Divine Master, who was so far from
making such passionate returns, that he did not forbear, even in the height of
his Persecutions, to signalize the Excess of his Charity to those who were
guilty of them. 1 Pet. 2.
St. Peter puts you in mind of this, proposing the Example of Christ to your
imitation; who, when his Enemies treated him with most outrageous Language, was
far from answering them in the same Dialect: When he was provoked by them to
the highest degree of a just Indignation, he did not so much as threaten them
with the exercise of his Power. 1 Pet. 3.
The same Apostle leaving us a Character of true Christians, declares, That
they must be unanimous, compassionate, Lovers of the Brotherhood, merciful,
modest, humble, not rendering evil for evil, railing for railing; but on the
contrary returning Blessings to those who treated them in this manner.

Now if in quality of true Christians you ought to live up to this Character;
if you ought to make it good in the most provoking circumstances that
Providence might place you in; what is to be expected from you in these which
at present you are favored with? You are indulged a public Exercise of your
Religion; a great part of the Nation, whose Persuasion in Points of Religion
does differ most from Yours, and which in time past has been severe upon your
Persons, is willing to enter into a Friendly Correspondence with you; and if
some others do repine at your being Sharers in the Liberty which themselves
enjoy with much greater Advantage, the most effectual means to convince them of
their Error, is to edify them by your good Example.

You live under a Prince of your own Religion, to whom, next unto God, you owe
this Felicity. You have his Power to protect you in the free Exercise of your
Religion, and his Example to encourage your discharge of this Duty in a most
edifying manner. His Majesty's assiduousness at the Divine Service, and other
Functions performed in his Chapel, notwithstanding the multitude of weighty
Affairs, which might frequently excuse him from such Attendance; the respectful
Posture in which he performs this Religious Duty, and which argues a Presence
of Mind no less than of his Body, cannot but invite you, both as good Catholics
and good Subjects, to a Conformity with so Eminent a Pattern. What business can
dispense you from discharging these Obligations, when you see His Majesty under
the Weight of the whole Government so punctual in His Compliance with them?

It may seem needless to suggest unto you another Obligation you lie under, not
only of a passive Obedience to His Majesty's Orders relating to the Government,
but also of an active and cheerful Concurrence with Him therein: Your own
Safety and Interest being concerned in this, and depending on it, are
sufficient Inducements for your endeavoring to give full Satisfaction in this
Point.

His Majesty has been graciously pleased not only to favor you with His Royal
Protection, but moreover to honor many amongst you with a share of the
Government under Him. He has admitted you to Employments both Civil and
Military, from which by the severity of our Laws you have formerly been
excluded: He has placed you in Circumstances of manifesting to the World that
it was neither want of Loyalty nor Ability that occasioned your former
Exclusion: He has capacitated you hereby to remove the Prejudices which in
former Reigns your Religion and Persons have lain under. So that henceforth
there will be no reason to apprehend your being Sufferers, or that your
Fellow Subjects will be preferred before you in management of public Trusts on
these accounts, since Religion is no longer a Bar to your Preferment.

We therefore earnestly desire those amongst you who are already in Offices, so
to behave themselves in them, that neither His Majesty may have occasion to
repent, nor His other Subjects to repine at the Choice he has made of them. We
exhort those who are not yet in public Employment, to bear their Lots with
Modesty and Patience, without Murmuring or Envy. We conjure you all to abstain
from speaking or acting any thing that may seem to have the least indecent
reflection upon the Government. The Councils of Kings are Sacred, as well as
their Persons; and it is a kind of Sacrilege in Subjects to be too bold with
either: Their Duty is, not to approach their Persons but with respect, nor
discourse of their Councils without submission. Romans 13.


Let every Soul (We speak to you again in the words of St. Paul) be subject to
Higher Powers; for there is no Power but of God, and those that be, are
ordained of God: Therefore he that resists Power, resists the Ordinance of
God; and they who resist, do purchase to themselves Damnation. What in this
Text of the Apostle is said of Higher Powers, must be understood not only of
the Supreme Authority which is seated in the King's Person, but proportionably
also of that which His Majesty is pleased to impart to His Ministers of State,
and other Magistrates in their respective stations. It is the King that acts
principally in, and by those Subordinate Officers: His Royal Character being
stamped upon them, challenges respect from the rest of His Subjects, and
renders their failings therein a Trespass in some measure against Majesty it
self.

Having thus minded you of the general and more substantial Duties incumbent on
you, We do not judge it either necessary or proper to descend at present to
such others as are of a more special Nature: Occasions hereafter will not be
wanting of inculcating these, when We enter upon Our respective Provinces,
where We are to dedicate Our Labors to your Spiritual Improvement, and where We
hope to find such Dispositions, as by rendering Our Pastoral Solicitude
profitable to you, Heb. 13.
may make it easy and comfortable to Our selves. Pray for Us: And the God of
Peace, who brought out from the dead the great Pastor of the Sheep in the Blood
of the Eternal Testament, our Lord Jesus Christ, fit you in all Goodness,
working in you that which is pleasing in his sight.

Your most affectionate Servants in Christ, John Bishop of Adramite. V. A.
Bonaventure Bishop of Madaura. V. A. Philip Bishop of Aureliople. V. A. James
Bishop of Callipoli. V. A.


LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty
for His Household and Chapel; and are to be sold at his Printing House on the
Ditch-side in Blackfriars. 1688.


