THE VIRGIN MARY Misrepresented by the Roman Church.

PART I.

Imprimatur, Liber cui titulus [The Virgin Mary misrepresented by the Roman
Church.]

Nov. 23. 1687. Guil. Needham, R R. in Christo P. ac D. Wilhelmo Archiepisc.
Cant. a Sacr. Domest.

THE VIRGIN MARY Misrepresented by the Roman Church.

In the Traditions of that Church, Concerning her Life and Glory; And in the
Devotions paid to her, As the Mother of God.

Both showed out of the Offices of that Church, the Lessons on her Festivals,
and from their allowed Authors.

PART I. Wherein Two of her Feasts, her Conception and Nativity, are considered.

Valde honoranda est, inquis, Matter Domini. Been admones; sed Honor Reginae
justitiam diligit. Virgo regia falso non eget honor, veris cumulata honorum
titulis.

Bernard. Epist. 174. Securitas laudis in laud Dei est; ibi laudator securus
est, ubi non timet ne de Laudato erubescat.

S. August. Enar. in Psalm. 94. Restat ut homo mendaciter non fingat apertum,
quod Deus voluit manner occultum.

Author Sermon. 35. de Assumpt. apud Augustinum. LONDON, Printed for Richard
Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXXXVIII.

THE CONTENTS OF THE PRINCIPAL MATTERS.
INfallibility vainly pretended, unless it be as secure a Guide of our Worship,
as of our Faith. Page 1 This pretended in Canonizing Saints, though certainly
false. Ib. Devotions in the Roman Church conducted by Interest. 2 Strange
Worship given to the Virgin in that Church, and to what height they have
advanced her. Ibid. False Charges against Protestants, that they cast Contempt
upon her. 4 Who say all that is fitting, and all that the Scripture teaches of
her. 5, 6 This Church has made a new Gospel about her Life and Excellencies. 6,
7 What Rules and Measures they take in describing her. Ibid. What Privileges
they conferr on her, whose Numbers still increase. 8, 9 What they plead for the
large Account they give of her, when the Scriptures and Antiquity say so
little. 10, 11, etc. Their fulsome Flatteries of her; Submissions to her, and
Expectations from her. Marg. p. 15 Of her Predestination, and their applying
Scriptures to her that belong only to Christ. 17, 18 The Arians excused by what
they do herein. 19 They give her the Privilege of being first elected, and all
others predestined for her sake. 20 The late Contemplator's new Logic, in
referring all to her as the Means and the Conveyance of all to us. 21 The
Jesuit Salazar's blasphemous Conceits, applying all in Prove. viij. to her. 21,
22, etc. Of the blessed Virgin's Parents and Conception, out of their Offices.
27 Their Legend more at large, out of the English Festival. 28 All taken out of
Two Apocryphal Authors especially. 30, 31, etc. Of the Riches and Barrenness of
her Parents. 34 How they cry up their Faith above that of Abraham. Ibid. The
Fable of Joachim's being rebuked for Barrenness by the High Priest, and
comforted by an Angel. 35, 36 How they will have the B. Virgin to have been
conceived. 38 Their singular Conceits about the Formation of her Body. 39
Wherein they aim at making her in all like to Christ. 40 They give her the use
of Reason in the first moment of her Conception. 41 What Contemplations they
say she had in her Mother's Womb. 42 Her Charity then also exercised, and what
Measures of Grace and Merits she then attained to. 43 It was once by them
accounted Christ's Privilege to have the use of Free Will in his Mother's Womb,
now granted to her. 44 Her immaculate Conception asserted in allowed Offices.
46, etc. This Privilege of hers never thought of by the Ancient Fathers. 56 How
ridiculons the Controversy about it is, considering the small Difference
betwixt the Opinion of the Maculists and Immaculists. 57 The Maculists have the
old and great Schoolmen on their Side. 59 St. Austin is expressly theirs. 60
Their Adversaries would have it a Secret in former Ages, and why kept so. 61
The Scriptures clear and full for the Maculists. 62 Redemption and Salvation
there as general as Sin and Death. Ibid. Her preservative Redemption an absurd
Shift. Ibid. Two former Popes against it. 63 Other Arguments of the Maculists.
Ibid. What the Immaculists plead for themselves. 64 Scotus, the first Assertor
of their Opinion, and doubtful in it. Ibid. It has now got the Name and Credit
of the Pious Opinion. Ibid. The Woment engage stiffly on this side. 65 Their
Proofs from Scripture all Allegorical. 65, 66 Proofs from Reason. 1. Arg. That
otherwise she had not been a fit Mother of God. 67 2. Arg. From the Virulency
of Original Sin. 68 3. Arg. That Christ had not been a good Son, unless he had
preserved her. 69 4. Arg. That the Maculists Opinion must needs offend the
Blessed Virgin. 70 5. Arg. That if Christ had not preserved her from Original
Sin, she must needs be guilty of Actual Sin. Ibid. How coursely Salmeron has
used the Fathers and slighted them. 71 The Immaculists urge Miracles, and some
of them set down. 72, 73. The remarkable Story of Thomas de Bohemia's Leg
restored. 74 Visions and Revelations urged by the Immaculists. Ibid The
advantages we receive by these Proofs. 1. That we are excused from believing
the Miracles they urge us withal. 75, etc. 2. That they themselves regard not
this Proof, but turn it off as that which produces no certainty of Faith. 77 We
may be excused by the Popes sullenness, who dare not determine the Point upon
the Evidence of Miracles, etc. 78 The History of the Embassy of Two Kings of
Spain to Two Popes, urging in vain the Decision of this Controversy. 80, 81,
etc. What Comfort the Immaculists have above their Adversaries, though it be
not decided 93 How the Virgin was preserved from Original Sin, according to
some of their Authors. 95 Concerning the Feast of her Conception, that its
Institution is Novel. 96 Revelations of no Authority, the ground of it; and
when first kept. 96, 97, etc. This Feast pretended by S. Oringa's Revelation to
be kept in Heaven. 99 S. Bernard questions the Revelations for this Feast.
Ibid. This Feast interrupted in England, where it first was observed. 100 This
Feast opposed by many great Men of their Church. Ibid. Of the blessed Virgin's
Nativity, and the Devotions relating to it. 102, etc. Their bold asserting that
her Birth was the Desire and Expectation of the Patriarchs. 109 We are to
believe that Wonders preceded her Birth. 110 Baronius will not allow us to be
in our Wits if we deny this, though he produces none in particular. Ibid. Those
that are produced are without color of Truth. 111 The time of her Birth, how
exactly they calculate it. 112 They urge Motives of Congruity for the time. 113
They differ about the Place of her Birth, but most say at Nazareth. 114 Poza's
great doubt whether she came the common way into the World. 115 They will not
allow her to cry, or make her Mother cry out when she was born. Ibid. That her
Body shone with Brightness, and breathed a Perfume from her Birth. Ibid. and
116 A great Question whether she had a Guardian-Angel assigned, and who he was.
116, 117 Their Harangues about the Nobleness of her Birth. Ibid. The Devotions
of the Church of Rome to the blessed Virgin's Parents. 118, etc. Many Authors
assert their Sanctification from the Womb. 123 S. Anne made the Mother of more
Children besides the Virgin. 124 Devotions to the Virgin and her two Sisters,
whose Names were Mary. Ibid. Concerning the Feast of her Nativity; this
confessed to be Novel. 125 France contends for the Glory of first observing
this Festival. 126 The Jesuit Inchofer would give it to the City of Messina, in
gratitude for a Letter the blessed Virgin wrote to them. 127 The Virgin's
Letter (being a Rarity) set down out of him. 128 The Foundation of this Feast
was a private Revelation to a Man without a Name. 129 Mel. Canus censures such
Revelations, but Xaverius is fond of them. Ibid. The Calumny of Saunders and
Theoph. Raynaudus, that this Feast was blotted out of our Calendar to make room
for Queen Elizabeth's Birthday. 130 Several scandalous and profane Meditations
upon the blessed Virgin's Nativity, set down out of their Authors. 131, etc. An
Office of the Name of the blessed Virgin. 134, etc. Nothing extraordinary in
the Name of Mary, it being the same with Miriam. 140 How many significations
they give of it, and pitch upon that which has least probability. viz. Stella
Maris, Star of the Sea. 141 Chrysologus his admirable Conceit about Maria. 142
Saints pretend to have found sweetness in her Name, both as to their Smell and
Taste. Ibid. Bonaventure's Reason why she is called a bitter Sea. 143 The
Mysteries they find in every Letter of her Name. 143, 144 Mysteries in this
Name as consisting of Five Letters. Ibid. So there is also supposing it to
consist only of Four Letters. 145 S. Gerard taught the Hungarians not to
pronounce it, or with great Reverence, uncovering the Head, etc. Ibid. In
Poland a Crime to name any Woman Mary. Ibid. Their Fancy that Angels admire
this Name and love to hear it procounced. 146 And that the blessed Virgin her
self delights to hear it also. Ibid. The manner of reciting Jesus Psalter. 147
They lay great stress upon the repeating merely the Name of Mary, without any
other sense adjoined. 148 The extravagant story of a converted Japan Woman. 149
Saying an Ave Maria seventy two times with Genuslections, a prescribed Exercise
of Devotion. Ibid. Another Exercise of repeating Five Psalms that begin with
the Five Letters of her Name. 150 Brussels Charity in Honor of her Name. 151
Beggars in the Mogul's Country ask Alms in her Name. Ibid. They conclude her
Name to be more sweet than that of Jesus. 152 And in some respects more
powerful and prevalent. 153 The great Effects that follow the use of her Name.
154, 155.
ERRATA.
PAge 10. line 30. read their. p. 26. l. 28. r. Salute. p. 32. l. 1. r. which.
p. 34. l. 4. r. division. p. 36. marg. r. quiliae. p. 38. l. 16. r. Hic. p.
134. dele Sect. l. p. 140. l. 8. r. make.

THE INTRODUCTION.
Giving an account whence the Roman Church has so much to say concerning the B.
Virgin, when the Scriptures and the Ancient Writers of the Church say so little
of Her.

THAT Infallibility which the Church of Rome only challenges, and so much
boasts of, can signify no less than this, That she expects that all Christians
should securely commit, not only their Faith, but also their Devotions to be
conducted by her. For it is not so necessary in Religion, to be instructed in
all its Articles, and to believe aright, as it is duly to obey and serve God:
nor is every wrong Opinion so dangerous, as false and mistaken Worship. If a
Physician should proclaim himself for infallible, the reputation of his skill
would quickly sink, if he failed ordinarily in the Regiment of Health, and made
more Distempers than he cured. And no wise Traveller would choose him for the
Guide of his way, who though he perfectly knew every step of it, yet was wont
to lead those whom he conducted, to repose themselves under Trees of
unhealthful shade and influence; and to bring them, for the quenching their
thirst, to those Springs whose Waters were neither clear nor wholesome. A
learned person Serarius in Litaneut. 2. Quest. 1^.
of this Church, is so sensible of this truth, that he is fain to defend, that
their Infallibility extends as far as to the Canonization of Saints; and that
there can be no mistake committed herein; for, says he, If in this matter the
Church can be deceived and deceive, the pillar and ground of Truth would totter
and fall; the Lord Christ would forsake his Spouse; the Holy Ghost would not
teach those that are his all necessary Truth; Peter would not in his Successors
feed the Flock of Christ with the necessary food of Religion; no nor Jesus
Christ himself the Prince of Shepherds: For he to whom the Pope gives his
Testimony, and pronounces, that he is authentically to be venerated with
Religious Worship, and to be invoked with public Prayers; if such a one may
prove to be no Saint, is it not plain, that a false Testimony is given, deadly
poison, lying worship, etc.? Another great Spanish Preacher says, Carthagena de
arcan. Deip. l. 14. Hom. 13. Nihil re ipsa falsum Ecclesia Catholica quae
spiritu veritatis regitur, colendum potest praecipere fidelibus.
The Catholic Church which is governed by the Spirit of Truth, cannot require
the Faithful to Worship any thing really False. And Cardinal Bellarmine De
Sanct. Beat. l. 1. c. 9.
gives us a great many reasons to prove that the Church cannot err in
Canonization of Saints.

But how false this Assertion is, has been shown them in numerous instances, V.
Reflections on the Devotions of the Roman Church.
not long since. That a great many of the Saints they venerate are Fabulous,
and no evidence that such were ever in being; some Canonized for Saints that
were Boutefeus and Traitors, heady and high-minded, such as spoke evil of
Dignities, and unjustly opposed the Powers ordained of God. The Reader will see
false Miracles and false Tales advanced to give them reputation and credit;
and, which is worse still, the Falsity so apparent, that those who make use of
them to abuse the simple thereby, must needs, if they be but tolerably knowing
in History, be self-condemned. In fine, he will see so clearly that the
interests of the World, and not those of true Piety, both makes many of their
Saints and warms their Devotions to them, that he may well suspect, that in
this Church Faith has not been well preserved, when he sees so little regard
had to the keeping of a good Conscience. Yet I must show you far greater abuses
than these, I mean such as are committed in their Devotions to the B. Virgin
Mary.

Here we have a new scene opened, and a very strange one. They have put a
Scepter into the hands of this Handmaid of the Lord, as she calls her self Luke
1. 38.
; they have advanced her into a Throne by God himself; and, without asking his
leave, call her the Queen of Heaven. Some of them give her the name of a
Goddess, and if we may judge of them by the Worship they pay to her (which is
the way the Scripture takes in the description of Idolater) Esa. 42. 17. and
cap. 44. 15, 16, etc.
she is the Goddess of this Church. They dote so much upon her divine
Excellencies, that they fansy God himself to fall in Love with her, as his
Spouse: And a late bold Jesuit Ph. de Convelt. Theatr. excellentiar. Dei^. p.
20.
dares to give this for a Reason, why she is not a Goddess, because there can
be but Three persons in the Deity, otherwise, Deus Deam vellet, si posset; God
has kindness enough to make her one, if he could.

Who can forbear, when he considers the madness of this Worship, from crying
out, Lord! into what extravagant folly and heights of impiety does that
Superstition run, where the wisdom of Men prescribes the way of their Religion,
without once consulting their Maker? For we may as well put the Question to
this Church, as Epiphanius of old did to the Collyridians, (...), etc. What
Scripture has told us any thing of this? What Prophet has given leave to
worship any Man; much less a Woman? The great silence of the Scripture in this
matter is acknowledged by themselves (as we shall see by and by) and the Reader
will meet with admirable Reasons, why this Church is so copious in giving an
account of her, when the Scripture says nothing of it. In the mean time, I
cannot but mention a Complaint that Pet. Cluniacensis once made (as Espencaeus
In 2. Ep. ad Timoth. c. 4.. 21.
relates it) of the Service of St. Benet. That among the false Canticles in the
Church of God, and among the loud trifles that were odious to him, on the Feast
of the great Father Benet, he heard a Hymn sung, and was compelled to bear a
part in it, in which Song he found at least Four and twenty Lies. This Trade
you see went pretty forward in this Church above Five hundred Years ago; but
since that time it is vastly improved, and in the case of the B. Virgin, above
all other Saints, the fictions are far more numerous and bold; because they
bear proportion to that height to which their fancies have advanced her. This
plain dealing our Adversaries cannot bear, and no wonder, since nothing can
more vex a Cheat, than to be discovered. All that have remarkably contributed
to this, have been loaded with their Calumnies, alive or dead, no matter which.
Thus they have told the World, that Luther Cochlaeus in actis Lutheri.
like a jolly Glutton, having made a large meal at Supper, the Devil, the same
night, strangled him in his Bed: That Calvin Hier. Bolsec in vit. Calv.
rotted alive, and died of the Lousie Disease: And a Cretian Liar Andr.
Eudaemon Johan.
forces the Learned Casaubon to prove, in almost half a Chapter of his Book
Exercit. 1. Sect. 4.
that his Father was not hanged, as the Jesuit had reported of him. But the
most spiteful charge against us, and, if it were true, not to be answered, is,
That Protestants cast contempt upon the B. Virgin her self. Bellarmine says De
Sanct. Beat. c. 13.
The Heretics now give no honor to the Virgin: And Coster the Jesuit Praef.
ad Med. de vit. and Laud. B. Virg.
accuses us, That we reduce the Mother of God into the rank of ordinary Women;
and with impure Tongues fear not to blaspheme her, as one obnoxious to sin, to
vicious perturbations of soul, and to the wrath of God. Wherein they deal with
us, as they did with the Opposers of their Superstition heretofore; for thus
Th. Raynaudus Diptycha Marian. p. 233.
reports of the Albigenses, That they called the B. Virgin Monoculam and
meretricem. But our Adversaries themselves in another mood will be our
Compurgators in this matter. Carthagena Lib. 6. de Arcan. Deip. Homil. 17.. 3.
has mustered up the sayings of many of the first Reformers, giving large
Encomiums to the B. Virgin, such as any Catholic might repeat after them; and
particularly cites this saying of Calvin, I trust in God it shall never be said
of me, that I have an aversion to Mary, toward whom not to be well affected, I
esteem it a certain sign of a reprobate mind. And Canisius Citante cod. ibid.
gives singular thanks to immortal God, who not only out of the mouth of Babes
and Sucklings, but even of Adversaries, has perfected his Mothers praise. There
needs but a little Charity to make any one believe, that it is no ways likely,
while we profess to adore the Son, that we should think meanly, much less speak
contemptuously or blasphemously of the Mother. No, we are so far from it, that
we are always ready to own her as a most blessed person; and that she was
endued with Excellencies far above the common size of her Sex: And though we
cannot determine the measures of her Virtue and Sanctity, yet we are sure they
were such as deserve always to be admired by us, and imitated: We admire
particularly her singular privilege in being chosen to be the Mother of our
Lord; and acknowledge, that she wanted no Gifts nor Graces that might qualify
her thereunto. But as we are persuaded, that we come not short in giving her
all due praises; so we think it both possible and dangerous, (...), to advance
her above what is meet, as Epiphanius speaks In Haeres. 79.
and we bewail the sad instances of this in the Roman Church; and are not to be
blamed if we avoid this rock, as well as that other (...), of those that
undervalue the Holy Virgin. The same Father has cautioned us, That we are not
to honor the Saints above what is befitting, but to honor him that is their
Lord Epiph. ibid. (...).
: and we unfeignedly consent to what he says, (...), Let Mary be honored;
adding withal, Let the Father, Son and Holy Ghost be adored, but let no Man
adore or worship Mary. (...).
In a word, we heartily subscribe to what one of their one Poets says of her:
Mantuan. Fast. l. 12. de Concept. Virg.


Non est laudis inops Virgo, tot floribus Hybla
Non redolet -- segetes non tot spicantur aristis
Per Libyam, quot sancta parens praeconia laudum
Verarum si quaeris habet; figmenta relinque,
Et quod scire nequis, ne divinare labora,
Incassum --.
That is,

The Virgin lacks no praise, not Hybla yields
More Flowers, nor Ears of Corn in Libyan Fields,
So fair and thick, as her true Virtues rise:
Think not to grace her then with specious Lies;
Nor give her those perfections, by fond guess,
Thou never can find, and only make her less.
Herein indeed lies one great difference betwixt us and them, That we,
observing that it is the plain design of the Holy Writers, in the particular
account they give of the wondrous Birth and Life, Death and Resurrection of
Jesus, to engage all Men to believe, That he is the Christ Joh. 20. 31.
the Son of God; that our eternal Life depends upon our knowing him who is the
only true God, Joh. 17. 3.
and Jesus Christ whom he has sent; that there is no Salvation in any other,
nor no other name Act. 4. 12.
under Heaven given among Men but his, whereby we must be saved; and that
having the power of Judging all the World committed to him, all Men are bound
Joh. 5. 22.
to honor the Son, even as they honor the Father; we, I say, finding this to
be the great concern and scope of the Gospel, are well satisfied with those few
words of Truth and soberness, we meet with there, that relate to the B. Virgin
his Mother; and are not needlessly curious to enquire any farther. It Is plain it
was him they designed to advance and not her: Even the Holy Spirit's
over-shadowing her Virgin Womb, was rather intended to proclaim the Glory and
Majesty of his Incarnation; than of her Conception. The Scripture mentions some
other instances of her Faith and Piety, wherein it places her chief Happiness,
as St. Austin's known saying expresses it; Tom. 6. lib. de Sanct. Virgin.
Beatior ergo Maria percipiendo fidem Christi, quam concipiendo carnem Christi.
Mary was more blessed in receiving the Faith of Christ, than by Conceiving the
Flesh of Christ: For Materna propinquitas nihil Mariae profuisset, nisi
selicius Christum cord quam carne gestasset: Her nearness to him as a Mother
had not profited her, if she had not been more happy in bearing Christ in her
Heart, than in her Womb. Which also our Savior confirms in that saying of his,
Luc. 11. 28.
Yea rather blessed are they which hear the Word of God and keep it. As for
other matters concerning her, where the Scriptures have not gone before us, we
are contented to remain in the dark; concluding that we are not one way or
other much concerned in them; for if we had, God would no doubt have declared
them to us. We think it necessary for the honor of our Lord, to believe, that
his Mother remained a Virgin till she bare him and brought him forth: We think
it highly probable too that the Honor of our Lord preserved her a Virgin ever
after; and we detest the bad Spirit of Helvidius, that made a contest of it,
and brought it into dispute in the Church. But yet we are of the great S.
Basil's mind Homil. de humana Christi generatione.
that if she had not remained a Virgin afterward, (...), the Doctrine
according to Godliness would not have suffered by it; and therefore we lay not
such stress upon it, as upon the former, (...), We leave it without anxious
inquiry about it. But now this Church, having as much business with the Virgin
as with Christ himself, and making indeed more stir about her; the modesty of
the first Faith, and the silence of the Scripture, give them but little
comfort; if they cannot find in the old Gospel enough to proclaim her a fit
object of Men's worship, and to engage their Religious addresses to her, rather
than fail of this, which they are resolved upon, they will make a new Gospel,
which the Apostles never Preached; and venture the Curse that is threatened to
them that do so, Gal. 1. 8. First indeed the words of the Scripture must be
Wire-drawn, and Every Syllable of it that relates to her stretched and set upon
the Tenters; but still they find, that the Bed is shorter than that a Man can
stretch himself on it, and the Covering narrower than that he can wrap himself
in it Esa. 28 2^.
They are therefore resolved to add where that is defective, and to feign those
privileges for her which they cannot find there. To show a little their fine
way of proceeding in this Matter.

They have laid down this for an undoubted Rule, as any Aphorism in
Hippocrates, that Mensura perfectionum B. Verginis est maternitas Dei. Her
being the Mother of God, is the measure of the Perfections of the Blessed
Virgin. Not to dispute at present the Truth of it, which may be granted in a
sober Sense, let us see what Conclusions they draw from it. Aquinas P. 1. qu.
2^ art 6. ad 4 tum.
infers, That the Blessed Virgin, because she is the Mother of God, has a kind
of infinite Dignity belonging to her, from that infinite good which is God; and
that in this respect, nothing better than she could be created, as there can be
nothing better than God. Ant. Spinellus the Jesuit says: Maria Deip. thronus
Dei ^. 5. s. 4.
From this Motherhood of God, that Maxim owned by all Divines is drawn; viz.
That there is no gift of Grace that was ever granted to any pure Creature,
which was not bestowed upon the Virgin in a like or more perfect manner, unless
it were repugnant to her Sex. Wherefore all the Graces, Virtues, and Privileges
divided among other Saints are found collected in her alone. And they are very
fond of that saying of S. Bernard, Epist. ad Can. Lugdun, Quod itaque vel
paucis mortalium constat fuisse collatum, fas certe non est suspicari tantae
Virgini esse negatum.
Whatsoever has been granted to other Saints, though but to a few, we are not
to suspect that it has been denied to so glorious a Virgin. Aquinas Part. 3. qu
27. art. 1. 4, 5.
in another place from these principles has deduced her Sanctification before
she was Born; the Privilege never to have committed any Sin mortal or venial,
and a fullness of all Graces above all others. This, one would judge, is pretty
fair; but a daring Jesuit J. Baptista Poza. Elucidar. l. 3. tr. 16. p. 1050.
resolving to enlarge the Charter of her Privileges, has advanced this
position, That all true Theology does require, That in those things that belong
to the greater glory of Jesus and his Mother, if the Church does not prohibit
it, (and they are sure it will not interpose to the hindrance of the Mother at
least) we are not to look what Two or Three, Five or Ten Doctors have said in
the Case, but what will best defend and secure the Honor of Mary and Jesus.
Here now the door is set wide open to give admittance to all the throng of
Fables, that any one will invent, under pretense to advance her Honor: The
Evangelists have said Truth enough to make Jesus glorious; and they are
resolved to try what may be done for Mary in the other way: And every Monk or
Nun of a busy Fancy, is perpetually teeming forth some new privilege to grace
the B. Virgin withal. Albertus Magnus De Laud. Virg. super missus est.
had got them up to Fourteen. Vinc. Bandelis De Concept. Virg. Part. 2. p. 183.
reckons Twelve Privileges bestowed on her from the Fourteenth Year of her Age
and afterward, which considering this date of them is an increase: But
Spinellus has made them up above a Score, Maria Thronus Dei. c. 20. p 252, 253.
which I will set down out of him, that the Reader may try how many of them he
could have Collected by perusing the Four Gospels, without the help of those
forenamed Principles. They are these. 1. She was not only elected by God, but
pre-elected before all others, Cantic. 6. 8, 9. There are Sixty Queens, and
Eighty Concubines, and Virgins without number: My Beloved, my undefiled is but
one, the only one of her Mother, the choice one of her that bare her. 2. That
she was promised by Heaven to the Fathers, prefigured by mystical Miracles,
foretold by Prophetic Oracles, and by the Sybils was honorably predicted. 3.
That she sprang by the kindness of God from barren Parents, that vowed to give
to God the Offspring he should bestow on them; that an Angel foretold her
Nativity to her Parents, which we do not read in the Scriptures concerning any
other Woman, (no nor of her neither there.) 4. That she only of all the
Children of Adam, that descended from him by the ordinary way of Propagation
(per seminalem rationem) was free from Original Sin. 5. That in the very
beginning of her immaculate Conception, she was so confirmed in Grace, that
ever after she was without stain of actual, though but venial, Sin. 6. That the
Fomes peccati, that which like Tinder so soon kindles in us, was extinct in
her; so that she never was sensible of that Tyrannous Law of the Members, or
the Rebellion of the lower Part. 7. That in her very Conception she had the use
of Reason, and made a Vow of Virginity to God; from which instant also she
began to merit, and that the merit of her Works was never interrupted, no not
so much as in her sleep. 8. That in the same Conception of hers she was adorned
with all Theological and Cardinal Virtues; and that in that Heroic Degree, as
well as with all the gratiae gratis datae, graces freely given. 9. That at the
Age of Three Years she was in the Temple, according to her Parents Vow,
consecrated to God, and there was most holily Educated. 10. That this Blessed
Person among Women, escaped all that Curse to which mankind, by reason of
Adam's Sin, was obnoxious. 11. That she alone, that had conceived without any
lustful Pleasure, did not undergo the Irksomness that other Women with Child
are subject to. 12. That by a Virgin Birth she brought forth God without pain.
13. That the Lord's Body exhibited in the H. Eucharist, is formed of her Blood
in her Virgin Womb, which therefore is compared, Cant. 7. to a heap of Wheat
set about with Lilies. 14. That she in a singular manner did many ways
cooperate to our Salvation. 15. That the Fruit of Christ's Passion was in a
singular manner communicated to her, and standing courageously by the Cross of
her Son, was pierced through with the Sword of grief, and therefore she first
of all saw Christ when he arose from the Dead. 16. That she was the Instructor
and Mistress of the Apostles and Teachers. 17. That her Body did not see
Corruption; but being assumed and taken up to Heaven in Body and Soul before
the common Resurrection, she was placed above the Choires of Angels and Orders
of Saints, at the Right Hand of her Son, where she makes a distinct Order
(Chorus) above them all, and she alone obtained more glory than all the rest of
the Saints and Angels put together. 18. That her presence brought a great deal
of accidental Joy to the Blessed in Heaven. 19. That she is the Queen of
Heaven, and Lady of all the Angels and Saints. 20. That she is the common
Advocate of Sinners, the Mother of Mercy, the Mediatrix to intercede for them;
and that she is also the Mother of the Living, and promotes the Salvation of
all Men. 21. That she is so formidable and terrible to the Devils, that they
presently fly away at the mention of her Name, and much more at her Command;
and that she has powerfully broken their Head. 22. That all the Graces and
Privileges that are dispersed among other Saints, are found united in her,
after a far more perfect manner. Thus far he. But others Paul Comitolus reckons
up 130. Privileges. Alegambe Bibl. p. 363.
have enlarged her Privileges to above an Hundred.

These are a few Instances, among many, which will afterward occurr, that give
the Reader a taste of the New Faith and Gospel, concerning the Virgin Mary,
which is taught in this Church. With such particulars as these, the Hymns, and
Lessons of their Breviaries are stuffed: For to establish the believe of them,
many of their Festivals are Instituted; and to the Scandal of Christianity, as
well as the eternal reproach of their Missions, Hierome Xaverius a Jesuit, in
the History of Christ, which he published in the Persian Tongue, Ar. Dom. 1602.
being commanded to give an account of the Life and Actions of our Savior by
the Great Mogol; he, not contenting himself with an Impartial delivery of that
Faith which the Apostles taught, and was once delivered to the Saints, has,
together with the Gospel Story, interwoven idle Tales, and fabulous Legends,
derived from Gossiping Tradition, or taken out of Books confessed by themselves
to be Apocryphal, and the Fictions of ancient Heretics, especially what refers
to the Bl. Virgin; which I suppose he intended for this end, that all his
Converts should set her up for an Object of their Religious Veneration;
otherwise that first Faith might have been sufficient for them, which served
those first Christians, and made them wise to Salvation, who only worshipped
God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

From all that has been said it cannot but appear, that this Church has made a
very bold attempt, for which they must answer one day to God, among the, (...),
the many that have Adulterated the Word of God, and corrupted it by their bad
mixtures: And there shame will still more appear, when their sorry pretenses
for doing all this are laid down and examined, which I shall now give a further
account of.

They confess Carthagena de S. arcan. Deip. l. 13. hom. 1.
that it has been the complaint of many, and who have taken it very ill (aegre
serentium) that the Canonical Scriptures have given us no History of the
Nativity, Gests, and Death of the B. Virgin. Strange! say they, that they
should be silent in matters of so great moment: For, says Pelbartus Stellar.
Coron. l. 7. p. 1. art. 1.
Matthew (Cap. 1.) writing the Genealogy of Christ, says only, Jacob begat
Joseph the Husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ. I
thought he ought to have said, the Husband of Mary, who was the Daughter of
Joachim, whom he miraculously begat of Anne his Wife, an Angel being employed
to foretell it, and who was a most chaste Virgin, etc. Which complaint seems the
more reasonable, because the Evangelists in the case of his Forerunner John
the Baptist, have described his Birth, and the Dignity of his Parents, the
Holiness of his Life, and the difficult and famous Passages of it; unto the end
of his Life and Martyrdom; therefore much more ought they to have done thus of
the Mother of God, etc.

It Is very easy for us to assoil this Objection, by telling these bold men,
that it is not needful for us to know any thing further in this matter, when
God thinks fit to say nothing to us: And let them prove, if they can,
concerning John the Baptist, whose Story the Scripture has told, that it was
unnecessary for us to know that. We may also add (if we had a mind to be
guessing) What if the cause of the Scriptures silence about her Birth, etc. be
the same, which one of their own Jesuits Bonfrerius in Deuteronomy. 34. 6.
gives about the place of Moses's Burial, which God would let no Man know of,
least the Israelites, who were prone to Idolatry, should take so admirable and
almost divine a Man, for a God, and Worship him? Who also adds, That this in
all probability was the subject of the Contest betwixt Michael the Archangel
and the Devil (which S. Jude mentions v. 9.) about the Body of Moses, that the
Devil would have had the Sepulcher in which his Body lay, to be discovered,
that thereby he might draw the Israelites to Idolatry; and Michael would have
it hid, to prevent it.

But they who must have the matters that concern the B. Virgin discovered, will
find the solution of it a harder task. Yet something they will say, though
little to the purpose, to unfold the Mystery of this spiritual Omission, as
Pelbartus phrases it Loc. Cita^.
. The Author of the Pomaerium says, That this Omission was, to excite the
Devotion of the Faithful more toward her, that they might more greedily
inquire after her Actions, her Life and Death. So indeed we see foolish
Children cry the loudest after that which cannot be had: But I think those
Devotions had better go out than flame, where God affords not his holy Fires to
kindle them, nor any fuel to maintain them. Otherwise, as a Sorbon Doctor
Claud. Joly. Traditio antiqua adv. Jac Gaudinum. p. 178.
wisely notes, When Devotion only governs the Church, though it be the best (i.
e. in the fervency and degree of it) yet it may sometimes speciously deceive.
Gregorius Gallicanus Mariale, p. 4.
would bring off the matter thus; Many, says he, are of this Opinion, That
Christ resolved that he himself, and no other Pen or Tongue besides, would
explain the Praises of his Mother: Therefore in the Canticles he has elegantly
drawn her from head to foot, when he put the Pencil into Solomon' s hand to
describe her. Which indeed is a good reason to prove that a Thousand of their
Books concerning her might be burnt, since theirs must needs be superfluous,
after that Draught of her to the Life in the Canticles of Christ's own doing.
Aloys. Novarinus Umbra Virg. p. 58. n. 187.
thought himself no doubt very Witty, when he gave this Answer to the
Objection: Credo rei magnitudine pressos, etc. I believe the Evangelists, says
he, being oppressed with the greatness and difficulty of the thing, abstained
from meddling with that, which by no labor or skill of theirs they could
perform; wherefore, like skilful Painters, they drew a veil, that under the
covering and shade of silence, we might conjecture the more concerning her,
because they had expressed nothing. To which reasoning I shall only make these
two demands. 1. How come they to have the presumption to undertake that, which
the inspired Writers found too heavy for their Shoulders, and would not meddle
with? 2. Whence should arise this difficulty of describing her to them who had
drawn the lines of our Savior's Life, and finished it; unless he imagine
greater Glories and Excellencies in the Mother, than in the Son of God?
Canisius is very angry with us Lib. 4. de Deip. c. 22. p. 478.
and charges us with a heinous Error, for denying at this time so many things
concerning Mary and her Dignity, which though not taken notice of in the
Scriptures, nor presently delivered in the time of the Apostles, yet have been
revealed by God to the later Ages as certain, and at length recommended for
such by the Church. This indeed is somewhat to the purpose; for no Man can
reasonably require, that God should manifest a thing sooner than he has a mind
to; nor complain that that was not known in a former, which he reserved for a
latter Age: Only that we may avoid being cheated, we expect as good evidence
for the later that they are Divine, as God has given for the former; but
without this the Church's recommendation will not create Faith in us,
especially not that of their Church; which has played so many tricks in
Religion. Poza Elucidar. lib. 2. tract. 7. c. 1.
has this farther fetch, By this silence we are told, that there is nothing
written in the Gospels, nothing in the Law and Prophets, which does not, after
a sort, appertain to Mary. And in another place Ibid. tract. 6. c. 1.
, If you would comprise in short, what is more largely diffused in the
Scriptures, know that Mary is the sum and brief of them all. Carthagena De
arcan Deip. l. 2. hom. 2.
thinks, that this is a contrivance of the Divine Wisdom; because this silence
does commend her Excellencies more fully, than the most eloquent Tongue can do;
since her Dignity and Sanctity, supposing her to be the Mother of Jesus, is a
first Principle, of which there need be nothing said. And so too the Author of
the first Reason Author Pomaerii loc. citat.
says, What soever belongs to her Dignity, etc. is per se notum, known of it
self by those who have an entire Faith in Jesus. This I see is the solution
they most insist on. So Suarez, Praefat. ad Tom. 2. in 3. partem.
Few things are said in the Gospels of her, because the intention of the
Evangelists was wholly carried out to Christ, (thus far we are of his mind, and
wish that they also had made him their scope more, and her less;) but he being
known, and his Faith enough established, her Excellencies could not be unknown
or hid. Or as Sherlog the Jesuit expresses it, Antelo^. 3. in Cantic. n. 142.
It was necessary for us to know that Mary was the Mother of Christ; this the
Evangelists sufficiently declared, and this her Honor being manifested, the
rest might be collected therefrom, though they said no more. The force of this
reasoning will appear, if you only change the name of Jesus for Mary, and put
it thus: It was requisite for us to know that Jesus was the Son of God; (as
necessary as that Mary was his Mother) this the Evangelists sufficiently
declared, and this Dignity of his being manifested, the rest might be
collected, though they said no more. We should have had an admirable Gospel, if
this had been the way of writing it; much what I suppose like the History of
the Seven Champions; for that Writer did not feign the Men; their worth and
excellency was abundantly declared to the World before; he only collected, as
every Writer of Romances does, what was proper for such worth to accomplish;
and his Fancy ran much upon enchanted Castles and Giants with huge Maces in
their Hands, which he makes his Hero's to dissolve and overcome. However, we
have discovered, by what these Authors have told us, a secret which they had
better have kept so still; that now we know what way has been taken in writing
the History of the B. Virgin, and the Lives of other Saints; Two or Three
Truths have been given, like a Ground to a skilful Musician; upon these they
have run what Division they best fansied, and according to the skill of the
writer, the Descant has been agreeable or otherwise; and it is remarkable, that
commonly where any faithful and certain Records have said the least, there they
have given the World the most large and complete Story. Which we are beholden
to the aforesaid Greg. Gallicanus Marial. p. 3.
for confessing the most plainly, and without any disguise, as the sense of
some in this very case of the Scriptures silence concerning the B. Virgin;
Dicunt aliqui, immensum esse laudum B. Virginis campum, ideoque liberum
unicuique relinquere voluisse (sc. Deum) ut de ea dicerent quod vellent: i. e.
The field of her Praises is wide and immense, and therefore God would leave
every Man at liberty, to say of her what he pleased.

CHAP. I.
An account of the Current Faith of the Roman Church concerning the B. Virgin,
and of the Worship they pay to her suitable to that Belief. Beginning with her
Predestination, to her Nativity.

WHatsoever I have asserted in the foregoing Introduction, will appear more
clearly in that Romantic History this Church has given us of the B. Virgin's
Life. Wherein we shall see both what the Church believes concerning her; and
after that, what Worship they pay to her, agreeable to that Belief. And in
doing this, I hope I shall not incur any Readers censure, no not so much as of
the Romanist for taking this Method, since they themselves have given it me, in
their own Offices upon the Feasts that are appointed to her honor; wherein we
find these two are interwoven, her History and her Worship. To have set down
only the last, viz. her Worship, would have been to present a naked Image of
strange Devotion, enough to have frighted any Christian. The flattery of her
being so fulsome She infinitely surpasses all the Excellencies of Men and
Angels. Contemplations of the Life and Glory of H. Mary, p. 18. As it is not
possible for the Tongue of a Seraphim, to explain to our comprehension the
Shapes and Liveries of the heavenly Spirits, their Quires and Hierarchies, to
blazon the Glories of the Saints, and to expound the Plenty, Pastimes and
Language of the Divine Courtiers; so much rather is it impossible for a pure
Creature to unfold the immense Attributes of the Maternity of Holy Mary, the
Mother of Jesus; which gives to her an inherent right to all the perfections,
so copiously by Providence dispersed amongst Creatures here beneath, the Stars
in the Firmament, and the Angels in Heaven. Ibid. Ep. Dedic.
; the veneration of a mere Creature so submiss and lowly Whatsoever can be said
of her, will be only an essay, infinitely too narrow to fill the orbs of her
exuberant Sanctity, Grace and Glory. -- I do with trembling attempt this great
work (of explaining the Mysteries of her Life and immortal Glory) lest
searching into the Holies of so great a Majesty, I be oppressed with its
brightness and splendors. Ibid. Epist. Dedic. -- Entering a solemn covenant with
Holy Mary to to be for ever her Servant, Ibid. p. 12. -- All Christians vow
Obedience, Fealty and Homage to her, as to their supreme Governess, Leige-Lady
and Advocate, Ibid. p. 21. -- She justly claims a servitude from all pure
creatures, Ibid. p. 8.
; the expectations of receiving Blessings from her so high and excessive
Almighty God has, by a solemn Covenant, pronounced her to be the Treasury of
Wisdom, Grace and Sanctity, under Jesus; so that whatsoever Gifts are bestowed
upon us by Jesus, we receive them by the Mediation of Mary; no one being
gracious to Jesus, who is not devoted to Mary: Nor has any one been specially
confident of the Patronage of Mary, who has not through her received a special
blessing from Jesus: Whence it is one great Mark of the Predestination of the
Elect, to be singularly devoted to Mary: since she has a full power, as a
Mother, to obtain of Jesus, whatsoever he can ask of God the Father. -- Neither
has any one petitioned Mary, who was refused by Jesus; or trusted in Mary, and
was abandoned by Jesus, Ibid. p. 7.

(Our Savior speaks of many who shall say to him Lord, Lord, and yet he would
not know them; but it should seem by this, if they had but known the secret of
saying Lady, Lady, they would not have miscarried.)


; that if there had been nothing said to give a rise to such Courtship, it
could not escape the censure of extravagant Madness; whereas the History
clothes the Image with an advantageous dress, and gives some color at least to
those applications, while it represents her not only in her self a subject of
Excellencies and Perfections, far above those of Men and Angels, and nearly
bordering upon the Divinity; but also one, who in the Intention of God was
designed to have a great Hand in the conducting us to Happiness, a helper and
coworker with our Savior himself in the work of our Redemption, and thereby
fairly challenging a great share in our Veneration. So that if the things they
say of her were but evidently true, the things they say to her in their
Devotions might be the better born withal and justified.

To prepare us for what we may expect to hear of her, when they bring her upon
the stage of the World, give me leave only to premise, how they consider her in
the Divine Decree, before she was conceived and born into the World.

SECT. I.
Of the B. Virgin's Predestination.
Lectio. Prove. 8. Dominus possedit Missal. Romans ad Sept. 8. and 8. December.
me in initio viarum suarum, antequam quicquam faceret ab initio. Ab aeterno
ordinata sum, ab antiquis antequam terra sieret. Nondum erant abyssi and ego
concepta eram; necdum montes gravi mole constiterant, ante colles parturiebar,
etc.

The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his ways, from the beginning before
he made any thing. I was ordained from everlasting, and of old before the Earth
was made. When there was no Abyss I was already conceived; the heavy Mountains
were not yet settled, I was brought forth before the Hills.

Capitulum Ecclus. 24. Ab initio and ante Brev. Romans ad 8. Sept. and 8. December.
secula creata sum, and usque ad suturum non desinam, and in habitatione sancta
coram ipso ministravi.

From the beginning and before all Ages I was created, and I shall never fail;
and I ministered before him in the holy habitation.

The late Contemplations of the Life and Glory of H. Mary have given us a
formal Office, for the Eternal Predestination of the Mother of Jesus; which
runs thus.

The Praise.
Hail Mary full of Grace, our Lord is with thee; P. 22.
Blessed art thou amongst Women, and blessed is the Fruit of thy Womb, Jesus.
Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for us Sinners, now, and in the hour of our
Death.
Verse. Open my lips, O Mother of Jesus;
Resp. And my Soul shall speak forth thy praise.
V. Divine Lady, be intent to mine aid;
R. Graciously make have to help me.
V. Glory be to Jesus and Mary;
R. As it was, is, and ever shall be.
The Hymn.
All hail, most high, most holy one,
Above the Angels, beneath the Son, etc. Sad Rhimes.

Anthiem. I was pre-ordained from the beginning, before the Creation of the
World; my Habitation was in the highest, and my Throne was seated on a Pillar
of Light.

Psalm 8.
Mary, Mother of Jesus, how wonderful is thy Name, even to the ends of the
Earth.
All magnificence be given to Mary; and let her be exalted above the Stars and
Angels.
Reign on high as Queen of Seraphims and Saints; and be thou Crowned with
Honor and Glory.
Innocence and Mercy has exalted thy Name above the Sphere of pure Creatures.
Exceeding glorious is Mary, the Mother of Jesus; thy Name is wonderful above
the Clouds.
Glory be to Jesus and Mary, as it was, is, and ever shall be. Amen.
Anth. I was Pre-ordained.
V. Holy Mary, Mother of God;
R. Pray for us, Sinners, now, and in the hour of our Death.
The Blessing.
Through the Merits and Intercession of the Mother of Jesus may we come safe to
the harbor of eternal Salvation.
V. Bid us be blessed, O Holy Mary;
R. Bless us, O Mary, the Mother of Jesus.
The Lesson. I Issued forth out of the Bosom of God on High, the first
conceived before all Creatures; my Abode is in the Depths, and my Throne in a
Pillar of Light. He who made me, took his rest in my Tabernacle; my Inheritance
is in the choicest Blessings of my God, and my Possession in the fullness of the
Saints. For I am the Mother of beautiful Love, of holy Fear, Knowledge and
Hope. In me is all grace of Truth, and righteous Ways, and all hope of Life and
Virtue.

Verse. Be thou, O Mary, merciful to us.
R. And by thee be all Glory to Jesus.
The Cantique.
Let us Praise thee, O Mother of Jesus, let us acknowledge thee our Sovereign
Lady.
Let Angels and Men give Honor to thee, the first conceived of all pure
Creatures.
To thee the morning Stars, and highest Seraphims, sing Glory for thy
magnificence.
Make Intercession for us, O powerful Mother of Jesus: for God will not refuse
thee our Petitions.
Then shall we rejoice in the fullness of thy Glory: and shall sing the Praises
of Jesus for ever.
REMARKS.
IT were easy, if it were as needful, to give the Reader a large Catalogue of
the Ancients, who have made use of the forenamed places in the Proverbs, to
prove the Divinity of our Savior against the Arians, understanding Wisdom
there, of him who is the Increated Wisdom of God. But just as they have
betrayed the Christian cause against the Heathens, in the case of Images, since
the same Distinctions, and Answers this Church makes use of to defend their
Worship of them, may all be pleaded for the justifying the Heathen Idolatry in
that particular: So by their Application of these places of Scripture to the B.
Virgin, which the Fathers generally thought did belong only to Christ, and
proved his existence before all Ages of the World; they have plainly put
Answers into the mouths of those Heretics, to evacuate the force of all those
Arguments; for those places may then be applied to Christ, though supposed a
Creature and a mere Man, as well as to her who must be acknowledged to be a
mere Woman. Carthagona L. 1. de arc. Deip. ho. 2. p. 9.
is so sensible of this, that not being able to deny what by the Authority of
his Church he is forced to own, nor yet to disown the other, he thus agrees the
matter: Since those things which are spoken of the infinite Wisdom of God, are
verified also of the B. Virgin, it is necessary that from the infinity of the
Son, she borrow a kind of infinite Dignity; and from thence those Words may
agree to both, though in a different Sense. And another Carre. Sweet thoughts
of Jesus and Mary, p. 293.
thus, What was said of the eternal Wisdom, by eternal Birthright and property,
is applied to her by the wisdom of the Church, guided by the H. Ghost, by
attribution and participation: Our Lord possessed me in the beginning of his
ways.

This therefore is now their business, to advance her as high as is possible,
and to give her Prerogatives above all other.

Creatures; of which many of their Authors Cited by Raynaudus, Pipt. Mar. p.
130.
make this to be one, That after Christ, she was elected the first of all
others. So our Contemplator Contemplat. L. and Gl. of Mary, p. 21.
, Thou wast the first and most delicious Object of God's Love toward pure
Creatures, from the beginning of Eternity. Which they Illustrate thus
Carthageua. Ibid. p. 7.
: As God decreed to constitute our first Parent Adam to be the Head of Mankind,
and gave him Eve for his Companion, taken out of his side while he was a sleep;
so for the Reparation of Mankind, he predestined Christ to be the Head of
another spiritual Offspring, and out of his side whilst he slept upon the
Cross, he brought out this second Eve the Mother of all Living by Grace. And to
this purpose they cite Prove. 8. 25. Before the Mountains were settled, before
the Hills I was brought forth; that is, Spinellus. Ibid. c. 14. p. 198.
I was brought forth before all Angels by predestination (for they are the high
Hills by reason of the sublimity of their Nature and Glory.) When there was no
Depths I was brought forth. v. 24. that is, when Original Sin, which is like a
profound and obscure Abyss, was not yet considered as foreseen by God. One has
dared Nierembergius, L'aimable Mere de Jesus. cap. 8. p. 59.
to address thus to God, You your self, O great God, took pleasure to entertain
your self before all time, in this sweet and agreeable cogitation, that Mary
would be a most perfect and accomplished Creature; and that she alone would
give you more glory than all Angels, Saints, and Men together: And that God
comforted himself, by considering her, for the loss and ruin that would be
caused by the insolent Rebellion of the third part of the Angels, by the
disobedience of the First Man, and by the horrible Deluge that would make the
World a frightful Solitude in the days of Noe. Nay, they go so far as to say,
Raynaudus. Ibid. p. 131.
That all the elect are predestined for her sake. And therefore she is called
by such Fathers as Germanus, Orat. de Praesent. Deip.
The Business of all Ages, the Scope and End of all God's Counsels. And the
spurious S. Bernard Sermon. 3. supe^ salve Regina.
De hac, and ob hanc, and propter hanc omnis Scriptura facta est, propter hanc
totus mundus factus est, etc. The Scriptures were intended for her, and the
World made for her sake. And not only made, says another, Galatinus de arcanis.
l. 7. c. 2.
out of Love to the Virgin, but sustained also; for the World, by reason of our
wicked Deeds, could no ways consist, unless the Glorious Virgin, praying for
us, with her Mercy and Clemency did sustain it. This was Christ's Prerogative,
if we believe the Apostle, Col. 1. 16, 17. All things were created by him and
for him; and he is before all things, and by him all things consist: Now, if we
believe these men, she comes in for a share in these peculiarities, by which
Christ was once distinguished from all Creatures. For thus Alcazar Lib. 4. in
Apoc. c. 2. v. 1. not. 2.
maintains, That by reason of the Union of the B. Virgin with Christ, the H.
Ghost, in a secondary Sense intended by him, has expressed the Virgin in those
very places of Scripture, which are spoken of Christ in the first and primary
Sense. And now we may the less wonder to hear another Contempl. L. and Gl. of
Mary, p. 10.
referring all the wonderful effects of our Predestination to Glory, Election
by Grace and Redemption from sin through the Blood of Jesus, to the excellent
perfection of Mary, as a most effectual means of all -- acknowledging all these
Blessings to flow from Jesus to all through Mary, and may therefore justly
refer them all to her, as the most effectual instrument, chanel and conveyance
of all. Though I must say, this is new Logic, as well as new Divinity, to
refer all to the Means and to the Conveyance, instead of the End and original
Spring; just as if a man should refer all the Light in his Room to his Window,
(not to the Sun the Fountain of it) because the Light shines through it. But
none has so copiously and audaciously discoursed this matter as the Jesuit
Salazar Comment. in Prove. 8. 22, etc. number. 260, etc.
, beginning at those words, Prove. 8. 22. The Lord possessed me in the beginning
of his ways, before his works of Old. When God, says he, began to create the
World, he possessed me, [Mary] that is, he conceived in his mind, and
contemplated me as present. And the end of it was, 1. Because he went more
cheerfully about his work, foreseeing that Mary would at length be brought into
Being, under whose Empire all things, which he then created, should come into
Subjection. 2. God carefully searched out what were the Excellencies of every
Creature, that he might heap those perfections upon her, that so she might
become a new and no fabulous Pandora, made up of all their Perfections. 3.
Because as God foresaw that Man would fall from his Obedience and ruin the
Creation, so Mary was the cause why he did not upon this desist from his
purpose of creating the World, and alter his mind, foreseeing that by her all
the Ruins of the Creation would be restored and repaired. 4. He foresaw too
that the World he intended to make would decay and wax old, and presently Mary
came into his mind, who would bring freshness and youth to it when it was aged.
5. Because, as God by the word Fiat (Let it be) repeated several times, did
produce all things, and bestowed on them all their Powers; so by the same word
used but once (by Mary) she should renew them all. [Which is a great mistake,
unless he thinks (...) in the Septuag. and (...) in S. Luke to be the same. But
of this Fiat we shall hear him Blaspheming farther upon another occasion.]

Upon v. 23. I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the
Earth was;] These are some of his Admirable Contemplations. Ibid. n. 295, etc.
1. That if we should suppose this impossibility, that all things were not
objected at once to the mind of God, but that he needed counsel and
deliberation, and to know one thing from and after another; verily Mary is so
excellent a Work, that to make and form her in time, it is requisite to use
even the Eternal premeditation and fore-counsel of God. 2. If we should suppose
another impossibility, That God should not see some things that are very
inconsiderable or very distant, yet such is the magnitude of Mary, such the
height and vastness of her Merits, that he could not but reach her, and
foreknow her at the distance of infinite Ages. 3. He is much pleased with the
doting conceit of Andreas Hierosolymitanus (Sermon. de Annunc.) who salutes her
by the name of Dioptra (which is the Radius of an Astrolabe with two sights,
through which Astronomers look, and measure the magnitude of distant things)
which he thus applies. God foresees and foreknows all that are predestined,
but Mary more especially, because through her (tanquam per Dioptram) he views
and measures the greatness, height and degrees of their Sanctity. So that as it
is true, that all are elected and predestined through Mary ( not chosen in
him it seems, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 1. 4. but in her.) So also it is
true. That in that vast space of Eternity, his sight reached all other just
Persons, because before them all he foreknew Mary. -- Through Mary he viewed
and measured the magnitude of Peter, So the Contemplations of H. Mary, p. 19.
All Saints and Angels have their measures of Glory set forth through a
redundancy of hers, and in a subordinate proportion to hers.
the height of Paul, etc. Because by the Prayers of Mary, they attained to the
greatness of Sanctity, which God bestowed on them.

Upon v. 25. Before the Mountains were settled, before the Hills I was brought
forth, thus he descants, (Ibid. n. 317.) We may imagine the divine mind big
with Mary and with all other Creatures, yet they did not urge God to a Birth,
since their Creation might have been deferred to many Ages: But Mary she
pricked forward and urged, so the Divine Mind, that being as it were Impatient
of such a Conception, and that he might bring her forth in due time, he did
anticipate many Ages the Creation of the World.

Upon v. 30. I was by him, as one brought up with him. V. Lat. Cum eo eram,
cuncta componens. Thus he Discourses (n. 380, 381.) We may proclaim of the H.
Mother of God, that all Creatures are as it were in her -- and they may all be
glad that they are better in her than in themselves: For in themselves they are
frail, and weak, and unstable; in Mary they are without all Fault; and in
short, though in themselves they cannot differ from themselves, yet being
translated into her, then they are Mary, who is the noblest and highest under
Heaven. Therefore when God would confer great Honor and Comeliness on his
Creatures, he would have her to consist of them all, Vt quemadmodum in ipso
cuncta Deus erant, sic etiam in Maria cuncta Maria forent; that, as in him all
things were God, so also in Mary all things might be Mary. And a little after
he calls her Mundus Archetypus, the the Archetype and original Model, according
to which the Elements, consisting of contrary qualities, were fitted and
married together, just as all Passions and Appetites were all at perfect
accord, and made no Rebellion in her.

Verse. 30. I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him. Vulg. Lat.
Ludens corameo. Here we have such stuff as this, speaking in the Person of
Mary; Ibid. n. 416.
When God made the World, and the things contained in it, and rejoicing, and,
as it were, smiling, determined that they were good; then I also pleased him,
and he smiled on me. For therefore he signisied his approbation of them,
because he knew they would be profitable and commodious to me; for preferring
me before all other men, he had respect chiefly to my profit and benefit. To
which he adds again what he had before, being hugely pleased with the conceit.
That contemplating all things in Mary, they pleased him better in her (being
then all Mary) than in themselves. Then he goes on to tell us of several
Figures and Shadows, such as the formation of Eve, the Ark of Noah, etc. which
were preludes and sportful works of God, that went before that serious work of
making her; Ibid. n. 418.
for when God carnestly desired to make Mary, and the disposition of his
eternal Counsel, required the deferring it some while, by such ways, Longas
moras ludendo sesellit, God did sportfully drive away the time.

He adds another Conceit as derogatory to the Work of our Redemption, as the
foregoing were to his Creation. Ibid. n. 419.
Whatsoever Christ did whilst he lived, whatsoever things he suffered whilst he
looked upon other men, for whose sakes he laid out himself, they seemed to him
difficult and hard; because he knew, that dispising so great a benefit, they
would be unthankful, and not use those Blessings aright: But when he looked
upon the Virgin, and beheld her grateful mind, and her diligence to make use of
his merits, so as to reap abundantly the Fruit of them; hence it was that
Christ did as it were play with all that he did and suffered in the World; that
is, he undertook them cheerfully and without difficulty.

We have seen how much they make us beholden to the B. Virgin; for had it not
been for her, Christ's undertaking might have stopped in the way for want of
sufficient encouragement, and have come to nothing. But alas! this is a small
matter in compare with the last Instance, I shall now give of this Blasphemer's
boldness, who makes even the whole Trinity to be beholden to her: For upon
these words of the 23d. verse, I was set up from everlasting (Vulg. Lat.
Abaeterno ordinata sum) he endeavors to make this plain, that she must needs
be so ordained; for, says he, There was a special reason, why, as soon as ever
the divine Persons did eternally exist, they should have the Virgin in
readiness; for according to Hesychius, Sermon. de Laud. Mariae, in Bibl. Patrum
Tom. 2. Gr. Lat. p. 421.
the Virgin Mary was the (completion of the whole Trinity: For thus he says,
comparing her and Noah's Ark) Arca Noe tres contignationes habebat, haec autem
(sc. Maria) (...): That had Three Stories, and she complementum totius
Trinitatis; (which any one would Translate thus, She had ((...), the word which
went before) the whole fullness of the Trinity, that is, when Christ was in her
Womb; not as he would have it, She was the Completion of the Trinity, for the
explication immediately follows in Hesychius, The H. Ghost was her Guest, the
Father over-shadowed her, and the Son dwelt in her, being carried in her Womb:
But the Jesuit is resolved to speak Blasphemy when no occasion was given him,
and thus he proceeds) If the Virgin Mary does in some regards belong to the
completion of the Trinity, it could not be that the Trinity should sooner
exist, than think of that which should complete it. He confesses it is difficult
to conceive, how the Trinity, which is most complete and absolute, should
derive any fullness from a Creature: Yet this undertaker will try what he can
make of it; and among his Three ways of explaining it, the Reader I dare say,
will have enough of the second, which therefore I shall only set down. Ibid. n.
302.
It runs thus, The eternal Father does generate the Son, and communicates his
essence to him; the Father and the Son breath forth the H. Ghost, and together
with the essence communicate to him all its attributes: But now the H. Ghost
neither generates nor breaths another person: Wherefore seeing the goodness of
the H. Ghost is equal to that of the Father and the Son, and the property of
goodness is to let forth and communicate it self, thence it follows, according
to our imperfect manner of conceiving, that something seems to be wanting in
the H. Ghost; for the other Persons do fill up the measure of goodness, but to
the Spirit there wants a fourth Person, into which it may pour out it self
without measure: For though he does communicate himself, yet he does it very
sparingly to the Creatures and Saints ( and he quite forgot him whom God gave
the Spirit without measure, Joh. 3. 34.) This therefore one would desire, that
he might communicate himself so largely to some one person, that if he cannot
satiate his infinite longing perfectly, yet he may give it ease and relaxation.
That this might not be wanting to the Trinity, and that the H. Ghost might stay
that Longing, Mary is of set purpose ordered and committed to him, that so he
might come upon her, with a wonderful affluence of all his Gifts, etc. And
another Blasphemer adds, Phil. de Convelt. Theatr. Excellent. p. 67.
Tanto ergo impetu spiritus sanctus supervenit in Virginem, ut quantum ipse
valeat ostenderet. Which I shall forbear to Translate.

These are some of their lewd conceits for the advancement of the Honor of the
Bl. Virgin. Haec Ithacus velit, and magno mercentur Atridae. The Socinians make
good Markets of such passages, by representing and reproaching them; as
Crellius De uno vero Deo, lib. 2. Sec 2. cap. 5.
takes notice of Corn. a Lapide's Dedication of his Commentaries on the Minor
Prophets, To the Holy increated Trinity, and ereated in Christ Jesus. And an
Epistle attributed to And. Dudithius at the end of Socinus his Epistles in
Biblioth. fratr. Polon. p. 512.
, cites the Pages of the Polonian Missal, where they thus salute the B. Virgin,
Ave, universae Trinitatis matter: Hail, O Mother of the whole Trinity. And
Dudithius adds, Now nothing hinders, but that leaving the Trinity, we fly to
Mary herself, and impore her aid.

SECT. II.
The Legend of the Blessed Virgin's Parents, and of her Conception.
Anaph.
PAter praecelsae Portifor. Sec. usum sarum, Jul. 26.
Virginis Joachim erat nomine;
Matter Anna nobilis, quae regali fulsit semine:
In tres parts dividunt sic rerum substantiam,
Dant Templo, dant pauperibus, servant sibi tertiam.
THat Joachim begat the Virgin, it is agreed;
Anne was her Mother's Name, derived from kingly Seed:
When into Portions three their Riches parted were,
The Temple, Poor, and they had all an equal share.
In 2do Nocturn. Anaph.
Annos quoque plurimos ducunt in conjugio
Steriles and tristes, sub legis opprobrio;
Exprobravit hunc pontifex, Joachim quod sisteret
Infoecundus cum foecundis, seque eis jungeret.
Joachim ex opprobrio in Templo tristis exiit,
Nec ad domum vel uxorem, sed ad pastores transiit.
These two in married state full many years did pass
Barren and Comfortless, under the Laws disgrace;
The Priest with scorn rejects his Offerings as defiled,
Who with the Fruitful dared t'appear and had no Child.
With foul reproach dismayed, and from the Temple sent,
He left his Wife and Home, and to his Shipherds went.
In 3tio. Nocturn. Anaph.
Joachim and conjugi Angelus apparuit,
Dolentesque nimium dulciter compescuit;
Preces vestrae ^unt acceptae, habebitisque filiam,
Per quam Deus magnifice praestabit sanctis gratiam.
To this afflicted pair an Angel then appears,
Who bad them grieve no more, but dry up all their Tears;
God does accept your Prayers, and you shall have a Daughter,
Trough whom the Saints shall gain abundant Grace hereafter.
Hymn.
Fletus longaevi Rex regum misertus, Horae sec. usum Hierosol. Lugd. 1516.

Angelum mittit, gaudium pro luctu,
Ut dicat Annae tempore senili, Prolem habebis.
-- Joachim magno gaudio repletur,
Vocem dum audivit Angeli dicentis,
Pariet tibi Anna matrem Dei Grandem prae cunctis.
Their griefs prolonged made Heaven at length relent,
Which first to Anne this joyful message sent,
Thou shall conceive a Child, though thou art Old, An Angel this foretold.
Her Husband Joachim greatly did rejoice,
When after this he heard the Angels voice,
Which said, that Anne God's Mother should bring forth Excelling all in worth.
Their English Festivale (Printed 1511.) has given an account of this matter
more at large, thus, De Concept. Mariae, Fol. 62.
The Virgin had a Fader that was called Jochym, that was so holy a Man, that
when he wa^ but 15, year of Age, he departed all his Goods in 3. parties; and
one party he deled to Wyddowes and Federless Children; the second party he
gave to them that were poor and nedy; (here he left out the Temple and made two
of one) the third party he kept to himself and to his Householde. And when
that he was 32. year of of Aege, for the great goodness of Anne he Wedded her,
and when they were Wedded they were togeder 22. year: in which time Anne never
dyspleased him with no manner thing neither night nor day; for she was so
gentyl to him, and they both good and holy: Yet God sent them no Fruit of
their Bodies, but were Baraynes. Wherefore they made a Vow to God, That if he
would send them a Child, they would offer it up to him into the Temple for to
serve God both night and day. Than on a day as Jochym went with his
Neybours to the Temple for to do his Offrynges, the Bishop, that hight Ysachar,
rebuked him openly before all the People and said, Jochym, if falls not for
thee that is Barayne and have no Fruit to do Offrynges with other People,
that God has sent Fruit in Jherusalem. Than was Jochym sore dismayed and
astonyed with this rebuke. Than he went home weeping and took his Shepeherdes
pryvely with his Sheep, and went forth into a -- far Country among
Mountains and Hills, and purposed to have be there all his Life, and never
more to come home to Anne his Wife. Than when Jochym was gone, Anne was right
sorry and prayed to God and said, Lord, that I am woe and full of sorrow, I am
Barayne and I may have no Fruit; and now moreover my Husband is gone away
from me, and I know not whyder he is gone. Lord have mercy on me, poor
desolate Creature. Than as she prayed thus, an Angel came down and comforted
her and said, Anne be of good comfort, for thou shall have a Child in thyn
old Aege, there was never none like ne never shall be. Than was Anne aferde of
this Aungells Words and of the syghte of him; and lay always in her Prayers
as she had been deed. Than went the same Angel to Jochym and said these
words, and badde Jochym take a Lamb and offer it in Sacrifice to God, and so
he did. And when he had done so, from Mydday till Evensonge time he lay on the
ground in his Prayers, thanking God with all his heart. Than on the morrow
as the Angel badde he went homewarde to Anne his Wife with his Sheep. And
when he came nigh home, the Angel came to Anne and badde her goo to the Gate
that was called the Golden-Gate, and abide her Husband till he came. Than was
she glad and took her Maidens with her and went to the Gate, and there she
met with Jochym and said: Lord I thank thee, for I was a Wydowe and now I am
a Wife; I was Barayne and now I shall bear a Child; I was Woo and Weeping, and
now I shall be in Joy and Liking: And soon after Anne conceived our Lady, and
when she was borne she was called Maria as the Angel badde before.

REMARKS.
ALthough the Salisbury Portuise, has given us, in the foregoing Hymns, a short
account of the Parents and Conception of the Virgin in the Legendary way; yet
it is so ingenuous as to confess in another place, In fest. concept. Mar. Dec.
(...). Lect. 2.
that the Book that treats of these is numbered by the Fathers among Apocryphal
Writings, and therefore forbears to set down the Lessons out of it. But what
this has omitted, the old Roman Breviary (on the Twentieth of March, and Six
and Twentieth of July) has inserted; whose Lessons are taken out of Two
spurious Authors, viz. the Protevangelium of S. James, and the Epistle to
Chromatius and Heliodorus, concerning the Nativity of the B. Virgin, falsely
fathered upon S. Jerome, whom it cites Brev. Romans Antiq. ad 26. Jul. Lec. 3,
and 6.
And because these Two are the Shops from whence they fetch a great deal of
their false Wares, I shall here say a little concerning them. The Learned
Bishop Mountague Acts and Monu. c. 8. sec. 35.
says, not without great reason, That both these Books came originally from the
Gnostics, but interlaced after them and new varnished by the Manichees; among
whom Seleucus was a great dealer in this Trade. Concerning the first of them,
(viz. Protevangelium Jacobi, published at Basil in the Monumenta Patrum
Orthodoxographa) Bellarmine in his Book of Ecclesiastical Writers says, There
is extant a Protevangelium under the name of James, but was never received by
the Church. If by the Church we understand that which is taught Devotions, it
must needs receive it, when the Lessons taken out of it were publicly read to
them to instruct them, as we find them in the Roman Breviary before cited: But
if he means that part of the Church which censures Authors, then indeed he says
true that they never received it; but then the more horrid shame to suffer, nay
obtrude that upon the People which they censure and know to be false. Pope
Innocent the First V. Council. Labbe. Tom. 2. p. 1256.
about the Year 402, condemned this Gospel of James the less, in his Third
Epistle ad Exuperium. So does Gelasius after him in the first Roman Council
Ibid. Tom. 4. p. 1264.
: The Gospel under the name of James the Less is Apocryphal. And Baronius
Appar. ad Annal. n. 39.
has taken such distaste at him, that he has banished all consideration of him
from his Writings; and indeed every one that will vouchsafe to peruse him, will
justify his Censure and abhor the Cheat. Neither need he be moved by what he
finds cited out of this Author, in the Hexaemeron set forth by Leo Allatius,
Anno 1629. under the name of Eusrathius Bishop of Antioch, that great Father in
the Council of Nice; or by what Allatius adds in his Notes upon him, to gain
him some credit; for the Testimonies of the Ancients he produces, mention no
work of his under the name of Hexaemeron; though S. Jerome in Catal. Scriptorum
tells us of his Book De anima and de Engastrimutho against Origin and his
Epistles. And though Anastatius, Sinaita (Anagog. Contempl. in Hexaem. lib. 9.
if they are his, which is doubted) cites Words of Eustathius about the creation
of Birds and Beasts, yet there are no such to be found in this which Allatius
published: Who also in his Notes confesses, That this Book has the very same
Sentences and Words that S. Basil uses upon the same Argument, and that there
was an Eustathius who did Translate Basil's Hexaemeron into Latin, which it is
probable might give occasion to fix the name of the famous Eustathius to this
work; who sure was a greater man, than to believe such stuff as his Jacobus and
ours relates, of the Dove coming out of Joseph's Rod at the Espousals of the B.
Virgin, and of a Mountain cleaving to receive and hide John the Baptist and his
Mother when Herod sought to kill him among the Infants; so far was he (as
Allatius thinks) from leaving out and sifting the Heretical and fabulous
Additions which our Protevangelium does abound with; and could not all of them
be set down by him in that short account of the B. Virgins Nativity, which he
has extracted out of him.

As for the other, viz. the Epistle, under the Mask of S. Jerome, there is not
one Learned Man of that Church that offers to defend it for his; and but one
Jesuit Christoph a Castro Hist. Deiparae in Catal. Auctor. p. 701.
that I meet with, that is concerned to vindicate him for an Author to be
relied upon; and I do not blame him for bearing him a kindness, because he has
been beholden to him for a great deal that makes up his History of the B.
Virgin. He calls him a pious and ancient Author: We may guess at his Piety, by
endeavoring to impose upon the World under those great names, and by
pretending that this account of the B. Virgin was written in Hebrew by S.
Matthew, and kept as a great secret, which he having met withal, desires him to
Translate. As for his Antiquity, we shall grant that, seeing, as Sixtus
Senensis says Bibl. Sanct. L. 2. tit. Matthew. ^^vang.
it contains those Fictions of the Valentinians and Gnostics, which Irenaeus
and Epiphanius do confute. Even he that is vouched for the Author of the
Epistle dares not vouch for the Truth of what he Translates, only he thinks
that it may be read salva fide and sine periculo animae, whether true or
feigned: Neither does he pretend strictly to Translate, but that he will set
down either what is there written, aut consequenter scribi potuerunt, or might
be written in consequence. So that the Learned Jerh. Vossius Dissert. de genere
J. Christri. p. 34.
might well say of it, Though this Impostor would seem to have made a
Translation out of the Hebrew, I fear he understood not Hebrew, and that he
took his Story either out of the Book of the Gnostics, called Stirps Mariae,
or out of Seleucus his Book of the Nativity of Mary; and only passed over those
things which patronized the Manichaean Doctrine: for he commends Seleucus that
he had spoken truly of the Virtues and Miracles of the Apostles, though he had
told many falsities of their Doctrine, etc. He thinks it also probable, That by
those Writings under the name of Matthew, mentioned and condemned by Innocent,
in his Third Epistle to Exuperius, are those which this counterfeit Jerome says
he Translated out of Matthew in Hebrew. And it is also likely, that he is
comprehended in that censure of Gelasius Loc. ante citat.
: All the Books which Leucius the Disciple of the Devil made, are Apocryphal
(for Leucius is the same with Seleucus, as learned Men have shown:) See Casaub.
Exercit. 1. sec. 16. Bp. Mountague's Apparat. 8. sec. 31.
And, Liber de Nativitate salvatoris and de Maria and obstetrice, Apoc. The
Book of the Nativity of our Savior, and of Mary, and the Midwife, Apocryphal.
Melch. Canus Lib. 11. loc. com. c. 6.
calls this Epistle Fabulam insulsam aeque ac barbaram; An unsavory and
barbarous Fable. Baronius Apparat. ad Annal. n. 44.
condemns him for an Author unknown and unskilful, that knew not how to avoid
manifest Lies, as he instances in his making Isachar High Priest, whereas he
shows out of Josephus, that there was none of that name about that time. And,
to name no more, Bishop Mountague Acts and Monum. c. 8. p. ^^24.
after he has told the Story of Joachim's Oblation at the Temple, and Isachar's
disgraceful rebuking of him for his being Childless (which we heard before) out
of this Author, he calls him Impudent, blasphemous Impostor thus to babble, and
gives many Reasons for this sharp censure See his Apparatus, 8. sec. 51, 52,
53. where he answers Castro's Defense of him.
. Yet this is he whom Xaverius in his New Gospel, as well as the Old Breviary,
chooses to follow in most things concerning the B. Virgin. But enough of these
spurious Authors. To return now to our Remarks upon the foregoing History.

I will not make any dispute of it, that the names of the Parents of the B.
Virgin were Joachim and Anna: Neither will I urge that of S. Austin, L. 23.
cont. Faust. c. 9. ad Finem.
That her Father was a Priest of the Tribe of Levi named Joachim, because it is
not Canonical, it does not bind me; because he seems rather to oppose his being
of the Tribe of Levi, as Faustus the Manichee held, than to doubt of his Name;
especially since Epiphanius Haeres. 78, and 79.
takes it for granted. There is no mention of them in Scripture, unless Heli in
S. Luke, c. 3. 23. be the same with Joachim. Galatinus De arcan. l. 7. c. 12.
cites his famous Rabbi Haccados, that he had two Names Heli and Joachim: But
that Author has been discarded by Baronius Appar. n. 39.
for a forged one, who pretends to write Prophetically, in answer to several
Questions proposed by Antonius, a Roman Consul, whereas no such name is to be
found among the Fasti of Consuls at that time. Sanctius in Jerem. 1. v. 3. n.
10.
thinks that the Virgin's Father was called Heliacim, or, which is the same,
Helijoacim; and sometimes Heli, sometimes Joachim. Ger. Vossius Ubi supra, p.
31.
that it is a contraction of Eliakim, and that Eliakim and Joakim are the same,
as appears by 2 Kings 23. 34. and that the High Priest who is called Eliakim,
Judith 4. 5, 11. (so it is in the vulgar Latin and Syriack) is called Joakim,
Judith 15. 9. However this be their own Authors are not backward to grant that
the Scripture is silent concerning them. Pet. Damianus Lib. 3. de Nativ. Virg.
calls it a needless inquiry to ask who was the Father or Mother of the B.
Virgin, and a superfluous curiosity to seek after that, which the Evangelist
had not thought fit to tell us. Nay several Catharinus in c. 3. Genes.
Novarinus umbr. Virg. p. 349. Carthagena de arc. Deip. l. 2. hom. 2.
of them draw a great mystery from it; such as the Apostle does from
Melchizedeck's being without Father and Mother, and without descent, (Heb. 7.
3.) to signify that immortal Priest that should come after: So here, in her
case, it denotes her freedom from Original Sin. Who was her Father and Mother,
says Novarinus, is not told us in Scripture, as if she, the Virgin, had no
Parents; and in this regard she had none, because she derived no spot or stain
from them.

The Legend makes her Parents to be Rich; Joachim was (...), very Wealthy, says
the Protevangelium; and Xaverius Histor. Christ. p. 14.
mentions their Riches after him, and how they expended them by a threefold
diversion, which Mantuan Parthen. Mar. l. 1.
has thus expressed.

Sic nostras partimur opes, pars optima Templo,
Altera sorsinopi, servit pars tertia nobis.
That is,

Into Three parts our Substance we divide,
The first and best we to the Temple give;
The Poor is by a second share supplied,
On the Remainder we our selves do live.
All which they borrowed from the Counterfeit Jerome. And if they had told us
of their low Estate ((...),) as the Scripture does of their Daughters, we had
had as much reason to believe them. But since they also inform us how they laid
it out, and into how many Portions they divided it, I wonder they did not give
us the particulars of Joachim's Last Will, which I do not find in any of them;
for it had been as easy to have done the one as the other.

The same Counterfeit has also told the Story of their Barrenness, and
determines it to Twenty Years, in which time they Fasted and Prayed for a Child
with many Tears, and vowed to consecrate it to God, if he would bestow one upon
them. Poza Elucid. l. 2. tr. 8. c. 1.
enlarges the time to about Fifty Years from their Marriage; and yet their
Prayers and Fastings must be continued, yea and Pilgrimages too many times, and
that barefoot (if we believe Vinc. Ferrerius) Sermon. 2. de Nativ. B. Virg.
from Nazareth to Jerusalem, which the Breviary ad Mart. 20. Lec. 5.
says, was Thirty two Miles. But fasting and Prayers to obtain a Child at this
Age seems to be not over-wise a Business: Poza Ibid. tract. (...). c. 2. p. 499.
therefore, to free this from the Imputation of Folly, is fain to grant that it
was a Miracle they desired, but says they were put upon it by divine
Inspiration; or perhaps they had the Promise of a Child by an Angel's Message.
Having now bestowed this Faith and Patience upon them, the next Work is to cry
it up: As Poza and others Novarinus, umbr. virg. n. 1230.
do, preferring Joachim's Faith before that of Abraham, whom the Scripture
calls the Father of the Faithful. Behold here, says one, a greater Faith than
in the Conception of Isaac. But what talk we of Isaac, when that bold Jesuit
Poza ib. l. 2. tract. 4. c. 1.
will have this Conception of the B. Virgin by Two Parents both barren, to be
equally a rare Thing in Nature, as the Conception of Christ himself of a Woman
without a Man. Nay he goes farther, Ibid. c 2.
that it was more wonderful than this, abstracting from Christ's Divinity; for
only parts viri were supplied in her conceiving Christ; but Two barren Persons
were supplied with Strength in her Conception. But no Faith will be great
enough to make the next Passage to go for current with any intelligent Reader,
where both the Fablers bring in Joachim rebuked and reproached by the
High Priest, and his Oblation rejected: And what wot you was his Crime? A new
and strange one; that he had hitherto be got no Child, taking it for granted,
it seems, that it was his Fault, which was a little severe; especially if Poza
Ibid. l. 2. tr. 2. c. 2, 3.
has guessed right, That Anne labored under a preternatural Impotency, and
that the Marriage between her and Joachim was never consummated, nor her
Virginity lost, till the B. Virgin was conceived; which, he says, is favored
by Germanus's Words, Encom. de Virg. praesent.
Immediately at God's Command Nature received Seed, which it durst not do
before the Divine Grace was bestowed.

Xaverius Ibid. p. 17.
adds, that the Priest when he removed him in Indignation, told him for
certain, That he was guilty of some secret Pollution, which was the Cause of
his Barrenness. One may well be tempted to enquire the Name of this surly
High Priest, for he never had his Fellow in Story: But here the forenamed
Cheats are not agreed; for St. James his Man calls him Reuben, and St. Jerome's
Isachar; the old Roman Breviary Ad Mart. 20. Lec. 5.
had so great a Respect for them both, that it takes them both in, Isachar for
the High Priest, and Reuben for a Scribe that assisted him: And they have also
put a Text in his Mouth to confound poor Joachim withal. Maledictus omnis qui
non genuisset masculum in Israel, Cursed is he that has not begot a Male-Child
in Israel. But to see the good Luck of it, both the Curse, and he that
pronounces it are only of their own making, for there is no such High Priest to
be found at this time among the Jews; nor no such Scripture to be found in all
the Bible. One would imagine that this Bolt should have done no Execution: But
they make Joachim just like one of their meek Devoto's at Confession, trembling
at the Priest's Anger and not daring to dispute any of his Sayings. He goes
away confounded, and you find him presently at his Penance, separating himself
from his Wife, and running into a Desert, where he fasts Forty Days and Forty
Nights Protevang. Jacobi.
: or if you will believe the Breviary Ibid. Lec. 6.
spending almost Five Months in watching and fasting:

-- Mantuan. Parth. Mar. l. 2.
patriam fugiens ob dedecus urbem,
Rus coluit, pluresque latens inglorius annos
Duxerat in luctu tristem sine conjuge vitam.
That is,

-- Disgraced he flies his native Seat,
Choosing a Country and obscure Retreat;
Where many Years he leads a pensive Life,
As far removed from Joy as from his Wife.
And you may well think that Anne must have her share too in this Affliction;
she gives herselfover to Sorrow, and could hardly be persuaded by her Maid
Judith Protevang. Ibid.
(for they know the Names of all the Family) to put on her best Clothes upon a
Gaudy Day. She cannot look upon a Sparrow's Nest, but it works upon her
melancholy Fancy, and she sighs and says, (...), Alas! what Womb bare me, these
Birds are Fruitful whilst I am Barren, etc. Nay such Prayers this false Gospel
and the later Greeks Bp. Mountague deservedly calls Cedrenus, Metaphrastes,
Nicephorus, Germanus, Andreas (Cretensis vel Hierosol.) Scriptores stramentitii
and quisquillae quaedam Antiquitatis. Apparat. 8. Sect. 30. p. 299.
(such as Germanus In Encom. de Virg. praesentat.
of Constantinople, who seems to have licked up his very Drivel) have put into
her Mouth, as do not become a modest Woman, and yet they bring her in praying
(...), in the Holy of Holies (as the History in Greg. Nyssen, Orat. in Natal.
Domini.
which he calls Apocryphal, does) whither never any such Prayers, no nor any
Woman ever came.

But now it is high time to think of comforting them; and they have Two Angels
ready if need be, Protevang. Jac.
though the Epistler is contented with One; but if we believe Pantalion, the
Deacon in Metaphrastes In fest. Mic. Archang.
, he is no ordinary one, but Gabriel the Archangel: with whom agrees S. Briget
Orat. 1. a deo revelat.
who gives glory to the B. Virgin for having her birth foretold by the same
Angel that brought the Message to her concerning the Birth of Christ. And that
the Mother and the Son may be as like as may be, Ludolfus de Saxonia De Vita
Christ. Part 1.
brings him in speaking just such words to Joachim as Gabriel did at the
Annunciation, Ecce uxor tua pariet tibi filiam, etc. Behold thy Wife shall bear
a Daughter, and thou shall call her Name Mary. They add also this farther
Prophecy of her by the Angel See also Xaverius. Hist. Christ. p. 17.
That she should be consecrated to the Lord, according as they had vowed, and
should be filled with the H. Ghost from her Mother's Womb, and her conversation
should be in the Temple of the Lord. The same Message, says Xaverius Ibid. p.
18.
was carried by the Angel to Anne; only he added those Words to it, Of this
Daughter of thine, Christ the Restorer of the World shall be born. But now, to
show how these Liars contradict themselves, this Angel encourages him by the
Examples of Sarah and Rachel, of the other Anna, and the Mother of Sampson, who
were all a long time Childless, and tells him, that Peccati non naturae ultor
est Deus Epist. ad Heliod. and Chromat. Xaverius. Ibid.
, God is the Avenger of Sin, not of natural Defects, whom yet before this, the
High Priest had cursed out of the Law for being Barren. Here again one might be
apt to wonder, how such glorious and admirable Passages concerning the Parents
of the B. Virgin, came to be passed over in Silence by the Evangelists, which
yet are now so particularly made known to the World: The Answer is ready,
Novarini umbr. Virg. n. 1201.
It was partly, lest the Eyes of Believers should be too much dazzled by so
great a Light; and partly, that something might always remain to recreate the
declining World, and that the Faithful by these, as by so many fresh Dishes,
might feed and nourish their Devotion. So that now any Tales will serve to
refresh and entertain the old doting World; and if they be cloyed with the old
Gospel, these Cooks are ready at hand to serve up these new Dishes, which no
doubt will abundantly gratify and please them. But if this will not satisfy,
there is another will Bernardin de Bust. Marial. p. 2. Ser. 3.
show you, that all this was mystically foretold in the very first Words of the
Bible. In the Beginning God created the Heaven and Earth. That is, Joachim the
Father, and Anne the Mother of the B. Virgin, for all things happened to them
in a Figure. The Earth was empty and void, (i. e.) Anne was Barren and
unfruitful. And Darkness was upon the Face of the Deep, (i. e.) the Darkness of
Affliction and Confusion was upon the Face of Anne. And the Spirit of the Lord
moved upon the Waters, that is, upon the Waters of her Tears to comfort her,
And he said, Let there be Light, (i. e.) the Blessed Virgin.

Before the Angel departed, the Legend says he gave them this Sign that his
Message was true, viz. That they should meet one another at the Golden Gate of
Jerusalem. There, says the false Gospeller Protevang. Jacob. p. 73.
Anna met Joachim, and hung about his Neck, blessing God, that she now was no
longer a Widow, but should conceive: Molanus Lib. 3. de Imag. c. 55.
tells us of a Picture in which was exhibited Joachim and Anna kissing one
another, at the golden Gate, with this Inscription, Taliter concepta est B.
Maria; Thus was the B. Virgin conceived. The like I have met with in the Horae
of the Carmelites, printed at Lions 1516. with a Motto little different: His
Joachim dato osculo Virginem Mariam ex Anna concepit: Here Joachim by a Kiss
conceived the B. Virgin of Anne. And Pelbartus Lib. 4. Stellar. p. 2. art. 1.
affirms, that this was the Sense of some of the common People in his time. If
the Jesuit Poza's forenamed Rule were true, seeing it makes so apparently for
the Honor of the B. Virgin, methinks this Opinion should prevail; but since
the Fathers have overruled it (especially Epiphanius Haeres. 79.
, calling it an Error of unhappy Men; for Mary is not God, says he, nor
received a Body from Heaven, but was begot of a Man and Woman,) however they
will consult her Honor as far as they can in this matter, and yet avoid too
that Heresy, as Gononus Chronic. Deip. p. 2.
calls it. The forenamed Jesuit Poza Elucid. l. 3. tr. 2. c. 1.
finds a comfortable Mystery in it; for asking the Question, why the B. Virgin
was generated by a Man and Woman, and did not come of a Virgin? one of his
Answers is, That God took care hereby that Mary might be most dear to us, and
therefore she was begotten of a Man and Woman, that she might more fully agree
with us in the same Nature, (by which Reason, if God intended that Jesus should
have been most dear to us, he should not have been born of the Virgin Mary.)
Others that will grant her Conception to have been after the Conjugal Commerce,
yet assert that it was without any Motions of Concupiscence: So another Jesuit
Jac. Granado de immac. concep. B. Virg. p. 111.
, It is not to be said of the B. Virgin, that she was begotten by
Concupiscence, which signifies somewhat Inordinate; for the use of Matrimony,
by which she was begotten, was most pure, and altogether without Sin. So also
S. Briget Revel. l. 1. c. 19. (vel 9.)
, When it was foretold them by the Angel, that they should beget a Virgin from
whom the Savior of the World should proceed, they would have chosen to die
rather than join in Carnal Love, and all pleasure was dead in them: and
afterward, contra voluptatem suam ex semine eorum per divinam charitatem caro
mea compaginata est; By the Divine Love my Flesh was compacted of their Seed,
contrary to their pleasure. This Galatinus De Arcan. l. 7. c. 8.
has explained more fully, I confess, says he, that S. Joachim and S. Anne, did
couple as Man and Wife, yet their ardent Devotion, and vehement Contemplation
(their Minds being upon better things) did extinguish all Bodily pleasure, all
Lust and Concupiscence. Which a Jesuit Spinellus Mar. Deip. c. 18. p. 240.
has thus illustrated, As Lot being drunk with Wine, did not perceive when he
lay with his Daughters; so the Parents of the most sacred Virgin, being
inebriated with Spiritual Love, yet knowing well what they did (which makes it
a special parallel) by a special privilege of God, they did not feel any
unbridled pleasure of Concupiscence, but begat her, just as our first Parents,
if they had not sinned, would have procreated Children in Paradise; (for they
know exactly how this matter would have been ordered there.)

If these have hit the mark, they must grant that S. Bernard was much mistaken,
when he says, Epist. 174. ad Canon. Lugd.
Quomodo peccatum non fuit, ubi libido non defuit, etc. How could her
Conception be without Sin, when it was not without Lust, unless we say that she
was Conceived by the Holy Ghost, and not by Man? The secret of this fancy, is
only to avoid a saying or two of S. Austin's Or Fulgentius lib. de fide ad
Petrum. p. 1. qu. 24. so also l. 1. de Nupt. and Concupis. c. 24. Ex
concupiscentia carnis quaecunque nascitur proles briginali est obligata pecato.
Believe firmly and in no wise doubt, that every one that is conceived by the
commixture of Man and Woman, is born with Original Sin, subject to death, etc.
Which because he was unwilling to grant of the Blessed Virgin, Galatinus
restrains it thus, He that is generated Per concubitum, cum corporis libidine
and voluptate, where the Parents have had pleasure; which is as wise a
reasoning, as if when one had made this a Rule, That whatsoever is nourished
will at length be corrupted and die; another should put in this exception Yes,
if it eats its meat with pleasure, otherwise it is not necessary. But we have
not yet done with their Conceits about her Formation. Many will have her Body
to be formed and animated differently from other Conceptions, which they say
ordinarily in Females is eighty days after the Man has known his Wife. S.
Amideus his Revelations Apud Th. Raynaud. Dipped. Marian. p. 22.
say, That the Soul was infused into the Body of the B. Virgin six hours after
the use of Matrimony by her Parents, her Flesh (which was unusual) being in
that short space of time formed and figured. Bapt. Poza Elucidar. l. 3. tract.
3. c. 1, etc.
is peremptory, That she had no part of her Body, which was not completely
perfect on the first day of her Conception, so that she might have been fed at
the Mouth, and have beheld the common light: Only he is put to it, to resolve
without a Miracle (since she might have been born the same day she was
Conceived) how she could have been suckled, if she had then been born: since
according to Fienus, a humane Body, when it is first quickened in the Womb,
does not much exceed the bigness of a Barley-Corn, or as others, of a young
Be; and it is hard in such a small Body to imagine how the Mouth can receive
and draw the Mothers Breasts; and it would be to no purpose to trouble you with
his foolish Resolution. But if you ask again, what End this invention of her
momentaneous formation serves? Though he conceals, I think, one Reason, which
is a thing mainly intended by them, to make every thing almost in her to answer
what was done in our Savior, whose Body the Schoolmen See Aquinas 3 part. qu.
33. art. 1, 2. Durandus l. 3. did. 2. qu. 2. Becanus Sum. Theol. part 3.
tract. 1. c. 5. qu. 2. Estius in 3 lib. sent. did. 2. sect. 6. Greg. de
Valentia Tom. 4. disp. 1. qu. 6 punc. 1. Greg. Gallicanus says the same after
them, Corpus Christi in instanti fuit formatum perfect in parva quantitate
sicut una apis. Marial. p. 165.
generally make to have been formed in its several parts at once, and at the
same instant animated and united to the Divinity; yet he discovers another
Mystery; and he will quickly resolve you Elucid. l. 2. tract. 5. c. 2.
, That this did that for her, which Christ's being born of a Virgin did for
him, viz. made her not guilty of Original Sin, because not included in the
Covenant with Adam, her Conception not being ordinary, but Miraculous. Nay he
goes so far as to Assert, that by reason of this Miraculous formation, she was
excused a debito originalis peccati, from being liable to Original Sin, as well
as from the sin it self. As wisely also, in another place, Ibid. tract. 7. c. 1.
he concludes, that although no violence was done to the B. Virgin, when she
was made of the Female Sex, yet considering the perfection of her Soul and
Body, it was a Miracle that she was not a Man rather than a Woman, since all
the wonderful productions mentioned in the Scripture that sprang of barren and
effoete Parents, were all Males.

We are told by Aegid. Gelenius De Colon. Magnit. p. 266.
of a great rarity shown at Colen, viz. some remains of the place (I suppose of
the Dust or Earth) where the Blessed Virgin was Conceived. And Xaverius has
given us another Discovery, Hist. Christi, p. 18.
and I think none has prevented him herein, that S. Anne conceived the Blessed
Virgin upon a Thursday.

But all this refers to her Body, and if there should be nothing Rare and
Extraordinary said of her Soul, this better part would bear no Proportion with
the other: But they have taken care that it shall have no reason to complain;
though we have, for obtruding upon us such raw and indigested Fancies.

We all know that our Reason comes very slowly upon us, and that the first Life
we live is merely animal: Our Understanding begins to dawn a little like the
first Peep of Day, some while after we are born, and so proceeds by an
imperceptible Progress, as Light does, till we arrive at our Noon, which is
very late. But in her, they tell us, it was quite otherwise; Nescit tarda
molimina, etc. Her Understanding is anticipated Vinc. Bruni Med. de B. Virg. p.
74.
, and they give her the use of her Reason in the first Moment of her Being;
Raynaudus, ibid. p. 158.
she had the Use of Free Will and perfect Light in her Mind, says S.
Bernardine, De concep. Virg. Sermon. 4. Art. 1. c. 2.
even in her Mothers Womb; so that she could from the first Moment exercise
supernatural Acts both of Knowledge and Faith; Raynaud. ib. p. 159.
and by this Use of her Reason she disposed herself to all that Grace that she
received in her first Sanctification; just as the Schoolmen say, That the
Angels disposed themselves to all that Grace in which they were created: For
her Sanctification was not in the way that other Infants are sanctisied Vasquez
in 3 part. tom. 2. qu. 27. art. 6. c. 3, 4.
, only by the Infusion and Reception of habitual Grace, but instar adulti, like
one of age, by her own proper Act of Conversion to God, proceeding from the
Assistance of Divine Grace. Only here is a great Doubt, whether this use of
Reason was granted as a Privilege to the Blessed Virgin, only for that Moment
of her first Justification and Conception, as Vasquez speaks, Ibid. c. 4.
and then ceased till she came at the ordinary time to find it again, as some
Infants have by a Wonder spoke once and no more, in their Infancy: This he says
indeed was Cajetan's Opinion; but it seems more probable, That the Blessed
Virgin, from the instant of her Conception, and so forward, all the time of her
Infancy (without Interruption) had the full use of her Reason, at least in
those things that appertained to God and Virtue: Having an uninterrupted
Influence (says our late Contemplator) Contempl. L. and Gl. of H. Mary, p. 20.
of actual Graces so quickening her great Soul, that no one Moment of her Life,
from the first Conception of her Soul, was vacant from divine Contemplations,
heavenly Affections and Ecstasies of supernatural Love; or as he more
fantastically expresses it elsewhere Ibid. p. 45.
, She, from the first positive Instant of the Infusion of her Soul, ever
exercised the most sublime Operations of the contemplative and unitive Life,
without Recourse to the Images of Imagination or Dependence on Sense. -- Her
great Soul was so completely actuated, even in the Womb of her Mother, that her
Contemplations, Sallies of Love, and Unions with God were restless; ever
increasing in their Vigor, and still expatiating through the vast Motives and
Methods of mystical Love. Nay She was, says another Novarini Umbr. Virg. n.
1323.
, in such perpetual Contemplation of God and divine Things, that she was never
so busied or so fast asleep, but she directed her Mind toward God, and thought
of him, so that in this Respect she was in the State of the Blessed (par
beatis.) If you have a mind to understand this still more particularly, the
Contemplator Ibid. p. 45.
tells us, That by the Help of abstractive Lights divinely infused, were
represented, 1. The several Essences, Attributes and Motions of the whole Body
of the Creation, in their several Degrees and Stations. 2. The Divinity of God,
with its manisold Emanations, Operations and inexplicable Comprehensions. And,
3. The Humanity of Jesus, with all the Orders of Grace, Mysteries of Salvation,
and extatick Loves of the Saints. But S. Bernardine Loc. ante citat.
informs us of Seven things, that according to some, she understood perfectly
in her first Sanctification (viz. in her Mothers Womb.) 1. Irrational created
Nature. 2. Rational created Nature. 3. Spiritual created Nature. 4. Divine
increated Nature. 5. All things that were to be avoided. 6. All things to be
followed and embraced. 7. After what manner and to what degree all things were
to be hated or loved. He that could believe all this, might well add, That she
was (when imprisoned in the Womb) in a more sublime State of Contemplation,
than any humane Creature ever was in its perfect Age; and though she slept in
her Mothers Womb as other Infants do, yet Sleep did not effect that in her it
does in us, for in us it buries the Acts of Reason and Free Will, and by
Consequence Acts of Merit; but I believe her Soul by free and meritorious
acting did then tend unto God, so that she did more perfectly contemplate when
she slept, than any others ever did when they were awake. The Jesuit Poza
Elucidar. lib. 2. trac. 15. cap. 4.
tells us of Fr. Ximenes, a Patriarch of Jerusalem, who has given an account of
some of her sorrowful Thoughts, and also joyful Reflections she made in her
Mothers Womb. S. Bernardine Loc. citat.
seems to have been almost as skilful as the other, for he says, the impetus
(force) of her first Sanctification did impel the Mind of the Blessed Virgin to
desire the Incarnation of the Son of God, out of fervent Charity for the
Salvation of all the Elect. Her Charity they also equalize in this State to her
Knowledge; for thus they sing of her in the Hours Litaniae variae. Colen. 1643.
p. 226.
of her immaculate Conception.

In conceptione, charitate ignita,
Draconis potestas est a te contrita.
When first conceived, with Love inflamed,
By thee the Dragon's Power was maimed.
She began to love God, says another, Novarinus ibid. p. 89. n. 296.
from the very first Instant of her Conception, and never ceased to do so
afterward, never intermitted (as he explains it) the most fervent Act of
Charity. If he had said this of the Habit that it never ceased, it might have
better passed; but understanding it of the Act, as he does, it is impossible to
be true of any one that lives in Flesh. But what we think impossible, they say
no body need doubt of, as in this that follows, which concerns the measure of
that Grace, she had in the first moment again of her Conception; which we are
told Raynaudus, ibid. p. 159. and Illeph. Giron in promptuar. conc p. 60.
was more copious and intense, than that which Angels and Men attain to in
their Consummation; which is admirably proved by that of the Psalmist (Ps. 87.)
The Lord loves the Gates of Sion Spinellus, ib. c. 7. p. 115.
, that is, the Conception of the Virgin, more than all the Dwellings of Jacob;
that is, more than other Saints.

The Reader, I dare say, by this time, is past all Hopes of guessing, to what
Pitch his Faith is to be screwed up, in matters that concern the Blessed
Virgin. When I met with a Jesuit Sherlog Anteloq. 8. in Cantic. Sec. 1.
asserting, That the oldest Saint in this Life, never attained so great a
Measure of Grace, as was infused into her when she first began to live, I was
ready to think that he would make a bold Attempt that would carry the Matter
higher: For though another Max. Sandaeus in Luna mystic. p. 52.
indeed was so great a Lunatic, as to call her, Antiqua dierum, the Ancient of
Days, a Title given, by the Prophet Daniel, to God himself; yet his Reason for
it was but the same; Because she in her Mother's Womb was filled with Wisdom,
Prudence, Understanding, and the rest of the Gifts of the Divine Spirit, above
all the most aged. But to tell us, that then her Grace exceeded the Measures of
Angels and of Saints consummate in Bliss, is such wild Divinity, as one would
scarce look to meet with any where, unless from him that for half an Hour
together cries Glory, Glory in Bethlem.

One would wonder whence this Fancy concerning her, of reasoning in her
Mother's Womb, and having such Contemplations there, shoald arise. The only
acknowledged Reason of it is, That many Authors See Vasquez loc. citat. qu. 27.
art. 6. c. 3.
have attributed this to John the Baptist, when he leaped in his Mother's Womb;
which they would have to proceed from the Use of his Reason, and a gift of
Prophecy, conferred on him at the Presence of our Savior (which I will not now
debate, because we shall have Occasion to consider it under another Head, when
we speak of her Visitation of Elizabeth) and it is not fit that any Saint
should out-go her in any Privilege.

Another Reason they reserve as a Secret, though I doubt not but it is intended
in all these Assertions, viz. The making her in every thing that is possible
like unto Christ himself; that so, when their Lines run so parallel, they may
the more plausibly call her, a Helper, a Co-worker, a Co-redeemer, or what ever
other Name they use, to signify how much we are engaged to her in promoting our
Salvation.

This therefore being the common Opinion of the Schoolmen, (as Estius In lib.
3. Sent. did. 18. sec. 1. See also Aquinas p. 3. qu. 34. art. 2. 3.
attests) That Christ merited from the Beginning (i. e. from his first
Conception) by the actual Use of Free Will, which supposes the Use of his
Reason; they have given the same to her: Though there was a time when this was
denied her, even by him who is not sparing in his Grants to her; I mean Aquinas
Part. 3. qu. 27. artic. 3.
: Non statim habuit usum liberi arbitrii adhuc in ventre matris existens, boc
enim est speciale privilegium Christ: He held it to be a special Privilege of
Christ to have the Use of Free Will in the Womb, and not to be affirmed of her:
But now Christ must be contented to part with some of this Prerogative, as they
make him resign a share in many a Privilege, for the pleasing and honoring of
his Mother, as we shall find it in the very next thing that follows.

SECT. III.
Of the Blessed Virgins Conception being Immaculate.
THough the pretended Infallible Chair has not thought fit as yet to determine
the Controversy about the Immaculate Conception, for Reasons we shall after
give, (which have no relation at all to Piety, but to Craft and Cunning, lest
the breach about it in their own Church should be made wider) yet however it
has given them leave to pray that, which it dare not command them to believe as
an Article of Faith. Almost every Church is furnished with Offices to that
purpose; some of which I shall here set down, beginning with our own Church.

I find in an Old Primar of Salisbury (fol. 127.) The Hours of the Conception
of the Blessed Virgin, wherein this is plainly asserted against all Opposers.

Ad Matutinum. Hymnus.
BEnedicta conceptio Virginis Matris Mariae
Festivetur cum gaudio, assit dies laetitiae:
Laetetur tota regio serviens regi gloriae,
Non obstante objurgio detrahentis invidiae.
LET every place that serves the King of Glory,
Observe a Feast and keep an Holiday
For the Conception of the Virgin Mary,
However detracting Envy may gainsay.
Oremus. Deus, qui pro salute humani generis Carnem gloriosae Virginis Mariae
assumere dignatus es, and ipsam sine Macula concipiendam ante saecula in Matrem
praeeligisti; concede propitius, ut qui de ejus conceptione (quae fuit nostrae
redemptionis, necnon temporum plenitudinis exordium) laetamur, ejus piis
intercessionibus ab instantibus periculis and a morte perpetua liberemur, etc.

Let us Pray. God, who for the Salvation of Mankind did vouchsafe to assume
the Flesh of the glorious Virgin Mary, and before all Ages did pre-elect Her
for thy Mother to be conceived without Spot; mercifully grant, that we who
rejoice in her Conception (which was the beginning of our Redemption, and also
of the fullness of Times) by her pious Intercessions, may be delivered from
present dangers, and from everlasting death, etc.

Ad primam. Hymnus.
Erubescant insensati qui respuunt celebrare
Mysteria tam sacrati diei and festivare;
Quo anno fuerunt copulati vir cum sua muliere,
Pessime sunt advisati sic volentes deviare.
Verse. In conspectu Altissimi immaculata permansisti.
Resp. Dei genetrix, intercede pro nobis.
Hymn.
Shame on those senseless Persons that refuse
This high days Mysteries to celebrate;
When she conceived was by Marriage use,
They Are ill advised that thus will deviate.
Verse. Thou did remain immaculate in the sight of the most High.
Ans. O Mother of God, Intercede for us.
Ad Tertiam. Hymn.
Conceptio mirabilis ab Angelo nunciata,
Maria tam laudabilis in conceptu praeservata,
Est unde venerabilis Ecclesia illustrata,
Et in suis miraculis and laudibus honorata.
An Angel brings the News of her Conception,
So wond'rously secured from sins Infection;
The Church that hence derives illustrious Rays,
Strives to proclaim her Miracles and Praise.
Ad Sextam. Hymn.
Ave Regina coelorum, inter omnes mitissima;
Ave decus Angelorum, inter omnes pulcherrima,
Simul and Archangelorum omni laud dignissima,
Quae concepta vitiorum sine labe purissima.
Hail Queen of Heaven, yet mild beyond compare;
Hail ornament of Angels, none so fair:
Worthy the Praise of an Archangels strain,
Whose pure Conception was without all stain.
Ad Nonam. Hymn.
Quum corpus and viscera quae dominum portaverunt,
Virginalia ubera quae ipsummet lactaverunt
Beata sunt and opera tua, and qui crediderunt
Quod sine labe concepta post and ante remanserunt.
Since that the Womb that bare our Lord, the Breast
That gave him suck, and all thy Works are blessed;
They Are blessed too, that believe thee without stain
Conceived, an Ever-Virgin to remain.
Ad Vesperas. Hymn.
Salve Matter salutaris, quae es soror insignita,
Salve quia Deum paris Angelorum spes and vita,
Salve Virgo singularis vere sacra Margarita,
Salve quia stella maris es sine labe concepta.
Hail saving Mother and our Sister too,
Gods Mother, Angels Life, and Hope art thou;
Hail sacred Pearl, thou Virgin singular,
Conceived without all Spot, the Seas bright Star.
Ad Completorium. Hymn.
Matris Dei conceptio est nostrae redemptionis
Potissima inceptio atque reparationis,
Et non mirum: Exemptio antitiquae contagionis
Fuit and in principio ipsius creationis.
When first Gods Mother was Conceived, began
The reparation of lost Man;
Sins old Contagion first escaped our Nature,
When she began to be a Creature.
Before these Hours is a Picture of God the Father, speaking these words to the
Blessed Virgin; Tota pulchra es, amica mea, and non est macula in te. Thou art
wholly fair, my Love, and there is no Spot in thee.

I find another Office of her Immaculate Conception in several Books Litaniae
variae Colon. 1643. p. 221. L'Office Divin. Paris. 1658. Heures dediees au Roy.
Paris. 1662.
out of which I shall set down a few Passages.

Ad Matutinum. Hymn.
AB aeterno Dominus te praeordinavit
Matrem unigeniti Verbi, quo creavit
Terram, pontum, aethera: Te pulchram ornavit
Sibi sponsam, in qua Adam non peccavit.
BEfore the World thou wast designed to be
The Mother of that Word, by whom the Sea,
The Earth and Heavens were made: He beautified
Thee for his Spouse, and in this fairest Bride
Adam never sinned, although in all beside.
Oremus. Sancta Maria, regina coelorum, matter Domini nostri Jesu Christi and
mundi Domina, quae nullum derelinquis and nullum despicis; respice me Domina
clementer oculo pietatis, and impetra mihi apud tuum dilectum filium cunctorum
veniam peccatorum: Ut qui nunc sanctam tuam conceptionem devoto affectu recolo,
aeternae in futurum beatitudinis bravium capiam, ipso quem Virgo peperisti
donante Domino nostro Jesu Christo, qui cum patre, etc.

Let us Pray. O Holy Mary, the Queen of Heaven, the Mother of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and Lady of the World, who neither for sakest nor despisest any one;
look upon me, gracious Lady, with an Eye of Pity, and obtain for me, of thy
beloved Son, Pardon of all my Sins: That so I, who now remember thy holy
Conception with devout Affection, may hereafter receive the Reward of eternal
Felicity, by the Donation of him, whom thou, remaining a Virgin, did bring
Forth, our Lord Jesus Christ, who with the Father, etc.

Ad primam. Hymn.
Salve Virgo sapiens, domus Deo dicata,
Columna septemplici mensaque exornata;
Ab omni contagio mundi praeservata,
Ante sancta in utero parentis quam nata.
Wise Virgin hail, Gods holy House thou art,
Seven Pillars and a Table, thee adorn;
The Worlds Contagion never defiled thy Heart,
Cleans'd in thy Mother's Womb, whilst yet unborn.
Ad Tertiam. Hymn.
Salve Arca foederis, thronus Salomonis,
Arcus pulcher aetheris, rubus visionis:
Virga frondens germinis, vellus Gideonis,
Porta clausa numinis, favusque Samsonis.
Decebat tam nobilem Natum praecavere
Ab originali labe Matris Evae
Almam, quam elegerat, genetricem vere
Nulli prorsus sinens culpae subjacere.
Hail saving Ark, and Throne of Solomon,
Hail Heaven's fair Rainbow, Bush of Vision,
Thou budding Rod and Fleece of Gideon,
Gods Gate never opened, Sampson' s Honeycomb.
'Twas fit a Son so noble should obtain
Freedom from Mother Eve' s original Stain,
For her whom we Gods Mother truly call,
Nor leave her under any Sin to fall.
Ad Sextam. Hymn.
Salve Virgo puerpera, templum Trinitatis,
Angelorum gaudium, cella puritatis,
Solamen moerentium, hortus voluptatis,
Palma patientiae, cedrus castitatis,
Terra es benedicta and sacerdotalis,
Sancta and immunis Culpae Originalis.
Hail Virgin Mother, House of the Trinity,
Delight of Angels, Cell of Purity,
The Mourners Joy, Cedar of Continence,
Garden of Pleasure, Palm of Patience,
Blessed Ground, like that which to the Priests did fall,
Holy and free from Sin Original.
Antiph. Haec est virga in qua nec nodus originalis, nec cortex actualis culpae
fuit.
Verse. In conceptione tua, Virgo, immaculata fuisti.
Resp. Ora pro nobis patrem cujus filium peperisti.
Antiph. This is the Rod, in which was neither the Knot of Original, nor Bark
of actual Sin.
Verse. O Virgin, in thy Conception thou wast immaculate.
Resp. Pray for us to the Father, whose Son thou broughtest forth.
Oration. Deus qui per immaculatam Virginis Conceptionem, dignum filio tuo
habitaculum praeparasti, quaesumus, ut sicut ex morte ejusdem filii tui
praevisa eam ab omni labe praeservasti, ita nos quoque mundos ejus
intercessione ad te pervenire concedas, Per eundem Dominum.

A Prayer. O God, who by the immaculate Conception of the Virgin did prepare
a fitting Lodging for thy Son, we pray thee, that as by the foreseen Death of
that Son of thine, thou did preserve her from all Stain, so grant, that we
being cleansed, may come to thee by her Intercession, Through the same Lord.

This Prayer is still owned by the Church, for it is in the Missal of Clement
VIII. (Paris. 1625.) among the proper Offices granted to the Franciscans; where
the first Office, is for the Feast of the immaculate Conception, and there we
meet with Deus qui per immaculatam, etc. We are told in a Rubric (Litan.
variae p. 230.) that the foregoing Antiphona and Prayer were approved by Pope
Paul V. who granted to those that should recite them, Indulgences of an Hundred
Days. They remain also among the proper Offices for the Order of the Holy
Trinity, printed at Lisbon 1621. called Officium immaculatae Conceptionis Virg.
Mariae in Sabbato, where I meet with several Strains worth the noting, of which
take these following.

Invitatorium. Immaculatam conceptionem Virginis Mariae celebremus: Christum
ejus praeservatorem adoremus Dominum.

Let us celebrate the immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary, and adore the
Lord Christ her Preserver.

Anaph. Fortitudo and decor in dumentun ejus; byssus and purpura vestis illius.

Verse. Liberasti me Domine ex ore Leonis.

Resp. Et a cornibus Unicornium humilitatem meam.

Anaph. Strength and Beauty are her Clothing; her Garment is fine Linen and
Purple.

Verse. Thou have delivered me from the Lions mouth.

Resp. And my only Mother from the Horns of the Unicorns. (To these they
compare original Sin.)

Anaph. Aquae multae non potuerunt extinguere charitatem; nec flumina
peccatorum obruent Mariam.

Verse. Eruisti a framea, Deus, animam meam.

Resp. Et de manu canis unicam matrem meam.

Anaph. Many Waters could not quench Charity; nor Floods of Sin overwhelm Mary.

Verse. Thou have delivered my Soul from the Sword.

Resp. And my only Mother from the Power of the Dog.

After the 5th. Lesson. Resp. Fac tibi arcam de lignis levigatis, ruptaeque
sunt abyssi magnae, and factum est diluvium peccati super omnem terram.

Verse. Arca vero deifera elevata est in sublime, and ferebatur super aquas;
opertique sunt omnes montes excelsi Sanctorum.

Resp. Make thee an Ark of plained Boards, and the great Abysses were broken
up, and there was a Deluge of Sin upon all the Earth.

Verse. But the Ark in which God was carried was lifted up on high, and born
upon the Waters, and all the high Mountains of the Saints were covered.

After the 6th. Lesson. Resp. Fiat mihi sanctuarium and habitabo in medio
eorum. Arcam de lignis Sethim compingite, and deaurabis eam auro mundissimo
intus and foris, etc.

Verse. Inspice, and fac secundum exemplar quod tibi in monte monstratum est.

Resp. Make me a Sanctuary and I will dwell in the midst of them, Make an Ark
of Shittim Wood, and thou shall gild it within and without with pure Gold, etc.

Verse. Behold it, and make it after the Pattern that was showed thee in the
Mount.

Ad Lauds. Anaph. Domum tuam decet sanctitudo, Domine, in longitudine dierum.

Anaph. Holiness, O Lord, becomes thine House for ever.

Anaph. Haec est domus domini firmiter aedificata, been fundata est super
firmam petram.

Anaph. This is the firm-built House of the Lord, and it is well founded upon a
sure Rock.

Anaph. Fundavit eam Altissimus, qui super maria fundavit eam, and super
flumina praeparavit illam.

Anaph. The most high has founded her, who has founded her upon the Seas, and
prepared her upon the Floods.

Anaph. Dominus custodit te ab omni malo, Maria, custodivit animam tuam,
introitum tuum and exitum tuum in saeculum.

Verse. Non accedet ad te malum.

Resp. Neque flagellum appropinquabit tabernaculo tuo.

Anaph. O Mary, the Lord keeps thee from all Evil, he has kept thy Soul, thy
going in and thy coming out for ever.

Verse. No Evil shall approach thee.

Resp. Nor any Scourge come nigh to thy Tabernacle.

Anaph. Quam pulchra es, amica mea, columba^mea, and odor vestimentorum tuorum
super omnia aromata.

Verse. Dominus est in loco sancto isto, and ego nesciebam.

Resp. Non est hic aliud, nisi domus Dei and porta coeli.

Anaph. How fair art thou, my Love, my Dove, my undefiled one, the smell of thy
Vestments is above all Spices.

Verse. The Lord is in that holy place and I knew it not.

Resp. This is nothing else but the House of God and the Gate of Heaven.

I find a Prayer in the Hours of Sarum, wherein her Freedom from Original Sin
is expressed, and a most encouraging Indulgence annexed in the Rubric before it;
which is this.

Alexander the VIth. Pope of Rome has granted to all them that say this Prayer
devoutly in the Worship of S. Anna and our Lady and her Son Jesus, Ten thousand
Years of Pardon for deedly Sins, and Twenty Years for venial Sins totiens
quotiens.

Oration. Ave Maria, gratia plena, dominus tecum, tua gratia sit mecum.
Benedicta tu in mulicribus; and benedicta sit sancta Anna Matter tua, ex qua
sine macula and peccato processisti Virgo Maria; ex te autem natus est Jesus
Christus Filius Dei vivi. Amen.

The Prayer. Hail Mary, full of Grace, the Lord is with thee, and let thy Grace
be with me: Blessed art thou among Women; and Blessed be S. Anne thy Mother,
from whom thou Virgin Mary did proceed without Spot and Sin; and of thee was
born Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living God. Amen.

Many Instances of the like kind may be seen in Balengem's Parnassus Marianus,
where several Hymns are collected out of diverse Missals and Breviaries.

She is called,

Cella plena vino mero, Ibid. p. 4.

Granum sine palea.
Virgo non inficitur, P. 24, 25.

Cum a matre concipitur,
Originali crimine.
Tu a Deo fabricata,
In conceptu praeservata
Nulla trahis scelera.
De mulierum numero haec sola P. 377.
praeservata
Fuit Matris in utero sancta absque labe nata.
A Cellar filled with unmixed Wine,
Pure Grain without Chaff.
The Virgin was not infected with original Sin, when her Mother conceived her.
Thou wast framed by God, preserved in thy Conception, contracting no Sin.
Among Women, none but she the Favor gained,
To be conceived pure, and born unstained.
Oration. Deus ineffabilis Horae sec. usum. Hieros. de concept. and Hortulus
animae p. 81.
Misericordiae, qui prim^ piacula mulieris per Virginem expianda sanxisti, da
nobis quaesumus ejus memoriam digne venerari, quae unigenitum tuum Virgo
concepit, and Virgo peperit Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum filium tuum.

The Prayer. O God of unspeakable Mercy, who have ordained that the First
Transgression of the Woman should be expiated by a Virgin; grant us, we pray
thee, worthily to venerate her Memory; who, being a virgin, did conceive thy
only begotten Son, and remaining a Virgin did bring forth our Lord Jesus
Christ.

There also you find the Blessed Virgin included in a Gloria Patri,

Gloria Patri genitaeque proli,
Flamini Sancto, Virginique Matri,
Quae Dei natum genuit hominem,
Sit laus perennis. Amen.
Glory be to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and perpetual Praise to the
Virgin Mother, of whom the Son of God was born a Man. Amen.

The present Roman Breviaries, though they are not so express in the Point of
Immaculateness, yet are full of other unwarrantable Applications.

Oration. Famulis tuis quaesumus Brev. Romans Reform. ad 8 December.
Domine coelestis gratiae munus impartire; ut quibus Beatae Virginis partus
extitit salutis exordium, conceptionis ejus votiva solemnitas pacis tribuat
incrementum, Per Dominum, etc.

A Prayer. Lord we beseech thee bestow upon thy Servants the Gift of heavenly
Grace, that they to whom the Birth of the Virgin was the Beginning of
Salvation, the vowed Solemnity of her Conception may contribute to the increase
of their Peace, Through our Lord, etc.

Lect. 1. Ecclus. 24. Ex Ore Altissimi prodivi, primogenita ante omnem
creaturam, ego feci, etc.

Lesson 1. I came out of the Mouth of the most High, the Firstborn of every
Creature, etc.

Lect. 2. Ab initio and ante saecula creata sum, and usque ad futurum saeculum
non desinam, and in habitatione sancta coram ipso ministravi, etc.

Less. 2. From the Beginning, and before all Ages I was created, and I shall
never fail; in the holy Habitation I ministered before him, etc.

Lect. 3. Ego matter pulchrae dilectionis and timoris and agnitionis and sanctae
Spei. In me gratia omnis viae and veritatis; in me omnis spes vitae and
virtutis. Transite ad me omnes qui concupiscitis me, and a generationibus meis
implemini.

Qui audit me non confundetur, and qui operantur in me non peccabunt, qui
elucidant me, vitam aeternam habebunt.

Less. 3. I am the Mother of fair Love and Fear and Knowledge and holy Hope. In
me is the Grace of every Way and Truth; in me is all the Hope of Life and
Virtue. Come unto me all ye that are desirous of me, and from my Offspring ye
shall be filled.

He that hears me shall not be confounded, and they that work by me shall not
do amiss; they that brighten me shall have eternal Life.

REMARKS.
THere is no Controversy ever was started, that has more busied the Wits of
those of the Roman Communion, nor any that ever was managed with greater Heats
and Animosities in their Schools, than this of the Immaculate Conception. A
Question that never entered into the Heads of any of the Ancient Fathers, for as
Vasquez Part. 3. disp. 117. c. 1.
confesses, it is manifest, that before the times of S. Bernard there was no
Dispute among the ancient Fathers concerning the Blessed Virgins Preservation
from Original Sin, since none of them so much as mention it: Though in his time
it appears, by his 174 Epistle to the Canons of Lions, there was some Debate
about it among Divines. I shall make bold to add, that this Controversy betwixt
the Two Parties (they who assert her Conception in Original Sin, whom we shall
call (to avoid Circumlocution) Maculists, and those who deny it the
Immaculists) is not only Late and Novel, but also extremely foolish and
ridiculous, when you consider where the Difference lies betwixt them. They
themselves confess Vasquez ibid. qu. 27. disp. 114. c. 1. and Bellarm. de
amiss. gratiae, l. 4. c. 15.
that it is agreed on all Hands in their Church, that she was sanctified in her
Mothers Womb before she was born; so that the only Question (and it is a very
wise one) is, Whether in the first Moment of her Conception Th. Raynaudus Dipped.
Mar. p 132.
she was immaculate, yea or no? Both Parties agreeing, that she had the Use of
her Reason (as we heard before) in the first Moment of her Conception; one
might have been tempted to think, considering the Zeal of the opposite Side,
that the Maculists had brought her in loaded and laboring for some Months
together in her Mothers Womb, under a sense of Gods heavy Displeasure for
Adam's Sin, which the other side could not endure to suppose, and that this
made them so very angry. But there is no such matter I assure you; they are as
civil to the Blessed Virgin in this Respect as one can possibly desire. For one
of their Adversaries Franciscus a Christo. praelect. de Incarnat. fol. 189.
has given us an account of Three Opinions among them, and all of them very
favorable to her. The Severest is that of S. Thomas, who thinks that she was
in Sin for a time (but so short a time that none can measure it) to wit, so
much time as intervenes between two Moments (inter duo instantia;) for in the
first Instant of her Conception, she contracted the Original Stain; in the next
Moment after it, she was purged from it; so that she was obnoxious to Sin only
the time that must come between those Two Moments. Others think that the
Blessed Virgin was a whole Moment of Time in Sin (integro temporis instanti,)
but all the time that is coupled with that Instant, was in Grace, and so grant
that her Son delivered his Mother from Guilt, as soon as it was possible for
Divine Omnipotency to effect it. This will not please the Immaculists; for this
Reason, because if they say that the first Instant she was in Sin, tho they
grant that in the next Instant Grace was infused to take it away; yet because
two Instants (according to the Philosopher, 6 Physic.) cannot immediately
cohere (no more than Two Atoms in continued Quantity) without a middle Time
between them, therefore the Blessed Virgin must be in Sin according to this
Opinion, not only the first Instant, but also the time between that and the
second. But he says there are a third Sort (and they are the very Pinks of
Courtesy) who come thus far as to say, That in the first Instant in which she
contracted Guilt, she was also delivered from the same by God: Only they crave
Leave to divide an Instant into Three (in tria Signa): In the first of which
she contracted Sin; in the second sanctifying Grace was infused into her Soul,
but more incomplete and transient, abiding with Sin, but ready to expel it: In
the third the same Grace is understood as permanent, and actually to have
expelled Sin. This indeed is too subtle to be Intelligible, yet however one
would think, it should be kindly taken by those of the other Opinion; since, if
they will but allow them the third Part of a Moment for her stay under the
Original Guilt, they then declare her to be as immaculate as the other can
imagine her to be: And if the one Party apprehends a Wound to be given to the
Honor of the Blessed Virgin, by the Supposition of her being under that Sin,
it is healed, you see, by the other in far less time, than the twinkling of an
Eye, or the quickness of the swiftest Thought. And yet after all, I assure you,
it is morally certain that these Two Parties will never be pieced together, but
eternally quarrel. Fresh Combatants appear every day upon the Stage, and they
charge one another so furiously, and engage the People in such Numbers in the
Quarrel, that neither General Council nor Pope (whom both sides acknowledge
only capable of doing it) dare decide this doughty Matter, for fear of worse
Consequences to ensue thereupon. So that all things considered, never was a
juster Censure, than that severe one, which a Poet of their own Mantuan. in S.
Fest. Decembr.
has passed upon them both,

-- Duae veniunt ista in certamina Sect^
Nonnunquam magno implentes subsellia risu.
Aequanimes autem, volumus si vera fateri,
Vanus uterque labor, pietas temeraria, praeceps
Religio, levitas velata scientiae amictu.
Nec Natura potest illuc extendere visum,
Nec Deus hoc docuit, nec re dependet ab ista
Nostra salus: Quae nos igitur dementia torquet,
Ut studeamus in his consumere litibus annos?
That is,

Whilst these Two Sects in furious Combats chase,
Their pleased Spectators only louder laugh:
For if we'll freely say the Truth, it is plain
Their Piety is rash, both strive in vain:
All the Religious Zeal they seem t'express,
Is only Folly clothed in skilful Dress.
Natures short Sight cannot so far extend,
What God never taught, on that can never depend
Our Happiness: What Madness then t'engage,
Or in such Fruitless Quarrels spend our Age?
Since therefore we are made Spectators of this Combat, and need not, as they
have stated the Question, trouble our selves much about it; it may not be amiss
to take a View, how they have listed themselves, and with what Weapons
Offensive and Defensive they come appointed into the Field.

The Maculists, tho their Infantry be not so numerous, yet they are no ways
daunted, as having, they judge, a better Cause, and more experienced Leaders
260 Famous Doctors are named and their Words cited by Vinc. de Bandelis in
tract. de sing. purit. and praerog. concept. J. Christi.
and Old Commanders on their Side: The Fathers (tho you take S. Bernard into
the Number) are wholly theirs M. Canus Loc. The. l. 7. c. 1. Sancti omnes uno
ore asseverant, etc. So Pet. Cellensis, Sententiae omnium retro Sanctorum. lib.
6. Epist. 23.
; so are also the most ancient Schoolmen and those of greatest Note. They think
they are sure of the Master of the Sentences Estius l. 3. did. 3. Sect. 3.
, and their Claim is not questioned to the Great Albertus, and Alexander
Alensis, to Bonaventure, Durandus, S. Antoninus, and a little Army of other
Chieftanes mentioned by Vasquez Ibid. disp. 117. c. 1.
. But there are Two especially whom they glory in, and who spirit the whole
Party, the one a School-man, and the other a Father. Aquinas Part. 3. qu. 27.
art. 2. in corp. and ad 2. 3 and 4.
of the first sort, with his vast Train of Thomists, must needs make a
formidable Appearance to the Enemy, when they cannot deny that Christ gave
Approbation to his Writings, in that famed saying. Been de me scripsisti,
Thoma: Thomas, thou have written well of me. And that Evasion is only to be
laughed at, which a Jesuit, Barth. de Scobar. conc. 1. de concept. B. Virg. p.
27.
being sensible of the Force of it, has given; Forte dixit de me, etc. Perhaps
he said on purpose those Words, Of me, by way of Restriction and Limitation,
lest any one should take Occasion to think, that Christ approved whatsoever he
wrote of Mary. The Father I mentioned is S. Austin, 14 Places are cited out of
him by Bandelis lib citat. part. 1. c. 9.
who may well stand for a great many, because in his Writings against the
Pelagians, he had Occasion particularly to take Notice of it, and always
resolves it the same way, making it the Privilege of Christ only to have no
Original Sin, but involving his Mother by Name in it. To mention a few of the
Places. In his 5th. Book against Julianus C 9.
thus he says, Quod si dementis est dicere and sine dubio caro christi non est
caro peccati, sed similis carni peccati, etc. If it be undoubted and madness to
affirm the Contrary, that Christ's Flesh is not sinful Flesh, but like to sinful
Flesh, what can we conceive further, but that, excepting this, all other human
Flesh is of Sin? And hence it appears, that that Concupiscenco by which Christ
would not be conceived, did cause in Mankind an evil Offspring; and although the
Body of Mary came from thence, yet she did not transmit it into the Body which
did not conceive from thence. Now from hence it is that the Body of Christ is
said to be in the Likeness of sinful Flesh, because all other Flesh of Men is
sinful: Whosoever denies this, and so compares the Flesh of Christ with the Flesh
of other Men that are born, as to assert that both are of equal Purity, he is
found to be a detestable Heretic. And elsewhere, De genes. ad lit. l. 10. c.
18.
Virginis caro etiamsi de peccati propagatione venit, etc. The Flesh of the
Virgin, tho it came of a sinful Stock, yet she did not conceive (Christ) from
the Stock of Sin. -- Therefore the Body of Christ, tho it was assumed from the
Flesh of a Woman, who was conceived of that Stock of sinful Flesh, yet because
his Body was not conceived in her, as she was conceived, neither was his Flesh
sinful Flesh, but the likeness of sinful Flesh. In another place, De peccat.
merit and remis. l. 2. c. 24.
Solus ergo ille homo factus manens Deus, peccatum nullum habuit unquam, nec
sumpsit carnem peccati, quamvis de natura carnis peccati (alia Lect. Quamvis de
materna carne peccati) i. e. Therefore he alone, who remaining God was made
Man, had never any Sin, nor did he take sinful Flesh, tho it was of the nature
of sinful Flesh (or, tho it was of his Mothers sinful Flesh.) And again In
Psalm. 34. conc. 2.
, Maria ex Adam mortua, etc. Mary deriving from Adam died because of Sin: Adam
dyed because of Sin, and the Flesh of our Lord, derived from Mary, died to take
away Sin.

Saint Bernard also speaks the same Sense, in his Words which were cited
before, p. 37. If their Adversaries were not convinced that the ancient Church
knew no such Doctrine, they need not trouble themselves to give an Account, as
they do, Carthagena de arcan. deip. l. 1. hom. 4.
why this was kept as a Secret in former Ages, and why God did hide the Mystery
of the Immaculate Conception from them. The reason of this is worth setting
down, as well as the Confession of the Novelty of the Opinion. Non pauci
homines rudes, etc. The rude and vulgar sort of People, if they had found for
certain that the Blessed Virgin had never contracted Original Sin, would have
been apt to have committed a Mistake, and thought her to have been a Goddess.
For if the Inhabitants of Melita, when they saw the Viper fastening on S. Paul's
Hand, and yet neither biting him nor vomiting any Poison upon him, cried out
that he was a God; how much more easily would unlearned Men, when they saw that
the Viper of Original Sin had envenomed all the Children of Adam, and that it
had not touched her, have concluded that she was a Goddess? By which admirable
Reason, God must be supposed to keep it as a Secret still, for there are rude
and unlearned People still, in as much Danger as ever of this, or rather more;
for even in the Days of Epiphanius, when the Collyridians venerated her, she
was not magnified, nor her Privileges manifested near so much as now.

From all which it appears, that the Maculists Opinion has the Advantage of
Prescription and immemorial Possession, if they are sufficiently provided to
keep and maintain it. And here too they question not their Furniture,

-- habent quo se tueantur, and olim
Ista hominum communis erat sententia. Mantuan. parthen: Mar. 1.

That is,

They plead the ancient Churches common Sense,
And store of Arguments for its defense.
The sacred Writings secure their Title, and they produce them with more
Advantage than their Adversaries; they can flourish sometimes with a Scripture
Allegory indeed, and tell the Immaculists, that tenebr^ erant super faciem
abyssi; Rich. a S. Laurentio.
Darkness was upon the Face of the Abyss, to signify that she was conceived in
Sin; yet this is needless, when so many Places in their plain and literal Sense
offer themselves to their Service: Such as these; All have sinned and come
short of the Glory of God Romans 3.
. As by one Man Sin entered into the World and Death by Sin, and so Death passed
over all Men, for that all have sinned Rom 5.
. The Scripture has concluded Gal. 3.
all under Sin. He gave himself a Ransom 1 Timothy 2.
for all. If Christ dyed for all 2 Cor. 5.
then are all dead, etc. Where the Antecedent being universal, the Consequent
must be so too. From these and such like Texts, they have raised several strong
Arguments: As 1. That it is a bold Presumption, when the Scripture so plainly
involves all under Sin that derived from Adam in the way of ordinary
Generation, to make an Exception in her Case, who so derives, without the least
Countenance from it. Besides, 2. Redemption and Salvation by Christ is declared
there to be as general and universal, as Sin and Death by Adam; and the Blessed
Virgin rejoices in God her Savior, but all these suppose Sin: And therefore
Christ is called our Savior and hers, because he saves his People from their
Sins. And in her case it must be from Original Sin, because the Maculists, as
well as their Adversaries, grant, that she was guilty of no actual Sin: And
there are few of them that will assert with Card. Cusanus, Exercit. l. 8.
That the Virgin needed no Redeemer to absolve her from the Sentence against
Adam and his Posterity, to which she was never subject. That she alone, after
the Fall of Adam, never stood in want, but was created full of Original
Righteousness, as Eve was, and much more; just as Christ, according to his
Human Nature, was created in all Fullness of Righteousness much more than Adam.
To talk of a preservative Redemption Scotus in 3. did. 3. qu. 1.
from the Sin she might have incurred, is to say that Christ was the Redeemer
of Angels: And if Bellarmine's Answer be allowed De Amiss. great. l 4. c. 16.
Dicimus ei remissa fuisse peccata, non in quae inciderat, sed in quae
incidisset, nisi gratia Dei per merita Christi praeventa fuisset. Her Sins were
remitted, not those which she had committed, but which she might have
committed, if not prevented by Gods Grace through Christ's Merits. You may as
well say of the Blessed Angels (which yet was never heard of) That they had
their Sins forgiven, for if it had not been for Gods Grace, they also might
have fallen into Sin. And Christ might be said to shed his Blood for them too,
if the Jesuit Coster Medit. de B. Virg. p. 76.
says right, That Christ did not purge her Soul from Sin by his Blood, sed
mundam praeservavit, but preserved it clean.

Antiquity never understood these Distinctions, and the former Popes were
against them. So Zosimus Apud Augustine. Epist. 157. ad Optatum.
Nullus nisi qui peccati servus est, liber efficitur, nec redemptus dici
potest, nisi qui vere per peccatum fuerit ante captivus, etc. No Person is made
free by Christ who was not before a Servant of Sin, nor can be said to be
redeemed, unless he were a Captive. So also Pope Leo Sicut nullum a reatu
liberum reperit, ita pro liberandis omnibus venit. Sermon. 1. de Not. Christ.
says, As he found none free from Guilt, so he came to free all Men from it. 3.
They urge also, that according to the Sentence upon all that derived from Adam,
she suffered the Punishments which were the Effect of it, and was subject to
Calamities and Death, therefore it must be granted, that the Cause of these
must have place in her, to wit, Original Sin: Especially since the Second
Council of Aurange against the Pelagians (Can. 2.) defined it to be affixing
Injustice to God, to say that by one Man Death passed upon all Mankind and not
Sin. 4. Lastly, They think they have an Advantage over their Adversaries by
this Question, What if the Blessed Virgin had died before our Savior's
Passion? (for it is apparently foolish to say, as Galatinus L. 7. de arcan. c.
10.
does, That it was impossible that the Mother of the Messiah should die before
her Son:) Now if she had died before him, and had had no Sin, she could not
have gone to Purgatory, but must have been received into Heaven; and then this
Absurdity would follow, That the Kingdom of Heaven was opened, before Christ
had overcome the sharpness of Death.

Thus I have given an Account, in some particulars, what the Maculists have to
plead for themselves. And I shall pass over and not urge the Revelations of S.
Catharine, since they do not seem to need them; nor the Argument from Miracles,
since though they have tried them (to be even with their Opponents) yet they
are not so skilful in this Trade, but have come off very ill in the Attempt, as
appears by the History of the Friars at Bern, An. Dom. 1509.

And now it is time to turn our Discourse to their Adversaries, and to take a
View also of their Strengths.

The whole Stream of Antiquity running so clearly in the former Chanel, and the
Scriptures also so plainly making way for it; it cannot well be thought, that
any one Man should boldly undertake to stem this Tide. And indeed he that first
appeared of any Note, to give a Stop to the former prevailing Opinion, was
Scotus In 3 lib. Sent. distinc. 3.
the subtle Schoolman: But you may plainly perceive that he had no assurance of
the Cause he had undertaken, by his timorous proceeding: For he acknowledges
that the Maculists Opinion was the common one; and having added Three other
possible ones, he adds, Quod horum trium sit factum, Deus novit: God knows
which of these had place in the Case of the Blessed Virgin. And again, If it be
not repugnant to the Authority of the Church or of the Scripture, it seems
probable that what is most excellent may be attributed to Mary. His Scholars
have taken more Heart, and are more positive than their Master, especially
since the Franciscans and the Jesuits have both entirely espoused this Opinion,
and stand up stiffly in maintenance of it: And the Pretense of the Excellency
and Honor of the Virgin Mary, has so far charmed the Body of this Church, that
now all the People almost are devoted to it, who would be accounted pious; and
though one might have expected some Concern for our Savior, who once had no
Compeer in this Privilege of immaculate Conception, but was accounted the only
Holy one of God in this respect; yet now the Case is altered, and Piety is
measured more by the Honor given to the Mother, than to this Son of God
himself; insomuch as now in all their Books, this has the name of the Pious
Opinion (though the Impiety of it was demonstrated sufficiently in Six
Arguments by a sturdy Champion on the opposite Side. Bandelis, loc. citat. p.
1. c. 34, 35, etc.
Nay they fancy strongly that Christ himself is pleased when she, in this or
any other way is advanced: as their Mantuan Ibid. lib. 1.
, speaking of the Immaculist's Opinion, has expressed it.

Sed prior, ut nobis aequum sentire videtur,
Dignior est, and grata magis Nato atque Parenti.
That is,

This speaks her Worth and Honor more than the other,
And better pleases both the Son and Mother.
Even the other Sex is engaged on this side, being made to believe that the
contrary injures the Mother of God: And in a revengeful Zeal we are told
Bernardinus de busto. Marial. Sermon. 9. P. 103.
that the Women of Mantua refused to give a piece of Bread or any Alms to the
Maculists, unless they asked it in honor of the immaculate Conception, or
renounced the contrary Opinion (which was as troublesome an Objection as a
begging Friar could well meet with) so that now this Novelty gets Ground every
day of the other Opinion, which as the same Poet says Mantuan. ibid.
;

Jam Senio exsangui frigens, sua robora sensim
Perdit, and amiss^^am Majestate recedit
Sponte sua --
That is,

Now chilled with Age, its Strength and Beauty lost,
It Lies as if 'twere giving up the Ghost.
The Wonder is the greater when we find that their Arms, by which these Feats
are done, are all Bulrushes, and their Arguments above Measure trifling and
childish.

There is not one place of Scripture (as was observed before) which in the
litteral Sense can be produced to countenance it. Bellarmine himself tells us,
De amiss. great. l. 4. c. 15.
we must not look for an express Text in this matter: For it is resolved that
this Case must never be determined, but, like a Tenis-Ball, must be tossed up
and down, and bandied from one side to the other, to the Worlds End, as if that
Church wanted some Toy to entertain it, and to play withal. And indeed it is
pretty to observe how sportfully Figures and Allegories and Texts out of the
Canticles, are applied to her by way of Accommodation (such as those the Office
of the Immaculate Conception abounds with, of her Soul being delivered from the
Lion, and the Power of the Dog, and the Horns of the Unicorn, etc.) Here now by
the Help of a little Fancy, any place almost will be made to chime to this
Tune. The Formation of Adam Bellarm. ib.
out of the Earth that was not yet cursed, shows that the Blessed Virgin, of
whom the Second Adam was formed, was not under the Curse, because without all
Sin. Paradise Gr. de Valentia Tom. 4. disp. 2. qu. 1. punc. 2.
is a Type of it, which in its first Plantation had nothing that grew there
hurtful or deadly. Eve, that was given to Adam, and made an Help-meet for him
(Vulg. Lat. adjutorium simile sibi) denoted that the Blessed Virgin, whom God
gave to Christ to be adjutorium nostrae salutis, Bernard. de busto. sermon. 5. p.
58.
the Helper of our Salvation, was to be similis ei, like to him, without Sin.
The Ark of Noah carried above the Waters, tells you, that she was preserved
from the Deluge of Original Sin that overflowed the rest of Mankind. The Ark of
the Testament, made of Shittim wood, which was imputribilis, had no Worm or
Rottenness in it, and in which the Pot of Manna was laid up; how plainly does
it show Greg. de Valentia, ibid.
that she that in her Womb was to receive Christ the Heavenly Manna, was not
obnoxious to the Corruption of any Sin. The Ivory Throne of Solomon (1 Kings
10.) overlaid with the best Gold, was a Figure Coster. Medit. 1. p. 19.
of her bright and pure Soul not sullied with any Sin. Who also was like his
Temple in the building of it (1 Kings 6.) neither smitten with the Hammer of
Original, nor wounded Bern. de bust ib* sermon. 6. p. 64.
with the Axe, or any other Tool of Actual Sin. The Gate that Ezekiel saw (Cap.
44. 2.) That was shut and never should be opened, it is agreed, Id. ib. p. 66.
prefigured her, and tells us that all Sin was barred out; and no Man should
enter in by it; therefore Original Sin was prevented, else the Devil, which is
worse, would have entered in: But the Psalmist says (Ps. 147.) That God has
strengthened the Bars of thy Gates. And thou art that City of which the Prophet
says (Esa. 37.) He shall not come into it, nor shoot an Arrow there Spinellus
de thron. dei, c. 7. p. 115.
, that is, God did not permit him to wound thee with the Dart of Original Sin.
The Characters which Solomon gives of the Spouse, their Church has applied to
her, and they argue the same. For She is among the Daughters as the Lily among
the Thorns See Delrio' s Florida Mariana. orat. 1. applying this to her.
Cant. 2. Thou art all fair my Love, there is no Spot in thee, Bellarm. and
Greg. Valentia ubi supra.
Cant. 4. Which we are told Pelbartus l. 4. Stellar. p. 1. art. 3.
were the Words of Alex. Ales, which he spoke, when dying, to the Virgin,
commending by her his Soul to God. Tota pulchra es amica mea, and nulla macula
neque originalis neque actualis est in te. Thou art Beautiful, Comely as
Jerusalem, Terrible as an Army with Banners, c. 6. My Dove, my undefiled is but
one. The Daughters saw her and blessed her, ibid. Who is she that looks forth
as the Morning, fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, etc.

Their Adversaries perhaps will say, that these Texts rather agreed to her
after-Sanctification than to her first Conception: But Jac. de Valentia has one
place in Reserve, which he thinks comes home to the Point; (Psalm. 46. 5.)
Adjuvabit eam deus mane diluculo: God shall help her and that right early. It
had not been early enough, if she had sinned in Adam before she was sanctified.

Thus we have seen as remarkable a Verification, as can any where be met with,
of that usual Reproach they cast upon the Scriptures, that it may be made a
Nose of Wax to bend and stand any way. I suppose they would not think it safe
to use the Laws of the Land in this manner; but according to their Principles,
they may make bolder with God Almighty and his Oracles; for this is but a small
matter, for their Patroness to obtain Pardon for an Abuse of Scripture, when
one that sealed a Writing, giving his Soul to the Devil to enjoy a Wench
Tursellinus in Hist. Lauret. lib. 3. c. 33.
, and another that denied Christ himself in such another Bargain with the Devil
to get an Estate Caesarius l. 2. exempl. c. 12. and Vinc. Belluac. spec. Hist.
l. 7. c. 105, 106.
, yet both of them were secured and forgiven, by applying themselves to the
Blessed Virgin.

As for their Arguments from Reason, they are of the same Strain with the
former, very witty and very ridiculous. The chief Argument that Bellarmine Loc.
ante citat.
and most of the Schoolmen insist on, is this; That it being certain that God
could have preserved her from this Guilt, the only Reason why he should not,
must be because he would not do it. And here they undertake a pretty hard Task,
as well as a very saucy one, to determine what is decent and fitting for God to
will in this Case, when he has not declared one Syllable concerning it. God be
thanked, that he has told us, what he himself thought was fitting with
Reference to our Savior, otherwise these Reasoners would undoubtedly have
concluded, That it was no decent Preparation for the coming of the Son of God
into the World to lie in a Cratch, nor for his going out of it, to hang upon a
Cross. But Gods Thoughts are not like ours, nor his Ways like our Ways, Esa. 55.

But let us hear their Proofs such as they are.

1. Some urge Francisc. a Christo, ubi supra.
that it was most fitting God should do this in respect of the Mother, for if
she had been obnoxious to Sin she had not been idonea Matter Dei, a fit Mother
of God. Rupertus has been so bold before them to assert, That it was requisite
that she should be sanctified, that is, cleansed from all Sin both actual and
original, that so Christ that was born of her might be altogether Holy (though
I find one Jesuit Raynaudus ibid. p. 215. says, Quamvis Matter Christi
scrduisset peccato, Christus ex-ea nasci potuisset, neque tamen minus sanctus
fu^sset quam nunt sit, quia sanctificatio or^a ex unione ad verbum, and fons
secundariae sanctitatis Christo communicatae, fuit independens a sanctitate
Matris.
so Ingenuous as to profess that His Sanctity did not at all depend upon Hers.)
Here again their Fancies work amain. It Is altogether fitting and becoming God's
Wisdom, says Gab. Biel In Fest. Concept. Sermon. 3.
, that the Immaculate Lamb of God should proceed from one that was immaculate;
and if so in Body, why not rather so in Soul? Christ would sit, says another,
Bernar. de bust. Sermon. 8. p. 86.
upon the Foal of an Ass on which no Man had sat before, and would lie in a
Sepulcher in which no Man had lain; so also take Flesh of a Virgin, where the
Devil had never sat, and in whose Soul Sin had never dwelt. If the Host Idem
Sermon 9. p. 99. Si in aliquo calice semel stercorizatum fuisset, licet postea
purificatus esset, non tamen honestum esset in eo consecrare SS. sanguinem
Domini nost^i J. Christi; sic indecens fuisset in muliere in qua semel
Diabolus, peccati stercora projecisset del filium procreari. -- Christus noluit
acceptare in matrem, nec Deus pater in Conjugem.
should fall into stinking Mire, or into the Mouth of a Mad Dog, or a Swine,
who would consecrate it into the Body of Christ? So absurd would it be, if of
her that had rolled in the Filth of Sin, and been worried in the Mouth of a
stinking Devil (foetentis Diaboli) the most pure Body of our Savior should
have been formed.

A Maculist may easily with one Breath, blow away all these pretty Similitudes
like so many Bubbles: For it is to be hoped, that inspight of original Sin and
the Devil, one that is guilty of it, if no other Sin intervenes, may still be a
true and pure Virgin; and then the Sanctification of her Soul being supposed,
the Son of God resolving to be made Flesh, need no more abhor this Virgins
Womb, than the Holy Ghost does the Bodies of those that have been very Impure,
after they are washed and sanctified; so far from it, that he vouchsafes to
dwell there, and they become his Temple.

2. Others insist much upon the Virulency of original Sin Raynaud. ibid. p. 145
and plerique alii.
(which Raynaudus says always seemed to him to be the strongest Argument: For
this is a mortal Sin, and makes a Man a Child of Wrath, and the Devil's Slave;
by reason of this an Infant is a Monster in that Rank of Beings, that is
destinated to a supernatural End. It seems clear therefore, that original Sin,
which has so frightful and horrid a Form, had no Place in her; for so the
Throne of God would have become the Seat of the Devil. If she had been
conceived under this Guilt, says another, Bernar. de bust. ib. Sermon. 7. p. 74.
she had been more punished in that Instant, than all the Creatures in the
World; for all of them put together could not have attained to her Merits and
Reward, all which spiritual good things by this means she must lose, though she
only was disposed to receive them: So that considering how great this
Punishment would be to her, one may say that she must be more hated of God for
that time than Cain or Judas, or any other of the Damned: Nay, says another,
Novarinus umbr. virg. p. 65. n. 207.
it would have more displeased her to have been sullied and defiled with this
Stain, than to have been damned or annihilated.

3. But if all this will not do, they have the Reserve of a bold Charge against
the Son of God himself. Greg. de Valent. ib. Arg. 8. Bern. de busto. Marial.
ser. 1. p. 16.
For since Christ could easily have preserved her Immaculate; if he would not
do it, says Bernardine, it must needs be confessed, that he was not a good Son
to his Mother. Or, as a Nephew of the Sultan urged it, Idem, ibid. ser. 6. p.
65.
Christ loved his Mother more, and did more for her than my Father did for me;
but my Father on my Birthday made me free, as much as was in his Power: But if
Christ, who foresaw the Damage and Evils which by original Sin would befall his
Mother, would not prevent it, he had sinned against the Command of the Law of
honoring Father and Mother, and had been impius Filius and ingratus, a wicked
and ungrateful Son See late Contemplations p. 30. harping upon this, That
Christ would honor his divine Mother even for Example sake, in doing that he
requires of all, etc.
. This, besides the Blasphemy of it, is a very foolish Assertion: For, by the
same Reason of honoring his Parents, they might have required that none of his
Race and Genealogy should ever have been stained with any Crime: That no Blot
should have lain upon Judah for Incest, nor upon Rahab for being an Harlot, and
especially not upon David, whose Son he is called, for being an Adulterer. But
these saucy Prescribers of what is becoming to our Savior, would do well to
remember how he turned upon Peter, with a Get thee behind me Satan, for Words
of his, that savoured more of God and less of Men, than these of theirs do.

4. That no Blot may be left unhit; a Jesuit Greg. de Valentia, ib.
conceives he has spied a weak place, an easiness and tenderness of Nature in
his Adversaries, in Matters that concern the Honor of the Blessed Virgin, and
he resolves to work upon it. He tells them, That though their Opinion be not
heretical, nor contains mortal Sin in the holding of it; yet it gives just
Occasion of Offense to the Blessed Virgin, so that they may well expect she
should be less favorable and propitious to them, which, says he, they ought
extremely to dread. Now that so it is, is plain by this Instance: Suppose a
Controversy depended before a Judge concerning the Nobility of a Person, which
though the Judge did not absolutely define, yet if he declared that it was very
probable that he was a noble Person, and he should take it more kindly, if he
were accounted and treated as such; would it not be sufficient Cause of
Distaste, if he to whom the Judge had been so favorable, could not obtain that
Honor which is so encouraged? This is the Blessed Virgins Case exactly; every
one has Liberty given him by the Church to think thus honorably of her; and
the Church has encouraged the paying of it, by spiritual Indulgences; and has
not the Blessed Virgin reason then to be somewhat displeased and angry with
those that still deny it?

5. I shall add but one Argument more, which another Jesuit Raynaudus Diptyc.
Mar. p. 144.
has advanced upon the Principles owned by the Maculists themselves; and let
them look to it how they will answer it, for it need trouble none else besides,
viz. She must be free from original Sin, otherwise she was guilty of actual
Sin; which he thus proves. It is, de Fide, an Article of Faith, that the
Blessed Virgin had no actual Sin, no not the lightest and most venial. Aquinas
in Opusc. 60. Art. 3. and 3 Part. qu. 27. art. 4.
The Adversaries also grant that she had the use of her Reason the first Moment
of her Being, and that whosoever is endued with it, is obliged in the first
dawning of Reason to subject himself to God by an Act of Love toward him above
all, or else he contracts a grievous Guilt: Wherefore unless the Blessed Virgin
in the first Moment of the use of her Reason (that is, of her Being) had
offered herself to God by a perfect Act of Love, she had incurred actual Sin.
If she did exert such a perfect Act of Love to God, it is plain by that Act
sanctifying Grace was conveyed. Therefore she was freed from original Sin. I
leave them to squable it out, for I am afraid it will not be answered in have.

But if the Maculists seem to have lost any Ground, by their own unwary
Concessions; in the next thing I am sure they will recover a great deal more,
and put their Opponents so hard to it Pelbartus was hard put to it, when in
Answer to that place of S. Austin (ad Petrum, Firmissime tene omnem hominem qui
per concubitum concipitur, cum peccato originali nasci) he says it is, qui per
concubitum, Maria autem non fuit qui sed quae. Aurei Rosar. Tom. 5. page 101.
, that they must quit one of their strongest Holds, and it is well if they can
any way save their Honor. I mean in the Point of Antiquity, and the Judgment
of the Fathers. I know the Immaculists are not wanting to bring in their Lists,
and make a show of Fathers, as Salazar has done in his Book of the Immaculate
Conception: Yet every one that will take the Pains to examine them, may see
with half an Eye, that most of those they produce speak nothing to the Purpose,
and those that seem to do so, are Testimonies out of false and spurious
Writings. This the Jesuit Salmeron In Epist. ad Romans c. 5. disp. 51.
being aware of, has taken another course, which is indeed more ingenuous, but
I doubt they will conn him no thanks for it; seeing he has discoursed in this
tender Point, more like an Enthusiast (not to say a Protestant) than a good
Catholic. For, among other things, he asserts, that the Argument from
Authority is weak and infirm: That the strength and efficacy of the Reasons he
has urged is to be preferred before it: That God does not reveal all Truths to
all, but every Age glories in its proper Verities, which the former Age was
unacquainted with (which he would never have mentioned, if he had not known
this to be a Novelty) that the Doctors the younger they are, they are so much
the more quicksighted. This is pretty course Usage, methinks, of old Friends,
especially, knowing how much they fawn on them and flatter them upon other
Occasions; and Fathers are the only things they are fond of, and they talk of
nothing else; but in this case, you see, where they cannot persuade them to
speak on their side, they take snuff and are sullen, and any Youngster or
upstart Doctor shall be preferred before them.

But leaving this, and all other little Arguments urged by the Immaculists,
such as those of our Late Contemplator, Contemplat. of H. Mary p. 31.
That Jesus had not perfectly appeased Gods Wrath against Men, had he not
preserved one Soul from Sin and Gods Anger incurred by it. -- And again, That
Innocence is much more honorable and valuable than Sanctification; and
therefore it becomes a most perfect Mediator, much rather to preserve the
Innocence of some one, than only to purchase the Sanctification of all. Passing
over these, I say, and such like,

I now come to that wherein the Immaculists glory most, viz. The Proof from
Miracles and Revelations; which indeed gives great Spirit to them, and wherein
their Adversaries cannot compare with them, no not so much as in pretense.

This made one of them say, Bern. de bust. sermon. 9. p. 115.
If we are deceived in this Particular, none has deceived us but God, seeing
such Wonders are done under the Name of the Blessed Virgins Conception, which
could be performed only by the Power of God. And Catharinus says Lib. 4. contra
Cajetanum.
That by interposing (in their Prayers) the immaculate Conception, healing the
Sick and other admirable Gifts were obtained in his time. To give a few of
their Instances. That of Alexander Ales is recorded by many, Raynaudus ibid. p.
139.
who upon the Eighth of December, having taught publicly that the Blessed
Virgins Conception was maculate, he was presently seized with a grievous
Disease, which had a yearly Return upon that Day; who finding the true Cause of
his Distemper, he made a Vow that he would change his Opinion for the future,
and write a Book to prove it; upon the making of which Vow, a sudden Cure
followed. This Carthagena De arcan. deip. l. 1. hom. 19.
says, is told by himself in his Book of her Conception, remaining in the
Cathedral of Toulouse.

A Friar of Mantua Bern. de bust. sermon* 6. de conc. Virg. p. 80.
having prepared himself for a public Disputation to prove that she was
conceived in Sin, when he came to argue, the Blessed Virgin changed the Words
in his Mouth, so that he spoke thus to his Auditors; I propose to you this true
Conclusion, That the Blessed Virgin was conceived without Original Sin; and
though he was told of his Mistake, and said he would correct it, yet he still
asserted her Purity a second and a third time. At Crakow in Poland, Spondani
Continuat. ad an. 1350.
one Paul a Monk, declaiming against the immaculate Conception in a Sermon,
before he had ended it, he fell down dead in the Pulpit by the just Judgment of
God. A Schoolmaster at Mantesa Raynaudus ibid. ex Nieremberg* in vita S.
Ignatii.
in Spain, having severely chastized a Youth under his Care, was killed by a
Kinsman of that Youth: As the Body was preparing for the Funeral, and laid upon
the Bier, suddenly the dead Man starts up, and spoke to the amazed Company,
telling them, That by the Favor of God he was brought to Life, that he might
make a public Retractation of a false Opinion he in his Lifetime had embraced,
concerning the Blessed Virgin's being conceived in Original Sin; he did what
God commanded him, and after this laid himself down again on the Bier and dyed.
This Narration was drawn in the Cloister of the Collegiate Church at Mantesa,
which when some would have had it obliterated, the Inquisition of Barcellona
discussing the Matter, determined it should remain.

At Rome Raynaudus ibid.
in the Ides of November 1652. a Virgin being in great Torment by the Stone, a
Confessor of hers gave her a piece of Paper to be applied to the grieved Part,
with this Inscription, Conceptio Immaculata S. Dei Genetricis Mariae. The Nun,
instead of applying it, swallowed the Paper, and immediately voided Two Stones,
upon which one added,

Conceptionem Labis expertem negas?
Lapides loquuntur, lapidis hoc verbum, sat est.
That is,

Do thou deny that her Conception's pure?
When Stones proclaim it, thou wilt believe it sure.
In Italy, a Nun of the Order of S. Francis Bernardin. de bust. ibid. sermon. 6.
p. 82.
contending with another Nun who opposed the Immaculate Conception, said to
her, Let a great Fire be kindled, and let us both enter into it, and she that
is burnt will be proved to hold afalse Opinion: They both agreed, and went into
the Fire; the Franciscan Nun escaping, the other was presently consumed.

The like Miracle he tells Ibid. p 94.
of a Laick and another Person; the Laick believed the Immaculate Conception,
and entered into the Fire; and challenged the other that disputed against it to
do the like, but he durst not try, and the other remained untouched.

The same Bernardine Ibid. p. 11.
assures us, that many of the Friars that were subject to his own Court at
Milan, importuned him earnestly, that in defense of the Blessed Virgin's
Innocence, he would suffer them to make that Trial with their Adversaries by
entering into the Fire; he did not think there was any canonical Prohibition of
such Experiments, because (as his words are) They that are acted by the Spirit
of God are not under the Law, Gal. 5. Yet he would not give his Consent; partly
because the Blessed Virgin could otherways defend her Purity; and partly
believing that the Impugners would not accept the Proposal; or if they should,
that they would have been suddenly burnt (concluding so, I suppose, by what had
happened before in the like case.)

Another Miracle he mentions, Id. ^b. p 82.
a very remarkable one, and how he came to be acquainted with it, of one Friar
Thomas de Bohemia, that had one of his Legs dried up, and utterly infeebled
(onmi vigore destituta) so that he despaired of a Cure, and was advised by the
Physicians to have it cut off: But in this Distress he betook himself to the
Blessed Virgin and prayed, That she would restore Soundness to him for the
Praise of her immaculate Conception: In honor of which he celebrated a Mass,
standing in great Torment upon one Foot: When the Mass was ended he was
perfectly cured and freed from his old Infirmity; so that he who before could
not go, came without Help to Rome on foot, and this Morning, says Bernardine,
told me this Miracle.

Revelations they have also many to boast of, Raynaudus ibid. p. 139.
those that are most cried up, and the most express, are those of S. Briget
(lib. 1. c. 9. and lib. 9. c. 49.) and their Authors Catharinus adv. Cajetanum
lib. 4. Delrio disqu. Magic. l. 4. c. 1. qu. 3, etc.
take a great deal of Pains to prove, that the Revelations of S. Catharine on
the other side, are feigned on purpose to oppose hers. Gonsalvus had the like
Revelation, who was taught by the Blessed Virgin her self, That her first
Animation was not only without Sin, but brightened with wonderful Splendors of
Grace: And Pelbartus Stellarii lib. 4. part. 1. art. 3.
says the same was revealed to S. Elizabeth.

Visions also they relate, such whose Signification is not doubtful, but which
clearly and punctually express it and determine for it. Thus we are told,
Bernar. de Bust. Marial. sermon. 6. p. 70.
That a Master of Divinity in Paris, being to preach on the Day of the Blessed
Virgin's Conception, had prepared to discourse against it: The Night before as
he was in his Study, there appeared a Company of Doctors and Angels, and a Seat
was made ready, upon which sat down a noble Queen, who called for this Master,
and said thus to him: What Harm, I pray, have I ever done to thee, That this
Morning thou should design to preach against mine Honor; and saying this,
she commanded him to be scourged: Whereupon he fell upon his Knees and begged
her Pardon. Then the Blessed Virgin said to the Angel Gabriel; Go and teach
this Man a Sermon for this Morning before the University: Then Gabriel said to
him, Open thy Mouth and I will fill it; whereupon he perceived an admirable
Sermon in his Heart, in which it was demonstrated that the Queen of Heaven was
conceived without original Sin, and he preached it the Morning following to the
People of Paris: The same Author Ibid. p. 79.
tells us, that a Bishop of Padua, as he was reading S. Thomas his Sums,
wondered that he determined against the Virgins immaculate Conception; To whom
S. Thomas appeared and said, Know Sir, that when I laid down that Opinion, I
only had respect to the divine Decree, whereby the Blessed Virgin ought to have
contracted original Sin, unless she should be preserved from it by her Son; but
the Son of God did preserve his Mother from it, and so he disappeared. S.
Bernard also, who was another stiff opposer of her Immaculateness, is reported
Novarini umbr. Virgin. p. 65. n. 207.
to have appeared to a certain Monk after his Death, having a Spot upon his
Breast, signifying that he was now of another Mind, and did Penance, as it
were, for what he had written before against it.

The Reader, I hope, has had some Pleasure (and that was all that I intended
him) in viewing the foregoing odd and fantastic Arguments used by the
Immaculists in this Debate. But from this latter Proof by Miracles and
Revelations, every Protestant may reap much Benefit and Advantage, considering
what Service they have done our Cause hereby, before they are aware. For,

1. We think our selves excused from all Obligations to believe, upon the
Account of Miracles and Revelations they urge us withal, and bring as a
Demonstration for any Article of their Faith that is not one of ours. One
Frederick Fornerus, a Bishop of their Church, has wrote a whole Book about this
Argument, called Palma Triumphalis Miraculorum Catholicae Ecclesiae, and
imprimis gloriosissimae Virginis Mariae, Ingolst. 1622, and in the 39th.
Chapter of the first Book, he insults over the Calvinists and Lutherans for
want of Miracles: But alas! he and a Hundred others that have made Collections
of this nature might have spared their Pains, for they themselves have taught
us how to deal with this Argument: For do any of the Immaculists value a
Farthing all the Stories that their Adversaries have told them of this kind? Do
not they account them all as Cheats, and tell the World so? And if the
Dominicans do not make the same Reckoning of all that these pretend, why are
they not converted to their Opinion? Here are Two Parties that divide their
whole Church, and both of them urge each other as they do us with Miracles, and
each hold the Opinion they did before notwithstanding this, and pray why may
not we do so too? I am sure I have produced as substantial Miracles for the
kind, as any they object to us. For what can be greater than to continue in the
Fire unhurt, when it consumes another to Ashes? (which was the Miracle of the
Three Children) or for a dead Man to start up and proclaim the Blessed Virgin
to be free from original Sin, and when he has told his Errand immediately to
die again? What Wonders of the Lady of Loretta, or the Diva Halensis or
Aspricollis, which are so often rung in our Ears, can outvie these? How many of
their Authors have told us, and Father Godden Catholics no Idolaters p 424.
among the rest, the Miracles of John Damascen's Hand cut off by the Command of
the Emperor, and restored by praying before an Image of the Virgin? Recorded in
his Life by John a Patriarch of Jerusalem. I will not question whether it was
his Hand or his Finger (as the Author of his Conversation relates Apud Cent.
Magdeb. Sec. 8.
) which might easily in that Age improve into a Hand. Nor will I insist upon
another Story of the same kind, concerning the Hand of Pope Leo I. which is
said also to have been restored by the Blessed Virgin, after it was cut off by
himself, and is related in a Manuscript Life of S. Leo, says Bollandus De S.
Leone Apr. 11.
; in the Lombardica Historia, in Pet. de Natalibus, Dionys. Carthusianus,
Nauclerus Chronog. generat. 15.
, the Historia Pontifical in Spanish by Gonzalo de Illescas (who says he would
not have set it down, but that he found it in grave Authors) was commonly
represented in Pictures, which is an Argument of current Tradition: Yet after
all Baronius Annal. to. 6. in Leone Papa ad An. 461.
condemns it for a Fable, and Pope Clement VIII. commanded the Pictures of it
to be rased out: The Reason, I suppose, of smothering this Miracle was, because
of the Occasion of it, which seemed to reflect scandalously upon so holy a
Pope, who, as Nauclerus says, was vehemently tempted (with lustful Inclination)
by a Woman's kissing his Hand, when she made her Oblation at the Mass on an
Easter Day. Though it seems to be better attested than that of Damascen's Hand,
which has only one Witness produced for it; and those libidinous Motions might
have been excused, from what has befallen other great Saints; for to overcome
such Temptations S. Benet Greg. Dial. l. 2. c. 2.
rolled himself in Thorns and Nettles; and S. Bernard was fain to use the
Remedy In vit ejus per Gulielmum, l. 1. c. 3.
of leaping into cold Water. Not to invalidate this Miracle, I say, but to let
it pass, I shall only oppose the foregoing Story of the Leg of Thomas de
Bohemia (which also may be opposed against that other famed Miracle of
restoring the Leg to the Youth of Zaragosa) and yet not one Thomist does
believe upon it that immaculate Conception to which the Cure is owing; though
we shall be as bad as Infidels, if that Hand and Leg do not make us fall down
and worship the Blessed Virgin; or if we do not almost adore Virginity, when we
read of S. Euphemia Speculum exempl. did. 9. exempl. 20.
, that she to avoid Marriage cut off her Nose and Lips, and had them restored
afterward by the Blessed Virgin. Methinks therefore we should have a little
better Quarter notwithstanding this Argument, especially when we see how kind
they are to themselves, in not pressing it too hard where they are themselves
concerned. For Gr. de Valentia Analys. fidei l. 1. c. 6.
tells you, That Miracles of themselves (i. e. without the Church) do not cause
infallible Certainty of the truth of a Doctrine; and therefore he calls them
afterward a prudent Motive: And Bellarmine says De Eccles. l. 4. c. 14.
, Before the Approbation of the Church, it is not evident or certain with a
certainty of Faith, of any Miracle, that it is a true Miracle. And another
Jesuit Raynaudus Diptych. Mar. p. 139.
more fully, Neither Miracles nor Revelations are a Motive sufficient of
themselves, to oblige all the Faithful to believe a thing with a Divine
Catholic Faith (as he calls it) though a Relation may oblige him to whom it is
made to believe with a Divine private Faith: (And so a Miracle, I suppose, may
oblige his private Faith upon whom it is wrought) yet it is not to be denied
that both of them are very fit Motives, and may be looked upon to have a kind
of Sprinkling of divine Authority upon them (Divina authoritate aliquatenus
perfusum.) The plain Meaning of which is, That God cannot deliver his Mind
fully to us, so as to engage us peremptorily to believe him, though it may be
prudent to do so, unless he deliver his Mind by the Pope. And that there may be
no Mistake of his Sense, we have it all out in another Place Raynaudus in
defens. scapular. Marian. p. 291.
: I say that the Argument fetched from Miracles does not clearly and
unquestionably (ineluctabiliter) convince that Truth to be confirmed by the
Testimony of God, speaking by a Miracle as it were by his own Mouth: Which is
strange, that when the Miracle speaks such a thing and nothing else; and is
acknowledged to be such a Miracle as God only can Work, that it should not
confirm that thing to be true as if he spoke it. A Man might swear that he is
not urging us with this Argument of Miracles, but intends this as a Favor
somewhere else, as the Words following do inform us: For, says he, if it were
so, then it must be granted that the Proposition affirming the Blessed Virgin's
Conception to have been Immaculate, has the Certainty of Faith for it, which
it is plain cannot be yet affirmed, because of the Silence of the Church (that
is, with a Jesuit, of the Pope) in this matter. And he adds, That he does very
piously, who from hence gives a firm Assent to it, sed infra certitudinem
divinae fidei, but short of the Certainty of Divine Faith. Those Words then of
pious Assent and prudential Motives, and such like, are Tricks and only Words
of Course; for one of the Church may believe in this Case either way, and has
free Leave to do it, without being condemned: So that God may do what Miracles
he pleases on one side, and yet a Man may safely be on the other side, till the
Pope contradicts it: So that it is He plainly that can only oblige him to
believe to Purpose. Which gives me occasion to reflect upon a Second good Use
that the former Considerations of Miracles and Revelations will afford us, viz.
A plain Discovery of the Restiveness of their unerring Guide, infallible Judge,
and Determiner of Controversies in some Cases. For those Miracles, etc. have
but little to say to any but him, and he, when he pleases, has nothing to say
notwithstanding them. If one should be so bold to question the Pope after S.
Paul's manner: Do thou believe Miracles and Revelations in this Affair of the
Blessed Virgin? I doubt the Answer could not be returned so easily, I know thou
believe. He is not so quickly understood I assure you, nor his Mind so easily
known: He has often put on several Faces, and by his various Appearances given
Occasion to complain, Quo teneam vultus mutantem Protea nodo? Yet methinks we
have some good hold of him, and shall not easily let it go. Here slippery
Proteus thou art caught at last,
Change all thy Shapes, this Knot will hold thee fast.


For either the Pope believes those Miracles, Visions and Revelations for the
Proof of the immaculate Conception (to instance only in those) or he does not.
If he does not believe them, surely we are fairly excused from being concerned
about them, since he has greater Opportunities than we can have, to find out
their Cheat if they be forged; and if they were true, his Faith should be the
forwardest: But if he does believe them, then the Matter is worse, considering
the Place he sits in; for he pretends to be the unerring Guide (as I said) of
Faith, the Judge and Determiner of Controversies. It is boasted as a Privilege
of his Church, that its Differences can never be endless (though those of other
Churches may) for here is one appointed to decide them, and his Decision liable
to no Mistake. Very good: And why is not this Controversy then determined? It
has been a Controversy in his Church of Four hundred Years standing, and yet
every Judge in Succession that has sat in this Chair has been dumb, and his
Infallibility lain by, and no Body has been the better for it. It cannot be
pleaded on his behalf, That the thing is not weighty enough to be determined,
and to become an Article of Catholic Faith; for whatsoever we may think of it,
yet he dares not own that he thinks so, when it is about a glorious Privilege
of the Blessed Virgin; and when he is now supposed to believe the Revelations
and Miracles to be Divine that do attest it; for God surely does not use to
interpose in that manner about Trifles. He cannot be excused neither for hiding
this precious Talent of his, and not employing it for want of a sufficient Call
thereto: For besides that loud one of Miracles, etc. which he is quick enough
of hearing when he has a mind to canonize a Saint, or institute a Festival; he
has been loudly summoned to exercise his judging Faculty, by the Cries and
Beseechings of all sorts both high and low, to pity the divided Church and heal
its Breaches, to becalm the boisterous Tempest, that has threatened to sink the
Ship of the Church, by one powerful Word of his; but all in vain: He lies as
one in a dead Sleep, and nothing can awaken him. What Applications have been
made to him the following Story shows.

SECT. IV.
The History of the Embassy from Two Kings of Spain to Rome, to obtain a
Decision of the Controversy about the Immaculate Conception.
Upon occasion of what I said last, how the Pope has been loudly importuned, to
put an End to Controversies, I cannot well pass over that famous History of the
Embassy from Philip III. and IV. Kings of Spain, to Pope Paul V. and Pope
Gregory XV. for deciding this Controversy about the Conception of the Virgin,
which is given us by Luc. Wadding, a Franciscan Legatio Philippi 3. and Ph. 4.
ad paul. 5. and Greg. 15. Lovan. 1624. per Luc. Waddingum.
, out of whom I shall give the sum of it.

At the beginning almost of his Story he acknowledges that though heretofore
the Maculists might freely and without Offense have declared their Opinion; yet
now adays the contrary P. 3.
Opinion has-so possessed Men's Minds, that neither the Rabble nor the sober
People, the noted Doctors or grave Bishops can endure to hear it. This Devotion
to the Virgin, he says, prevailed wonderfully in Spain about Eight Years
before, and was chiefly excited by one Francis a san Jago, a Franciscan, who
was fore-admonished by the Blessed Virgin of Guadalupa (a Place in Spain, where
she has a famous Image) of the Increase of the Veneration and Worship of her
immaculate Conception within a few Years, though not without Contradiction and
Tumult; and for a Sign of the Truth of this, she bestowed upon him a Ring. Upon
this he became a P. 4.
zealous Promoter of this Mystery, and the People, especially of Boetica,
applauded it, setting up Trophies of the Virgin's Victory over original Sin,
causing this Inscription to be fixed on the Corners of Streets, Highways, and
on the Fronts of Churches, Mary was conceived without original Sin.

But the Maculists were not idle in promoting their own, P. 6.
and opposing and exposing the received and common Doctrine; calling it
heterodox and abominable, reviling those that dissented from them, and
following them with unsufferable Injuries; who being thus provoked prepare
Revenge and War; so that with this Dissension all Spain was on a Flame, which
occasioned Pope Paul V. to send forth his Apostolic Letters, P. 7.
dated July 6. 1616. wherein he renewed the Constitution of Sixtus IV. which
forbad the condemning the Opinion of the immaculate Conception for Heresy, as
also the Council of Trent and Pius V. had done, prohibiting any to preach about
this Controversy before a promiscuous Multitude, or to write concerning it in
the vulgar Tongue either way: Although permitting learned Men in public
Disputations of the Universities, and of general or provincial Chapters, where
they were present that could understand the Matter, and no occasion of Scandal
likely to be given, to discuss that Question, and by Arguments to assert or
oppose either Part, so that neither were asserted to be Erroneous, etc.
Threatening Penalties against the Transgressors, till the Controversy were
decided by the Pope. After this the Catholic King, moved by the Complaints of
the People, consults with the Pope's Legate and other learned Prelates, whether
these Constitutions of the Pope did sufficiently extinguish this Flame; who
gave in their Judgment in the Negative.

The Catholic King resolves therefore to petition the Pope for a more
effectual Remedy, and sends Placidus de Tosantes, sometimes General of the
Benedictines in Spain, with Two others, to Rome about it. These obtained this
Decree of the Inquisition, confirmed by his Holiness Aug. 31. 1617. That the P.
14.
Opinion of the Maculists, which occasioned so much Scandal, Strife and
Dissension among Christian People, should, in no wise, be any longer asserted
in public Sermons, Lectures, Conclusions, or any other public Acts, affirming
that the Blessed Virgin was conceived in original Sin: Notwithstanding it was
strictly and severely cautioned also, That their Opinion should not be impugned
by others, no, nor so much as named or mentioned in the aforesaid public Acts;
because his Holiness did not intend hereby to reprobate that Opinion, or to do
it any Prejudice, but left it in the same State and Terms that he found it.

This was received with great Joy in Spain by the People, who favored the
immaculate Conception; they feasted and entertained themselves with Plays and
Shows, judging that their Business was sufficiently done. But others that were
wiser foretold the contrary, and that it would give Occasion to greater
Scandals: And so it proved; for the Maculists raised new Tumults, and the
Disorders were increased, and both Parties broke out into cruel and railing
Invectives against each other. The King therefore, by the Advice of his
Council, determined to send a new Embassy to the Pope, to move him that he
would command the Maculists wholly to be silent, till he had decided the
Controversy. Whilst he was preparing and consulting about P. 22.
the Person that should carry this Embassy, the King receives a Letter from the
Pope, wherein he desires him to forbear urging him farther for a Decision of
the Controversy, subscribing with his own hand, That he had done what was
expedient in the last Decree, and all that he could do (totum quod potuit) in
this matter.

The King thereupon thinking to desist, he is so alarmed afresh with the News
of Tumults from diverse Cities and Kingdoms, that he resolved upon a new
Embassy, and chooses for it Antonius de Treio, sometimes General of the
Franciscans, whom he chose to be Bishop of Sosa, who came with the King's
Letters to Rome, dated 24 Sept. 1618. Together with which he P. 30.
delivered several other Pacquets of the same Import with the Kings,
soliciting the Decision, viz. A Packet from the Kingdom of Portugal; another
of Spain; Letters of the Archbishop of Toletum and his suffragan Bishops;
Letters of the Archbishop of Compostella and his Suffragans: Another Bundle of
Letters from all the Universities of Spain; another from the Fathers Confessors
to the King and Prince, and other learned Doctors of the Order of the
Predicants; with other Three Bundles of Letters from the Praefects and
Provincials of all the Orders except one. To all which the Pope, after he had
commended the Piety of the King, and the Devotion of the Kingdoms to the
Blessed Virgin, answered, That he could do no more P. 31.
than he had done in this Controversy, and that the Matter required more mature
Consideration than he could afford it.

On the same Day he visited and delivered the King's Letters to several
Cardinals and Ambassadors of Princes, declaring the King's Desires, and begging
their Assistance in this Matter, that concerned the Honor of the Blessed
Virgin: And gave an Account of all to his Master in a Letter dated December. 23.
1618. Wherein he informs him what he had done, and the Difficulties of the
Affair; telling him, among other things, that the Pope's Answer was, That God
had not yet inspired, P. 41.
nor his Conscience as yet dictated any thing to him, besides that which was
before commanded in his late Decree, and then was asked on his Majesty's
Behalf. The Ambassador could do no more that Month, because of the approaching
Feast of the Nativity of our Lord. After the Festival was over the Ambassador
offers to the Pope an Oration, containing an humble Petition and a sad
Complaint P. 44.
against the Actions and Interpretations of the Maculists, who wrested the last
Decree, and made it to favor themselves. He complained also, That since the
Decree they taught their Opinion more eagerly, that no body offered to repress
their Excesses, that in Desks and Pulpits they detracted from the Credit of
their Adversaries, calling them Ignorant, Idiots, Simple, Fools, etc. He
represented the Scandals also that must needs arise from the different
Observations of her Feast, whilst P. 51.
instead of celebrating her Conception without Sin, some celebrated her
Sanctification from Sin. To all this, and more, which the Ambassador urged, the
Pope, after he had commended the pious Affection of the King, told him, by way
of Answer, That Popes could not always satisfy the Desires of Kings and P. 54.
Princes, especially in those things which are determined not by an humane, but
by a divine Sentence, such as require not Man's Judgment, but the Inspiration
of the Holy Ghost, and an inward Impulse; and the Spirit breathes when and
where it lists: (By which Answer we may perceive, what Opinion the Pope would
have the People have of his Determinations.) The Ambassador also offered an
Apology for his Master, whom some had reflected upon as too busy about
Ecclesiastical Affairs, as P. 56.
if he would constrain the Pope against his Mind: He offered also a Second
Oration to the Pope, in which he complained P. 79.
of the Scandals in Spain, and represented the Advantages of a Definition, and
concluded with this Speech to the Pope. Consider the Loss of many Souls, the
Discord of the Church, the P. 89.
Dissentions of Cities, and the great Dangers that hang over Kingdoms, all
which you only are able to obviate and prevent. The Pope still persisted in his
Denial, that he could not then define the Controversy. In the Interim the King
gives his Ambassador notice of the Continuation of the Scandals, and sent him
Three Sermons, preached at Madrid and elsewhere, in which the Adversaries urged
their Opinion, after the Decree. He complained also of the Theses maintained at
Doway, and of P. 91.
a Book of Fr. Sylvius, in which he disputes against the immaculate Conception.
The Pope answered, That these Abuses should be punished.

After this the Ambassador gave in a Third Paper, wherein P. 92.
he sets forth the weightiness of the Matter, and after he had given large
Encomiums of the Virgin out of diverse Authors, he complained that her Sanctity
was called in Question, and the Controversy managed irreligiously and
irreverently; and one declared, that she was conceived just as other Women, and
that Mary's Conception was not more pure than that of Mahomet. He added, it was
a vain thing to dissemble the Difference, and not to take away the Cause of it,
which otherwise would end in Contempt of Mary, the Grief and Horror of the
People, and a Decay of Devotion toward the Mother of God.

He represented what Advantage the Heretics made of these P. 103.
Contentions, to deride the Unity of the Church so much boasted of. He said it
was horrible, That while the Priests offered the Body of Christ in honor of
the immaculate Conception, P. 106.
there should be found those among themselves, that should deride and insult,
saying, That it was to be rejected, and that all was Figments and Chimaera's,
etc. At the Conclusion of his Oration, among other things, he urged the Pope
withal P. 113.
to make a Decision, he mentioned this, That hereby the Truth of those many
Miracles wrought by God and the Saints in testimony of the immaculate
Conception, would be more apparent, and the Certainty of many Revelations
confirmed. (Which was well urged, since any one would think they themselves did
not give Credit to what they would have us believe, when the Pope knows not
what to say to the Matter after all.)

The Pope replied, That he stood well affected to the immaculate Conception,
but intimated that his Definition would not remove the Disturbances, since the
Maculists insisted, That P. 116.
theirs was the unanimous Doctrine of all the Fathers, and in particular
produced the Testimonies for it of S. Austin, Lumbard and Bonaventure. The
Embassad or understanding that the Adversaries had collected the Sentences of
the Fathers, and offered them to the Pope, he put in a Fourth Paper, wherein he
showed, that the Authority of the holy Fathers indeed was great, especially in
establishing weak Opinions; but to counterfeit it was dangerous: That the
Doctors were falsely cited by the Adversaries, and Three only truly. That every
Doctor might err, which S. Austin confesses of himself, and if S. Thomas had
lived now, he would have been of another Mind; and he concluded, That there was
none after the Apostles who were not Popes that might not err: And then
turning to the Pope, In P. 129.
thee alone, and the Bishops in thy Chair, no Error has Place, in thee Truth is
established, and in thy Seat has set up her venerable and perpetual Throne;
from that Throne no Lie can ever arise. After he had thus flattered the Pope,
he obtained of him a Book of P. de Vincentia a Dominican, in which the Sayings
of the Fathers were collected for the Maculist's Opinion, which were taken out
of Two Books of Vinc. Bandellus, which fiercely opposed the immaculate
Conception. And the Orator endeavored in a Fifth Paper to show, that these
Books contained such things as were condemned by the Bull of Sixtus IV.
Particularly he gave in the Heads of Bandellus his Books, which contained the
severest Charges against the Opinion of the Immaculists; as that it was a
mortal Error, full of Falsity, Impious and Pernicious; that it was injurious to
the Blood of Christ, making her neither to be reconciled nor justified by it;
that an Opinion founded in the holy Scriptures, was to be preferred before the
Determinations of Pope and Council; That the Immaculists did contradict
Scripture, and perniciously depraved them, and defended the Heresy of Pelagius
and Julianus, in their Expositions: He affirms, That the Persons to P. 134.
whom Revelations are said to be made, concerning the Virgin's immaculate
Conception, were suspected Persons, addicted to carnal Vices, and discovering
that they had nothing of Spirituality in them: That the Miracles brought to
confirm it, were P. 140.
wrought by the Devil, who, by God's Permission, healed some Infirmities upon
invoking the immaculate Conception; that so he that was Filthy might be Filthy
still. After many such Charges (which may be seen in the History) he produced
the Testimonies of Two hundred and sixty famous Doctors who were against it:
This Work of Bandelis, which was in many Hands that made ill use of it, the
Ambassador urged, that it might by an Edict be put among the Catalogue of
prohibited Books. But the Pope made answer, That the Constitution of Sixtus IV.
(which begins Grave nimis, etc.) was sufficient.

After this the Ambassador put in a Sixth Paper, to prove, P. 149.
that the Difference of the Adversaries in celebrating the Feast of the
Conception, was not to be tolerated, and that it was fit they should be
commanded to celebrate it unanimously with the universal Church. The Pope
returned that he had often dealt about it, and desired that this Mystery might
be equally celebrated by all; but it was always answered by the Maculists, That
they did the same with others under the Name of Her Sanctification (not
Conception) which comprehended all. Whereupon in a Seventh Speech, the Orator
endeavored to P. 172.
show, That the Catholic Church in the Feast of the Blessed Virgin's
Conception, did now, and always, intend nothing else thereby, than to celebrate
her Preservation from original Sin, so that in no Instant she was actually
subject to it. The Pope said he did not doubt of this, that the Church intended
by their Worship of the Conception to profess that Mary was preserved from
original Sin; but it was better in this turbulent and calamitous State of the
Empire, to study and endeavor Peace at Home, than by innovating to beget
intestine Broils. Notwithstanding this Answer, the Ambassador offered an Eighth
P. 201.
Paper, to show how great the Inequality was between the Opinions; and that an
Opinion which at one time was probable, at another time might become altogether
Improbable; That Truths do not appear all at one time, but some are reserved
for every Age: That many things accounted dubious by the Ancients, are now
looked upon as certain and unquestionable; such as the Validity of the Baptism
of Heretics; the seeing the divine Essence before the Day of Judgment; That
Angels are incorporeal; and that Souls are immediately created by God, and such
like: Which he applied to this Matter of the Conception, which, though it was
not so clear in the Ages before, yet after the Appearance of Scotus (about the
Year 1300.) who opened the Controversy with all Accuteness, the Maculist's
Opinion did decline, and the Contrary ever after got Ground of it: After this
he endeavored to prove his own Opinion about the immaculate Conception, by
various Reasons, too large to be repeated. The Pope made Answer, That he
acknowledged the great Probability of the P. 234.
Immaculist's Opinion, and that its State and Terms were better; but the
Adversaries still maintained, That theirs still kept its Place, and had not
lost all Probability, nor that the pious Opinion was so undoubted and
irrefragable, that for its Sake the Contrary should be exploded: Nay they
further added, That if it should come to a Definition (which some say is
impossible) that the Sentence must needs go on their Side, because of the
Authority of the Scripture, the Doctors, and S. Thomas; nor that it could, at
least ought not, be carried for the Pious one.

The Ambassador not being yet satisfied, he adds a Ninth Treatise, to prove
that the Controversy concerning the Virgin P. 236.
Mary's Conception might be ended by a definitive Sentence of the Church, and
that no other Sentence, but for her immaculate Conception, could be propounded
by the Church with certainty of Faith; and gave many Reasons to show the
Expediency of doing it as soon as might be. The Pope replied, That there was no
need of Arguments to prove that the Controversy was capable of Decision; he P.
289.
knew well how much he was able to do in it; neither did he doubt of his Power,
but of the Convenience and Necessity of defining it; That this was by no means
a fit Season for the Examination and exact Determination of this Matter.

Thus things stood whilst this Ambassador managed them: But, when by reason of
this Delay of the Pope in defining P. 291.
(to which he could not be brought by all these repeated Urgings) the
Differences in Spain increased daily; the King chose a more illustrious
Ambassador, the Duke Abuquerquius, and sent him to Rome. Where the first thing
he met with was a Complaint, That the Master of the Sacred Palace, had
prohibited the making any more Medals of the Conception, and confiscated those
which he found made. These P. 295.
Medals had been coined for the Spaniards, and on one side had the Image of the
Body of Christ and of the Chalice, with this Inscription, Alabado sia el
santissimo Sacramento: That is, Let the most holy Sacrament be praised. On the
other side was an Hieroglyphick Image of the immaculate Conception This is
explained among the Indulgences, at the end of the holy Bull of the Crusado,
granted by Gregory XIII* and approved by the Inquisition, dated at Lisbon 1588.
Apr. 6. viz. The Image of the Virgin in Metal, clothed with the Sunbeams,
crowned with Stars, with the Moon at her Feet, and the Cord of S. Francis round
about.
surrounded with S. Francis's Cord, and this Inscription, Concepta sine peccato
originali. Mary was conceived without original Sin. This the Duke complained of
to the Pope and his Duchess humbly begged, that there might be Leave granted
to coin and disperse them as formerly. He referred the Matter to Cardinal
Cobellutius, who, after a few Days, told them, That he thought their Desire
would be granted together with Indulgences, if these Words pie creditur (it is
piously believed) were adjoined to the former Inscription, P. 306.
to prevent the Mistake of the People, and the Fear of the Adversaries, that it
might not be thought that the Matter was defined for the Immaculists, and the
contrary Opinion exploded. This the Ambassador upon Deliberation would not
consent to, but insisted, that in Favor of the Duchess the Medals might be
allowed without Exception: But nothing was further done in it.

The former Ambassador having received Letters from the P. 335.
King for his Return, before he departed he presented two or three Tractates to
the Pope. The one was about Revelations, especially those of S. Briget, which
he defended against the Adversaries, and endeavored to lessen the Authority of
those of S. Catharine of Sena: And then applied himself to the Pope, exhorting
him to make an End of the Difference; urging him with the Definitions of other
Popes, which relied upon Revelations, etc. As for Instance, Pope Pius I.
defined the Controversy on what Day Easter was to be kept, moved by a
Revelation made to Friar Hermes: Urban IV. instituted the Festival of Corpus
Christi Day, upon an Instinct and Revelation made to a certain Woman: Who also
decreed Paul the Hermit to be a Saint, and to be invocated, only because
Anthony the Abbot reported (as S. Jerome says) that he saw his Soul fly up to
Heaven, and his Sanctity was revealed to him. The Feast also of Michael the
Archangel was instituted upon the Testimony of the Bishop of Sipontines and
certain rude Neatherds, concerning an Apparition of his upon Mount Garganus;
and then concludes pathetically; O blessed Father, speaking to the Pope, pity
the Calamities, and remove the Contentions of P. 373.
Christian People: Be at length overcome by the Catholic King's Prayers for
the pacifying of his Kingdoms: Remember how much better it is, That the
Orthodox should contest with the insulting Heretics when they are united, than
oppose and rend one another: Take away this troublesome Doubt by one Word, and
compose this dangerous Controversy by thy last Sentence. But he might as well
have said all this to the Winds, and had as good an Answer.

Another Paper he put in, to show that the Pope was bound by his Office, to
provide a timely Remedy for these great and P. 375.
growing Scandals, arising from the Liberty of opining in this Controversy of
the Blessed Virgin's Conception, and the tolerating the Maculist's Opinion. In
which he showed, out of approved Authors and authentic proceedings of Courts,
how these Scandals had been notorious and continued, notwithstanding all that
had been yet done to hinder them, in France, in Italy, in Germany, and
especially in the Kingdom of Spain, in all Places of it; which Scandals he
proved to continue still after his Decree, so that there was no Remedy
remaining but that of a Peremptory Definition.

The History further tells us, That in Spain the Scandals still increasing, and
Cities and People being divided into Factions, some Academies, and rich Cities,
and whole Kingdoms did bind themselves by Oaths and Vows, to defend the Opinion
of the immaculate Conception; and we are told by others Vid. August. Barbosae
Remissiones in Conc. Trident. Sess. 5.
of particular Universities that thus bound themselves, those of Me^tz, Colen,
Paris, and that in all the Universities of Spain it was established by a
special Decree, That none should be admitted to the Degree of Doctor, till
first he had promised upon Oath never to oppose this Truth.

After all this Stir and doing nothing; the former Ambassador took his Leave of
the Pope; who told him that he was sorry that he could not satisfy the Kings
pious Wishes in this Matter: But, he said, that which was desired, was not of
that sort of things, which is within the Limits of humane Diligence, or P. 424.
which by reason of Necessity, or worldly Instances, or the Power of Kings may
presently be granted, until the Spirit from on high shall infuse, what in such
a weighty Controversy ought to be gravely and maturely deliberated. Now shame
on this vile Hypocrisy; who when every one may see this Matter wholly conducted
by Interest, and cowardly fear of disobliging a powerful Party, dares to talk
of the Spirit from on high, and imitate the fulsome Language of a canting
Enthusiast.

When this Ambassador was gone, Albuquerque, upon whom the whole Care of this
Affair was devolved, insists upon it afresh, and receives the same delatory
Answers from Pope Paul V. who, upon the fourth Calends of February 1621.
departed P. 431.
this Life, and was succeeded by Gregory XV. to whom this Duke applies himself
in the Name of his Master; who commending, as his Predecessor had done, the
Piety of the King, told him, he would comply with him, when time and
circumstances of Things, after a foregoing grave Examination of the Matter,
would give him leave.

But presently after Philip III. of Spain dies, and chose to do it in the Habit
of a Franciscan, and left the care of this Embassy to his Son Philip IV. his
Successor, who confirmed Albuquerque therein.

About this time, not only the old Contests and Scandals which troubled Spain,
but a new Occasion of an extraordinary Ambassador to Rome, made the King to ply
the former Business: He writes therefore to Albuquerque, to urge the Business,
and give the Letter to the Pope which he sent. The Queen also, the Infanta of
Spain, and Margaret the Daughter of Maximilian the Emperor, all wrote to the
Pope. The Ambassador had a Hearing, and a general Answer of good Hope was given
him, That the Pope thought of nothing now, but to remove those Scandals that
continued, etc. A while after a new Ambassador (Comes Montis Regij) arrives at
Rome: He was sent thither to assist at the Canonization of Five new Saints
(Four of which were Spaniards) Isadore of Madrid, Ignatius Loyola, Fran.
Xaverius, Teresia a Jesu; and one Italian, Philip Nereus. This Count was
brought in to the Pope in great State and Magnifice, P. 443.
and begged in Favor to him, that the Pope would put his last Hand to this
Business; who promised that something should be done in it before his
Departure. And in order to it several Cardinals were appointed, to whom their
Desires should be proposed. Two things they offered to them. First, That it was
more desirable that the Controversy might be determined. Secondly, If by the
straitness of Time that could not be done, then in the Interim, that whatsoever
did seem to contradict the immaculate Conception, might be removed and banished
from Discourses and Worship, in all Acts both public and private, otherwise
Matters would never be pacified in Spain.

The Cardinals approved of what they desired, and represented it to the Pope;
who, in a full Congregation of the Senate of the Inquisition, approved the
Cardinals Thoughts about prohibiting in all Acts the maintaining of that
Opinion, which gave the People Offense, and taking away the Word Sanc^^^^cation
out of the Office of the Church. And upon May 24. 1622. came forth a Decree,
which repeating those of P. 447.
Sixtus IV. and Paul V. and confirming them, farther commanded, That for the
future, till this Article should be determined by the Apostolic Chair, neither
in private Discourses, or in Writings, any one should dare to assert that the
Blessed Virgin was conceived in original Sin; nor handle any thing concerning
this Opinion, excepting only those, who were specially privileged herein by the
Pope. Also his Holiness commanded, That since the Holy Roman Church celebrates
solemnly the Feast and Office of the Conception of the Virgin Mary, That all
Persons Ecclesiastical and Secular, and those of every Order, in the holy
Sacrifice of the Mass and other divine Offices both public and private, should
use no other Word but that of Conception, instead of Sanctification, etc.

Now again the Immaculists, after this Decree, are trepanned into new
Rejoicing; the Franciscans, in their Convent P. 450.
on the Top of the Capitol, for Three Nights together had Fireworks and Signs
of great Triumph, as if they had got the Victory.

On the Fourth of June 1622. a Brief of the Popes was dated and sent to the
King, signifying, after the Commendation P. 451.
of his Piety, how far he had proceeded in this Affair, out of a Desire to
bring some Comfort to him and his Kingdoms. But then he adds, in the former
canting Strain, That the Reason why he did not determine any thing new at
present, was the weightiness of the Affair, and the Example of the Popes his
Predecessors: For we, who are placed by God over the Christian World, in the
Chair of Christian Wisdom, ought to hearken to the Voice of the holy Spirit,
and not examine the Matter by the Poises of humane Reasons: Wherefore, seeing
the eternal Wisdom has not yet discovered to the Church the Recesses of so
great a Mystery, the faithful People ought to rest satisfied in the Authority
of God and the Roman Popes, etc.

The King sent his Letters of Thanks to the Pope, dated P. 453.
July 14. 1622. and in like manner to the Cardinal Inquisitors; entreating them
to use the same Endeavors in what remained, till his Holiness would vouchsafe
to define the Controversy. And now all Spain sounded their Gladness and erected
their Trophies, and nothing but Expressions of Joy were seen or heard for
several Months together.

But all this Joy was interrupted at Barcenona, Caesar-Augusta, P. 455.
and other Parts of the Kingdom, by reason of a Grant the Pope made and which
was publicly affixed, according to the Clause of the foregoing Constitution
(excepting those to whom the Pope should give a special Indulgence) wherein he
gave this Privilege to the Dominicans notwithstanding the former Decree, That
in any of their private Conferences among themselves, and none else, they might
freely and lawfully handle the Matter of the Blessed Virgins Conception,
without incurring the Penalties contained in the said Decrees. Which was dated
22 July 1622. This Grant, says the Author of the History, troubled many who
would have had the pious Opinion secured and put beyond all Doubt; but he
hopes, that those to whom the Pope gave this last Indulgence, will not abuse
it, nor break out into open Scandals, when the Permission reaches no further,
than to private Colloquies.

Thus we have seen the busy Management of a Four Years Embassy, ending just
where it began; and made a pleasant Piece of formal Pageantry: Great Charity
and Piety pretended by Two Kings, answered with Deceit and pious Frauds,
apparently intended by Two Popes. We have seen pretended Infallibility sitting
in a Chair of State, and saying nothing: A fierce Controversy brought before an
unerring Judge, who will let no body determine such Matters without or besides
himself; and when all earnestly expect how he will end it, he tires them with
Delays, or deceives them with doubtful Answers. In a Word, I verily believe
that this Judge of Controversies, has set a foot Ten, for one he has ever
decided: For though he calls this last his Office, yet he is as hardly brought
to this Work, as a Bear is to the Stake; and when he is, he is either fearful
of the Consequents, and dares not speak out, or sullen and will not, or crafty
and puts it off, and says he cannot do it yet, (as in the Case before us, which
I suppose he will leave for the day of Judgment to decide) or if it happens
that once in an Age he gives us a Cast of his Office, as he has done in this
Age, in the Case of Jansenius, the contending Parties might have done as wisely
to have referred the Matter to a Lottery, or the Chance of a Die, as bound
themselves to stand to this blind Award; for after his Decision they find such
manifest Defects either of Skill or Honesty, That those who are condemned, see
no reason to retract or alter their Opinion, and oftentimes are so bold as to
declare and prove him to have been mistaken.

But though the Popes are resolved not to define the Opinion of the Immaculists
to be de fide, yet it is a great Comfort to them, that the Church has showed a
greater Propension and Inclination to this than the contrary. The Fathers of
the Council of Basil Sess. 36.
spoke all their Mind, when they determined plainly for it, That she was free
from all Sin original and actual, and declared that this Opinion ought to be
approved, held and embraced of all Catholics as pious and agreeable to the
Churches Worship, to the Catholic Faith, right Reason and Holy Scripture, and
that it shall be lawful for none to preach and teach the contrary. What an
unlucky Chance was it, that this Decree was not anticipated Three Sessions; for
then their Work might have been effectually done? Whereas having in the Thirty
fourth Session deposed the lawful Pope Eugenius IV. the Council when it held
this Session which decreed the immaculate Conception was it self Schismatical,
and so it became invalid, not having the Pope's Confirmation herein. It is a
great Comfort to them, That though (as a Jesuit Jo. Bonisac. de vit. and mirac.
Mar. Virg. l. 1. c. 4.
says) our Mother the Church of Rome is dumb (he means the Pope especially, who
is the Churches Mouth) in this Question, yet with Zachary she sometimes takes
the Writing-Tables into her Hands, and does even as good (tantum non) as
subscribe to the Opinion of Divines that contend for it. Even those dumb Popes
have made very broad Signs of their Good Will toward it. Witness their
Approbation of the Feast of the Conception, which if it had not been without
Sin, we are told, Raynaudus Dyptic. Mar. p. 135.
had not deserved to be celebrated, being not worthy of Veneration for it self,
yea hated by Job and Jeremy, because of the original Stain annexed to it.
Bernardinus de Busto composed an Office of the Conception, which the Pope
approved, and gave Indulgences to those that celebrated that Office, as he
himself tells us, Marial. ser. 3. p. 40.
and cites several Passages out of it Ibid. p. 51.
. Pope Sixtus IV. (as appears by his extravagant Cum praeexcelsa) commanded and
approved another Office of the immaculate Conception composed by Leonard de
Nogarolis, to be seen in the old Roman Breviary; and though Pius V. ordered
this Office to be the same with that of the Nativity, yet even there in the
eighth Responsorio Raynaud. ibid. p. 136.
it is said, Let all perceive thy Help, who celebrate thy holy Conception.
There was also a religious Order erected by S. Beatrix in Spain, under the
Title of the immaculate Conception, and approved by Innocent VIII. And in the
time of P. Alexander VI. many Fraternities Wadding. Legatio de Concept. p. 219.
were instituted and Temples erected in honor of the immaculate Conception,
especially in Portugal and Catalonia. Also a Rule of Nuns Raynaud. ibid. p. 154.
under the same Title, approved by Julius II. in diverse Chapters of which Rule
the immaculate Conception is asserted; as Cap. 2. Where a Form of Profession is
proposed, and said that it is made for the Love of God, and in Honor of the
immaculate Conception of the blessed Virgin. And Cap. 3. a Garment (pallium) of
a blue Color is decreed to be used, to signify that the Soul of the Virgin,
from her first Creation, was altogether Holy and Celestial. This Pope also
granted great Indulgences Wadding. ibid. p. 220.
, as Leo X. did the like after him, to Persons of both Sexes, that in Devotion
carried the Image of the Conception on their Breast. Temples and Altars are
erected to the Memory of the same; and Pope Julius II. Pope Adrian VI. Pope
Gregory XIII. and other Popes have granted plenary Indulgences in favor of the
immaculate Conception; and Pius V. Id. ibid. p. 222.
when he reformed the Breviary, and took away some Feasts, yet required that of
the Conception to be kept by the whole Church, and moreover gave Liberty to the
Franciscans to recite the proper and old Office of the Conception. So that
although they have not got of their Father what they have so long desired, yet
he has done something for them, and they are very jocund upon it, and full of
Consolation; as the Language of one of them proclaims it, Sherlog. Anteloquium
in Cantic. Sec. 2. p. 114.
who thus breaks out: O blessed Virgin, I give immortal Thanks to thy Son, That
the Days are come, in which none dare so much as mutter that thou wast
conceived in original Sin. Oh! how many Friends of thine have cried to Heaven
with Groans unutterable, to see that Day and could not see it; but thy poor
Servant has seen it, seen it indeed, and it has greatly gladded him: But who
has so steelly a Breast that will not be softened, (none, doubtless, unless it
be the hard-hearted Pope, who cannot relent) when all the World conspires to
assert the Innocence of the Virgins Soul, for as to the Integrity of her Body
none of the Orthodox ever doubted it?

If after all this Stir about the immaculate Conception, any one be so curious
as to ask, in what manner we are to conceive the blessed Virgin's Preservation
from original Sin to have been effected? They have Answers ready.

The last named Jesuit Idem in Cantic. c. 1. v. 8. p. 347.
is of Opinion, That when God made the Covenant with Adam, he made him the Head
of all Mankind, and wrapped up their Fates and Wills in his, only with a
particular Exception of one Creature, and that only in one Case, viz. If his
Son should require such a Creature for his Mother; for then it was not his
Intention that the Will of that Creature, in order to sinful Actions, or the
loss of Grace, should be included in the Will of Adam.

Others, who as Bernardine Marial. ser. 9. p. 105. See also Galatinus de arcan.
lib. 7. c. 3.
says, speculate the Matter more devoutly, think that the Seed out of which the
blessed Virgin was to be conceived, was virtually preserved by God in the Loins
of Adam from all Infection, and transmitted through all Generations to her
without any Stain, of which immaculate Seed she was conceived most pure and
immaculate: And he says, this is touched upon by the Psalmist (Psalm. 89.) where
God says (according to the vulgar Latin) I have sworn to David my Servant, That
I will prepare thy Seed for ever, and build thy Seat from Generation to
Generation.

SECT. V.
Concerning the Feast of the Virgin Mary's Conception.
THere is nothing remains to be considered under this Head of the Blessed
Virgin's Conception, save only the Institution of the Feast on December. 8. in
Memory and Honor of it. Bellarmine De cultu Sanctor. l. 3. c. 16.
confesses ingenuously, That some of the Feasts of the blessed Virgin are new
and of a late Institution: For the Feast of her Nativity begun, says he, in the
time of S. Bernard, but was not publicly received by the whole Church, till
after the Decree of Sixtus IV. in Extravaganti cum praeexcelsa, that is Anno
1476. Petrus de Natalibus Catalog. Sanctor. lib. 1. c. 41.
when he wrote (which was in the same Age) says, That this Feast was not kept
by a general Institution of the Church, but by the special Devotion of some
Persons.

It is a ridiculous Story that is told us by Galatinus De arcan. l. 7. c. 5.
out of I know not what Martyrology of J. Damascen, That the blessed Virgin is
said to be (...) Pure before her Conception: Though Canisius L. 1. de deip. c.
7.
is not ashamed to mention it after him. Baronius Ad Martyr. Romans Dec. 8.
and Bozius De sign. Eccles. l. 9. c. 8.
would give it the Credit of some Antiquity by a Greek Oration of Leo VI.
Emperor (about the Year 886.) upon the Solemnity of the Virgin's Conception,
extant in Manuscript in the Sfortian Library. But J. Bapt. Thiers De Fest.
dierum imminutione c. 17, 18. p. 90, 96.
who has thoroughly examined this matter of Festivals, can find no mention of it
among the Greeks, before the Constitution of the Emperor Eman. Comnenus, Ann.
1166. In some particular Churches of the West, it began to be observed a little
earlier; and the forwardest we meet with in celebrating of it, were in England,
though upon very slight grounds, and such as give it no Authority: For the
Institution of it there depended upon very questionable Revelations; such as
agree not well among themselves, and some of them so ridiculous, as to spoil
their own Credit together with that which depends on them.

The Story which is most generally received, as that which gave Rise to this
Feast, is told us by Pet. de Natalibus Catal. Sanctorum ubi supra.
, concerning S. Anselm whilst he was Prior in Normandy, before he was
Archbishop of Canterbury, That he sailing to the Parts of Britany, as he was
returning, a great Tempest put the Ship in extremest Danger, so that
despairing of Safety, they betook themselves to the Help of God and the blessed
Virgin, and on the sudden one clothed in the Habit of a Bishop came toward
the Ship, walking upon the Waters, and calling for Anselm, told him, that if he
would escape the Danger, he must promise him before God, that he would yearly
keep the Feast of the blessed Virgin's Conception, and persuade all he could to
do the same, informing him that the Day of her Conception was the Sixth of the
Ides of December, and that the Office to be said on that Day should be the same
with the Office of the Nativity, only changing the Name of Nativity into
Conception. When Anselm enquired who he was that brought this Message, he told
him he was Nicholas the Bishop, and that he was sent by the Mother of God to
reveal this to them, and to deliver them. Anselm promised to do as he was
commanded, and confirmed it with a Vow, upon which the Tempest immediately
ceasing and a fair Wind blowing, they came safe to Shore. Thus the said Feast
was first begun to be kept in S. Anselm's Monastery, and afterward in the
Church of Canterbury when he was preferred thither.

That Anselm was the First that instituted this Feast in England, is
acknowledged by Simon Mepham Vid. Thiers loc. citat. p. 323.
, who, in a provincial Synod at London Ann. 1328. made a Constitution to
observe it, treading in the Steps of his Predecessor Venerable Anselm, who,
says he, superadded this Feast to those of blessed Mary that were more ancient.

Jacobus de Voragine Lombard. Hist. c. 188. Which the old Roman Missal shows
was the current Tradition (cited by Balinghem. Peruas. Mar. p 27.) Tri^orme
prodigium edocens officium probat hoc solennium justum esse, Dum Abbas
Naufragium, Sacerdos supplicium, Levita refugium vult adesse. See his Notes
upon it.
mentions Three other Revelations requiring this Feast to be observed. The
First of which, is the very same for Substance with the former, only it is
dated somewhat before it, and the Names are different: For he makes it to be in
the time of William the Conqueror, about the Year 1070. and the Person to whom
the Apparition was, when the Tempest threatened Shipwreck, to be one Helsinus
(others call him Elpinus) the Abbot of Ramsey, the rest agrees with what was
set down before.

The Second Revelation or Apparition is this. In the Days of Charles (no body
knows which) King of France, there was a Clerk, a Kinsman of his, a great lover
of the blessed Virgin, and one who daily read her Hours devoutly, who, by the
Advice of his Parents, consenting to marry with a fair and noble maid, and
receiving the nuptial Benediction from a Priest, after Mass was ended, he
remembered that he had not read that Day the Ladies Hours; wherefore making all
go out of the Church, and sending his Spouse home, he read the Lady's Hours
hard by the Altar; and when he repeated that Antiphona, Thou art fair and
comely, O Daughter of Jerusalem, suddenly the blessed Virgin appeared between
Two Angels, with Christ in her Arms, saying to him; If I be so fair and comely,
wherefore is it that thou leavest me, and take another Spouse? Am not I
fairer than she is? Have thou seen any so fair? He made Answer, O my Lady, thy
Brightness excels all the Beauty of the World, thou art elevated above the
Quires of Angels, what would thou have me to do? She answered, if thou will
forgo thy carnal Spouse for my Love, thou shall have me for thy Spouse in the
celestial Kingdom; and if thou will solemnly celebrate the Feast of my
Conception yearly, upon the Sixth of the Ides of December, and preach the
Celebration of it, thou shall be crowned with me in the Kingdom of my Son;
after which Words, the blessed Mother of Christ vanished. The Clerk refusing to
return home, became a Monk in another Country, and after a short space of Time,
he was made the Patriarch of Aquilegia, and carefully celebrated the Feast of
her Conception, and ordained it to be kept yearly.

The Third Revelation, is a scandalous Story of a Priest, a devout Worshipper
of the Virgin, that used to sing her Hours, who, after he had been committing
Adultery with another Man's Wife, entered into a Vessel to pass over the River
Seine, and as he sailed, sung the Virgin's Hours, and when he came to these
Words, Ave Maria, gratiaplena, being in the midst of the River, a company of
Devils overturned the Vessel and drowned him, carrying his Soul to Torments. On
the Third Day, the blessed Virgin with a company of Saints, came to the place
where the Devils tormented him, and said to them, Why do you so unjustly punish
the Soul of my Servant? They answered, We ought to have him, for he was taken
doing our Work. The Virgin replied, If they ought to have him, whose Work he
was employed in, then he is mine; for when you drowned him, he was saying my
Mattins, so that you are guilty of Injustice to me. When she had said this, the
Devils fled away, and she restored his Soul to his Body, and taking him by the
Arm, commanded the Waters to stand as a Wall on the right hand and left, and so
brought him from the Bottom safe to his Harbor: Who falling down at her Feet,
and asking her what Return he should make for her Kindness? She desired him for
the future to have a care of committing Adultery, and both to keep himself, and
exhort others to keep the Feast of her Conception upon the eighth of December.
Upon the saying which, he saw her ascend into Heaven, and he led ever after a
Hermit's Life, telling what had befell him, and doing as he was commanded.

We are also told, Raynaudus ubi supra p. 135.
out of the Acts of S. Oringa (alias Christiana) who died in Etruria An. 1310.
how this Feast was celebrated in Heaven, being made known to her by a
Revelation: For she was rapt up in an Ecstasy into Heaven, and saw the blessed
Virgin sitting on a bright Throne by her Son, clothed in a most precious
Garment, with all the Saints rejoicing about her and keeping a solemn Feast.
Oringa admiring the Cause of all this, and the whiteness of the Garment wherein
the mother of God shone, Christ himself gave her an account of it, That on that
Day they kept in Heaven the Feast of her immaculate Conception, who remaining a
Virgin conceived and bore him who is the true God and Man, and that the
whiteness of her Garment denoted the Prerogative of her singular Innocence.

Now what slender Credit is to be given to these Stories of Apparitions and
Revelations, S. Bernard will tell us; who, it seems, himself had met with them,
and treats them very coursly in his Epistle to the Canons of Lions Epist. 174.
. They produce a Writing of heavenly Revelation, as they call it: As if any one
might not, in like manner produce a Writing, in which the Virgin seemed to
command the same thing (sc. the observing a Feast) for her Parents, according
to Gods Command saying, Honor thy Father and thy Mother. (Little did he
imagine that Joachim and Anne should have had a Festival appointed for them,
when he wrote this, which was not then thought of) I am not apt to he moved by
such Writings, which are neither backed with Reason nor favored by certain
Authority. And it is very observable that the Credit of this Feast decayed in a
little time, even here in England, where it was first observed: For in a
Council held by Stephen Langton, Archbishop, at Oxford An. 1222. it was
ordered Council. Labbe tom. 11. part. 1. p. 274.
That all the Feasts of blessed Mary should be kept, except the Feast of the
Conception, for the celebrating of which no Necessity is imposed. In this
Council it is left at Liberty; and in another Synod, a while after, at
Worcester An. 1240. under Walter de Cantilupo the Bishop there, where the
Feasts of his Diocese are mentioned, this is left out Thiers. ibid. c 20. p.
105.
, and the same Synod reckoning the Feasts of the Church of Salisbury, does also
again omit this.

The earliest time in any other Church, is the Observation of it in France, An.
1215. in a Decree of Galo and Simon, Legates of Pope Innocent III. related by
Bochellus Lib. 4. decret. Eccl. Gallic. tit. 9. c. 13.
in these Words. This Day the Conception of blessed Mary is celebrated by the
Command of the Apostolic Chair. Which, as Thiers observes Ibid. p. 323.
, argues that it was not observed in France before that Synod, for then it
would have only been recited, as other Feasts there are, without adjoining this
special Admonition.

But all this reaches only to some particular Churches, not to the universal
Observation of it; for it was opposed as an Innovation by many, and great Men.
S. Bernard is very sharp against it (in the forecited Epistle to the Canons of
Lions.) We wonder, says he, what some of you mean, to bring in a new Solemnity,
which the Custom of the Church is ignorant of, which Reason does not prove, nor
ancient Tradition commend. What are we more learned or Devout than the Fathers?
We dangerously presume whatsoever in such things their Prudence did pass by.
And if so, what reason for the Feast of the Conception? How, I say, can her
Conception be asserted to be Holy, which was not of the Holy Ghost, not to say
that it is of Sin; and can it have a Festival when it is not Holy? The glorious
Virgin will willingly be without this Honor, where either Sin is honored, or
Sanctity seems to be falsely brought in. This presumed Novity will no ways
please her against the Custom of the Church; it is the Mother of Temerity, the
Sister of Superstition, the Daughter of Levity, etc. Petrus Cellensis Lib. 9.
Epist. 10.
defends this Censure of S. Bernard against Nicholas a Monk of S. Albon, who
had objected to him that S. Bernard had recanted what ^he had written
concerning the blessed Virgin's Conception in a Vision to one of his College of
Clervaux (which I before recited) when he appeared with a black Spot upon his
Breast, arrayed in snow-white Garments. To whom Petr. Cellensis answers; I
believe the Gospel, not Dreams, concerning the blessed Virgin, and if I be
otherwise minded than I ought, God will reveal this also, when and how he
pleases: In the mean time, while the Voice is above the Firmament, and does not
descend so low as to us, I beg that the Darkness of our Ignorance may be
enlightened, not by thee, but by the Father of Lights.

The same is the Opinion of Jo. Beleth De divin. Offic. c. 146.
, a Paris Divine, who says, Some have at some times celebrated the Feast of the
Conception, and perhaps yet observe it; but it is not authentical nor approved,
but rather seems to deserve to be prohibited, for she was conceived in Sin.

With whom agrees also Durandus Mimatensis, Rational. divin. offic. l. 7. cap.
7.
who, showing that only Four Feasts of the Virgin were observed by the Church,
adds; Some indeed make a Fifth Feast, viz. of the Conception of blessed Mary,
saying, That as we celebrate the Death of the Saints, not because of their
Death, but because they are eternally happy; so in like manner the Feast of the
Conception may be kept, not because she was conceived, or conceived in Sin; but
because she was conceived the Mother of our Lord, affirming that this was
revealed to a certain Abbot in danger of Shipwreck, which Story is not
Authentic: So that this Feast is not to be approved, seeing she was conceived
in Sin, to wit, by the Commixture of Male and Female.

Thus I have largely considered the Matters that relate to the blessed Virgin's
Conception; and upon the whole may well conclude and say, From that Church
where her Conception without Sin passes for a pious Opinion; and which suffers
this Petition to be put up in her Litanies, S. Litaniae variae. Coloniae 1643.
p 63.
Per immaculatam conceptionem tuam, libera nos mediatrix nostra: O our
Mediatress, deliver us by thy immaculate Conception, Good Lord deliver us!

CHAP. II.
Of the blessed Virgin's Nativity.
SECT. I.
Devotions to her, with Relation to her Birth.
THE Devotions for her Nativity being, for the most part, the same with those
upon the Feast of her Conception, there remains not much to be added under this
Head.

The old Roman Missal, and Missal Cluniac. begins thus.

Nativitas Mariae Virginis
Quae nos lavit a labe criminis
Celebretur hodie,
Dies est laetitiae.
Let Us celebrate the Virgin's Birth to Day
With Joy, who washed our sinful Stains away.
The Missal of Sarum thus begins on the Nativity of blessed Mary.

Gaudeamus omnes in Domino, diem Festum celebrantes sub honor Mariae Virginis,
de cujus nativitate gaudent Angeli, and collaudant filium Dei.

Audi filia and vide, inclina aurem tuam, quia concupivit Psalm. 45.
Rex speciem tuam.

Specie tua and pulchritudine tua intend prospere, proceed and regna.

Verse. Per^e, Dei genitrix, nobis est vita perdita data, quae de coelo
suscipisti prolem, and mundo genuisti salvatorem.

Let us all rejoice in the Lord, celebrating a Festival in honor of the Virgin
Mary, for whose Nativity Angels rejoice, and praise together the Son of God.

Hear O Daughter, and see, and incline thine Ear, for the King has desired thy
Beauty.

In thy Beauty and Comeliness advance prosperously, proceed and reign.

Verse. By thee, O Mother of God, the Life that we had lost is given to us
again, who did receive an Offs-spring from Heaven and begot a Savior to the
World.

In a following Sequence we have these Expressions.

O Virgo fola, matter casta
Nostra crimina solvens, da regna,
Queis beata regnant agmina.
Potes enim cuncta ut Caeli in Mis. Attreb.
mundi regina
Et jura cum Nato omnia
Decernis in saecula.
Blessed Virgin, and thast Mother too,
The Bands of all our Crimes undo,
That by thy Gift we may attain,
That Kingdom where the Saints do reign;
To every thing thy Power extends,
To thee, as Queen of Heaven, it bends:
Nothing to thee can ever be denied,
Who, with thy Son all Titles do divide.
In the Reformed Roman Breviary, on the Feast of her Nativity, September 8.

Capitulum. Ecclus. 24. Ab Initio and ante saecula creata sum, and usque ad
futurum saeculum non desinam, and in habitatione sancta coram ipso ministravi.

From the Beginning, and before Ages I was created, and shall never fail, and I
ministered before him in the holy Habitation. (Thus translated by themselves in
the Office of the Virgin. Lat. and Eng. p. 47.)

Hymnus.
Ave Maris stella,
Del Matter alma,
Atque semper Virgo,
Felix coeli porta.
Sumens illud Ave,
Gabrielis orc,
Funda nos in pace,
Mutans Evae nomen.
Solve vincla reis,
Profer lumen caecis,
Mala nostra pelle,
Bona cuncta posce.
Monstra te esse matrem,
Sumat per te preces,
Qui pro nobis natus,
Tulit esse tuus.
Virgo singularis,
Inter omnes mitis,
Nos culpis solutos,
Mites fac and castos.
Vitam praesta puram,
Iter para tutum,
Ut videntes Jesum,
Semper collaetemur.
Sit laus Deo patri,
Summo christo decus,
Spiritui sancto,
Tribus honor unus.
Amen.
All hail Star of the Sea,
Gods Mother clear and bright,
The happy Gate of Bliss,
And still in Virgins plight.
Receiving that all hail (Ave)
Which Gabriel' s Mouth did give,
Establish us in Peace,
Changing the Name of Eve.
The Guilties Bands unbind,
Blind Men their Sight assure,
Ill things from us expel,
All Good for us procure.
A Mother show thy self,
He take our Plaints by thee,
Who being for us born,
Vouchsafed thy Son to be.
O rarest Virgin pure,
Meekest of all that wast,
Discharged of our Sin,
Make thou us meek and chaste.
Grant that our Life be pure,
Make safe for us the way,
That while we Jesus see,
Our Joy may last for ay.
To God the Father Praise,
To Christ high Worship be,
And to the Holy Ghost,
One Honor unto three.
Amen.
Oration. Famulis tuis quaesumus Domine coelestis gratiae munus impertire; ut
quibus beatae virginis partus, extitit salutis exordium, Nativitatis ejus
votiva solemnitas pacis tribuat incrementum. Per Dominum.

A Prayer. O Lord, we pray thee bestow upon thy Servants the Gift of heavenly
Grace; that as the blessed Virgin's Birth has been to us the beginning of
Salvation, so the vowed Solemnity of her Nativity may afford to us increase of
Peace. Through our Lord.

Lect. 1. Cantic. Canticor. Osculetur me osculo oris sui, quia meliora sunt
ubera tua vino, etc.

Resp. Hodie nata est beata virgo maria ex progeny David, per quam salus mundi
credentibus apparuit, cujus vita gloriosa lucem dedit saeculo.

Let him kiss me with the kisses of his Mouth; for thy Breasts are better than
Wine, etc.

R. To day was born the blessed Virgin Mary of the Progeny of David, by whom
the Savior of the World appeared to Believers, whose glorious Life gave Light
to the World.

Resp. Beatissimae virginis Mariae Nativitatem devotissime celebremus, ut ipsa
pro nobis intercedat ad Dominum Jesum Christum.

After the Second Lesson. Resp. Let us most devoutly celebrate the Nativity of
the most blessed Virgin Mary, that she may intercede for us with our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Resp. Ora pro populo, interveni pro clero, intercede pro devoto foemineo sexu:
Sentiant omnes tuum juvamen, quicunque celebrant tuam sanctam nativitatem.

After the Eighth Lesson. Resp. Pray for the People, intervene for the Clergy,
intercede for the devout Female Sex; let all those perceive thy Help, whosoever
celebrate thy holy Nativity.

Ad Lauds. Anaph. Regali ex progeny maria exorta refulget; cujus precibus nos
adjuvari mente and spiritu devotissime poscimus.

Mary arising from a royal Stock shines brightly; we beg with the greatest
Devotion of Mind and Spirit to be helped by her Prayers.

Hymnus.
O Gloriosa Virginum,
Sublimis inter sidera
Qui te creavit, parvulum
Lactante nutris ubere.
Quod Heva tristis abstulit,
Tu reddis almo germine;
Intrent ut astra flebiles,
Coeli recludis cardines.
Tu regis alti janua
Et aula lucis fulgida;
Vitam datam per Virginem
Gentes redemptae plaudite.
(Thus translated in the Latin and English Office forenamed.)

O Virgin set in Glory great,
Among the Stars in high degree;
Whose Breasts, when he was yet a Child,
Gave Suck to him that formed thee.
By thy fair Blossom thou restor'dst
That which sad Eve away had given;
That wailing Wights might mount the Stars,
Thou have set open the Gates of Heaven;
The Gate thou art of the high King,
The Port of Light that glisters clear;
Since Life was given by a Maid,
Let freed Men show joyful cheer.
On the Ninth of September, the Second Day after the Octave of blessed Mary' s
Nativity, we have these Three Lessons taken out of the 18. Sermo de Sanctis,
attributed to S. Austin (though certainly none of his.)

Lect. 4. Exultat Maria, and matrem se laeta miratur, and de spiritu sancto se
peperisse gaudet: Nec quia peperit innupta terretur, sed quia genuerit cum
exultatione miratur. O foemina super foeminas benedicta, quae virum omnino non
novit, and virum suo utero circumdedit! Circumdedit virum Maria Angelo fidem
dando, quia Heva perdidit virum, serpenti consentiendo. O felix obedientia, O
insignis gratia! quae dum sidem humiliter dedit, coeli in se opificem
incorporavit: Hinc promeruit gloriam, quam ipsa postmodum hausit. Ecce ait, ex
hoc beatam me dicent omnes generationes.

Mary exults, and joyfully admires to see her self a Mother, and is glad she
was with Child by the Holy Spirit: Neither was she frighted that she was with
Child being unmarried, but she wondered with Exultation that she had begot a
Child. O Woman, blessed above all Women, who never knew a Man, and yet
encompassed a Man in her Womb! Mary compassed a Man by giving credit to the
Angel, as Eve destroyed Man by consenting to the Serpent. O happy Obedience, O
remarkable Grace! Who, while she humbly consented, did incorporate the Maker of
Heaven within her self. Hence she merited the Glory, which she afterward
gained. Behold, says she, from henceforth all Generations shall call me blessed.

Lect. 5. O beata Maria, quis tibi digne valeat jura gratiarum, ac laudum
praeconia rependere, quae singulari tuo assensu Mundo succurristi perdito? Quas
tibi lauds fragilitas humani generis persolvat, quae solo tuo commercio
recuperandi aditum invenit? Accipe itaque quascunque exiles, quascunque Meritis
tuis impares gratiarum actiones. Et cum susceperis vota, culpas nostras orando
excusa. Admit preces nostras intra Sacrarium exauditionis, and reporta nobis
antidotum reconciliationis.

O blessed Mary, who is able to make worthy Returns of Thanks and Praises to
thee, who by thy singular Consent did succor the lost World? What Praises
can the Frailty of humane Nature pay to thee, who, only by thy commerce have
found a Passage to our Recovery? Accept therefore our Thanksgivings, though
never so poor and unsuitable to your Merits: And when you shall receive our
Devotions, by your Prayers excuse our Faults: Admit our Prayers within the holy
Place of your Audience, and bring back to us the Antidote of Reconciliation.

Lect. 6. Sit per te excusabile, quod per te ingerimus; siat impetrabile, quod
fida mente poscimus. Accipe quod offerimus, redona quod rogamus, excusa quod
timemus; quia tu es spes unica peccatorum. Per te speramus veniam delictorum,
and in te beatissima nostrorum est expectatio praemiorum. Sancta Maria,
succurre miseris, juva pusillanimes, resove slebiles, ora pro populo, interveni
pro clero, etc.

By thee let every thing be excused easily, which we bring in by thee, and
easily obtained, which we request with a faithful Mind. Accept what we offer,
give us what we ask, excuse what we fear; for thou art the only Hope of
Sinners: By thee we hope for the Pardon of our Offenses, and in thy blessed
Self is our Expectation of being rewarded: O holy Mary, succor the Miserable,
help the Faint-hearted, refresh those that mourn, pray for the People,
intercede for the Clergy, etc.

The late Contemplator has invited us to celebrate her Nativity in this manner,
p. 50.

The Praise. Hail Mary, full of Grace, our Lord is with thee, etc.

The Hymn.
The morning Star does spread its Ray,
The Sun ever long will make clear Day:
Welcome great Mary, Herald of Peace,
Rich Spring of Grace, which never cease.
This newborn Light, which chears our Earth,
Sums the Worlds Blessings in her Birth;
God's Mother is this Day revealed,
Heavens Treasures are in her unsealed.
Glory be to Jesus and Mary;
As it was, is, and ever shall be, Amen.
Anaph. Who is she that comes forth, as the Dawning of the Day, beautiful as
the Moon, chosen as the Sun?

Psalm 44.
My Heart shall power forth Words of Joy, because Mary the Mother of Jesus is
born.
Above all Women beautiful is Mary; Grace is spread through her Soul.
Rejoice, triumph and Advance, for thou art amiable and acceptable to God our
King.
Justice, Truth and Meekness are thy Ornaments; the Hand of God has wrought
them in thee.
Every Creature shall bless the Hour of thy Birth, because Jesus covets thy
Beauty.
Anth. Who is she?
Verse. Mary the Mother of Jesus is born.
Resp. Let Heavens and Earth sing forth her Praise.
Let us Pray. Grant unto us thy Servants, O Lord, thy Gifts of heavenly Grace,
that the Birth of holy Mary may increase our Acceptableness unto thee; since
thy Son Jesus, who was born of her, is the Beginning of our Salvation; through
the same Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. (This is but an ill and disguised
Translation of the former Collect: Famulis tuis quaesumus, Domine, etc.)

SECT. II.
Concerning the blessed Virgin's Nativity, and the Circumstances of her Birth;
with Remarks thereupon.
AS we have hitherto found a great many bold Assertions obtruded on us without
any cogent Proof; so the Reader must expect the same Entertainment still; and
it cannot well be otherwise, where both Scripture and ancient genuine
Authorities are wholly silent, as they are in the Things that concern her
Nativity. There are indeed Prophecies in the holy Bible concerning her, but not
as she is the Daughter of Anne, but the Mother of Jesus; not to tell us how she
was conceived and born, but that a Virgin should conceive, and the Holy one
should be born of her: Even the Verses we now have of the pretended Sibylls,
say very little more than that of her.

But the Men of this Church cannot be contented and at rest, till they have
filled every Stage of her Life with Wonder and Miracle. So they have done here
in her Birth; the Circumstances whereof they make as glorious as possible may
be, and to run parallel in most things with those that are related of our
Savior. The oft-cited bold Jesuit Pozae Elucidar. l. 2. trac. 6. p. 494.
thinks it not enough to call her (what the Scripture calls the Messiah) The
Desire of all Nations; but, he adds, That this Woman was in their Wishes before
her Son, though he was much more noble and necessary for Mankind. Abraham
rejoiced to see the Day of Christ, he saw it and was glad; but long before
Abraham, Adam and Eve rejoiced to see the Day of Mary, they saw it and were
glad. Wherein he is seconded by another of his Society, J. Bonifacius de vit.
and mirac. B. Virginis l. 1. c. 5.
saying, We ought to believe that Adam foresaw this Nativity to the rejoicing
of his Heart. So did Seth too, if you will believe the Relation of J.
Gerbrandus Chronic. Belgic. l. 31. c. 26.
, who tells us, that in the Year 1374. Sibylla Queen of Hungary, causing
Workmen to dig in the Valey of Jehosaphat, they found a Tomb made of Brick,
with a Body in it entire, over whose Head was a Tablet with this Inscription in
Hebrew Characters, I Seth, the Third born Son of Adam, believe in Jesus Christ
the Son of God, and in the Virgin Mary his Mother, who shall come from my
Loins. A very likely Story! Much of the same Nature and Credit with that which
is mentioned by Aquinas Summa Theol. in 2. secundae qu. 2. art. 7.
, of an Inscription upon a Plate of Gold found in a Tomb, which prophesied
thus, Christ shall be born of a Virgin, and I believe in him; O Sun, thou shall
see me again about the time of Irene and Constantine. Or like that Table which
J. Boniface Lib. citat. 2. p. 137.
relates out of Cassinaeus, That in the Sepulcher of Plato, was a Plate of Gold
found with this written on it: I believe in Christ who shall be born of a
Virgin, suffer for Mankind, and rise again the Third Day.

Neither will these Prophecies suffice, unless Miracles also prepare her Way,
and accompany her into the World. Baronius Apparat. ad Annal. n. 40.
is contented to tell us in general, That great Things, and altogether
admirable, such as cannot worthily be expressed, did precede the Birth of Mary
the Mother of God: And every one that questions this, he brands for a Man of a
narrow Soul, and for one out of his Wits. And his Reason for it is very
admirable: Because we know that great and strange Things went before the Birth
of Sampson and Samuel, Jeremiah and John the Baptist; and who can think so
abjectly and meanly of God, or be so mad as to affirm, That he did greater
Things, and was more liberal to his Servants than to his Mother, to the Friends
of the Bridegroom than to his Spouse? (Or, if you will, to the Handmaid rather
than to the Lady, for in the Language of another Cardinal Bonaventure in
Speculo. c. 1.
, Every faithful Soul is a Handmaid of the Virgin; nay more, even the Universal
Church it self.) If the Cardinal had been speaking of the Graces that were
necessary to make her beloved of God, or necessary to her Salvation, his
Reasoning might have been allowed; but speaking of Gifts (the gratiae gratis
datae, as the Schools speak) which are measured by no Rule, but only the
Pleasure of God, who gives them as he thinks sit, being at perfect Liberty
herein, both as to the Kind and the Degree; it is great Presumption to argue
and reason from what has been done for one, to what will be done for another:
Because God may deny that, for secret Reasons of his own, to one, which he may
bestow upon another: And thus, for Instance, he may resolve to make Sampson's
Birth Conspicuous by a Miracle, and to conceal that of the blessed Virgin, and
therefore work none when she was born. Not that I affirm that he did not, but
that he not having told us that he did, no Man can reason (unless he were as
Wise as God, or a Privy-Councellor of Heaven) that God must do it, or if he
does not, that he is too sparing where he ought to be more liberal in his
Donations. And I am afraid, upon these Principles and Arguings, we shall have
but a sorry Account, why the Apostles, that were but Servants, had the Power
given, not only of doing the same Works that the Son of God did, but greater
than those; which we are sure is true, because Christ foretold it; or why this
blessed Mother did not work greater Miracles than any of the Apostles, which we
are sure she did not, but ought to have had such a Power given her, by the said
Reasoning of the Cardinal. However he was so wise, as not to mention in
particular any Miracle at her Birth, as well knowing, that none could be
produced, unless he made use of those fabulous Authors to vouch for them, which
he had before discarded.

But we have a Jesuit Poza ib. l. 2. tract. 7. c. 1.
to help him out even here also, who seldom fails at a dead Lift, whose Fancy
and Invention is so pregnant, that he can accommodate any wonderful Story to
his Purpose: For Josephus Antiq. 15, cap. 14.
mentioning a Tradition, That all the time Herod's Temple was a building (which
he makes to be about Eight Years) it never rained on the daytime, but all
Showers fell by Night, that the Work might not be Interrupted; he takes the
Story for granted; only what Josephus thought was ordered for the Service of
the Temple, he forsooth will have these Night-showers to fall in honor of the
Virgin, whom he would have to be born at this time; and to give it some Color,
heaps up a deal of forced and metaphorical Stuff concerning her, not deserving
to be mentioned. He also Id. ib. c. 2*
hooks in that Miracle S. John mentions (Chap. 5.) of healing at the Pool of
Bethesda: This Wonder he will have, no body knows why, to happen in the Month
of September, when the blessed Virgin was born; and having found in some
Authors that Joachim had a House by that Pool, and that she was born there, he
presently concludes that this Miracle was yearly iterated in honor of her
Birth, and he thinks it first began at the time when she was born, and that the
Virtue that was in it to cure the Sick and Impotent that were let down into it,
was contracted, ex vicinia hujus domus, by its Neighborhood to this House: He
finds also a Mystery in it Ibid. c. 7.
That she washes away our Filth, like that Pool, and was born there to show how
tender her Care is of Sinners.

We are further informed Barnard. de Bust. Marial. p. 2. ser. 3.
That a numerous Multitude of Blessed Angels, at the time of her Birth, out of
every Order did descend from Heaven, and with ravishing Music of all sorts,
played the Spouse of the eternal King into the World, singing sweet Songs of
ineffable Melody. For thus, because we read that Angels with their Songs of
Praise ushered our Savior into the World, we must believe that they performed
the same Office to his Mother also at her Birth. Nay, Poza Ib. l. 2. tract. 5.
c. 3.
would have us think that not only Angels Songs and Harmony were then heard,
but that all other Creatures testified their Joys, Because they were all
renewed by Mary to their pristine State and Condition; I suppose he means
before the Fall. Pelbartus Stellar. l. 5. p. 2. art. 2. c. 9.
tells us out of one Theophilus (no doubt, an ancient and authentic Historian)
That on the Day of Mary's Nativity the Sun shone twice as bright as he was
wont; and on that Night the Moon shone almost as bright as the Sun, and that
cloudiness that darkens her Face for a time, did not appear from the Day of her
Birth (I suppose he means to the next new Moon) but it showed like one great
bright Star about the middle of the lunar Globe. This Miracle had been better
calculated for the Day of her Conception, especially that of the Moon having no
Spots, for then it would have admirably declared, that the blessed Virgin, whom
they call the Queen of Heaven and the mystical Moon Max. Sandaeus Entitles his
Book of the Virgin, Luna Mystica.
had no Spot or Stain of original Sin in her Conception.

As for the Year when she was born, they give us a formal Account of that too,
for thus Chr. a Castro Hist. deip. c. 2. p. 85.
has summed it up: She was born September 8. on the Fourteenth day of the Moon,
on a Saturday, because the Dominical Letter on that Year was G. Fifteen Years
before Christ was born, on the Fourth Year of the 190 Olympiad; 738 Years from
the building of Rome; L. Domitius and P. Corn. Scipio being Consuls; 27. Years
from the first Consulship of Augustus; from the Victory at Actium 15. in the
Eighteenth Year of Herod the King; from the beginning of the World 4073, etc.
Baronius sets it Apparat ad Annal. n. 48.
one Year sooner. If you ask how they came to know this so exactly? I answer,
it depends chiefly upon this Supposition, That the Virgin was Fifteen Years of
Age when Christ was born. And how know they that? I am sure, not by Baronius's
Reason Ibid. n. 47.
, That it was the Custom of the Jews to marry their Daughters when they were
adult; for that concludes no more for her being Fifteen, than Fourteen or
Sixteen Years of Age: Nor by the Testimonies of any of the Ancients of
undoubted Authority; for all that he produces for it, is only a Fragment in
Nicephorus Eccles. hist. l. 2. c. 3.
of Euodius Bishop of Antioch and Successor to the Apostles, in an Epistle of
his called Lumen, though the Cardinal confesses that he never met with any
ancient Writer that took notice of such a Work of his; and if any one examine
it (as we may have occasion afterward) he will find it plainly to be a
Counterfeit; or as Bishop Mountague Acts and Monum. c. 8. p. 535.
censures it, That it was never the Issue of any of the Children of Light, but
the misbegotten and misborn Changeling of an heretical Father.

But still if all this were granted about the Year, it makes nothing for the
Month and Day of her Nativity, which still remains as uncertain as before. In
this they must be beholden to Ecclesiastical Tradition and its teaching,
Raynaud. Dipped. Mar. p. 24.
from whence they have learned many other great Secrets, and that determines it
on the Eighth of September; only they have an admirable Art to back it with
Motives of Congruity, as here in this Case. Congruum fuit, etc. Says
Carthagena, De arc, Deip. l. 2. hom. 2.
That she who was to be for ever a Virgin, should be born in the Month of
September, was very congruous, because in that Month the Sun going out of the
Sign of Leo, enters into the Sign of Virgo; which plainly enough foresignified,
That God, who otherwise roared like a Lion, according to that, Vengeance is
mine and I will repay, should now be born like a Lamb of the meek Ewe Mary, and
like an Unicorn, should lay aside all his Fierceness in the Lap of the Virgin.
Another Gononus Chron. Deip. p. 3.
says, This was a very convenient Season for her Birth, that as the World,
according to the commonest Opinion, was created in the Month of September, so
the new Creation of it should begin at the same time: Besides, we know that
this Month does commonly abound with Diseases, and therefore it is no wonder,
if at that time in which Dangers appear, the Medicine and Remedy against every
Sickness should be sent. (Though these Reasons seem to conclude stronglier for
the Birth of our Savior in that Month, than for hers.) Nay, in this way of
Congruity, they can tell us the very time of the Day when she was born, that it
was in the dawning of the Morning before Sunrise, Raynaudus ibid.
that so this Circumstance of Time might answer to the Mystery, who in the
Hymns is called, Solis justitiae aurora, The Morning of the Son of
Righteousness. As for the Place where she was born, they are not so well
agreed. Poza, as we heard before, will have her to be born at Jerusalem, and he
brings Ib. tract. 8. c. 3.
S. Briget's Revelations L. 5. c. 13.
, and others to countenance it. But the most common Opinion is that which
Baronius Apparat. n. 48.
mentions, That she was born at Nazareth: So says also the Counterfeit Epistle
of S. Jerome; and the Table that hangs up in the holy House at Loretta, makes
that Church to be a Chamber of the House of the blessed Virgin at Nazareth, in
which she was born and educated, and afterward received in it the Salutation
of the Angel Gabriel. This Chamber was taken from Nazareth by Angels, and
carried over-Sea, and after some Removes, was at last placed by them where it
now stands in Italy, by a Highway side. Chr. de Castro Hist. deip. c. 1. p. 60.
says that she was born at Nazareth, Inter ovium balatus, pastorumque hilares
concentus, among the bleatings of Sheep, and the joyful Consorts of Shepherds:
And afterward in his Notes adds, It is probable that S. Anne came over to
Joachim, while he lived with his Shepherds, and there brought forth the holy
Child; adding in the Margin, That Mary was born in the House of a Shepherd: For
which he cites J. Damascen. Lib. 4. fid. Orthod. c. 15. Editur partu in ovilis
ipsius Joachim domo. Wherein Castro commits a gross Mistake; for the Words of
Damascen in the Greek are these, (...) (Sc. Virgo) (...) where (...) is not a
Shepherds Dwelling, but signifies the Place in S. John c. v. 2. (...), etc. In
the Sheep-Market we translate it, or Gate, there was a Pool called Bethesda:
And he means, no doubt, that House of S. Anne at Jerusalem, which Adricomius
Theatr, terrae sanct. Jerusalem, n. 37. p. 153.
mentions, and places hard by the Pool of Bethesda, and where, he says, Joachim
and Anne often lived, and where blessed Mary was conceived (for he makes her
also to be born at Nazareth.) This appears by another place in Damascen Orat.
1. de Nativ. Virg.
, where he wishes all good Luck to this Probatica, calling it Patrium Reginae
domicilium; and after mentions how once a Year it of old received the Angel
that troubled the Waters, and restored one Person to Health: This by the way.
However it be, whether as to the Place Damascen be in the Right or no, we need
not much trouble our selves, but it concerns them much, who are resolved to
believe the Fable of the House at Loretta, which this plainly contradicts.

These curious Inquirers into her Birth, that nothing may escape them, consider
whether she came into the World the common way; and one of them Poza ib. l. 2.
tract. 15. c. 3.
, after all his Search professes, That he cannot yet resolve, whether she came
out of S. Anne's Womb with her Head or Feet foremost: Only he has discovered to
us thus much, That she might, if she pleased, have come with her Feet foremost:
For, says he, she having in the Womb the use of her Reason; she might have
contracted her Arms and other Parts close together, and then there would have
been no more Difficulty in this, than in the other common Way.

It would be a great Mistake to think, That when she came into the World, she
cried as other Children do. No, says one Bernard. de Bust. part. 2. sermon. 1. p.
133.
, She neither sighed nor cried, but expressed great Joy in her Face, smiling
upon those that looked on her, and rejoiced with a multitude of Angels that
sang sweet Songs at her Birth: Which the former Virtuoso Poza ib. c. 2.
ascribes to that perfect Wisdom wherewith she was endued from her Conception,
and her grave Constancy, not to be altered by this new Sight of the Fabric of
this World. Nay, so far was she from crying her self, when she was born, That
she did not so much as make her cry out that bare her. Those that think that S.
Anne conceived her without Pleasure, conclude from thence, that she brought her
forth without Pain; besides the Congruity of it Raynaudu^ lib. citat. p. 29.
, That she, who by her Birth, brought Joy to all the World, should not tear her
Mother with grievous Pangs. But the skilful Poza Ib. l. 2. tra^. 15. c. 7.
goes further (as he commonly flys at all) and says, That by a Miracle, and
God's Kindness, S. Anne, when she went with Child of her, felt no Burden, and
in her Childbed she had no Sorrows, for it was without Pain, without the Help
of Midwives, without fainting of Spirits, or consequent Uncleanness; so that
excepting the Miracle of the Virginity of the Mother of God, before and after
her bringing forth, all the other Wonders are alike in the Birth of Mary and
Jesus. He also concludes, Ibid. c. 3.
That the Body of the blessed Virgin did shine at her Birth with exceeding
Brightness; for so, he says, we read it happened in the Nativity of S.
Herebert, S. Avitus, and S. Suibert, etc. And we know it is a first Principle,
that no other Saint must outdo her, which I suppose their Poet Mantuan.
Parthan. Mar. l. 1.
intended, who speaking of her when she sucked, says,

Stringere complexu natam, far oscula fronti
Non erat ausa parens, nec enim mortalis in illa
Humanusve decor, sed erat* coelestis Imago.
That is,

Anne durst not with her circling Arms embrace
This Babe, nor give fond Kisses to her Face;
Amazed to see such Majesty combine,
With heavenly Graces and a Form divine.
As confidently does another Gononus in Chron. de^p. p. 3.
assert, That from her Birth and so sorward, the Virgin's sacred Body breathed
a Perfume and fragrant Smell, that so, as he adds, she might not be excelled by
any illustrious Person: Plutarch having reported the same of Alexander, and God
having granted it to several dead Bodies of his Servants, it can in no wise be
thought that he would not bestow this Honor upon her Body, in which God
intended to take up his dwelling afterward.

There remains a great Question, much debated among them, concerning her
Guardian Angel: For it is generally resolved among the Schoolmen See Aquinas
sum* Th. p. 1. qu. 113. art. 4, 5.
that every Man from his Nativity has such an Angel appointed to keep and
defend him; even Adam in Innocence had one Id. ib. art. 4. ad 1, 2. Fr.
Albertinus de Ang. Custod. c. 4. p. 24, 29, 30. Becanus in Theol. Schol. trac.
3* c. 6.
: Only our Savior, though he had Angels ministering to him, yet he needed none
to counsel or defend him. Poza Elucid. l. 2. trac. 16. c. 3.
, who would fain make the blessed Virgin in every Privilege as like to her Son
as may be, will allow her one or more, ad famulatum, for Attendance and State,
though not as a Guardian, for that, forsooth, would suppose something of
Superiority, which must not be allowed over her: She had, he says, an Angel
just as she had the Habit of Penitence, which yet conferred nothing to the Work
and Exercise of it, because she had no Sin; only it was profitable to adorn
her, and keep company with her other Virtues. God would deny her nothing that
he had bestowed upon others, therefore she should rather have Angelum otiosum,
an Angel that was Idle, and had nothing to do, than seem to be wanting in
Liberality to his dear Daughter. But Raynaudus Ibid. p. 26.
assures us, that the common Opinion is, That she had a Guardian Angel, and
that this Angel was Gabriel, according to that of P. Damianus Sermon. 1. de
Nativ. Mar.
, who compares Gabriel and John the Evangelist, to Two Lions, the one of which
was deputed to be a Keeper on her right Hand, the other on her Left; Gabriel
watchfully preserved her Soul, and John her Body. But neither can this so
easily obtain, but meets with great Opposition. Aquinas Ib. qu. 113. art. 3.
is of Opinion, That the Custody of single Persons, belongs only to Angels of
the lowest Form and Order: And another says Gononus ib. p. 4.
It is certain that none of the Order of Archangels (such as Gabriel is made to
be) is taken to this Office of being Guardians of Men. Besides, we know, says
he, that remarkable Embassies are wont to be made by some Prince, who does not
familiarly converse with the Person to whom he is sent: such was the Embassy of
the Annunciation, which therefore had not been so fit to be committed to
Gabriel, if he had been her Angel Guardian: He thinks therefore, that it was
not he, but the chief of the Order of mere Angels, to whom this Charge was
committed. But others Castro Hist. deip. c. 2. p. 86.
are not content with one alone (no not if it were Gabriel himself) but that
more besides were in Commission to minister to her. Pelbartus Stellar. lib. 10.
par. 5. art. 2.
says, many Angels, according to that of the Canticles (cap. iii. 7.) Behold
Salomon's Bed, Three score valiant Men are about it. Albertinus Loc. citat. p.
28.
thinks that almost an infinite Multitude of Angels did concur to her
Protection; which is plain enough out of Cant. vi. ult. What will ye see in the
Shunamite? as it were the Company of Two Armies. Vulg. Lat. Choros Castrorum,
which signify her guardian Angels.

Their Authors also make very large Harangues, to declare the Nobleness of her
Birth. S. Bernardine asserts De Nativ. Virg. sermon. 5. art. 1. c. 1.
That the blessed Virgin was the most noble Creature that ever was in humane
Nature, or ever can be begotten; for she derived in her Birth from Forty
Patriarchs, Fourteen Kings, and Eleven Dukes. And we ought, says he, to prefer
her before all Princesses, Kings and Queens, Emperors and Empresses, and before
all Powers, Tribes and Languages of the whole Universe. Whither will not the
Folly of superstitious Men carry them? And where will it stop? What nauseous,
as well as insignificant, Flattery is this? How would it have grated in her
Ears, if this Story had been told her whilst she lived? We may easily guess at
it by her own Song, which magnifies God, for exalting them of low Degree; and
for regarding the low Estate of his Handmaiden. But it is worse still, when we
hear her very Sanctity flattered, and the Merit of it proclaimed by another
Poza ubi prius. l. 2. tract. 15. c 8.
to be so great, as to be the Cause, That after her Birth all her Kindred were
holy Persons: Though this plainly contradicts the Gospel John vii. 5.
, which says, That neither did his Brethren believe in him. Unless Christ's
Brethren were nothing akin to his Mother.

But the worst of all is still behind; I mean, the abominable Flattery of their
Devotions; their lowly addresses to S. Anne and her Husband in their Prayers,
upon the Account of being her Parents, and bringing such a Daughter into the
World.

SECT. III.
Devotions to the Parents of the blessed Virgin.
A Noted Jesuit Spinellus Deip. thronus Dei, c. 18. p. 241.
exhorts Men, To worship the most holy Parents of the Virgin with a peculiar
Reverence, for this Reason, because they begat such a Daughter for us, that
they should give them Joy of her, earnestly praying that they would commend
them to the Mother of God. For, says he, we may easily collect that their
Intercession with the Virgin must needs avail much, because the Authority of
Parents weighs much with good Children. Which he seems to have learned from the
Breviary, which in a Hymn Breviar. Romans antiq. ad 20 Martii.
declares the same.

Qui optat S. Virginis juvari piis precibus,
Devotus sit Charissimis illius genitoribus:
Nam illis, dum impendimus honoris reverentiam,
Devotam; ei reddimus and nato ejus gratiam.
That is,

He that would have the Virgin's Ear,
And by her Prayers be helped out;
In Worship of her Parents dear
Let him express himself devout:
For whilst on them our Honor we bestow,
To her and to her Son we Kindness show.
Devotions to S. Joachim.
IN the old Roman Missal, on the Feast of S. Joachim (March* 20.) they make
this Address to him.

Verse. O Joachim sanctae conjux Annae, Pater almae virginis, hinc famulis
confer salutis opem.

O Joachim, Husband of S. Anne, and Father of the blessed Virgin, from hence
bestow saving Help on thy Servants.

A long Prosa that follows, concludes thus:

Vale, Pater inclyte,
Placa Regem gloriae
In hac valle miseriae:
Clara Dei facie
Da frui in requie
Sanctorum sanctae curiae.
O pater Reginae coeli nos adjuva.
Amen.
Farewell great Father, Heaven's blessed King appease,
In this sad Vale of Tears and Misery,
Grant God's bright Face hereafter we may see,
In Heaven, where happy Saints have Rest and Ease.
O Father of the Queen of Heaven help us.
Amen.
In the old Roman Breviary, March 20. They pray thus:

O pater summae Joachim puellae,
Quae Deum clauso genuit pudore,
Promove nostras Domino querelas
Castaque vota.
Scis quot hic saevis agitemur undis,
Triste quos mundi mare defatigat:
Scis quot adnectat Satanas caroque
Praelia nobis.
Jam sacris junctus superum catervis,
Imo praecedens, potes omne, si vis;
Nil Nepos Jesus merito negabit,
Nil tibi nata.
Joachim, Father of that blessed Maid,
Who brought forth God, yet Virgin did remain;
See our chaste Vows we make to God, be paid,
And all our Prayers promote, when we complain.
Tossed in this Sea with many a cruel Wave,
Thou know we weak and weather-beaten are;
Thou know what combats we are like to have,
Which Flesh and Satan, our sworn Foes, prepare.
And now you are placed among the blessed so high,
Thou can do every thing thou art inclined to;
Thy Nephew Jesus sure will not deny,
Much less thy Daughter, what thou have a mind to.
Devotions to S. Anne, as Mother of the B. Virgin.
Anaph.
Foelix, Anna cella munditiae, Portifor. Sec. uf. Sarum ad Jul 26.

Lumen mundi, vena clementiae,
Spes salutis, porta laetitiae,
Nos divinae commenda gratiae.
O Blessed Anne, the Cell of Purity,
Light of the World, the Vein of Clemency,
Our saving Hope and Gate of Consolation,
Commend us to God's gracious Acceptance.
Hymn.
Ave matter Anna,
Plena melle Canna,
Cui matrem passa,
Nulla coequanda.
Ergo te rogamus,
Rogantes supplicamus,
Ut quod potes velis,
Prece nos da coelis.
Placans nobis natam,
Per te mundo datam,
Illa natum suum,
Tu nepotem tuum.
All hail we wish to thee S. Anne,
Who art the B. Virgin's Mother;
Brim full of Honey is thy Cann,
There Is none can show me such another.
Therefore still asking we remain,
And thy unwearied Suitors are,
That what thou can, thou would obtain,
And give us Heaven by thy Prayer.
Do thou appease the Daughter thou did bear,
She her own Son, and thou thy Nephew dear.
Another Hymn speaks thus to her.

Quicquid hic deliquimus
Vitae per immunditiam,
Abstergas illud petimus
Per divinam clementiam.
All those Impurities of Sin,
We heretofore have lived in,
Through the Grace of God we pray
Cleanse and wipe them quite away.
Another Hymn calls her Happy.

Quae medelam vitiorum matrem gessit gratiae.

Who bore the Mother of Grace, the Medicine of our Vices.

The Second Lesson says thus of her;

Haec est illa supernae benedictionis terra, de qua coelestis figulus ollam
spei nostrae composuit, quae ex divini roris imbre conceptum verbum, humano
generi protulit incarnatum.

This she is that Earth blessed from above, out of which the heavenly Potter
formed that Vessel of our Hope, who when the Word was conceived by a Shower of
divine Dew, brought him forth to Mankind incarnate.

In the Sixth Lesson thus;

O quam gloriosa est matter ista, and quam digna solenni attoilenda praeconio,
quae nobis Matrem nostrae redemptionis attulit, and in illa Testamentum
haereditatis supernae inclusit.

O how glorious is that Mother, and how worthy to be advanced by solemn
Praises, who brought to us the Mother of our Redemption, and enclosed in her
the Testament of the Inheritance above.

Hymn.
O vas coelestis gratiae,
Matter reginae virginum,
Per te precamur anxie
Remissionem criminum.
Memento Matter inclyta
Quam potens es per filiam,
Et nobis prece solita
Procura Dei gratiam.
O Vessel of celestial Grace,
Blessed Mother to the Virgin's Queen,
By thee we beg in the first place
Forgiveness of all former Sin.
Great Mother always keep in mind
The Power thou have by thy sweet Daughter,
And by thy wonted Prayer let us find
Gods Grace procured to us hereafter.
The Missal of Sarum speaks in the same Strain.

Tua proles est regina
In coelesti patria;
Ipsa cunctis jam praelata
Nostra fiat advocata
In Dei praesentia.
Thine Offspring is a Queen
In The Regions unseen;
May she that is thus advanced prove
Our Advocate with God above.
Postcommunio. Beatae Annae Matris Mariae gloriosa intercessione nos protege,
de qua virgo puerpera ad salutem humanae Nativitatis prodiit.

Protect us by the glorious Intercession of S. Anne, the Mother of Mary, out of
whom the Virgin Mother came forth for the Salvation of humane Birth.

These Expressions of her being the Medicine of our Vices, the Mother of our
Redemption, and being born for the Salvation of Mankind; if they be not of
blasphemous, yet I am sure they are of doubtful Signification, and such as
ought not to be in any Prayer. I find like Expressions to these in the old
Roman Breviary, on July 26. Lesson 1. which says thus of S. Anne:

Ex hac clavis David (Sc. Maria) est fabricata, per quam paradisi porta cunctis
iterum est patefacta. Ex hac est plenitudo gratiae nata gloriosa semper Virgo
Maria, quae dedit coelis gloriam, terris contulit Deum and pacem refudit, fidem
Gentibus dilatavit, sinem vitiis posuit, vitae ordinem, moribus disciplinam
donavit.

Out of her the Key of David (viz. Mary) was framed, by which the Gate of
Paradise is again opened to all. Of her was born the fullness of Grace the
ever-Virgin Mary, who gave to the Heavens Glory, bestowed God on Earth and
poured out Peace, spread the Faith among the Gentiles, put an end to Vices,
gave Order to our Life, and discipline to our Manners.

It is a strange hard Figure, that can make these many things, which the
Scripture attributes to Christ, and by which it sets forth his glorious Power
in the Work of our Redemption and Salvation, become fit to be applied to the
blessed Virgin. One might conclude these Men think it no dangerous Error, if a
Man in Devotion should mistake Mary for Christ, whatsoever it is in Belief.

As for S. Anne, all these Encomiums already mentioned are not thought enough
to set her out; but many of their Authors Cited by Raynaudus ib. p. 19.
go so far as to affirm, that both She and Joachim were holy from the Womb and
sanctified in it; thinking it not fit to deny this to them, which is affirmed
of John the Baptist. The venturous Poza Elucidar. l. 2. trac. 8. c. 3.
goes a Step or Two further, who besides this early cleansing in their mothers
Womb from original Sin, will have them also, never to have committed any mortal
Sin, and, if any among mankind, no venial ones neither. There was also a kind
Motion made heretofore by Fulbertus Carnotensis Sermon. 3. de Nativitat. Virg.
to make S. Anne the Mother only of this Child, and to have had no more, as the
blessed Virgin bare no other but our Savior. For, says he, it was not fitting,
that the most holy Parents of this singular Virgin, should be defiled with the
Propagation of more Children, who were to provide for and eduoate her, that was
to be the alone Mother of our Lord. Yet here I observe a strange Oversight (and
the only one, I think, that can be named, wherein they seem to have forgot a
Privilege to grace the Virgin withal) that even in their Devotions, S. Anne is
made to be a Mother of more Children: For thus in the Breviary of Bruges V.
Balinghem parnass. Marian. p. 396.
they sing,

Anna radix uberrima,
Arborque salutifera
Virgas producens triplices.
Health springs from thee,
Thou blessed Tree:
From thy fair Root
Three Rods did sprout.
So also Mantuan (...). l. 7. (...).
,

Anna puerperio fortunatissima Sancto,
Tres habuisse viros, and tres genuisse puellas
Dicitur --
That is,

None had more lucky Births than she,
Nor holier, for it is said,
She did Three Husbands wed;
By whom she brought forth Daughters Three.
The Revelations of S. Coleta Ap^d Raynaud. ib. p. 27.
explain this, telling us the Names of her Three Daughters, viz. The Virgin
Mary, Mary the Mother of James, and Maria Salome. They also bring in S. Anne
speaking to Coleta thus, Though I was married to Three Husbands, yet both the
triumphant and militant Church was wonderfully beautified by my Offspring, etc.

But perhaps they have made some Amends for this Oversight, by their devout
Addresses to these Sisters, which I find thus Balinghem ubi supra p. 406. ex
horis Sec. usum Roman. antiq.
,

De sororibus B. Virginis.
O nobile ternarium
Sanctarum sororum trium,
Quibus nomen est Maria;
Vestrum sacrum collegium
Imploro ad praesidium
In omni angustia.
Quae erit Christo gratior,
Aut quae sit acceptior,
Quam vestra sit oration?
Nulla sibi conjunctior,
Nulla sibi proximior
Quam sit vestra cognatio.
Tu virgo silii matter es,
Inde sibi quod imperes
Naturae donat ratio; This every whit as bad as Jure Matris impera Redemptori.

Vos vero duae caeterae,
Estis ejus materterae,
O quam ingens acceptio!
O sacred Ternary
Of holy Sisters Three,
Called by the Name of Mary.
In all my Misery
To your joint Aid I fly,
That I may not miscarry.
Who can pretend their Prayer
With Christ can stand so fair
As yours for Acceptance?
None may with you compare,
Or say so near they are
Akin, as your Relation.
Virgin, to thee alone,
The power to rule thy Son
As Mother, Nature grants.
You Two that are behind,
Will great Acceptance find,
Because you are his Aunts.
One would hope that the ordinary Reason of every Man that will make use of it,
should prevent his falling into such gross Imaginations, and such childish
Conceits as these Strains of Devotion do betray: But after our blessed Savior
discovered, more than once See Luc. ii. 49. Luc. viii. 21. John ii. 4.
whilst he was here upon Earth, That in Matters that related to the Exercise of
his Office, when he was about his Fathers Business, the Interposing of Mother
and Brethren was unseasonable and unacceptable, and rather repressed by him
than encouraged; Christus non agnoscit viscera humana, operaturus facta divina.
S. Augustine. Tract. 8. in Johan.
to think by these Considerations to move him in Heaven, seems to argue such
Men forsaken of Reason, and to have too little Regard to the Honor of God.

SECT. IV.
Concerning the Feast of her Nativity.
THere now remains under this Head only one thing more to be considered, viz.
The Feast of the blessed Virgins Nativity: Concerning which Mantuan Fastor. l.
9. September. de Nativ. Mariae.
has told us truly,

Hunc antiqua Diem Fastis non intulit aetas.
That is,

This Day of old was not a Feast to her,
Nor placed in the ancient Churches Calendar.
St. Austin has Sermon 20. and 21. de Sanctis.
asserted it for his own Age, That in the whole World, only Two Nativities were
celebrated, That of our Lord, and of S. John Baptist. Baronius In Martyr. Romans
ad 8. September.
cannot tell the time when to fix the first Institution of it. J. Baptista
Thiers De Fest. dierum imminut. p. 332, 333.
speaks in the same Language, That he neither can nor dare affirm when it first
began in the Church. And he confesses, That it is not to be found in the
ancient Catalogues of Feast-days, being omitted in these following, viz. of
Chrodogangus's Regulae Canonicorum, cap. 74. Concilium 1. Moguntinum in Can.
36. Carolus Mag. lib. 1. capitul. c. 164. and in lib. 6. c. 186. Haito
Basiliens. Episc. in capit. 8. Ludovicus pius in lib. 2. capitul. c. 35.
Concilium Aquisgran. 2. c. 46. Herardus Turonensis in capitul. c. 61. Nicolaus
P. 1. respons. ad consult. Bulgar. cap. 5. and 11. Thiers Ib. cap. 9. p. 47, 48.
indeed opposes Baronius for asserting In Martyr. ubi prius.
, That it is plain that the Gallican Church were ignorant of this Feast in the
times of Carolus Magnus and Ludovicus Pius: And he produces against the
Cardinal the Council of Rhemes, Can. 20. Wherein both the Feast of the
Assumption and Nativity of the blessed Virgin are set down; which Council was
held long before Charles the Great's time, about the Year 630. But this learned
Man might have remembered, that there is no mention of Festivals in the Canons
recited by Flodoardus Lib. 2. Hist. Eccles. Rhem. c. 5.
: And though they are found in the Canons published under the Name of Sonnatius
Council. Labbe. Tom. 5. p. 1693.
, yet Labbe adds in the Margent by Sonnatius as some would have it, for they
seem to savor of alater Age. And Binius in his Notes says, There are some
things in these Canons, which seem not to carry so much Antiquity; and he
instances in the Feast of the Nativity of Mary, which, says he, seems not to be
ancient in these Parts, since it is first said to be celebrated in France by
Fulbertus Carnotensis, who lived in the Year 1017. But since France seems to
contend for the Glory of beginning this Feast (as England for that of her
Conception) the fairest Pretense of its Original, is that which Thiers mentions
out of the Capitula of Walter Bishop of Orleans, cap. 18. about the Year 868.
under Carolus Calvus, where the blessed Virgin's Nativity has a Place among
other Feasts. Lud. Cellotius in his Notes upon it Council. Labbe Tom. 8. p 648.
judges the Praise due to this Church of Orleans for first celebrating it
there, but he incloses it in this Diocese, since neither Herardus Turon.
Hincmarus. Rhem. Isaac Lingonens. nor Theodolphus, though of Orleans too, make
any mention of it: And Thiers acknowledges Loc. citat. cap. 18. etc. 51. p. 334.
that in the Synod of Galo and Simon the Pope's Legates, An. 1215. it was
antiquated and out of use again in France, for it mentions only Three solemn
Feasts of the Virgin, viz. The Annunciation, Purification, and Assumption,
leaving out the Nativity (besides the Conception then first ordered to be
kept.) These things, though they seem to prejudice this Instance of Walter of
Orleans, yet we shall let it pass and fix here; since it is as good a time as
can be to allow an Innovation in this Case for the blessed Virgin's Honor,
forasmuch as just about this time another more considerable Innovation was made
by Paschasius Radbert in the days of Carolus Calvus, in the matter of
Transubstantiation. The Jesuit Inchofer, who could believe that the City of
Messana in Sicily, received a Letter sent to them by the blessed Virgin, and
has wrote a Folio Entitled Epistolae B. Virg. Mar. ad Messanenses conjectatio.
to make it probable, could not choose but give this Honor to that City, to be
before the rest of the World in celebrating this Feast of her Birth Inchofer
ibid. p. 110.
and that it is beyond all Memory, how anciently they have kept it: But since
he has not dated the time when they began to pay this Honor to her Birth, we
are not concerned in it; but let it pass. Only because I have mentioned the
blessed Virgin's Letter, though any one that reads the Superscription and
Subscription, need look no further, to know it is forged; yet because it is a
Rarity, I will set it down as the said Jesuit Inchofer ibid. p. 115.
has given it us in Latin, more correct than ordinary: Which, according to the
common Story, is a Translation made by Constantine Lascaris (of the last Age)
out of the Greek, which was a Translation of S. Paul's out of the Hebrew, in
which Language the Letter is pretended to have been wrote by the Virgin her
self. Thus it runs.

Maria Virgo, Joachim filia, humillima Dei ancilla, Christi Jesu crucifixi
matter, ex Tribu Juda, stirpe David, Messanensibus omnibus salutem, and Dei
Patris omnipotentis benedictionem.

VOS omnes, side magna legatos ac nuncios per publicum Documentum ad nos
misisse constat. Filium nostrum, Dei genitum, Deum and hominem esse fatemini;
and in coelum post suam resurrectionem ascendisse; Pauli Apostoli Electi
praedicatione mediante, viam veritatis agnoscentes. Ob quod, vos and ipsam
civitatem benedicimus, cujus perpetuam Protectricem nos esse volumus.

Anno filii nostri 42. Indictione 1. 3 Nonas Junii. Luna 27. Feria 5. ex
Hierosolymis.

Maria Virgo quae supra hoc Chirographum approbavit.

The Virgin Mary, Daughter of Joachim, the humblest Handmaid of God, the Mother
of Jesus Christ crucified, of the Tribe of Juda, of the Stock of David, wishes
Health, and the Blessing of God the Father Almighty, to all the People of
Messana.

IT appears that you all, with great Faith, have sent Ambassadors and
Messengers by a public Decree to us. You confess our Son, the begotten of God,
to be God and Man; and that he ascended into Heaven after his Resurrection;
acknowledging the Way of Truth, by means of the preaching of Paul the Elect
Apostle. For which Cause, we give our Blessing to you, and also to your City,
whose perpetual Protectress we resolve to be.

In the 42. year of our Son; Indiction the First; 3d. of the Nones of June;
27th. of the Moon; 5th. day of the Week, from Jerusalem.

The abovesaid Virgin Mary approved this Handwriting.

But to return from whence we have digressed. Whatsoever was the Time of the
first Celebration of this Feast of her Nativity, yet all acknowledge the
Occasion and Foundation of its Institution, to be no other than a private
Revelation to a Man of no Name, who lived God knows when and where: (unless
Mantuan's Loc. cit. l. 9. September.
Authority determine it for one that lived on the top of a Mountain in Cyprus,
-- -- Super alto vertice montis
Idalii --
And he might have said as well, on a Mountain of the Moon, for any Evidence in
History.) This pious Man, says J. Beleth De Divin. officiis, c. 149.
, praying in the Night, heard the Angels sing in Heaven; which happened to him
many Years on the same Night. Therefore he desired God to reveal to him the
meaning of it; and he was told, That their Joys were occasioned, because on
that Night the blessed Virgin was born, and they kept it as a Festival. This
Man relates the Matter to the Pope (no body knows which) who understanding that
he was a grave and holy Man, and believing what he said, did institute the
Celebration of this Feast over all the Christian World.

Melch. Canus Loc. Theol. l. 11. c. 6. fol. 334.
has given a good Caution out of P. Gelasius, not to receive those Histories
which are produced, without the certain Name of the Author; for they smell of
the Tricks of Impostors that seek Gain, or are the Products of Heretics. The
same sharp Censure he passes upon novel Revelations, showing how much they
prejudice the Church, who seek to adorn the Stories of Saints with feigned
Revelations and Miracles, wherein Men's Impudence has not spared the blessed
Virgin, nor our Lord Christ himself.

This great Bishop, and Jer. Xaverius, their Missionary, were of very different
Persuasions in this Matter, for this latter thought these things of so great
Importance for the Salvation of the Indians, that in his History of Christ, Page
18. 21.
they must beacquainted, not only with the foresaid blind and senseless
Revelation, but also with another additional idle Story, which the Legend Jac.
de Vorag. Legend. aur. c. 126.
had furnished him withal; how for the greater Honor of the Feast the Octaves
came to be added to it; telling his Indians, That Pope Innocent IV. An. 1250.
ordered it upon this Occasion; That after the Death of Pope Celestine IV. the
Cardinals in their Convention not agreeing in their Suffrages, the Sea was void
Eighteen Months: Whereupon a certain Cardinal made a Motion, That whosoever
should be chosen Pope, should appoint the Day of the Virgin's Nativity for a
Festival to all Christians, and besides they should spend Eight Days (which
they call the Octaves) in rejoicing, to try if by this Means they might finish
the Business: They all agreed hereto, and immediately they agreed in their
Suffrages for Innocent IV. to be Pope; who gave that Solemnity to the Festival.
Was not this a weighty Affair, and a necessary Point for the Heathens to be
instructed in, to make them good Christians?

This that I have said, is enough to show, That our Church has no Blame lies
upon it for letting this Festival fall, which the ancient Christians never
kept, and where it is observed, stands upon such a weak and tottering
Foundation, as we have seen.

But we abhor, and justly reprove the Calumny, which Sanders would fasten on us
De Schismate Anglic. f. 17^.
: That the English, for the greater Contempt of the blessed Virgin, do solemnly
celebrate Queen Elizabeth' s Birthday September 7. on the very Eve of the
Virgin's Nativity; the day of whose Birth they set down in their Calendar in
small and black Letters, but Queen Elizabeth' s in great and red Letters.

Which Story of his, I presume, gave occasion to the spawning of more impudent
Lies still, by the Jesuit Raynaudus Dipped. Mar. p. 233.
, who reports, That Queen Elizabeth caused the Nativity of the blessed Virgin
to be blotted out of the Calendar, and substituted in the room of it her own
Birthday, which fell on the same day, viz. September the 8th. As to the latter
part of which every one may know it to be false; and it is so too as to the
former: For the Festival blotted out was a Religious one; but, I suppose,
neither he nor any else, ever heard of an Office of our Church composed for
that day, which, he says, was put in the room of it: Only it might occasion
some Bonefires and Testifications of Joy, such as were usual in London upon the
Seventeenth of November, which was the day of her coming to the Crown, and yet
it is not in the Calendar either in black Letters or red.

But if nothing were to be objected against observing this Feast of the
Virgin's Nativity; yet I am sure we have reason to be offended with those
Devotions (such as those I have already set down) which those of the Roman
Communion on this Day offer up to her: And also with those scandalous and
profane Meditations upon her Nativity, which we find in their Authors; a few
Instances of which I shall here subjoin for a Conclusion.

Our late Contemplator Contemplat p. 45. 46, 48, 49.
finds a large Scope here, for his Languishings and Sallies, Unions and
Absorptions. Divine Mary, says he, replenished with Grace, and absorpt in the
Abyss of supernatural Perfection, wonderfully increased the Languishings of the
Angels, Souls in Limbo, and of her holy Parents, for the Hour of her Birth. --
She was unconceivably more Glorious, in being designed to be the Mother of
Jesus, and that her rich Blood in Jesus, should be the Price of the World, the
Laver of Sinners, and the Purchase of the Saints; and should be so pleasing to
God, as to be acceptable for the Insurance of the Purpose of the Predestination
of Men and Angels; for the raising an unexhaustible Fund of Grace, in the
Sacraments; and for the propagating Citizens of Heaven, Partakers in God's
Councels, and Partners in his Glory. Therefore did all Men and Angels, with
earnest Desires thirst after her Birth, as an approaching Prelude to all these
inestimable Blessings of Grace and Glory. -- From the first Instant wherein the
World was blessed with the Birth of the Mother of Jesus, Heaven and Earth
seemed to put off Mourning, and to be clothed with Joy: For now the Gates of
Paradise seem again to be set open, an eternal Jubilee proclaimed, a general
Peace published, a free Intercourse decreed between Men and Angels; and the
Throne of God's Mercy erected on Earth, and made accessible to the most
enormous Criminals. -- This Mother of Jesus now born, is the Mother of
Christians, because she ever has the Bowels of a Mothers Compassion opened to
us; by Mercy to us in our sinful State; by Mediation for us, for the Grace of
Jesus; and by Protection over us, amidst the Temptations on all sides set to
entrap us. Behold, with what Glory the Sun this Day arises, to beautify Mary's
entry amongst us; what Homage and Offerings the Angels make before the Cradle
of their illustrious Queen; what Acclamations of Joy resound from the Souls in
Limbo, for the Birth of the Mother of Jesus. -- With what Alacrity all Sinners
salute her, their Patroness, Refuge and Advocate; and with what Ecstasies of
spiritual Joy God's People are replenished, for this comfortable Birth of the
Mother of Jesus, the Spouse of the holy Church; of the Empress of the World,
the Gate of Heaven, the Throne of Mercy, the Ladder of Jacob, the Morning Star
of Grace, Peace and Salvation; of her who shall bring forth Jesus, the Author
and finisher of our blessed Hope.

Resolv. I do from this Moment, acknowledge thee, O divine Infant! to be the
Adoptive Mother of my Heart, the Queen of my Affections, and the Empress of all
the Powers of my Soul; and therefore I will daily pay unto Thee, the most
cordial Homages of my Love, Congratulations and eminent Servitude, Observance
and Supplication; and will in all my spiritual Combats, Afflictions and
Distresses, have a confident Recourse unto thy Bowels of Mercy, as a Child to
his Mother, as a Sinner to the Mother of Jesus, and as an Outcast, banished the
House of my eternal Father, unto his Patroness, Refuge and Advocate, etc.

Another of their Contemplators T. Carre, Sweet Thoughts of Jesus and Mary, p.
300, 301.
breaks out as if he were in a Rapture, thus; O my Soul, let us mark this Day
with a better Stone, with a mark of Joy for ever, which gave at once a Queen to
Men and Angels; nay, a dearly beloved Child to God the Father, a designed
Mother to God the Son, and a best beloved Spouse to the holy Ghost. O let my
Soul praise, love and magnify her for ever, who has so singular near and dear
Relations to all the Persons of the Trinity. -- Let us join in Admiration with
Angels in Heaven, and say, Who is this that our Desert brings out? Who and
what, do we think this Child shall prove to be? A Prophetess? Nay, more than a
Prophetess, more than an Angel, more than an Archangel, more than a Cherubin or
Seraphin.

Another Gr. Gallicanus in Marial. p. 70.
cries out, Her Nativity is the Pledge and Pawn of our spiritual Nativity and
Redemption, because for this End she was born, that she might abolish the Debt
of Adam's Transgression, repair our Innocence, appease the Anger of the strict
Judge, open the Gate of Heaven, and bestow Liberty on the Captives. (And I
wonder what Christ himself can do more for us.)

Another Fr. Co^ter. Medit. 2. de Nativ. Virg. p. 22, 23, 24, 26.
speaking of the Joy her Nativity does occasion, gives this as one Reason,
Because She is born among Men, whose Authority is as great with Almighty God,
as that of a Mother uses to be with her only and best beloved Son. Let us
rejoice, because our Sister can do so much with God, That if she be propitious
to us (which is the great thing they court) we may dare to promise our selves
all things from God. -- Those Brothers would have Cause of rejoicing, whose
Sister a King should marry, and count her most dear to him; much more has
mankind cause to rejoice, whose Daughter is advanced to that Dignity, that God
himself deferrs that Honor to her, that is due from a Son to his Mother. Not
to tire the Reader with this Jesuits Blasphemies, I Will add but one of his
Meditations more. She was born under the same Princes of the World and of
Judaea, Augustus and Herod, in whose times our Lord was born, (as, in all
probability, many more were) that thou may know, that this Virgin was born
for the same cause, for which Christ was born, viz. That the Devil, the Prince
of the World, who now had possessed the Hearts of Men, might be cast out: Our
Lord broke his Power, and cast him out by his Passion; but our Lady, gave her
Son a Body (which, it seems, is the meaning of, a Body have thou prepared me)
of her own Body, by which he overcame the Devil; and in this Sense it is most
rightly said, That this Mother did break the Serpents Head, and slew all
Heresies in the whole World, because she clothed the divine Word with humane
Flesh, that by this Flesh the Devil and all Heresies might be beaten down and
destroyed. And by the same Reason he might have added, if he had pleased, That
she cured all Diseases, wrought all Miracles, raised the Dead, and shall come
at last to judge both the Quick and Dead.

SECT. V.
Of the blessed Virgin's Name.
AFter her Birth, the next thing to be considered is her Name; which was given
her presently after. Castro Hist. deip. c. 2. p. 87.
produces Authors, That S. Anne, her Mother, imposed it: Not that she did this
of her own head, (take heed of that Mistake;) for the spurious Jerome De ortu
Mariae.
has taken care, that as our Savior was called Jesus, according to what the
Angel Gabriel required; so her name Mary was given her by her Parents upon an
Angels Command. Nay, if you will credit their famous Idiota Contemplat. de
Virg. Mar. cap. 5.
, the whole Trinity ordered it to be so; and adds, That Mary, after the Name of
her blessed Son, is above every Name, that at this Name every Knee shall bow,
as it manifestly appears, of things in Heaven, things on Earth, and things
under the Earth, and every Tongue confess the Grace, Glory and Virtue of this
most holy Name, etc. This perhaps might be looked upon as a high Strain of a
Man besotted with Superstition, were it not for the Countenance that is given
to such Folly and Impiety, even by the Devotions of this Church, which I shall
here produce.

SECT. 1.
An Office of the Name of the blessed Virgin.
I Find an Office printed at Lisbon 1627. with this Title. An Office of the
most holy Name of the blessed Virgin Mary, to be recited by the Friars of the
Order of the most holy Trinity, on the Seventeenth of September, by the
Concession of our holy Lord Gregory XV. with Leave to use it in all their
Monasteries and Convents throughout Spain. In which you may find such admirable
Strains as these.

Anaph. A solis ortu usque ad occasum laudabile nomen domini, and Mariae matris
ejus.

From the rising of the Sun to its going down, the Lords Name is Praiseworthy,
and the Name of Mary his Mother.

Anaph. Lauda Jerusalem Dominum, lauda inclytum nomen Mariae.

Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem, praise the renowned Name of Mary. (Instead of,
Praise thy God O Sion, which the Psalmist adds.)

Oration. Deus qui gloriosam matrem tuam nominari Mariam voluisti, concede
quaesu^us, ut qui dulce nomen Mariae implorant, perpetuum sentiant tuae
benedictionis effectum. Qui vivis, etc.

O God, who would have thy glorious Mother to be called Mary, grant, we
beseech thee, that they who implore the sweet Name of Mary, may perceive the
perpetual Effect of thy Benediction. Who live, etc.

In 1. Noct. Anaph.
In universa terra admirabile est nomen tuum, Maria.
In omnem terram diffusa est laus nominis Mariae.
Verse. Magnificate Mariam virginem mecum.
Resp. Et exaltemus nomen ejus in aeternum.
Thy Name, O Mary, is wonderful in all the Earth.
The Praise of the Name of Mary is diffused into every Land.
Verse. Magnify ye with me the name of Mary.
Resp. And let us exalt her Name for ever.
Post 2. Lect.
Resp. Benedictum sit nomen Mariae cujus manus tornatiles plenae hyacinthis.
Verse. Implorantibus Mariae nomen, Maria praesto adest.
After the 2d. Lesson. Resp. Belssed be the Name of Mary, whose well turned
Hands are full of Jacinths.
Verse. Mary is ready at hand, to those that invoke the Name of Mary.
Post 3. Lect.
Verse. Haec est Gideonis ve^lus, quae levissima orationis compressione, larga
exhibet gratiarum stillicida.
After the Third Lesson.
Verse. She is Gideon' s Fleece, which by the easiest Pressure of Prayer, does
afford large drops of Graces.
In 2. Nocturn, Anaph.
Refugium est in tribulatione Mariae nomen, omnibus illud invocantibus.
The Name of Mary is a Refuge in Tribulation, to all that call upon it.
Post 5. Lect.
Resp. Melius est bonum nomen quam divitiae multae. Turris fortissima Mariae
nomen.
Verse. Propugnaculum est omnibus qui ad illud confugiunt.
After the Fifth Lesson..
Resp. A good Name is better than much Riches. The Name of Mary is a most
strong Tower.
Verse. It is a Fortress to all that fly unto it.
Post 6. Lect.
Resp. Nomen sanctum meum notum faciam in medio populi mei, and scient, quia
ego Maria.
After the Sixth Lesson.
Resp. I will make known my holy Name in the midst of my People, and they shall
know that I am Mary. (Instead of, I am the Lord.)
In 3. Nocturn. Anaph.
Nunciate inter gentes gloriam Mariae, in omnibus populis mirabilia nominis
ejus.
Declare among the Gentiles the Glory of Mary, and the Wonders of her Name
among all People.
Anaph. Annunciaverunt Coeli nomen Mariae, and viderunt omnes populi gloriam
ejus.

The Heavens have declared the Name of Mary, and all People have seen her Glory.

Anaph. Notum fecit Dominus sacrum Mariae nomen, and in conspectu gentium
revelavit virtutem nominis ejus.

The Lord has made known the sacred Name of Mary, and has revealed the Power
of her Name in the Sight of the Heathen.

The Seventh, Eighth and Ninth Lessons are taken out of the Homilies, falsely
ascribed to S. Bernard, super missus est. Where commenting upon the Name of
Mary, and calling her Maris stella, the Star of the Sea, you have these
following Directions.

Lect. 8. O qui te intelligis in hujus saeculi profluvio, magis inter procellas
and tempestates fluctuare, quam per terram ambulare, ne avertas oculos a
fulgore hujus sideris, si non vis obrui procellis. Si insurgant venti
tentationum, si incurras scopulos tribulationum, respice stellam, voca Mariam:
Si jactaris superbiae undis, si ambitionis, si detractionis, si aemulationis,
respice stellam, voca Mariam: Si iracundia aut avaritia, aut carnis illecebra
naviculam concuslerit mentis, respice ad Mariam: Si criminum immanitate
turbatus, conscientiae foeditate confusus, judicis horrore perterritus,
barathro incipias absorberi tristitiae, desperationis abysso, cogita Mariam.

Lesson 8. O thou that in this Worlds Sea, know that thou rather art tossed
among Storms and Tempests, than that thou walk upon sirm Land; turn not away
thine Eyes from the brightness of this Star, if thou would not be
overwhelmed with the Storms: If the Winds of Temptation do arise, if thou
fallest foul on the Rocks of Tribulation, look toward the Star, call upon
Mary. If thou art tossed with the Waves of Pride, of Ambition, of Detraction,
of Emulation, look toward the Star, call upon Mary. If Anger or Avarice, or
the enticings of the Flesh shake the Vessel of thy Mind, look toward Mary; if
being troubled with the greatness of thy Crimes, confounded with the foulness
of thy Conscience, affrighted with the Horror of thy Judge; thou beginnest to
be swallowed up in the Gulf of Sadness and the Abyss of Despair, think on Mary.

Lect. 9. In periculis, in angustiis, in rebus dubi^s Mariam cogita, Mariam
invoca: Non recedat ab ore, non recedat a cord: Et ut impetres ejus orationis
suffragium, non deseras conversationis exemplum. Ipsam sequens non devias;
ipsam rogans non desperas; ipsam cogitans non erras; ipsa tenente non corruis;
ipsa protegente non metuis; ipsa duce non fatigaris; etc.

Lesson 9. In Dangers and Straits, when thy Affairs are doubtful, thinkon Mary,
call upon Mary: Let her not depart from thy Mouth nor from thy Heart; and that
thou may obtain the Suffrage of her Prayer, do not for sake the Example of
her Conversation. By following her thou shall not wander, by asking her thou will not despair, by thinking on her thou shall not err; whilst she has hold
of thee, thou will not fall; whilst she protects thee, thou will not fear; when
she goes before thee, thou will not be weary, etc.

Anaph. Benedictus Deus qui Mariae virgini lucis nomen donavit, ut illuminaret
eos qui in tenebris sedent, and ut stella Maris errantes dirigeret in portum
salutis.

Blessed be God, who has bestowed on the virgin Mary a Name of Light, that she
might enlighten those that sit in Darkness, and as the Star of the Sea, direct
those that wander, into a safe Port.

After this Office follows a Mass of the most holy Name of the Virgin Mary.

In the Salisbury Breviary upon the Nativity of the blessed Virgin (ad Sept. 8.
Sexta die infra Octavas) you may find Three Lessons that are a Descant upon her
Name: As follows.

Lect. 1. Haec electa and insignis inter filias, non fortuito quidem aut solo
placito parentum ut plerique, sed divina dispensatione nomen accepit, ita ut
ipsa quoque vocabuli sui figura magnum quoddam innueret, interpretatur enim
Maris stella.

Lesson 1. This elect Virgin and renowned among the Daughters, did not receive
her Name by chance, or as most do, by the sole Pleasure of her Parents, but by
divine Dispensation; so that the very Figure of her Name might intimate some
great thing, for it is, being interpreted, the Star of the Sea.

Lect. 2. Quid ergo mysticum interpretatio gerat per similitudinem ostendamus.
Nautis quippe per mare transeuntibus notare opus est stellam, non long a summo
coeli cardine corruscantem, and ex respectu illius aestimare atque dirigere
cursum suum, ut portum destinatum apprehendere possint.

Lesson 2. Let us show by the Similitude what Mystery the Interpretation
carries. Mariners, when they pass through the Sea, it behooves them to observe a
bright Star not far from the Zenith, and with respect to it to estimate and
direct their Course, that they may come to their designed Haven.

Lect. 3. Simili modo, fratres, oportet universos Christicolas inter fluctus
hujus saeculi remigantes, attendere maris stellam hanc, id est, Mariam, quae
summo rerum Cardini Deo proxima est, and respectu exempli ejus cursum dirigere.
Quod qui fecerit, non jactabitur vanae gloriae vento, non frangetur scopulis
adversorum, nec absorbebitur Scyllea voragine voluptatum, sed prospere veniet
ad portum quieris eternae.

Lesson 3. In like manner, Brethren, it behooves all Christians that ply through
the Waves of this World, to attend to this Star of the Sea, that is, Mary, who
is next to God, who is at the Top of all things, and to direct their Course
regarding her Example. Whosoever does thus, shall not be tossed with the Wind
of Vainglory, nor be split upon the Rocks of Adversity, nor swallowed up in
the dangerous Gulf of Pleasures, but shall safely come to the Harbor of
eternal Rest.

SECT. VI.
Remarks on what their Offices and Authors say concerning the blessed Virgin's
Name.
THE whole Discourse of their Authors upon this Subject is made up of Two
things, Folly and Profaneness. Folly, by childish toying with the several
Significations of the Virgin's Name, and sinding great Mysteries in every
Letter of it. Profaneness, by attributing those Effects to the pronouncing and
using of it, which makes it look like a Charm; and applying such things to her
Name, which can only be given to God and our Savior; as we have seen in the
foregoing Offices, and will farther appear in the Sequel of our Discourse.

That there was a Mystery in our Savior's Name, and that it was intended to be
significative to us, when he was called Jesus, we are sure, because the
Scripture tells us so: And a learned Man Rivet. Apolog. pro S. virg. Maria l.
1. c 9.
has well observed, That as there is no mention there of any Message of an
Angel to impose this Name of Mary on her; so if there had been any Mystery in
it, the Scripture would not have been silent, in all likelihood, to have
declared it. The Name of Mary was a common Name at that time among the Jews,
and many Mary's are mentioned in the Gospels; and as now the Names of the
Apostles and other holy Persons are given to Children, so it is probable that
the Name of Mary was given to many of their Daughters in memory of Moses his
Sister Miriam, (for that is the same with Mary.)

But though there need be no further Inquiry into that, for the imposing of
which we read of no extraordinary Reason; yet this will not satisfy her
Devoto's: They examine all the Significations of Hebrew Words from whence it
can be derived, and commonly pitch upon that which is most improbable. Jerome
Xaverius Hist. Christi persic. p. 18.
will not let his Indians be ignorant that her Name has several Significations;
Maria is as much as Alta, high, (and that indeed is the most likely, from the
Hebrew (...), to exalt) Maris amaritudo, (or as others amarum mare) a bitter
Sea; Magister seu Dominus maris, a Master or Lord of the Sea, (he should have
said Lady.) S. Jerome De nomin. Hebraic.
mentions several others; as, Illuminatrix mea, She that enlightens me; or,
Smyrna maris, The Myrrh of the Sea. But in another place De nomin. super
Matthaeum.
he pitches rather upon amarum Mare, or Stella maris, bitter Sea, or Star of
the Sea. Which latter, some learned Men Rivet. ibid. Drusius comment. post. ad
voc. Nov. Test. c. 15.
think should rather be read Stilla maris, a Drop of the Sea, because the
Hebrew (...) signifies Stilla, but no Word in Hebrew like it answers to Stella.
The pretended Epiphanius Orat. de laud: Virg.
says, That Mary is wont to be interpreted Domina and Spes, Lady and Hope, for
she brought forth our Lord, who is the Hope of the whole World.

These are all far fetched, and must be so strained by Fancy to make them suit
to her, that it is pity to insist farther on them. S. Ambrose De Instit. virg.
c. 5.
has a Signification of the Word that is some. what to the purpose, viz. Deus
ex genere meo, God of my Offspring; which Poza Elucid. l. 2. tr. 17. c. 11.
approves; but adds, That he cannot see from what Hebrew Root it can be made
out: But Castro Hist. deip. c. 2. p. 93.
has made a Conjecture, and thinks it may be compounded of (...) the
Preposition, (...) signifying the Womb, and (...) the Name of God, which put
together must then sound Merehemjah, and by Contraction Meriah: But all learned
Men almost agree that the Hebrew (...) Mirjam, is dissyllabum, a Word of Two
Syllables, not compounded but simple, and therefore excludes all this fooling.
Now amongst all this Variety of Significations which they produce, it is pretty
to observe, that the most unlikely of them all, viz. Stella maris, the Star of
the Sea, is that which they generally make choice of, and declame upon. You
have seen before the Explication of it out of the Breviary of Sarum: That noted
Hymn, Ave maris Stella, gives her this Title, Hail Star of the Sea; and some
have made whole Books Fr. Bonaldus' s Stella Mystica; a Book to explain this
Hymn.
to explain it, and apply it to her. Erasmus Colloq. de Naufragio.
in his Colloquies brings in the Mariners in a Storm imploring the Help of the
blessed Virgin, and giving her the sweet Titles of Star of the Sea, Queen of
Heaven, Lady of the World, Port of Safety, and many more which are never to be
found in the Scriptures; and he wonders, What she has to do with the Sea,
since, as he supposes, she never sailed. He gives a probable Account of it,
That of old the Goddess Venus had the Care of Mariners, who was believed to
spring from the Sea (and was called also Stella matutina, the morning Star) but
since she was discharged of that Office, The Virgin Mother is substituted in
the Room of her, that was a Mother and no Virgin. But alas! this is a poor
Conceit compared with that of Pet. Chrysologus Sermon. 146. if it be his, for
Bellarmine de Scr. Eccles. reckons only 122. Homilies of his.
who may fully satisfy any that questions what she has to do with the Sea: For
says he, Quomodo non Maria mare? Congregationes inquit aquarum vocavit Maria.
Mary must needs be the Sea, for the gathering together of the Waters called he
(Maria) Seas: To signify, says Novarinus Umbr. virg. n. 1153.
that Mary was to be the Place where all Graces should be collected. Carthagena
Lib. 2. de arc. deip. Hom. 6.
adds, That God was so much in love with this Name of Mary, that he would not
let slip this slight Occasion, but therefore called the Collection of Waters
Seas, (Maria); Vt sic primus omnium Mariam pronunciaret, That he might be the
first that should pronounce the Name of Mary. This indeed supposes that the
Language God spoke in at the first Creation was Latin; which if you will but
grant (and what pity is it not to grant it rather than lose so precious a
Conceit,) they can easily answer another Objection, taken from the different
Pronunciation and Quantity of the middle Syllable of the Two, Maria's, that
which signifies Seas being short, and Maria, that signifies the Virgin, being
long. There is a Mystery in that, says the Homilist Ib. p. 167.
last named, to signify the delating and extending her Dominion from Sea to
Sea, and to the Worlds End; therefore God would have it pronounced long, not
short. Or you may have another Reason from Novarinus Umbr. virg. p 338. n. 1153.
, that by staying longer in the pronouncing this Name, we may find the more
Pleasure and Sweetness in it, which their Saints have found by comfortable
Experience. For he tells us Ib. n 1124. ex Sur^o ad Apr. 7.
of S. Hermannus, That when he heard Mary named, he used to fall flat on the
Ground with his Face, and stay some while before he arose; and being asked the
Reason, he said, That when upon the naming of her he cast himself on the
Ground, there was such a smell of Flowers and Perfumes came from the Earth into
his Nostrils, that he could have been content to fix always there, if he might;
and therefore he used to call the Virgin Mary his Rose. Caesarius Lib. 7.
Mirac. cap. 50.
also tells us of a Matron that could not pronounce the Name of our Lady,
without a sensible and wonderful Sweetness, (not to her Smell, but to her Taste)
for by repeating Fifty Ave Maria's daily, in the time of her Prayers, all the
Spittle in her Mouth seemed to be turned into Honey: The same was tried by
Marsilius (to whom she confessed this) for Six Weeks with the same Effect, and
also by a Third Monk. And we are told of B. Ida of Lovaine Novarin. ib. n. 1337.
that she began an Ave Mary on a certain Day, but by reason of the exceeding
abundant Delight she found, she scarce finished the saying of it in Two Days
time. This, I hope, is a Reason sufficient why her Name should not have a short
Pronunciation, and methinks may serve to prove that every Syllable (not the
middle one only) of Maria should be long.

If all this be not enough to show how properly she is called the Sea, you may
hear it further made out by the consideration of a kind of Immensity Novarinus
ib. n. 1154.
in her Liberality, which can no more be exhausted than the Sea, and the
multitude of her Mercies which cannot be numbered (no more than the Sand upon
its Shore.) But though she be a Sea, and the Star of the Sea, yet why is she a
bitter Sea, amarum mare, (which was one of the Significations we heard before
of her Name.) Can that Name which we just now heard, has been as sweet as Honey
to the Taste, be bitter too? Yes, very well, in the Sense of S. Bonaventure In
speculo virg. c. 1.
, a bitter Sea, Diabolum sub^ergendo, by drowning the Devil, as the red Sea was
bitter to the Egyptians when they were drowned therein. But enough of the
Signification of her Name. Let us now see a little how childishly they
endeavor to find great Mysteries in every Letter of it.

One that was employed by the Pope to make an Office for the Feast of her
Conception Bernard. de Busto, who cites often this Office in his Mariale.
(and therefore to be looked upon as a man of Note, and one that had examined
thoroughly all things relating to the blessed Virgin) has observed I know not
how many fine things, in the Word Maria Id. Marial. part. 3. ser. 1. See also
Carthagena lib. 2. hom. 6.
, which make for her Honor. The Five Letters of her Name signify Five precious
Stones with their Properties. M. Margarita, (a Pearl) (I never knew that was a
Stone before;) A. Adamas, (a Diamond;) R. Rubinus, (a Ruby;) I. Jaspis, (a
Jasper;) A. Amethystus, (an Amethist.) He finds also in these Five Letters the
Five Benefits she confers on the World; as Mediatrix, Auxiliatrix, Reparatrix,
Reconciliatrix, Illuminatrix and Advocata. That is, She that Mediates on our
behalf, is the helper of our Salvation, a repairer and reconciler of us to God;
she that enlightens us and is our Advocate. Or as others will have it V. Rivet.
Apol. pro Mar. virg. p. 65.
, M. Matter misericordiae, A. Advocata afflictorum, R. Refugium redeuntium, I.
Inventrix Justitiae, A. Amica Angelorum. That is, The Mother of Mercy, the
Advocate of the Afflicted, the Refuge of those that repent and return, the
Inventor of Justice, and the Friend of Angels. Another Ambro. Servita a pud
Bernard. de Bust. ib. p. 235.
finds in them her Five principal Virtues. By M. is shown her Faith; for that
Letter is made up of three l's bound together, to show that she had the perfect
Knowledge and Faith in the Trinity: For as Three l's joined together make one
Letter M; so the Three divine Persons, joined by Generation and Procession,
make but one God: (And it may be this is it which the Salisbury Breviary means
in the forecited Expression, That ipsa vocabuli sui figura, etc. The very
Figure of her Name does intimate some great Matter.) By the Second Letter A. is
signified her Hope: By R. her Charity: By I. her Humility; and by A. her
Bounty. And I Will forfeit my Credit, if any Man can imagine how these Four last
should be made out of those Letters, without consulting his Words, which yet I
do not think worth setting down, nor a great deal more of the same kind you may
find there: For indeed in this way any Man may find any thing he pleases: It
being merely such Fooling as Schoolboys use with, I love my Love with an A,
etc. I could fancy nothing else but this, when I saw him running her
Excellencies through all the Letters of the Alphabet Id. Marial. part 12. ser.
2. p. 994.
, and making a Prayer to her upon every one of them, ex. gr. A. Advocate of
Mankind (Advocata humani generis) do thou desend our Cause and pray for us. B.
Blessed above all Women; make us to be blessed by thy Son. And so he proceeds
with the rest, (only is sadly put to it, as the Boys use to be, with the Two
Letters K. and Q. for which he puts Karismatum d^i dispensatrix, and Quartae
Hierarchiae praesidens.) Pelbartus Stellarii l. 6. p 1. art. 2.
not only runs such Descant upon the Five Letters of her Name, but he adds this
further Conceit, That it was very fit that her Name should consist of Five
Letters (though the Hebrew (...) has but Four:) For thus it admirably
corresponds to several Mysteries: As First, To the Mystery of the divine
Conception, For, says he, she conceived Christ by Five Words (Luc. 1.) Fiat
nahi secundum verbum tuum. (i. e.) Be it according to thy Word. Second, To the
Mystery of the Eucharist, in Five Words again, Hoc est enim corpus meum: For
this is my Body. Third. To the Mystery of our Redemption, for the
accomplishment of which Christ received Five Wounds. But there is a Jesuit
Spinellus de throno Dei, c. 4.
finds as great a Mystery in it, or greater, supposing it to consist but of
Four Letters; for he would have it to be Tetragrammaton, a Name like that of
God with Four Letters ((...)) which the Jews refuse to pronounce; and he tells
us that S. Gerard In vit. ejus apud Surium. October. 24.
in like manner taught the Hungarians not to pronounce the Name Mary, but that
they should call her Lady (Dominam,) and if any did name her, they should do it
with great Reverence, bending their Knees and bowing their Heads, and
uncovering it, which was practiced also by Fr. Binans Paul Barry paradis.
ouvert. p. 265.
. Yea to testify the great Worthiness they apprehended to be contained therein,
some great Kings have denied it to be fitting that any mortal Woman should bear
that Name Raynaud. Dypt. Mar. p. 28.
. Therefore Alphonsus VI. King of Castile, being to marry a Wife that was a
baptized Moor, would not have her called Mary, though she desired it: And
Casimire I. King of Poland, changed his Wives Name which was Mary, into
Dobrogneva: Whence the Custom is thought to have risen, that in Poland it is a
Crime to name any Woman Mary P. Barry ib.
.

But I Will conclude these Mysteries of her Name, with one that Spinellus Ubi
supra.
mentions, consisting in Numbers that may be made out of it. That as the Number
of the Beast is 666, and the Number of the Name of Jesus 888, so the Number of
Mary's Name is 999. (How he makes this good he does not tell us, but) he
inferrs from hence her Dignity; For, says he, the Number Nine consists of the
Number Three (which is a most perfect Number agreeing to the divine Persons)
thrice repeated, and is attributed to the Orders of Angels; wherefore it shows,
That the Mother of God is wholly celestial and Angelical; and then this Number
Nine being thrice repeated, shows that this her Excellency and Dignity is both
eminent and solid.

Having thus found a great many fantastical Mysteries in that where none was
ever intended, the next Work is to cry up this Name, and make it as venerable
as possible; not only by the Ways now named, but by others which now shall
follow. They endeavor to persuade us, That not only Men but Angels admire this
Name, and are in love with its Pronunciation.

Richardus de S. Laurentio Lib. 1. de laud. Virg. c. 2. citante Novarino.
(a great Author with them, who lived above Four hundred Years ago) makes this
Observation. That at least three times this Question is asked in the Canticles
in the Person of the Angels, Quae est ista? Who is this? And he imagines the
Reason to be, That they are desirous that the sweet Name of Mary may be
answered to that Question: For, says he, Angels desire that her Name should be
mentioned and discovered; and that it should not only be renowned in Heaven.
And if this Concern of theirs does not move us, yet Gratitude to her, when she
her self is also concerned in it, will not fail to do it. To which Purpose they
tell us, That her beloved Hermannus, whom she married Barthol. de los Rios
Hierarch. Marian. l. 5. c. 40. ex Surio vit. Hermanni Apr. 5. Gononi Chron.
Deip. p. 242.
, being distracted and hindered by Business, and Cares of his Monastery, grew
more negligent and remiss in reciting her Offices and Hours, than formerly; to
whom she appeared in the Shape of an old withered wrinkled Woman, chiding him
that now her Memory was grown old with him, whereas formerly he named, saluted
and praised her a Thousand times: Upon this Rebuke, he resolved, by
commemorating her Joys, and reciting her Ave's, to make her young again, which
he did. The Name of Mary, says another, Barthol. de los Rios ib. l. 6. c. 11,
and 26.
is the best Image of her, and more venerable than all her Relics and Images:
He that does invoke her by this sweet Name, attending to the Etymology thereof,
does recite compendiously great Litanies of extraordinary Merit and Efficacy.

Poza Elucidar. l. 2. trac 17. c. 5.
and others, think that the Name of Mary, as far as is expedient for our own
and others Salvation, does confer the Effect ex opere operato (by the Work
done) just as the Churches Exorcisms do, and as many say the same of the Sign
of the Cross, and of the Name of Jesus. From such Principles as these, they
fall into those heathenish Battologies and vain Repetitions, which our Savior
condemns (Matt. 6. 7.) and their Prayers become, in the Phrase of the Son of
Syrach Ecclus. 7. 14.
, much babbling: consisting of a nauseous Repetition of one and the same Name
over and over again. Of this the Reader may take a shameful Instance, how they
abuse in this manner, the blessed Name of Jesus, in that which they call Jesus
Psalter, See Manual of godly Prayers, at the end.
which consists of Fifteen Petitions, with the Name of Jesus ten times (or
rather Thirty times) reiterated before every one of the Petitions.

The Manner of reciting the Psalter of. Jesus, is as follows.

The First Petition.
1. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Mercy.
2. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Mercy.
3. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Mercy.
4. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Mercy.
5. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Mercy.
6. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Mercy.
7. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Mercy.
8. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Mercy.
9. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Mercy.
10. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu. Mercy.
The Second Petition.
1. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Help me.
2. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Help me.
3. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Help me.
4. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Help me.
5. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Help me.
6. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Help me.
7. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Help me.
8. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Help me.
9. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Help me.
10. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu. Help me.
Third Petition.
1. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Strengthen me.
2. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Strengthen me.
And so on, as before. Fourth Petition.
1. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Comfort me.
2. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Comfort me. etc.
Fifth Petition.
1. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Make me constant and stable.
2. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Make me constant and stable. etc.
Sixth Petition.
1. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Lighten me.
2. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Lighten me. etc.
Seventh Petition.
1. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Grant me Grace to dread thee.
2. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Grant me Grace to dread thee. etc.
Eighth Petition.
1. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Grant me Grace to love thee.
2. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Grant me Grace to love thee. etc.
Ninth Petition.
1. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Give me Grace to remember my death.
2. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Give me Grace to remember my death. etc.
Tenth Petition.
1. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Send me here my Purgatory
2. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Send me here my Purgatory etc.
Eleventh Petition.
1. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Grant me Grace to fly evil Company.
2. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Grant me Grace to fly evil Company. etc.
Twelfth Petition.
1. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Give me Grace to call for Help to thee.
2. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Give me Grace to call for Help to thee. etc.
Thirteenth Petition.
1. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Make me to persevere in Virtue.
2. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Make me to persevere in Virtue. etc.
Fourteenth Petition.
1. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Give me Grace to fix my Mind on thee.
2. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Give me Grace to fix my Mind on thee. etc.
Fifteenth Petition.
1. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Give me Grace to order my Life to thee.
2. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Give me Grace to order my Life to thee.
3. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Give me Grace to order my Life to thee.
4. Jesu, Jesu, Jesu, Give me Grace to order my Life to thee.
etc. As many times as the First. Here you see an Hundred and Fifty Rows of the
Name of Jesus, (which being Three in a Row make up Four hundred and Fifty)
which must be all pattered over, before those few Words that make up the
Fifteen Petitions are concluded. There is no Atheist or Infidel, who, if he had
a Design to turn Prayers into Ridicule, could more effectually do it, than by
such a Prescription as this. But we have not the worst of it yet: For you must
know, that it is not the Petition and the Sense, following this often repeated
Name that is necessary, but the Name alone often used without any thing else
adjoined is that which they lay much Stress upon, and which makes acceptable
Devotion with them. For thus I find in that Book of the Jesuit P. Barry Le
paradise Ouvert. p. 166. The Author of which is so fond of the Virgin's Name,
that instead of Paul Barry he desired to be called Paul of S. Mary.
which contains an hundred Devotions to the blessed Virgin (and is bought up
for common Use as our Practice of Piety, or the Whole Duty of Man; for I
observe Seventeen Editions of it in less than Thirty Years) he gives this for
one. Often to pronounce the Name of Mary, in imitation of a Japan Woman.
Concerning whom the Annals of the Jesuits report, That in honor of a Deity
which that Country worships, called Amida, she used to repeat that Name an
Hundred and forty thousand times daily, rising very early every Morning (as she
had need to perform this Task) and being assisted by a familiar Spirit that
awaked her: This Woman was baptized An. 1621. And after she was a Christian,
changed this Superstition into Devotion, and obliged herself, in gratitude for
her Conversion, to pronounce every day as many times (viz. a Hundred and forty
thousand) the sacred Names of Jesus and Mary; and because now the Devil would
come no more to awake her in the morning, her Angel Guardian succeeded in that
Office; so pleasing to God, says the Author, was her Simplicity and Devotion.
This Worship, so Japan and unparalleled, cannot, he says, be practiced, the
Number is so great, unless God give some special Grace: However he advises his
Philagie (so he calls the devout Person he instructs) to choose a good round
Number of Mary's to repeat, as a way to get Comfort, and to testify the
Tenderness of his Affections to the Mother of God. Another great Stickler
Barthol. de los Rios ib. l. 5. cap. 40.
for the Advancement of her Devotion, prescribes this Exercise as very pleasing
to her, viz. The repeating only these Two Words, Ave Maria (Hail Mary) Seventy
two times, in memory of the Seventy two Years of her Life; to which if you
adjoin as many Honors and Genuflections, the Devotion will, he believes, be
increased, and both Soul and Body be exercised in the Service of the blessed
Virgin. And lest any one should scruple these Reverences at the naming of her,
which are usually paid at the mention of Jesus, a famed Devoto Rich. a S.
Lanrentio l. 4. de laud. virg.
of the Virgins tells us, That she made her self of no Reputation, after the
Example of her Son, taking upon her the form of an Handmaid; wherefore God also
has highly exalted her, and given her a Name that is above every Name, that in
her Name every Knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and
things under the Earth, etc. Which very Text thus applied (In the Name of Mary
every Knee shall bow) another Jesuit Vincentius Brunus Medit. 2. de B. Virg. p.
62.
thus comments upon; After the sweet Name of Jesus, there is no other Name
under Heaven given unto Men, whence such Salvation and Security comes to
Mankind. He might have spared his Complement (after the Name of Jesus) since he
adds a little after, Ib. p. 64.
In all Temptations and Infirmities of the Soul, and in all Necessities of the
Body, this holy Name of Mary is our only Remedy and Refuge; neither was there
ever any one in any such Tribulation, that upon devout Invocation of her, did
not find present Help.

The Sense of all which Blasphemies is contained in the Words of that Hymn.

Gaude Matrona coelica, In Antidoto animae and Hist. sec. chorum Augustini in
commemor. B. Virginis.

Tu ancillam Jesu Christi
Te vocare voluisti,
Sed ut docet Lex divina
Tu illius es Domina:
Nam Lex jubet and ratio
Matrem praeesse filio:
Ergo ora suppliciter,
Et praecipe sublimiter
Ut nos in mundi vespera
Ad regna ducat superna.
All Joys attend thee, heavenly Dame,
Though humbly thou did choose the Name
Of Handmaid unto Christ; yet we,
Taught by the Law Divine, may see
Thou art (unless we would degrade thee)
Rather his Governness and Lady:
Reason and Law back one another,
Before the Son to set the Mother.
Pray for us then, and if need be,
Exert thy high Authority,
That when the Worlds Joys set and leave us
His heavenly Kingdom may receive us.
In Honor of the Name Maria some have culled out Five Psalms that begin with
the Letters of her Name, and chosen it as an Exercise daily to recite them. The
Psalms are, Magnificat (Luc. 1.) Ad Dominum (Ps. 119.) Retribue (Ps. 118.) In
Convertendo (Ps. 125.) Ad te Levavi (Ps. 122.) This was practiced, says
Vincentius Bellovacensis Specul. Hist. lib 8. cap. 116.
by one Joscio a Monk of S. Omars; and you may guess how acceptable this
Devotion was by the Miracle that followed; for as he lay dead in his Chamber,
they found Five Roses. growing upon his Face; one coming out of his Mouth,
other Two out of each Nostril, and Two more out of each Ear, which in Letters
of Gold had severally these Five Letters of her Name, and those Words of the
Psalms written plainly upon them. Though the very same Story is told by Tho.
Cantipratanus De mirac. sui temp. l. 2. c. 29. sec. 15.
concerning one Josbertus of the Monastery of Dole, and one, no doubt, as true
as the other. But any thing will do Wonders, when the Name of the blessed
Virgin is glorified thereby; for so we hear Barthol. de los Rios ubi supra p.
628.
, that a Plague was immediately stopped in a Convent, An. 1470. only by
reciting Five Psalms taken, not out of the Bible, but, out of Bonaventure's
Psalter (as blasphemous as it is) which begin with the Letters of her Name,
being these that follow: Magna es Domina, Ad te Domina clamabo, Refugium tu es
Domina, In Domina confido, Ad Dominam cum tribularer.

There is no foolish Lover that plays more childishly with the Name of his
Mistress, than their ridiculous Superstition does with the Name of this their
Lady, as they call her. They think their very Charity is more acceptable when
it honors her. For thus they advise Id. ib. p. 629.
, and thus her Slaves (Mancipia) at Brussels practice, to relieve Five poor
People on Saturday (which is dedicated to the Virgin) in memory of the Five
Letters of her Name: And to do it more effectually, such Five poor People may
be chosen to bestow the Alms upon, who, by the capital Letters of their Name do
express and make up the Name of blessed Mary, that so the Remembrance of it may
be the more lively. Nay some in honor of it, deny nothing that is asked of
them in the Name of the Virgin; being mindful (as the Author wisely adds) of
that saying, Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my Name he will give it you. Thus
Alex. Ales Antoninus 3. part. Hist. tit. 24. c. 8.
was trepanned to list himself in the Order of the Franciscans, at that time
famous for Severity and Poverty, being suddenly requested by one to enter into
it for Love of the Mother of God, which, as irrefragable a Doctor as he was,
made him yield, though otherwise very unwilling and loath at the first. The
Beggars in the Country of the Great Mogul understand the Efficacy of this; who,
we are told Purchase pilgrims. part. 1. l. 4. c. 17. p. 600.
ask Alms of Christians in the Name of Bibee Maria (i. e. Lady Mary,) not in
the Name of Hazanet (or Hazareth) Eesa (i. e. Lord Jesus) which shows that the
Jesuits have preached to them Mary more than Christ. How can it choose but that
her Name must be very prevailing, when we read Vincent. Bellov. spec. Hift. l.
7. c. 102, 103.
of a Soldier, an old practitioner in the fornicating Trade, who having hired
of a poor Man a Nights-lodging with his Daughter, and was just preparing to
deflower the Virgin, who hung back and made lamentable Moan; when he asked her
Name, and understood that it was Mary, and remembered it was Saturday Night,
(devoted to the Virgin) he desisted from his Purpose, and placed her in a
Nunnery; and immediately after being slain in a Tournement, it was revealed by
the blessed Virgin to this Nun in a Vision, That for the Kindness he had showed
to her for her Sake, she had brought his Soul to Heaven; and as a Sign of the
Truth of it, they should find a fresh Rose upon his Grave springing out of his
Mouth, which upon Examination proved so. Not unlike to this is another
encouraging Story, which Pelbartus Stellarii l. (...) p. 2. art. 3.
gives us out of a Book of Miracles, which he attributes to S. Anselm: How a
Beggar came to a covetous rich Man greatly devoted to the Virgin, and asked an
Alms of him for God's sake, and he denied him with Reproaches; he asked again
of him, for the Love of his own Soul and his Salvation, but that Argument moved
him not at all: He begged a Third time, for the Love of the blessed Virgin; at
which the covetous Man angrily threw a Loaf of Bread to him, charging him to
beg no more in that Name. When this Miser died, and his Works came to be
weighed, it was found that his good Works were less, and so was adjudged to the
Devils to be tormented: But the blessed Virgin immediately appeared and brought
a Loaf of Bread he had given for her sake, and put it in the Balance, and
immediately by her Merits the Scale was turned. She entreated her Son for him,
who said, I was hungry and he gave me no Meat, etc. He showed no Mercy,
therefore deserves to find none; to whom she replied, I am the Mother of Mercy
and he had me in great Devotion: And so he was released and sent into the Body
again to repent and lead a better Life. Such Stories as these have given such
Spirit to the Worshippers of the Virgin, that they are not afraid to dispute
and put it to the Question, Whether the Name of Mary be not more powerful than
that of Jesus. That it is a sweeter Name is a concluded Case. For they compare
Barthol. de los Rios ubi supra l. 6. c. 32.
the Two names of Jesus and Mary to Salt and Honey: Salt (which answers to
Christ's Name) is more wholesome, and in respect of its Preservative Virtue, of
it self more efficacious; yet for all that it seems to be more sharp and
pungent; and so the Name Jesus, howsoever you take it, sounds something of a
judging Majesty, by reason of his Divinity; but now the Name of Mary, quantum
quantum est, is every way all Sweetness; it is Honey, preserving from
Corruption, yet not biting; and he concludes, That the Name of Mary to us
affords a sweeter Taste than that of her Son.

If you ask about the Power and Prevalency of the Two Names, we are told Id.
ib. c. 38.
That it is not improbably said, That her Name, at lest, quo ad nos, is more
efficacious than his: For which he cites the Words of the spurious S. Anselm,
Velocior est nonnunquam salus, etc. De excel. Virginis c. 6.
Salvation comes more speedily by invoking Mary's Name than that of Jesus. --
Christ being called upon in his own Name, he does but what is just if he does
not presently hear; but when his Mother's Name is invoked, though he that prays
does not deserve to be heard for his own Merits, yet the Merits of his Mother
intercede that he should be heard. So that he concludes, That the Name of Mary
affords more gentle and humane, more frequent and speedy Arguments of Pity and
Mercy, than the Name of her Son. Which another Blasphemer Rich. a S. Laurentio
de laud. Virg. l. 1. c. 2.
thus expresses, Jesus is as it were a proud name (quasi superbum nomen) and
too potent, but Affection becomes hers that is a name more humble; so that if
any one dreads the Austerity of the Deity or Male-sex (Sexus virilis) in Jesus,
let him have Recourse to Mary, in whom nothing of these is to be suspected; for
Mary is a Woman's name, commending and carrying before it Gentleness.

Francis Mendoza Veridar. l. 2. probl. 2. p. 70.
the Jesuit, has spoke his Mind out, in answer to the former Question. I say,
though Christ stands in greater Authority with God than the Virgin, yet the
blessed Virgin sometimes is more easily moved by our Prayers than Christ, and
therefore the Patronage of the Mother is sometimes more present to us, than
that of the Son: The Reason is, That Christ is a Judge, and the blessed Virgin
only a Patroness, and a Patroness is only Mercy. And for a further Proof of
this, he gives Examples of this greater Prevalency of the Virgin in several
Plagues at Rome and Constantinople, etc. Where after the Invocation of Saints,
and of Christ himself without Success, upon flying to this sacred Anchor (as he
calls her) upon carrying about her Image, or celebrating her Festival, the
Plague has immediately ceased; for as it is a common thing to break the Force
of Cannon Bullets by opposing Wool-sacks to them, Ib. p. 73.
so the Anger of the Deity thundering and raging against miserable Offenders,
the Force of it is broken and dulled by the Interposition of Mary's Fleece. We
read, says another Novarinus umbr. Virgin. number. 1195.
, Prove. 18. 10. That the Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the righteous Man
runs unto it and is safe. Turn but nomen Domini into Dominae (a small matter,
only the change of a Letter) the name of Lord into that of Lady, and you may
say the same of Mary. Nay you may say more of her name, for though Solomon
indeed (says the foresaid Richardus Rich. a S. Laurent. ubi prius.
) who knew but little of Mary, bids the Righteous fly to the name of the Lord
as to a strong Tower; yet we (to whom blessed Revelations have been made since
his days) may say, The Name of our Lady is a strong Tower, the Sinner flys unto
it and is safe. It seems a just Man may fly to God, if he pleases, but a Sinner
had better betake himself to Mary. And thus, says Novarinus Ibidem.
some explain that in Luc. 13. concerning the Tower of Siloam that fell and
slew Eighteen Persons; That Tower is Christ, who was sent by the Father into
the World, and broke in pieces all those on whom he fell: The Virgin Mary is
our Tower, but for Safety, who withdraws and fetches off Sinners (subducit)
from the deserved Anger of her Son.

So that according to this Doctrine, though it be a common thing in
Exclamations (Jesu Maria) and in Prayers (Laus Deo and Virgini Mariae) to join
the Two names of Jesus and Mary, and to put Jesus first, just as Philip and
Mary stand in our Coins, yet this must be interpreted as done rather in
Civility to the Relation of Son and Mother, than that Sinners have an equal
Expectation from them, or Encouragement in Addresses to them, for in this Mary
has the Preference and Precedence.

To conclude this, the Jesuit Poza Elucidar. l. 2. tr. 17. c. 6.
reckons up several admirable Effects, that follow the use of the Virgin's
name; That the name of Mary frees from the Fear of Death and injury of Devils;
that it makes the Mind Chaste; that it refreshes a Soul that is fainting and
sorrowful; that it gives Security and Safeguard to the Body: And in a Word,
That her name receives all Virtue from her self, and does the same things that
she does.

The Words also of S. Briget Revelat. l. 1. cap. 9.
must not be forgotten; Upon the hearing Mary named, those that are in
Purgatory rejoice beyond measure, as a sick Man lying in his Bed, when he hears
a word of Comfort. The good Angels hearing this name, presently approach nearer
to those just Men who are committed to their Guardianship, and rejoice in their
Proficiency (as if, for sooth, they were more negligent in their Office, till
she was invoked) The Devils also all of them dread and fear it; so that upon
hearing the name of Mary, they presently let go and leave the Soul that was
detained in their Clutches.

All that I shall further add is, That upon Instigation of Lewis IX. King of
France, Pope Clement IV. Raynaud. Dipped. Marian. p. 28.
bestowed a Three years Indulgence upon all that should repeat these following
Words, viz. Benedictum sit dulce nomen Domini nostri Jesu Christi, and
gloriosissimae virginis Mariae matris ejus, in aeternum and ultra. Nos cum
prole pia benedicat virgo Maria. That is, Blessed be the sweet Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and of the most glorious Virgin Mary his Mother for evermore.
Afford to us thy Benediction,
O Virgin Mary with thy gracious Son.


The name of Mary has its Feast Idem. ib*
also among the Conchenses in Spain, confirmed from the Year 1513. by the
Pope's Brief; and though taken away for a time by Pope Pius V. yet it was
restored by Pope Sixtus V.

The End of the First Part.
Books Printed for Richard Chiswell.
Dr. CAve's Lives of the Primitive Fathers, in 2. Vol. Folio.

Dr. Cary's Chronological Account of Ancient Time. sol. Hooker's Ecclesiastical
Polity. sol.

Sir John Burlace's History of the Irish Rebellion. fol.

The Laws of this Realm concerning Jesuits, Seminary Priests, Recusants, the
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, explained by diverse Judgments and
Resolutions of the Judges; with other Observations thereupon. By
William-Cawley. Esquire sol.

Dr. Towerson's Explication of the Creed, the Commandments, and Lords Prayer,
in 3 Vol. sol.

Bishop Nicholson on the Church-Catechism.

Mr. John Cave's Seven occasional Sermons. 4to.

Bishop Wilkins Natural Religion. 80.

-- His Fifteen Sermons. 80.

Mr. Tanners Primordia: Or the Rise and Growth of the first Church of God
described. 80.

Spaniards Conspiracy against the State of Venice. 80.

Dr. Caves Primitive Christianity in three Parts. 80.

Certain genuine Remains of the Lord Bacon, in Arguments Civil, Moral, Natural,
etc. with a large Account of all his Works. By Dr. Tho. Tenison. 80.

Dr. Henry Bagshaws Discourses on select Texts. 80.

Mr. Sellers State of the Church in the Three first Centuries.

Dr. Burnet's Account of the Life and Death of the Earl of Rochester. 80.

-- History of the Rights of Princes in the disposing of Ecclesiastical
Benefices and Church Lands. 80.

-- Relation of the present State of the Difference between the French King and
the Court of Rome; to which is added, the Popes Brief to the Assembly of the
Clergy, and their Protestation, published by Dr. Burnet. 80.

Dr. Combers Companion to the Altar. 80.

Dr. Sherlocks Practical Discourse of Religious Assemblies. 80.

-- Defense of Dr. Stillingfleets Unreasonableness of Separation. 80.

-- A Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet, in answer to Mr. Baxter
and Mr. Lob about Catholic Communion. 80.

Sir Rob. Filmers Patriarcha, or natural Power of Kings. 80.

Bishop Wettenhalls Method and Order for private Devotion. 240.

Valentines private devotions. 40.

Dr. Spencer de Legibus Hebraeorum Ritualibus. and earum Rationibus. fol.

Dr. John Lightfoots Works in English, in 2 Vol fol.

Sir Tho. Browns Vulgar Errors, with all the rest of his Works. fol.

Patris Simonii Disquisitiones Criticae de Variis per diversa Loca and Tempora
Bibliorum Editionibus. Accedunt Castig. Opusc. Is. Vossii de Sybil. Orac. 40.

The Case of Lay-Communion with the Church of England considered, 4^.

Two Letters betwixt Mr. R. Smith, and Dr. Hen. Hammond about Christ's descent
into Hell. 80.

Dean Stratfords Disswasive from Revenge. 80.

Dr. Hez. Burtons First Volume of Discourses, of Purity and Charity; of
Repentance, and of seeking the Kingdom of God. Published by Dean Tillotson. 80.

-- His Second Volume of Discourses on several Practical Subjects. 80.

Sir Thomas Mores Vtopia, newly made English by Dr. Burnet. 80.

Mr. Sellers Devout Communicant; assisted with Rules, Meditations, Prayers and
Anthems. 120.

Dr. Towerson of the Sacraments in general.

-- Of the Sacrament of Baptism in particular. 80.

The History of the COUNCIL of TRENT; in which, besides the ordinary Acts of
the Council, are declared many notable Occurrences which happened in Christendom
for 40 Years, and particularly the Practices of the COURT of ROME to hinder the
Reformation of their Errors, and to maintain Their Greatness; Written by Father
Paul of the Servi. To which is added, the Life of the Author and the History of
the Inquisition.

Dr. Burnets History of the Reformation of the Church of Eng. in 2 Vol. Fol.

A Collection of Sixteen several Tracts and Discourses, written in the Years,
from 1678, to 1685. inclusive; by Gilbert Burnet, D. D. To which is added, A
Letter written to Dr. Burnet, giving an Account of Cardinal Pools secret
Powers. The History of the Powder Treason, with a Vindication of the
Proceedings thereupon. An Impartial Consideration of the Five Jesuits dying
Speeches, who were Executed for the Popish Plot, 1679. 40.

A Dissertation concerning the Government of the Ancient Church; more
particularly of the Encroachments of the Bishops of Rome upon other Sees, By
William Cave D. D. 8vo.

An Answer to Mr. Serjeant's [Sure Footing in Christianity] concerning the Rule
of Faith. With some other Discourses. By WILLIAM FALKNER, D. D. 40.

A Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England; in Answer to a
Paper written by one of the Church of Rome, to prove the Nullity of our Orders.
By GILBERT BVRNET, D. D.

An Abridgment of the History of the Reformation of the Church of England. By
GILB. BVRNET, D. D. 8vo.

The APOLOGY of the Church of England; and an Epistle to one Signior Scipio; a
Venetian Gentleman, concerning the Council of Trent. Written both in Latin, by
the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN JEWEL Lord Bishop of Salisbury; Made
English by a Person of Quality* To which is added, The Life of the said Bishop;
Collected and written by the same Hand. 8vo.

The Life of WILLIAM BEDEL, D. D. Bishop of Kilmore in Ireland. Together with
Certain Letters which passed betwixt him and James Waddesworth (a late
Pensioner of the Holy Inquisition of Sevil) in Matters of Religion, concerning
tho general Motives to the Roman Obedience. 8vo.

The Decree made at ROME the Second of March, 1679. condemning some Opinions of
the Jesuits, and other Casuists. 40.

A Discourse concerning the Necessity of Reformation, with respect to the
Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome. 40. First and Second Parts.

A Discourse concerning the Celebration of divine Service in an Unknown Tongue.
40.

A Papist not Misrepresented by Protestants. Being a Reply to the Reflections
upon the Answer to [A Papist Misrepresented and Represented] 40.

An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the several
Articles proposed by the late BISHOP of CONDOM, [in his Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church] 40.

Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England; against
the Exceptions of Mons. de Meaux, late Bishop of Condom, and his Vindicator. 40.

ACATECHISM explaining the Doctrine and Practices of the Church of Rome. With
an Answer thereunto. By a Protestant of the Church of England, 8vo.

A Papist Represented and not Misrepresented, being an Answer to the First,
Fifth and Sixth Sheets of the Second Part of the [Papist Misrepresented and not
Represented], and for a further Vindication of the CATECHISM, truly
Representing the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome. 40.

The Lay-Christian's Obligation to read the Holy Scriptures. 40.

The Plain Man's Reply to the Catholic Missionaries. 240.

An Answer to THREE PAPERS lately printed, concerning the Authority of the
Catholic Church in matters of Faith, and the Reformation of the Church of
England. 40.

A Vindication of the Answer to the said THREE PAPERS. 40.

Mr. Chillingworths Book, called [The Religion of Protestants a safe way to
Salvation] made more generally useful by omitting personal Contests, but
inserting whatsoever concerns the common Cause of Protestants, or defends the
Church of England; with an exact Table of Contents, and an Addition of some
genuine Pieces of Mr. Chillingworth's, never before Printed, viz. against the
Infallibility of the Roman Church, Transubstantiation, Tradition, etc. And an
Account of what moved the Author to turn Papist, with his Confutation of the
said motives.

An Historical Treatise written by an Author of the Communion of the Church of
Rome, touching Transubstantiation. Wherein is made appear, That according to
the Principles of that Church, this Doctrine cannot be an Article of Faith. 40.

The Protestants Companion, or an impartial Survey, and Comparison of the
Protestant Religion as by Law established, with the main Doctrines of Popery.
Wherein is shown, that Popery is contrary to Scripture, Primitive Fathers and
Councils; and that proved from Holy Writ, the Writings of the ancient Fathers,
for several hundred Years, and the Confession of the most learned Papists
themselves. 40.

The Pillar and Ground of Truth. A Treatise showing that the Roman Church
falsely claims to be that Church, and the Pillar of that Truth mentioned by S.
Paul in his first Epistle to Timothy, chap. ^. ver. 15. 40.

The Peoples Right to read the holy Scriptures Asserted. 40.

A short Summary of the principal Controversies between the Church of England
and the Church of Rome, being a Vindication of several Protestant Doctrines, in
Answer to a late Pamphlet, entitled, [Protestancy destitute of Scripture
Proofs] 40.

An Answer to a late Pamphlet, entitled, [The Judgment and Doctrine of the
Clergy of the Church of England, concerning one special Branch of the Kings
Prerogative, viz. [In dispensing with the Penal Laws.] 40.

Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
A Discourse of the Holy Eucharist in the two great Points of the Real
Presence, and the Adoration of the Host; in Answer to the Two Discourses lately
Printed at Oxford on this Subject: To which is prefixed a large Historical
Preface relating to the same Argument.

Two Discourses; of Purgatory, and Prayers for the Dead.

The Fifteen Notes of the Church, as laid down by Cardinal Bellarmin examined
and confuted 40. With a Table to the Whole.

Preparation for Death: Being a Letter sent to a young Gentlewoman in France,
in a dangerous Distemper of which she died. By W. Wake, M. A. 120.

The Difference between the Church of England and the Church of Rome, in
opposition to a late Book, Entitled, An Agreement between the Church of
England and Church of Rome.

A Private Prayer to be used in difficult Times.

A True Account of a Conference held about Religion at Land. Sept. 29. 1687.
between A. Pulton, Jesuit, and Th. Tenison, D. D. as also of that which led to
it, and followed after it. 40.

The Vindication of A. Cressener, Schoolmaster in Long-Acre, from the
Aspersions of A. Pulton, Jesuit, Schoolmaster in the Savoy, together with some
Account of his Discourse with Mr. Meredith.

A Discourse showing that Protestants are on the safer Side, notwithstanding
the uncharitable Judgment of Adversaries; and that Their Religion is the surest
Way to Heaven. 40.

Six Conferences concerning the Eucharist, wherein is showed, that the Doctrine
of Transubstantiation overthrows the Proofs of Christian Religion.

A Discourse concerning the pretended Sacrament of Extreme Unction; with an
Account of the Occasions and Beginnings of it in the Western Church. In Three
Parts. With a Letter to the Vindicator of the Bishop of Condom.

A Second Letter from the Author of the Discourse concerning Extreme Unction,
to the Vindicator of the Bishop of Condom.

The Pamphlet entitled, Speculum Ecclesiasticum, or an Ecclesiastical
Prospective-Glass, considered, in its false Reasonings and Quotations. There
are added by way of Preface, Two further Answers, the First, to the Defender of
tho Speculum; the Second to the Half-sheet against the Six Conferences.

A Second Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England,
against the new Exceptions of Mons. de Meaux, late Bishop of Condom, and his
Vindicator. The FIRST PART. In which the Account that has been given of the
Bishop of Meaux's Exposition, is fully vindicated; the Distinction of Old and
New Popery Historically asserted, and the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, in
Point of Image Worship, more particularly considered. 40.

A Second Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrins of the Church of England
against the New Exceptions of Mons. de Meaux, late Bishop of Condom, and his
Vindicator. The SECOND PART. In which the Romish Doctrines concerning the
Nature and Object of Religious Worship, of the Invocation of Saints, and
Worship of Images and Relics, are considered, and the Charge of Idolatry
against the Church of Rome, upon the account of them, made good, 40.

The Incurable Skepticism of the Church of Rome. By the Author of the [Six
Conferences concerning the Eucharist] 40.

Mr. Pulton Considered in his Sincerity, Reasonings, Authorities: Or a just
Answer to what he has hitherto published in his True Account, his True and
Full Account of a Conference, etc. His Remarks; and in them his pretended
Confutation of what he calls Dr. T's Rule of Faith. By Th. Tenison, D. D.

A Full View of the Doctrines and Practices of the Ancient Church relating to
the Eucharist, wholly different from those of the Present Roman Church, and
inconsistent with the belief of Transubstantiation. Being a sufficient
Confutation of Consensus Veterum, Nubes Testium, and other late Collections of
the Fathers pretending to the contrary. 40.

An Answer to the Representer's Reflections upon the State and View of the
Controversy; With a Reply to the Vindicator's Full Answer, showing that the
Vindicator has utterly ruined the New Design of Expounding and Representing
Popery. 40.

An Answer to the Popish Address presented to the Ministers of the Church of
England. 40.

An Abridgment of the Prerogatives of St. Ann, Mother of the Mother of God,
with the Approbations of the Doctors of Paris, thence done into English, with a
Preface concerning the Original of the Story.

The Primitive Fathers no Papists, in answer to the Vindication of the Nubes
Testium; to which isadded a Discourse concerning Invocation of Saints, in
Answer to the Challenge of F. Sabran the Jesuit; wherein is shown, That
Invocation of Saints was so far from being the Practice, that it was expressly
against the Doctrine of the Primitive Fathers. 40.

An Answer to a Discourse concerning the Coelibacy of the Clergy, lately
Printed at Oxford. 40.

The Virgin Mary Misrepresented by the Roman Church, in the Traditions of that
Church concerning her Life and Glory, and in the Devotions paid to her as the
Mother of God. Both showed out of the Offices of that Church, the Lessons on
her Festivals, and from their allowed Authors.

Dr. Tenisons Sermon of Discretion in giving Alms. 120.

A Discourse concerning the Merits of Good Works.

The Enthusiasm of the Church of Rome, demonstrated in some Observations upon
the Life of Ignatius Loyala, (Founder of the Order of Jesus).

A Vindication of the Answer to the Popish Address presented to the Ministers
of the Church of England. 40.

Reflections upon the Books of the Holy Scripture, in order to establish the
Truth of the Christian Religion, in 3 Parts. 8vo. In the Press.

The Texts which the Papists cite out of the Bible for Proof of the Points of
their Religion Examined, and showed to be alleged without Ground. In several
distinct Discourses. Five whereof are published, viz.

Popery not founded in Scripture. The Introduction.

Texts concerning the Obscurity of Holy Scriptures.

-- Of the Insufficiency of Scripture, and Necessity of Tradition.

-- Of the Supremacy of St. Peter, and the Pope, over the whole Church. In Two
Parts.

-- Of Infallibility

The Rest will follow Weekly, in their Order.

FINIS.

