Post nubila Phoebus Or A SERMON OF Thanksgiving For the safe and happy Return
of our gracious SOVEREIGN, to His Ancient DOMINIONS, and Restoration to His
just and Native DIGNITY, ROYALTIES and GOVERNMENT.

Preached in the City of Aberden, at the desire of the LORD PROVEST, Bailies,
and Council thereof, upon the XIX day of June.

By Mr. JOHN PATERSONE Minister of the Gospel in the said BVRGH.

PROVE. 20.28. Mercy and truth preserve the King, and his Throne is upholden by
mercy.

Let the KINGS Enemies become a Portion for Foxes.

ABERDENE, Printed by James Brown, Ann. DOM. M.DC.LX.

Unto the Right Honorable, GILBERT GRAY, LORD PROVOST. And Unto the Right
Honorable, JOHN JAFFRAY, Late PROVOST. Baylies.
WILLIAM GRAY, ALEX. ROBERTSONE, ALEX. ALEXANDER, Mr. ROBERT PETRIE, PATRICK
MOIR, GILBERT MOLYSONE, Late Baylies.
John Duncan, Dean of Gild, John Burnet Thesaurer: And Remnant Honorable
Counselors of the City of Aberden Thomas Mercer, Late Dean of Gild Thomas
Mitchell, Late Thesaurer: And whole Remnant of the Late honorable Council of
Aberd.

Right Honorable,
THE Day of BRITAIN'S solemnities, for the Happy Return and Restoration of
our Most Gracious and Illustrious KING, safe in His Person and sound in the
truth of Religion (after such a long and dismal Absence) to His Ancient
Dominions, and to His native Royalties and Government, is such an transcendent
temporal Mercy, as deserves to be written, not only on Pillars of Marble, and
with a Diamond and Pen of Iron, but upon the Spirits of all, who are truly
Godly and Loyal within BRITAIN and Ireland. And it cannot be expected, but
such an great and merciful Revolution, brought about in such an unanimous,
peaceable, sweet way, without blood, will be exceedingly magnified and called
Blessed, by all succeeding Generations, so long as SCOTLAND ENGLAND and Ireland
remains to be NATIONS. And who are so stupid? but must look upon this, at an
signal token for good, that after such an great State-quake, and Overturning
in these three KINGDOMS, when all concernments in them were wrapped up in
Darkness and Confusion, when men's thoughts were quivering, like the needle in
the Sea compass and knew not where to rest, The LORD should have been pleased,
even then, in such a sudden, to concenter the hearts and desires of these three
NATIONS, in the KINGS MAJESTY, his Person and Government, as the only earthly
Foundation of their Prosperity and Peace. This admirable Mercy, has brought
forth many loud and Public Acclamations of joy in all Cities, Counties,
Incorporations and Churches of the three LANDS, and indeed Duty to GOD
ALMIGHTY, who has made his own A^me bare in our Deliverance, Duty to Our
SOVEREIGN the KING, GOD His immediate Vicegerent over us, the Duty which we
owe to Our Consciences, Relations and Interests, and to the Protestant Religion
at home and abroad, calls for very singular appearances, and resentments of such
an eminent Blessing.

Amongst many other His MAJESTY'S Royal Burghs in SCOTLAND, I believe none (be
it spoken without envy or disparagement) did appear more early, and with
greater alacrity and cheerfulness in the public and solemn manifestations
of their Joy, for His MAJESTY'S safe and happy Return and Restoration to His
just Government, nor this City did, which has always accounted its Fidelity
and Loyalty to its native KING, its chief earthly Ornament; whereof it has
many testimonies and evidences standing in public Register, and during His
MAIESTY'S sad days, and absence, none loved His MAJESTY more, none Prayed more
heartily, none longed more earnestly, nor ABERDENE did, for that blessed day of
His MAJESTY'S Return and Restoration, which the right hand of the LORD has
at last brought to Pass: Beside many other very Solemn and Public
Manifestations of the joy of this CITY, for this Mercy, never to be forgotten,
it was your HONORS command, that the following Sermon, being preached in your
Pulpit at your desire, should be put to the Press, and although the Conscience
of my own weakness, and the worthlesnesse of any thing, which can drop from my
Mouth or Pen, might and would have put me, from any appearance in Print, Yet
the subject being so Royal, and at such a nick of time, and my respects to
your HONORS being so many and so pressing, have prevailed with me to let this
poor Mite of yours and my own Loyalty, appear on the Stage of a Critic
World, Veritas non querit angulca: I know I must meet with Censurers, but if
men will censure Truth harshly, it will stand upon its own joints, and if they
censure my mean conceptions, and expressions, I can suffer that easily, for it
is the matter and not the manner, that I have chiefly aimed at, which makes
this paper come out, in its naked Simplicity, without Ornaments. Whatever it
is, I have put it under your Patrociny, and I lay it down at your feet as a
small testimony of my many Obligations and Engagements to your HONORS and to
this Honorable City. The LORD multiply His Spirit and Grace upon you, that you
may go on, to act for the Glory of GOD, for the Power of GODLYNES, for the
KINGS MAJESTY'S happiness, and for the Good and Prosperity of this People. So
Prays

Your Honors affection at servant in the Work of the Ministry, Mr. JO:
PATERSONE.

From a very Reverend and Faithful BROTHER: Mr. William Dowglasse, Professor
of Divinity in the KINGS COLEDGE of the University of Aberden.
MY thoughts of this SERMOM, after perusal, are as follows.

That the whole Draught is plain, pertinent and powerful: That the Observes
have such a natural and genuine arise, and the Uses are so consequentially
flowing from the Observes and Doctrines, that the committing of it to the
Press, shall tend much to the public good; And so much the rather, That
herein is holden forth what have been the public faults of these three
NATIONS: as also pointing punctually at our duties, we owe most to OUR
SOVEREIGN: both which are to very good purpose, branched out in many
particulars. This is testified (though much more might be said) by my
subscription.

Mr. W. DOUGLAS.
At Old Aberdene, AUGUST 4. 1660.
A SERMON OF Thanksgiving: For the safe and happy Return of our SOVEREIGN
LORD, CHARLES the SECOND, by the Grace of GOD: KING of great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defender of the faith, to His Ancient DOMINIONS, and Restoration
to His just and Native DIGNITY, ROYALTIES and GOVERNMENT.
PSALM. CXXVI. Verse. 1. When the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion: We
were like them that dream.

Verse. 2. Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing
etc.


We may look upon this day, as upon the springing up, of a bright and fair
morning, after a cloudie dark night, wherein so many beasts of prey did creep
out of their den's, and lurking places of their hateful and hellish
Hypocrisy: we may look upon it, as the beginning of a sweet calm, after a
long and dangerous storm; as upon the breaking of an heavy and sad yoke, which
has lion sore upon the necks of these three Kingdoms, SCOTLAND, ENGLAND and
IRELAND; in the wreathing whereof, some of this Nation cannot justly plead
innocence: We may look upon this day, as the beginning of a blessed Peace,
after a time of much innocent blood: as upon a day of a civil Resurrection,
after a long civil or rather incivill Death: as a day long wished and prayed
for, by all the truly godly in the three Kingdoms, who have not learned that
fanatique and overturning PRINCIPLE, to divorce between Religion and Loyalty,
which GOD has so nearly and strictly united; And therefore the Lord has
called the Land to Rejoicing, and to songs of Praise and Jubilation.

Division.
These words of the Text, May be taken up in five points. I. We have the
Condition of the Jews before the time of their release and delivery came. They
were in BONDAGE. (When the Lord brought back the Captivity of Zion:) They were
under the power and slavery of their Conquerours, the Babylonians. II. We have
their Deliverance, the loosing of their Captivity, with their Reduction to
their native Country. (Brought back the Captivity of Zion:) III. We have the
Author of their Delyverance, it was not Themselves, not their own wisdom, nor
Power, nor Policy, not the arm of Flesh, but GOD, and GOD alone. (When the
Lord etc.) IV. How the loosing of them from Captivity and their Reduction from
Bondage did affect them, at first they were so surprised with it, that they
could not believe, that it was a true and real Thing, they looked on it as a
Dream. (We were like them that dream.) V. The Effects which the sense of their
Delyverie did work upon them, after that the Amazement was a little allayed,
and these were, Rejoicing and Mirth. (Then was our mouth filled with laughter
and our tongue with singing.)

first Thing considerable in the words, is, the JEWS condition, before the Lord
visited them with this mighty and gracious Deliverance. They were in bondage
and slavery. (When the LORD brought back the captivity of ZION:) by ZION, we
ar to understand the two Tribes, or the KINGDOM of Judah, comprehending both
their Church and State; They were carried Captives from their own Land by
Nebuchadnezar to Babylon; The STORY whereof we have at length, II. Chronicl. 36.
and in the tenth book of Josephus de BELLO IUDAICO, as also in the Ps. 137.
there is a hint of it. By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, yea we
weept, when we remembered Zion: We hanged our harps upon the willows, in the
midst thereof. For there they that carried us away captive, required of us a
song, and they that wasted us, required of us mirth, saying, Sing us one of the
songs of Zion: How shall we sing the LORDS song in a strange land? If I forget
thee, O JERUSALEM, let my right hand forget her cunning. If I do not remember
thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if I prefer not
JERUSALEM above my chief joy. verse. 1.2.3.4.5.6.

That even that people whom GOD loves and respects, bondage, and that in
reference both to their Ecclesiastic and Civil ESTATE; This was the lot of
the LORDS own peculiar People, the Jews were bondmen in Egypt, they labored
there in brick and mortar, they were Captives in ASSYRIA, Captives in BABYLON,
they are now scattered up and down the World, for their Blasphemy, Infidelity;
and Crucifying the LORD of GLORY, and for not accepting their MESSIAH to reign
over them.

And what has our Condition been these several by gone years? Even a Dark
gloomy black Day, wherein we had light neither of the Sun nor Moon nor Stars
in our civil Relations. I do not say, That we are a people beloved of God in
such a signal way, as the Jews were; They were a Royal Priesthood: but I may
say, That the Lord has had a singular respect to Britain, beyond many
Nations, for many ages: And yet because, we were not thankful to God, for His
rich and signal Mercies, for such a fair day of the Gospel, for so long
continued Plenty and Peace, under such a just, equal, ancient and
wel-ballanced GOVERNMENT, as any Nation in Europe enjoyed, but like JESHURUN,
we waxed fatt in our sins, and like a wild untamed Colt, did cast our Ryder,
and took the reins upon our own lawles necks; Therefore the LORD brought us
under a base Slavery and Bondage, by which our sins might visibly be read in
our judgment. The Lord did justly bring us under, by a Factious, rebellious,
Hypocritical, Treacherous and usurping Party, who have trod on the necks of
three Ancient KINGDOMS, as upon the Mire in the streets, and rendered us
Captives in reference both to our State and Churches Interests. As for our
State, IT was clearly and totally overturned and razed to the very foundations:
our ancient Iudicatories changed: Strangers imposed on us for our Judges, men
unacquainted with our Laws and Customs: our Parliaments with their power,
totally taken away: OUR GRACIOUS and DEAREST KING, of Sacred and Eternal
Memory, CHARLES the FIRST, the PEARL of earthly Kings, most cruelly,
inhumanely and barbarcusly martyred, and murdered by a faction of Godless,
Cruel, Bloody, Perfidious and Hypocritical TRAITORS, and yet under a pretense
of Zeal for GOD and justice. O unparalleled hellish Villainy! Traitors who
plotted it, Traitors who acted it, traitors who rejoiced in it, Traitors who
allowed it, for by that one fatal, O fatal blow, these Canniballs cutted the
throats of three KINGDOMS, and left them bleeding, they did put out the most
GLORIOUS and SHYNING LIGHT, that ever swayed Scepter in Britain! But the
Cruelty and bloody Design, of that Murdering Faction, was not satia^ed with
that Royal and innocent Blood, after that sweet SOVLE was posted into GLORY,
to receive the immarcessible Crown, whether no Traitor can reach a bloody
hand, then they voted down MONARCHICAL GOVERNMENT, by a faction, having
secluded and forced from the Parliament, the godly, honest and loyal Party
thereof, they proscribed, and by an ungodly Act, they disinherited our most
GRACIOUS KING (now reigning by the mercy and goodness of GOD over their
bellies) and laid aside that ROYAL FAMILY, from having any right to the
CROWN, and declared Him the Capital Enemy of their new-moulded COMMONWEALTH,
they did raze the HOUSE of LORDS, that Ancient and wel-ordered Pillar of the
STATE: And when this Nation of SCOTLAND, had brought home our Native and
Righteous KING, and set the CROWN on His Head; Did not that bloody faction,
headed by that Cerberus, Oliver Cromwell, force Him from all His DOMINIONS* to
live as an Exile in foreign Nations? Were not our Nobles and ancient Gentry
despised and abused? Were not these three KINGDOMS impoverished with heavy
Assesses and sad impositions, and the blood of the poor sucked out, and all to
maintain the ambition and tyranny of an usurping Faction? Were not the Lives
of the most godly and most faithful Subjects of the three Nations made bitter
unto them, and their hearts sadded by being nicknamed Malignants? And were not
the heads of unnatural factious Incendiaries lifted up? Thus was our State in
perfect Captivity. And as for our Church, it also was in Captivity. The just
Power, Privileges and Authority of it was trod upon, our Church Iudicatories
threatened, and not suffered to proceed in their own proper affairs, our
Assemblies, yea, the GENERAL ASSEMBLY raised by force: and for want of our
Native KING and lawful Magistrates under Him, to give life and vigor to
Church-sanctions, Was not the Authority and just sentences of the Church
despised, yea counteracted to, by any who pleased? by means whereof and of
that vast and laxe Toleration (the great engyne which made these men keep the
sadle so long) has not Popery increased in the Land? have not all manner of
Herisies, schisms, wild and abominable opinions abounded in Britain? A
whirle-winde of fancies and delusions, a swarm of Locusts, Antiscripturists,
Antitrinitarians, Arrians, Sabellians, Macedonians, Photinians, Pelagians,
Socinians, Arminians, Enthusiasts, Beheminists, Antinomians, Levellers,
Seekers, Quakers, Ranters, Fifth Monarchy men, a company of proud greedy Saints.
And beside all these sad and sinful Captivities in reference to Church and
State, were not men's Consciences in Captivity and Bondage, being forced with
Oaths, yea with Contrary-oaths and Tenders, contrary to former solemn
Engagements, contrary to Allegiance and Loyalty, and was not this a perfect
Bondage.

Argument to prove that God has rejected and fully casten off a People or
Nation, because in his just and wise Providence, they are brought into sad
Bondage and Captivity; ye know how often God dealt so with these Jews, who
yet for all that, still remained his People. The external Passages of
Providence are a very unsure Rule, whereby to judge of Gods special Love and
Favor to a Nation: As it is an evil Argument to prove that God carries no
respect to a people, but has utterly rejected them, and casten them off,
because their Enemies prevail over them, and they are brought under: so it is
as bad an Argument to prove, that God carries a singular Respect and Favor to
a people, or allows their Undertakings, because they prosper and are
victorious over others; No man, yea no Nation, nor people knows, whether they
be hated or loved of God, by these external passages of Providence, All things
fall alyke to all. But I must confess, that this Turkish Argument built merely
upon external Providence and Success, has been most sinfully and factiously
made use of, in these late Troubles and Revolutions. How many false and unjust
Conclusions, have been drawn from the Lords most wise and providentiall Actings
in Britain of late, as if God had allowed all these horrible Villainies, these
treacherous Attempts and Conspiracies, all the bloodshed, Murders, Tyranny,
Usurpations and oppressions, which have been acted in the three KINGDOMS, by a
factious and treacherous Party, because they were like ANTIOCHUS, who practiced
and prospered? and so did these in their mischief; but God will not take with
their bastards, although they laid them to the door of his all wise and just
Providence, which stands clear and orient, when shame now is covering their
faces.

The second Point in the Text, is the JEWS Deliverance from their BONDAGE and
CAPTIVITY. (When the LORD brought back the Captivity of Zion:) Which expression
implies two things. 1. The loosing of their Captivity, or the taking away the
yoke of BONDAGE from off their necks. 2. Their Returning back to their own LAND
in freedom and safety.

That although the Lord suffer Nations and Kingdoms to bondage and captivity,
for a long time, yet He can put an end to their Captivity when he pleases, and
he does so when his appointed time comes: for all times and seasons are in his
hands. The JEWS were above 400 years Strangers and Bondmen in Egypt, but the
Lord redeemed them. They were 70 years captive in Babylon, but the Lord loosed
their Captivity; that Bondage came to an end, and they returned safely to their
own land: and thus has the Lord in his unspeakable Mercy, been pleased to
deal with Britain and Ireland; the Lord has reduced our Captivity. And as in
many things this Mercy is great and wonderful, so specially is it in this,
that the Lord has been pleased to reduce our Bondage and Captivity so soon,
IT is a wonder of the Lords Goodness, that he has not wreathed the Yoke of
our Bondage about our necks for many generations. His own peculiar people were
in bondage 70 years, in a strange Land: but God has been pleased to shorten
the years of our bondage, and to break the teeth of the old and young lions, so
we may say now, as Nahum. cap. 2. verse. xj. Where is the dwelling of the
Lions, and the feeding place of the young Lions? Where the Lion, even the old
Lion walked, and the Lions whelp, and none made them affrayed. verse. 12. The
Lion did tear in pieces enough for his whelps, and strangled for his
Lionesses, and filled his holes with prey, and his dens with ravine. verse. 13.
Behold I am against thee, says the LORD of Hosts, and I will burn her
Chariots in the smoke, and the sword shall devour thy young Lions, and I will
cut off thy Prey from the earth, and the voice of thy Messengers shall no more
be hard. Where now is the dwelling of these men, who of late did tear these
Nations in pieces, and devoured them like a Prey? Are they not gone, and going
to their own place.

People when he pleases, so he can restore an exiled afflicted KING, after long
and many sad Sufferings. I know not, who can sufficiently enumerat our GRACIOUS
KINGS Sufferings. Has he not been a Sufferer since his Childhood? What did he
suffer, before his DEAREST FATHER'S unparalleled Murder? Consider how his
tender SOVLE was affected, when these sad News come to his ears, of that
dismal blow given to his most ILLUSTRIOUS and LOVING FATHER, by some incarnat
Devils, whereof one or two were Masked-Devils. What has he suffered since?
What a miraculous Escape did the Lord make for him at Worcester fight? when an
Hollow Oak was his ROYAL PALACE? What hazards has he been exposed to, by sea
and Land? What temptations did he meet with abroad? What Leagues and
Confederacies have been drawn up against him and his just interests, by
foreign Princes and States? How unkindly used by these who should have been
friends? How deserted and forsaken? How tossed with so many billows of
Adversities? Was he not of late looked upon, but as a broken vessel, in whom
the Enemies thought there was no pleasure, and but as water spilt upon the
ground? And yet GOD in his wise, just and gracious Providence has been pleased
to reduce him to his ancient KINGDOMS, safe in Body, and sound in the Faith,
and has made his GLORY and HONOR more resplendent and orient, like a bright
Sun, after a dark and tempestuous Night. Surely this is a matter of exceeding
great Praise to GOD, and of wonderful Rejoicing to all the truly Godly and
Loyal, in the three KINGDOMS. But as for Mal-contents, let them gnaw their
Tongues for sorrow, and feed on their own Bowels like young Vipers.

The third point in the Text, is the JEWS Deliverer. captivity? IT was not
Themselves, it was not their own Wisdom, and Policy, nor Strength, nor Power,
but the LORD JEHOVAH, (When the Lord,) The LORD had a very immediate and
visible hand in their deliverance, as may be read at length in the books of
Ezra and Nehemiah. And may not SCOTLAND, ENGLAND and IRELAND say, That the LORD
JEHOVAH, has brought back our Captivity, Has not the LORD made His Arm bare,
and His steps manifest, and His Hand visible in our DELIVERANCE? Who is so
blind but sees the very FINGER of GOD, and a wonderful PROVIDENCE in this
Work, to be delivered at such a nick of time, when few or none were expecting
any deliverance, but all things looking worse and worse, when that Fanatique
Party had forced that pretended Parliament of ENGLAND, and had brought all to a
mere Anarchy, and intended to rule not by the SPIRIT, but by the sword, and
that none should have RVLE or POWER, but these Fifth Monarchy men, Quakers, and
such like deluded giddy spirits? Yet at that very point of time, GOD divided
the Army, and did spirit and animat the honest and Loyal Party of it, under
the Command of that Noble and Valorous GENERAL MONCK, to stand up for lawful
Authority, and to call for a free and well-constituted PARLIAMENT, which could
not be in ENGLAND, without a KING and house of LORDS. And although there were
many Plottings and Contrivings, Stirrings and Risings, to hinder the electing
and sitting of a free PARLIAMENT, and many illegal Qualifications intended to
be put upon Elections and persons elected, yet then did the LORD arise, and
befoole these Firebrands of Sedition and Confusion, and took them in their own
Snares, when as they had not so much confidence, as to draw a Sword in their
own defense (Guiltines within, often makes feeble hands.) and did not the LORD
send the Ringleaders of that Fanatique party, prisoners to LONDON, the very
day before that the PARLIAMENT sat down, a very Presage from HEAVEN of better
days? and was it not GOD who did put it so unanimously, into the hearts of
both houses of PARLIAMENT, of the ARMY, and body of the people of the three
KINGDOMS, of all Ranks, to erect MONARCHY, the only Ancient and Lawful
government of these NATIONS, and to send for the KING, and to bring him home,
with great HONOR and STATE, with the universal acclamations of his People?
Yea, and all that so great a Work, to be brought to pass, without one drop of
blood? Who ever dreamed of such a peaceable, sweet and unanimous REDUCTION of
our native KING? and is not this, the very immediate hand of GOD? Yes indeed it
is, (The LORD has brought back our captivity.) and to his NAME be the Glory of
that MERCY.

Fourth Point is in these words, (Then we were like them that dream.) Now in
this Expression take notice of two Things. 1. That these who ar under Captivity
and Bondage, are like to men in a Dream. 2. When these who have been in Bondage
and Captivity are delivered, they are not at first sufficiently awakened out of
their Dream, that is, they cannot get their Deliverance fully believed.

Bondage and Captivity, are like these in a Dream, or Captivity is a Dream, or
it is as a dreaming Time, and that in these Considerations.

These that Dream, dream, in the Night, the night is a Dreaming, even so is
Captivity a dreaming Time, it is a Night, a civil Night, it is a time of
Darkness and Clouds upon a Land: And what have these late years of our
Bondage been, but a Night, a night of Confusion, of Usurpation, of Tyranny, a
night of Blackness and of Darkness upon the three NATIONS, a night which did
overcloud all these Ancient lights, which sometimes shined clear in Britain
and Ireland? a black night, which overshaddowed KING, PARLIAMENT, STATE,
CHURCH, NOBILITY, GENTRY, BURROUGHES, MINISTRY and body of the People.

Captivity and Bondage is like a dream in this respect, These sleeping, so a
Land under Captivity and Bondage is sleeping, ordinarily it is so. I mean not
sleeping in respect of external peace and rest, ease and plenty: but they are
sleeping in a sense Moral and Spiritual: thus did the JEWS (I believe) dream
in their Captivity, they were sleeping in sin and security, under the LORDS
Wrath and Anger: and in this sense, our bondage was like a dream, for although
GOD has been persuing these Lands these several years bygone, for many
abominations, and particularly for the cry of blood, and above all, for that
Royal and innocent Blood of our Late SOVEREIGN, yet we have sleeped on in our
sins and security. We have kept fast deceit, and have hid our sins like
Adam: we have been as one that sleeps on the topmast.

These that sleep, have their senses bound up, Their Eyes see not, their Ears
are shut, they hear not, so it fares ordinatly with a People that are in
Bondage and Captivity, a people lying under sin and wrath, Their Eyes are shut,
their Understanding and minds are darkened, they do not take to heart their own
sinful and slavish Condition, they do not see nor consider these things which
may conduce for their relief and deliverance; This was the Jewish people their
Condition under the Romans, as ye may read Matthew. 22. ( O if thou had
known, in this thy day, these things which belong to thy peace, but now they
are hid from thine eyes. How so? They were sleeping and dreaming in their sins.
I am sure that was our Condition during our late Captivity and bondage, our
eyes were shute, we were dreaming, we did neither see nor consider rightly,
how to win out of our Thraldom and slavery; Wisdom, Counsel, Resolution,
Courage all our politic Senses, for the most part at least, were gone! We
were become like EPHRAIM, A silly dove without an heart.

Captivity and Bondage is like a Dream, because as they who dream, know not,
when they shall awake; So a land in Captivity, knows not, when their Captivity
shall be loosed, and the Yoke broken: In this consideration also, Britain and
Ireland were dreaming.

Captivity is like a Dream, because as they who dream, know not, that they
are Dreaming, till they awake; so a people under Slavery, are oftentimes so
stupefied and benumbed, and do sit down like Issachar, under the burden, that
for the time scarce are they sensible of their Condition, they do not take to
heart, that they are in Bondage, like Galley-slaves, who can be merry under
their Guardians lash: but when a Captive people are restored to their wounted
freedom, and Liberty and Laws and King, then they find, that before that,
they have been dreaming, then they look upon their former base dishonorable,
and slavish Condition, with astonishment and admiration: thus are these three
NATIONS awakned out of their dream: and these who of late were studying to
keep the three KINGDOMS under slavery and bondage, does now (I believe) find
that they were dreaming also, but some of them are now awakned out of their
dream, when Justice is beginning to pursue them.

dreaming, their heads are full of imaginations and fancies. How many thousand
fancies float up and down their Brains? a Poor-man dreams that he is Rich, a
Thirsty-man, that he is Drinking, a Beggar dreams that he is a King? Even so a
people that is in Captivity and Bondage are like Dreamers, ordinarily their
heads are full of Fancies and Imaginations: And I must say, that never a people
were filled with more Fancies, Imaginations and Whimsies, then many in Britain,
during these late Revolutions have been. Have not some been dreaming to be
Kings? did not all the Fift-monarchists dream to be Kings, Princes, Rulers and
Possessors of the Earth? did they not call themselves, The sword of the Lord
and of Gideon? and that to cut off all the Canaanits, in the three NATIONS, and
to possess All; this was a greedy Dream. Were not some dreaming to be
Protectors, to be Dictators, to be the Council of Estate, the Co^mitty of
safety, yea some dreaming to have this Place or that Place. Were not
Anabaptists, Quakers, Seekers, Levellers, and all the rabble of that fanatique
Party dreaming strange dreams? And did not these pretended Parliaments of
late, and their Council of Estate, dream strongly? How many new fancies and
modells of Government did they hatch in their brains, one Government this
year, then another government the second year, and a third Government the
third year? How often did they change their Principles and instruments of
Government; even like to young Children building Castles of clay, they build
one, that pleases not, down goes it, and then another is put up, but in end all
is thrown down, and the Builders evanish and are scattered.

The second Particular proposed on this branch of the text Bondage and
Captivity, are delivered from their Bondage, they are so surprysed with their
Deliverance at first, that they can hardly get it believed, they think that it
is not real, but a dream, and so was it with the JEWS, at this time.

Because of their long continuance under Bondage, they Captivity, that when
they were delivered, they could not get it at first believed, they thought it a
Dream.

Dream, in respect of the nick of time, when it fell out, that is, when least
expected.

Deliverance a dream, and were surprysed with it, because of the Manner and Way
how they were Delivered: which was without Armies, without Fighting for their
Delivery and for their Liberty, without Blood, without any common Consultation,
or Meeting amongst themselves, yea without so much as petitionating for their
own Deliverance.

Dream, in respect of the Instruments of their Deliverance. Cyrus and
Artaxerxes to do it, that is, these who detained them in Captivity and Bondage.

Dream, in respect of the Suddenness of it.

Dream, in respect of the Repairer of their breaches. Now let us apply these
things.

Condition was sad and woeful, and as they were accustomed to Captivity, and so
habituated in it, that when they were indeed Delivered, they could not at first,
get it believed, but thought it a Dream: so our Deliverance seemed to us at
first a Dream, we have been so sore tossed with Troubles, so accustomed to
Slavery, that when our Bondage is broken, by the good hand of our GOD, we can
hardly get it believed, we are like men that Dream.

Occasion of their present Deliverance was strange, which made it look like a
Dream, so the Occasion of BRITAINS Deliverance was very strange, we may look
upon it as a Dream. And what was it? even the Pride and Ambition of that
Fanatique Party, who raised that pretended Parliament, that they might have
wreathed a new Yoke upon the necks of the three KINGDOMS.

Deliverance was like a Dream to them, in respect of the Time when GOD did
bring it to pass, so is our Deliverance, the LORD wrought it at such a Time,
when we were not expecting Deliverance, but looking for sadder days, when all
Matters were casten loose, all in a Confusion, the pretended Government in a
non-entry, an Army on foot to rule by the Sword, then and not till then, did
the LORD step out for out Help and Deliverance.

As the JEWS Deliverance out of Babylon, looked like a Dream at first, in
respect of the Instruments of their Delivery; so may our Deliverance look like
a Dream, who could have imagined, that an English GENERAL, an English Army,
an English Parliament, should have been the Instruments of SCOTLANDS
Deliverance? this is like a Dream.

The Suddenness of the JEWS Deliverance, made it like a Dream, so may we
look on our Deliverance, in respect of it is Suddenness. That noble and worthy
PARLIAMENT having but newly sit down, when matters are brought to such a pass,
that our GRACIOUS KING, is voted unanimously (nemine contradicente) to have the
just and undoubted Right, to the CROWNS of the three KINGDOMS, and voted to be
sent for, and so brought home in great State and Honor, these Bloody Parricids
and Murderers of his DEAREST FATHER voted Traitors, the KING so much longed
for, received and welcomed, by the joyful Acclamations of the three NATIONS,
and all this in so short a Time: is not this like a Dream? were not people
thinking that there would be a long, intricate and doubtful Treaty, between
the KING and the PARLIAMENT? and were not the Salamanders of Britain and
Ireland preparing all the Doubts, Scruples, Obstructions and Remora's that lay
in their power, to cast in the way, to have rendered such a Treaty void and
ineffectuall? but the LORD of his rich Mercy was pleased to preveen, yea and
befoole such unthankful and disloyal Incendiaries, and the KING is at home,
before they can get their ginnes and snares well ordered and laid.

As the JEWS Deliverance out of Babylon looked like a dream at first, in
respect of the Repairer of their breaches, so is our deliverance: Whom has GOD
made the Repairer of our breaches? Even our own Native, Gracious KING, by His
Gracious Messages to His Parliament, Army, Navy, and to His whole Subjects of
the three NATIONS? Who dreamed, that KING CHARLES the SECOND, (on whom too many
of late looked, as upon water spilt on the ground) that a PRINCE Exiled,
without Armies, without real and cordial Friends abroad, a KING without the
Sinews of war, should have been the Repairer of our Breaches? This is the
LORDS doing, and it is Marvelous in Our eyes. Let all the GLORY of it be His.

Last words are ( Then was Our mouth filled with laughter etc.) in these words,
we have the Effects, which the JEWS Deliverance wrought on their Spirits, it
made them to rejoice exceedingly.

Observe.
That it is not only lawful, but it is also the duty of a People or Nation,
whom the LORD has brought out of Thraldom and Bondage, and restored them to
their Ancient and fundamental GOVERNMENT, and Laws, and Liberties, and
brought home their long wished for, Native KING; to manifest the sense of their
Deliverance, not only in their hearts to GOD, but by outward signs and public
solemnities of rejoicing before men. When DAVID brought up the ARK from Kiriath
Jearim, II. Sam. 6. He did it, with great state and solemnity, and with great
outward and public expressions of joy. DAVID and all the house of Israel
played before the Ark, on all manner of instruments, on harps, cornets,
cymbals, psalteries and timbrels; And in the 16 verse. of that same Chapter,
DAVID daunced before the Arc, and none censured him for so doing, but a vain
precise, hypocritical scold, Michal. II. Kings 11. When Jehoash was crowned, it
was done with great Solemnity and State. So also was SOLOMON'S Coronation, and
such was DAVID'S return from beyond Jordan, and from the land of the Hermonits;
All these signal Mercies were acknowledged by public Expressions, and
solemnities of Rejoycings. This has been the Custom of all Nations, Ages and
Generations upon such eminent occasions, and wonderful revolutions of Mercies.
And who can forbid such Solemn and public Expressions of Joy? But let it be
much locked to, that there be no Excess, nor Riot, and no Offense be given to
GOD, in our public Rejoycings. If I had said two things, I have done.

If I may compare Spiritual things with Temporalls, as I sin in it, and the
rather, because that Christian KINGS, are CHRIST'S Vicegerents on Earth, I
offer to you a passage of Scripture from Zech. 9.9. (J Rejoice greatly, O
daughter of Zion, shout, O daughter of Jerusalem; behold, thy KING comes unto
thee: He is just, and meek.) This is indeed a Prophecy anent CHRIST the
MESSIAH, as it is applied Math. 21 Yet I believe it to be no offense, to make
some Allusion to it; And therefore I say, Rejoice greatly O thou BRITAIN, shout
for joy, for thy KING comes to thee.

A KING comes, not a Protector, not a Rump-parliament, Fanatique Counsel of
State, not a Tyrant but a KING.

THY KING, not the King of France, nor of Spain, Turk, not a Stranger King,
but THY KING, THY OWN KING, THY NATIVE KING, THY KING by a CIX lineall Descents
from Royal Blood, THY KING by Birth, THY KING by Education, THY KING by
Profession, THY PROTESTANT KING.

THY KING comes to Thee, not Against Thee, THE to us, not Against us, with
foreign Forces, (which might justly have been feared) venit non irruit: HE
comes Softly, not Jehu-lyke marching Furiously, HE comes Smoothly and Calmly,
like the Waters of Siloah, not Rashly, but Deliberatly, by the unanimous Call
of HIS PARLIAMENT, ARMY, NAVY, NOBILITY, GENTRY, city of LONDON, and all the
NOBILITY of the THREE NATIONS, by the Ministry and Body of the people.

HE comes not to Oppress, nor to Tyrannise over His Subjects, but HE comes
JUST, to restore JUSTICE, which was fallen in Our Streets, and where Equity
durst not enter, and where Mischief, was established by a Law: HE comes JUST
to erect our Ancient Iudicatories, Laws, Just Judges, to lift up His afflicted
and faithful Subjects Heads, which were trod under, by a faction of Rebels
and Usurpers, and to bring Oppressors, Tyrants and Bloody men low.

HE comes MEEK, Just and Meek; This His Meekness is abundantly manifested in
His MAIESTY'S gracious Letters, Declarations, Proclamations, and Emissions, to
HIS PARLIAMENT, ARMY, NAVY, City of LONDON, to the Houses of LORDS and COMMONS,
and to the whole NOBILITY, GENTRY, MINISTRY, BUROUGHS and people of these
LANDS. I trust that GOD has so taught His MAJESTY, and so principled HIM for
ROYAL GOVERNMENT, that HE can mix Justice with Meekness and Meekness with
Justice, and has given to HIM a spirit of Wisdom, to discern between the
clamorous pretending Whore, and the true Mother of the Child.

Now (before I close) let me offer to you, some things, by way of advice.

Praise of this great WORK, of this wonderful and gracious Revolution, for the
WORK is His; There has not a Revolution fallen out in our time, not in many
generations before, wherein the LORDS Power, Mercy, Wisdom and Goodness has
been more conspicuously and eminently seen, then in this our KINGS
Restoration. Has not the Wisdom of GOD in a sudden befooled all these
Bloudy-minded, Treacherous, Perfidious, Disloyal Achitophels and Macchiavells
in the three KINGDOMS? And therefore let the Praise and Glory of this WORK, be
to the Holy Name of the LORD our GOD, Who is Excellent in working, Wonderful
in Counsel,

Next under GOD, Let that Noble, Wise, and Religious PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND,
That Noble, Wise, and Valorous GENERAL MONK, now Duke of Albemarlie, Knight of
the most Noble order of the Gartar, etc. Let the honest and loyal Party of the
Army, who adhered to Him, Let the Navy, and all these in the three KINGDOMS,
both of the NOBILITY, GENTRY, BARONS, MINISTERS, BUROUGHS, and all who had an
hand in this great WORK (which some have been studying like Foxes in their
den's and Conyes in their holes, to underminde) I say, Let all these who have
been isntrumental to carry on this great WORK and REVOLUTION, have their own
deserved Estimation and Praise, and let them be looked on with Love, Respect
and Honor as Lovers of Religion, of their Native KING, and their Countries
Honor, Freedom and Happiness, as polished shafts in the LORDS right Hand.

I beseech you, let the KING have the benefit of your Prayers, that is one of
the best Offices, that ye can do to HIM, Pray for HIM often, not for a Form,
but in good Earnest, and from a pious Loyal Affection, hold up HIS Condition
to GOD, when ye remember your own; Pray the LORD, to establish HIS THRONE in
Righteousness, to make the CROWN to flowrish on HIS HEAD, and the HEADS of HIS
POSTERITY, while Sun and Moon endure. Pray that no Treason, nor Traitor at any
time may reach the CROWN, that GOD would bless His MAJESTY, with a wise,
Godly, faithful, and Loyal Counsel, with an holy, obedient, and peaceable
Clergy, with a submissive, contented, Loyal People, that HE may be a Bulwark
for Truth, Godliness, Religion, Justice and Equity, that HE may be a Nursing
Father to the Church, an Advancer of the Protestant Religion, and that HE may
Scatter the wicked of the land, with his eyes, and that HE may be a Diadem,
in the hand of the LORD of HOSTS, and a Pattern for all the Kings of the world
to imitate: For there was never KING of Britain, that had more need of
Wisdom, Prudence and Forsight, then HIS MAJESTY who now Reigns. Never any of
His Royal Ancestors did come to their Crown in a more difficult time, Never a
KING had greater variety and tempers of Spirit, to deal with, nor more
difficulty to give just and reasonable satisfaction and content to so many
several and contrary Interests. Never any of His Royal Predecessors had more
Enemies, some known, and some veiled, who can very sliely and subtly drop out
words, for His Disadvantage, so the KING stands much in need of the Prayers of
His Godly and loyal Subjects, wherefore let our hearty Prayers be to GOD for
HIM.

Reports, Suggestions or Misinformations against the KING'S Person or
Government. There is and was a generation in BRITAIN, who made it their trade
and game (Religiously and Devotly enough) to blast His MAIESTY'S FATHERS
Reputation, whose Memory is now sacred, and will be as a sweet favor to
succeeding Generations, when the Memory of these vile Aspersers shall rote and
stink in the Dust* Yea that same evil Spirit, is not yet banished away,
studying what lies in its power in a fly, subtle, hypocritical, clandestine
Way, under a pretense of Zeal and Piety, to suggest Prejudices in the mynd^ of
simple and well-minded People, whom they have abused too long against the KING*
whereas HE has given far more evident Testimonies, in the midst of many
strange Temptations to the Truth of the Protestant Religion, then any or all of
these disloyal Whisperers. Beware to hear such false Insinuations, for they
smell worse then Hemlock in the furrows of the Field. I do not speak this,
with any reference to this Place in particular. I know and that upon good
Grounds from many years Experience, that ABERDENE might of old, and yet may (be
it spoken without Envy or Disparagement) compare for Loyalty to their KING,
with any City in BRITAIN, but I speak this as a general Warning, for the
whole land, for there has been much Sin that way in BRITAIN; and if any now
should follow such disloyal Steps, they ought to be marked and discovered.

Beware to have an hand, or any way to be accessory, to any Prejudice to
MONARCHICAL GOVERNMENT, or to the shaking one Pin of it loose. It was most
wysly said by our late Martyr KING of blessed Memory, that the Government then
was like to a Watch, when it is taken down, if one Pin be set wrong, it will
mar all, and make all go Wrong. We have found HIM a true Prophet in that, as
in many other things. Now therefore since GOD in His deep Wisdom and
wonderful Goodness, has reduced Our NATIVE KING and set up MONARCHY, the
Ancient and Lawful Government of these Nations, let all the Subjects beware of
the least occasion, directly or indirectly to loose the smallest Pin of it.
Let all the Subjects know that it is their Liberty and Honor, to live under
their NATIVE KING, under their Ancient, fundamental Government and established
Laws, and not under the sword of Usurpers and Tyrants. Have we not sore
smarted already under the change of Government? Have we not found a fancyed
Comonwealths Finger heavier then Our former Lawful KINGS Loynt? Let us account
Government a precious tender Thing, Let us not middle with them that are given
to Change.

Lastly be content to bear Burdens for a time, to pay public Assesses and
Impositions, which yet the Necessity and Condition of affairs call for. What
was paid to Usurpers, let non grudge to pay to Our just KING, for the great
Affairs of the Kingdom. And I am confident that a short time shall ease these
Nations of that, which for the present it is not rationally possible to be
eased of: but I need not to spend time on Exhortations of this nature, as to
Loyalty and Cheerfulness under burdens to this Honorable and Loyal City; in
whose estimation and hearts the KINGS Majesty is most dear and precious. Love
makes you Loyal. I say no more, but Fear GOD and Honor the KING. GOD bless
K. CHARLES II. KING of great BRITAIN etc. Now to him who is KING of kings, and
LORD of Lords, be Praise and Glory for ever, Amen.


