A NEW METHOD OF PHYSIC: OR, A Short VIEW of Paracelsus and Galen's Practice;
In 3. Treatises.

I. Opening the Nature of Physic and Alchymy.

II. Showing what things are Requisite to a Physician and Alchymist.

III. Containing an Harmonical Systeme of Physic.

Written in Latin by Simeon Partlicius, Philosopher, and Physician in Germany.
Translated into English

By NICHOLAS CULPEPER, Gent.

Student in Physic and Astrology, Dwelling on the East Side of
Spittle-fields, near London.

Dogmata non juro in Paracelsi, aut scita Galeni: Vera utriusque placent, falsa
utriusque jacent.

London, Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden Hall, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Printing-press in Cornhil near the Royal Exchange: And by S.
Howes, J. Garfield, and R. Westbrook. 1654.

MR Culpepers New METHOD both of Studying and Practicing Rhysick.

To the Reader.
Reader,
THis ensuing Discourse I finished when I was in Health, which had been
Published Two years since, but that the Act of Parliament for Punishing such
Thieves as steal away Copies from those that Purchase them, did Expire the Nine
and Twentieth Day of September, 1651. And was not Revived until the Seventh of
January, 1652. I have spent Twenty One Years Study for the Good of this Nation,
and have Written Seventeen BOOKS (besides those already Published) which I hope
to Finish and Publish if the Parliament please to perfect the Law to Punish
Copy-stealers with the same Punishment they do other Thieves. I Thought in an
Epistle to have Write something that should have been useful for all young
Practitioners of Physic and Alchymy; And also have Answered some Objections
made against my Wrightings; I shall now only Answer one, viz. That my Books do
no other good but make Empericks. I have therefore given you in this Work a
joint view of the whole Method of Physic, according to both Paracelsus and
Galen's Practice; That so the industrious may judge which is best: There being
none that are Empericks except such as are Lazy. But at the present I am so
sickly that I am not fit for any Study, having not strength of Body to Write;
and therefore must only refer you to this Book (which was the Child of my
Health) with this assurance, That (if God restore Health) I shall never leave
making more Books (for Public good) as long as I am,

N. Culpeper.
From my House on the East Side of Spittle-Fields, near London, this 12. of
November. 1653.
THE CONTENTS.
Treatise I. Of the Nature of Physic, and Alchymy.
CHap. 1. Of the Opinions of Physicians. Page. 4 Chap. 2. Of the Essence of
Medicine and Alchymy. Page. 11 Chap. 3. Of the Name of Medicine and Alchymy.
Page. 14 Chap. 4. Of the Kind of Medicine and Alchymy. Page. 16 Chap. 5. Of the
End of Physic and Alchymy, which is Health. Page. 22 Chap. 6. The Cause of
Physic and Alchymye, both Principal, and less Principal. Page. 28 Chap. 7. Of
the Original of Physic and Alchymy. Page. 31 Chap. 8. How the Beginnings of
Medicine and Alchymy were drawn from Nature. Page. 36 Chap. 9. Of the Matter
Form, and Effect of Medicine and Alchymy. Page. 41 Chap. 10. Of the Subject and
Object of Alchymy and Physic. Page. 44 Chap. 11. Of the Certainty of Physic
and Alchymy. Page. 49 Chap. 12. Of the Dignity and Profit of Medicine and
Alchymy. Page. 55 Chap. 13. The Excellency of Medicine and Alchymy. Page. 56
Chap. 14. Of the Difficulty of Medicine and Alchymy. Page. 58 Chap. 15. Of
things agreeable to Medicine and Alchymy, which are Natural Philosophy,
Divinity, and Astrology. Page. 61
Treatise II. Of the Nature and Ministers of the Physician and Alchymist.
Chap. 1. Of the Definition of a Physician and Alchymist. Page. 73 Chap. 2. Of
what is Requisite to a Physician and Alchymist, in the general. Page. 75 Chap.
3. Of the Ornaments of a Physicians mind. Page. 79 An Idea of the Aphorisms of
Hippocrates. Page. 80 Chap. 4. Of the Ornaments of the body of a Physician and
Alchymist. Page. 92 An Idea of Hippocrates his Aphorisms. Page. 93 Chap. 5. Of
the Ornaments of Estate belonging to a Physician and Alchymist. Page. 98 An
Idea of Hippocrates his Aphorisms. ibid. Chap. 6. Of the Authority of Physic.
Page. 103 An Idea of Hippocrates his Aphorisms concerning Duty. Page. 104 An
Idea of Hippocrates his Aphorisms concerning Persons. Page. 108 Chap. 7. The
Oath of Physicians according to Hippocrates. Page. 111 Chap. 8. The Oath of
Apothecaries. Page. 113 Chap. 9. Of things repugnant to Physic and Alchymy:
Or, Of the Marks and Vices of Sophisters, and Impostors in those Arts. Page.
114
Treatise III. Containing a Physical Idea of the Hermonical Systeme.
Chap. 1. Of the Definition of Medicine and Alchymy. Page. 119 Chap. 2. Of the
Definition of Medicine and Alchymy in general. Page. 123
TOME I. Of the Theorical part of Medicine.
Of the General knowledge of things Natural, Or the Object of Medicine and
Alchymy. Page. 129 LIB. I.
The Common Affections are called Special. ibid Chap. 1. Of Principles. Page.
130 Chap. 2. Of Elements. Page. 131 Chap. 3. Of the Three Principles of
Alchymists which are contained in every Natural Body, and give it its
Constitution: As also of the Faculties and Properties of the Elements and their
Number according to the Doctrine of Hermes. Page. 132 Chap. 4. Of both first
and second Qualities. Page. 136 Chap. 5. Of Mixture and Generation in the
General. Page. 140 Chap. 6. Of Mixture according to the Opinion of the
Dogmatists, and Hermetical Philosophers. Page. 141 Chap. 7. Of Generation
according to the Opinion of Dogmatists, and Hermetical Philosophers. Page. 142
Chap. 8. Of Temperaments. Page. 145 A Body with Life. Page. 146
TOME I. Part II. Of living bodies, not Sensible, and Sensible.
LIB. I.
Of Art Botanical. Page. 147 The showing the Reason of Plants. Page. 148
LIB. II.
Of the History of Plants. Page. 149
LIB. III.
Of Metalography, or Knowledge of Metals. Page. 151 Another Division of
Stones. Page. 153 Another Division of Stones. Page. 155 Metals. Page. 162
Earth. Page. 163
LIB. IV.
Of Zoography. Page. 164 Of Flying Creatures. Page. 165 Of Four-footed Beasts
that go upon the Earth. ibid Of Creatures Living in the Water. Page. 166

TOME I. Part III. Of special Physiologie: Or, the Subject and Object of the
Physician,
LIB. I.
Of the Faculties and Functions of the Soul both General and Special. Page. 168
LIB. II.
Of the Anatomy of the Body. Page. 174 Similar Parts. ibid The Bones. Page. 178
Cartilages. Page. 181 Nerves. Page. 182 Arteries. Page. 183 Veins. Page. 184
Ligaments. Page. 186 Muscels. Page. 187 Flesh. Page. 193 Dissimilar Parts. ibid
The Eyes. Page. 394 The Ears. Page. 395 The Nose, Cheek, and Mouth. Page. 396
The Neck. Page. 397 The Middle or Vital Ventricle. Page. 398 The Lowermost, or
Natural Ventricle. Page. 399 The Branches, or Limbs. Page. 402 Another Division
of the Parts. Page. 403 Of the Administration, Dissection, Or Anatomy of the
Corpse. Page. 404 I. The Anatomy of the Inferior Ventricle. ibid II. The Anatomy
of the Middle Ventricle, or Breast. Page. 408 III. The Anatomy of the Higher
Ventricle, or Head. Page. 411 IV. The Anatomy of the Hands. Page. 415 V. The
Anatomy of the Foot. Page. 417
Paris contained. Page. 419 Hermetical Philosophers. Page. 421

TOME I. Part IV. Of Vertual Anatomy, Or the Harmony between the Macrocosm, and
Microcosm.
LIB. I.
Of the Analogical Comparation of the Heavens with the Body of Man. Page. 424
LIB. II.
Of the Influential Harmony. Page. 425
LIB. III.
Of the Faculties of Simples, which the Dogmatists make use of to find out
their Natures. Page. 427

TOME I. Part V. Of that part of the Theorick of Physic which is called
Pathologia.
LIB. I.
Of Semeiotica, or the Doctrine of Signs. Page. 437 Prognostical Signs. Page.
439 Signs of Death, according to the Opinion of Hermetical Philosophers. Page.
441 Of the Crisis, and Critical Days. ibid
LIB. II.
Of the Doctrine of Pulses. Page. 444 1 The Reason of observing, and knowing
the Pulses. ibid 2 The Difference of Pulses. Page. 445 3 The Causes of Pulses.
ibid 4 Prognostics by the Signification of the Pulse. Page. 446
An Hermetical Consideration of the Pulse. Page. 447
LIB. III.
Of Urine. Page. 449 The Significations and Differences of Urine. ibid
Hermetical Consideration of Urine. Page. 452
LIB. IV.
Of Symtomes. Page. 453
LIB. V.
Of the Aethiologie of Diseases. Page. 455 The Causes of the Diseases of the
Parts, both Similar, Organical, and Common. Page. 462
LIB. VI.
Of General Nosologie. Page. 464 Accidental Diseases. Page. 465 Diseases
according to the Place. Page. 466 Diseases according to Time. Page. 467
Diseases according to Custom. Page. 468 Diseases according to Cause. Page. 469
LIB. VII.
Of Fevers. Page. 470
LIB. VIII.
Of Internal Affections. Page. 473 Afflictions of the Eyes. Page. 476 The
Afflictions of the Ears. Page. 477 The Afflictions of the Nostrils. Page. 478
Afflictions of the Mouth. ibid Afflictions of the Jaws. Page. 479 The
Afflictions of the Breast. Page. 480 The Afflictions of the Stomach. Page. 481
The Afflictions of the Bowels. Page. 483 The Afflictions of the Fundament and
Mesenterium. ibid Afflictions of the Liver and Spleen, Gall, Reins and Bladder.
Page. 474 Afflictions incident to the Parts Dedicated to Generation. Page. 485
Afflictions of the Habit of the Body. Page. 487
LIB. IX.
Of External Afflictions. Page. 488 Panpemical Afflictions. Page. 492
LIB. X.
Of the Pathologie of Hermetical Philosophers. Page. 493 The Differences of
Disseases. Page. 500

TOME II. Of Practical Medicine.
TOME II. Part I. Of Hygiena.
1 Air. Page. 511 2 Nourishment. Page. 513 3 Exercise. ibid 4 Sleeping and
Watching. Page. 515 5 Affections of the Mind. Page. 516 6 Fullness and
Emptiness. ibid The Use of things not Natural in preserving Health. Page. 517
The Use of things not Natural in Diseases. Page. 519
TOME II. Part II. Of the proper Practical Part of Medicine, called
Therapeutica.
LIB. I.
Of the Method of Curing. Page. 521 General Indications. Page. 522 Physical
Indication. Page. 523 Mathematical Indications. Page. 527 The Method of Cure,
according to the Opinion of Hermetical Philosophers. Page. 528 The Cure of
Particular Diseases. Page. 531
LIB. II.
Of both General and Special Evacuation. Page. 534 Chyrurgical Evacuation. ibid
The Evacuation of Cachochymia. Page. 535
LIB. III.
Of Medicaments. Page. 536
LIB. IV.
Of the General Composition of Medicines. Page. 538 The Opinion of Hermetical
Philosophers, Concerning Composition. Page. 539
LIB. V.
Of the Common way of Preparing Medicines by the Art of the Apothecary. Page.
541
LIB. VI.
Of the Chemical Preparation of Medicines. Page. 544




The Names of several Books Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden Hall London, and
are to be sold at his Shop at the sign of the Printing press in Cornhil, near
the Royal Exchange.
Six several Books, by Nich. Culpeper, Gent. Studene in Physic and Astrology.
1 A Translation of the New Dispensatory, made by the College of Physicians of
London. Whereunto is added, The Key to Galen's Method of Physic. 2 A Directory
for Midwives, or a Guide for Women. Newly enlarged by the Author in every
Sheet, and illustrated with diverse new Plates. 3 Galen's Art of Physic, with a
large Comment. 4 The English Physician: being an Astrologo-Physical-Discours of
he vulgar Herbs of this Nation: wherein is showed how to Cure a man's self of
most Diseases incident to man's Body, with such things as grow in England, and
for three pence charge. 5 The Anatomy of the Body of Man, wherein is exactly
described the several parts of the Body of Man, illustrated with very many larg
Brass Plates. 6 A New Method both of studying and practicing Physic.
Seven Books of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs lately published: As also the Texts of
Scripture upon which they are grounded.
1 The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment, on Phil. 4. 11. 2, Gospel Worship,
On Levit. 10. 3. 3 Gospel-Conversation, on Phil. 1. 17. To which is added, The
Misery of those men that have their Portion in this life only, on Ps. 17. 14. 4
A Treatise of Earthly-Mindedness, on Phil. 3. part of the 19. verse. To which is
added, A Treatise of Heavenly-Mindednefs, and walking with God, on Genesis 5. 24
and on Phil. 3. 20. 5 An Exposition on the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh
Chapters of the Prophecy of Hosea. 6 An Exposition on the eighth, ninth, and
tenth Chapters of Hosea. 7 An Exposition on the eleventh, twelfth, and third
Chapters of Hosea, being now Complete.
Twelve several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Collected into one Volumn. viz.
1 The great Gospel Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and
applied from Christ's Priestly Office. 2 Satan's Power to tempt; and Christ's Love
to, and Care of His People under Temptation. 3 Thankfulness required in every.
Condition. 4 Grace for Grace; or the Overflowing of Christ's Fullness received by
all Saints. 5 The Spiritual Actings of Faith through natural impossibilities. 6
Evangelical Repentance. 7 The Spiritual-Life, and In-Being of Christ in all
Believers. 8 The Woman of Canaan, 9 The Saints Hiding place in the time of Gods
Anger. 10 Christ's Comin is at our Midnight. 11 A Vindication of Gospel
Ordinances. 12 Grace and Love beyond Gifts.
Six Sermons Preached by Doctor Hill, viz.
1 The Beauty and Sweetness of an Olive Branch of Peace and Brotherly
Accommodation budding. 2 Truth and Love happily married in the Churches of
Christ. 3 The Spring of strengthening Grace in the Rock of Ages Christ Jesus. 4
The strength of the Saints to make Jesus Christ their Strength. 5 The Best and
Worst of Paul. 6 Gods eternal preparation for his dying Saints.
The Bishop of Canterburies Speech on the Scaffold.

The Kings Speech on the Scaffold.

King Charles his Case, or an Appeal to all Rational Men concerning his Trial.

A Congregational Church is a Catholic visible Church, By Samuel Stone, in
New England

Mr Owens stedfastness of the Promises.

Mr Owen against Mr Baxter.

A Vindication of Free Grace, By John Pawson.

The Magistrates support and Burden, By John Corael.

The Discipline of the Church in New England, by the Churches and Synod there.

A Relation of the Barbados.

A Relation of the Repentance and Conversion of the Indians in New England, by
Mr Eliot and Mr Mayhew.

An Exposition on the Gospel of the Evangelist S. Matthew, by Mr Ward.

Clows Chyrurgery.

Marks of Salvation.

An Exposition of the whole first Epistle of Peter, by Mr. John Rogers of Dedham
in Essex.

Christians Engagement for the Gospel, By John Goodwin.

Great Church Ordinance of Baptism.

Mr Love's Case, containning his Petitions, Narrative, and Speech.

Vox Pacisica, or a Persuasive to Peace.

Dr Prestons Saints Submission, and Satan's Overthrow.

A Treatise of the Rickets, Published in Latin by Dr Glisson, Dr Bate, and Dr
Remorter, now translated into English.

Mr Symsons Sermon at Westminster.

Mr Feaks Sermon before the Lord Major.

Mr Phillips Treatise of Hell.

-- Of Christ's Geneology.

Mr Eaton on the Oath of Allegiance and Covcnant, showing that they oblige not.

The First Treatise: Which explaineth the Nature of Medicine and Alchymy.
PROOEMIUM.
FIrst, Every Science is made complete and perfect by these Four Parts,

Fore-knowledg. Precept. Rule. And Commentary.
These four Parts are diligently to be distinguished in every Science (then not
to be confounded:) According to these ought the Master to teach, and the
Scholar to learn, orderly and by degrees: In these is no redundancy, and as
little want.

1. Foreknowledg is nothing else but the learning of Art anticipated, or the
knowleg of the Nature of what you would learn.

For three things ought to be foreknown in every Art, be it Theorick, or
Practick.

In the Theory, the Subject, Principles, and Affections.

In the Practick, the Subject, End, and Means.

I leave the more exact description of this to such as study Logic, the Terms
whereby they call it Synonymia, Paronymia, and Homonymia:

But I do not write Logic here, but Physic, and therefore come to the rest of
the Notions.

2. Precepts which seem to be the only Essentials to Discipline, are, The true
Definitions, and congruous Distributions of things. 3. The Rules of Definition
and distribution contains their properties. 4. A Commentary is that which makes
both Fore-knowledg and Precept fit for use.
Amongst other things, It explains them what they be, and makes such things as
are doubtful, clear; answers all needful Questions; puts an end to
controversies; quotes the examples and authorities both of ancient and Modern
writers, gives a Reason for every truth.

These four beget a child called Method; or (if you please) make way both for
Universal and Particular practice.

This is the Reason Galen decreed upon it; That no Art could be learned without
Method or Uniuersal Theorems; and exercised in particular Examples; Thus you
see Method consists in Univiersals, and Practice in particulars. Also
Hippocrates (who was dead before Galen was born) seems to be of that opinion
too.

Method (which is Universal) cannot make a man an able Physician with out much
Practice. Also in another Book he says, There are seven helps to find out a
truth when it lies most hid.

1. A ripe witted Nature. 2. Good Education. 3. An Ingenious Master. 4. A
diligent mind. 5. A fervent desire after truth. 6. Good Method. 7. Continual
Practice.
Now then it is clear from the consideration of these four which ought in every
science to be observed, That our devision of this Book into four parts is very
rational: of which,

The first shall contain the Prologomena, or Fore-knowledg. The second, the
Precepts. The third, the Rules. The fourth, the Commentaries.
I premise the first only, to make the three latter the fuller and Plainer.

TREATISE I. Of the Nature of Physic and Alchymy.
1. IN this Treatise we will first intorduce the Opinions of Physicians: and
when we have done so,

2. Secondly the Names, and Essence of Physic and Alchymy. Then

3. Thirdly, We will come to the matter it self, which we will declare
according to its cause, and its effect, subject, object, and adjunct, sympathy
and Antipathy.

Chap. 1. Of the Opinions of Physicians.
THe Body of Physic (according to Physicians) is the consent of a huge sort of
precepts gathered together in a heap, founded upon certain principles, which
are either congruous to one another, or at least seem so to be.

1. That which we call the Sect is either the first, or the daughter of the
first. The first is Practice: the daughters of the first are either the eldest
or the youngest; The eldest as Rule and Hermetical Philosophy, The youngest as
Method. 2. Secondly, Practice is the original of all Physic.

Experience is the mother of Physic; daily necessity administers ocasion for
experience to work uopn: When a man is out of his way he inquires after it of
every one that comes near him: so does a man that is out of his Health, require
help of all his friends: This begot Practice, though peradventure accompanied
with ignorance in the Principles. A Smith has certain Rules to make a key, or
something else of a piece of Iron, though he know neither the Nature of the
Iron, nor the Original from whence it comes.

The Species of this are three.

1. Perictosis: when unadvised experiences are made. 2. Antoskedion: when men
are warned of things in their sleep, or led by opinion; Or when they dream
waking. 3. Mimetikce: when men imitate like Apes. Another did good with such a
Medicine, why maynot I in another body?

Hence is a threefold experience gained.

Chance Medley. Advice, and Imitation.
Experience, first found out the Rules of Diet, and this was the opinion of
Hippocrates Men (says he) when they are sick are many times cured only by
changing of their diet: And Herodotus writes that the Egyptians did so, who
purged their bodies three days in every Month, as thinking that all
sicknesses came by reason of their food.

3. Thirdly. All Rules are the daughters of Experience, and thus she begat
them: When men first found things to be true, they sought after the Causes of
them, as thinking if the causes were unknown, the effects could not be sure:
Thus were the Rules and Precepts of Physic invented. 4. Method was begotten by
Practice and Rules. 5. Hermetical Philosophy was invented by Hermes
Trismegistos, and others: In our times it is as it were revived from the dead
by Paracelsus and seems now like a new Model of Physic. 6. All these were
illustrated by the judgments of each Author. 1. The Empericks; neglecting the
Cause and Nature of the disease, minding only the symptoms, putting too much
confidence in the Experiences of others, and when they knew not the disease,
they run to their old remedies, for they had no other. As in diseases of the
legs and Arms when they are weak, they used the same remedies that they did to
weak stomachs. Imagine, Medlars Quinces, and Cervices, called in Sussex
Checkers. 2. Dogmaticks searches after the Nature of things, the Causes of
diseases, makes use of the symtomes, to find out the cause, and gives
directions for the cure. 3. Methodists regards not the cause much, nor the
symptoms at all, but only judges by Evidences; And take Indication alone for
the principal and leading Rule of their practice.

They dealt by Triplicities, and used but three kinds of Medicines according to
the three Natures of diseases. Viz.

1. Diseases of Binding. 2. Diseases proceeding of loosening. 3. Diseases
compound of both these.
For they defended with all the wit they had, That Looseness or Binding
accompanied all diseases, and therefore they called them Communitvies Besides,
in all Cures they Presciribed Fasting, as the Egiptians did (as we showed you
before)

Lastly They observed certain scopes in administering Physic, of which they
called one Metasyntrecos, with which they empted the body of Humors: another
Resumptivos, with which they restored decayed Flesh.

4. Hermeticks, or Alchymists (which you please) being something male-contented
with such a Method of Physic, brought in new Rules contrary to them.
7. Medicine cannot want Alchymie, the one is so helpful to another as man and
wife, and therefore they ought not to be separated.

Many contend stoutly and stubbornly too, That Physic is a sufficient body of
it self without Alchymie. And what a learned Argument do they bring to prove it
think ye? Galen and Hippocrates the two great Lights of Physic were without
it. A Cuckoos song is worth ten such Arguments, They are far of another opinon
whose Breasts Apollo inlightens with the light of nature; for. That without
which Medicine cannot attain the end it was ordained for; namely, To Cure the
sick perfectly, and speedily: That is plainly necessary and ought in no wise to
be wanting. But we cannot do this by common Medicines without Alchymie.

Therefore Alchymie is very necessary, and ought in no wise to be wanting.

The Assumption is thus proved,

Although when you look upon one of Galens Apothecaries Shops, you see fine
painted Boxes and curious pots, that it would dazzle your eyes to look upon
them, they are so finely painted, That if there be a paradise upon Earth you
would think it were there: yet in the inside is nothing but filth and the very
Carkeises and Dung of all Medicines. Their common Medicines are gross, crude
bodies, the vices of the simples are in, as well as their virtues, yea so many
simples are in one Composition, that they hinder one another operation, and
therefore how can they ease the sick without calling the help of an Alchymist
to resolve, separate, and exhale what is obnoxious, thereby producing the
hidden Natures of things for use (For God has vayled the greatest and most
wonderful things, that so he may stir up man to search after them: else why did
God hide the virtues of an Herb amongst his vices, seeing he would have all
things made manifest) Also the Alchymist searches after the strength and
Temperature of things, the Causes and Original of their actions, and by
Mediation of a certain pure body sets the very species and forms of things
before your eyes: I could bring an infinite Examples of this: Opium is held to
be cold, because it is stupefactive, but it is bitter, therefore according to
Galens Hypothesis, hot: you see then, it contains in it self more properties
then one, which Alchymie teaches artificially to separate from one another:
Here then is no more doubt, then there is knots in a Rush, but that Alchymie is
the Fountain of sound Philosophy the key of Wisdom, the soul and Marrow of
Physic, the Root of Medicine, and the Mark at which wise men shoot; therefore
not to be separated from Medicine: Nay, we may say (and that truly too) That
Physicians destiture of Chemical remedies, are like to Smiths that give you an
Axe that is dull or broken in the middle, to cleave Loggs with: yet seeing the
Theory of Alchymy as well concerning things Natural, as things not Natural,
and preternaturall is not yet sufficiently unfolded, and Methodically digested,
and is pestered with variety of names and Opinions; Physicians follow the
precepts of Galen and Hippocrates. But O let us shake of this lazy life and
learn the preparation of Medicines from Paracelsus and the Alchymists, which is
far fitter, more pleasing, and more profitable, and let us use it to the glory
of God, the health of our selves, and of our Neighbors.

This is the Reason moved me to handle both in this book, That the Medicine
both of Hypocrates and of Alchymy, might be a Rule for us, and that you may see
the Sympathy, and Antipathy between them.

The other two Sects, namely Empericks and Methodicks (if they be rightly
understood), pertain to them both, for both embrace Experience, both strive
after Reason and Method: Besides, they seek after the knowledge of the body of
man, and conses that they search after the Elements, principles and Causes by
which the body may be changed as very necessary, for stark naked Experience if
it be not joined with Reason is very dangerous, and to build upon Reason alone
is very difficult and many times puzles the wisest Physicians: Neither do we
approve of that ill favored fashion of scribbling Receipts, which most
commonly, the Apothecaries either for want of learning do not understand, or
for want of care alter, But we embrace that Manual, pleasant and effectual
preparation of Medicines which Alchymie teaches.

Chap. 2. Of the Essence of Medicine and Alchymie.
1. There is no doubt but Medicine may be given unto men.

There were a sort of men formerly in the world, that were of an opinion (and
that opinion is scarce worn out yet) That because Physicians dissented in
Opinions, the groundwork of Physic was built only upon imagination without one
jot of Truth in it: That no honest man may harbor such a thought in his
breast, We will prove the contraries by what follows.

1. From a resolution of the action to the Habit, for he that grants there is
any operation without the understanding, must needs grant it to be within
either in Act, or in possibility of Act. 2. From the sense of bruit beasts, and
Reason of men: For that which bruit beasts know only by natural instinct, man
must needs know by observation:

But bruit beasts know the natures of Herbs and make use of them when they need
them, as we find by continual observation. Ergo,

3. From the actions of Physic from certain causes, for if the Example of the
action be certain, the Cause must needs be certain too. But Examples of many
Cures done by Medicine are certain. Ergo. 4. From the Habit by the cause of the
Physical actions, to the Essence of the Medicine: For if the causes of
whatsoever be certain, there must needs be a just knowledge of the same causes,
in the mind of him that knows them: And this must needs beget a certain Habit,
according to which Habit, he exercises the like actions.
2. Secondly, There is no doubt but Chymicall Medicines may be given unto men.

The Truth produces Hatred, said that famous Orator Cicero, and that is the
reason so few people look after it, and those few such whose hearts God has
touched: Therefore Alchymie was first damned to Cymmerian darkness; and being
afterward by some honest souls brought up once more to see the Light, up start
all the haters of Truth, and labor with might and main to keep this hopeful
plant from bearing fruit: when once they had brought men into darkness, who can
blame them if they labor to keep them there; and to do so, they left never a
ston unturned; but labored night and day even til they sweat again to exclud
Alchymy from the society of men, nay they were come to that point of madness,
that they accounted it, either no Art, or else an Art, vain, bewiching, invented
by the Devil, and the Devils kitchen. And then the Bedlams run to the
Magistrate, and Petition him to restrain Alchymists. But the soul of man
furnished with the principles of Reason and instructed with the principles of
Art, was quickly able to see the truth, through so slender a cobweb, and found
it out to be the truest and most Ancient way, even almost as old as the world,
although but latly revived from the dead. We might make this good by solid
Arguments if we would, and therefore,

1. The Operations of what Arts soever are Natural, proceed from Nature, But
the Art of an Alchymist is natural. Ergo 2. We cannot say nature's false. Ergo
neither Alchymie.
3. If the knowledge of Metals be true and natural, Then Alchymie must needs
be true and natural, because it teaches it.

Thus you see that Alchymie is an Essential part of Philosophy, as well as
Medicine.

Chap. 3. Of the Name of Medicine and Alchymy.
1. THe name of Medicine may well be reduced unto these three Heads,

Synonymia, Paronymia, and Homonymia.
1 Synonymia, The Hebrews call it Remedy, or Health. The Greeks (...) Medicine.
To omit what the Germans, Slavonians, and Bohemians call it. 2. Paronymia: The
Hebrews derive from a word which signifies He has Healed, The Greeks from
(...) to give Medicines, and the Latin word Medicina is derived from Means. 3
Homonymia: and this word carries the same signification in all Dialects, It is
properly and genuinely put for the Method of Curing, which consists in
Conserving preserving and restoring Health. Sometimes it is taken for the Act of
the Physician: We in this place take it for the Discipline, and faculty in
giving Physic; but it is not always so taken, for it is sometimes taken for the
whole, and for every part of the Physical method: sometimes for the method of
cure, which is not manual; and other times for that which is Manual or
Chyrurgical (which you please) And thus much for the first general head. The
Second follows.
2. The name of Alchymy is declared by Synonymia, Paronymia, and Homonymia.

1. Synonymia. Chymia is the Greek word; The Arabins added their vulgar
particle Al, thence it was called Alchymi, It is called Spagyry, Hermeticall
art and the Art of perfect workmanship,

The art of Segregation, Separation and Distillation; thence (vulgarly) A
distiller and an Alchymyst are held to be both one,

2. Paronymia. Chymia is an Egyptian art (if you will believe Plutarch) used by
the Priests, especially those inhabiting in Egypt the Town of Chemis derived
(...), Which signifies to power out,, melt or convert to juice or Liquor: thence
the word (...), signifies Juice. Alchymy then is an art making Juice, or
converting solid matters into Liquid, as also Coagulation of them is
understood. It is called Spagyrick from drawing and compelling; Hermetick from
Hermes the Inventor of it: Other names it has from washing, sequestring, and
purifying. 3. Homonymia. Alchymie of most, and those the best, is taken for
that part of Physic which give cure; because it makes the Medecines
efficacious: It manifests many secrets to him that studies it, and
administreth many very profitable observations, and indeed it seems to be
nothing else, but natural Philosophy, and medicine, brought both into one
practice. By other Authors and those Modern, it is taken for a part of
Philosophy distinct from others, the Fountain and Key of Philosophy; The soul
and Marrow of Physic; The Root of Medicine. The Name has been spoken to: The
Kind follows.
Chap. 4. Of the kind of Medicine, and Alchymie.
1 The Genus of Medicine is a Phylosophicall Discipline, or superior faculty.

THere are very many which suppose Medicine, and natural Philosophy to be
synonimous, and their reasons were, first, because Aristotle thought so, when
he wrote that Physic was to know the first principles of health and Sickness
and that it ended in that which is called Medicine: And that the Physician
begins with those things that are Natural: for as Plants have their Roots
fixed in the earth by which they receive nourishment, yet they are conserved by
the temperature of the Air about them, and flourish by the vital Influence of
the Stars, so the Art of Curing men, takes it is Root and principles from
Philosophical means which are confirmed and illustrated by particular
precepts: wherefore say they, Medicine is nothing else, but a certain
particular point of natural Phylosophie, objected to the senses; for a
Naturalist considers all natural bodies universally, for knowledge sake; But
a Physician is conversant about the body of a man, not only that he may know
his nature, but also that by knowing his nature, he may know the manner of Cure.

2. Because those things which are required to make up the, true and proper
Synonymy of Scienses, agree perfectly with the Comparation of Medicine and
natural Philosophy: for the body of man which is the subject of Physic, is
not drawn by difference of accidentalls, which is to be curable by Art; and the
first principles of Medicine are showed and handled in Physic: Therefore, as
Law may be reduced to moral Philosophy, and Divinity to Metaphysics, so may
Midicine to Natural Philosophy. But why I and others cannot close with this
opinion, hear a little.

There ought to be two things habited in a perfect Physician: One by which he
knows the precepts of medicine, and the things there to belonging. The other by
which he operates well and readily, together with all the circumstances which
concur to the perfecting of a Cure. That these two Habits are distinct, appears
by this that one of them may be without the other: for very many learn the
Science of Medicine in the Schools, and yet know not a whit what belongs to
Use. On the contrary Many which are unskilled in the Science of Medicin by
practice and Experience become good Physicians. There is then this difference
between these Habits, The first is goren by speculation, and may be taught
without any practice at all. The other is gotten only by Practice and
Experience. Then, One is occupied altogether about universals, the other about
particulars also, although the one be imperfect without the other; yet the
first can do nothing without the second; the second little without the first:
Both together make an able Physician. Moreover That first Habit which is
nothing else but the Science of Medcine, is divided in to two parts. The first
contains general Precepts, and Notions far enough off from Practice which
Physicians call Speculative. The other touches upon the Practice and teaches
the way and means of Operation, and this they call Practick; These things thus
premised, it is an easy matter to prove That Medicine is not synonymous with
Natural Philosophy; for this latter Habit is not synonymous Physic because it
consists totally of Practice, and Practice is not synonymous with speculation
seeing they are things of a diverse order, and Essentially different. Now
Doctrins synonymous cannot Essentially differ: for there are three things which
Speculative Medicin chefly handles, First, the Body of Man. Secondly, Health
and Sickness. Thirdly, Nourishment, and Medicament.

2. Alchymie is the Fountain of Sound Philosophy, the Key of wisdom. The soul
and Marrow of Physic. The Root of Medicine. and the mark all wise men Shoot at.

There are some that are so simple as to affirm that Alchymie is also
Sinonymous to Natural Philosophy. Al real things are of three sorts according
to Aristotle. For either they are joined to motion and matter; and of these is
the Science of Natural Philosophy: Or joined to matter, and separated by
motion; and of these are the Mathamaticks: Or separated from motion and matter,
and of these are the Metaphysics. Now Alchymy, seeing it is by a real being,
joined to motion and matter, must needs come under the head of Natural
Philosophy: But if part of Natural Philosophy be Synonymous with Minerals and
Metals, it ought to have a certain matter of determination; and seeing the
matter is one, and the determination altogether natural, and not manifold;
therefore of necessity, that same determinated matter must be like in the Art
of Alchymy, and not manifold; and although (say they) the manner of action and
direction and information of the Art be different from Natural Philosophy as
also the place, time, yet they tend all to one ultimate end: for as nature
brings forth an Herb, or Gold, or other Metal, out of that one matter for the
use of man: so the Art of Alchymie takes the quintescence of that metal or
medicament out of that matter of the same use: Put case this be so; yet can I
easily persuade my self that Alchymie is the fountain of Philosophy, and the
soul of Physic: for (by their leaves) That Philosopher never yet breathed
which had the perfection of Alchymie but had also the knowledge not only of
metals but also of Vigetables and living creatures: therefore it was well said
that Alchymie brought many hidden things to light, found out many excellent
medicines for the Physician and many useful observations. Alchymy is then
admirably profitable to search out the hidden things of nature so that a man
can scarce be excellent in this world, without the knowledge of this Art: for
what Philosopher can perform his duty more Nobly, more Happily, then he that is
exercised in Alchymy: for it is not the proud Sophister that vapers with a few
phylosophycal sentences, light conceits, and trivial Quirks that deserves the
name of a good Physician; but he that according to the rules of nature, makes
his medicines honestly and faithsully, and applies them wisely and studiously
Just so for all the world, neither is he worthy of the name of a Philosopher
that has nothing in him but words, but he that has been bred up in the School
of Nature, and knows how to practice what he has learned.

3. Midicine is a certain faculty commixed of Science and Art. For it cannot
be pure Science. 1. Because it does not demonstrate all that belongs to it
self. 2 Because it is not conversant about eternal things, but transitory. 3.
It has not it is principles in it is self, that is in nature; but some of it is
in the Artifficer.
Neither can it be pure Art. 1. Because it is principle consists not in it self,
but part of it also in nature. 2. Because it is not altogether attained by
reason, but partly by Contemplation:
And yet it is an Art; 1. Because some principle of it consists in the
Artifficer. 2. Because it has the end of Art, namely Operation.



And because all Art is either factive or active; factive also either makes a
new work, or mends up an old one: In this sense, according to Galen, medicine
is factive, Because it restores: weakened body to strength and health.

4. Alchymie is a most excellent art.

It is indeed the cause of medicaments and all other natural bodies: It
inquires after the parts and Affections, and may properly be called knowledge:
for it is an Art which teaches the preparations of remedies and a Key to unlock
the secret Cabinet of nature; nay more than that, It can transmute ignoble
metals into Noble; also it begets a peculiar art distinct from other Arts no
art promising that which Alchymy does: you have the kind, the matter it self
follows.


In which consider the cause, and effect, Subject, Object, and Adjunct,
Simpathy and Antipathy.

The Causes are Internal, and external.

Internal are Efficent, and the End.

External are matter and form.

Chap. 5. Of the end of Physic and Alchymie, which is Health.
1. THe principal end of Medicine is Health, les Principal is the knowledge of
things Natural, not Natural, and against Nature.

The principal end is either Intentional or Executional; Intentionall and
Internal, which Galen peculiarly calls Scope and that is Health. The
Execution of this is the Fruition or Possession of Health: and for this end
Medicine was first invented.

The end less Principal, is, The knowledge of, and Operation by all things
Natural, not Natural and against Nature. And though a Physician do not always
actayne to his ultimate End; yet he shows himself an honest man, if he neglect
not his duty, but performs such Cures as are within the reach of Nature and
Art.

2. The end of Alchymie is Internal, to resolve bodies. or External so to
change or direct Mettalls or Medicaments, that they may be wholesome Physic for
the sick.

The internal end of Alchymie is to reduce Compounded bodies into what they
were Compounded of: to cleanse, purify, and take away their Milignant
qualities, that so, either they may be fit for the Physicians use, or else
transmuted into other Metals. In respect of the first, Alchymie is very
necessary to Physic: in respect of the second, it is an Art by it self, and
the Mistress of all other Arts.

The External use of Alchymie is also double. First, either for the change and
transmutation of ignoble Metals into Noble; and so it is a distinct Art by it
self. Or secondly, to maintain the body of man in, or restore it to health;
and in this sense Alchymy, ought to be joined with medicine.

3. Health, and the Enjoyment of Health, is the ultimate end of Medicine.

Health is the favorer of Wisdom and al Siences, and all the comfort a man has
in this turbulent and troublesome World. This, this is that whose Presence
makes Humane Actions flourish, preserves body and mind in vigor. she is an
Excellent Chamber mate, more precious then Gold; admirable useful both; for
Church and Commonwealth, and the best of all earthly goods. she being gone the
body runs the direct road unto Death.

4. Health is a Power of exercizing the actions of the body of man, which are
according to Nature, arising from the Natural Constitution of all the parts'

We will let Galens definition of this alone, as something imperfect you shall
find, that to Perform the ordinary and Natural offices of the body, two
things are required. The Action it self; and the Power of acting. Thence we
gather that Health consists either in actual or potential act. That it does
not consist in Acting alone is Palpable; for then every man should be sick when
he is asleep, because most parts of his body Act not then.

5. The Reason of Health is to be sought out in the body, rather then in the
Soul.

For seeing there are two things required to every Act, namely the faculty, or
the soul instructed with its faculties, which is the principal cause of
Operation, and moves the body to action, Then the organ which the soul uses as
a means to act by. The faylings of this cannot be imputed to the soul for the
soul cannot be hurt nor weakened but remaynes always the same, it acts the same
operation so long as the creature lives, if it have the same instruments to
act by: According to Aristotle for a man is Sometimes well, sometimes sick, the
Cause of which is to be sought from the constitution of the Organ; although I
ingeniously confess My opinion is That the greatest mischiefs that befall a man
during his life, take their Original from the soul and the internal spirits, as
I shall show more clearly when I come to the Subject.

6. Health consists in an Accedental, not in an Essential Constitution.

The Consttitution of each Part is double; Essential and Accidental. Essential
is that which depends upon Matter and Substancial Form, by which all Compounds
have their Nature and being.

Accidental is that which follows the former and disposes their qualities and
Accidents in all parts; Exercies all their action diversely according to their
diversity. Now Health consists not in the Essential Constitution; for so long
as a man lives the Essential Constitution is immutable but Health may be
changed, and Sickness come in place; the Substantial Form remaining: Therefore a
man is Sometimes sick and Sometimes well, and yet a man still. Health then is to
be placed rather in Accidentalls for they are changable both by reason of Age,
Diet, Air, and other circumstances.

7. To the Health of a man's body is required, a good constitution of the humors
and Spirits, a good temperature of the similarie prats, a good structure of the
Organs and union of all the body.

The word Healthful is taken three ways, As the Body, As the cause, As the
sign.

A healthful body is such a one as enjoys present health, and that either,
as always so; or as most commonly so as at present.

Health always so, is he who has a firm and stable Health.

Health as at present is that which is fleeting and unconstant.

The Cause of Health is that which either restores it being lost or
preserves it being obtained; good Constitution of the four Humors and spirits
causes Health.

The just structure of the Organs is when they consist of a just Magnitude,
Number, Place, and Confirmation.

Lastly the union and Continuaty of all the Parts.

To conclude, you shall find no greater preserver of Health than the Moderate
use of the six things not Natural, which because my Author has left out I care
not greatly if I set them down.

1. Air. 2. Meat and drink. 3. sleeping and watching. 4. Fullness and
Emptiness. 5. Exercise and Rest. 6. Affections of the Mind.
8. Medicines may be given even to men in health if they be rightly administered.

Hyppocrates was the first that gave occasion to this question, Whether
healthful men ought to take Medicines or not, But yet it is most certain, and
Galen both confesses and commends it, That it is the Peculiar Office of many
Medicines to resist the Disease before it comes; as such as resist infection,
cut gross, and tough Humors, and many others which we may read in his fourth
Book of Preserving Health. But if by Medicine Hipocrates means Scammony and
such other violent purges we will easily grant him the point without further
dispute of the story. We have done with the end; and come now to the cause both
of Medicine and Alchymie, both principal and less principal.


Chap. 6. The cause of Physic and Alchymie, both principal, and less principal
1. THe principal Cause of Medicine is God.

As all good Arts in general have their fountain and Original from God
himself; So Medicine also is a gift of God by his divine will granted to the
sons of men: for the Art was never first invented by the wit of man, but came
by demonstration from God himself to man, becanse he belighted in the sons of
men. All Arts and Mystriees as well as the world that contains them have their
Original from God: Hence it came to pass that those ancient wise men, because
they knew Medicine was a divine thing; and they were ignorant what the true God
was ascribed it unto their gods: God then is the Author of medicine, Nature the
instrument of God, and the Physician is or should be the servant of them both:
Hence it is that Herophylus said, That medicine was the band by which God
healed the sick: if then the most high God be the Author of Medicine let not
men despise it.

2. God is the principal cause of Alchymie.

All true Medicine is the gift of the most high God; and he that will learn it,
let him go to God and not to the Ethics. If you will learn wisdom go to God,
and not to the creatures, for they are as foolish as your self: God is the
maker of all secrets, and has distributed some of them to every creature; you
can never learn them by reading dead letters but go to the living God from whom
all knowledge flows to mortals, even as the trees bud by the heat of the sun:
What knowledge has man which he has not from above even from that God which
created knowledge, it is not an Accademie can furnish a man with the principls of
knowledge, but'tis the grace and gift of that invisible God, if God inlighten
your eyes, the best Book of Physic is the Book of nature and there you may read
it, and search for it, by Chyromancie and Physiognomie.

3. The less principal cause of Physic is either Impulsive or Instrumental.

Impulsive, is the want and defect of Human Nature joined with a natural
appetite to knowledge,

Instrumental, is that admirable Beauty and Hermony of Natural things.

4. The less principal causes of Alchymie are the same with those of Medicine.

The Impulsive cause is the daily necessity of men.

The Instrumental cause is that stately light of nature, or the knowledge of the
world in general without which there is never a Physician breathing can come to
the exact knowledge either of the disease, or the body diseased.

For the Macrocosme, or world in general, is the the Looking Glass and Theory
in and by which man comes to the knowledge of him self; and the very principle
which moved man to look after Physic.

5. The Isntrumental cause of medicine which Physicians use are Reason,
Experience, and Speculation.

A Physician in making a Medicine uses three principles of which the first is
Invention, and done by experience. The Second Constitution performed by reason
and experience: the third Interpretation done by natural speculation.

Expeirence is the first and most ancient principle of invention, and gave to
Medicine it is denomination, daily necessity gave occasion to experience. Reason
and experience is the directing principle in the constitution of the Art.
Natural speculation is the principle of interpretation and demonstration.
Experience therefore gave the Original both to Medicine and Alchymie, and
therefore they must needs take their beginnings from nature.


Chap. 7. Of the Original of Physic and Alchimie.
1. MEdicin takes his original from the first Ages of the world, and was
increased and approved by the most excellent Physicians in the succeeding Ages.

There is no question to be made of it, but Physic had it is beginning when
Adam had his, and that it flourished in Egypt as well before as after the
flood. That they learned it of Hermes Tresmegistos, and of Aesculapius who was
his Scholar. Abraham also taught them much when he came thither out of
Pheenicia: also Jacob and Joseph taught the Egiptains much Wisdom: At last
Apollo who was afterward worshipped for the god of Physic who flourished a
long time before the Trojan War and added many famous things to that art, is
said to have had the principls of it from the Egiptians. And though Egypt was
the first nation that was so famous for this Art, yet they Learned it of the
Hebrews: Aesculapius added much to the Art and transported it from Aegipt into
Greece, where he was worshipped as a god for his labor; because they thought he
could recovor dead men: thence came that in Virgil of Hyppolitus Poeoniis
revocatum herbis: Neither were they only so sottish as to worship him for a
god, but they must worship his two daughters for goddesses; for he had two
Daughters, of which the name of the one was Hygaea' and she they thought
preserved them in health: the name of the other was Panacea, and she (they
thought) frighted away diseases. Before Aesculapius, was Chyron the Centaure
and his Scholars, as Petens, jason, Achilles and Thessalus, All these, used
only the administration of Herbs, which they found out by Experience little
other Method. Afterward Medicine came in request among the Greeks, Latins and
Christians: Then, it was first brought into a Method; the Arabians and Jews
following none at all: Of these Sects Aeron Argentinus was the author of the
Empericks, who (a most terrible Pestilence raging in Sicillia) purged the Air
by only making great fires about the streets. Themison was the first inventer
of Methodicks: As for Dogmaticks they were used before the days of Hyppocrates
by Machaon, Paeon and Mercurius, but much amended by Hipprocrates, who deduced
his Pedigree by his Fathers side from Aesculapius by his Mother from Hercules:
Thus after Hippocrates Physic was divided into Factions, Factions bred
Contentions; and this continued til Galens time who about the year of Christ,
one hundred and forty restored Physic to a settled Model: Him many Grecians
followed, as Arateus, Aetius. Tralianus, Orabasius, Cassianus, Dioscorides,
Damascenus, Theophilus, Philaretus, Dionyisius, Cassius: Amongst the Latin
Physicians the first and chiefest is Cornelius Celsus, their followed him
Scribonus, Largus Quintus, Saronus, Coelius Aurelianius, Theodorus Marcellus,
Priscianus, Constantinus, Apher, Johannes Fernelius, Fuchsius, Forsterus,
Platerus, Bauhinus, etc. The Arabian Physicians, neither much following Greeks
nor Latins, got the glory to themselves, the others Libraries being spoiled
after their Kings Porus; Mahomet, and Almanzor, had erected two Schools: Hear
flourished very many, and very famous men, as Isaac, Serapio, Averrois,
Avicenna, Rhasis; Avezor, Mesue. etc. The Alchymists of our times oppose
themselves to these, and will be called Paracelsians from Paracelsus; of which
more anon.

II. There is no question to be made but Alchymie is almost as old as the
world. For, old Father Adam when he taught his children Phylosophie and other
Arts; it is not very prob able that he left out Alchyme, which is the most
excellent of all: such an assertion does not sound like a truth. But it is most
probable he distiled the principles of it into Tubal Cain who as we read Genesis
4. 22. was the first that wrought in Brass and Iron, and that out of question
was the Reason why the Grecians worshipped Uulcan for a god: And I am so much
the rather of this Opinion, because such as dealt in Metals were the first
inventors of Alchymie. The first Alchymist that was heard of after the flood
was Hermes Tresmegistos, From him the Art is called Hermetical; the vessels
belonging to the Art; Hermetical vessels, and from him comes the word
Hermetical seal. The word Hermes signifies Mercury; He was called Trismegistos
because he was an High Priest, Philosopher, and king; or as others think
because he was a king and a Prophet: What Countryman he was is uncertain;
There is a Table of Hermes now extant, caled Tabula Smaragdina, which the
Alchymists prize as a great jewel; Some Say it was found in the valley of
Hebron after the flood: others say, It was found by a woman in Hermes his Tomb:
where it was found it matters not much; this is certain, it contains in it the
Fundamentals of Alchymie, and the way of making that universal Medicine which
so many gape after, and so few catch. Also Albertus Magnus calls Hermes the
Root from which all the rest of the Philosophers Spring; and if he Spoke of the
Philosophers of our times he mist not a hayres breadth of the truth: Other
Books are Fathered upon Hermes, as of The Secrets of the Philosophers stone and
many others, which although his name be written in their Frontespeice yet many
men, and those learned too, question whether they be his legitimate children or
not.

Also a man had as good deny that the Sun is up at Noone day, as deny that
Moses both studied and Practiced Alchymie: How else could he burn the golden
Calf which Aaron had made and grind it to powder, which all the fire in the
world was not able to do without the Art of an Alchymist. Also Myriam Moses
his sister was an Excellent Alchymist as some write and Synertus is one of them.

Also Suidas reports, That the Golden Fleec which Jason stole, was nothing else
but a Book in Parchment, which contained the Art of making Gold; and that the
golden Apples of the Hesperides were neither better nor worse than the very
same: To let Pass other Fables, as that of Atlanta and Hipomanes, of Cadmus
and the Dragon, of Argus his Eyes, etc.

After the Birth of Christ Alchymie flourisht much in Egypt: and Histories,
this day to be had witness, that they got that Treasure by Alchymie wherewith
they defended themselves against all their enimyes: and relying upon that only,
was the reason of their so often vexing the Romans: Therefore as Suidas reports,
when Dioclesian had conquered them he commanded all the Books of Alchymie, and
Transmutation of Mettalls into Gold, of which Egypt had some store, to be
sought out and burnt: lest the Egiptians making themselves rich by their Art
should rebel again. In after Ages the light of Alchymie shone brightest among
the Arabians as he may se that takes but the pains to read Mesue, who desires
such as are studious in Physic to be much conversant with Alchymists if by any
means they might learn of them to separate the hidden quality from the
Concrete by the force of fire: And that it flourished many years amongst the
Arabians appears by their own writers: as Geber, Avicenna, Rhasis, Arnoldus
de villa n^va etc.

In this latter age of the world, it turned Monk and was seldom seen out of a
Monastarie: amongst which some were famous as Raymundus Lullius, Albertus
Magnus, Johannes de Rupe feissa, Savanorola Morienus, Trithemius, Friar Bazil
Valentine: and there it had dyed, had it not been for Paracelsus, who in the
year 1493. by care and industry brought it again to the Light of the Sun,
which else had been suffocated in a Monastarie. Him all the later writers
follow. Thus you have the Original of Medecin and Alchymie.

Chap 8. How the beginings of Medicine and Alchymie were drawn from Nature.
1. THat the beginings of Medicine are drawn from nature may be proved by
Arguments enough.

As Mechanics learned all their Arts and Sciences from the Creatures; as the
Art of Swimming from the Geese, of weaving and Hunting with Nets from the
spider, just so for all the world Physicians and Chyrurgeons, learned many
remedies for diseases, and virtues of many things from the Creatures also, For
all creatures are Physicians by natural instinct: take a few Exampls in lieu of
many.

1. The Goats and Stagges of Creet shake out the Arrows that are fastened in
them by eating Dittanie. 2. The Sea Horse was the first author of leting Blood:
for when he has gotten a Plethora of blood by much eating, he goes out upon
the shore and having found a sharp Stake, lets himself blood with it in the
leg, and when he thinks he has bled enough, closes the Orifice with slyme. 3.
The wild Goats by lying long upon the Hills and stones in the sun cause
themselves to vomit. 4. The Egiptian bird Ibis (not much unlicke the Storke)
when it cannot avoid the excrements of it is belly as it would fills his bill
full of sea water and casts it up his fundament; and so was the use of Clysters
first found out. 5. The Serpent having over dried his skin by his winters rest,
casts it of by eating the juice of fennel 6. The same creature cures his Eyes
when they are ill affected with Fennel; his wounds with Bistort, which is
therefore called snakeweed; and with comfrey. 7. Cats strengthen their sight by
eating Valerian, and so was Valerian first found out to be good for the Eyes.
8. If you prick out the eyes of young Swallows: The old one will bring them to
their sights again with Celondine. 9. Goats will take away a Caterract from
their own eye with a thorn, and from thence was invented the art of Couching
the eye with a needle. 10. The Hungarian Horses, when they need bleeding, do
let themselves Blood with their own teeth. 11. The Lyzard using the Herb
Galega or Goats Rue mocks at the deadly poison of the Viper. 12. The Dog, by
eating Dog-Grass, cures himself of the infirmites of his stomeck by Vomiting.
13 Hogs by eating Ceterach ease themselves of the infirmites of the Spleen. 14.
That Mullein is an Antidote against Poison and the Pestlence, a Weasel will
teach you by eating of it when she goes to fight with a Serpent: Neither is
there a better remedy for the Pestilence than the juice thereof drunk in wine.
15. The Hind a little before she brings forth young, eats Heartwort, which
opens her Womb. After she has brought forth, by eating the same herb again,
she closes it. 16. The storke cures poison with Origanum. The weasell with
Rue. 17, Boares cure themselves of almost al diseases by eating Ivy. 18. The
Bear after he has layen a long time in his Den, moves himself to stool by
eating Arum, or Cuckoopints. 19. Laro, a certain water foul, when he has eaten
more than does him good, creepes between two boughs of a tree which grow close
together and preseth the victuals out of his body. 20. Ringdoves, Dawes,
Partridges, Blackbirds. Cure themselves by bay leaves and other remidies well
known to themselves.
II. Alchymists and hermeticall Philosophers learnt the way of renewing youth
from the Creatures.

So they observed the manner of renewing Man by Herbs and Mettalls, from the
kingfisher, Eagle Crab, Serpents etc. which almost yearly renew their youth.

And pray tell me, you that cavil at this; if this be granted to Birds and
Beasts by the Eternal God; is it impossible for man that is made after the
Image of God? For so,

1. The Eagle by casting her Bil casts away her old age, and takes up youth
again. 2. The Serpents in spring time, leave their old skins and their old
age together with them. 3. The Heart perseving himself to be well stricken in
age, draws serpents out of their holes whith the breath of his Nostrills,
whether they will or no, by a wonderful gift of nature, and having kiled them
with his feet, eats them having first separated the poison; and having eaten
them grows young again thereby: In the same manner the Toad draws weasells and
the Weasell mice. 4. The Crab grows young by eating Frogs. 5. The Hens by eating
spiders. 6. The Eagles by eating Tortels, 7. The serpents by eating Toads. 8.
The tongue of a serpent being pulled out when the Serpent is alive about the
full Moon for some Magical use or another; the Serpent recovers it again by
eating Nettles. 9. So the Elements themselves putting off their dross, seem
young again and so does nature her self every Spring. 10. The Creatures give
Arguments enough of a future Resurrection, if men have but wit enough to see
them, or Honesty enough to confess them.
First, So the King-fisher yearly changing her skin and feathers, seems like
one risen again from the dead. Secondly, The silk worm having made it self a
silken nest, dies in it, and after putrification, leaves both the property and
form of a worm and comes forth a Fly. Thirdly, The Emmet, Ant, or Pismire
which you will, when they are so old they can scarce go upon their legs,
Nature provides them Wings, and so of a Creeping, it becomes a flying Animal.
Fourthly, The Phoenix being worn out with Age, burns her self, and rises
again out of her own ashes.
Chap. 9. Of the matter, form, and effect of medicine and Alchymie.
I THe Matter or rather Matteriall of Medicine is both a Methodical disposition
of Precepts, as also the matter it self.

If you consider the matter by way of Systeme, the matters of Medicine are
sencere parts, and the precepts thereof congruous to nature: But if you would
Dispute the point Physically, They are.

1. Things Natural called Physiologia, 2. Things not Natural called Hygiena. 3.
Things against Nature called Pathologia
II. The matter of Alchymie is both a disposition of Precepts, as also the
matter it self.

For it is as true as what is truest That Alchymists have many singular
precepts and Observations not only in their Operations but also in administering
Physic contrary to the Opinion of the Dogmaticks: They can give you a true and
exact Anatomy, not only of the Body of Man, but also of the whole world, As
concerning their way of making the Philosophers stone, they differ much and
perhaps as much from the Truth as they do from one another.

III. The form of Medicine is External or Internal.

The External is a methodicall disposition and connection of such precepts as
are agreeable to Nature.

The Internal is the Truth it self of the Physical Substance.

IIII. The form of Alchymie is the same with that of Medicine.

The external is a Connection of Precepts.

The internal is the truth and excellency of the Chymicall preparations

V. The proper effects both of the Physician and of his medicine, are various
and manifold.

For a Frugal and temperate Diet, preserves Health and amends sickness,
maintaynes the body in vigor, which is the most excellent of all Natural
things: for what good does the Contemplation of Herbs bring to a man, or what
delight? What does a man get by his observation in dissecting the body of a
man? you can hardly persuade a man there is any unless he find it by use and
exercise: So then, As of the liberal Sciences Physic is one, the use of it
makes it inferior to none.

VI. The proper effects of the Alchymist and his Alchymie are various and
Excellent.

The chief effect is the excellency of medicine; for although Nature gives us
our Medicines whole, yet most commonly they consist of diverse parts; nay
sometimes in a whole pound of Medicaments you shall not find an Ounce of that
spirit or Oil you desire, or which conduces to the cure you intend: Nay more
than this There is no whole medicament, but has it is impurity. The Art of an
Alchymist is to separate this which nature has mixed: As the Maseraick veins
separate the pure Chyle from the impure dung in the body of man; So Alchymie
seperates the spirits from the medicine, and rejects the impure dross; And who
unless he be a Madman but will easily grant, and that by the rules of nature
that the Chemical preperation of a Medicine, the dros being cast away must
needs bemore wholesome, more safe, more effectual in it is Operation than to give
the whole Medicine dross and all as it grows out of the earth: There is indeed
and in truth as much difference between them as there is between a Bushel of
fine flower, and a bushel of Bran.

Besides in stubborn and lasting diseases, strong Medicines (stronger then any
naturally grows out of the earth) must be given. And if Artificially Prepared
may be given without any hurt or danger, Namly such as are made of Mineralls
and Mettalls. To these I might add That an Alchymist has the key of natures
Secret Cabinet, and is able to produce all her hidden treasure to public view:
so that Mesue avows That scarce any deeper knowledge of Natural things is given
unto man, than what is given by Chymicall operations: by which the Sympathy and
Antipathy of things is known; and thus much for the Cause and Effect of
Medicine and Alchymie. The Subject and object follow.


Chap. 10. Of the Subject and Object of Alchymie and Physic
1 THe Subject of the Physician or of his Medicine is man considered as he is a
creature Subject to Health and Sickness, both according to the whole, and
according to each part.

They all determine the parts of the Subject to be two Material and Formal. The
Material is a Man's Body and not a beasts.

The Formal Subject, they say is not the Soul, that belongs to Metaphysics or
else to Devinity, and is of itself perfect. but the body curable according to
Aristotle. A living man and not a dead Corpse, for barely a Body is too general
a title.

II A Physician cures not only the body but the mind in some manner.

Pray tell me what there is in this whole Universe, but may be delighted and
refreshed, be it Mind or Body or what you will. Opto tibi meus Sana in Corpore
Sano said one. The whole Scope of a Physician is that he might keep the Organs
of the Mind and the understanding in a due tempperature: for if they be out of
tune, so is the natural State and Condition also: Take away the Organs of the
Rational soul, and you take away the soul it self; Restore the Organs, and you
restore it: Besides the body and soul are knit together by a certain Sympathy
or Consent, and derive virtue and vice from one another, and if there be such a
Harmony between them, the one must needs require help as well as the other: I
know it is both douted, and called into Question by many; To which part of the
Nature of man the disease is most hurtful and deadly: which although I confess
I cannot easily answer yet would I have all men persuaded of this truth That
the greatest part of all evils, comes from the soul, and the Internal spirits:
for if the body being sickly be a burden to the soul, and deny it, it is
operations, then comes the injury from the body: But if the body be subject to
the Command of the Mind, and it be the duty of the Mind to keep Passions and
affections in awe, and preserve all in a due decorum by the rule of Reason;
then Licentious living, Idleness Effeminatness, Luxury and almost what not; are
al vices of the mind and what worse diseases come to the body of man than by
these and their likes: I pray you, is the fault in the body or the mind that
people give themselves to gluttony, to lust, Drunkenness, Quarelling etc? Is
not the mind the seat of Temperance and Intemperance? and is not Intemperance
the cause of most diseases? Thus you se the point is clear enough, That the
original of most diseases is in the mind, and is discernable to all unless such
as are so blind they will not see.

III. The Subject of Alchymie is the same with Medicine.

For although Alchymie do not beget a New Model of Philosophy and Medicine as
some would have it, because they have different Theorem's and Hypotheses: yet
because it is referred to the most excellent Part of Medicine which is the Rule
of cure; it must needs have the same subject.

IIII. The Object of Medicine, or rather of the Physician about which it is
conversant, are Things Natural, not Natural, and against Nature.

A Physician therefore is conversant.

1. about things Natural. That he may keep the Constitution of man in health;
and fortify the parts of the body with things like. 2. About things which
afflict the body against Nature; as diseases their causes and symtomes; that he
may cure them with contraries. 3. about things not Natural, which are either to
be taken or not to be taken according to discretion; Namely Diet, Physic, and
the Help of a Chyrurgion. 4. If these or those be out of the reach of his
Senses by Diagnostical signs; Let him go to work warily, least the
Prognostics Fall as he would not have them. 5. Let him use indications for his
lawful and safe Method of Cure. Thus you see a Physician ought not only to be
of great integrity of life but also admirably well Skilled in the knowledge of
Medicine; that he may know every thing that belongs to the Health of the body
of man.
V. The generation of diseases is ended, and no new diseas happens to the body
of man.

There are those that think, and stiffly maintain. That Diseases are more in
Number, and more violent in quality, than they were in former ages; But there is,
never a word on it true. Accidents by long time hid in their Causes, and get
strength by stealth, even insensibly; as the often dropping of water upon a
stone makes it hollow: There are no new species in the power of Nature besides
these that are already therefore there can be no new diseases: if Nature bred
new, diseases, she must be turned out of her old course, But the one is
impossible, therefore so is the other: it is a new Essence, and not a new
Accident that must make a new disease; There may be a difference in Diseases
according to more or less, but difference, and Novelty are two things; if
there be then any new diseases, Rarietie or ignorance is the Mother of them.
The Manner, species and the Cause of all diseases is the same; Now no disease
can be without a Cause, because nothing is the maker of it self; neither can
any thing work against the Laws of Nature, because nothing can work above
it is strength, Diseases arise even of that very same thing by which we live,
Neither are there such things as peculiar seeds of diseases; but only they
arise from our own vices, whereby we disturb Nature; and all vices, though
they have different Names, yet have they but one Nature.

VI. The Object of Alchymie, or rather of the Alchymist, about which he is
conversant are all Natural bodies which are concrete, especially Mettalls.

If the internal end of Alchymie be but considered, you shall find the
Alchymist occupied about all Natural concrete bodies which are to be dissolved,
purifyed, and artificially wrought: But if you regard the External end; it is
conversant only about the transmutation of Mettalls. You have the Subject and
Object both of Medicine and Alchymie. The Adjuncts follows.

The Adjuncts or Attributes of Medicines and Alchymie, are
1. Certainty. 2. Dignity and Proffit. 3. Excellency, 4. Dificultie.

Chapt. 11 Of the Certainty of Physic and Alchymie.
1. The Art of Medicine is Certain and infallible.

There are a sort of men (and those no small fools neither) that cry out,
Medicine is uncertain; and therefore it is a thing full of danger for a man to
commit himself into the hands of a Physician: And this they go about to prove
by an Argument such a one as it is; Because the whole Art of Physic is
Conjecturall and therefore no certainty is to be expected of it: what a lean
hungery Argument this is, I shall make evidently appear.

1. Because that is imputed to the Art which ought to be imputed to the Artist;
for Medicine it self consists of most firm and undoubted principles; but the
Physician because he uses sometimes Conjectures in his actions, does not
always perform his Cure, with the same Dexterity nor felicity.

This comes to pass diverse ways.

1. When the Circumstances are diverse, nay sometimes contrary. 2. When the
Physician is deceived by those that are about the sick. 3. When whatsoever
hinders, he does not visit the sick, nor speak to him. 4. When the bowels of
the sick have an unequal or contrary temperature: for as Aristotle says in
another case; It is a hard thing to find out a virtue Posited between two
extreme vices. So say I in this case, it is a hard matter to correct the
bowels distempred in a contrary manner. 5. It often happens that the sick
either through Age, or weakness, on want of wit, is not able to declare his own
infirmity. 6. Sometimes the Patients are Impatient, and will not be ruled,
neither will they take the Medicine, or their case is desperate, or they are
poor and want Necessaries: These and other things like them may hinder the
Physician in his cure, but they detract nothing at all from the Art it self.
2. The doubt lies in the word Conjecture. For if you mean a bare and simple
guess, that does nothing at all: But if together with the Conjecture; you ad
Demonstration as a Companion then it is no longer a Conjecture but a
Demonstrative sign: you must make a difference between a bare guess and a
Demonstrative sign, which Physicians call Indication: bare guesses infer no
necessity, but probability; and that neither not always, but most commonly;
and is the usual practice of the Empericks. But Indications setch their
Original from Nature, and pass judgment from Logical Arguments, without any
doubtfulnes.
II. The Art of Alchymie is certain and infallible

For it propounds two scopes to it self.

Either to transmute Mettalls, or,

To make profitable and effectual Medicines.

Both of them it performs with great success and Praise.

The second of these, namely, the preparation of Medicines is granted on all
hands. The first is the point in dispute; which because it is much doubted by
many, we will put it to the Question:

1. Whether Mettalls may be changed? 2. Wether gold may be made by Art?
First, Whether Mettalls may be changed?

To dispute the Point on both sides is not worth the while, seeing none but
Madmen will fight against Experience: for to search after Reasons and not
regard apparent sense, denotes a weakness of the Mind: it is apparent to all
men's eyes, That glass may be made of Ashes: Experience teaches this; and
it were extreme folly to bring Reasons to persuade a man to that which he may
see with his eyes. Experience teaches as plainly also that Mettalls may be
transmuted; therefore to go about to prove it by Reason were but to trifle away
time. In Hungary, In Mount Carpathus, near the Town Smalnitium are
Fountaynes into which if you thorw Iron, it will be turned into excellent good
Copper: the same may be done by Art. If you put Iron into Aqua Vitriolata, it
will turn into a Red powder, which being melted in the fire will be as good
Copper as any is in the world: But I come to the second.

2. Whether gold may be made by Art?

This many deny, and to make their Negation seem as though it had some weight
in it: they bring some Arguments, viz.

1 Because Nature proceeds by certain, and determinated principles and so
much the more by how much the thing she makes is more perfect. 2. Because in
these Principles, The Efficient cause, Matter, and place of Generation are the
principal: for one Horse is not bred without another. 3. Because even those
Creatures which are bred of putrefaction, must have a fit matter to be bred of,
as Experience it self witnesses. 4. Because in Mettalls although some change
may be made in the color and such like Accidents, yet not in their Natures and
form, for they are Mettalls still. 5. Because one species cannot be changed into
another Genus, neither by Nature nor Art; Neither does Art make form.

These Arguments if we diligently weigh them in the Balance of Reason, we shall
find them a grain too light.

For form cannot indeed be made by Art, if you consider Art, barely as Art;
But join Nature to it, what then? seeing then in Nature and in Form two
Species agree under the same Genus which before were diverse, we see Wood,
(...), Skins etc. turned into Stones by Nature, as Albertus Magnus shows and
shows truly in his Book of stones. As concerning Place, that is nothing at all
necesary: Nature begets something in every place, and makes one Metal or
another in every place, according to the matter it has to make it of: so then,
it is a right Matter, and not a right place which is needful. To let pass
Authors both such as have written the truth, and such as have written Fictions:
That this Art is very rare, We may give two Causes.

1. Because there are but few Artificors, which have attained the right Method
of making of it; and those few reveal not this secret to any. 2. Because God
blinds the Eyes of many in the thing, lest Pride, Luxury, Abuse, and other
vices which accompany Riches, should reign. Therefore I Exhort those which
spend much Money and Time (which might better be employed about other things,
Namely in maintayning their own Familes and releeving the Poor) upon their
serutiny and search after this secret, thereby vainly and rediculously spending
their Estates in smoke, and Coals, to desist from their labor, and look after
their Families.

You have the Certainty of Alchymye and Medicine; The Dignity, and Profit
follows:

Chapt: 12. Of the Dignity and Profit of Medicine and Alchymie.
1. Medicine is an Art most Noble, most worthy, and most profitable. Medicine
is the most Noble of all Arts.
1. By reason of the subject about which it is occupied, viz. Man, the most
Noble of all the Creatures. 2. By Reason of the Manner of proceeding of it: It
is an Art drawn from Nature her self. 3. By Reason of the Effective principle:
God himself is said to creat Medicine Eccles. 38. 4. 4. In regard of the end:
The Health of man which is the greatest of Earthly Blessings: All other earthly
blessings without it, want their Luster.

As for other Arts, their ends are External: They are adjuncts and not
conjuncts to the life of Man; They may serve as Minsters and Handmaydes to
Medicine: It Is Medicine makes a man live; all other Arts do but ad Delight to
his life: Thus you see Medicine is the most Worthy, and most profitable of all
Arts: If all Arts were so painted before your eyes that you might see them at
one single view; what would a man desire more then the knowledge of Medicine?
Health and Life being the greatest Blessings, sickness and Death the greatest
enemies a man has in this world: Will Riches and a vast Estate, much Land, and
curious Household stuf help a man's little finger when it aches: a little sickness
takes away the Comfort of all pleasures.


II Alchymie is the most Noble, worthy; and profitable Art.

If we regard the Subject, the End, and the Scope, we shall find them common
with Physic; and therefore no more words about it.

If we regard the Transmutation of Metals, nothing is more Effectual, nor
profitable; nor better shows the wonderful works of God to the Sons of men:
You have the Profit. The Execllency of medicine and Alchymie follows


Chap. 13. The Excellency of Medicine and Alchymie
I MEdicine is a most excellent Art.

For Proofs of this, we might bring Antiquity, Authors, Divinity, Power,
Necessity, Virtue, witnesses Both from holy Writ and other Authors.

Necessity was the first thing that found out Medicine; it did not so in all
other Arts: for if Sickness and Death had not been formidable, Medicine had not
been invented. The Invention of Medicine is to be attributed to God Himself:
and the Illustration of it by Authors to his Mercy; Good God what shall we
think then of those that hide it, Great Kings and Nobles have not only approved
of it, but illusterated it. Would you know whence the dignity of it arises?
What is that makes it so Excellent? what Greater Natural Mercies has God
given to man since he gave him life, then to teach him how to preserve it? It Is
the Divine Oracle of a man's life and the praise of it reaches to the Skies.
Again, Would you know the Excellency of Physic? Consider it is Extent: It
reaches the natures not only of the highest star in the heaven but to the
meanest grass upon the Earth: it keeps the whole Creation in a due Decorum,
which else would fall into a Rout. It maintayns Health and destoryes what
opposes it. When God made man, He made a most excellent fabric, and He left
Physic to maintain this Fabric in repair in every part and portion thereof,
that thereby it might glorify God as it stands, and beget its like to do the
like.

II. Alchymie is a most Excellent Art.

So excellent, that my Pen is not able to give one Hundredth part of his due
praise: Nature brings forth a Medicine in its Bulk, Alchymie chooses the
best, and rejects the worst: So many wonderful works of Almighty God it
opens; So many Strange and hidden Secrets of Nature it reveals; so many
notable prepartions of Herbs it unfouldeth; So many lost virtues it
discloseth; That to give it, it is due praise, belongs to the tongue of an
Angel, and not of a man: You have the excellency of physic and Alchymie; the
difficulty follows.

Chap. 14. Of the Difficulty of Medicine and Alchymie.
I MEdicine is the most difficult of all Arts

Thessalus (as you may find, if you read Galens, writings) had such a strange
waking dream, that he conceited the whole art of Physic was so easey that it
might be learned in three months space; and to make fools believe this looked
like a truth. He held that al diseases, and by consequence all remedies might
be reduced to these two heads. That all diseases came either of binding or
loosening: and So al remedies must be endued with either a binding or loosening
faculty, and that's enough: to stope which monstrouss and absurd Opinion,
consider with me these few Principles:

1. The Nobility and Variety of things requisite to this Subject.

Those which study Physic shall find it not only the most Excellent, but also
the most Difficult study in the world: and without great knowledge, and as Great
care, most dangerous: if you consider that there is required to it an
admireable knowledge of causes: an incredible Judgment to discern, and exceeding
quickness of wit to apprehend, in every physician: Besides if a physician will
get honor by what he does, which if he do well, he shall not want: Continual
and daily experience is requisite for him. With what knowledge ought that man to
be endued? with what care and industry ought he to perform his office, when the
lives of those that Christ dyed for, is committed into his hands?

2. The Infinite number and Species of the Diagnosticks of diseases.

Not only three Hundred as Pliny thought, and yet that is two many to be well
skiled in, in three Months; but almost an infinite Number, many new ones arise
every day, which though they have been formerly in the world, yet not in our
generation; therefore are New to us. To let alone Diseases, and speak only of
Casualties: How many Bruises, Ruptures, Fractions Burnings, Scaldings,
Luxations, Dislocations, are to be amended by the skilful hand of the
Physician? How many dangers by Poison, which must be remedied Extempore, or not
at all? How much diversity is there in the bodies of men by reason of Age, Sex:
Region, Education; what a difficulty is it to take the exact observation of
the Celestial bodies, without the knowledge of which you may as soon give
poison as an antidote.

What a difficulty is it to find out an internal disease; How deceitful are
the Marks of them; whether you regard the body it self, or the Urine or the
Pulse; So that the wisest Physician breathing may sometimes be deceived.

3. The prognostics and manner of cure, are very difficult.

What a knowing man ought he to be, that is able to prognosticate the end of a
disease: The knowledge of the Nature of no part of the Creation ought to be hid
from him: and when he has that, it requiers a new search to find out a
reamedie, nay many times all this must be done upon a suden, and in the very
nick of time: Before a Physicians eyes ought always to be placed the sad Image
of the death of his Patient, The sadness, fear and sometimes the undoing of the
Patiants, acquaintance; and the great account himself must make before God
another day for the life of every one that is committed into his hands: and when
he has seriously considered this, if he think three Months study sufficient
for so great a calling let him turn practitioner.


II. Alchymie is the most difficult of all Arts.

For although the Artificial making of Gold be most true (as we told you before
Experience testified) so the vain attemps of many have also testified it to be
most difficult, and neither to be gotten by reading, nor studying Books. It Is
only granted to a few that fear God and eschew evil and know how to use it
when they have it. The study of it makes many poor, in so much that a great
Alchymist said; if he wished any man a Mischief, he would wish him no other
than to study that Elixar.

Chap. 15. Of things agreeable to Medicine and Alchymie, which are Natural
Philosophy, Devinitie, and Astrology
I. Natural Philosophy is agreeable to medicine, and yet also it differs from
it.

That Medicine takes his Original from Natural Philosophy is most certain; for
the speculative part of Medicnie is pure natural philosophy. For

First of all The body of man with all it is parts, temperaments, facultyes, and
operations, every one that knows his right hand from his left, knows to be
Natural Second, Health and Sickness which are the affections of Nature, come
from Natural principles. Thirdly, Nourishment and Medicament by which these
facultyes and the actions thereof are maintained, are Natural: For the Virtues
of Herbs, Stones, and Metals, and of al Medicaments by which Physicians cure
Diseases, and restore Health and Strengthen the parts, are al Natural and
pertain to Natural Philosophy, no less than the Motions of the Elements does;
only the Practical part, Medicine assumes to it self alone: Thus you see
Natural Philosophy is of great Use for, and a great Ornament to a physician;
only there is some difference between them, and the differences are these. 1. A
natural Philosopher treates of a man as he is a natural body; A Physician, as
he is a body cureable by the Art of physic. 2. The Natural Philosopher
treates of sickness and health as they are affections of the Natural body, and
proceed from natural causes.

The Physician treates of them how he may expel the disease, and preserve
Health.

Briefly thus, The Natural Philosopher reasons of things as they are barely
natural.

The physician, how he may remedy what is amiss and mayntain health in a good
Decorum.

II Natural Philosophy is agreeable to Alchymy.

The Reasons are the same which we gave you before concerning Medicine.

III. Medicine and Alchymie are Sacred Arts, and therefore agreeable to
Divinity.

They are sacred.

First in respect of their Original; Because they are brought out of the
Treasuries of the goodness of God himself.

Secondly, In regard of their Institution: Because they were ordained of God to
preserve man: and it is one part of the Worship of god to admire at his
Creatures and gifts: and one part of the Will of God to search after his
wonderful works in the Creation. 7. Eccles. 35. Let it not greive thee to
visit the sick, for that shall make thee to be beloved. And Paul tells you in
the Corinthians that the gift of healing is one of the gifts of Gods Spirit:
Also that great Physician both of our bodies and souls our Lord Jesus Christ,
cured many diseases, as dropsies, palsies, leprosies, Issues of blood
blindness, Fevers, and other desperate diseases by his wordalone. And God by
his word alone, made all the Creatures, and gave them virtues to do the like:
Paul in the Epistle to the Colossians says; Luke the beloved physician
greeteth you: And to Timothy he prescribes Physic himself, Drink a little
wine for thy stomaks sake. Damascus was once famous for Physicians, especially
at that time when Johannes Mesut that excelent Physician sone of Abdela king of
Damascus taught Physic there: Suidas reports that king Solomon wrote a most
singular volume of remedies for diseases; the heads of which were engraven upon
the Temple gates. Whence it appears that the Jews kept the Copies of their
Medicines in the Temple because of their Holiness; and thence came that
Blasphemous practice of the Heathen to dedicate it to their Gods; And though
they were but men themselves yet they made their ablest Physicians Gods, after
they were dead and rotten; Witness Aesculapius and others.

IIII. Astrology is not only agreeable to Medicine and Alchyme, but also
Exceeding necessary for the Physician and Alchymist.

Astrology is that part of Natural Philosophy which inquires after the Causes,
properties, Nature, and Effects of the stars.

If it be a part of Natural Phylosophie then it must needs be agreeable to
Physic: The Principles of Astrology are drawn from Experience, which
Experience is drawn from observations, which seldom fail,

It makes universal conclusions; and from the demonstration of one, shows the
Effect of another thing; so that from the stars it is able to give a Judgment
of the Natures of Herbs, Plants and Mineralls. And therefore he that does not
reckon it amongst the Liberal sciences as well as Physic, does it a great
deal of wrong. I am not ignorant that very many and those Learned, deny the
Art of Atrologie to be an unniversal Art, and that only some few Particular
Observations happen true: But I shall easily prove they are beside the Cushion;
and thus I begin.

Neither Medicine cures all Diseases, neither does state Politics remove all
the troubles of a Commonwealth: And yet all will grant that they are grounded
upon true and firm precepts and very necessary for the life and livelihood of
man: Is not the Art of Gunnerie good; because the Gunner does not always hit
the Mark? So may the Art of Astrology be both good and necessary though the
Astrologer do not always predict the truth. He that would deny Astrology to
be one of the Liberal sciences must of Necessity deny the influences of the
stars upon inferior bodies. What if I should go about to prove That all
Physical predictions are deduced from Astrology? I Will try what I can do.

Whatsoever science teaches the Effects the stars have upon Elements and
mixed bodies; The Temperament, alterations and Inclynations of all things below;
That is the ground of all Predictions, and admirably useful for the life and
well being of man.

But Astrology does so.

Ergo.

If you please we will devide this into a few branches.

1. It Is doubtful to none, unless such Blockheade as deny manifest Experience;
That Infniit Actions both Healthful and unhealthful are caused in this lower
world by the Influence of the stars. Has any one studied Physic seven
years, and does not know that the various position and diverse Aspects of the
stars breeds variety and diversity of Diseases? What Is the Reason of
Contagious and Epidemical diseases? comes it not from the Air? And how can the
Air do it being a pure Element, without the Influence of the stars. 2. The
various mixture of the stars, makes a various mixture of the Elements, which
if it be wholesome turns to the Generation; if unwholesome turns to the
destruction of mankind: And therefore wellsayed Hypocrates when he said That the
seed plot of Epidemicall diseases was an Air corrupted by Planitary influence.
Our late Physicians will say God does it; but how they know no more then a Hobby
Horse, as though all Epidemicall diseases were Miracles: Others that think they
are a little wiser say, it comes by Infection; and the next time you hear one
say so, ask him Who infected the first man that dyed of it. 3 It Is a certain
Quality not abounding with Heat nor Cold, nor Drynes nor Moisture; nor yet an
imperfect mixture of Elements; But it is a more hidden business; for the Congress
of the Superior bodies above Seminate Something in things below; which in process
of time grows up, and according to it is own Nature either rejoices or
afflicts the Sons of men. 4. In Eclipses of the Luminaries with such or
such fixed stars especially those of the first or second Magnitude; or when
other plannets are Joined or opposed with such fixed stars; Consider the
Degree of the Zodiac therein, or in which the Luminaries are Eclipsed; and
tell me if things here below correspond not exactly to them. 5. The Beams of
the Celestial bodies are not always one and the same, for sometimes they are
in the same sign and degree; and that is called a Conjunction; sometimes
diametrically placed; and that is called an Opposition; sometimes they are in
Trines, Squares, And Sextiles; all which have peculiar effects. 6. The seed
which they cast upon Inferior bodies is not always one and the same: sometimes
it is wholesome, sometimes unholsome, and according as the seed is, so is the fruit
to be expected. 7. Unhealthful or Intemperate meetings of the Plannets (For
that is it we are here to Speak to) Proceeds From the Intemperancy of the
Stars themselves that meet: Imagine Saturn and Mars to which add the Eclypses
of the Luminaries. If they happen in an Ayrie Sign they may cause a pestilence,
if they be with malevolent fixed Stars; But if they be with Jupiter or Venus
or benovolent Fixed Stars their evil is mitigated. The time will be
unhealthful by reason of violent Fevers: but (...) so mortal. 8. And as the
Disease draws danger of Death at the tail of it, and sometimes it does not, so
the conditions of these Diseases which are dangerous are not always the same
but diverse, as happens not only in Malignant Fevers, but also most commonly in
the Pestilence: Therefore he that would be accounted a Skilful Physician must
be well Skilled in the whole course of Nature of which Astrology is no small
part. 9. The air being of a thin substance, is the Medium by which the
heavenly bodies (...) their Influence upon things below, and thi^ in a double
manner, either Hidden from or manifest to sense. 10 So sometimes Epidemical
diseases break (...) when a man little thinks of them, and th^^ upon a sudden
the Air and al sublunary cause^ being according to Nature, and not vitiated,
and this must needs come by the Influence of the Stars, at other times the
air is either too hot, or too cold, too dry or too moist or too cloudy or too
mystie: or the winds are unwholsom and then the cause of Infection is apparent
say Physicians, and they can give a reason for it, it is well they know anything.
1. Although the Air be the Medium by which the Influence of the Planets is
dispersed through the sublunary world yet are not al places alike infected, and
who but an Astrologer can give a reason of this: the Reason is from the house or
Sign of the Zodiac where the Conjunction causing the Malady happens: under
each sign of the Zodiac are certain Clymats Kingdoms, and Provinces, and
they are like to Suffer when others escape. Besides the age and sex of the
Plannets is to be considered, and Judgment to be Passed accordingly: Also the
Nature of the Signs, for some are Humane and they endanger Men most, others
the Signs of Beasts and they hurt Beasts most especially Some Specis of
Beasts, Imagine Horses, Sheep, Hoggs etc. In watery Signs it hurts Fishes
most. 2 The actions of the Heavens Astrologers call by the name of Universal
Influence, not because it works Universaly in all Sublunary creatures, for we
showed the contrary but now: but because it works of it self without any other
disposing cause. 3 The Planets have a disposition to act, Sublunary bodies to
suffer; by action and passion are all things generated, therefore are always
subject to them. And the whole Creation being taken as one United body, one part
of it must needs be Subject to the other 14 There is such a Harmony in the
Creation that every particular Constellation Produces Effects according to its
own Nature. 15 Therefore when the Horoscope, or the degree ascending at the
nativity of any man or beast, or the building of a Town, setting of a Tree,
sowing of Corn, Changing of the Government of a Commonwealth or of a City is
afflicted by the Conjunction of evil Plannets or Eclypse of the Luminaries: It
threatens the destruction of them; and the time when you may know by Direction
or progression. 16 Hence it appears that the Operation of these is two sold,
first upon those Clymates, Provinces and Kingdoms under that Sign the
Conjunction or Eclypse happens, and secondly upon those Living Creatures In
whose Genesis that sign ascended or upon Trees and Plants sowed under that
sign 17 Neither are we to think this cause works altogether absolute and
simply of it self, But other causes also intervene, as il Diet, want of
convenient Remedy etc. 18. By all that has been spoken you may see how
absolutely necessary the knowledge of Astrology is to a Physician, that so when
such Accidents happen so the Ascendent of a man's Nativitie or any other
Hylegiacal part, or indeed when any bad Direction comes which may signify
Death; He may keep the body with fit Diet and convenient Remidies, pure and
clear from such an Humore as at such a time will take fire at the least touch.
Thus you have what is agreeable; It follows what is disagreeable to Medicine.

Desagreeable to Medicine and Alchymie, are Confusion, abuse and ill
preparation of Medicine, Ignorant and Blockheaded Physicians. But those things
Because they belong not to the Art it self but to the Artist; we will speak
of in the book following.

And thus much for the Nature of Physic and Alchymie and also for this first
Treatise.
The Second Treatise. Of the Nature and Ministers of the Physician and
Alchymist.
Wherein come these three things into Consideration.

1. The Definition of a true Physician and Alchymist. 2. The Office and
Requisites of them both. 3. The Wits of Sophisters and Impostors.
Chapt. 1. Of the Definition of a Physician and Alchymist
1. A Physician is a person called of God to that Office, instructed by Doctor
Reason and Doctor Experience, to prserve the health of man, and restore it
being lost, as much as is possible.

The more difficulty there is in Medicine, the more Dignity belongs to a good
Physician: Scaliger discribes him thus A Physician is a man learned, and as
honest, as learned, Gentle, Diligent and Fortunat a man that trusts in God and
not in his own Skill. Hippocrates thus, A Physician ought to be filled with
the Deity, he ought to be learned, good, and well Skilled in his Art, He
ought to know what he would do, and be able to put it in practice; for the
Health and life of Mankind is committed into his hand: The Latins derive Medicus
a Medio. A Physician, from the Means by which he Cures. And to speak ^he
truth, A Physician is a great imitater of Christ himself: for as Christ cures
our spiritual wounds, so ought a Physician our Natural.

He ought to deny himself, to be mindful of the Poor; He ought not to
regard Gain for that is the bane of the World. He ought to be one that knows
what spiritual good Christ has done him, that so at the same rate he may do
his Brother Temporal good freely without grumbling.

II. An Alchymist is a person called of God himself, artificially to make
profitable Medicines, of Plants, living Creatures, and Mineralls, as also (as
much as is possible) to change base Mettalls into Noble, that so they may be
the more useful unto Man kind which are his Brethren.

I told you before that such as dealt in Mettalls gave the first occasion of
finding out Alchymie; for they first found out how, what was mixed by nature
might be separated by Art: And when they noted Gold to be the most Noble
Metal, and found it mixed with much dross, they conceived a hope of changing
other Mettalls into Gold as well as Ore; and when they found that things were
made more perfect by Distillation and separation; they began to try whether the
same might not be don by Herbs and Plants: and by trying found it true; and
their Operation to be more perfect: And thus came the Art of Alchymy which
before was purely Natural, to be Medecinall; from being servile to Household
uses; it became excellent to restore Health: for the Art of transmuting Ore
into Metal, begatt the Art of transmuting Metal into Medicine: To which
Doctor Reason adjoining himself as a Companion (for he loves ingenious wits)
finding that Ore may be separated from his dross, and so become pure Metal;
presently gave order the same should be tried in Herbs and plants; that so
the dross being separated from them, the Medicine might be most pure: Just
so it came to pass; And thus came the Art of an Alchymist to be conversant
upon all Natural bodies.

The art of an Alchymist is to be considered under a double notion.

1. As a Physician 2. As an Apothecary.
1. As a Physician: Because he knows the use of Simple Medicines, Metals, and
living Creatures; and knows not only what they are, but what they are good
for; and is very well able to teach another how to prepare a Medicine:

2. As an Apothecary; He prepares Medicines exactly for the Physicians use.
You have the Definition of a Physician and an Alchymist. The Requisites follow.

Chapt 2. Of what is requisite to a Physician and Alchymist, in the general.
I. Of a Physician and Alchymist are two things required Form and Beauty.

Form, is held to be an Historical knowledge of certain precepts, but
indeed and in truth it consists chiefly in Example and Experince.

II. Doctor Reason, and Doctor Experience are thetwo pillars upon which a
Physician stands: the Principles of his knowledge are Drawn from them.

Doctor Reason is his master, Doctor Experience his mistress, both of them Join
together hand in hand to teach a Physician how to cure a Disease. What wonders
can a Physician do unless he know such an Herb Performs such an Operation:
Has he any more Skill in Physic without (...) then a Parrat has in Oratory;
yet a Physician having this is not crowned with Bays, before Experience comes
in and witnesses that what is done, is well done. A man may Sooner be mistaken
in his Reason then he can (...) in his Experience, and therefore Almighty God
knowing the weakness of man has given him two stringes to his bow. A Physician
ought First to consult with Reason, because he is the elder brother, then he
ought to take counsel with Experience whether the Dictates of Reason be true
or not. Virtue is nothing else but the Rules of Reason made manifest by
Experience, Oh what baser thing is there for what more unbeseeming to a
Physician then to build upon the Forms of other men, and yet every corner of
the world stinks of such Creatures at this day. If you look into the world of
Physicians, good God How many Follow Doctor Galen, how few Dr. Reason and Dr.
Experience. I confess I desire to Join them both together in all my Discourse.

How notably spoke Calsus, It happens (says he) just with our Physicians as it
does with Lawyers, although they pretend they know all the Laws, and teach them
to others, yet when a brangling business comes before them they are so
uncertain that they know not where to begin nor how to end, Neither shall you
scarce find two of them in one Opinion: Nay so contradictory they will be in
pleading, That if the Judge and Jury were not either knaves or Fools, they
would burst their hearts with laughing. Now if their Clyents would be but
ruled by Reason and Experience, they would agree, and never go to Law, and in
so doing would show themselves wiser than either their Lawyers or their
teachers.

Just so for all the world it is with Physicians. An Ancient grave Physician
can sit in his Chayer and reason of all the parts of Physic, such as belong to
the Diagnosticks of Diseases, and the Method of their cure, He can reason of
the Anatomy of all parts; of the History of simples, and living Creatures,
their Natures and Forms, their properties and virtues, he can quote
Dioscorides and Theophrastus and say they were better men then himself: He
can tell you how you must make up Antidotes and other Medicines, and for them
he can quote Mesue Nicholaus Myrepsus, and Nicholus Alexandrinus, and all this
he can utter Magnificently and stateliely: But if you call him to one that is
sick of a Plurisie or a Fever, a Bloody Flux, Dropsy, or a Falling sickness,
or any other disease it is no great matter whether it be acute or Cronicall,
Good God, in what an astonishment is my learned Physician: Although he feel
the pulce and gaze upon the urine, he scarce knows what to do for all
Discorides, Theopharstes, and the rest of his Authors; Nay it may be an old
woman That stands by may teach him his Lesson a little better.

Lastly. Our young Physicians which need a Master to instruct them in the Rules
of physic and are minded to practice it, and use it well; I commend them to
Doctor Reason and Doctor Experience, which two alone are necessary to this
profession. Thus Celsus.

III. The way whereby Alohymists come to learn, is by the light of Nature and
Grace.

We will not deny but Paracelsians make use of Reason and Expereince as well
as other physicians; but they soar a little higher, even to the light of Nature
and Grace. That Is the Fundamental, the other are but means how to use it.
There is within a man an Internal Angel, and the Light of Nature; you need not
ask What the Light of Nature is, the whole Creation shows it every day; for as
all Natural bodies grow out of the earth and are nourished from it, so is the
mind of man nourished by the knowledge of Nature: By Nature Does a wise man
learn all his Arts and Factcultis as a tree has i'es nourishment from the
earth: and he that learnes Arts from Authors learnes them Just as a parrot
learnes to spoke. The Motion of the Creation is the Father of all Arts
whatsoever Divinity excepted for that is inspired into men by the spirit of
God: And as Divine wisdom comes from the Divine spirit: so Natural wisdom,
comes from the course of Nature. Authors may tell you, such a thing may be done
in such a way; but what Accidents will come in the doing of it they cannot tell
you: The Light of Nature is that, and only that which teaches true
Phylosophie; yet is Divinity the Foundation of true Wisdom; for God is the
revealer of all secrets; and he will reveal them to none but those that fear
him. As for the Beauty of Medicine which we spoke of before, we shall speak
of more by and by, when we come to the Oath prescribed to Physicians,
Alchymists, and Apothecaries. It consists chiefly in Order and Honesty.

Chap. 3. Of the Ornaments of a Physicians mind.
1. The Ornaments of a Physicians mind are the principles and Habit of
Phylosophie.
1. A Physician ought to give pure Language; Neither ought he to be ignorant
of the Rules of Grammar, Rhetoric and poetry. 2. His Phylosophical Habits
pertinent to knowledge and Acttion are various. 3. To the knowledge of a
Physician, some things conduce more, some less; Devinity is the Basis of all
Arts; and in Nature a Physician ought to be well Skiled in Anatomy, the
knowledge of plants and making up Medicines: Besides Galen calls all such
Physicians as are ignorant of the Mathematics Murderers.
An Idea of the Aphorisms of Hipocrates
1. In speaking and discoursing, let him be nimble witted and solled. 2. In
reproving the Errors of the sick and such as stand by them as also of his own
scholars let him be quick wited. 3. Let his Mind be equally balanced
between Fear and Confidence, let him keep the middle path. 4. Let him keep his
body neat, but his Mind neater: Let him be temperate in Diet, and shut the
suspicion of venus out of his doors. 5. Let him have base thoughts of Honor
unles it be such as he gets honestly by his Art; and let him not beg that
neither, and be sure let him never Praise himself. 6. Let him be severe
toward those which introduce Errors into the Art: Let him be courteous toward
others, and have a fellow feeling of others Miseryes. 7. Let him not be
ashamed to confess his own errors but let him give others warning to have a
care of them. 8. Let him desire the Company of, and Commerce with other
Physicians. 9. Let not his Tongue make a disease worse then it is. 10. If he
know the Event of a Disease, let him speak it, not only to stir up the sick to
obedience, but also to avoid the slandering of the Art: Always have a care
lest you afflict the mind with the Disease of the body. 11. Keep close such
things in the Art as are to be kept close. 12. Observe diligently other men's
actions but be not invective agianst them. 13. Be not envious against the
success of other men, neither yet detract any thing from their due praise. 14.
Be familliar with all, but prattle no more then becomes you. 15. Be neither
Doggish and Curtish, nor yet scurrilous and Ridiculous. 16. Love familiatitie;
be diligent in keeping of it; Give Council gratis. 17. Use few words but let
those few be pertinent to the purpose. 18. Let Gravitie and Love be read in
your Brows. 19. Speak comfortably to the sick, and visit him often if the
Disease require it. 20. Carry thy self Modestly before thy Patient, both in
asking him questions, feeling his pulse, and considering his Disease. 21. Let
no unseemly action; nor unseemly word proceed from thee. 22. Let him love
Godliness and Honesty, and be an unblameable servant both to God and Nature.
23. Let him consult with God in the beginning of all his Cures, and give God
thanks after the performance of them. 24. Forsake not your sick Patient for any
cause whatsoever. 25. Honor your Master as your Father, and embrace his
Children as your brethren. 26. In consultations with Physicians, both hear what
others say, and also teach without Envy, or branding them with nicknames. 27.
Let not such a thought enter into your heart as to take that which is not your
own.
II. A Physician as well as a true Alchymist comes to the knowledge of many
things which belong to the Health of the sick, by Astrology, and therefore the
Art is very necessary for them both.
And it is true enough; For the superior bodies work upon the Inferior and that
by a kind of necessity, for without operation there can be no action: Therefore
without the operation of the superior bodies there could be no production in
the inferior. This they do three ways.

1. By a way universal. 2. By a way particular. 3. By a way of Means.
1. Universally: the Celestial bodies act in things below by Light and Motion.

2. Particularly. By Influences differently upon proper Nativities or
Revolutions,

3. By way of means: They operate upon such as are of the same Complexion with
themselves; As Mars upon Chollerick people, Saturn upon Melancholy, etc.

Also we may see, (if; our eyes be in our heads) what force they have in
changing the Air; and by the Air men's bodies: To make this appear consider
with me.

1. Sick people are most at ease, and rest best after Midnight, although then
the Air be coolest: The Reason is Because the sun then draws toward the
Ascendant.

2. All hold, the cause of buding of Trees and plants, is the heat of the Sun;
yet Trees begin to bud in February, though the Air be not so hot, as it is in
October when the leaves fall of: It is not then a sensitive heat, but an
Influentiall heat of the sun approaching to the Equator that causes it. Most
true then was that assertion of Hermes in his Tabula Smaragdina Superior Bodies
are like the Inferior, and Inferior like the Superior. This is the golden chayn
of Homer. This is the Marriage of Coelam and Opis. This was the Ring of Plato.
This is the perpetual Circulation of the Philosophers; Or to speak more like a
Divine, This is the Providence of God, which so knits the Creation together
that one Part of it stands in continual need of another. I could easily prove
(if it were my scope at present) That of Natural knowledges, Astrology is most
necessary for man in this World: But I am upon Physic, and therefore I say that
it is most profitable and necessary for a Physician: How can you find out the
Crisis of a Disease but by the course of the Moon? Or how can Diseases be
better cured then by the knowledge of the Celestial bodies by which they are
caused? We read in the Scripture, That Christ cured a man which was Lunitick,
who often fell into the fire, and often into the water. If often, then not
always; If Lunatic, then according to the Course of the Moon. This Hermes
Trismegistos in his Jathro Mathematics (the word sounds nothing else but
Medicine joined with Astrology) affirms, That it is found out by Exreperince,
and I my self have found it to be true, That the Egiptians could predict the
disposition not only of the sick but also of the healthful by the Motions of
the Moon: Therefore if you observe it, The Moon in the place of Mars in your
Genesis stirs you up to Choler, but to the place of Saturn to Melancholy;
judge the like by the place of their Aspects in the Nativity.

Imagine a man to be borne when the Fortunes were in Aries and the Infortunes
in Taurus: This man when the Moon is in Aries, Cancer, Libra or Capricorn will
do well enough: Let him look sor his troubles when the Moon is in Taurus Leo,
Scorpio, or Aquarie.

Also if his Diseases begin when the Moon is in Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, or
Aquarie, they are like to prove dangerous, and strike at life. But if the Moon
be in Aries; Cancer, Libra, or Capricorn they are easily cured: This not only
the Physicians, (such as are Physicians indeed) and Astrologers; but also
daily Experience witnesses to be true: My self have found the truth of it
oftener then once or twice.

By all this you see what exceeding need a Physician has to be an Astrologier.
Because by the Motions of the Heavens, the Indications are so varied, and
either moved forward or retarded: so that a Physician that is ignorant of
Astrology, many times prescribes remedies, Diets, and Chyrurgical observations
in vain. 'Twas a most notable speech of Galen to this purpose: He that is a
Physician, the same man is an Astrologer; thereby deriding those Physicians
that denied Astrology to be necessary to Physic.

III. A Physician and Alchymist ought with all diligence to keep the Method of
Physic.
For that Physician lends a helping hand to the sick that knows how to use fit
Medicines at a fit time; and he cannot be ignorant of this that knows what
remedy is suitable to each disease in respect of Quantity Quality, Time and
Manner of Administration: He that is ignorant of this, is as ignorant of the
Method of Physic: The Method of Physic teaches to Cure. 1. Safely. 2.
Quickly. 3. Delightfully.


1. Safely: Lest you hurt one part by helping another. 2. Quickly: That is act,
not rashly; Delay not rashly. 3. Delightfully: That the remedy burden not the
sick as much as the disease.


And always register in your brayn that speech of Hypocrates. Use no violent
Medicines if gentle will serve the turn.

IIII. Paracelsus beside Phylosophie and Astrology. reckons up Alchymy and
Magic amongst the Fundamentalls of Medicines, and the requisites of a Physician
The kinds of Magic which he reckons up are Six.

1. Supernatural things sometimes appears amongst Natural things, and carry
the resemblance of their bodies. God has placed them in Nature to signify
something; and the first part of Magic is the interpretation of those. Such was
that star which appeared to the Magitians which our translators (to keep the
people in ignorance) translated Wise men. that came to worship Christ in his
Infancy. Such were the Visions of the Prophets, and of John in the Revelation.
2. The transformation of living bodies, as was in Moses his time before
Pharaoh. and the Transfiguration of Christ. Let no man say I writ Blasphemy in
following my Author in this; and say it was done by Divine power, I Will easily
grant it. I'ts by Divine power the Trees blossom, and bear fruit; if you say
that is according to Nature, I will quickly answer you. That it is Divine power,
and the finger of God himself that upholds Nature and the Creation in the state
it is in. 3. The third is Characters, or certain strange words, which have the
same virtue with Harbs etc. and will cure Diseases as well. 4. The fourth is
called Gamahew: or Gamaheos. Viz; Images and sculptures with certain strange
Characters engraven upon them which carry the virtues of the Heavenly bodies,
and mightily strengthen Creatures below,: For as a key opens a Lock, a Sword
wounds, and a Breastplat defends, so the Images of things above engraven upon
things below, have a strange operation upon Sublunarie Creatures. 5. The fifth
is an action from one to another and that by Images which are like them: I
would translate my Author in this particular if I durst, but I dare not, before
the Nation is honester. 6. The sixth is Art Cabalistick. Cabal amongst the
Ancients was nothing else then a certain mistical Symbolicall, and Aenigmatical
Divinity, it was three fold. 1. That which Adam learned of God, and taught to
his Children. 2. That by which God delivered the Law to Moses upon Mount Sinai,
and Moses again taught it to Joshua: This continued by succession unto Ezra:
yet was it lawful for few to read it; and not for those few before they were
forty years of age. 3. The third Cabal was invented by the Jews Rabbis,
which converts the Letters and sillables of the scripture into Number: and
finds out the hidden sense of them, etc.

But the Cable of Paracelsus, manifests a way whereby Characters, Figures,
Sigills, and words; strange things which some think is impossible, may be
Performed: He teaches a way how a man may hear ones voice cross the seas; Nay
how one thet dwells in the East may hear ahother that dwells in the West, and
both keep their stations, though they are above a hundred Germane Miles distant.

In Natural Magic, Imagination bears a great sway not only in gausing, but
also in curing diseases: For proof of which we may let Phylosophie alone: Look
but upon a woman great with child and you may see it without a pair of
spectacles. Imagination is a knowing power; it acts potently upon other things
beside it self; and although knowledge and (...) concur to a Local Motion, yet
are they not the first cause of Motion, neither can they work alteration or
change in their own body, much less in another, But Knowledge is an act of the
soul, and appetite always follows it or always should: Neither is the soul
of man conversant only in it is own body, if it were, How could one man love
another? And if the souls of men produce Mutual Love, why not a Mutual help by
the same Rule: Hence it comes to pass that many times a sick man is more
cheered by the sight and Company of one man, then he is by the help of
another: It Is in vayn to object That Humors and Spirits are immediately and
directly moved by Imagination; for it is only Accidental: They are moved by the
Attractive, Retentive, and Expulsive Faculties. Weconfesse a sudden fear will
make a man tremble: though there be no reallity in it; so then the Humors and
Spirits are the second cause of the chang of man's body, but the first and
remote cause is Imagination.

You may see it clearly in all Epidemical diseases, who is sooner taken with
them then they that fear them? Or I Will make it more clear by a simillitude; An
Apple-tte is the second cause of bearing the Apple; but the first and remote
cause is the sun which causes the tree to spring and grow, blow and bear: But
the first cause seldom produces an act without the help of the second cause:
For Example: In a Pestilential time Imagination it self will infect a man; but
it is fear and terror caused by that Imagination which corrupts the Humors, and
changes them into the nature of the thing feared. Those that have read
Physical Authors know what strange Imaginations a Melancholy Fancy will
introduce into men; As one that conceited his Nose to be bigger then al his
body: Another that he had no Head. A third that he was made of Butter; who
being a Baker by Trade durst not come near his Oven lest he should be melted:
Another that he had gotten a Fish in his blood; But to let pass others: My
self the translator of this work. Anno 1642. had a Patient in Old street
London, who being troubled with a Melancholy distemper, conceited himself only
a man, and all others that came near him Wild Beasts that came to devour him:
To see whether this Fancy might be removed or no, I persuaded him He was made
of a black pot: This also wrought upon his Imagination; and then he durst let
no body touch him for fear they should break him: until at last, his cure
drawing near, such vayn delusions vanished.

To return to my Author.

The strongth of Imagination appears in this; (to go no further) In that
Women with child, will not only desire, but also eat such things as are not
fitting to be eaten; and their health is so far from being impaired, that it is
much amended by so doing.

That the Imagination of one man will work upon another is very conspicuous by
a Woman with child; the child bearing the mark upon it is body of what the
Mother desired. Nay, if we do but consider what Union there is between our
Spirits and the Angels and Intelligences; nay (to reach a little higher) If man
be united to God by the person of Jesus Christ, what wonder is it that one man
should be united to another by Imagination? He that would know more of this,
let him read Synertus his book of Alchymie.

V. A Physician ought to be busied in diligent speculation and happy Imitation
of Nature.
A Physician ought perpetually to watch the Motions of Nature, and order his
Physic accordingly, that he may expel the infirmities of Nature that way. If
he drive the same course Nature drives, the Cure will be easy, because Nature
helps; and safe, because it is Natural. Let all Physicians know that they are
servants, and not Masters to Nature.

VI. Physicians are Rulers over both body and Mind.
We told you before, the subject of a Physician was the whole body of man taken
universally: And he that does not know that the Conditions of the body follow
the Temperature of the Mind, is a fool. The words were Galen's: And Arnoldus
says, A Physician may make a Covetous man prodigal, and a Lecherous man chaste;
and a fearful man valiant: The blood being altered from it is present
temperature, alters the Complexion, and the Complexion being altered, so is the
inclynation of the Mind: And this is the greatest secret in Physic. This is
clearly seen in Melancholy persons, who if they mind Religi o n at all when
they are in health, in their sickness think themselves Reprobates: Remove but
their Melancholy distemper, the grace of God will come again: And thus you see
the Assertion clearly prooved; That Physicians are rulers both of body and
Mind. Thus much for the Ornaments of a Physicians mind: The Ornaments of his
body follow.

Chap. 4. Of the Ornaments of the body of a Physician and Alchymist.
I. Let the Ornaments of a Physicians body be suitable to those of his mind.
An Idea of Hypocrates his Aphorisms.
1. Let him keep his body in a due Decorum, but his mind in a better, 2. Let
him be very temperate in Nourishment, But more temperate in the sports of
Venus. 3. In his youth Let him be patient and doubtful: In his old age Wise and
Judicious; and let his middle age take part with all four. 4. Let his body be
personable, lest that old taunt be cast in his dish Physician cure thy self. 5.
Let his garments neither proclaym him a sloven nor proud; but clenly, and
thrifty. 6. Let him go so as he may not be despised of others, nor proud of
himself. 7. Let him abstayn from perfumes.
II. A Physician ought to be able not only to write Receipts, but to make up
all his. Medicines himself.
Is a man a Physician; and does he not know his Art belongs to action, and not
to Contemplation? Contemplation teaches men how to dispute of, and not how to
cure the sick: Imagine a Physician to be an excellent Linguist, and to
understand, Hebrew, Greek and Latin; we confess it is a great Ornament to a
Physician; but they teach him only how to discourse, not how to Cure: It Is the
true knowledge of the light of Nature, verified by Experience in making up
Medicines that teaches a Physician what Medicines are to be used, what to be
refused: you shall oftentimes find Physicians vapouring what Linguist they are
and what breding their friends have bestowed upon them; and yet an Emperick,
nay perhaps an old woman can come and cure a disease which it may be they
cannot: Therefore well said Celsus. Physicians prate of their wit and show their
Eloquence, but it is Medicines, and not words must cure the disease; and truly
Galen was also of the same Judgment It Is action says he, and not prattling that
shows a man to be a Physician indeed: And in truth I desire from my heart, all
those that take upon them the practice of physic that they would not dwell upon
those generals, which have been left, them by Ancients; but search into the
Closet of Nature and see what wonders the eternal God has laid up there for
them to busy their brains about.

III. The true Alchymist by making up his Medicines diserves the name of a
Physician.
We told you before, that an Alchymist was to be considered two ways.

1. As he makes up Medicines for Physicians, and so he performs the office of
an Apothecarie. 2. As he finds out-secrets in nature by his own brayn; and
knows how to use them when he has done: and so he deserves the name of a
Physician.
And this no man breathing will deny unless it be such as are their Masters
Apes, and will swear what er'e they say though they say Black is white, or whit
black: I beseech you, what greater argument of a man's weakness can be delivered,
then to say, My Master said so? It Is true, these men, they may be decked with
gold Rings and Jewels, but they are no Physitians' they say

The operation and preparation of Medicines is to be left to Alchymists and
Apothecaries, as being a thing unworthy the Majesty of a Physician whose
statliniss admits him only to prescribe, and not to make up Medicines.

Good God, to what Pride has the feigned Majesty and deceitful pomp of this
World brought Physicians too! Imagine they lived in the Country, and there
were sent for to visit a Sick party, where neither Apothecarie nor Surgeon
were near, as oftentimes it comes to pass: The disease also may be violent,
and admits of no delay, but speedy help must be had: What will the Majesty of
my venerable Doctor do in such a case? Will the disease be affrayd of his Pride?
Must he not act something himself or else plainly and downrightly Murder the
Sick? Does such a famous fellow deserve the name of a Physician? you see the
folly of such as hold, it is the duty of a Physician to prescribe, and not to
act.

To proced a little further.

Difference of Clymates, difference of places, difference of parts of the body
aflicted; difference of Complexion in the parties aflicted, require different
forms, and different preperations of Medicines: Both matter and form is to be
altered according to these circumstances, which cannot be done without long use
and experience in making up Medicines: which may indeed be disired, but cannot
be so much as hoped for; much less expected from such titular Physicians as our
times affords; whose sacred Majesty leads them to fill their own purses, and
not to benefit the Sick. Antiquity will lead them and us unto better manners if
we had but Honesty enough to follow it. Hippocrates would have spit in that
man's face that should have taken from him the power of making up his own
Medicines: And the Ancients taught their Children and servants the way of doing
it; and thought it as great a Sin to deny them that, as to deny them the use of
Fire and water: and howsoever they boast themselves to be Galenists, and are
ignorant in making up Medicines; what do they else but brand the Name of dead
Galen with a blot of Ignomy, who had more wit in his little Finger, then they
have in all their bodies?

Again. That great writer of Physic Hippocrates, in his Epistle to Democritus
writes: That a Physician could never find out an absolute form of Medicine,
that he durst say was perfect: and we (and if we will be honest) must
ingeniously confess, That the Ancient Physicians were not only ignorant in some
things, but also erred in many: What then shall we think of those that build
their whole Practice upon the Prescripts of the Ancients! We cannot choose but
admire what slavish Brains they are endued withal, who had rather err with the
Ancients, than take the pains to find out a Truth themselves. Of how much
better Opinion was Julius Scaliger; I have often (said he) admired at the
boldness and impudence of Mortal Men, who build their faith upon such errors of
the Ancients, which they would have amended if they had lived; for it is not
high base to commit an Error, because it is the beginning of Wisdom; but to
cherish Errors is madness in the highest degree.

IV. A Physician ought to be very diligent of another Man's Health, though in
the mean time he be negligent of his own.
A Faithful Physician (and there is but few of them) regards the health of the
sick in the first place: He undergoes any danger to help them; nay, he has a
fellow feeling of their Miseries, so that the help of others is a trouble to
himself; because he knows the Subject of his Art is Man, that noble piece of
Gods Workmanship, and the Tabernacle in which the holy Ghost dwells. You have
the Ornaments of the Body. The Ornaments of the Estate follow.

Chap. 5. Of the Ornaments of Estate belonging to a Physician and Alchymist.
I. A Physician ought to be adorned, not only with Ornaments of Body and mind,
but also of Estate.
An Idea of Hippocrates his Aphorisms.
1 Leave vaporing of outward Pomp, and Letters Pattents from Princes for
Mountebanks. 2 Let Study and not Gain, be the motive Cause of your Practice. 3
Never make your bargain for Reward, unless it be to make the sick confident of
his Cure. 4 Be not too hasty for your reward of those that are able to give it,
never ask for it if they be not able. 5 Do not Measure the excellency of your
Remedy by the price of it: Give freely to the Poor. The tender Mercies of God
are over al his Works. 6 Boast not of thy own Cures, unless it be to move the
sick to confidence in thee. 7 Regard Reason in all Cures, and look not after the
Estate of thy Patient; so thou shall show thy self a Workman well pleasing to
God.
II. The Dignity and Honor of a Physical Alchymist is exceeding great.
The Dignity of a Physician is known by Object and End.

The Object of a Physician, is Man.

The End, Health.

As much then as a Man excels other Creatures, so much does he that is a
Physician indeed, excel other men; and as a man prizeth his Health, so let him
prize the Physician. Therefore in Ancient times, Kings were Physicians, and
such as were ablest in Physic were chosen to be Rulers, and that not only
amongst the Heathens, but also amongst the Jews, as appears by Esaias 3. 6, 7. A
man shall take hold of his Brother and say, Thou have clothing, be thou our
Ruler; and he shall answer, I am no Physician; by which it is clear, That all the
cause he brings why he would not be a Ruler, was, Because he was no Physician,
and therefore not fit to take the Dignity of a Prince upon him. Whence that
Ecclesiasticus. 38. Honor the Physician because the Lord has created him for
thy necessity; for all Healing is from the most High; and he shall receive the
Honor of a King. We do not deny but God may give these gifts even to wicked
men: yet this we say, A true Physician deserves praise, as well as reward. And
this we affirm is the property of a good, honest, and prudent Physician, not to
gape after reward like a Stage Player, but to be content with what is given
him. Menecrates the Scicilian, howsoever later Pens have thrown dirt enough in
his Face; yet Suidas reports in his 6. Book, 38. Chap. That he never took any
reward at al for his Cures, but rested himself infinitely contented if he could
but perform the Cure; often protesting, that he was born a Servent to men and
not a Master.

III. As Diligence is required of the Physician in curing, so thankfulness is
required in the Parties cured.
Therefore the Roman Emperors, when they had observed any that were excellent in
the Art of Phyfick, they gave them a yearly Stipend, sufficient to maintain
them in a good Decorum, that so they might give Physic to the Vulgar freely,
without any desire, or hope of reward: and indeed it is usual with people after
they are cured by the great labor and diligence of the Physician, to give him
ingratitude for a recompense of his pains and care: Thence came that vulgar
speech of Diogenes, Give thy Cook, ten Pound; thy Flatterer, five Talents; thy
Physician, a Groat; and the Philosophers, three Farthings: Hence came that
Proverb in use:

Exige dum dolor est, nam postquam pena recessit
Audebit sanus dicere multa dedi.
Whilst that your Patient is in pain
Be sure you ask your Pay;
For when as he is well again,
You have had enough, he will say.
But this is most base, and most dishonest; the Heathens shall rise up in
judgment against such fellows and condemn them, who built Altars for Chyron,
Machaon, Podalirius, and Hippocrates and for their excellency in their Art
honored them as gods: but enough of this, if not too much, considering that I
know, and am very well versed in it, That the ultimate end of studying Arts, is
not reward and gain; but the finding out of the Truth, and the using of it to
the glory of God, and the health of the sick, being found out. Riches are but
the goods of Fortune, and wicked men have usually the greatest shares of them.

IV. A Physician stands in some need of Estate, besides his Knowledge and Art.
For although he that knows any thing, knows well enough that a man may give
Physic well if he have it, whether he have Estate or not, and that the Estate
of a Physician conduces not a whit to make him either the more knowing, or
less knowing; but it enables him wherewithal to get fit Medicines to give: What
good does a man's knowledge do him unless he bring it into practice? So then a
Physician take him as a Student he needs no Estate, but take him as a
Practitioner, he does: Neither indeed is it convenient, That a man whom Nature
has enriched with knowledge, should want wherwithal to put it in practice. I
could wish there were in this respect such a Harmony between men as God has
made in the Creation: Therefore Cornelius Celsus said well, That a Physician
stood in as much need of an Estate to make up his Medicines, as a man in health
did to buy him Bread: And Aristotle was excellent in the point, Fools that know
nothing, but are ignorant of the causes of things regarding only to get vast
Estates; if they suffer in their Diseases, let them impute it to themselves.
And the truth is, I do not know but it belongs to the Governors of a
Commonwealth to provide for the health of their Subjects.

V. The more the Physician is confided in, the sooner he cures.
And this is true enough; Confidence in the Physician begets Hope, Hope begets
Joy, Joy cheers the Spirits, Cheerfulness of the spirits helps to expel the
Disease, and wonderfully promotes the operation of the Medicine. On the
contrary, If the sick abhor the Physician, the sight of the Physician terrifies
him: Terrifying weakens the spirits, weakening of the spirits encroaseth the
Disease, and makes way for Death.

VI. The Physician gets confidence of the sick Party, partly by his own Nature,
partly by the help of other men.
That a Physician may get confidence in his Patient by his own Nature, let him
carry himself like a wise man, as well as like an Artist: Cicero said true when
he said, That in all Arts nothing memorable, or worthy of praise, could be done
without Wisdom. If a Physician carry himself rigidly, and not respectively
toward his Patients, he affrights them; if they like not his person, they will
like his Medicine much less: you may see this in Chyrurgions when they let
people blood; If the sick be afraid, the blood retires, and he seldom bleeds as
he should do: But if he come cheerfully, and have good confidence in his
Chyrurgion, he bleeds well: So if the party dislike the Medicine, either he
vomits it up again, or retains it in his Body that it never operates. Cornelius
Celsus was of opinion, That the prudence of a Physician did more good than his
Art: and Socrates included al Virtues in this one word Prudence. And Celcus
held, That a prattling Physician was another Disease to the sick.

Chap. 6. Of the Authority of Physic.
PHysical Authority endowed with the Ornaments of Body, Mind, and Estate,
coming out into the World to act, is to consider,

1 Its Duties. 2 The Persons.
An Idea of Hippocrates his Aphorisms concerning Duties.
1 The Duties of a Physician, unless limited within the bounds of Method, are
innumerable. 2 He ought to have a quick eye to the Air, Earth, and Water of the
place where the sick is. 3 He ought to observe the operation of the Chyrurgion;
seek out fit Remedy for the Disease, and leave necessary Precepts with those
about the sick. 4 He ought to enquire after the Disease, of the sick, and of
those that stand by; diligently to heed when the change will be, and what the
event will be. 5 The whole course of his Physic ought to be only an Imitation of
Nature. 6 He ought to communicate what he knows to be true, to his Scholars. 7
He ought to warn the sick of their Duty, to terrify them that are secure, and
to cheer up those that are faint hearted. 8 Let him not perform his Office
negligently, nor rashly. 9 Let him take Occasion by the Fore-top, and expect
patiently what the end will be. 10 Let him not be too confident in what he
expects, neither let his courage fail if it fall out otherwise. 11 When he takes
a Patient in hand let him shut rashness and fearfulness out of doors. 12 Let
him be ashamed of no work, or operation that belongs to Physic. 13 Let him fly
rashness and headiness in all his actions. 14 Let him use Gravity in his
Apparel, Speech, Gate, and every thing else. 15 In commanding things necessary,
in forbidding things hurtful, in reproving Errors, let him be of an Heroical
spirit, and do it with Authority. 16 Let him be very gentle to, and familiar
with sick people. 17 Let him give Physic to the poor freely, and without
reward. 18 Let him have a special care of sick strangers. 19 In dangerous
Diseases, let him do good to such as are ungrateful and Covetous. 20 Let him be
ready, nimble, and clever in all his actions. 21 Let him want no Physical
Instruments at home, but carry only such abroad as are necessary. 22 Let him
keep the Forms as well of Compound as Simple Medicines in his memory. 23 Let him
prescribe as well what Diet, as what Medicine the sick ought to use. 24 As for
such things the sick has a desire to, let him not so follow his humor that he
increase his Disease; nor so rigidly oppose him that he perplex his mind. 25
Let him be well skilled in the operations of Chyrurgery, that so if a Chyrurgion
be wanting, he may perform his place, speedily, securely, and safely. 26 Let
him always have a special regard to the former Custom, and present strength of
the sick. 27 Concerning Duty, his Office is, First, To prescribe a Diet which
strengthens Nature, and resists the Disease. Secondly, To loosen the Belly with
gentle Remedies, as Subpositoris, Clysters, etc. Thirdly, If Blood abound, to
breath a Vein. Fourthly, To use Apozemes to cut the matter causing the Disease.
Fifthly, To prepare tough humors for expulsion. Sixthly, To purge them out.
Seventhly, To draw humors back to use Diurecticks, Rubbings, Cupping Glasses,
to cause sweat. Eighthly, To draw the Disease to the external part of the Body.
Ninthly, To draw it out by Baths or Issues. Tenthly, To dissipate the matter
remaining, and strengthen the part Eleventhly, To recover strength with good
Diet.
28 Let him keep a Method of Physic in his Study such a one as you shall find
in the following Scheam. First, Let him have a Catalogue of Authors, both
Galenists, Paracelsians, and Empericks. Secondly, If he travel, let him keep a
Diary. Thirdly. Let him set down by themselves what things he finds worthy of
observation. Fourthly, Let him keep a Garden of Herbs of his own. Fifthly, Let
him set down his best Experiments in such an order that he may know redily how
to find them. Sixthly, In the morning let him call to mind what he did the day
before. Seventhly, In the afternoon, 1 Let him walk abroad to know and gather
Simples. 2 Let him confer with Galenists, Paracelsians, and Empericks. 3 Let
him visit the sick.
Eighthly, In the Evening, 1 Let him consider what he has done all day. 2 Let
him commit something to memory.


An Idea of Hippocrates his Aphorisms concerning Persons.
1 Of Persons,

Some regard the Sick.

Some those that stand by: And

Others the Physician.

2 Cure the mind of the Sick with good Language, before you attempt to cure his
body with Medicine. 3 Declare in loving Language to the Sick what is fitting
for him to know; so carry yourself toward him that he may not be too confident
of Life, nor too fearful of Death. 4 What the Sick ought to do command
peremptorily, and make him not too confident of his life, lest he disobey your
Command. 5 Keep close from the Sick that which is not fitting for him to know,
and if he suspect it, either craftily dissemble it, or cunningly make the best
Interpretation of it. 6 If the Patient be stubborn, make the Disease worse than
it is, that he may obey: If he be faint hearted, tell him it is better than it
is, that he may not despair. 7 Promise nothing directly, but tell the Patient,
all the Work lies in the Power of God, and his obedience. 8 Sometimes use many
Remedies. sometimes but few, according as the disposition of your Patient is,
either stout, or faint-hearted. 9 Let a Physician be neither Covetous nor
unfaithful: above al things let him not neglect his Patients. 10 Let the
Physician abstain from threatenings, unless he deal with Madmen: Let him use
modest Language, and gentle admonition. 11 Let him suffer none to be about the
Sick, but such as the Sick loves; let him cause the rest to be turned out of
doors. 12 If the Sick be a knowing man let him tell him the Cause and the
Nature of his Disease; and let him explain it to him, not with a Budget full of
prittle prattle, but by apt Similitudes. 13 Let him give himself to know what
the event of Diseases will be. 14 Let him rid the Chamber of al such guests as
have more tongue than wit. 15 Exhort those that are near the Sick to perform
what you command; and in this case use either promises or threatenings, which
you think sit. 16 Trust as little as you can to the Fidelity of those that
are near the Sick; but as much as possible lies in your power see the Medicine
taken your self. 17 In dangerous Diseases, desire the advice of other
Physicians; and if you are called to counsel by others, by no means refuse it.
18 Give Counsel to other Physicians without contention, or wrangling; envy, or
desire of gain: Let the Health of the Sick, and the sinding out of the Truth,
be the mark you shoot at in all your actions. 19 Examine the Counsel of
Empericks before you follow it, because they are ignorant of Method: but if
when you have weighed them in the balance of Reason, you find it good, follow
it, for Nature has given them gifts as well as you. 20 Make use of your former
Experiences: If you keep those you had when you were young, they will do you good
when you are old. 21 Communicate al things faithfully to your Scholars; show
them your Examples; teach them how, and when Medicines ought to be given; let
them be your Companions, lookers on, and standers by in your Cures; that so the
blessing of God may be upon you, and they when they come to age may bless you.
You have the Authority of Physic: The Oath of Physicians follows.

Chap. 7. The Oath of Physicians according to Hippocrates.
I Swear by that great Physician Apollo; as also by Aesculapius, and his two
Daughters Hygieam, and Panacea; and I call all the Gods and Goddesses to witness,
That I will keep this Oath under written entirely, and without any mental
reservation whatsoever, according as God shall give me strength and Judgment.

1 I will will the same Honor to my Master that taught me this Art, as I will
give to my Parents: If he want temporal goods, I will supply him, so far as God
shall enable me with Estate: his Children I will account of as my own Brethren; I
will instruct them in all the parts of Art which God has endowed me with,
without either asking or hoping for reward. To my Scholars that I undertake to
teach, will I impart whatsoever God has imparted to me; namely, To al such as
take this Oath, and to no others will I be free in what I know in Physic.

2 To those which are sick (according to my power and ability) will I give
speedy Health, without any delay of time for hope of gain: I will never give two
Medicines, when one will serve the turn.

3 The entreaty nor Fees of other men shall never move me to give preposterous
Physic; but I will give warning to the Magistrate of such as do it.

4 I will give nothing to any Woman to kill her Conception, neither will I
declare to any body, which way it may be done.

5 I will manage my Life and Art in that manner, that I will not be afraid to
answer for them another day.

6 I will cut none for the Stone, but give place to others to do it that pretend
they have more skill than I have.

7 When I enter into the house of a sick Party, my motive cause shall be the
Health of the sick, which I will labor for with all my might.

8 I will keep my Body in temperance from all unlawful Venereal actions.

9 I will give Physic without respect of persons, whether they be Poor or Rich,
Masters or Servants.

10 I will keep close the infirmities of the Sick, as being the greatest secrets
a Physician has to keep.

This Oath, whilst I keep purely and umblamably according to my Power and Skill,
I desire the blessing of God upon my Person and my Art, together with renown in
this World, and glory in that to come. If herein willingly I fail, may the
contrary to this fall upon me.

Chap. 8. The Oath of Apothecaries.
I Call the Creator of all things to witness, the one God manifested in
Trinity, whom I serve, That I will with all diligence perform these things
following.

1 I will live and die in the Christian Faith.

2 During life I will carry my self dutifully to my Parents.

3 Be obsequious to my Masters and Physicians that employ me.

4 I Will give railing Rhetoric, neither to those of my own Profession, nor yet
to others.

5 I Will labor what lies in my power to adorn the dignity of my Art.

6 What is to be kept close, I will reveal to none.

7 I will attempt nothing unadvisedly for hope of gain.

8 In acute Diseases I will give no purging Medicine without consent of a
Physician.

9 I will not meddle with the secrets of Women, unless it be to apply Medicines
to them.

10 I will reveal the secrets of none to the World.

11 I will give Poison to no Body.

12 I Will not persuade it to be given, no not to an Enemy.

13 I Will neither give, nor sell any Medicine that destroys Conception.

14 I Will prepare no Medicine to cause Delivery in Women without advice of a
Physician.

15 The Prescripts of a Physician I will in no wise alter.

16 I will not give one thing for another, though they be both of a Nature.

17 I Will never turn Emperick while I have a day to live.

18 I Will give Medicines freely to those that have no money to pay for them.

19 I will not keep corrupted Medicines in my Shop.

These things I performing, the Lord bless me in all my Actions.

You have the Requisites of a Physician: The Marks and Vices of Sophisters and
Impostors follow.

Chap 9. Of things repugnant to Physic and Alchymy: Or, Of the Marks and Vices
of Sophisters, and Impostors in those Arts.
1. The Marks and Vices of Mountebanks, Sophisters, and Impostors, which make a
stately flourish only for Gain and Ambition, are contrary to the Notes and
Marks of true Physicians.
OF this number are,

1 Company of dirty Rogues, that carry all their Medicines in one Pot, having
no more Medicines but one; and are as excellent in the Art of Physic, as an
Ass is in Music. 2 Such as run up and down from Town to Town, and from Market
to Market, and having gotten a few terms of Art in their Noddles, make the
common people believe they can do wonders, being in deed and in truth as
absolute Physicians as he is a King that Acts a Kings part in a Play. When they
meet with sick people, they get money right or wrong. 3 Such as have formerly
been Monks, and leave their Professions; or such as have been Parish Priests,
and are so lazy they will preach no longer; Barbers, such as shaved men but
yester day, turn Censurers of Diseases to day; Old Women with never a Tooth in
their heads.
II. All abuses of the Art are repugnant to true Alchymy.
And first of al truly, Unskilful Alchymists, a company of ungodly wretches,
that vapor up and down, they can transmute Metals, they can prepare Medicines,
I by all means; and yet they have neither Judgment nor Method, nor Skill, unless
it be to do mischief to the Sick. If by Chance-medley they hap to cure one, Oh
that is a gallant Experiment, and that Medicine will serve for all Diseases: And
this is one Reason true Alchymists are so evil spoken of as they are. But in
truth it is not fitting, neither ought such a thing to be amongst Christians,
that a most excellent Art should be condemned because of the abuse of it: For
as Mountebanks and old doting Women, detract nothing from the Splendour of true
Medicine; so Idiots, and such as profess Alchymy without wit or reason, detract
nothing from the dignity of true Alchymy: Neither are they worthy of the Name
of Alchymists that spend al their time and means in trying Experiences, not
knowing what Rule they go by, nor what end they drive at: as he said well that
said, They seek and find nothing, but seek after what they have found. Let no
man give any credit to those who promise, they will tell the Art of changing
Metals into Silver or Gold for Money: The Deceits of such Impostors are these,
and such as these that sollow:

1 They dip their wooden sticks, with which they stir their melted Metals,
with Silver or Gold dissolved in Aqua fortis, or other the like Water. 2
Instead of Ink, they write in the paper in which they wrap up their matter to
be reduced, with the Solution of Silver or Gold. 3 Or else instead of Sand,
they dry their Writings with the Filings of Gold or Silver. 4 Others put in
Powder of Charcoal mixed with the Solution of Gold or Silver amongst their
Metal when it is melting. ^ Others melt it in Vessels with a double bottom,
the lowermost being filled with Gold; and they break the uppermost bottom as
they are stirring it up and down. 6 Others put great Charcoals into their
Metal, which they have made hollow for the purpose, and filled with Gold. 7
Others stir the Metal with wooden sticks, or other Instruments which are
hollow, which hollowness they fill with Gold. 8 Others wrap up a Mass of Gold or
Silver in the Lead, and melting of them both together, make them believe al is
turned into Gold. 9 Others color over Silver with Copper, and so melting of it,
make people believe the Copper is turned into Silver. 10 Others cunningly and
subtly put in the filings of Gold amongst it whilst it is melting. 11 Others
put in some other Powder that makes it look like the color of Gold, when it is
no such Metal. 12 Others put in Antimony mixed with Gold, instead of common
Antimony. 13 Others for common Precipitate, put in Gold precipitated. 14 Others
instead of common Mercury, put in the Amalgama of Gold. 15 Others instead of
common Aqua fortis, put in Aqua fortis in which Silver or Gold has been
dissolved. 16 Others color over Gold with Silver, and so melting of it, make
people believe the Silver is transmuted into Gold. 17 Some steal a little of
the true Tincture or else get it by some sinister means, and then they can
perform the business as they should do, so long as their Tincture lasts; which
usually they make last so long till they have deceived people of Money enough:
But their Tincture being gone, they being ignorant of the Art can do no more
feats. 18 Others having wit enough to prepare Quicksilver partly as they
should do, mix it with Gold, and so they will make a little more of it.
Therefore let all Men beware of such Impostors.

A certain famous Alchymist at Rome, many looking on him, put only one scruple
of pure Gold into two ounces of Quicksilver over a hot fire, and turned it al
into most pure Gold; not without the admiration of the Beholders.

An End of the Second Treatise.
The Third Treatise. Containing a Physical Idea of the Hermonical Systeme.
Wherein (as it were in a Platform) is showed, What the Labor is; What the
Order and Series; And what the Work in our Systeme.

In this we will consider,

1 The Definition and Division of Medicine and Alchymy. 2 The Method of the
Hermonical Systeme; and the Idea of the whole Practice.
Chap. 1. Of the Definition of Medicine and Alchymy.
I. The Definitions of Medicine which Galen, and most others have brought, are
rather Descriptions than Definitions.
HIppocrates his Definition is this: Medicine is an adding of things necessary
and a substracting of things not necessary. But this includes a Description of
the Office of a Physician: For all Diseases coming either of Emptiness or
Fullness, the first is cured by Addition, the second by Substraction.

Others Define Medicine thus:

Medicine is a Knowledge restoring and preserserving the health of the Body of
Man.

Others thus:

Medicine is a knowledge, preserving Health, and expelling Diseases.

Others thus:

Medicine prescribes a right Diet to people in Health, and cures such as are
sick. But never a one of these are true Definitions:

1 Because Medicine it self does not this, but it appoints such things as do
it, and that not always neither. 2 Health is the Proposition of the Art of
Physic, and its End is the obtaining of it; and it is necessary for a
Physician to know by what means Health may be maintained being present; and
restored, being absent.
Herophilus had another Definition.

Medicine is the Knowledge of things Healthful, not Healthful, and Neuters,
between both.

Things are said to be Healthful or Unhealthful, three ways:

1 As a Body. 2 As a Cause. 3 As a Sign.
A Body is said to be Healthful when it is in health, Unhealthful when diseased.

A Cause is Healthful which causes Health, Unhealthful which causes Diseases.

The Sign is Healthful which shows Health a coming; Unhealthful which shows
increase, or il end of the Disease.

The knowledge of Neuters is twofold.

1 In respect of Desidence, when any declines from the integrity of Action, and
receives hurt thereby. 2 A Neuter of Recovery, when any first of al begin to
mend of a Disease.
Hence others make another Definition of Medicine, which is this:

Medicine is an Art which conserveth sound Men in Health, restores the Sick,
and preserves Neuters from Diseases.

Or if you will have it plainer thus:

Medicine is the Knowledge of things Natural, not Natural, and against Nature.

But this belongs to the Practice, and Definition is only Theorical; whence it
appears that they are imperfect. I shall satisfy my self with this short, yet
complete Definition.

II. Medicine is an Art of Healing well.
This Definition is perfect, consisting of Genus and Form.

As for Genus, it is an Art (as we showed you before, that Medicine was an Art.

The Form is manifested in this word Healing, by which it is made to differ
from other Arts. And I ad the word Well, to show a difference betwixt the
skilful Physician and a Mountebank. And this Definition contains, not only all the parts of Medicine, but also all the Offices of a Physician.

III. Alchymy is an Art of dissolving all Natural Compound Bodies from that
whereof they Naturally consist, thereby making them purer and stronger, and
fitter Medicines for the Physicians use: Or may serve for the perfecting and
transmuting of Metals.
Some hold Alchymy to be nothing else but a separation of what is pure from
what is impure: But this is too general by half; for an Apothecary does so when
he scrapes the dirt off from Roots: neither does he any less when he clarifies
and strains Syrups. And although it be true an Alchymist does this, yet is not
his Industry limited under such a Bound as this is: For his work is not only
external, but he penetrates to the internal parts, dissolves and separates
Natural Bodies from what they Naturally consist of; he severeth what is
profitable from what is unprofitable; he purifieth, alters, and perfecteth
al, and if need be joins them together again. You have the Definition: The
Division follows.

Chap. 2. Of the Definition of Medicine and Alchymy in general.
I. Medicine is either Theorical or Practical.
THere are those that reject this Definition, as not accurate enough.

1 Because by this means it is not divided into opposite parts. 2 Because al
Medicine is one Discipline, and has but one Habit, namely, Practical and
Operative. 3 Because al Disciplines take their Denominations, not from
particular things which are handled in them, but from the Subject and End to
which they are directed. 4 Because, although some things which are handled in
Medicine seem to belong to Theorical Discipline, yet because al of them are not
handled in respect of knowledge, but directed to some common operation or end,
they are partly referred to the Subject, and partly to the End.
We thought good to hold fast this Definition, not only because it is found in
the Schools of Physicians, but also confirmed by reason and Authority; for both
Hippocrates and Galen confessed, A Physician ought to be a Natural Philosopher:
And the words Naturallist, and Physician are the same: And that Natural
Philosophy is divided into Theorick and Practick, we prove by these Reasons:

1 Philosophy, as the Ancients very wisely said, is a kind of Physic to cure
the Diseases of the Mind.

The Diseases of the Mind may be divided into two Parts.

First, Dullness of the Understanding; the effects of which is, Ignorance of the
Truth. Secondly, Corruptions of Manners; the effects of which, is, A vicious
Life.

The Speculative part of Philosophy is a Medicine for the first.

The Practical part for the last.


2 Because every Man naturally desires Knowledge, both of those things which
pertain to Humane actions, which the Practice of Moral Philosophy will amply
instruct you in; as also of those things which make for the finding out of
Truth; which knowledge Speculative Philosophy will bestow upon you. 3 Because the
Subject of Knowledge is the Understanding which is two fold, Speculative and
Practick, as Aristotle well teaches in his Ethics: Therefore Philosophy must
also be two fold, Practick and Speculative. 4 Because the Basis of Philosophy
is to direct the life of Man in an happy way. But to this belongs both
Speculation and Practice, therefore Philosophy is two fold, viz. Speculative
and Practick. 5 Because every Learning tends to some good end: to attain which,
is required Knowledge, which is the Speculative part; and Operation, which is
the Practick. 6 All Learning was invented to direct those operations of Man
which are in our own power, and so al viciated by the Fall of Adam. There are
three sorts of Actions then, which may be rectified by Learning. 1 The
Operations of the Understanding, which are rectified by Speculative Philosophy.
2 The Operations of Appetite both Rational and Sensitive, which are rectified
by Moral Philosophy. 3 Very many other operations of Man, either inherent in
their Members, as Running and Leaping etc. Or acted upon other things, as
Building, Painting, etc. And so both Mechanical Arts as well as Liberal, are
rectified by Practick Philosophy.
7 Because the Unity and Distinction of Knowledge, are taken from the Uniny and
Distinction of the Object. But the Objects or Matters of Knowledge are three;
for they fall either under the Action, or Effect, or only under the Knowledge:
For whatsoever is only Speculative, was not made only to look upon, but to be
produced to act or action. Hence you see that this division of Philosophy into
two parts, namely, Theorick and Practick, is very good: And if of Philosophy,
then of Physic, which indeed is but the putting of Philosophy into practice,
the one being Essential the other Remote.
II. Theory is the remoter, or more common part of Medicine delivering a
certain Method both of Medicinal matter, and preserving the Health of Man.
It is indeed, to speak briefly, the Proaemium, or Preparation to Practice: It
consists in the knowledge of things Natural, both General and Special; as also
of things against Nature.

III. Practice is the next, and Essential part of Medicine, giving a Reason of
the Means both of preserving and restoring Health.
This comes to the very Operation and End of Medicine, and indeed is the very
Essence of it: It stirs up Nature, incites her to action, tells her what must be
done: It administers aid to Nature where she is too weak, and routs her Enemies
when they are too strong for her.

IV. The parts of Practical Medicine are two, First, called not Natural;
Secondly, Proper, or Method of Cure.
This is Galen's Division; namely, First of all concerning the use of things
not Natural, which respects most the Diet and ordering of the Body.

Secondly, The Method of Curing, which concerns the administration of necessary
Medicines.

For a Physician considering that his Duty is no less to look after present
Health, than to restore it when it is lost: therefore although things not
Natural appertain to the Theorical Part; yet in this respect it is broughr into
Practice, and is made the first part of it: For as Theory is to be considered
under a double Nature; namely, as a man is either Healthful or Sick: So
Practice works upon both these Natures, namely, things not Natural to preserve
Health; things Medicinal to cure Diseases. Moreover, The Medicinal part of
Physic is double, General and Special: General which shows the Method of
Curing: Special which shows the Instruments to cure by.

V. Alchymy, or Hermetical Philosophy is Theorick and Practick.
Theorick by Paracelsians is divided into Vital and Local.

By Vital they understand things Natural.

By Local, things against Nature.

VI. Practical Alchymy is divided by Paracelsians into Method and the
Instruments of Healing.
In Method they observe not only Physical Indications, but also the motion of
the Heavens. As pertaining to Instruments; they consider the Difference,
Composition, and Proportion of Medicines both Chyrurgical and Physical; they
never regard Diet much in the Cure of Diseases: and this Paracelsus not only
taught, but also practiced; for he would drink with his Patients night and day,
or else he is belyed.

Thus you have the general Definition of Medicine: What follows now but that we
give you an Idea of our Hermonical Systeme in two Tomes. Whereof the first shall
contain the Theorick, and the latter the Practical part.

Tome I. Of the Theorical part of Medicine.
THis is divided into two parts, Remote and Near.

Remote, which is common both to Physic and Natural Philosophy, and is called
the Knowledge of things Natural, is either General or Special.

Of the General Knowledge of things Natural, Or the Object of Medicine and
Alchymy.
1 THe General knowledge of things Natural, is the Remote part of the Theory of
Medicine; which treats of the Object of Medicine, or Matter of curing; the
Natures, Parts and other Accidents of al Elementary Bodies. By others it is
called (...).

2 The Common Affections thereof, as also the Species, are to be considered.

LIB. I. The Common Affections are called Special.
1 SToicheiologia Special, is that which delivers the common Principles of
Elementary Bodies.

2 It is derived from (...); which signifies an Element, an lgo, which
signifies to speak.

3 Its Parts are either the first, or those which arise from the first.

4 The first are Principles, Elements, and the Qualities which are in the
Elements.

5 Parts arising from the first, are Mixture and Generation, and the
Temperament which arises from the Mixture of Qualities.

Chap. 1. Of Principles.
1 A Principle is that whereby one thing or another gets its beginning.

2 And this is called either the First, or a rising from the First. The first
is called Nature Naturing; the second, Nature Natured.

3 The First is, by which, and from which all things are made; but that
subsisteth by it self, and draws the original of its Essence from nothing;
and therefore Plato in his Phoedon calls God, Nature Naturing.

4 That which has his Original from the first, which we call Nature Natured, is
that by which all Natural things subsist, and from which they borrow their
Name, viz. Natural.

5 Nature then is double, Universal and Particular.

6 Universal is the Power of the Godhead spread through the whole World,
according to which Nature acts.

7 This is taken,

1 For that Divine Virtue which God has planted in all things. 2 For the
Influence of the Stars, by which he acts it in all things. 3 For the Moderater,
and Nourisher of all Natural Bodies. 4 The Pithagoreans, called it God himself;
Virgil, an Internal Spirit; and Plato, the Soul of the World.
8 The Particular Principle or Nature, is every Natural Body taken as
consisting in Matter and Form.

9 Matter, is the first Subject by which things are made.

10 Form, is the Manner, or Example they are made by.

Chap. 2. Of Elements.
1 AN Element, according to Philip Melancton, is a Simple Body, containing in
it the Seeds of all mixed Bodies.

2 It is twofold, either Opacous, which is an Object of the Sight; or
Transparant.

Transparant either more or less.

Less, as the Water.

More, as the Air and Fire.

3 The Earth is an Element obscure, cold, and dry.

4 The Water is an Element less clear, very moist, and something cold.

5 The Air is an Element very clear, something moist, and very cold.

6 The Fire is an Element, cleerest, dryest, and hottest.

7 Elements and Principles differ:

1 Elements are Corporeal; Principles Incorporeal. 2 Principles are the Objects
of Reason; Elements of Sense. 3 Principles are first and immediate, Elements
compounded of the Principles, for they consist of Matter and Form; and if you
will take Elements as Principles, then take them as Sensible Principles,
consisting of Matter and Form.
Chap. 3. Of the three Principles of Alchymists which are contained in every
Natural Body, and give it its Constitution: as also of the Faculties and
Properties of the Elements and their Number according to the Doctrine of Hermes.
1 IN this particular, Alchymists reject the Opinion of Aristotle altogether.

2 According to Paracelsus, the first Matter of al things is a certain great
Mystery, not perspicable to Sense, which contains in it something after an
hidden and invisible way.

3 According to the Opinion of later Alchymists it is an Essential Subject
containing all Forms in it: or a certain Punct from which all things flow, and
to which they return as to their Center. Plato calls it the Soul of the World.

4 The Principles are either such things as are Simple, or Bodies composed of
them.

5 Simples are such as consist of themselves, from whence al other things come,
and to which they return.

6 Compounds are such as are made of these Simples, and return to them again:
and they are divided into Bodies, Formal and Material.

7 Both Simples and Compounds then, are, either Invisible, as Formal and
Spiritual: or Visible, as Material and Corporeal: and these are contained in
every individual Substance.

8 Those that are Invisible, are contained within those that are Bodily: as the
Soul is in the Body, and the Spirit in whatsoever lives, whereby it not only
preserves it self, but begets its like.

9 They are double, Active, and Passive.

10 Actives, are nothing else but the Forms of Natural things, which God gave
by his blessing at the first, and they have continued ever since.

11 Passive, as Seeds, Roots, Plants, Constellations, etc.

12 Seeds are a vital beginning, containing within it self the Spirit of what
it is a Seed of, by which it produces again its own Body, Taste, Color,
Quality, Magnitude, and Figure.

13 Constellations are ordained by their Motions to order the Actions of
Natural things, both of Herbs, living Creatures, and Minerals to concoct their
Nourishment, to separate their Excrements, to supply them in matters belonging
to Procreation and Increase, both continually and constantly.

14 Roots, are that which dispose to Action, Maturity, and Fruitfulness, both
Plants and Trees.

15 Seeds act by another invisible way, and have a strange kind of Power within
them to beget their like, having their like within them only in respect of
Power, and they are,

1 Of Living Creatures provoked by the power of Venus. 2 Of Plants, shut up in
their Seeds. 3 Of Minerals, which is covered with a bulk of Rubbish.
Al these have hidden Spirits in them.

16 The Formal Principles, or Active Bodies are three; whereof two are moist,
and one dry: The two moist are, Mercury and Sulphur: That which is dry, is Sal.
These, Hermetical Physophers call Spirit, Soul, and Body. These three
Principles, although they are Spiritual, yet being joined with Simple Elements,
they make up Material and mixed Bodies.

17 Mercury is that sharp, penetrating, pure, and Aetherial Body; that Aerial,
Subtle, and Spiritual Substance, the next Instrument of Life and Form.

18 Sulphur is that moist, sweet, oily, viscuous Substance, the food of heat
endued with a glutinative Quality.

19 Sal, is that salt, dry and purely terrene quality, representing the Nature
of Salt, endued with wonderful Virtues, having power to dissolve, coagulate,
cleanse, evacuate, and to perform such like actions.

20 The Visible Elements are two; one dry, which is the Earth; the other moist,
which is the Water.

21 The Earth is a Body separated by the Water from Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury;
It is called Terra damnata, Ashes, and Caput mortuum.

22 The Water is an insipid phlegm, destitute both of Sal and Sulphur, only
moistening, without any manifest strength or force.

23 There are two Elements then you see, Earth and Water.

24 The Air, seeing it cannot be separated, is therefore mixed with Sulphur, or
more especially with Mercury.

25 We acknowledge no other Fire, than that which they call in English the Sky;
the Greeks Ether, from burning.

26 The Heaven is then the fourth Formal or Essential Element, or rather the
fourth Essence extracted from Elements and Principles.

You have the Principles and Elements: The Qualities follow.

Chap. 4. Of both first and second Qualities.
1 QUality is an Affection of Body which demonstrates what it is, or the Form
which moves the Senses.

2 Qualities are either the first, because they are in Elements and Simple
Bodies: or such as arise from the first, and are called Compounds.

3 Quality, is either manifest or hidden.

4 Manifest and first, is either Active, as Heat and Cold: or Passive, as
Dryness and Moisture.

5 Heat is the first Quality which heateth.

6 Cold is the first Quality which cools.

7 Moisture is the first Quality which moistneth.

8 Dryness is the first Quality which dries.

9 The Heaven, according to Plato and the Astrologers, is the first Principle
of Heat: according to the Peripateticks, it is Elementary Fire.

10 You have the first Qualities: Those which arise from them follow: And they
are either Simple or Mixed.

11 Simple, are such which principally consist from the first, as

1 Rarity and Lightness, from Heat, which moves upwards. 2 Thickness, from
Cold; which moves downwards. 3 Softness and Thinness, from moisture; which
yields to touching. 4 Hardness, from Dryness; which resists touching.
12 You have the Simple Qualities; the Mixed follow, which are, Taste, Smell, and
Color.

13 Taste, is a Quality arising from a straining of an Earthy Body through a
Moist, by the force of Heat.

14 It is double, Mean and Extreme.

15 Mean, causes Sweetness and Fatness, consisting of an hot and moist Quality.

16 Extreme is that which shows,

1 More Heat, as sharp, bitter, and Salt. 2 Remiss Heat, or rather Cold, as
Tart, Austere, and Sower.
17 A sharp taste proceeds from strong heat, and thin dryness, as in Pepper,
Onions, etc.

18 Bitter, has not so subtle a Dryness, nor yet so strong an heat, as in
Wormwood.

19 A Salt taste, has a thicker Dryness, and less Heat, as in Salt.

20 A Tart taste, consists of very much Cold, or else of very remiss Heat and
Dryness, as in Crabs, Verjuyce, and wild Pears.

21 Austere, consists of less Coldness and Dryness, as in our English Grapes.

22 Sour, consists of a thin dryness, and mean cold, as in Vinegar.

23 You have the Taste; the Smell follows:

Smell. is a Quality arising from the straining of Moisture through Dryness,
caused by Heat.

24 It Is either Mean, as Sweet and Fat; Or Extreme, in which,

1 By greater Heat, it is Sharp, Bitter and Salt 2 By remiss Heat, it is Tart,
Austere, and Sour.
25 You have the Smell; the Color follows:

Color (according to Philip Melancton) is mixture of Transparant Bodies with
Opacous.

26 It is either Simple, or Mixed.

27 Simple is that which immediately consists from the qualities.

28 It is either exactly Mean, as Redness; or less Mean, as other Colors.

29 You have the the Manifest Qualities; the Hidden follow: Which are certain
special Virtues, which Physicians can give no Reason for.

30 These are twofold, which the Learned call Idiocratia, and Pathema.

31 Idiocratia, is a Property working by it self, for which a Reason cannot be
given; neither does it call for help from any thing else. And so Fennel cures
the Eyes, and Peony the Fallingsickness.

32 Pathema consists in Sympathy and Antipathy: Sympathy, is a mutual Love one
thing has with another.

Antipathy, is a Hatred in the like Nature: Both of them are Natural, and may
clearly be seen both in Living Creatures, Plants and Minerals.

And now by the leave of my Author: I would fain demand of some of the Rabbis
of our times, Whether God when he made the Creation, made not a Rational piece
of Work? If so, Whether a Reason may not be given for every thing in the
Creation? If that be granted me too, then, What hidden Virtue can there be in
things? I cannot endure such sleepy businesses which are maintained by few, the
Brats of Dr. Ignorance, and Dr. Laziness excepted.

33 You have the Principles, Elements, and Qualities of the Dogmatists, which
Hermetical Philosophers very ingeniously comprehend in Principles, Visible and
Invisible. Mixture and Generation arising from these now follows.

Chap. 5. Of Mixture and Generation in the General.
1 HEre come Two things to be considered:

1 General: That which is needful to Generation and Putrefaction, as Alteration
and Mixture. 2 Special: as Generation and Putrefaction, or the Temperature
which comes from Mixture and Alteration.
2 Alteration, is a Motion or Effect whereby another quality is procured.

3 And it is either Simple or Compound.

4 That is Simple which contains but one quality in it, and operates either in
Actives or Passives.

5 In Actives, it is a Heating, which is an Alteration whereby the Cold is
expelled, or else a cooling, whereby Heat is served with the same Sauce.

6 In Passives, it is a moistning, whereby Dryness is converted into Moisture:
or else a Drying, whereby Moisture is changed into Dryness.

7 A Compound Alteration is that which contains more qualities in it self, and
it is called Concoction.

8 Concoction, to wit, of mixed things (for the Concoction of Living Creatures
is another manner of business) is an Alteration tending to Perfection.

9 It is Threefold, Maturation, Elixation, and Assation.

10 Maturation, is a Concoction, by which the Fruits of Trees and Plants wax
ripe.

11 Elixation, is a Concoction made by the Heat and moisture of a thing which
is within it self; as things putrefie.

12 Assation, is a Concoction made by external Heat and Dryness, as Meat is
roasted.

Chap. 6. Of Mixture according to the Opinion of the Dogmatists, and Hermetical
Philosophers.
FIrst, According to the Opinion of the Dogmatists: 1 Mixture is an Union of
Bodies to be mixed for Alteration. 2 In matters of Passion, it consists in
quality or substance. Matters Active, are employed in acting. 3 The four
Elements are in all mixed Bodies according to form and quality.
Secondly, According to Hermetical Philosophers.
1 They can by no means close with this Doctrine; for they demand (seeing
Mixture is a certain Motion) Who is the Mover? By what Powter ^he Elements tend
to Mixture in such just (...)

2 The Mover is a Vital Principle endued with Knowledge, the Form, Species,
Seed, Constellation by whose Power and Knowledge such Divine Offices of Mixture
are administered.

3 Transplantation is a certain accident of Mixture and Generation, when not
that which is intended, but another thing is Generated: And this comes to pass
two ways:

First, By a confusion of Seed; and so of a Horse and a she Ass a Mule is
engendered: Or the Seeds of many Plants put close together, will produce but one
Plant. Secondly, By Degeneration, when not the same Seed comes up which you
Sow; so Wheat often degenerates into Darnel.
Chap. 7. Of Generation according to the opinion of Dogmatists and Hermetical
Philosophers.
1 GEneration is a Mutation from qualities, having respect to the Nature of
each Subject.

2 For as Philip Melancton says, Heat being tempered with cold, and joined
with dryness and moisture, is a mixed body of al qualities and Elements.

3 Putrefaction is an Alteration bringing Corruption, from whence is bred
Consent.

4 Consent is a Transit of one thing into another by certain Nurseries,

5 According to Hermetical Philosophers. Generation is the progression of the
Seminal Spirit out of its Fountain and vital Principle into the Stage of the
World: whereby of Invisible it becomes Visible, and produces Color, Smell,
Taste, Heat, Cold, Moisture, Dryness. Magnitude, and Form, and all Ornaments of
Body; and by this Renovation maintains a perpetuity of its own Species.

6 Whatsoever new things we see every day, they had a being before in the Seeds.

7 Whatsoever we see corrupted here every day, they are not brought again to
nothing, but return again to their Fountains from whence they came.

8 For this cause are Elements necessary to Generation, which are the Wombs
that contain the Seeds, and Principles of al Bodies.

9 The Places, Elements and Bodies must be agreeable to the Seeds; for the
Seeds themselves have this Power, to find out what is agreeable to their own
Natures; and therefore such Seeds grow Naturally in hot places, such in Cold,
such in Moist and such in Dry.

Sulphur is best found in one place, Mercnry in another, and Salt in a third.

10 The Seeds perform their Progress and Operation by the help of the sensible
Mechanical spirits.

11 The Mechanical Spirits are such as are adorned with an inbred Knowledge, and
instructed with an Artificial Workmanship, whereby they cause Taste, Color, Smell
Order, and Proportion in Natural things: He that dreams of Spirits without
these endowments, dreams of nothing but Vapor and Smoke.

12 In this inferior Globe, are three famous differences of Generation; namely,
of Living Creatures, Plants, and Minerals.

13 In Living Creatures, the Seminal Matter is contained in the Natural Balsom;
in the Vital, Sulphur; in the Vital spirit, in the Mummy, in the Radical and
first matter, etc.

14 The Generations of the superior Globe, are certain, but far different. For
in the Celestial Spears, they continue perfect til the Consumation of al
things.

15 Generation comes not by Putrefaction as people think: Putrefaction does but
administer heat, whereby the vital virtue is stirred up to action: For as in the
Earth it were a Madness to think that one Plant was changed into another by
Putrefaction: so above the Earth, Living Creatures beget their like, not by
Putrefaction, but by the Vital spirit of the seed.

Chap. 8. Of Temperaments.
1 TEmperament is either the end of the Mixture, or the Form of the thing
mixed, or the Principle of Natural Faculty.

2 The Soul makes use of the Temperament as an Instrument to perform its
Actions.

3 Temperament is the Principle without which actions cannot be performed: Take
away the Temperature of a Particular part, and the Natural Actions thereof
cease also.

4 The Temperament of Living Creatures is one thing, and of Creatures without
life another; and yet some question whether there be any Creatures without life
or not; and my self (by the leave of my Author) could afford to be one of them.

5 The Temperament of Living Creatures is either Total or Partial.

6 The Total, is either Influential or Radical.

7 Influential arises from the Elements.

8 Radical, is the Justice, or due giving to every one his own.

9 Justice, is Simple or Compound.

10 Simple is Fourfold, Hot, Cold, Dry, and Moist.

11 Compound is Fourfold, Hot and Moist, Hot and Dry, Cold and Moist, Cold and
Dry.

12 Temperament is to be considered in respect,

1 Of Sex. 2 Of Age. 3 Of Place or Region. 4 Of the Seasons of the Year.
13 It is called Temperament,

1 For its Excellency. 2 Absulutely, or Comparatively. 3 By act or power of
acting. 4 By it self, or by accident.
Also it is either Healthful or Sickly, either alone by itself, or with Flux of
Matter.

Fluxes of Matter which hinder Temperament are Blood, Choler, Phlegm
Melancholy.

14 Al these, Hermetical Philosophers call Salts, which are of diverse abilities.
And thus much of the Common Affections: The Species follows, to wit, A Body
with Life.

A Body with Life.
1 It is either not sensible as Plants and Metals: or sensible, as Living
Creatures.

2 Living Creatures are either Rational, or Irrational.

3 Irrational, are Beasts; of which, some have Blood, and some have none.

4 Such as have Blood, some have Feet, and some have none.

5 Of such as have Feet, some have two, as Birds; some have four, as Beasts.

6 Of such as have no Feet, some have Fins, as Fishes; some no Fins, as
Serpents. Of al these in Order.

The second Part of the first Tome. Of Living Bodies, not Sensible, and
Sensible.
1 A Living Body not sensible, is that which we call Vegetative.

2 It is either perfectly Living, as Plants; or imperfectly, as Metals.

3 The Doctrine of Plants is called Botanical.

LIB. I.
Of Art Botanical.
1 ART Botanical, is the Anatomy of Plants. 2 The Instruments to be compared
for this Art. as also for all other Arts, are Skill and Exercise.

3 The Parts of this Art are Two, The showing the Reason of them, and the
History of them.

The showing the Reason of Plants.
1 It is the first part of Art Botanical, which finds out the common Natures of
Plants from their Causes.

2 A Plant is a Vegetable Essence, growing for the most part out of the Earth
or Water.

3 Its parts are two, A Body, and a Soul, by which the Body is nourished,
increased, and brings forth seed.

4 The Kinds of Plants are two, Simple and Compound.

The simple are Garden and Wild.

5 The parts of a Plant are like or unlike.

6 As in men there are Ages, so there are in Plants, and also in Herbs; namely,
before they run to Flower: in flower, in seed, or Fruit, and when they shed
their seed or Fruit.

7 Of Herbs, some are nourishing, as Wheat, Barley, Oats; some less nourishing,
as Violets, Marjoram, Lavender; some Medicinal, as Saffron, Ginger, Zedoary,
etc. You have had the Reason; the History of Plants follows.

LIB. II
Of the History of Plants.
1 THe History of Plants, is the second part of Art Botanical: and it treats of
the several kinds of Plants.

2 We divide the whole History of Plants into ten parts: namely,

1 Fungous. 2 Mossie. 3 Reeds. 4 Pulses. 5 Solid. 6 Such as stain not. 7 Such
as do stain. 8 Such as are of the Nature of Poppies. 9 Such as are propped up.
10 Such as strengthen.
3 Of these, some are more rude, as such as are Fungous and Mossie; others more
absolute and perfect, as the other eight.

1 Such as are Fungous, contain Toad-stools, so called of their killing
property: Fungus, a funere dictus. 2 Mosses, contains both such as have narrow
and broad Leaves. 3 Reeds, of which sort are some Grasses, Reeds Bul-rushes,
Jacynth, Daffodil, Saffion, Satyrion, Lillies, etc. 4 Under Pulses are all such
as bear their Fruit in Cods. 5 Such as are solid, are Fern, Ivy, etc. 6 Such as
stain not are Endive, Succory, Scabious, Carduus etc. 7 Such as stain, are
Housleek, St. John's wort, Spurge, Plantane, Mints, Arrach, (...), Beets. etc. 8
Under Poppies, are al sorts of Poppies, Mallows etc. 9 To such as are propped
up, belong Ivy, Sarsaparilla, Vines, Cucumers, all sorts of Climers. 10
Strengthening Plants, are Willow, Olive, Myrtle Bay, Oak etc.
4 You have Botanical Art: Exercise remains, which is done two ways; by
Analysis and Genesis.

5 In Plants, five things are especially to be regarded; Name, Color,
Gathering, Place, and Nature.

Thus you have a Body perfectly living in Plants, that which lives in Metals
follows.

LIB III
Of Metalography, or Knowledge of Metals.
1 MEtalography is the Anatomy of Metals.

2 Metal is a Body imperfectly Living, growing for the most part in the Veins
of the Earth.

3 Of Metals, some are more ducible, some less.

4 More Ducible are First and Second: First are, Quick silver and Brimstone:
The Second are, Natural or Artificial.

5 Natural are more precious, as Gold and Silver: or less precious, as Copper,
Iron, and Lead. Artificial, are Steel, Pewter, or Brass.

6 Metals less Ducible, are hard, or such as people throw.

7 Such as are hard, are some more precious, and such as are called Gems; or
such as are taken for Gems.

8 Of Gems, some have many colors, others but one. Such as have many Colors,
are either more or less Transparant.

9 More Transparant are Crystalline, Diamond, Sapphire, Emerald, Sardonix. Less
Transparant are either clear, as Carbuncles, Calcidony, Ruby, Topaz Jacynth: or
Opacous, as Corral, the Lodestone, Alectoris, and Lapis Lazuli.

10 Stones of one color are, Achates, Chrysopas Hematites, Chrysolite, Aetites,
Beril.

11 Stones improperly taken as Gems are,

1 Such as are taken from Creatures living in the Water, as Pearls, Crab's-eyes,
stones of the Perch, and Carp etc. 2 Such as are taken out of Land Creatures,
as those that are taken out of Snakes, Toads, Snails, Lapis Lincis, Bezoar etc.
3 Such as are taken out of flying Creatures, as Alectorius, or Cock stone;
Celidonius, or Swallows stone; the stone of a Vultur and Lapwing.
12 Metals which are thrown up and down, are some Common, others not Common.
Common are stones of al sorts, Sand, Flints etc.

Not Common are either,

1 Earths: as Terra Lemnia: Terra Armenia: Terra Sylesia: Chalk etc. 2 Or
Juyces made thick: as Amber: Alum: Salt: Bitumen: Vitriol etc. 3 Or things
made of Metals: as Stibium: Auripigmentum: Chrysocolla: Sanderach: Glass.
Another Division of Stones.
1 OF stones, some are more precious, some less. Those which are more precious,
alter by a quality Manifest or Hidden.

They that alter by a way Manifest do it according to the first or second
quality.

2 According to the first quality; they are cold

1 In the first Degree: as Jacynth: Sapphire: Emerald. 2 In the second Degree:
as Ruby: Carbuncle: Granate: Sardine. 3 In the fourth Degree: as Diamonds.
3 By the second manifest quality they resist Poison and Enchantment: as
Bezoar: Jacynth: Sapphire: Emerald: Carbuncle: Granate: Amethist.

4 Such as alter by a hidden quality: are Bezoar: Topaz: Snake-stone:
Cock-stone: Amethist: Lapis Nephriticus: Lapis Tyburonum.

5 Stones less precious are either altering or purging. Such as alter do it by
a way either Manifest or Hidden. Manifest by a first or second quality.

6 Such as alter by a first quality, are either hot: as Hematites: Pyrites:
Thyites: Smiris: Lapis Asius. Or cold: as Cristal: Lapis Phrigius: Lapis
Samius: Or dry: as Sand.

7 Such as alter by a second quality are binding: as Lapis Asius: Whetstone of
Naxos: Pumice stone. Or secondly, Emollient, as Alablaster, Jet, Lapis
Thracius. Or stupifying, as Jasper, Ophites, Memphites. Or clensing, as that
Arabic stone that dries up the Hemorrhoids. Or Glutinating, as Galactices,
Melites. Or Scarifying, as Galaxia. Or breaking the stone, as Lapis Lincis, and
Judaicus. Or retaining the Birth, as Lapis Aetitis being tied to the left Arm,
stays the Birth: Being boiled in Beer, or put into Bread, he that has stolen
any thing from you cannot either eat or drink. Or provoking the Terms, as the
stones of Oysters, a dram of them being taken in Wine. Or resisting Poison and
Enchantment, as Selenites, and Amyanthus. The Stone in the head of a Toad being
born about one, eases the pains of the Reins, and hinders the breeding of the
stone.

8 Stones less precious, altering by a hidden quality, are Spongites,
Pantarbes, which draws Gold as the Lodestone does Iron. Swallows stone,
Lodestone, the Powder whereof being drunk in Juice of Fennel cures the
Dropsy. All Stones found in the heads of any Fishes whatsoever, being beaten
into Powder, and drunk in Wine, break the stone in the Body of Man, and give
easy Labor to Women in Travel. The stone of a Vultur, and of a Lapwing, Lapis
Lyncurius, Coral, ten grains being given to an Infant in breast milk for the
first food it takes after it is born, keeps a Child from ever being troubled
with the Falling sickness.

Another Division of Stones.
OF Stones, some are Red, others Green, some Yellow, others Purple, some Black,
others White, and some of such a Color, we know not what denomination to give
it.

I. Stones of a Red Color, are 1 Anthracites, which burns like fire: being put
into the fire it cease burning; being sprinkled with Water, it burns again. 2
Baalagius. 3 Carbuncle. 4 One kind of the Swallows stone; for if you take young
Swallows out of their nest and cut them open before they touch the ground,
between the time they are hatched, and the next full Moon; you shall find two
little stones in their Ventricle, the one of which is Red, the other Black. The
Red cures Fevers, and causes love between people: The Black one being bound
under the Armpit, helps the Falling Sickness; or if you will, you may beat it
into Powder, and drink it in some Liquor, for the same use. 5 Red Coral is good
against the Falling Sickness. 6 Granate. 7 Hematites. 8 Red Jacynth. 9 Lychnis.
10 Ruby, which being worn in a Ring takes away evil Dreams. 11 Sardine; which
is an excellent Remedy against Poison, and vain Fears; and quickens the Wit. 12
Red Carniolus.
II. Stones of a Green Color. 1 One of the Sorts of Achates. 2 Lapis Armenius.
3 Beril. 4 Chrysolite; being worn in a Gold Ring, it takes away Melancholy. 5
Chrysophras; it is a stone hard to come by: it shines in the dark, and
strengthens the heart and Sight. 6 Jasper, takes away Fevers and Dropsies; it
wonderfully helps Conception in Women; and yet makes a man but dull in the
sports of Venus. 7 Lapis Lazuli, rids the body of melancholy Afflictions. 8
Indian Pearls, which cause joy. 9 Indian Sapphire. 10 Emeralds, which are found
in the Silver Mines in great Britain, and are profitable against Poisons.
III. Stones of a Yellow Color. 1 Clear Carniolus, which is of the Color of
Gold: being born about one, it represseth Anger. 2 Chrysoberillus, defends men
from their Enemies, and makes man and wife live quietly together: being beaten
into Powder and taken inwardly, it helps the weakness of the Stomach and Liver,
helps the Asthma. 3 Yellow Amber. 4 One kind of Jacinth. 5 Yellow Jet, which
being born about one, helps idle Fancies; being laid in steep three days in
Water, and the Water drunk, it gives a quick deliverance to Women. 6 Lyncurius,
which is of the color of Amber; It is engendered by the Urine of a Lynx; helps
pains in the Stomach, Fluxes; it draws Iron out of Wounds, being held to them;
it opens obstructions, and loosens the Belly. 7 Topaz, being put into boiling
Water, cools it so, that you may put in your hands and take it out: it stops
Lust, and stays the bleeding of Wounds. 8 A Water-Snake hung up by the tail,
casts a stone out of his mouth, which stone being bound to the Navil of one
that has the Dropsy, presently draws out all the Water.
IV. Stones of a Purple Color: 1 One sort of Achates. 2 Amethist, being bound
to the Navil of one that is drunk, instantly it makes him sober: it drives away
troubled thoughts, and makes men a little more Rational. 3 Calcidony, both Male
and Female, help men against sadness and foolish apparitions: The stone shines
like a Star.
V. Stones of a Black Color. 1 One sort of Achates, which is spotted with white
or yellow Veins; It cures the striking of a Scorpion, or the biting of a
Serpent, being applied to the place: being taken inwardly, it increases
Eloquence, and good will with men, but it causes many Dreams. 2 Jet, being
taken inwardly, it helps the fits of the Mother. 3 One of the Swallows stones
which is black; being bound under the left Arm it gives Men favor with great
Men, and is a present remedy for Madness and Falling Sickness.
VI. Stones of a White Color. 1 One kind of Achates. 2 Absynthius 3 Diamond,
which being worn on the left Arm, takes away vain fears, as of Spirits,
Hobgoblins etc. 4 Alectorius, being a stone taken out of the Head of a Cock,
Hen, or Capon of nine years of age: It increases Lust. 5 White Onyx, the best
comes out of India, the worst from Capadocia, which is of a Honey color, and
not Transparant: It causes Victory over Enemies, admirable true Dreams, opens
obstructions, and eases pains in the Stomach being applied to it. 6 Amyantes.
7 Andromata. 8 Anthrasites, that which comes from the Red Sea, and is hard like
a Diamond: It helps Madness. 9 Lapis Armenius. 10 Lapis Aetites. 11 Asbestos,
coming from Arabia, which once being kindled, it cannot be put out. 12 Azrius,
coming from Alexandria: It helps Ulcers, Fistulaes, Wounds, and the Gout. 13 A
sterites. 14 White Coral. 15 Jacynth, which is of three sorts, Red, Purple, and
White. The Red is cold, and strengthens the Body, begets Friendship, is very
good against Poison or Witchcraft. 16 Galaxias. 17 Galactites, which being
beaten into Pouper, moistens the Mouth like Milk: Being hung about the Neck, so
as it touch the Breasts, makes Women Fruitful: Being bound to their Thigh,
itquickens their Labor: being mixed with Water and Salt, and sprinkled amongst
your Sheep in the Evening, it makes them give much Milk, and cures them of the
Scab. 18 Sardonix, stays Lust. 19 Selenites: In the night time it is found
just like the Moon, and increases and decreaseth as she does.
Lastly; Stones of an uncertain color. 1 Bezoar, which is held to be the Tear
of a Stag: for when he has drawn Serpents out of their holes with his Breath,
this grows in the corners of his Eyes; therefore it is a Divine Antidote against
al Poison and Pestilence. 2 Cantarius. 3 Carcinas. 4 Chelonites. 5 Cristal: It
quenches Thirst being held under the Tongue: being beaten into very fine
powder, if a Woman take half a dram of it at a time, it increases her Milk;
and hung about the neck it helps the Vertigo. 6 Draconites, a stone taken out
of the head of a live Dragon. 7 Psamianthos. 8 Pardalios. 9 Syrenites, a stone
found in the Bladder of a Wolf. 10 Smyris, a stone as hard as a Diamond: It
strengthens the Gums. 11 Sagda. 12 Lapis Samius, a stone of a contrary Nature
to Aetites: It helps the Vertigo, and strengthens the Brain; being bound to the
Thigh, or the Foot, it hinders the Birth; but being bound to the Arm it hastens
it. 13 Sea Sand, one that has a Dropsy being set up to the Neck in it, it
quickly cures him. 14 Toadstone, being held to a Wound made by a venomous
Beast, cures it to admiration. 15 Lapis Nephriticus: It is brought from New
Spain, and is of a darkish green color: being worn about the Body, so as it
touch the Skin, it breaks, and brings away the Stone both in the Reins and
Bladder: An Angel can scarce do it with more speed or ease. 16 Lapis Tyburonum.
A stone taken out of a strong fighting Fish in the Red Sea: helps the stone and
difficulty of Urine. 17 Geodes, a stone that comes out of Saxony. 18 Memphites.
19 Ophites. 20 Lapis Arabicus, dries up the Hemorrhoids. 21 Lapis Lyncis. 22
Lapis Judaicus. 23 A stone that is found in a Sponge. 24 Ostrasites. 25
Amyanthus, resists Poisons.

Metals.
1 SOme alter by Conservation, some by Corruption.

Those which alter by Conservation, do it by a Quality either Manifest or
Hidden. They which alter by a way Manifest, do it by a first or second Quality.

By a first Quality they are Temperate, as Gold; or Intemperate, namely, Hot
and Dry, or Cold.

2 Those which are Hot and Dry, are so either

1 In the second Degree, as Iron, and Crocus Martis, Cynnabaris. 2 In the third
Degree; as Vert-de-greece, Burnt Brass, Scales of Brass, Alum, Salt Niter,
Brimstone, Chalsites. Or 3 In the fourth Degree; as Vitriol, Sandarach,
Chrysocolla, Misy, Sorry, Melanteria.
3 Intemperately Cold and dry, are either

1 In the first Degree; as Silver, Litharge of Silver. 2 In the second Degree;
as Quicksilver, Lead, Plumbago, washed Lead, burnt Lead, Ceruss.
4 Altering by a second Quality, are

1 Binding; as Alum, Tutty, Pompholix, Vitriol, Spodium, Antispodium. 2
Glutinative; as Lead, Alum, Cadmia, etc.
5 Some by corrupting are venomous; as Quicksilver, Auripigmentum, Mortar of a
Wall, Litharge, Ceruss, Sandarach.

Earths.
1 SOme expel Poison; as Bole Armoniack, Terra Lemnia, Terra Samia, etc.

2 Al Earths Cool.

3 Thus much of Living Bodies not sensible: Sensible Living Creatures follow.

4 Living Creatures are either Irrational, as bruit Beasts: or Rational, as Man.

But whether Beasts be Rational or no, is more than my Author can tell: I am
deceived if he do not contradict himself in this very particular, for in his
first Book, Chap. 8. he confesses that Man learned both Physic and Alchymy
from the Beasts: Is not he that teaches more knowing than he that is taught?
If my Author be minded to leave the Truth, and follow Aristotle, he should have
said so. But to follow my Authors Method, and to leave his failings.

The Doctrine of Bruits is called Zoography: but the special knowledge of Men
Physiologie.

LIB. IV.
Of Zoography.
1 ZOography is the Anatomy of Bruits.

2. Of Bruits, some are Insecta, others whole.

3 Insecta, are either such as have Wings, or such as have none.

4 Such as have Wings, are such as

1 Have but two Wings, as Flies, Gnats, Butter-flyes. 2 Such as have four
Wings, as Bees Wasps, Grasshoppers, Beetles, Cantharides.
5 Such as have no Wings are such as go upon the ground, as Emmets, Spiders,
Palmer Worms, Woodlice, Locusts, Moths, Fleas.

Of these some walk, some creep, some leap.

6 Such as are whole, are such as either live in one place or in diverse.

7 Such as live in diverse places, are such as live both on the Land, and in the
Water.

8 Such are Otters, Water Rats, Sea Horses, Crocodiles, Crabs, Frogs.

9 Such as live only in one place; are

1 Such as fly, as Birds. 2 Such as live upon the Earth, as four footed Beasts.
3 Such as live in the Water, as Fishes.
Of Flying Creatures.
1 These that fly in the Air are called Birds.

2 Besides those parts which they have common with other living Creatures, they
have some peculiar to themselves: as

1 Instead of a Mouth, some have a crooked Beak, as Kites, Hawks, Eagles,
Parrots. 2 Some have a straight Bil, as Crows, Ravens, Mag-pies, Storks. 3 Some
have a broad Bill, as Ducks and Geese. 4 Some have a sharp Bill, as
Wood-pickers, Thrushes and Finches. 5 Some have short Necks, as Crows etc. 6
Some have long Necks, as Storks Cranes, Swans, etc. 7 Some their Tails stick
out right, as Hawks, Black-birds, Mag pies, etc. 8 Some their Tails are
crooked, as Cocks. 9 Some their Tails stick upright, as Ostridges 10 Some walk,
and some hop. 11 Some seldom fly at all, as Peacocks, Hens, etc.
Of four footed Beasts that go upon the Earth.
1 They are either with Horns, or without Horns.

Such as have Horns, are either greater or lesser.

2 The greater are either Domestical, as Bulls and Cows: or Savage, as Stags,
Unicorns, Rhinocerots Wild Asses.

3 Of Beasts without Horns, some are Domestical, and others Savage. Domestical
are either greater, as a Horse, an Ass, a Mule: or lesser, as a Sheep, a Hog, a
Cat, a Dog.

4 Savage Beasts are greater or lesser. The greater are, a Lion, an Elephant, a
Dromedary, a Leopard, a Wolf, a Cammel, a Pardel, a Bear, a Tiger, etc. The
lesser are, a Fox, an Ape a Dormouse, a Hedg-hog, a Mouse, a Coney, etc.

Of Creatures living in the Water.
1 A Fish is a Creature of a cold and moist substance, long Body and lives only
in the Water.

2 They have no Necks, but their Heads are joined to their Breasts: Their Liver
is usually divided into two parts. But whereas my Author says, they have no
Lungs, he is mightily besides the Cushion; for many River Fish have Lungs;
neither can they live with out breathing, as Carps, Pikes. etc. He was mistaken
before in saying Bees have but four Wings, or else I am mistaken in thinking
they have six.

3 Of Fishes, some live in the Sea, Some in the Rivers; some have scales, some
have none.

4 Thus much of Zoography: In which my Author has taken much pains to little
purpose.

Tome I. Part III. Of special Physiologie: Or, the Subject and Object of the
Physician.
1 SPecial Physiologie is the Theorical part of Medicine, and treats of things
according to Nature.

2 The things which constitute our Nature are, Elements Temperaments, Humors,
Spirits, Faculties, and Parts.

3 The common Affections of Man are to be considered as Elements and
Temperaments, of which before. Or else the special.

4 Special parts of Man are, Soul and Body. The knowledge concerning the Soul is
called Psychologia: The knowledge concerning the Body is called Anatomy.

LIB. I.
Of the Faculties and Functions of the Soul both General and Special.
1. PSychologie is the knowledge of the Soul.

2 The Soul is Proper or Common.

3 Common, is either more or less Common: More Common is that which we call
Vegetable, and is in all living Bodies. Less Common is that which we call
Sensible, and is only in Men and Beasts, and not in Plants. But by my Authors
leave, Why not in Plants? I think Aristotle has led all the World into Errors.
If it were my present scope, I could prove both by Scripture and Reason, that
Man consists of three parts, Spirit, Soul, and Body: But to let this pass, Our
London Gentlemen that Nurse Curiosities in their Gardens, know well enough, that
diverse Plants are sensible, and few that have written Herbals, but have written
of them. Besides, it is apparent, That vulgar Herbs which we tread upon when we
walk the Fields are not only sensible of what is present, but also have a
fore-knowledg of a thing before it comes; else what is the reason the Leaves both
of Cynkfoyl and Trefoyl usually appear not only disordered, but also discolored
twenty four hours before a storm comes. It were a good thing if men would first
learn to know themselves, they might know the better what is in Herbs
afterward. But to return.

4 The Soul of Man consists in Faculties and Functions.

5 Of these Faculties, some are incited in Man, others Influential.

6 The Influential parts are three, Animal, Vital, Natural.

7 The Animal is double, Sensitive and Intellective.

8 The Sensitive is either Apprehensive or Motive. The Sensitive is called
Sense.

9 The Senses are Internal or External.

10 The External are five, Seeing, Hearing, Tasting, Smelling, and Feeling,

11 The Internal Senses are, Common sense, Fancy, and Memory.

12 Motive senses are twofold, Appetite, and Motive according to place.

13 Appetite is threefold.

1 Natural, as the desire of Meat and Drink. 2 Affectional, as the Motion of
the Will. 3 The desire of Pleasure.
14 The Intellective Animal Virtue is called Understanding, and consists either
in doing or suffering.

15 Of the Vital Faculty are three differences.

1 The Vital Spirit. 2 The Pulsifying Spirit. 3 The Faculty causing Anger.
16 Of the Natural Faculties, some are more, some less Principal, or
administering.

17 The more Principal are three.

1 Nourishing, which preserves the Body. 2 Increasing, which brings it to its
just bigness. 3 Generative, which begets its like, thereby preserving the
Species.
18 Less Principal or Administering, are subservient, some of them to
Nourishment, others to Increase, and a third sort to Generation.

19 To Nourishment and Increase are four subservient.

1 Digestion. 2 Attraction. 3 Retention. 4 Expulsion.
20 That which peculiarly administers to Generation, is the seed.

21 You have the Faculties. The Functions follow, which are but the Eeffects of
the Faculties.

22 The Functions are either Ingrafted or Influential.

23 The Influential are three, Animal, Vital, Natural.

24 The Animal Function is called Knowledge, and is threefold, Understanding,
Sensation, Motion.

25 Understanding, is the Apprehension, Composition, and Division of a thing;
as also Discourse, which is a Reasoning or Ordination.

26 Sensation is either Internal or External.

27 The Internal Species of it are, Judging, Composition and Conservation of a
thing: The External are, Dividing, or Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting, or
Feeling of it.

28 Motion is double, Appetite, and change of Place.

29 Appetite, because it is a Motion of the Mind, is not properly called a
Motion of the Body, but rather of the Will, and ought to be directed by Reason;
of which before.

30 Mutation of place, is either Total, or Partial.

31 Total, is Going, Flying, Swimming, Creeping.

32 Partial, is Breathing, and Pulse, of which latter we shall speak in its
proper place.

33 Breathing is a mixed Action, partly Animal, partly Natural. Its parts are,
Inspiration, and Expiration: One of which is Free, the other Coactive.

34 The Function of the Vital Faculty is called Life.

25 Life is distinguished into three Ages, Increasing, standing at a stay, and
Decreasing.

26 Increasing Age contains, Infancy, Childhood, and Youth; standing at a stay
is called Manhood.

37 Decreasing is called Old Age, and is divided into Gravity and
Decrippedness, or Doting.

38 The Functions of the Vital Spirit according to Galen are three.

1 The Generation of Vital Spirit. 2 The stirring up of the Pulses. 3 The
stirring up of the Affections.
Of the two first of which we shall speak in their proper places.

39 The Affections are either Simple or Mixed.

40 The Simple are, the Object of Good or Evil; and of both of them, either
present or to come: The Object of Good stirs up the Will.

41 This happens when things fall prosperously either with our selves or others:
If the business fall well with our selves, it moves Joy, Gladness, Vaporing,
which should do so when it falls well with others, but it usually produces Envy.

42 The Object of present Evil is grief of mind; the species or differences of
which are, Affliction, Sadness, Grief, Desperation, Pain, Envy, Lamentation,
Mourning, Care.

43 The Object of Good to come, is Hope; the Companions of which are, Ambition,
Covetousness, Desire, Anger, Lust: The Concomitants of anger in this Nature
are, Bitterness, Cruelty, Wrath, Hatred.

44 The Objects of Evil to come are, Fear, Astonishment, Dread, Slothfulness,
Quivering, Horror, Terror.

45 Mixed Affections are, Anger as it is joined with Sadness, Hatred,
Shamefacedness, or Zeal.

46 The Natural Function is commonly called Vegetative; and it is more
Principal or less Principal.

47 More Principal is Nourishment, Increasing, or Generation.

48 The Parts of Generation are either Common or Proper. Common are,
Copulation, Conception, Perfection of the Child, and bringing of it forth into
the World.

49 The Proper parts of Generation are,

1 Uniting of the Seed. 2 A Delineation of the Parts. 3 A filling of the Parts
with Flesh. 4 An absolute forming of the Child.
50 Natural Functions less Principal are, Attraction, Retention, Digestion,
Expulsion.

51 Appetite, is either of Nourishment, or, of Copulation. Appetite of
Nourishment, is either of Meat, or of Drink: Of Meat, is called Hunger; of
Drink, Thirst.

52 Digestion is either Natural or Artificial: Natural is either Public or
Private.

And thus much of Psychologie.

LIB II.
Of the Anatomy of the Body.
1 ANatomy teaches the Dissection of the Body of Man.

2 The Body of Man is a Mass made of Earth, and other Elements which we see and
feel, and is not much unlike to the Body of Beasts.

3 The Parts thereof are two, Containing, and Contained.

4 The Containing are such as have Form and solid Substance, and consist of
themselves without the help of any other parts.

5 To find out the parts Contained, is required Knowledge and Dissection. The
Difference of the Parts is the Object of Knowledge.

6 Of the Parts, some are Similar and Simple, others Dissimilar and Compound.

Similar Parts.
1 Similar Parts are Ten.

1 The Skin. 2 Membrana. 3 Fibrae, or strings. 4 Bones. 5 Cartilages. 6 Nerves.
7 Arteries. 8 Veins. 9 Ligaments. 10 Muscles.
To these you may ad (if you please) Fat, Marrow Hair, Nails, etc.

2 Of these, some are Properly so called, others Improperly.

3 Properly so called, are such as are Spermatical, or Fleshy.

4 Spermatical are either simply such, or Secundum quid.

5 Simply such, are either softer or harder.

6 Softer are the Skin, Membranae and Fibrae.

7 The Skin is either the outward or Scarf-skin; or inward, and true Skin.

8 The Membranae are either with Names, or without Names.

9 With Names, are such as are Common, or Proper to certain parts.

10 Common are such as compass the Flesh, the Muscles, and the Bones.

11 Proper to certain parts or particular, are such as are subserviant to the
three Ventricles, viz. The Highest, Lowermost, or Middlemost: Or if I would
speak a little plainer than my Author does, I would say, the Brain, Liver, and
Heart.

12 Those of the uper Vehtricle are some within the Skul, some without, and
some, belonging to the Face. Without the Skul is the Pericraneum. Within the
Skul the Pia and Dura Matter.

13 The Membranae of the Face, are either of the Eyes, or of the Ears. Of the
Eyes there are seven, and they are called by these Names,

1 Adnata. 2 Cornea. 3 Aranea. 4 Innominata. 5 Retina. 6 Vitria. 7 Uvia.
As for the Ears, they have but one only Membrana, and that is called Timpana.
Anglice, A Drum.

And now give me leave to leave my Author a little, and tell my Country men what
use this same Membrana is of: I would fain make them wise; if I could but do
so, I should think I had lived long enough. The Membrana (which is but a kind
of skin) reflects the outward sound to the Internal Senses. When a Man speaks,
the voice comes from him, But how come you to hear it? Thus: As a House casts
an Echo to a Voice; so this skin casts the Echo of all Voices to the Senses:
And that which causes Deafness, is an impediment lying either within or
without this Skin.

14 The Membranae of the middle Ventricle are six.

1 Diaphragma. 2 M^diastinum. 3 Pleura. 4 Pericardium. 5 Sygmoides. 6
Trisulsae.
15 Those of the lower Ventricle are nine, and called by these nine names,

1 Allantoides. 2 Amnios. 3 Chorion. 4 Darton. 5 Erythroides. 6 Mesenterium. 7
Omentum. 8 Peritoneum. 9 Scrotum.
16 The Tunicle of the Arteries is either superior, or inferior.

17 The Fibrae are either constituting or subservient.

18 Constituting are those which make up the substance of the Muscles, and they
take their Original, partly from the Nerves, partly from the Ligaments.

19 Such as are subservient are, Direct, Oblick, and Transverse.

20 The harder spermatical Parts, are Bones and Cartilages.

The Bones.
1 The Bones of the Body of Man, take them Universally are 318. Of which, some
are of the Ventricles, others of the Limbs.

The Ventricles have gotten one hnndred and forty: Of which, the uper Ventricle
has some the middle others, and the lower Ventricle the remainder.

2 The uper Ventricle has seventy and seven: of which, the Head has got some,
and the Neck the rest. The Head has fifty nine; of which, the Skul has some,
and the Cheek other some.

3 The Skul has fourteen, to wit, Each Ear three, called by name, Inchus,
Malleus, and Stapes. The Forehead: 1 The hinder part of the Head: 1 The
Temples, 2 The Crown of the Head. 2 And those two which are called Sphoenoides
and E^hmoides.

4 The Cheeks have got forty five; whereof some are superior, some inferior,
and some common. The superior are twelve: the inferior only one (but that is a
good big one.) Those which are common to both are the Teeth, which are, or
should be in Number thirty two.

5 The Bones of the Neck are eighteen; of which, eleven belong to the Os Hyois;
the word is derived from o to gape. (Take notice of the Ignorance of our
Chyrurgions: Ask them what Hyois is, they can show it you, but cannot tell what
it is.) The rest are the Vertebrae, or joints of the Neck and are in Numbea
seven; of which, some have Names, and the rest have none. Those which have
Names are called, Atlas, Epitropheus, and Axis.

6 The Bones of the middle Ventricle or Breast are forty three in Number, and
thus distinguished: 1 Clavicula on each side: 1 Scapula on each side. The
Sternum, or Bone before the Breast, which is three fold. The Vertebrae, or
Joints are twelve. The Ribs are a Dozen; of which, the seven upermost are
called true; the other five, Bastard Ribs.

7 The lower Ventricle has twenty Bones. Os Coccix, three fold: Os Coxendix
two: Illium two. The Vertebrae, or Joins of the Loins are five; of which, two
of them were Christened, namely the first, which is called Nephrites; and the
last, which is called Asphalites. All the rest have no Names.

8 You have the bones of the Ventricle: The Bones of the Limbs follow which are
in number one hundred, seventy, and eight. Of these, the Hands have gotten
some, and the Feet the rest.

9 The Bones of the Hands are eighty six which the right Hand and the left,
have equally shared between them; namely, forty three apiece: viz. Between the
Shoulder and the Elbow, one: Carpus, or the Wrest eight: Cubitus, or the Bone
between the Elbow and the Wrest, two; the greater of which is called Vlna the
lesser, Radius. The Fingers fifteen: The Metacarpus, or distance between the
Wrest and the Fingers, has four: The Bones called Sesamina are twelve; and one
between the bone of the Wrest, and Metacarpus. We will confess Dr. Read says
there is but sixty: but we will leave the matter to be judged by Dr. Experience.

10 The Bones of the Feet are ninety two according to my Author (but according
to Alexander Read but sixty four) I shall follow my Author now, and leave Dr.
Read for the present.

Of the Bones of the Feet, the right side has gotten one half, and left the
other for the Left. The right side has one Bone in the Thigh: 1 Patella: 2 In
the Knee. Two in the Leg: of which, one is called Phibula, and the other Tibia.
In the Instep seven, called by these Names. 1 Astragatus: 2 Calx: 3 Naviculare:
4 Cubiformae: 5 Cuneiformae, the lesser greater, and middle. The Metatarsus (or
distance between the Instep and the Toes) has five. The Toes fourteen; of
which, the great Toe has two, and the other three apice. Sesamina twelve. In
Ancient people there is a bony substance opposed to the Cubiformae. Also there
is a little Bone in the Articulation of the little toe. These if you reckon the
left foot to have no fewer than the right, will amount just to the number of
ninety two.

11 The connection or joining together of the Bones is also to be considered;
which are general or particular.

12 General is the joynting of all the bones.

13 Particular is the connexing of some particular Bones.

14 And that is divided into Arthrosis and Symphysis.

15 Arthrosis is divided into these Species,

1 Diarthrosis. 2 Arthrodia. 3 Gynglimos. 4 Synarthrosis. 5 Sutura. 6 Harmonia.
7 Gomphosis.
16 Symphysis, is a connection of bones by Continuity, by means either of
Cartilage, Nerve, Ligament, Flesh, or Muscles.

Cartilages.
1 The Cartilages in the body of Man are held to be seven. And though my Author
name but so many; yet some whose Eyes are in their Heads have found out very
many more. It may be my Author saw none but old men dissected; for those parts
which are Cartilages in Children, turn to be Bones in Ancient people.

2 Thus much for Spermatical parts which are simply so. Those which are
Spermatical Secundum quid, are either more principal or less principal.

3 More Principal are Nerves, Arteries, Veins.

Nerves.
1 Nerves take their Original from the Brain, and are either softer or harder.

2 The softer are either Principal, or arising from the Principal.

3 The Principal are seven Pairs: Bauhinus says eight.

1 The first of these are the Optic Nerves, 2 The second is Parmotoreum. 3 The
third goes to the Muscles of the Face. 4 The fourth to the Tongue and the
Pallat. ^ The fifth to the Ears, and the are Instruments of Hearing. 6 Par
vagum, or the wandering pair. 7 The seventh pair comes to the Tongue, and are
the Instruments of Speaking. 8 The eight pair is distributed to some of the
Muscles of the Eye.
4 Arising from the Principal of the Softer are, such as arise from the third,
fourth and sixth pairs: From the third arise four Branches; from the fourth,
three; from the sixth a rise some that are scattered both to the middle and
inferior Ventricle.

5 The harder Nerves are either Principal, or arising from the Principal.

6 The Principal are thirty Pair: Seven of the Neck; twelve of the joints of
the Breast; five of the Loins; six of the Os Sacrum.

7 Such as arise from these, are those that are branched from them to the Hands
and Feet.

Arteries.
1 Arteries proceed from the Heart, and are either Principal, or arising from
the Principal.

2 Principal, are either such as proceed from the Heart, as the great Artery
called Aorta; or the Vessels of the Lungs, which are,

1 Aspera Arteria, or the Windpipe. 2 Venosa Arteria.
3 Those which arise from the great Artery are two.

1 The lesser Trunk ascending. 2 The greater Trunk descending.
All the rest of the Arteries which are innumerable are branched from these two.

Veins.
1 Veins are either Principal, or arising from the Principal. The Principal are,

1 Vena Porta, which is distributed in the inferior ventricle. 2 Vena Cava by
the branches of which all the Body is nourished. Between the Branches of which,
and the Branches of the Vena Porta is no intermixture. 3 The Arterial vein,
which is distributed only to the Lungs.
2 Arising from the Principal are either from the Vena Cava, or from the Vena
Porta; of which some are Christened, some are not; I would have said, some have
Names, and some have none.

3 The Branches of the Vena Porta that have Names are,

1 Coronaria, if my Author be not mistaken; for I have a shrewd suspicion
Coronaria is a Branch of the Vena Cava. It is that which nourishes the Heart,
and is in form of a Crown, from whence it takes its name. It is a small Branch
which the Vena Cava sends to the Heart to nourish it, after it has passed the
Pericardium. The Vena Cava carrying Natural Blood to the Heart to be converted
into vital Blood; first nourishes the Heart, that so it may be able to perform
its Office; Nature being none of Pharaohs Taskmasters; that will not set the
Heart to make Bricks, but it will give it straw to burn them with. 2 Cystica;
and if I be not mistaken, this the vein that carries the Choler to the Gall. 3
Gastriea, gast signifies the Belly. 4 Epiplois. 5 Gastroepiplois. 6
Hemorrhoidalis. 7 Meseraicks. 8 The Sweetbread, which it seems my Author takes
for a vein: Neither can our Chyrurgions at present living, tell what the true
use of it is. Their general consent is, That it keeps the vessels from being
hurt by the Backbone. Give me leave to shoot my bolt a little, (and you know a
Fools bolt is soon shot) All late Anatomists hold.
First. That the Original of the Meseraick (or if you please) the Lacteal
veins, is the Sweetbread. Secondly, All hold ( nemine contradicente) that the
Liver delights in sweet things. Thirdly, General consent of Physicians also
agrees, That the Meseraick veins carry the Chyle from the Bowels to the Liver.
These being taken pro confesso, my own Opinion is, That the Office of the
Sweetbread is to give the Chyle a sweet taste that so the work of the Liver may
be pleasant to it, and not distastful.

4 The Trunk of the Vena Cava, is either Superior, or Inferior.

1 From the Superior arise many veins of note, 1 Cephalica. 2 Basilica. 3
Mediana, or the middle vein. 4 Salvatella. 5 Cornalis: and there my Author hit
the Nail on the head. 6 Solitaria.
2 From the Inferior, the chief veins are, 1 The Emulgent Veins. 2 The Seminal
Veins. 3 Saphaena. 4 Hip Veins.

5 You have the Principal parts Secundum quid. Less Principal are Ligaments and
Muscles.

Ligaments.
1 Very few Ligaments have proper names.

2 Some belong to the Head of Man; others to the Trunk, and others to the Limbs.

3 The Ligaments of the Head are such as either,

1 Knit the Head with the Backbone. 2 Knit the Tongue to the Jaws; and Oh what
pity is it they did not knit it closer; what a deal of mischief might then have
been saved! 3 Such as knit the uper Jaw to the lower.
4 The Ligaments of the Trunk are such as knit the Members either internally,
or externally.

5 The Ligaments of the Joints are twofold,

1 Some knit the Bones together. 2 Others embrace the Tendons like a Ring.
6 A Tendon is no hing else but the extremity of a Muscle, by which it moves
the Joints.

Muscles.
1 The Muscles in all the Body are in Number 395. according to my Author: of
which he says, some belong to the ventricles, and others to the Limbs: But
according to Dr. Read, they are but 270.

Popular Applause sounds out the praise of Dr. Read in Muscles.

My Authors Works are sufficient to speak for him: The Use which I shall make of
it, is only for Information, to show what an uncertain Master They say so, is.

2 The Ventricles have 181. Of which, some are Superior, others Inferior, and a
third sort Mean between them both.

3 Superior are 95. Of which, some belong to the Head in general: others to
certain parts.

4 Those which belong to the Head in general are nine pair: of which, seven
extend the Head, and compass it about, the other two bow it.

5 The Muscles of the other parts are 86. whereof,

1 The Ear has ten, says my Anthor: and Dr. Read is just of the same
Judgment: of which says he, there is four pair on the outside, and two on the
inside. The truth is I could never see any at all; perhaps the Reason is,
because I never wore Spectacles. It Is probable there may be two Muscles on the
inside of the Ear; but those eight on the outside the Ear, came newly from
Utopia, in the good Ship called the Ignorance. That Beasts move their Ears by a
proper or voluntary motion is certain; but that Men do, unless they move Head
and al I never yet saw, and as little believe. What an abominable Master is
Tradition? Who would have thought my Author Partlicius, and old Alexander
Read, should have been led by the Nose by him? Because Asses move their Ears,
must al Men be Asses? And now I have left my Author a little, I care not if I
leave him a little longer, and show you whence this Error sprung; as also what
it is. First, They say, The external Muscles of the Ear are four pair. 1 They
coin one pair, and call them Par Attollens; and these they say lift-the Ears up;
but whether I know not, unless it be upon the Pillory. 2 Par deprimens, and
they pull them down; but mine stick up still, and so do every honest man's. 3 Par
adducens, and they move them forward. 4 Par abducens, and they pull them
backward. It Is well Democritus is dead, or else he would have burst his heart
with laughing at this and died no other death.
Secondly, The internal Muscles of the Ear (they say) are two; One inward, and
the other ontward: And if there be any Muscles at al about the Ears, these are
probably like to be they.
We will now show you, what may probably be the Cause of these Errors.

They thought Galen was a famous man (and so he was) and rather than they would
make a famous man infamous, they would be infamous themselves. Read confesses
the motion of the Ears is obscure; and so indeed it is, being clouded with a
Mist of Ignorance.

1 The first pair is called Attollens, or lifting up, which is nothing else but
a part of the Frontal Muscle fixed near the Ear, which when you lift yp your
Forehead, lifts up a part of the Ear too, though not by a proper motion of the
Ear. 2 The second is Par deprimens, or pulling down, which is nothing but one
part of the Muscles of the Cheeks, the Tendon of which being fastened to the
Ear, and by pulling down the Cheeks, pulls down the Ear also. 3 The third is
Par adducens which is nothing else but a part of the Musculus cutaneus. 4 The
fourth pair is only the transverse Muscles of the Head. Substract me but these
Muscles cleverly, and show me any other Muscles of the Ears of Man, with the
help of a Perfpective Glass (if you can.) But then they run to the old
Argument, Galen said there was such: and I Will warrant you our Authors are as
confident of it, as the Pigmies were of their killing Hercules. But to return
to my Author.
2 The Buccae four. 3 The Jaws four. 4 The Forehead two. 5 The Bones of the
Hyois four. 6 Of the Lips five. 7 The Larynx nine ( Read says ten.) 8 The
Tongue five ( Read says eight.) 9 The Cheeks ten. 10 The Nostrils eight (
Read says sixth.) 11 The hinder part of the Head two. 12 The Eyes twelve. 13
The Eyelids four.
What do you think the Mind of God is, by this difference of Authors? Surely
(Courteous Readers) to make you studious and Industrious. Pluris est Occulatus
unus testis quam Auriti december. One Eye witness is worth ten Ear-witnesses, and
you will find it so in the winding up: But it is denied the Planets to have
Latitude without the Zodiac and therefore I return.

6 The Muscles of the middle Ventricle are 65. I shall now let Dr. Read alone,
for I cannot walk very fast with two Clogs upon my Feet.

1 The Diaphragma. 2 Mhe Muscles of the Back are eight. 3 The Intercostals are
forty four. 4 The Breast twelve.
7 The Inferior Ventricle has 21. whereof,

1 The Abdomen has ten. 2 The Fundament three. 3 The Yard four. 4 The Stones
two. 5 The Bladder two. (Dr. Read had seen the second, had he not been
pur-blind.)
8 The Joints have 214. Of which, some belong to the Hands, others to the Feet.

9 To the Hands belong 104. according to my Author; 53. according to Read: I
must follow my Author because of translating.

Of these, some belong to the Right Hand, some to the Left.

Those belonging to the Right Hand are 52. to wit,

1 The Fingers thirteen. 2 Between the Shoulder and the Elbow, eleven. 3
Between the Elbow and the Wrest, eight. 4 The Wrest and parts adjacent, ten. 5
The Metacarpus, ten.
The Left Hand has just so many as the Right.

10 The Feet have 104 Of which, some belong to the Right side, others to the
Left.

The Right side has 52. viz.

1 The Toes, twenty nine. 2 The Thigh, four. 3 The Instep, four. 4 The
Metatarsus, four. 5 The Hip-bone, seven. 6 The Share-bone, four.
If a man is minded to be wise, his readiest way is, Not to pin his Faith upon
the sleeve of Authors; for let an Author be never so excellent, his Works may
be abused by a Printer. And of all the Authors which ever I translated, I never
read one more vilely printed than this is. I confess I have corrected the
Printer in many places where he most notoriously failed; but in this I cannot,
as you shall easily find if you observe the disagreeing of his Numbers. Very
unwilling was I to do the good soul any wrong, because he was ingenious: But
finding an inability in my self, I called help of others that were Anatomists,
viz. Galen, Vesalius, Columbus, Ambrose Parrey, Crook, and Read; but they
were gotten so deeply together by the Ears one with another, that they could
afford me no satisfaction: Wherefore I desire the Reader,

1 Not to impute the failings to my Author, but to the Printer, whose I am
confident they were. 2 To take Counsel of my Brother, the Son of my Mother,
Doctor Experience.

You have the Spermatical Parts: the Fleshy Parts remain.


Flesh.
1 Flesh is commonly accounted to be of three sorts; to wit, Musculous,
Glandulous, and Common Flesh.

2 You have such as are properly called Similary Parts. Those which are
improperly called so follow: Of which, some are solid others fluid: Such as are
fluid belong to the Parts contained; such as are solid are, Hair, Fat, etc. But
why my Author reckons Fat among the solid Parts, I know not. nor I think
himself neither.

Dissimilar Parts.
1 Are twofold, Superior and Inferior. Superior is called the Head, or Animal
Ventricle: Its parts are the Head and Neck.

2 The Parts of the Head are, the Skul, and the parts within it, and without
it. The Parts without the Skul, are either the Face it self, or other parts.

3 The Parts of the Skul are Bones, Pericranium, Dura Matter.

The Bones are 59.

The sutures of the Skul are three, Coronalis, Sagitalis, and Lamdoides: to
which you may ad those of the Temples called Mendosae.

4 The Parts without the Face, are either Lateral, and on the sides as the
foremost, and hinder part of the Head: or else the top, as the Crown.

5 The parts of the Face are,

1 The Forehead. 2 The Temples. 3 The Eyes. 4 The Ears. 5 The Nose. 6 The
Cheeks. 7 The Mouth. 8 The Hollowness. 9 The Chin.
The Eyes.
1 The Parts of the Eyes are,

1 Such as compass them about 2 Such as give them their Form. 3 Such as move
them.
2 Such as compass them about are,

1 The Eyelids. 2 The Eyebrows. 3 The Glandulae, or Kernels.
3 The Eyelids are either Superior of Inferior

4 The Parts which form the Eye, are either Interior or Exterior.

5 The Exterior are,

1 The white of the Eye. 2 The Iris. 3 The Apple of the Eye.
6 The Humors are three.

1 Aqueal. 2 Christalline, and 3 Vitrial.
7 The Tunicles are seven:

1 Cornea. 2 Uvea. 3 Arnea. 4 Retina. 5 Conjunctiva. 6 Opacia. 7 Secundina.
8 The parts which cause Motion are, the Muscles and Optic Nerve.

The Ears.
1 The parts of the Ears are either External or Internal. The External are
holes by which the sound passes, and are in number five; three without the
Skul, and two within.

2 The Internal parts of the Eir are,

1 The Nerve, which brings the Sense of Hearing. 2 The Timpanum. 3 Two Bony
substances of each side. 4 Three small Bones knit together by a Skin, or
Membrana; whereof the first is called Malleus, the second Incus, the third
Stapes.
The Nose, Cheeks, and Mouth.
1 The Parts of the Nose are Internal or External.

2 The External are the Nostrils, the sides, and the Bridge in the Middle.

3 The Internal are, the Cribrum, and Caruncula.

4 The Parts of the Cheeks are two.

The Superior which is called Mala: And

The Inferior which is called Buccae.

5 The parts of the Mouth, are either Fleshy or Bony.

6 The Fleshy parts are, the Lips, Tongue, and Pallat the Gums, Jaws, Gurgulio,
Larynx, and Tonsillae.

7 The Bony parts are 32. Teeth; of which, the uper Jaw has one half, and the
lower Jaw the other.

8 The Cavities are three, Conchola, Labirinthus and Coclea.

9 The Chin is that part where the Beard grows.

10 Thus much for the parts without the Skul: the parts within the Skul follow,
which are called Brain.

11 Parts of the Brain are two, Cerebrum, and Cerebellum, from both which arise
the Marrow of the Back; as also all the Nerves.

12 The Parts of the Brain are.

1 The Glandula Pituitaria. 2 Fornix. 3 Infundibulum 4 Nates, and Testes. 5
Pelvis 6 Penis. 7 Plexus Choroides. 8 Processus vermi formis. 9 Rete Mirabile.
10 Sella. 11 Pia Matter.
13 Thus much of the Head: Now follows

The Neck.
1 The Parts of the Neck are Internal or External.

External are either before, as the Throat; or behind, as the Neck.

The internal are, The Windpipe, and The Passage of Food.

2 You have the Animal Ventricle, or Superior part: The Inferior follows: Which
is either The Trunk, or The Limbs. The Trunk contains The Vital Ventricles.
and Natural Ventricles.

The Middle or Vital Ventricle.
The Parts of the middle Ventricle are either External, or Internal. The
External are either, Before, as the Breast; or Behind, as the Back.

3 The parts of the Breast are either Fleshy, as the Muscles, the Breast and
the Nepples: or Bony, as the Sternum and the Ribs: or Skinny, as the Pleura.

4 The parts of the Back are, the Shoulders, the scapula, the Backbone, the
Vertebrae, and the Marrow.

5 The Interior parts of the middle Ventricle are, the Involucra, the Bowels,
and the Channels.

6 The Involucra are, the Pleura, Mediastinum, Diaphragma, and Pericardium.

7 The Bowels are two,

1 Vital, as the Heart. 2 Spiritual, as the Lungs.
8 In the Heart are considerable,

1 Two Ventricles; the Right, and the Left. 2 Its Motion, or Pulse. 3 Two deaf
Ears. 4 Eleven Valvulae. 5 The Coronal Vein.
9 Parts of the Lungs are,

1 The Lobi, which are divided, 1 Into Right and Left. 2 Into Superior and
Inferior.
2 The Vessels which enter the Lungs, and they are three: 1 The Windpipe. 2
The Venal Artery. 3 The Arterial Vein.

10 You have the middle Ventricle: the lowermost yet remains.

The Lowermost, or Natural Ventricle.
1 The parts of the Lower Ventricle are either External or Internal.

2 The External are,

1 Behind, as the Loins and Hips. 2 Before, as the Belly. 3 On the sides, as
the Hypochondria.
3 The Loins consist of five Bones, under which the Kidneys are placed.

4 The parts of the Hips are either Bony, as the Hip bones, Os Sacrum, and
Coccix: or Fleshy, as the Buttocks.

5 The parts of the Belly, are either Similar, or Dissimilar.

1 Similar, as the Paeritoneum, Omentum, and Mesenterium. 2 Dissimilar, as
Stomachalis, the Navel, and Abdomen.
6 The Hypochondria are two; the Right, and the Left.

7 You have the Exterior Part: the Interior are the Bowels.

The Bowels serve either for Nourishment, or Generation.

8 Such as serve for Nourishment, are either for Digestion, or Evacuation.

For Digestion are,

1 Such as belong to the first Concoction, as the Tunicle of the Stomach: Or 2
Such as belong to the second Concoction, as the Liver.
9 The Parts of the Ventricle are two: the Tunicles, and the Mouths.

10 The Tunicles are in number three; and the Mouths two.

11 The Liver is placed in the Right Hypochondria, under the Diaphragma.

Its parts are two:

1 The Uper, from whence arises the Vena Cava, which carries the Blood to the
Heart. 2 The Inferior, from whence arises the Vena Porta which carries the
Chyle from the Bowels to the Liver. Both these consist of red Flesh, called
Parenchyma; throughout which, the veins of the Liver are disseminated.
12 You have the Digestive Bowels: the Bowels dedicated to Evacuation follow,
which are, the Gall, Spleen, Reins Bladder, and Guts.

13 The Channels of the Bladder are two: the one of which is turned upwards,
the other downwards.

14 The Reins or Kidneys are two, placed under the Liver and Spleen, and
receive the watery Humor from the Liver by the Emulgent veins and having
clarified it, send it to the Bladder by the Ureters.

15 In the Bladder consider,

1 Its two Tunicles. 2 Its Neck. 3 Its Bottom. 4 The Hairs which draw and
retein the Urine.
16. The Guts are either the uppermost, and small ones: as the Duodenum,
Jejunium, and Illium: or else the lowermost, and thick ones, whose names are
Caecum, Colon, and Rectum, or the strait Gut.

17 You have the Bowels dedicated to Nourishment.

Those which serve for Generation, are either common to both Sexes, or peculiar
to one.

18 Those which are Common both to Man and Woman are the Seminal Vessels, as
the Stones, Parastatae, and Pecten.

19 The Testicles or Stones are two: The Parastatae are two Vessels placed at
the Mouth of the Pecten.

20 The Peculiar Vessels to each Sex are, In Men, the Yard; in Women, the Womb
and Matrix.

Of al these, see more in my Directory for Midwives.

The Branches, or Limbs.
1 The Limbs are, the Hands and Feet.

2 The Hand is divided into, the Arm, the Cubit, and the Hand it self.

3 The Hand it self consists of many parts, Carpus, Metacarpus, Nodi, Vola,
Hypothener, Palma, Pecten, five Fingers called by these Names.

1 Pollex, the Thumb. 2 Index the Fore Finger. 3 Medius, the Middle Finger. 4
Annularis, the Ring Finger. 5 Auricularis, the Little Finger.

The Nails.


4 Parts of the Feet are three, the Thigh, the Leg, and the Foot.

5 Parts of the Leg are two, the Calf and the Shin.

6 Parts of the Foot are, Talus, Malleolus, Calx, Planta, Dorsum, Digiti,
Ungues. In English thus, The Ancle, the Instep, the Heel, the top of the Foot,
the Sole of the Foot, the Toes, and the Nails.

Another Division of the Parts.
1 Hitherto of the Parts as they are Similar or Dissimilar.

We shall now speak a word of them as they are Organical: and so they are either
more or less Principal, and formed either of Blood, or of Seed.

2 The perfect Organical parts are twofold, Principal and Administering.

3 The Administering are threefold,

1 Such without which the Action cannot be performed. 2 Such by which the
Action is performed better. 3 Such by which it is performed safer.
4 The Principal parts of the Body are four, the Brain, Liver, Heart, and
Testicles.

The Administering are,

1 The Nerves, which administer to the Brain. 2 The Arteries which administer
to the Heart. 3 The Veins, which administer to the Liver. 4 The Seminal
Vessels, which administer to the Stones.
5 Less Principal are two fold, some common to the whole Body; others only to
some particular part.

6 Such as are common to the whole Body are, Fat Flesh, Cartilages, Skin,
Ligaments, Membranae, Bones.

7 Those which belong to some particular part are, Arteries, Nerves, Marrow of
the Back, Veins, Spermatick Vessels.

8 Some parts only are subservient to themselves, and to no other part, as the
Gall, Spleen, and Bladder.

9 You have the knowledge and difference of the Parts: the Administration and
Dissecting of them remains.

Of the Administration, Dissection, Or Anatomy of the Corpse.
1 THe Body of Man consists either of Ventricles, which are the Principals; or
else of Limbs.

2 The inferior Ventricle is that which is the dwelling place of the Natural
Spirits.

I. The Anatomy of the inferior Ventricle.
All Dissections begin here, because the Excrements contained in the Guts, will
soon putrify, and to hinder the Dissection of other parts.

2 The inferior Ventricle is all that part of the Body, which compassed round
with the Swordlike Cartilage above, with the Os Pubis beneath, and with the
Ribs on each side.

3 Its parts are two, Forward and Backward.

4 Forward, the Greeks call Epigastrium; the Arabians, Mirach: the parts of
which are,

1 The Superior, or Hypochondria. 2 The Middle, or the Region of the Navel. 3
The Lower, or Hypogastrium.
5 The hinder part is either Superior, which makes the Loins; or Inferior,
which makes the Hips.

6 It is otherwise divided into two parts; namely The parts containing, and the
parts contained.

7 The parts containing, are either Proper or Common; the Common are,
Scarf-skin, Skin, Fat, a Panicle.

Proper are, Muscles, the Peritoneum.

The oblick Muscles are four, two ascending, and two descending.

The Muscles called Piramidales are four, whereof two are straight, and the
other transverse.

8 The Parts contained, some belong to Man when he is in the Womb, and some
when he is out.

1 Those that belong to man while he is in the Mothers Belly are, the Navel
Vessels, and Skins that cover him: which are amply described in my Directory
for Midwives. 2 Those which belong to Man out of the Womb are subservient some
to Nourishment, others to Propagation.
9 Those that belong to Nourishment, are either for turning Food into Chyle, or
for turning Chyle into Blood.

10 Those which turn Food into Chyle, some make the Chyle, as the Stomach;
others are joined to the Mesenterium.

11 They are,

1 Such as help toward the Concoction of the Chyle, as the Omentum and
Sweetbread. 2 Some distribute and perfect the Chyle, as the Duodenum, Jejunum,
and Illion. 3 Other take away the Excrements, as the great Guts.
12 Those which conduce to the making of Blood, are,

1 Some prepare the Blood, as the Meseraick veins. 2 Some make it into blood,
as the Liver. 3 Some distribute it to the body being made as the Vena Cava, and
its branches. 4 Some receive the Excrements of Blood, as First, Choler, the
thinnest of which is taken by the Gall: the thickest is carried to the Right
Gut by a Vessel for that purpose. Secondly, Melancholy, the Receptacle of
which is the Spleen, which concocts it, and with the best of it, nourishes it
self: other of it, it sends up to the Stomach to provoke appetite: and some it
sends down sometimes to the Hemorrhoidal Veins. Thirdly, The watery blood is
carried to the two Kidneys, who having separated the blood for their own
Nourishment, send the Water down to the bladder.

13 The parts which are subservient for propagation, are either belonging to
Men or Women. Belonging to Men are,

1 Such as carry the Matter whereof the Seed is made, and prepare it, as the
Vasa Preparantia: or work it together, as the Corpus Varicosum: or give it its
Generative power, as the Stones, which are sustained by the Muscles called
Cremasters. 2 Such as carry the Seed from the Stones, being perfected, as the
Vasa Deferentia. 3 Such as receive the Seed and keep it, as the Glandulae
Prostatae. 4 Such as contain an Oily Substance, to make the Passage slippery.
14 The parts of Generation in Women are,

1 Such as carry the Matter to be made into Seed, as the Spermatical Vessels. 2
Such as make it into Seed, as the Corpus Varicosum, and the Testicles. 3 Such
as receive it, as the Womb.
15 The Internal parts of the lower Ventricle are subservient to the other.

1 Either to Nourishment, as the Vena Porta, and Cava, and their Branches. 2 To
vital Heat, as the Arteries. 3 To Sense and Motion, as the Nerves and Arteries.
You have the Anatomy of the lower ventricle: the Anatomy of the middle
ventricle or breast follows.

II. The Anatomy of the Middle Ventricle or Breast.
1 The Breast is properly that part which is compassed round with the Ribs,
separated from the lower ventricle by the Diaphragma. It is the seat of the
vital Spirit: neither is it altogether bony like the Skul, for then it could
not move: neither altogether Fleshy like the lower ventricle, for then it could
not be sustained: but it is moved by Muscles, and Articulated by bones.

2 It is divided into the former part, which is called the Sternon: the hinder
part called the Back: and on both sides by the Ribs.

3 The Parts of it are either Containing, or Contained.

The Containing are either Common or Proper.

Common are the Scaf skin, Skin, Fat, Membranae, and Panicles,

4 The Proper are soft or hard. The soft are either properly so called, or
improperly.

Properly so called are Muscles, which are either of the Breast, or of the
Neck: Of the Breast are such as are either upon the Ribs, or between them, and
therefore are called Intercostals.

5 Those upon the Ribs are placed either above, as Pectoralis, (...) major and
minor. Those that are placed below are, Cucularis, Rhombdoides, Serratus
posticus both the higher and lower, Sacro lumbus, Semispinatus, Splenius,
Complexus: These are without. The Triangular Muscle is within.

6 The Intercostal Muscles are eleven External, twelve Internal.

The Diaphragma is common to both sides.

7 The Muscles of the Neck, are some in the hinder part of the Neck, as
Cucullaris, Levator, (...), Complexus, the greater and lesser straight Muscles,
the uper and lower oblick Muscles, the transverse Muscles, Scalenus, Spinatus.

Some are in the Fore part, as Quadratus, Mastoides, (...), Choracohyoides,
Oesophygies, Longi.

8 The Muscles improperly called soft, are the Bodies of the Breasts, the
Pleura, and Mediastinum.

9 The proper parts containing which are hard, are the Bones and Cartilages.

The Bones are,

1 Before, as the Sternum, which consists of three or four Bones, and the two
(...). 2 On the sides, as the seven true Ribs, and the five Bastard Ribs. 3
Behind, as the twelve joints in the Back.
10 Cartilages; some serve for the inarticulation of the Ribs with the Sternon;
others the bastard Ribs end in; and the Sword-like Cartilage in the bottom.

11 The parts contained, are Bowels or vessels. Bowels are the Heart and Lungs.

12 The Heart of Man is covered with the Pericardium.

The vessels belonging to the Heart are four,

1 The Vena Cava. 2 The Arterial Vein. 3 The Venal Artery. 4 The great Artery.
To these vessels are appointed certain Shutters; two resemble a Miter, and
three the Letter S. and are therefore called Sygmoides.

The ventricles of the Heart are two, to each of which is adjoined a deaf Ear.

13 The vessels of the Lungs are, the Windpipe, the Arterial vein, the venal
Artery.

14 The vessels contained are veins, nerves, and arteries.

15 The Bones are either the Joints of the Back, which are twelve; or the
Joints of the Neck which are seven; or the two shoulder bones which are joined
together with Cartilages and Ligaments.

16 You have the middle ventricle: the upper follows.

III. The Anatomy of the Higher Ventricle, or Head.
1 The Head is the third ventricle: the Seat of the Animal Spirit, the
Principle of Sense and Motion: It is placed in the highest part of the Body,
partly for the Eyes sake, that so they may see the further; partly for the
Brains sake, (...) the Rational part may not be disturbed by the Irrational.

2 The parts of the Head, are either such as have Hair, or such as have none.
Both of them are either Containing, or Contained.

The Containing are Proper or Common.

Common are the Scarf-skin, the Skin, Fat, and Fleshy Panicle.

3 Proper parts are either internal or external.

The External are, the Pericraneum, and the Skul.

The Internal are, the Pia and Dura Matter.

4 The Bones of the Skul are fourteen, whereof some are proper to the Skul
alone; others common to the uper Cheek, as the Cuneiformi, and Spongeosum.

5 The proper to the Skul are twelve, whereof six make up the Skul. The
Forehead has one, the fore part of the Head two, the hind part one, the
temples two: these are joined together by either true or counterfeit sutures.
The true (...) are three, Sagittalis, Coronalis, and Lambdoides. The Counterfeit
sutures are six.

6 The things contained by the Skull is the Brain.

The substance of the brain is either that which is soft, or the Cerebellum,
from both which arise the Marrow of the back.

The Nerves, some of them arise from within the skul, of which are seven or
eight pair; most of which are distributed upon the Head, and Organs of Senses.
The rest of the Nerves arise from the Marrow of the back, (...) rather from the
brain of the back (if people would but learn to call it by its right name.)
They are in number thirty pair, and are distributed amongst the parts below the
Head, being all covered with three skins apiece.

7 The vessels are veins and arteries.

The veins arise from the Jugulars; two of which are distributed within the
skul, and three without.

8 Of the Face, some parts are Containing, others Contained.

The Parts Containing are Proper or Common.

The Common are scaf-skin, skin, Fat, and Panicle.

9 Proper parts of the Face are Muscles, as two of the Forehead, two of the
Eyebrows, two of each Eyelid, eight of the Nose, four (...) Muscles of the
Ears, six of the Lips, the Bucca two, the inferior Cheek ten.

Bones of the Forehead and Eyes six, of the Nose three, of the uper Cheek
twelve, of the lower one.

Cartilages, of the Nose five, of each Ear one.

10 The parts of the Face contained, are either the seats of the Senses, or
else the vessels.

11 The seats of the senses are,

1 The sight, which is contained in the Eyes. 2 Smelling, in the Nose. 3
Hearing in the Ears. 4 Tasting, in the Mouth.
12 The parts of the taste are twofold; some compass the Mouth about, some are
contained in the Mouth.

Those which compass the Mouth about are the Muscles common to the (...) and
the Lips, which are two (...) each side; the uper Lip two on each side; the
lower Lip one on each side: the lower Cheek five on each side.

13 The parts of the taste contained in the Mouth are,

1 The Instrument of taste and speech, the tongue, which has ten Muscles, and
the Muscles of the Jaws eight. 2 The Larynx, whose Cartilages are five, and
Muscles sixteen. 3 The Os Hyois, consisting of five bones, and nine pair of
muscles. 4 The (...). 5 The teeth, which in people grown up is usually sixteen
in each Jaw; namely, four Cutters, two Dog-teeth, ten Grinders.
My Author has kept a fearful racket about the Taste, and written more than I
can believe: I have often heard, the teeth were instruments of biting, but
never of tasting before. It is in vain to object, That a man's teeth may be set
on edg by eating sour things, Ergo they taste: So will a Sithe by cutting Crabs
(as they know that are accustomed to Mow) Must it therefore be capable of the
sense of tasting?

14 You have the Ventricles: the Limbs remain, which are the Hands and Feet.

IV The Anatomy of the Hands.
1 The Hand is an Instrument of all Instruments; it is that whereby a Man
defends himself, (...) wounds his Enemies, and is very necessary for the
learning of al Arts and Sciences.

2 That is called the Hand which reaches from the Shoulder to the top of the
Fingers; and is divided into the Arm, the Cubit, and that which vulgarly is
called the Hand.

3 The parts are Containing, or Contained.

The Containing are Common and Proper.

The Common are, Scaf-skin, Skin, Fat, Membrana, and Fleshy Panicle.

Proper, is the Membrana of the Muscles.

4 Parts Contained, are Muscles, Vessels, and Bones.

The Muscles are fifty five, if you ad those four of the Shoulder; and they
belong either to the Shoulder, or to the Arm, or to the Cubit, or to the Hand.

5 The Muscles of the Arm are seven.

1 Pectoralis, draws it to. 2 Dectois, lifts it up. 3 Latissimus, and Rotundus
major, draw it down. 4 Superscapularis, superior and inferior, move it in a
Circular Motion. 5 The fifth is called Subscapularis.
6 The Muscles of the Cubit are four: two bended as Biceps and Branchiaeus; two
extended, as Longus and Brevis.

7 The Muscles of the Hand are forty; of which, the Fingers have twenty nine;
the other part of the Hand eleven.

8 The Vessels of the Hand, are Veins, Arteries, and Nerves.

9 The vein of the hand is a part of the axilla vein.

10 It is divided into the superior Branch, which is called Cephalica; and the
Inferior which is called Basilica.

11 The Cephalica is divided into two Branches.

1 The Internal, which together with the Basilica, make the Median. 2 The
external, which makes the Salvatella.
12 The Basilica is either the Right, called the Liver vein; or the Left, which
is called the vein of the Spleen.

13 The Artery is a Branch of the Axillar Artery.

14 After it has passed the Elbow it is divided into two Branches.

1 The first is that which Physicians feel when they say they feel the Pulse. 2
The second passes internally to the Fingers.
15 The Nerves arise from the Marrow of the Back; either from the fifth, sixth,
and seventh Joints in the Neck; or else from the first and second of the
Breast, and are divided into many Branches, and are distributed amongst the
Muscles and Skin.

16 You have the Anatomy of the Hand: the Foot remains.

V. The Anatomy of the Foot.
1 The Foot is the Instrument of Walking, and contains all that part that is
between the Hipbone, and the top of the toes, and imitates the Hand as much as
may be. It is divided into three parts, the Thigh, the Leg, and that which we
call the Foot; which is also divided into three parts, Tarsus, Metatarsus, and
the Toes.

2 Parts of the Foot, are either Containing or Contained.

The Parts Containing are either Proper or Common.

The Common are, Scarf-skin, Skin Flesh, Membrana, and Fleshy Panicle.

Proper, is the Membrana of the Muscles.

3 Parts contained, are Muscles, Vessels, and Bones.

The Muscles are either the thigh, leg, foot, or toes.

4 The Muscles of the Thigh are eleven; of which,

1 Five stretch it out, as Gluteus major, Me dius and minor, Iliacus, Externus
Piriformis, and Triceps. 2 Three Muscles bow it, as Lumbalis, (...) internus,
and Lividus. 3 The other move it Circularly.
5 The Muscles of the Leg are ten, whereof

1 Five bend it, as Longissimus, Gracilis, Senervosus, Biceps, (...). 2 Some
extend it, as these four, Membranosus, Vastus, internus, externus and (...). 3
The other Muscle Popliteus moves it oblickly.
6 The Muscles of the Feet are eight, of which

1 Five extend it, as Castrominius, internus and externus, Plantaris, Soleus,
Tibiaeus Posticus. 2 The other three bend it, as Tibiaeus anticus, and the two
Periei.
7 The Muscles of the Toes are twenty three, whereof some bend them, some
extend them, and others draw them transversly.

8 The Vessels of the Feet are, Veins, Arteries, and Nerves.

9 The Vein of the Leg is branched.

1 Into the Saphaena, which passes by the inside of the Ancle, where it is
branched into four parts, and distributed amongst the Toes. This is the vein
which is opened in afflictions of the Womb and Head. 2 Ischias, which passes
by the outward part of the Leg. 3 That which passes to the Muscles. 4 Suralis,
which at the Knee is divided into two Branches, the one takes the inside, the
other the outside.
10 The Artery is divided above the Knee, and administers Branches both to the
Skin, and all the Muscles.

11 The Nerves arise from the Marrow of the Back, and pass through either the
Joints of the Loins, or the Os Sacrum.

12 The Bones in each Foot are forty six, One of the Thigh, one Patella, two of
the Knee, two of the Leg, and forty of the Foot. Thus you have the Parts
Containing.

The Parts Contained are such as are fluid, soft, and upheld by others.

Parts Contained.
1 Parts contained are either Humors, or Spirits.

2 Humors are either Natural, or Influential.

3 Natural is that which is called Humidum Radicale.

4 Influential, is either Primary, or Secundary.

1 Primary, is either Natural or not Natural. 2 Natural, is either, 1
Nourishing. 2 Excrementitious. 3 Participates of both.

5 Nourishing, is Blood and Phlegm.

Excrementitious is either Profitable, or Unprofitable.

6 Profitable, is Milk, Seed, the Water of the Blood, and the Water arising
from the first Concoction.

7 Unprofitable are, Tears, Snot, Spittle, Menstruis Blood, Sweat, and Urine.

8 Those which are both Excrementitious and Nourishing are, Choler and
Melancholy.

9 Humors not Natural, are the same with these; only they keep not a due
Decorum, in Quantity, Quality, Motion, and Rest.

10 They offend in Quantity two ways, either by Abundance, or Defect.

11 Abundance or Repletion is twofold, Plethora, and Cacochymia.

12 Cacochymia is either Simple or Compound. Simple is of Choler, Phlegm, and
Melancholy.

13 The failings of Quality, are either more Common, or more Proper.

More Common are, Corruption, Putrefaction, Malignity, Crudity.

14 More Proper are, in respect of certain Humors, and so,

1 Choler corrupted is, 1 Vitiline, or like Yolks of Eggs. 2 Eruginous, like
Vert-de-greece. 3 Prassine, like Juice of Herbs. 4 Azure.
2 Phlegm is, 1 Acide, sour like Vinegar. 2 Vitrial, like melted Glass. 3 Salt,
like Brine. 4 Gypsum, like white Mortar.
3 Melancholy adust, proceeding either of burnt Blood, burnt Choler, or salt
Phlegm.
15 Thus much of Hmors: the Spirits remain.

16 Spirits are insited in, or influential.

17 Spirits insited in are two, either innate Moisture, or innate Heat.

18 Spirits Influential are, either Vital or Animal.

19 The Innate Spirit, according to Hermetical Philosophers, is, An Astral and
vital Body, a Natural Balsom, a vital Sulphur, and a vital Mummy.

Hitherto of a Corporal Anatomy: A Vertual Anatomy follows.

Hermetical Philosophers.
1 They have a double kind of Anatomy; the one Local, the other Essential,
Vital, or Formal.

2 The Local (say they) is that which every Butcher does when he cuts open an
Ox or a Calf; which although Hermetical Philosophers do not reject, yet they
would not have Physicians spend all their days in pering upon that, and
neglect businesses of greater import.

3 A vi tal Anatomy is that which dissolves every Body into its first
Principles: He that drives such a Model of Physic, ought to be well versed in
the Natures and Properties of Seeds; the Office of Elements and Principles; the
Generation and transplantation of Roots; the Motion and Influence of the
Heavens, and Heavenly Bodies; the Disposition not only of Dead, but also of
Living Bodies. They do not call that Lump of Flesh only, the Heart, which others
do; but whatsoever has vital heat in it. They call every Cavity the Stomach,
nay, every place in which there is any Concoction: Every place (...) contains
any fruitful Seed is a Womb with them. But the main Basis of their Art is the
Harmony of the Creation, and the due Consideration of that notable Agreement
between things above, and things below.

Tome I. Part IV. Of Vertual Anatomy, Or the Harmony between the Macrocosm and
Microcosm.
VErtual Anatomy teaches the Harmony between one part of the Creation and
another; the Analogical Comparation and Reductions of things; thereby fetching
its remedies, and learning their strengths and virtues from the Book of Nature,
not of Galen.

2 For whatsoever is in the Universal World is also in Man; not according to a
certain superficial similitude as some Fools prattle; but in Deed, and in
Reality, are contained in him whatsoever is in the whole Theater of the World.

3 The Spirit of a Man communicates with God himself; the Rational Soul with
the Angels; and the Body with the Stars and Earth.

4 Paracelsus, and most other Hermerical Philosophers, hold that Man has a
double Body: the one Natural, Elementary. visible, and tangable, which was
first made of the Slime of the Earth: the other Invisible, Insensible, deduced
from the Celestial Influence of the Stars; and this Crollius calls the Genius
of Man; his Domestic Laris, the Instructor of Wise Men (for he cannot abide
Fools.)

5 This Analogical Comparation is to be considered in a double Manner.

1 In respect of the Heavenly Bodies themselves. 2 In respect of Medicines
caused by their Influence.
Of these, the Galenists knew either very little, or nothing at all.

LIB. I.
Of the Analogical Comparation of the Heavens with the Body of Man.
1 ALL things that are above, are to be found in things below: or if you would
have it a little plainer; Terrestial things are in Heaven after a Celestial
manner: Celestial things upon Earth after a Terrestial manner: And this, none
but a few people that are scarce well in their Wits will deny.

2 We shall only here give you the Sum of the Analogy and Harmony of the
Universal World with the Body of Man, which we shall (God willing) treat more
plainly and fully of in our Harmony of both Worlds.

First, Of the Coupling of the Celeftial Orbs with our Bodies and Eyes.
Secondly, Of the Coupling of the Sun and Heavens with our Rational Soul.
Thirdly, Of the Comparation of the Beams of the Sun with the Spirits of Man's
Body. Fourthly, Of the Comparation of the Sun with the Heart of Man Fifthly, Of
the application of the Heat of the Sun to the Native Heat of Man's Body. Sixthly
(...) the (...) of the beams of the Moon with the Animal Spirit of Man.
Seventhly, The comparing the Course of the Sun and Moon, with the Course of
Man's Life. Eighthly, The Comparing of the Faculties of the Beams of the Planets
with the Faculties of Man's Body. Ninthly, The comparing of the Nature of the
Stars with the Humors in Man's Body. Tenthly, The comparing the several Stars,
with the several Parts of Man's Body. Eleventhly, The comparing of the World
with the Affections of Man.
3 You have the Analogy of the Heavens with the Body of Man: The Anatomy, or
Analogy of Medicines follows, which is twofold:

1 According to the force of the Stars; and that is called (...) Anat my. Or 2
With the Body of Man, and that is called Signatura.
LIB. II
Of the Influential Harmony.
1 INfluential Harmony is that which teaches the Influence and Dominion of the
Planets both over Diseases, and the Medicines which (...) to cure them.

2 The Course of the Planets (...) Diseases according to the Nature of each
Planet, upon those parts of the Body which they rule: so Saturn (...) the
Spleen, Jupiter the Liver, and Mars the Gal; the Sun the Heart Venus the Reins,
(...) the Lungs, and the Moon the Brain.

3 So the (...) of Saturn proceed Melancholy, failings of the Spleen, and
Afflictions of the Hypochondria.

Jupiter causes distempers and obstructions of the Liver, Cachexia, Dropsy,
yellow Jaundice.

Mars causes al distempers of the Gall, the Stone, and Obstructions, Fullness
and Emptiness.

The Sun causes distempers of heat, tremblings, pantings of Heart, faintings,
weakness.

Vinus causes the Stone in the Reins.

Mercury the Phthisick, Pleuresie, Asthma, and Cough.

The Moon causes Diseases of the Brain.

I confess I am not altogether of my Authors Opinion in some of these; and what
my Jugdment is, you may find if you please to peruse my Semeiotica Uranica.

4 Diseases are cured either by Sympathy or Antipathy.

5 A Disease is cured by Sympathy, when it is cured by such remedies as are
under the Planet that rules the part afflicted: And so such Medicines (...) are
under the Dominion of the Moon and Mercury, help the Brain: and if Mercury
cause the Disease, your only way is to use such Medicines as are under the
Dominion of Jupiter: Not only because of the Antipathy between him and Mercury;
but also because Jupiter is (...) in the House of the Moon.

6 Diseases are cured by Antipathy, when they are cured by the Remedies of the
contrary Plannet, and that two ways.

1 When their Houses are contrary, and so Mars cures the ill effects of Venus.
2 When their Natures are contrary: so Saturn cures the ill effects Venereal
Lust causes.
LIB III.
Of the Faculties of Simples, which the Dogmatists make use of to find out
their Natures.
1 EXperience and Signiture first found out the Virtues of Plants: so Hemlock
was found out to be hurtful by Experience.

2 Signature is either External or Internal.

3 External is a mere accidental business, the Basis and Foundation of which,
is nothing else, than the Form or Figure, Color or Feeling of a Plant.

4 Internal is the Temperament or Quality, which is the Principle and
Foundation of their (...) and Virtues.

5 The Temperament or Qualities consist most in their Taste, less in their Smell.

6 The (...) by which their strength and (...) are known, ar nine:

1 Three (...) testimonies of heat, as Sharp, (...), and Salt. 2 Three give
testimonies of Cold, as Tart, (...), and Sour. 3 Three give testimonies of
temperance, (...), (...) Fat and (...).
7 Seeing Simple Medicines have two Qualities, and sometimes three; then the
first is called Simple and Elementary, which arises from the (...) of the four
(...). The other is called (...), which arises from the consistence of the
(...) and diversity of Proportion.

Besides these two, some have a third Quality, which is Purging, and is by
(...) called Hidden, because it is (...) from al Block heads.

8 In general some Simples conduce to Health, others to Ornament.

9 Such as conduce to Health, are either Alterating, or Evacuating.

10 Alterating are either Common, or appropriated to some certain part.

11 Such as are Common do it either by a (...) Quality, or by a Hidden.

12 By (...) they (...) it, by the first, second, or third degree.

13 First Quality is either Temperate or (...).

Intemperate is Hot, Cold, Moist and Dry.

14 These Qualities they call D'grees, but might (...) properly have called
them Orders: Galen calls them Numbers.

15 The Orders of Intemperature, reach to four Degrees, both in respect of
Heat, Cold, and Dryness, but not of Moisture, although my Author affirm it,
because Moisture is inconsistent both with Heat and Coldness, it being dried by
the one, and congealed by the other.

16 The second Faculties of Simples, are such as these:

I. Emollient, as Butter, Saffron, etc. II. Purifying, as Cadmea, Fat, etc.
III. Hardening, as (...), etc. IV. Making thin, as Chamomel, etc. V. Making
thick, as (...), and most cold Herbs. VI. Opening, as Garlic, Gall etc. VII.
Binding, as Bole (...), etc. VIII. (...), as Juice of unripe Grapes, (...),
etc. IX. Drawing, as Birthwort, Pepper etc. X. Discussing, as Southernwood,
etc. XI. (...), as Honey, Barley, etc. XII. Purging, as Lupines, etc. XIII.
Attenuating, as Vinegar, Acorus, etc. XIV. Emplasticks, as Oil Butter, etc. XV.
Stopping, as Chalk, etc. XVI. Putrefying, as Aconitum, etc. XVII. Causing pain,
as Mustard Seed. etc. XVIII. Easing pain, as Oil of Dill, etc. (...).
Stupefying, as Opium, Hemlock, etc.
17 The third Faculties arise from the Conjunction of the first and second.

Such are,

I. Suppuring, as Saffron, White Lilly Roots etc. II. Breeding Flesh, as Barley
Meal, etc. III. Glutinating, as Aloes, Alum, etc. IV. Scarrifying as
Frankincense, etc. V. Provoking the Terms, as Annis, etc. VI. Bringing a
Callus, as Terra Samia etc. VII. Stopping the Terms, as Acasia, Lillies, etc.
VIII. Pectorals, as Scabious, Orris, etc. IX. Breeding Milk, as (...),
Smallage, etc. X. Breeding Seed, as Pease, Beans, etc. XI. Extinguishing Seed,
as Rue, etc. XII. Helps Burnings, as Plantane, etc. XIII. Dissolves swellings,
as Marshmallows, Orris, etc.
18 You have the Manifest Qualities of Simples: the Hidden Qualities follow.

19 (...), all the (...) cannot tell what to make of; only their Ancestors gave
them with good- (...): They have nothing to say for the (...) of them, but only
Tradition, and by that they are led by the Noses as they use to lead Bears
along the street: And in so doing, pray tell me how much they differ from
Empericks.

20 You have the common Altering Qualities: the Proper follow, as they are
attributed to certain parts of the Body. Such are, Cephalic, Pectorals,
Cordials, Stomachicals, Hepaticals, Spleeneticals. Nephriticals, Histericals,
Arthriticals: (...) if a Man should write plain English; they are such as are
appropriated to the Head, Breast, Heart, Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Break the
Stone, Cherish the Womb, and the Joints.

21 You have such as Alter: those that Evacuate Chacochymia follow: And they do
it by a Quality either Manifest or Hidden.

22 They which Evacuate by a Manifest Quality, are either washing, clensing, or
making slippery.

23 They which Evacnate by a Hidden Quality (as they call it) do it either
Insensibly, as Sweating; or Sensibly: and that either upwards, as Vomiting; or
downwards, as Purging by Urin or Stool.

24 Purging is either Moderate, or Strong, and (...) certain Humors, as
Choler, (...), (...), and Water.

25 You have the Qualities of Simples conducing to Health: those conducing to
Ornament should follow; which because they rather consist of Compounds than of
Simples, we will refer them to their proper place.

26 Thus have you the qualities of Simples considered in General; what now
remains, but that we enquire after the Special Anatomy of (...).

27 In every Medicine we must consider its common Affections, and its Species.

28 Its Common Affections are either its Subject, as the place of gathering and
preserving of them: or Adjunct, as the time of gathering of them, and the time
of their durance.

29 According to Species, the Medicine is made either of simple bodies, or of
mixed.

Of simple Bodies, as Fir, Air, Water, Earth.

30 Of mixed Bodies, either such as have life and not sense; or such as have
life and sense: Such as want sense, are such as come out of the Sea, or (...)
out of the Land, as Metals, Plants, and their parts.

Thus you have the Signatures of the (...), which are no certainer than they
should be: The Signatures of Hermetical Philosophers follow; which if you try,
you shall find a little more certain.

LIB. IV.
The Signatures of Hermetical Philosophers, both Internal and External, by
which they find out the Virtues of things.
1 A Signature is either Internal, or External.

2 External is that which shows the Efficacy of a thing, and sometimes the
Temperature.

3 It contains

1 The Signatures of Men taken from other Living Creatures. 2 The Signatures of
Plants, by their similitude to some part of the Body of Man. 3 The Signatures
of Diseases. 4 Medicines which help by similitude.
4 Internal Signature is the Principle, Cause, (...), and Foundation, showing
the Virtue and Efficacy of a thing; and it is called Vital Essential, and
Formal (...) or Anatomy.

5 These Internal Principles are three, Sal, Sulpher, and Mercury.

6 In these three constituting and vertual Principles, the qualities, that is,
Taste, Smell, and Color are found; not by imagination and guess only, but in
Reality and Truth: namely, The Tastes are most found in the Salt, the Smell in
the Sulphur, and the Colors in the Mercury.

7 These three are found in every Elementary Body: These are the things that
bring it forth, and preserve it being brought forth: By these it flourishes,
and is furnished with diverse Operations.

8 None of these three Principles are found alone, but does partake of some of
the other; for Salt by the benefit of these two Salts, Sal Nitre, and Sal
Armoniack, contains in it self a certain Oily substance, and Mercurial: The
Sulphur retains a certain Salt substance and Mercurial: And Mercury retains a
certain Sulpurous, and Salt substance; but it retains the name of that which it
partakes most of.

Now what Analogy there is of these three with our Body, I shall open (God
willing) more plainly when I come to our (...) Harmony, which I promised before.

9 Thus you have the Remote Theorick of (...): the Near follows.

Tome I. Part V. Of that part of the Theorick of Physic which is called
Pathologia.
1 THE next part of the Theory of Physic is that which explaineth the
Universal Constitution of Man.

2 In every Constitution four things are to be considered,

1 The Disposition of the part to act. 2 The Action. 3 The Cause of the Action.
4 The Consequence of the Action.
3 Every Constitution of the Body is included under these three Differences,
namely, Good, Bad, or neither of them both.

4 Health is Good; Sickness Ill; Neutrality neither of them both: Therefore
Medicine is the knowledge of things Healthful, Unhealthful, and Neuter.

5 Healthful, Unhealthful, and Neutrality, is taken three ways, 1 As a Body. 2
As a Cause. 3 As a Sign.

6 A Body is said to be Healthful that enjoyes (...) Health.

The Cause of Health is that which either brings it, or preserves it being
obtained.

A Healthful Sign is that which shows the Body to be in Health.

7 An Unhealthful Body is that which is surprised with a Disease.

The Cause is that which causes the Disease.

The Signs are,

1 Such as show the kind and greatness of the Disease, and they are called
Diagnostical: Or 2 Such as show the Event of the Disease, and they are called
Prognostical.
8 Neutrality, is when the Body is neither perfectly well, nor yet sick, between
which two Extremes is a great Latitude: For when a Man begins to fail in
performing his Actions, before he falls absolutely sick it is called a
Neutrality of sickness when a man begins to recover again it is called a
Neutrality of Health.

9 The Causes of this Neutrality are no way (...); neither are the Signs
absolutely Demonstrative.

10 The knowledge of things Healthful is called Hygiena, or Diet; under which
also, the knowledge of things Neutral is comprehended. The knowledge of things
Unhealthful (if you regard the (...)) is called Pathologie; but if you regard
the Practice, (...).

11 Pethal gie is (...) part of Medicine which explaineth (...) against Nature.

12 The (...) which are against Nature in Man are

1 The Disease, which consists in the parts. 2 The Cause which consists in the
things contained of which we (...) before.) 3 The Symptoms which consists in
the Functions and Operations of the (...).
13 The Common (...) and Species are to be considered in Pathologie.

14 The Common (...) is that which unfoldeth the Accidents of the Disease.

15 It is called (...), and (...)

LIB. I.
Of Semeiotica, or the Doctrine of Signs.
1 SEmeiotica delivers the Doctrine of (...)

2 Physical Signs are either Healthful, Unhealthful, or Neutral.

3 Some Signs call to Memory the state past; Others show the state present, and
they are either General, or Special.

The General are Diagnosticks and (...)

4 Diagnosticks are Common or Proper.

5 Proper are threefold,

1 Some are taken from the Kind of the Disease. 2 Others from the Cause. 3
Others from the part of the Body afflicted.
6 The signs of Diseases are known by the Excrements, the Pain, the Nature of
the place Afflicted, the Color of the Nails, Tongue, and Face.

7 Of the signs of the Causes; some show the Cause either present, as the
Color, Nature, and pain of the part afflicted the Excrements: or else
Antecedent, and they are General and Special.

8 General are, the Disposition of the Mind, Dreams, Diet, and Exercise before
used.

Special show either Plenitude, or the Humor afflicting, as Blood, Choler,
Melancholy, Phlegm, Watery Humors, and Wind.

9 Signs of the part afflicted are Excrements, the Action of the part (...),
Pain, the situation and nature of the place.

10 The Part afflicted may be afflicted either by it self, or by Consent, for
sometimes one Disease remits by the increase of another; and this is (...)
Primar, or Secundary.

11 Primar, which is properly inhaerent in some part.

12 (...), which is done by Consent of the Parts: And this is done.

1 By Sympathy, as when the foulness of the Stomach causes the Head to ach. Or
2 By Translation, as when the Matter that causes the Disease (...) out of one
part of the Body into another: And (...) is twofold. First, When it passes
out of a more Noble, into a part less Noble. Secondly, When it (...) out of a
part less Noble, into a part more Noble.

Prognostical Signs.
1 Prognostical Signs judge of a (...) present, or to come.

2 The Signs of a Disease present, are (...) Apparent, or Supervenient, or
Decretory.

3 Apparent and supervenient signs are (...) of Concoction or Crudity; or signs
of Health or Death.

4 Signs of Concoction or Crudity are all the Excrements, both Urine and Dung.

5 Pronostical (...) from the Urine are.

1 If it be thin, meanly thick, or very thick. 2 If it be clear or troubled; if
so, whether it be clear when it is pissed out, and troubled afterward; or
troubled when it is pissed out, and grow clear afterward; or troubled when it
is pissed out, and remain so. 3 By the Color, namely (...), black whitish,
blackish yellow, (...). 4 By the things, contained in it, namely, clouds, sand,
(...), things like scales of Fish, etc.
6 Prognostics are taken from the Dung, either from its substance, (...), or
quantity.

7 Signs of Health or (...), are taken from the strength of the Disease, as
also from the strength of the Diseased; and they are either primary or
Secondary.

8 Primary are taken either from the strength of the (...), which the
Constitution of the Body (...); as also the (...) Animal, and Natural
Functions: (...) from the strength of the (...), which the kind, greatness,
durance, and (...) of the (...) shows.

9 (...) signs of Health and Death are taken,

1 From the Affliction of the Vital and Natural spirit. 2 From the Excrements,
as Urine, Dung, vomiting, sweating, bleeding. 3 From the Habit and qualities of
the whole Body, and every part of it. 4 From such things as hurt or help the
sick,
Signs of Death, according to the Opinion of Hermetical Philosophers.
Hermetical Philosophers take the signs of Death from Physiognomy.

1 From the Eyes, when they sink deep in the Head, and are discolored. 2 From
the Nose when it is sharp; the Ears and Lips, cold, pale, or discolored. 3 The
Teeth, Nails, and Hair looking deadish, which sometimes happens a fortnight, or
three weeks before the party dies. 4 The skin of the Fore head, and all the
Body, looking of a swarthy, palish, or dead color.
These and many other, you may find Methodically laid down in the Presages of
Hippocrates, which you may find at the latter end of my (...) Vranica; or
Judgment of Diseases by Astrology.

You have the Apparent Progonostical Signs: the Decretory, or Critical follows.

Of the Crisis, and Critical Days.
Crisis is a vehement change of a Disease either to Health or Death.

1 Crisis is, 1 Perfect, which is either Healthful or Mortal. 1 Imperfect,
which makes the sick either better or worse.
2 Of Critical signs, some go before, some accompany, and some follow after. 3
Of such as go before, some show the time of the Crisis, and others the Manner
of it. 4 Such as show the time of the Crisis, show the (...) state, and
Declination of the Disease. 1 Such as (...) the increase of the Disease, show
its swiftness, and unequalness, and its time of vehemence. 2 Such as show its
state, show to what height its vehemence and vigor-wil arise to, and what
symptoms it will produce. 3 Such as show its declination, show how these
symptoms will have remission, and when.
5 Such as show the Manner of the Crisis are, 1 Either Universal, which gives
Judgment by the kind of the Disease, and its Motion, the part afflicted, and
the Nature of the sick. 2 Particular, which shows the kind of Excretion, or
Imposthume.
6 Excretion is made either by bleeding, sweating, vomiting, stool, Urine,
Menstruis Blood, or the Hemorrhoids. 7 Signs declaring an Impostume, are such
as declare either the Impostume it self, as length of a Disease, thinness of
Urin, a winter season an imperfect Crisis; or the place of the Impostume, as
the condition of the humor offending, the strength of Nature, weakness and pain
in some certain part. 8 The signs accompanying a Crisis, are either Excretion
or Imposthumes. In Excretion there comes to be considered, the quality of the
Humor, the quantity, time, and manner of casting it out.

In an Impostume are three things to be considered; Where it is; Whence it
comes; and, What the occasion of it was.

9 The Consequents of a Crisis are taken, 1 From the quality of the Body. 2
From the Animal, Vital, and Natural Functions. 3 From all the Excrements
Universally.
10 Critrical days are begun at that very hour that the sick finds himself
manifestly to be taken ill: An exact Rule for which, you have in my
Astrological Judgment of Diseases. 11 The Foundation of Critical days is
gathered from the Moon, because if she be well affected she disposes the Humors
to the best advantage: if il affected, she shows increase of the (...), as
being but a servant to bring down the Influence of the other Celestial Bodies
to the Earth. 12 Critical days, according to the motion of the Moon are four,
1 The Place she is in at the Decumbiture. 2 Her (...) quartile to that place. 3
Her opposition to that place. 4 Her second quartile to that place.

Thus you have the more General Semeiotical part, consisting of Diagnosticks,
and Prognostics: The Special follows, namely, The Doctrine of Urine and Pulses.

LIB. II.
Of the Doctrine of Pulses.
1 PUlse has his Original, First, From the Motion of the Heart, Secondly, Of
the Arteries, by Distention and Contraction, which Physicians call Systolae and
Diastolae, and their use is to preserve Vital heat in the Body.

2 In the Pulse are four things to be considered

1 The Reason, and knowledge of them. 2 Their Differences. 3 Their Causes. 4
Their Significations.
1 The Reason of observing, and knowing the Pulse.
1 In this consider,

First, The Precepts of Feeling the Pulse; of which, some concern the sick
Body, others the means of its cure. Secondly, The Principles which are
necessary to distinguish the Pulse.
2 The Difference of Pulses.
1 Of Pulses, some are absolutely (...), others relatively such.

2 Absolutely such are either Simple or Compound.

3 Of simple are six kinds.

1 In the quantity of Distention, as great, mean, small. 2 In the quantity of
the Force as vehement, moderate, weak. 3 In Motion of Time, as swift mean,
slow. 4 In quantity of Time, and Rest; as often, Mean, seldom. 5 In quantity of
the Artery, as soft, mean, hard. 6 In perfusion of the Artery, as full, mean,
empty.
4 Compound are such as consist of the mixture of some of these simples.

5 Relatively such are reduced either to Order or Disorder; Equality, or In
quality.

3 The Causes of Pulses.
1 The Causes of Pulses, some are Primary, (...) (...) the Pulse; some
secundary, changing and altering the Pulse.

2 The Primary, or Efficient Causes of the Pulse are,

1 The Vital spirit, either strong or weak. 2 The Instruments are the Arteries,
either wide or narrow, soft, or hard. 3 The use of the Pulse is, the
conservation of vital heat in the Body.
3 The secundary causes which change the Pulse are,

1 Natural, as the Temperament, Habit, sex, and age of the Body. 2 Nor Natural,
as air meat and drink, exercise and rest, sleeping and watching, fullness and
emptiness, and affections of the Mind. 3 Things against Nature, as Diseases and
their symptoms.
4 Prognostics by the signification of the pulse.
1 Greatness of the Pulse shows Heat.

2 Vehemence, shows strength of the Faculties.

3 A weak Pulse, shows weakness of Nature.

4 Diseases of Love, give an unequal and inordinate Pulse.

But herein let none mistake my Author; for though Diseases of Love give
always such a (...), it does not therefore of necessity follow, That such a
Pulse always shows Diseases of Love.

An Hermetical Consideration of the pulse.
1 The Pulse is felt in five several places: for it is not enough to feel it in
the Wrest (as Physicians now a days do, that care not how little they do for
their money) Let it be felt then, first in the Hands and Feet, then in the
Breast, then under the Armpits, and last of all in the Temples.

If these agree together, all will go well enough: if not, mind these things that
follow.

2 The Pulse has four Virtues,

1 Of Tartar, which causes a Pulse either hard, circular, or slow. 2 Mineral,
which is either subtle or obscure. 3 Of Health, which is equal and mean. 4 Of
Disease, which shows either Tartar or Mineral. 5 Strange, giving signs either
of Heat or Coldness.
NOTE.
1 When all the Pulse beat at one and the same time, it is a laudible sign.

2 Health is not only found out by the feeling of the Pulse, but also by the
color of them.

3 When the Pulses are well color'd, it is a good (...); Evil, if discolor'd.

4 When the place of the Pulse is hotter than the rest of the skin, the Body is
diseased.

5 If the Pulse be Mineral, put a little cold water upon the place, and if the
Pulse stop for a while, it is a good sign.

6 If the Disease come of heat of Blood, you may know it thus: Wet a piece of
Silk in Role-water, and lay it upon the Pulse, that part of it upon the Pulse
will sooner dry than the other part.

7 If the Pulse be hard in one place, and soft in another, the Disease is
Chronical.

8 When the Body is near Death, the Pulse is strongest in the Forehead, not so
strong at the Neck, weaker in the Hands, and weakest of all in the Feet: for
the lower parts of Men die first.

9 IN all Apoplexies, the stronger the Pulse is, the worse.

10 In Frenzies, Falling Sickness, and Madness, it is a good sign when the
Pulse is the same out of the Fit, that it is in the Fit.

11 In Bloody Fluxes, and all other Fluxes of the Belly, though the Pulse
remain as it did in Health, give no credit to it: for in such Diseases, the
Pulse remains til Death, and sometimes a quarter of an hour after.

You have the Consideration of the Pulse: The Consideration of the Urine
follows.

LIB III.
Of Urine.
1 URine is the Wheyish part of the Blood, separated by the Virtue of the Reins.

2 In it consider the Inspection, Signification, and Difference.

3 In the Inspection of Urine, consider the Acception and Caution.

4 Cautions are,

1 The Causes changing the Urine, as Temperament, Sex, Age, and Diet. 2 The
Urines of Beasts, or something else brought for the Urine of Men, which is
easily known by Smell.
The Significations and Differences of Urine.
1 It discovers the Constitution of the Parts by which it flows, as the Reins,
Ureters, Bladder, and (...).

2 It shows the disposition which is in the Liver and Veins.

3 It shows the disposition of those parts by which the peccant matter can be
sent to the Veins or Urine.

4 In Urine, consider the Liquor it self, and the things contained in it. In
the Liquor it self, consider the substance, quality, and quantity.

5 In the substance, consider the Body and cleerness.

6 The Body of the Urine is either,

1 Thin; in color white, Saffron, like Gold, or Reddish. 2 Mean; of the color
of Gold, Saffron, or reddish. 3 Thick; which is a Mixture of al colors, and
sometimes Oily.
7 The Perspicuity of the Urine is either clear or troubled; and it is of three
sorts:

1 Such as is clear when it is made, and troubled afterward. 2 Such as is
troubled when it is made, and clear afterward. 3 Such as is troubled when it is
made, and so continues.
(...) The quantity of Urine is either Moderate, Much, or Little.

9 The quality consists in smell or Color.

The smell of Urine is either sweet or stinking.

10 In the Color, consider the Causes and Difference.

11 The Cause of the Color of Urine, is the heat of the Bowels, and mixture of
other Humors, and it is either white, citrine, subcitrine, of the color of Gold
or Saffron, red and bloody, green, blue, and black, which is the worst of al.

12 Things contained in the Urine, are either Essential or Accidental.

13 Essential is,

1 Toward the bottom of the Urine, which being white, light, and equal, is
very good: but being black, is very bad. 2 In the middle of the Urine, which
being white, light, and equal, is indifferent; if it be black, it is dangerous.
3 Clouds on the top of the Urine are but (...) seen, and when they are seen,
they portend but little good; and the blacker they are, the (...) they are,
because they carry the Image of Death.
14 Accidental is double; for either it (...) an uncertain, or certain place in
the Urinal.

15 Such as occupy an uncertain place, and sometimes fly up and down in the
Urine, and sometimes settle in the bottom, are sometimes like Bran, sometimes like
scales of fish, and sometimes like thrids.

16 Such as keep one certain place, are either in the bottom, as red and white
gravel, little clods of blood, worms, thick phlegm like snot: or else in the
top, as wind fat, and things like Cobwebs.

Hermetical (...) of Urine.
1 Urine is Salt, separated from undigested (...).

2 Of Urine, some is Exterior, some of Blood, and others Mixed.

3 Exterior Urine is that which comes of what we eat or drink, that is of our
Nourishment; neither has it any other Indication than what belongs to the
Stomach, Liver or Reins. It is called also the Urine of Tartar, because it
comes of congealed Tartar, or (...).

4 It is twofold, Sound, or unsound.

Sound is when there is a Tincture of Sulphur with it, and yet notwithstanding
it is not always of a Gold Color, but sometimes redder; and sometimes paler.

5 The Urine of Tartar is known by the Circle, which if it be only of a (...)
color, it shows Tartar, and the separation which is made in the three Members,
Stomach Liver, and Reins.

6 The Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury may (...) be discerned in Waters,

For the Bottom shows the Mercury.

The Settling near the Bottom, the (...).

And the Tincture the Sulphur.

7 The Urine of an unsound Man is twofold, (...), and of Nourishment.

8 The (...) of Tartar is threefold.

1 Alcolita, which signifies Congealation, and the Tartar of the Stomach. 2
Scatea, signifies Putrefaction, and the Tartar of the Liver. 3 Tremula, which
signifies stopping, and the Tartar of the Reins.
9 The Urine of Nourishment is Dreggy, and signifies a failing in the
Attractive Virtue.

10 The Urine of Blood is when a Circle is in the (...) of a different Color
and it tends commonly to Redness, and is the messenger of grievous (...).

11 The substance of Urine is three fold; Thick, Clear, and Diaphanous, or like
Cristal.

You have the (...): the Symptoms follow.

LIB. IV.
Of Symptoms.
1 Symptoms taken more generally, are an effect showing the strength of
Nature: More specially, they are an Accident proceeding from the Disease.

2 In Symptoms we are to consider the (...) and Causes.

A Symptom is either Primary, or Secundary.

3 Primary, is a hurting of the Actions or Functions.

1 Either of the Animal, in respect of sense or motion. 2 A lessening or
depravation of the Vital in Quantity or Quality. 3 A corrupting of the Natural.
4 Secundary, is either a change of the Quality, or a vice of the Excrements.

The change of the quality is twofold; either Common to all the Senses, or
Proper to one.

Common to al, are the Bigness, Number, Figure, Motion, or Rest changed.

5 Proper are, the Simple Effects of the Body: and they are either to be seen,
as the color in the yellow Jaundice; or to be smelt, as a stinking Breath; or
to be heard, as noise in the Ears; or to be tasted, as bitterness and saltness
in the Throat: or to be felt, as the heat in a Fever.

6 Excrements offend, either in substance, or in quality, or in quantity, in
manner, or in time.

7 The Causes of Symptoms are either the first, or arising (...) the first.

The first, are a hurt of the Functions, either of the Animal, as the Brain,
Senses, and their Organs: or of the Vital, as Diseases that afflict the Heart
and Lungs: or of the Natural, as such Diseases as afflict Nourishment and
Generation.

8 Arising from these, are the change of qualities; whether arising from the
Simple Affects, or the vice of the Excrements.

9 The Causes of the Simple affects of the Body are, the hurting of the Natural
Functions; namely, Attraction, Retention, Digestion, Expulsion, from whence
vicious humors arise.

10 The Cause of vicious Excrements, is these vicious Humors, which offend in
quantity, quality or substance.

11 Thus you have the Common Affection of Pathalogia: The Special remains,
which are Aethiologia, and Nosologia.

LIB. V.
Of the Aethiologie of Diseases.
1 AEThiologia is that Art which declares the Causes of Diseases.

2 The Causes of Diseases are either General or Particular.

3 The General are, the Theological, or Physical.

4 The Physical are either bred with us, or come afterward.

5 Those that are bred with us, are either Natural, or against Nature, through
fault either of the Seed, or of the Mothers Blood.

6 Those which come afterward, are either External or Internal.

The External Causes of Diseases.
1 The External Causes are either more necessary, or less necessary.

2 More necessary are the six things not Natural: namely, Air; Meat and Drink;
Sleeping and Watching; Exercise and Rest; Fullness and Emptiness; and Affections
of the Mind.

3 Air begets Diseases, either by Inspiration, or Respiration, and changes our
Bodies by a Quality manifest or hidden; and that according either to the
Heaven, or the Wind.

4 Nourishment changes our Body, according to its Quality, Quantity, and
convenient Use.

According to its Quality, Intemperancy, Matter, or Substance.

1 According to Intemperancy; when it is hotter, colder, dryer, or moister than
agrees with our Bodies. 2 According to Matter, when it is either too thick, or
too thin of Juice. 3 According to Substance; when it is (...) before it is
eaten.
5 According to quantity, when we eat so much that we over power the Vessels:
or so little that our Bodies want Nourishment.

6 Sleeping and (...), (...) when they are (...), or not taken at (...) times.

7 Exercise and Rest (...),

1 In Quantity; when they are either too much, or too little. 2 In Time; when
they are taken (...).
8 Fullness and (...)-(...).

1 Emptying offends, either when it is (...); or when it is too much. 2
Retention offends the (...), and that in respect of either (...), (...), or
Seed.
9 Affections of the Mind stir up (...); when they grow immoderate, as Anger,
joy, (...), and (...).

10 Causes of Diseases less (...) are four,

1 (...) things as compass us about, as (...), (...), (...), etc. 2 (...)
things as we take in; as Minerals, (...), Living Creatures, not well prepared. 3
(...) Evacuation of Blood, and immoderate (...). 4 External Motion as Running,
Riding, etc.
Internal Causes of Diseises.
1 (...) and all his Apes, deny any containing (...) of a Disease.

2 Internal Causes are either Containing, Contained, or such as cause violence:
but most properly things contained.

3 All Heredetary Diseases come from Causes containing.

Things contained as they are causes of Diseases, are against Nature, as
Humors, Vapors, or Wind.

4 The Internal causes are either by themselves, or by accident, or according
to place.

5 The cause which stirs up a Disease by it self, are either through fault of
Quantity or Quality.

Through fault of Quantity, is either a want of Blood and Spirits, or a
superabounding of Blood, which is called Plethora.

6 Want of Blood and Spirits, proceeds,

1 From the Constitution of the Body. 2 From outward heat, as of the Air, Fire,
etc. 3 From fasting. 4 From Purging. 5 From Watching. 6 From Labor. 7 From Joy.
7 A Redundance of Blood, or a Plethora, distempers both Heart and Liver, and
is most incident to people of idle lives.

8 The fault of the quality is called Cacochymia, which is either,

9 Confusedly of all things contained; or particularly of some of them; as

1 Of Humors, as a hot, cold, moist, or dry distemper. 2 Of Matter, when the
Humors are too thick, or too thin, hard or turbulent. 3 Of the Form, when the
Blood or Spirits are corrupted by putrefaction of humors.
10 Cacochymia of certain things contained, is of Choler, Melancholy, Phlegm,
Watery Humors, and Wind.

11 The Causes of Choler are,

1 A hot and dry Temperament of the Liver and Heart. 2 A frequent concourse of
cool Air. 3 Hot and dry Nourishment. 4 The Evacuations of Choler stopped. 5
Vehement Exercise. 6 Immoderate Watching. 7 Anger.
12 Choler, is either Natural, or against Nature.

Natural is either Nourishing, or Excrementitious.

Against Nature, is either in the Liver, or in the Vessels.

13 The Causes of Melancholy are,

1 A dry Liver and Heart, and a stopped Spleen. 2 Cold and dry Air. 3 Much
feeding upon gross food. 4 Usual Evacuation stopped. 5 Care, and much Watching.
6 A sad life.
14 Melancholy is either Natural, or against (...).

Natural is either Nourishing, or Excrementitious.

Against Nature is hot and sharp.

15 The Causes of a Cacochymia of Phlegm are these,

1 A moist Temperature of the Heart and Liver. 2 A cold and moist Stomach. 3
Cold and moist Air. 4 The use of cold and moist food. 5 The avoiding of Phlegm
by the Mouth and Fundament stopped. 6 An idle lazy life. 7 Much sleep. 8
Leading a life without Care.
16 Phlegm, is either within the Veins, or without.

Within the Veins, it is either Natural, or against Nature.

Natural is either more or less Nourishing.

17 The Causes of a Cacochymia of Water are,

1 The Stomach cold, the Liver and Spleen stopped. 2 Cold and moist Air. 3
Moist Food. 4 Retention of usual sweating, or urine, or accustomed Evacuation.
5 An idle life. 6 Immoderate sleep. 7 Sadness.
18 The Causes of a Cacochymia of Wind are,

1 A cold and moist Stomach. 2 Cold Air. 3 Windy Meat. 4 Retention of
Excrements. 5 Idleness.
19 The Internal Causes of Diseases by Accident, or according to the seat of
the Body, are either in the first, second, or third Region.

A Cacochymia may occupy all the Regions of the Body, or but one of them.

A Plethora is conversant in the second and third Regions only, or in but one
of them.

What my Author means by Region here, I know not, unless he mean the Ventricles.

20 The humor is gathered together in any part, either by Congestion, or by
(...).

21 In every Fluxion are four things to be considered,

1 The matter which is moved. 2 The way by which it is moved. 3 The part
sending it. 4 The part receiving it.
22 The Matter flows either by Transmission or Attraction.

23 The Causes of Transmission are either, the violence of the Matter, or the
plenty of it, stirring up the Expulsive Faculty.

24 The Causes of Attraction is unnatural heat, Grief, Motion, Rubbing, Consent
of Parts.

25 You have the Universal Causes both Internal and External: The Particular
follow.

The Causes of the Diseases of the Parts, both Similar, Organical, and Common.
1 The Causes of the Diseases of the Similar parts, are either Evident, or
Antecedent, and Consequent.

2 Evident are such as make a desperate attempt upon all the Body, and afflict
the Spirits, the Humors and Substance of the parts: if they be strong there will
be some quoil to get them out again.

3 Antecedent and Consequent, though they be of another temper and quality; yet
they afflict the parts of the Body by Contagion.

4 The Cause of Organical Diseases are, of Conformation, Magnitude, Number, or
Place.

5 Of Conformation are the Figures of the Parts, Passages, Cavities, or
Superficies.

6 The Figures of the Parts are inverted, either through the fault of the Seed,
or Women's Blood in the Womb, or default of the Midwife at the Delivery, or by
the fault of the Physician in giving Physic after the delivery; or by
accident, as blood-letting Convuisions etc.

7 The Causes of (...) of the Passages and Cavities are either of too much
dilation, or too much straitness.

8 The Causes of Dilation are, either opening Medicines, or the Expulsive
Faculty strong, and the Retentive weak.

9 Dilation of the Vessels proceeds either from the plenty, and quantity of
Humors, or else from their quality.

10 Diseases of straitness proceed either from Obstruction or Constipation,
Contraction, or Compression.

11 The Causes of Superficial Diseases are roughness and smoothness.

Of roughness are such things as are sharp, clensing and corroding.

Of smoothness, such things as are Glutinous.

12 The Causes of the greatness of the Disease are, either increase, as plenty
of Matter, strength of Nature, Wind, etc. Or decrease, as weakness of the
Spirits, defect of Matter, Wounds, Bleeding, Putrefaction.

13 The Causes of accidental Diseases, and their Symptoms, are understood by
themselves: but of Compound Diseases by the Causes of the Simple.

14 Thus-much of Aethiologie: Nosologie follows, which is either General, or
Special.

LIB. VI.
Of General Nosologie.
1 GEneral Nosologie is that Art which shows the (...) and (...) of Diseases.

2 A Disease is an Affect against Nature, whereby the Actions of the Body are
viciated.

3 A Disease is Essential, or Accidental.

4 An Essential Disease is Particular or Common.

Particular, are either Similary, Organical, or Dissimilary.

5 Similar, is

1 A Distemper either Simple, as Hot, Cold, Moist, or Dry: or Compound, as Cold
and Moist, Cold and Dry, Hot and Moist, Hot and Dry. 2 Immoderation of the
Matter, as when the Part is either too hard, or too soft, too loose, or too
much bound, too thick, or too thin. 3 A Corruption of the whole Substance, which
is either Infectious, or Venomous.
6 An Organical (...) is, either of the Conformation, Number, and Bigness, or
Place.

7 A Disease of Conformation is either in the Form, or passages of the Body.

8 A Disease of Bigness, is when the Members of the Body are either bigger or
less than they should be.

9 A Disease of the Number, is when the Members are either more or less than
they should be.

10 A Disease of the place is, when Members are not in their right places, as
in Ruptures and Dislocations.

Accidental Diseases.
1 Accidental Diseases are either in respect of Number, or Composition: and
both of them are either Singular or Manifold.

2 Singular, is either Simple or Compound.

Simple is either by it self, or with company.

3 Manifold, is either Implicit, Joined, or Disjoined.

4 Joined is, when the Effect of one is the Cause of another.

5 Disjoined are such as lie in (...) parts.

6 Implicit Diseases are, when diverse parts conspire together to afflict one
Function, as a Pleuresie and an Asthma both afflict the Lungues, and by the
Lungues the Breathing.

7 The Substance of some Diseases is like a Tenant at will, quickly removed,
the Cause being taken away, as Fevers: Others by tract of time are become
Habitual to the Body, as Hectic Fevers.

Diseases according to the Place.
1 According to the Place, they are taken either from the Subject, or adjunct.

Those which are taken from the Subject are taken either from the Parts, or
from the Constitution of Man.

Those which are taken from the Adjunct, are taken in respect of the Region and
Air.

2 The Diseases of the Body are either Universal or Particular.

Universal, as Fevers; or Particular to some parts of the Body, as pain in
some particular Member, etc.

3 A Disease, by reason of the Constitution of a Man is taken,

1 From the Nature of the Man, and so is more familiar to one Complexion than
another. 2 From the Age, and so is most familiar to Childhood, Youth, Manhood,
old age. 3 From Sex, and so is most familiar to Men or Women.
4 In respect of the Region,

1 Some are scattered up and down here and there, and are called Sporadical. 2
Others are Common, and are called Pandemical. 3 Some are proper to one place,
as Agues to Fenny Countries, and are called Endemical. 4 Others rage at some
particular times, and are called Epidemical.
Diseases according to Time.
1 They are taken in respect of the Time of the Disease, or the Time of the
Year.

2 The time of the Disease is taken according to the parts of the Disease, or
the Disease it self.

3 The parts of a Disease are, the Beginning, Increase, Station, and
Declination.

4 The Disease it self is to be taken in respect of its Continuing.

5 The Continuing of a Disease is either short, Long, or Chronical.

Short is either with danger or without danger: and in both, it is either very
Acute, or Acute; and in these, either Symply, or by Degeneration.

6. In respect of the Continuance of it; it is either Continual or Intermitting.

7 In both these consider, their Beginning, Increase, Station, and Declination.

8 In respect of time, some Diseases are most frequent in the Spring; some in
Autumn, some in Summer, some in Winter.

Diseases according to Custom.
1 They are taken according to the Nature, or according to the Event of the
Disease.

According to the Nature, it is either Gentle or Malignant.

2 According to Event, it is either Healthful or deadly, curable, incurable, or
threatening relapse.

Diseases according to Magnitude.
1 A Disease is either great or small.

2 A Disease is great, either by it self, or by accident.

By it sesf three ways:

1 In respect of its kind, proper Essence, or Cause. 2 In-respect of its active
Power. 3 In respect of its ill Conditions, or ill Symptoms
A Disease is great by Accident,

1 In respect of the part afflicted, if that be Noble; as a Disease in the Head
is greater than one of the Toe. 2 In respect of the Faculty of the Body that is
hurt by the Disease; and so deprivation of Senses is greater than the
Toothache.
Diseases according to Cause.
1 They are caused either Essentially, or according to Consent.

2 Some are inbred, or Hereditary: others not Hereditary, but advantitious.

3 Advantitious are of Blood, Choler, Phlegm, Melancholy: and each of these
are either Internal, or External.

4 Thus much of Nosologia in the General: the Special follows.

5 Special Nosologie is, that which Numbers up all the special Diseases which
afflict Nature.

6 These arise either from Natural Causes, or External.

7 From Natural Causes, are either Universal, which occupy the whole Body as
Fevers: Or such as occupy only particular parts of the Body: Of both which in
order.

LIB. VII.
Of Fevers.
A Fever is a heat against Nature, proceeding from the Heart to the rest of
the Body.

2 Its Considerations are,

1 The common Affections, namely the disposition of the Body, and the Signs. 2
The Differences of the Fevers.
3 The Disposition of the Body is either Internal, or External.

Internal in respect of Temperament, Sex, and Age.

External in respect of Heat, either of the Fire, Sun, or Bath, drinking Wine,
use of Spice, and hot Meats, or heat of Air.

4 The Signs are General as swift Pulse and frequent, heat of Body, and failing
of strength.

5 The Differences of Fevers are taken,

1 From the Quality of the Subject. 2 From the Quantity. 3 From the Essence.
6 Fevers from the quality of the Subject are taken,

1 From the Feeling; as such as come with cold fits at the first, or without
cold fits. 2 From the Sight; as with red high color, or swarthy color. 3 From
the Taste; as such as proceed of salt Phlegm.
7 Fevers from the Quantity are either continually great, mean, or but light,
short, or long, most violent in the night, or in the day.

8 A Fever from the Essence of the Subject, is either common to al, as
Pestilential Fevers: Or,

9 Proper only to those that keep ill Diet.

10 A Pestilential Fever is caused by breathing in a Venomous and Malignant
Air.

11 The Causes of Fevers properly to be considered are,

1 Of the Heart; as a Hectic Fever. 2 Of the Spirits joined to the Heart; as
one day Fever. 3 Of Humors joined to the Heart; as a continual Fever.
12 The Degrees of a Hectic Fever are four: A Consumption

1 Of the Fat of the Heart. 2 Of the Moisture between the (...) and the Heart.
3 Of the strings of the Flesh consuming. 4 Of the strings of the Flesh
consumed, and is called Marasmus: And this is two. fold.
First, Of Cold and Dryness, as happens to all people that die with Age.
Secondly, Of Heat and Dryness, which is contrary to Nature, and the disease now
mentioned.
13 Fevers that have their Original from the Spirits, are,

1 One-day Fevers. 2 Such as last three days; as Synochus non putrida. 3 Such
as increase from the beginning to the end, called Achmastica. 4 Such as
decrease from the beginning to the end, called Parachmastica. 5 Such as stand
always at one stay, as (...).
14 Of the Humors arises Synochus, or a continual Fever, either of
Inflammation or Blood, or Blood which is not putrefied: or of Choler which is
putrefied.

15 A putrefied Fever is either Primary, or not Primary.

16 Primary, is either Continual, or Intermitting

17 Continual is,

1 Without Remission, coming of thick Choler, as a continual burning Fever. 2
With Remission, which is (...) ordinate or inordinate; and so you have either a
Remitting, Quotidian, Tertian, or Quartan Fever; which are (...) according as
the Chollrer is in heat or thickness.
18 An Intermitting Fever, which is that (...) we usually call an Ague,
proceeds of thin Choler, mixed in small Veins.

Indeed (though my Author do not say so much) the cause of an Ague is Choler
within those veins appropriated to the Circulation of Blood.

19 Agues are Simple or Compound.

Simple are Quotidian, Tertian, and Quartan, Compound are compounded of them.

20 A not Primary or Symptomatical Fever arises from putrefaction without the
Vessels, and is incident only to some particular part.

21 You have the Universal Affects in Fevers: the singular follow, which are
either Internal or External.

LIB. VIII.
Of Internal Affections.
1 THe Internal Affects are those which are under the inward skin, and for the
most part, proceed from an inward cause.

2 They are such as belong to the Head, Jaws, Breast, inferior Ventricle, and
Habit of Body.

3 Those in the Head, are either in the principal part thereof, as the Brain,
in the Skin, Substance, Ventricles, or passages thereof.

4 The Affects of the Skins of the Brain, are (...) in the Head, the pains of
the Head, which are called,

1 Cephalagia, or a pain that comes but (...), and that upon occasion given. 2
(...), or an usual, or inveterate Headache. 3 Hemicrania, or the Megrim, which
is a painful evil, occupying only but one (...) of the Head.
5 The Asslictions of the substance of the Brain, are either of the Functions
of the Mind, or else the Sleep. The Functions of the Mind, are either Weakness,
or Alienation.

6 The Species of weakness of Mind are,

1 (...) of the Mind. 2 Slowness of Wit. 3 Want of Judgment. 4 Forgetfulness.
7 Alienation of Mind, is either without a Fever, or with a Fever.

Without a Fever (...) Folly, Fantasticalness, rashness, Melancholy, which is
twofold.

1 Hypochondriacal, proceeding of Wind from the Hypochondria, and causes idle
fancies, and as foolish as idle: Or 2 Without Wind, as Madness, Fury, and such
things as (...) like to it, which (...) usually called Witchcraft, and (...)
with Devils.
8 Alienation of Mind with a Fever is called a Frenzy.

9 The Affects of Sleep, are in quantity or quality.

In quantity, when it is too much, or too little.

10 Sleep exceeding in quantity, is either of such persons as are in Health, or
such as are not in Health.

Of such as are not in Health, it is called (...), Coma, or with a Fever, as
(...); or with Madness as Cataphora.

11 Sleep (...) in quality, is when (...) is unquiet, either by (...), or (...)
up and (...), snorting gnashing the Teeth, or talking, with the Mouth or Eyes
open.

12 The afflictions of the (...) of the (...) are (...) Falling (...),
Catalepsis, which is the disease old doting (...) call Planet struck, the Mare,
Apoplexy, Palsy, Convulsion, Trembling, Rhewm.

13 (...) either comes by (...), or is continual.

That which comes by (...), is either Universal, as the Falling Sickness; or
particular, as that which we usually call Convulsions.

Afflictions of the Eyes.
1 The Afflictions of parts of the Head (...) principal are of the Eyes, Ears,
Nose, and Mouth.

2 The Afflictions of the Eyes, are either in the Globe of the Eye, or without
it.

In the Globe are either Diseases or Symptoms.

3 Diseases occupy the three Tunicles of the Eyes: The Uvea Cornea, and Adnata.

4 In the Uvea happens a dilation, diminution, divulsion, and breaking of the
Pupilla, Puosis, and Suffusion.

5 In the Cornea are such afflictions as obscure it, make it stick out, or
dissolve it.

6 Afflictions which obscure the Cornea, are thickness, whiteness, redness, or
yellowness.

7 Such as cause sticking out in the Cornea, are Pustules like the small Pox.

8 Such as cause Solution of Unity, are Ulcers, or (...).

9 Rhexis is a Rupture of the Cornea, which is caused either by cutting or
corroding, and lets out the watery Humors, whereby the Eye is made less, and the
Sight taken away.

10 Ulcers of the Eyes are either Superficial or deep, which though they have
gotten many names, yet they are all but Ulcers.

11 Afflictions in the Adnata are Ferngion, and Opthalmia.

12 The Symptoms in the Eyes are, fault in the Motion, Pains, and (...) of
sight.

13 Dullness of the Sight, is when the Sight is either weakened, or quite lost.

14 Dullness of sight is when things are either seen darkly, or in false colors.

15 Diminution of sight is, either weakness, as in old men: or in young men that
are (...) blind, or cannot see well in the light.

16 Diseases without the Eye, are either in the corners of the Eye, or in the
Eyelids.

17 Diseases in the corners of the Eyes are Ulcers, Imposthumes, waterings of
the Eyes, wheals, little knobs.

18 Diseases in the Eyelids are, Pseudopthalmia, Scabs, failings in motion,
and in the hairs.

19 Failings in Motion are in opening and (...) of them.

20 Faults in the Hairs are, when they fall down into the Eyes, moistness,
sticking together, (...), etc.

The Afflictions of the Ears.
1 The Afflictions of the Ears, are either Diseases (...) Symptoms.

Diseases are either of Blood, (...), (...).

2 Symptoms of the (...) are Excrements contained in the Ears, pain, faults in
hearing.

Excrements are, immoderate Earwax, and (...).

3 (...) in Hearing are, falsness of hearing, dullness of hearing, and deafness.

Falsness of Hearing is, buzzing, singing, or noise in the Ears.

The Afflictions of the Nostrils.
1 The (...) of the Nose are, Ulcers, failings in the Smelling, and failings in
the (...).

2 Ulcers are either Simple, or else Excrescent.

(...) are, Polipus, or Noli me tangere.

3 Failings in the Smelling are, either a (...) in the Nose, badness or
absolute deprivation of smell.

4 Failings of the Excrements are, sneezing, (...), and bleeding of the
Nostrils.

Afflictions of the Mouth.
1 The Afflictions of the Mouth are, either of certain parts of it, or else of
the whole.

Of certain parts are, either of the Lips, Cheeks, Teeth, Gums, or Tongue.

2 Vices of the Lips are, wry Mouths, (...), etc.

3 Vices of the (...) are, Convulsions, (...), etc.

4 (...) of the Teeth are, over longness, or shortness; growing out of order,
too many or too few looseness, black, or other color; pain in breeding Teeth, or
Toothach.

5 Vices of the Gums are, swelling, consumption, Imposthumes, and Ulcers.

6 The Afflictions of the Tongue are, either Diseases or Symptoms.

Diseases are, roughness, swellings under the Tongue.

7 Symptoms of the Tongue, are vices either of motion of the Tongue, Speech,
or Taste.

8 Vices of Speech are, stuttering, lisping.

Vices of Taste are, either weakness, or loss of Taste.

9 The afflictions of the whole Mouth are, yawning, stink, and thrushes.

Afflictions of the Jaws.
1 The afflictions of the Jaws are either in the (...), or Colnmella, or in the
top or parts of the Throat.

2 The afflictions of the (...) are, Paristhmia, Antiades, Imposthumes, and
Ulcers.

3 The afflictions of the Columella are, falling down of the Pallat,
Inflammations, and Ulcers.

4 Such (...) as occupy the parts of the Throat are, Quinsies, or (...),
Ulcers, and Compression.

The Afflictions of the Breast.
1 The afflictions of the Breast, are either the afflictions of the Spiritual
part of the Heart, or of the (...).

(...) The afflictions of the Spiritual parts, are either (...), or Symptoms.

3 Diseases are in the Lungs, the Pleura, or the Cavity of the Breast.

4 In the Lungs are distempers, stretchings, obstructions, Inflammations,
Imposthume, and Consumption.

5 The afflictions of the Pleura, is a Pleuresie.

6 In the Cavity of the Breast is Suppuration (...) (...), and collection of
Humors.

7 The Symptoms of the Spiritual part are, failings of the voice, difficulty
of Breathing, Cough, Spitting of Blood.

8 Failings of the voice are, Hoarceness, and other failings.

(...) of breathing is either Asthma, or (...), or Dysnea.

9 The afflictions of the Heart are either (...). All Diseases afflict the
Heart, (...) such as come of venomous humors.

10 Symptoms of the Heart are, weakness of strength, Faintings, and
Palpitation of Heart.

11 The (...) of the Breasts, are either of the Body of the Breasts, or of the
Milk.

Of the Body of the Breasts, is of the Breasts themselves, or of the Nepples.

12 The afflictions of the Breast are, Increase, Decrease, Inflammation, Morbus
Pilaris, Hardness, Ulcers, Cancers.

The afflictions of the Nepples are, Ulcers, and Consumptions.

13 The vices of the Milk are, Congealation, abounding, and want.

14 The afflictions of the inferior Ventricle are, either in the parts
dedicated to Nourishment, or to Generation.

15 Diseases in the parts dedicated to Nourishment are, either in the Stomach,
or in the Guts, or Fundament, or in the Mesenterium, or in the Liver, or in the
Spleen, or in the Gal, or in the Reins, or in the Bladder.

The Afflictions of the Stomach.
1 The afflictions of the Stomach are, (...) of the Throat, Ventricle, or of
the Stomach it self.

2 The afflictions of the Throat, are either Diseases, or Symptoms.

3 Diseases are, distemper, hardness, ulcers.

Symptoms are, (...) of swallowing, and pain.

4 Afflictions of the Ventricle of the Stomach, are either Diseases or
Symptoms.

5 Diseases are, distemper, weakness, inflammation, imposthumes and Ulcers.

6 The Imposthumes are threefold,

1 Such as cause pain. 2 Such as afflict the Appetite. 3 Such as hinder
digestion.
7. The Stomach, because it is very sensible (and especially the mouth of it)
is easily offended by any matter that sticks there, and causes Headache, and
Heart-burnings by consent of the parts.

8 The Stomach, because it is the seat of Appetite, is afflicted either through
failing, or Corruption of Appetite.

9 Appetite failing, is either Queasiness, or loathing of certain Meats.

10 Appetite depraved, is either Longings, such as are incident to women with
Child, or immoderate Thirst.

Or else it is immoderate, as greedy eating, and Dog. like hunger.

11 The Stomach as it is the Kitchen that concocts the Food, is troubled either
with Crudities, ill Concoction, Wind, Belchings, Risings in the Stomach,
Hiccoughs, Vomitings both of Blood and Choler.

The Afflictions of the Bowels.
1 The afflictions of the Bowels are either Disease or (...).

2 Diseases are, Obstruction, Binding, Inflammation, Imposthumes, and Ulcers.

3 The (...), not going to Stool, (...), Worms and (...).

4 Want of going to Stool, is either very slow, hard, or altogether stopped.

5 Fluxes are either with Wind, or without Wind, with Blood or (...), or with
Skins.

6 With Blood is (...), the Bloody Flux, or Tenasmus, or a Flux of the Liver,
or the Hemorrhoids.

7 Pain of the Bowels is either the Chollick, or Illiack Disease.

Afflictions of the Fundament and Mesenterium.
1 Afflictions of the Fundament are, (...), (...), Ulcers, (...), Itching,
Swelling, sticking out of Hemorrhoidal Veins, and falling out of the Fundament.

2 The Hemorrhoids are either Internal, or (...).

The Symptoms of them are, (...) flowing of Blood, or a stopping of it against
custom,

3 The afflictions of the Mesenterium and Sweetbread are, Swellings either
soft or hard, and Inflammations.

Afflictions of the Liver and Spleen, Gall, Reins and Bladder.
1 The afflictions of the Liver and Spleen are either Diseases, or Symptoms.

2 The Diseases are either of the Liver, or of the Spleen.

3 The diseases of the Liver are, distemper corruption of the substance,
weakness, obstruction, hardness, swelling, inflammation, ulcers, imposthumes.

4 The diseases of the Spleen are, swelling, obstruction, hardness,
inflammation, imposthume, ulcers and wind.

5 The symptoms both of Liver and Spleen are yellow and black Jaundice,
Hypochondriack Melancholy, Atrophia, or pining away of Flesh, Cachexia, or
Dropsy, which is threefold.

1 Anasarcha, commonly called, a dry Dropsy. 2 Ascytes, or an ordinary Dropsy
of water. 3 Timpanites, a Dropsy of wind.
6 The afflictions of the Gall are, obstructions, stone fullness, and emptiness.

7 The afflictions of the Reins are, stone, imposthumes, ulcers and pain.

8 The afflictions of the Bladder are, the stone, inflammation, imposthumes,
ulcers, failings in making water.

9 Failings in making water and (...) are, Diabets, or continual pissing; often
and unseasonable pissing, when men are not able to hold their water; Ischuria,
or stoppage of Urine; Dysuria, or pissing with pain; Stranguria, or pissing by
drops, pissing blood.

10 These are the afflictions incident to the parts dedicated to Nourishment:
Those which are incident to the parts dedicated to Generation follow.

Afflictions incident to the Parts dedicated to Generation.
1 They belong either to the Genitals of Men, or to the Womb.

To the Genitals of Men, they either come from some internal cause, or else
they are subsistent in the Yard or Testicles.

2 From internal causes especially proceed immoderate Lust, (...), or continual
standing of the Yard, the running of the Reins, and want of carnal Copulation.

3 The afflictions of the Yard are, Phymosis, as when the top of the Yard (...)
not be covered, or being covered, will not open; inflammation, imposthumes,
ulceration, Fleshy swelling and corruption.

4 The afflictions of the Testicles are, inflammation, hard swelling and
ruptures.

5 Ruptures are of diverse kinds, and each kind has got a name by it self.

Those belonging to the Testicles are these three,

1 When the Omentum, fall down into the Scrotum. 2 When the (...), fall down into
the Scrotum. 3 When both fall down into the Scrotum.
6 The afflictions of the Womb are Diseases and Symptoms.

Diseases are either in the Womb it self, or in the passage to it.

7 Diseases in the Womb it self are, (...), (...), hardness, (...), that
dropsy of the Womb, usually (though (...) falsely) called a Timpany, the Mole,
afflictions of Wind and Blood.

8 In the passage to the Womb are, Imposthumes, ulcers, inflammation, itching,
warts, (...), and bits of Flesh growing.

9 The Symptoms of the Womb are, stopping and overflowing of the Menstiuis,
the Flux of the Womb, Whites, falling out of the Womb, and the (...) of the
Mother, pain, faults both in the Conception and Travel.

10 Faults of Conception are, Barrenness, and vicious Conception.

11 The occasion of Barrenness is,

1 From the Man, as Palsy in the Yard, ill shape of the Yard, stoppings and
bruises of the Spermatick Vessels, defect of the Testicles, a huge great fat
Belly.
12 Causes of Barrenness in Women are, vices of the Womb, vices of the (...) of
the Womb, but usually in the Womb it self, and that either in the Mouth of it,
or in the Substance of it.

(...): In the Mouth of it; being either too wide, or weakened by some violent
(...); or filled with moist Excrements, or shut by some scar or excrescence of
Flesh, or compressed by fatness of the Belly. Secondly: The vices of the
substance of the Womb are, hardness, weakness, or cold and moist distemper.
The Afflictions of the Habit of the Body.
The Air, too much grossness, or slenderness, weariness, stifness, too much,
too little, or corrupt sweat, pain in the Fleshy parts of the Body, and in the
Joints, bunches.

You have the internal Afflictions, the external follow.

LIB. IX.
Of External Afflictions.
1 OF External Afflictions are two kinds; for some cause Deformity, some other
vices.

2 Deformity is either in the Hair, or in the Nails, or in the Skin.

3 Of the Hair, when there is too much, too little, or none at al, when it is
tangled, when it curls too much, or not at al, or is too hard, too soft. or not
of the color you would have it.

4 The default of the Nails are, when they are loose, too long, or too thick,
or too thin, or spotted, or slit.

5 Deformities of the skin are in Certain parts, or in Uncertain.

In Certain parts, are in parts that have Hair, or else in the Face or Hands.

6 In places that have Hair, is Dandriff.

7 In the Face are, Wrinkles, Sunburning, Freekles.

8 The Hands are, scaly, hard, chopped.

9 The Uncertain parts are Deformities of the Skin, roughness, the marks of
Women's Longings.

10 Spots are either originally, as Molds, or else Tetters, Ringworms, bitings
of Fleas or Lice, Itch, Scabs, etc.

11 Thus much of Deformity: Other Afflictions follow.

12 Swellings are either with pain or without pain.

13 With pain are either Tumors or Pustules.

14 Tumors are either primary or secundary.

15 Primary are those that have their Original from collections of Blood, as
Erisipelas, and Cancer.

16 Collections of Blood are caused either by Inflammation or Bruises.
Inflammation is greater or lesser.

The greater Inflammation is that which occupies either Uncertain parts, or
Certain.

17 Inflammation occupying certain parts is either in the Glandulae, or in the
Joints.

18 An Inflammation occupying Uncertain parts is either Simple or Compound.

19 They are called

1 Phlegmon; of Blood. 2 Erisipelas; of Choler. 3 Oedema; of Phlegm. 4
Schyrrus; of Melancholy. 5 Flatuosus; of Wind. 6 Varicosus; which is sometimes
of the Spirits, sometimes of the Humors, sometimes of both.
20 Phlegmon; is either

1 Phygithlon: Emunctory Tumors inflamed. 2 Bubo: Or a swelling in the Groyn,
which is either Venereal, Malignant, or Pestilential. 3 Phyma: A Pustule or
Boil. 4 Forunculus: A Felon or Andicom. 5 Anthrax: A Carbuncle. 6 Gargarion:
The Uvula inflamed. 7 Paristhma: The Tonsilla inflamed. 8 Anurisma: An Artery
dilated. 9 Gangraena: An Inflammation not mortified. 10 Sphacelus: An
Inflammation mortified.
21 Erispelas is either

1 Herpes, Miliaris, Exedens, and Formeca: Pustles that eat. 2 Phlictenae:
Blisters. 3 Epinictides: Night Galls. 4 Hydrea: Blue Pustules 5 Dracunculus:
Crimson Veins.
22 Oedema is either

1 Atheroma: A soft tumor in the Head with Matter, and without pain. 2
Steatoma: with matter and hardness like Grease. 3 Melicerus: with gravelly hard
matter. 4 Hydrocele: of watery Rupture. 5 Dropsies. 6 Scrophulus: the Kings
Evil. 7 Bronchocele: a great tumor about the Throat. 8 Hydrocephalea: a watery
humor in the Head.
23 Schyrrus is either

1 A Cancer, ulcerated or not ulcerated. 2 Elephantiasis: a Leprosy. 3 Psora:
dry Scabs or Itch. 4 Enchymoma: Bruises, black and blue spots. 5 Sarcosele:
Fleshy Rupture. 6 Polipus: Spungy Flesh growing in the Nose. 7 Verrucae: Warts.
1 Acrocordones, hanging by a string. 2 Mermeciae, sticking in the Flesh. 8
Cornua: Corns on the Feet. 9 Callus: on the Hands.
24 Flatuosus is either

1 Priapismus: a continual standing of the Yard. 2 Timpanites: a Dropsy of
wind. 3 Hernia ventosa: a windy Rupture.
25 Varicosus is either

1 Vitiligo: Morphew. 2 Exanthemata: small Pox and Measles. 3 Parotides: Tumors
behind the Ears. 4 Mentagra: Scabs on the Chin. 5 Bubonocele: a Rupture in the
Groyn. 6 Arthritis: all Gouts: as 1 Chyragra: the Hand Gout. 2 Sciatica: the
Huckle-bone Gout. 3 Genugra: the Knee Gout. 4 Podagra: the Foot Gout.

26 Solutions of Unity follow, which are either Ulcerations or Wounds.

27 Thus much for Sporadical Afflictions, which arise from Natural, and diverse
other Causes.

Those follow which come from external and certain Poisons, or abuse of Good
Remedies.

So Coriander Seeds being unmeasurably taken, cause hoarsness of voice, and
madness, which of the two is the worst.

So Saffron, if it be immoderately taken, kills the Heart with laughing.

Pandemical Afflictions.
1 Pandemical or Common Afflictions are such as invade men universally, and
they are either Enmical, or Epidemical.

Endemical are proper to the Place.

Epidemical to the Time.

2 Endemical Diseases by a certain perpetuity, are addicted to certain Places,
Regions, and Cities, as Agues to the Fenny Countries in England.

3 Epidemical Diseases rage at some particular times, as Pestilences, small Pox,
etc.

LIB. X.
Of the Pathologie of Hermetical Philosophers.
1 IT is of small Moment, and not worth distinguishing, between the Disease, the
Causes, and Symptoms; for the Cause, the Disease, and the Symptoms differ not
in property, but only in power and act; as a Physician that is asleep, differs
from one that is awake; and as Sulphur kindled, differs from Sulphur not
kindled; and as Salt dissolved, differs from Salt not dissolved; and as Mercury
sublimated, differs from Mercury not sublimated.

2 The Roots of Diseases lie hid in the Body; which being in time separated,
exalted and kindled, produce the Disease, and change of the Pulse.

3 For in Agues the Root of the Disease is in the Body in the intermission of
the fit, though the Heart be not overheated: Also in Falling-sicknesses the
Root of them lies in the Body, though there be a months difference between the
fits.

4 Paracelsus teaches, That a Disease is a Substance, and declares it by an
Example; as in the yellow Jaundice, the Center of which is in the Gall, yet it
brings no harm to the man while it is in his Center, til it be diffused in the
Body among the Blood.

5 Hermetical Philosophers consider here only two things; namely, the Original
of the Disease, and the Difference.

6 The Opinion of Alchymists concerning the Original of Diseases is twofold:
One of the Ancient, and another of the Modern, which latter seems to be the
truest.

7 Ancient Hermetical Philosophers, referred the Original of Diseases to the
Seed of them: even as Plants arise from their own seeds; so do also Diseases
from their specifical and peculiar seeds in the Body of Man.

8 For as the beginnings of all Natural things proceed from the influential
operation of the Srars upon the Seeds; so by reason of the corruption of the
Nature of Man, there is contained in his Body, the seeds of al Diseases, which
by the influential operation of the Stars in time show themselves.

9 For to think that Diseases come from the Elements is ridiculous, for both
Elements and Elementary Bodies are but the Wombs in which these Seeds are
nourished.

10 In seeds is the form of the thing whereof it is a seed, potentially placed;
and by power of these, are al actions performed: (...) proceed Tastes, Colors,
Heat, Cold, (...), (...); they contain in them, Vital (...), Hardness, Softness
Thickness, Thinness, Roughness, Smoothness, and what not.

11 The Original then of these Seeds of Diseases is this: Although at the first
al (...) were created pure, and (...) void of corruption and death; yet after
the (...) of our first Parents, the Curse came upon them, and gave them a new
Tincture; and so the Seeds of Diseases came as well into the Body of Man, as
Thorns and Thistles on the Earth.

12 The Seeds both of Death and Diseases come thus into Man: The (...) being
cursed for the sin of Adam, brought forth many impurities, as Arsenick, (...),
and many other both hot and cold poisons, as Opiats; nay in the purest
Creatures there remains so much (...) which is as well able to hurt, as what is
pure in them to help. Living Creatures, as Beasts, etc. live by Plants and
Herbs. Man by Beasts, and the Fruits of the Earth: The impurity of which is
that which causes so many several sorts of Diseases to the Body of Man.

13 That there is such a seed of Diseases in Man, may appear by this: Because
we find many Diseases to be Hereditary, nay, to continue individually, many
times to three or four generations, which could not be unless the Seed of the
Disease were inherent in the procreative Virtue.

14 Sometimes Children are troubled with Diseases which were not heeded in their
Fathers, as men that never had the Gout, beget Children which in time come to
have the Gout; judge the like by the falling sickness, etc. The Reason is, All
Seed must have a time to grow, and the Seed was not come to maturity in the
Parent as it is in the Child: Contrary to this; Many times we find that such as
have the Gout, beget Children which never have it; and those that have the
Falling Sickness the like: The Reason of this is either,

1 Because the impurity is separated by the strength of the Natural Balsom in
the Womb: Or 2 Because the Root of the Disease is grown old, and able to bear
fruit no more.
15 That a Hot, Cold, Moist, or Dry Distemper, or Humors, should be the cause
of a Disease, is absolute nonsense to affirm; they are but the Effects, as
Heat is the Effect of Life, and not the Cause of it: The Cause of a Disease
must be something which is real, and endued with a power to produce such Effects.

16 Humors are a certain Fantastical Invention; but imagine there be such
things, they cannot produce Diseases.

1 Because they are not in the (...). 2 Because the Humors arise from the
Disease, and not the Disease from the Humors. 3 Because no Humor is either
Salt, or Sour, or has any other Taste; neither has it any Salt or Tartar in
it: And it is a most rediculous piece of nonsense to say Humors are burnt; for
bring a Humor to the fire it presently exhales away.
17 The Modern Alchymists derive the Original of all Diseases from these three
Principles, Mercury Sulphur, and Sal, because they are endued with Virtues,
Faculties, and Properties of al sorts: from whence come infinite Varieties,
Tastes, Colors, Smells, by which various kinds of Diseases are bred.

18 They hold the Causes of Diseases to be ten:

1 Mercurius Pneumosus. 2 Mercurius Cremosus. 3 Mercurius Sublimatus. 4
Mercurius Precipitatus. 5 Sulphur Congelatum. 6 Sulphur Resolutum. 7 Sulphur
Coagulatum. 8 Sal Calcinatus. 9 Sal Resolutus. 10 Sal Reverberatus.
19 (...) Pneumosus, is an Ethereal Spirit; the fire of Nature; the Ruler of
Man's Body; the Mover and Guider of Actions; and it is thought to remain in the
Ventricles of the Brain: It seems he understands the Animal Spirit by it. This
Mercury is sometimes made so thick, that against Nature it is shut up in Skins,
in Cavities of the Body; and so being made Material, changes its name, and is
called Wind: It causes Swellings, Kings Evil, Apostemes of Wind, and
whatsoever Disease the Galenists say comes of Wind.

20 Mercurius Cremosus, or Mercury distilled, is the Ark of our Life, the food
and nourishment of the other ethereal fire, it is true Lac Virginium (that in
the Colleges Dispensatory is but a Puppet in a Play) the true Radical
Moisture, the Subject of Generation, Sweet, Liquid, Rare, and Penetrating. This
Mercury being separated from the power of the former, whether by the solid
parts of the Body, or by Food, is sometimes so circled about by ascension and
descention, that it begets grievous Diseases, as Apoplexies, Palsies,
Convulsions Falling Sickness, Tremblings, Heartqualms, Incubus and Succubus.

21 Mercurius Sublimatus, is the acute Spirit of Radical Moisture, quick,
penetrating, aerial, subtle, a lively and spiritual substance, and the next
instrument of Action: This sometimes waxes hot, but it does not burn, and flies
up and down, whatsoever it lays hold on, it breaks, and pains, from whence
comes (...), (...), Melancholy, Head ach, Quinsies, Pluresies, Pestilences.

22 Mercurius Precipitatus, is an ethereal Spirit, sharp, tart, vehement
incombustible, hot; it is the Leaven of the Body whereby al things are digested:
By the Concoction and Digestion of this Spirit (namely, when it is hindered from
performing its Function) come al those painful congelations in the exterior
parts of the Body, as the Gout, etc.

23 Sulphur congealed, is most pure, white, sweet, moving the Pulse, and
distributing the heat throughout the Body: From this Sulphur congealed, arise
al inflammations whatsoever, as the Quinsie, Pluresies, etc. as also Fevers.

24 Sulphur resolutum, is a moist and soft substance, gently moistening all the
parts of the Body: it is full of Spirit and accomodated to Generation. From this
Sulphur, Alchymists derive those sleepy Diseases (not from coldness, as
Galenists prate) as Lethargies, Coma, Catalepsis, etc.

I wonder in my heart why Galenists should hold these Diseases to come of cold,
seeing they confess sleep is caused by a sweet vapor sent up to the Brain.

25 Sulphur coagulatum: From this some Alchymists derive all Fluxes: Others
(and those more properly) derive them from Sal.

26 Sal calcinatus, is the Balsom of Life; that firm, fixed, earthy Body,
compounding Mercury and Sulphur in one, and making the whole Body solid: From
this (if it melt in the Body as sometimes it does) arises Cachexiaes, Dropsies,
and al Diseases of Phlegm: If Nature can expel it, thence arises Sweating.

27 Sal resolutus is a liquid Body, sweet in taste, of a binding faculty, by its
pleasantness nourishing and preserving the Body: This is the Necter the Poets
said the Gods drunk. If this suffer Congelation, it grows hard, and this is the
original of the Gravel and Stone.

28 Sal reverberatus is the general Clenser of Nature: It cleanses the Body of
its filth, by opening, cutting, purging, provoking vomit, urine, and sweating,
whereby it purges and quickens the Body: From this Salt arises, Itch,
Scabs, Tetters, Ringworms, Botches, Boyls, Carbuncles, the French Pox, and the
Scurvy, and all Diseases that afflict the Blood.

The Differences of Diseases.
1 Of Diseases, some are Simple, some Compound.

Compound Diseases the Alchymists stand not much upon; because they are only an
impediment of the Actions.

2 The Differences of Simple Diseases, the Ancients laid down not so
accurately, but the Modern most accurately.

3 Of Diseases, some are from the Seeds, others without the Seeds; for Diseases
of the Instruments of Strength, the Figure of the Body, and solution of Unity,
as Wounds and the like, cannot arise from the Seeds; but only such as afflict
the similar Parts.

4 They hold two kinds of Seeds of Diseases:

1 Iliastrum: that is when the Seed produces a Disease, as Pears, Apples, and
Nuts, produce their like Trees: Of this Nature are Dropsies, yellow Jaundice,
Gouts, etc. 2 Cagastrum, which comes of Corruption, as Pestilences, Fevers,
Pluresies, etc.
5 They hold five Beings of Diseases.

1 Immediately from God: as the Pestilence in David's time. 2 Influential from
the Stars. 3 Natural: when it happens through default of Nature. 4 Mental: when
it proceeds from the imagination, either of the sick himself, or of some other;
under which head, Witchcraft is included. 5 Venomous: which contains all
Poisons, both Natural and Artificial.
6 All Diseases may be divided into these four Heads; to which all other
Diseases may be reduced as to their Fountains.

First, The Falling Sickness: to which may be reduced, the Palsy, Convulsions
Vertigo, Melancholy, Apoplexy, and fits of the Mother. Secondly, The Dropsy:
to which may be reduced, al Imposthumes, the yellow Jaundice and Cachexia.
Thirdly, The Leprosy: to which may be reduced, al Ulcers. Fourthly, The Gout:
to which may be reduced, the Chollick, Stone, Headache, Toothach, etc.
7 Of Diseases, some are Coagulated, others Resolved; for some consist of the
impurity of the seeds, the fruits of which turns to Coagulation: others to
Resolution.

Diseases arising from Coagulation or gnawing in the Stomach.

Al Diseases of the Head and Throat: all Diseases that come of parts stopped,
as the Chollick, stone, and all difficulties of urine.

Diseases of Resolution are, all such as come by opening of those parts of the
Body which should be stopped, as Fluxes of all sorts, Running of the Reins, etc.

8 Diseases are twofold; some proceed from the Food we eat; others from
Celestial Influence.

First. Those which come by the Food we eat, come by the impurity thereof,
which ought to be separated and expelled by the usual ways. But when Nature is
not able to administer her Functions as she ought to do the Disease takes Root
in the Body, which brings forth fruit in its proper and appointed time. That
which causes these Diseases to take Root is Opportunity; for they search out a
place where the Natural Balsom is weak, and the Spirits proper for the
nourishing such an untoward Seed: as Hemlock and Henbane grow near the places
where they empty Jakes, and Wormwood near Iron works, because there both Earth
and Air is convenient for them.

And then secondly, Such as come by Celestial Influence, take Root in our
Bodies by the Air we breath in: for as by the Blessing upon the Creation we
receive our nourishment from it; so by the Curse upon the Creation we receive
the Causes of Diseases by it: God is as the Sealer, that the Seal, and our
Bodies the Wax that receives impression from it.

9 The most exact difference of Diseases is drawn from these three principles,
Mercury, Sulphur, and Sal.

Of Mercury come all Diseases of sharp and sour Vapors, Falling Sickness,
Apoplexies, Palsies, al kinds of Defluxions and Rhewms, all Malignant and
Epidemical Diseases arising either from Poison or Infection of Air.

If Sulphur be immoderate, it causes (...) of al sorts, (...), al (...), Let
so man wonder that Fevers and sleepy Diseases should come from one and the
same Cause; you admiration will quickly (...) so soon as you are unchained from
Galen, and a little better acquainted with Dr. Reason: for the immoderate (...)
of Sack causes sleep as well though it be extreme hot, as the immoderate
taking of Hemlock, Poppy, or Henbane, which are extreme cold: The Reason is not
in the Bodies of the Creatures themselves, but in the Sulphurous quality of
them.

From Salts all Internal (...) take their Original, as Imposthumes, Ulcers,
(...), Bleeding, Heat, and stoppage of Urine; and according to the kinds of
Mercury, Sulphur, and Sal, so are the kinds of Diseases, as we showed you
before. I have now done, after I have told you, That Alchymists by the Seeds
and Roots of Diseases, understand nothing but the Causes of them.

10 To this Division pertain al Diseases of Tartar: It is called Tartar,
because of that similitude it has with that Tartar that is found in Wine;
because it heats and burns the Body as Tartar does.

Tartar in the Body of Man is a certain Juice coagulated: This Juice is taken
from our Nourishment by eating Beasts; and it is inherent in the Beasts we eat
by eating Herbs. But when in the Microcosm all the internal Faculties work in a
due order: This Tartarial matter is separated from the due nourishment, and
cast our by Nature.

There are two things which cause the retaining of it.

1 The weakness of the separating, or expulsive Faculty. 2 The immoderate
taking of Food, whereby there is such plenty of it, that the expulsive Faculty
is not able to cast it all our and so it lies in the Body, grows thick, and
produces those effects we mentioned before.
That we may make this appear the more lucidly, and as clear as the Sun when he
traces over the Nemean Lions Back, consider the very same things in the
Macrocosm. You see in that the Earth is in some places more pure, in others
more impure; you see the Water is purer in one place than in another, as every
Laundress can tell you, and yet al Water comes from the same Fountain and
Original, namely the Sea: You see the diverse difference in diverse Nations in
Corn and Wine, and the diverse effects they produce; and therefore what wonder is
it that this Tartarial matter being separated principally in the Stomach,
should produce such different effects in the Body of Man, as the Stone in one
place, and the Gout in another.

11 There are four kinds of Tartars, Viscuous, Bolar, Sandy, and Stony; and one
of these contains in it more Salt, another less: Thence it comes to pass that
one afflicts the Body with more pain than the other; for the more Salt there is
in the Tartar, the greater is the pain: for in Tartar is contained all the
species of Salt, which is that which causes the biting or paining quality of
all Minerals and Plants, as common Salt, Alum Vitrial, Salt (...), Sal gem Sea
Water, Aron, Nettles, Ars-smart; and therefore it is no wonder if the
differences of Tartarial Diseases be so manifold.

12 The Diseases of the Stomach arise from the impurest parts of the Tartar:
for if a Bolar Muccilage which is tough, viscuous, and alluminous, possess the
sides of the Tunicle of the Stomach, there arises a stoppage of the vital
Spirits, which are the Authors of al Natural actions, whereby they being taken
Prisoners, they cannot execute their Office in separating the pure Nourishment
from the impure; and so the digestion comes to be weak, flow, and as faulty as
either.

And if these Tartarial Spirits be very strong, they easily overcome the inbred
Spirit of Man: If they be mixed with much Salt, they turn into (...) and stone;
if pure of themselves, without much Salt, they cause Consumptions and pinings
away; if impure, they are changed into another Nature, they turn Antimonial,
and cause Vomiting; if Aerial, they cause Corrosions, and Pains, especially in
the Stomach; if Vitrial, they cause a Dog-like Hunger, because by the swiftness
of their motion they catch and consume what is given for Nourishment: for
according to the Opinion of Severinus it is the Spirits that cause Hunger,
draw, concoct, and coagulate whatsoever is taken into the Body of Man, which
the stronger they are, the more swiftly they perform it; the purer they are,
the better they perform it.

13 As for Diseases coming by Celestial Influence, Quercitanus affirms they
come through the breathing in of the Air; but if you ask him how the Air comes
afflicted, he gives you Ignoramus instead of Billavera. He and Fernelius say,
It is a Hidden Matter; it is something, but they know not what: But Severinus (a
man that waded a little deeper than the addle Brains of vulgar Physicians could
reach to) in his Book of Celestial Influences, proves, That they come from the
several Constitutions of Heaven, the several Influences of Stars arising from
the several Conjunctions with the Malevolents.

14 To make all a little plainer in the winding up that so we may be the better
understood.

The Diseases in Man are three fold.

First, Such as come from Fire and Air, which are the two Elements that
generate the Spirit of Man, (...) whence come all Epidemical Diseases, and such
as come by the Influence of the Heavens. Secondly, Such as come of Air and
Earth, which two Elements cause the Tartar, and all Diseases which we noted
before, to proceed therefrom: of which the Ancient Physicians wrote little,
knewless, and practiced none. Thirdly, The Seed of the Parents, which contains
in it, 1 The Course of the Elements, from whence arise al acute Diseases. 2 The
Courses of the seven Planets, from whence come Chronical Diseases, which last
as long as the said Course of the Planets remain uncontrouled by others; and
this may be known by the Government of the Planets themselves: as the Sun
governs the Heart, the Moon the Brain, Saturn the Spleen, Jupiter the (...),
Mars the Gall, Venus the Reins, and Instruments of Generation, and (...) the
Lungs: And all Diseases whatsoever keep their Court in one of these places. 3
The four Courses of the Humors, which Alchymists call Salts, Cabalists Humors,
and so do Galenists for fashion sake. 4 The four Courses of the Qualities or
Complexions, namely, Heat and Moisture, Cold and Moisture, Heat and Dryness,
Cold and Dryness.

You have the Theorical part of Medicine: The Practical follows.

TOME II. Of Practical Medicine.
1 PRactical Medicine is that which tends to, and endeavors at the end of
Medicine, namely, the Health of Man.

2 The Parts of it are, Hygiena, and (...). You shall have the Interpretation
of both words, when you come to the Explanation of them.

Tome II. Part I. Of Hygiena.
1 Hrgiena is the first part of Practical Medicine, which teaches the right
use of the six things not Natural, for the preservation of Health.

2 To the causing of Health belongs a good temper of the Similar Parts, a due
conformation of the Instrumental Parts; both which are attained by a due use of
the six things not Natural.

3 The signification of the word Hygiena, is a defending of Health: it consists
chiefly in Diet.

Diet belongs both to the Healthful, and to the Sick: in both of them to the
Knowledge and Method of using the things not Natural.

4 Things not Natural are in a Medium between things Natural, and those against
Nature: For neither do they constitute our Nature, as things Natural do;
neither do they afflict it as things against Nature do: being well used they
are good, ill used they are bad.

5 The knowledge of things not Natural consists (...) this,

1 That we know how many they are. 2 That we know what Efficacy they have.
6 Things not Natural are six.

1 Air. 2 Nourishment. 3 Exercise and Rest. 4 Affections of the Mind. 5
Sleeping and Watching. 6 Fullness and Emptiness: or if you will, Casting out and
retaining in.
These Galen reduces to three Heads.

1 Of taking in: As Nourishment and Air. 2 Carriage of the Body: As Exercise
and Rest; Sleeping and Watching; Affections or Perturbations of Mind. 3 Casting
out: as the Excrements both of the Bowels and Bladder, Sweat, and Seed in
Copulation.
I. Air.
1 Air either preserves the Body of Man, or changes it. Wholesome Air
preserves it, unwholsom changes it. That which preserves the Body of Man is,

1 Temperate in the first (...), namely, Heat, Cold, Dryness and Moisture. 2
Pure: and the more Trees there is, the purer is the Air, because the Leaves of
the Trees correct the Air (though my Author leave it out, give me leave to put
it in.) 3 Cleerness of the Air. 4 Air moved by gentle Winds. 5 Watered by
gentle Showers.
2 The Body of Man is corrupted by the Air two ways.

1 By Accident. 2 By itself.
First, By Accident: as corrupted Vapors, Fens, the Propinquity of the Sea,
which fills the Body full of Salt Humors; Jakeses, and stinking Ditches, as also
by dead Carcasses. Secondly, By it self, or its own Distempers, being too Hot,
too Cold, too Moist, or too Dry.
3 The Air (...) the Body of Man,

1 By breathing it in. 2 By an insensible drawing of it through the Pores of
the Skin; and that is the Reason the skins of people of diverse Regions, are of
diverse colors.
4 The Constitution of the Air changes our Bodies five ways; and by them you
may know (if you have but wit enough) how to (...) a Discase by changing of Air.

1 Consider the Situation of the Place, whether Hilly, Level, or Fenny. 2 The
(...) of the Earth, whether (...), or Barren, Woody, or Champion. 3 The variety
of Winds. 4 The Neerness either of the Sea or Lakes. 5 The Seasons of the Year.
II. Nourishment.
1 Nourishment is that Substance, which increases and Nourishes our Bodies:
and it is twofold.

1 Properly and truly: such are Nourishments which nourish our Bodies. 2
Improperly: such are Nourishments which by a Medicinal Virtue alter the
failings of the former, and yet notwithstanding nourish too.
2 The Nourishment we take in hurts our Bodies three ways,

1 In Quantity, when we (...) more than we can digest, and thence comes
Crudity. 2 In Quality, when the Food is too hot, too cold, too moist, too dry;
each of which (...) Diseases of its own Nature. 3 In Substance, when it is of
too thick (...), and this breeds Obstructions, and all the the Diseases coming
thereof.
III. Exercise and Rest.
1 (...), is a laborious Motion of the Body, altering both the breath and pulse
in respect of Motion.

2 Exercise is either General, or Particular.

General is of the whole Body, which either helps or hurts.

3 Exercise helps when it is Moderate: and it helps thus,

1 It makes the Body strong. 2 It increases Natural Heat. 3 It moves the
Spirits, whereby the Vapors and Excrements pass through the Pores by Insensible
Transpiration.
4 Too much Exercise (...), because it (...) Distempers, or Solution of Unity.

5 Particular Exercise is of some of the Parts; as Running to the Feet, Singing
to the Breast, and Fighting to the Arms.

6 Rest, either profits or hurts.

It profits,

1 When it is Temperate, for that recollects the tired Spirits. 2 When it follow
Moderate Exercise.
7 Too much Rest hurts,

1 It causes cold Diseases. 2 Hinders the expulsion of the Excrements. 3 Duls
Natural Heat. 4 (...) the Digestion of the Food.
IV. Sleeping and Watching.
1 Sleep profits and hurts. It profits,

1 Because it recruiteth the tired strength of the Body. 2 It rallies the
scattered Spirits. 3 It calls back the heat to the inward parts. 4 It helps
Digestion. 5 It routs Care from the Heart. 6 It settles a mutinous and troubled
Mind. 7 It recruits a dry Constitution with Moisture.
2 Immoderate Sleep hurts,

1 Because it duls the Spirits, and makes them (...). 2 Makes dull Wits, and bad
Memories. 3 Procures abundance of crude Humors. 4 Spoils Natural Heat.
3 Watchings either profit or hinder. If they be moderate, they profit: For,

1 They quicken the Spirits and Senses. 2 They distribute the heat into the
parts of the body. 3 Helps to expel the Excrements,
4 Immoderate Watching hurts;

1 Scatters the Animal Spirits. 2 It dries the Body, especially the Brain. 3 It
increases Choler. 4 It Is the Cause of hot Diseases.
V. Affections of the Mind.
1 Of Affections of the Mind, some tend to Health, as moderate Joy, and Content
of Mind.

Some hurt (...) all Perturbations of the Mind whatsoever. To name some of them;

1 (...) which heats (...) blood and spirits, stirs up the Humors, sets all the
Body in a hubbub, and ingenders Fevers. 2 Immoderate Joy: which sends all the
Spirits to the External parts of the Body, and leaves the Principal unguarded.
3 Fear; which calls all the Spirits inwards, and leaves the outward parts
unguarded. 4 Sadness: which consumes the Spirits by piece-meals, causes (...),
and thereby hinders Concoction (...) is this all the mischief (...) does, for
it dries the Body, and fills it as full of Melanoholly, as an Egg is full of
meat.
VI. Fullness and Emptiness.
I think that which Physicians vulgarly translate Fullness and (...), might
better be translated Casting (...), and Keeping in: or if you will have me spit
a few Scholastical Phrases, Excretion and Retention.

1 It is an excellent good principle when people cast out what should be cast
out, and retain what should be retained; and perform them both in a due manner.
2 When such things are retained as ought to be cast out, imagine Urine, Dung,
Spittle, the Menstruis, it hurts. 3 When such things are (...) out which ought
to be retained, as immoderate Bleeding, immoderate flowing of the Menstruis, it
can do no good.
Thus you have the things not Natural: It follows now that we show you a Method
how to use them, that so we may not seem like Pharaohs Taskmasters, set you to
make Bricks, and not give you straw.

The Use of things not Natural (...) preserving Health.
1 (...) a common Rule that we should use a Mediocrity in all things not
Natural; and have a special regard to former Customs.

2 The Use of the Air, is according to its Substance, and Quality. According to
its Substance, it ought to be pure, clear, thin, and open.

3 According to its Quality it ought to be according to the Nature and
Complexion of the Party; And therefore as the Eternal and only Wise God has
ordered the differences of Airs in this Nation: so has he ordered differences
of Complexions in men suitable to it.

4 Of Nourishments: The Substance, Quantity, Quality, Time and Manner of
administering (...) diligently to be heeded; al which are to be (...) to the
Complexion of the Eater, and the strength of his Nature.

5 The Rule of Quantity is this; That the strength of the Body may be
refreshed, and not oppressed.

6 The Rule of Quality is taken from the Nature of the Food: the Nature,
Custom, and Pallat of the Eater: the season of the Year: the Climate, and the
Position of the Heavens.

7 The time of giving it is, the accustomed times of eating, and when hunger
calls for it.

8 The use of Motion and Rest, Sleeping and Watching, and Affections of the
Mind; consists in Manner and Time.

9 The use of Excretion or Evacuation is various.

10 Evacuation is either Natural or Artificial, Universal or particular.

11 Universal Evacuation is Purging, Vomiting, (...), Bleeding by (...), by the
(...), or by Horse-Leeches, or by the Menstruis, Bathing, Sweating, Pissing.

12 Particular Evacuation are of the several Parts.

The Use of things not Natural in Diseases.
1 The first thing that here comes to be heeded is, That you have a special
care such things not Natural be used, as are contrary to the Disease, and its
Cause.

2 Although a Physician ought to have a special care of al six of them; yet
amongst them all. Nourishment seems to bear away the Bell. And,

3 In Nourishment have a care of the five things we told you of before, viz.
Its Substance, Quantity, Quality, Time, and Manner of giving.

4 As concerning the Substance of the Nourishment, note, That so much as Nature
is employed in overcoming the Cause of the Disease, so much slenderer ought the
Diet to be; because Nature when she employs much of her strength in opposing
the Disease, is not so well able to mind a hard digestion: Also the acuter a
Disease is, let the Diet be the slenderer.

5 The Quality of the Nourishment, let it be such as strengthens Nature, and
opposes the cause of the Disease: And is to be considered,

1 According to Custom. 2 According to the Disease. 3 According to the Natural
Constitution of the Body.
6 As for the Time of eating, regard must be had to the Custom of the Party
when he was in Health: only take this Caution, In intermitting Diseases, give
no food in the time of the (...), unless urgent necessity, or failing of
strength call for it.

7 Thus much of the first part of Practical Medicine, called Hygiena: the
second part follows, which is called Therapeutica.

Tome II. Part II. Of the Proper Practical Part of Medicine, called
Therapeutica.
THerapeutica, is that part of Medicine which teaches the Art of curing
Diseases: For the Art of Medicine is threefold: To (...), to Preserve, and to
Cure; therefore the Operations of Medicine must needs be threefold also;
Conserving, Preserving, and Curing.

2 The Efficient Causes of these Operations are, Nature and Art. The
Instrumental Causes by which these Operations are performed are, such (...) are
(...) to Nature, and coutrary to the Disease. The manner of acting this is,
quickly, safely, (...).

3 The way and manner of finding out matters of Help, (...) fold:

1 The Method by Indication.
(...)

4 (...) then is either General or Special.

General is performed by the Method of (...) ring: the Special by (...).

LIB. I.
Of the Method of Curing.
1 THe Method of Curing is a General way, common to every Particular, showing
by Intention and Indication the way of Cure for every Disease.

2 Its parts are two, Intention and Indication.

3 Intention, is that Scope which a Physician propounds to himself, when he
undertakes a Cure; the parts of which are Eight.

First, Whether it be to be done, yea or no. Secondly, What is to be done,
whether Alteration, Purging, or Restoring. Thirdly, By what Remedies, it is to
be done: whether by Cooling Heating Purging, or the like: and whether by Liquid
or Solid Romedies. Fourthly, How much is to be done: whether much or little, in
what Measure or Degree. Fifthly, In what Manner it is to be done: whether by
Degrees, or Speedily; whether continually, or by intermission. Sixthly, At what
time it is to be done: whether in the beginning, increase, or state of the
Disease. Seventhly, In what Order; what is to be given in the first place, what
in the second, what in the third: what is to be given alone by it self, and
what with other things. Eighthly, In what place, and in what manner.
General Indications.
1 Indications are to be considered Generally, and Specially.

2 General Indications, according to the mind of (...), are Sixteen:

1 From the Disease, which lies in the Body and calls for its Cure. 2 From the
Temperature of the whole Body. 3 From the part of the Body afflicted by the
Disease. 4 From the strength of the Patient. 5 From the Air the Patient is in.
6 From his Age. 7 From his Custom. 8 From his peculiar Nature. 9 From the Sex
of the Patient. 10 From the Exercise which he used. 11 From the length, or
shortness of the Disease. 12 From the four seasons of a Disease, namely, the
beginning, increase, station, and Declination. 13 From the particular fits of
the Disease. 14 From the ordinary Functions of Nature, 15 From the strength of
the Medicine. 16 From the influence of the Stars.
3 Special Indication is either Physical, or Mathematical.

Physical Indication.
1 Physical Indications are, Parts declaring, and parts declared.

2 The Part declaring is something observed in the Body, either according to
Nature, or else against Nature.

3 It is either Primary, or Secundary.

4 Primary is threefold: The Disease; the Cause of the Disease; and the
Faculties.

These may be thus distinguished.

1 It shows, what the Disease is, by (...) means it came, and whether it may
be cured. 2 The Symptoms which are proper and peculiar, namely, the (...) and
Form of the part afflicted; and the Disease afflicting.
5 Secundary is,

1 That which is joined to the Indication, that which shows that from whence
the Indication is drawn. 2 The Knowledge of what hinders Indication. 3 The
knowledge of what opposes it.
6 Parts declaring show, how much, how, when, in what order, by what place and
way you must act.

7 How much, shows the Natural Temper of the Body, as also of the part
afflicted, and compares them with the greatness of the Disease, and the
Situation of the part.

8 How, shows the strength of the sick Body, and the strength of the part
afflicted.

9 At what time, has a double signification,

1 Of things present, which require remedy. 2 Of things absent, which require
prevention.
10 In what order, shows either that which regards the Efficient Cause or that
which (...) occasion calls for: for many times the violence of the Effect must
be remedied before the Cause can be meddled with.

11 The Place, and by what Way; the Figure and Situation of the place declares.

12 Parts declared, are they which help those declaring.

13 They are either Primary or Secundary.

14 Primary is threefold: Preservative, Curative, and (...).

15 Indication Preservative, shows the Antecedent Cause of a Disease, which
must be taken away by its contrary.

16 Preservative Indication is taken,

1 From the Internal or Antecedent Cause. 2 From the Substance of the Matter
offending. 3 From the Quality of the abounding Humor. 4 From the Motion of the
Peceant Humor.
17 From the Motion of the Peccant Humor is a fourfold Remedy indicated. Viz.

First, (...): which is done diverse ways: Viz. By Bleeding, Cupping Glasses,
Rubbing of the opposite part, Binding, Hot Baths, Clysters, Blisters, etc.
Secondly, Intercepting Medicines, which stop the Passages, that the Humor
cannot come to the afflicted place, whence they are called Defensive, and to be
given in the intervalles of the fit. Thirdly, Such as draw the Humors from the
part afflicted, to another part. Fourthly, Such as Repress, and Repel the
Humor, as al Binding Medicines.
18 The Curative Indications of a Disease are such as are remedied by
contraries.

19 It is either Simple, which is the Indication of a Simple Disease: Or
Compound, which is the Indication of a Compound Disease.

20 An Indication of a Simple Distemper is, Cold of a hot Disease; Heat of a
cold Disease; Dryness of a moist Disease; Moisture of a dry Disease; Hardness
of a soft Disease; Softness of a hard Disease; Antidotes, and Counter-poysons
to Venomous, Pestilential, and Contagious Diseases.

21 Indications of an evil Composition, is Reduction; as making strait, crooked
things; making rough, such things as are smooth; and smooth, such things as are
rough; lessening and increasing Members, etc.

22 Conservative Indication is maintaining things by their likes.

23 The Foundation of Medicine lies in this, To preserve things by their likes,
and take away things by their contraries.

Mathematical Indications.
1 Mathematical Indications are taken from the change of the Celestial Bodies;
which by their Benevolent, or Malevolent Intercourse, work alterations in our
Bodies: Therefore Galen, Hippocrates, and Avicenna, all harp'd upon the same
string, That whosoever was a Physician, must needs be an Astrologer.

2 This Indication consists in the conservation of Health, in the seasonable
application of a Medicine, and in the opening of a vein.

3 Medicines are unseasonably applied.

1 In very hot, or very cold times. 2 The giving of Medicines ought to be
avoided, at the rising, or setting of hot Stars, either Cosmically, or
Heliacally. Such are, (...), Cor Leonus, both the Dog Stars, and Hercules. 3
They are to be avoided when the Malevolents are Aspected one to another, or to
the Moon. 4 Take no purging Medicines when the Moon is in Signs ruminating, or
in the Forms of such Beasts as chew the Cud, namely, Aries, Taurus, and
Capricorn, because then they are easily vomited up again. 5 When the Moon is
Aspected to Jupiter, Nature is so strengthened, that the operation of the
Medicine is hindered. 6 The Moon in the ascending part of the Circle, calls the
Humors upwards; and so easily provokes Vomiting, but hinders Purging by stool.
4 The unseasonable breathing of a Vein wonderfully weakens Nature, and brings
exceeding much danger to the Body of Man.

5 Hinderanees to Bleeding are,

1 Immoderate Heat and Cold; for Nature is rather to be cherished than weakened
at such times, and Bleeding weakens the Natural Sprits. 2 The Moon being in the
Sign governing the Member you bleed. 3 The Moon in Conjunction, Square, or
Opposition with the Sun, Saturn, or Mars; or with the Dragons Head, or (...). 4
The Moon in Signs Attractive, as (...), Leo, and Sagittarius.
The Method of Cure, according to the Opinion of Hermetical Philosophers.
1 As long as the Radical Moisture remains in its Quantity, no Disease is felt.

2 There is but one common Mummy of all Men, and but one Vital Spirit,
therefore a Medicine may be Universal: For all Diseases are nothing else, but
the Function of the Mummy and Vital Spirit hindered.

3 The Cure of Diseases is either Universal or Particular.

Universal is the taking away the Roots of it, or the impurity which causes
the Disease either,

1 Derived from the Seed of the Parents. 2 Through fault, or ill use of
Nourishment. 3 Through External Impression.
4 The Subjects of Universal Cure, is the four kinds of Diseases, to which all
the rest may be referred, as to their proper Fountains and Principles, viz.
(...)-(...), Dropsy, Leprosy, Gout: He that can cure these, will easily cure
all the other Diseases incident to the Body of Man.

5 Universal Cure, may be perfected by an Universal Medicine, or Remedy
agreeable to Man's Natural Balsom.

6 Universal Medicine is nothing else than a Medicine which by strengthening
Nature expels all the Diseases thereof.

7 It is called Quintessence, Balsom, Natural Spirit, Vital Principle Mercury,
Mummy, Elixar vitoe, Incombustible, Sulphur, A Secret, Sol, an Ethereal Spirit
diffused through all Natural things; the Fountain of Heat and Vigor, quickening
Animals, making Vegetables grow, and forming Minerals and Metals in the Earth.

8 The same Quintessence is in the Body of Man, and although it keep its Court
in the Heart, yet it is diffused through the whole Body, and produces diverse
actions, according to the diversity of the parts. For Example.

In the Sensitive parts it produces Sense: In the Movable parts, Motion; and
in the Stomach it concocts the Food into Chyle.

9 If any Disease like an Enemy assault the Body, it rallies up its forces to
oppose it, gives it Battle upon the Critical days, and if it can overcome it,
it triumphs over it.

10 Therefore this Spirit and Quintessence being produced from the Macrocosm,
and taken into the Body: That which is Natural in the Body being strengthened
with these Axilliary Forces so stoutly opposes any Disease, that it quickly
routs it, and expels whatsoever is vicious out of the Body.

11 Concerning this Universal Medicine, I find three Opinions among Authors:

First, Some hold, That it does it not by a Primary, but by a Secundary way,
namely, as it strengthens Nature, for if Nature, or that Natural Balsom of a
Man be strengthened by an Universal Medicine, it soon shows its power in all
the parts of the Body, and leaves not so much as the very Tincture of a
Disease, because it labors to preserve it self. Secondly, Severinus attributes
a power to the Universal Medicine, not only to strengthen the Natural Balsom
and Spirits, but also by the purity, and its purifying of Nature, to take away
all Causes and Seeds of Diseases whatsoever. Thirdly, Wolfgangus (...)
attributes these effects to the Universal Medicine, That it so disposes al
evil humors of what quality or malignity soever they are, or by what name
soever they are called, that it resists no Medicine which after the Vulgar
Method is given for them; but stoutly joins forces with it to help it to
perform its Office; and removes al impediments which lie in the way; yea, so
powerful it is in its operation, that it can be hindered by nothing, but by the
express will of the Creator.
The Cure of particular Diseases.
1 In a Disease the Roots and Seminary Tinctures are not always first to be
taken away, but oftentimes the Fruits, Symptoms, Fits, and Pains are first to
be mitigated: as an Aspiring man is sometimes to be staved from his Throne,
before he is to be taken out of the World: So a Disease is sometimes to be kept
from coming to his Exaltation, before he be thrown out of his House, viz. the
Body of Man: that so those parts of the Body which he has weakened, may be
strengthened.

2 Be the Dsease what it will, let your care be greater to fortify the spirits
than to overcome the Disease.

3 Particular Diseases are expelled.

First, By helping Nature with such Remedies as expel the Disease, as Vomits,
Purges, Medicines which provoke Urine and Sweating, Medicines which strengthen,
case pain, and please the Brain with sweet Smells. Secondly, Specifical Remedies
appropriated to certain parts of the Body: as Ceptralick Remedies in Diseases
of the Head; Ocular Remedies in Diseases of the Eyes; Cordial Remedies in
Diseases of the Heart Fevers, and Pestilences; Pectorals in Diseases of the
Breast; Stomachicals in Diseases of the Stomach; and so likewise in all
Diseases, to have a special care of the Parts of the Body they afflict.
4 In Diseases which afflict the whole Body generally, and yet have their
special fixed Roots, as have most (...) and Consumptions, be sure you
strengthen Nature first, and if she want help, help her afterward.

5 If the impurity of the Disease be violent, as happens usually in Fevers and
Inflammations, you will make mad work if first you go to purge it out: Concoct
it first by (...) Medicines, and bring it into better manners, and when you
have altered the property of it, then you may safely purge it out.

6 Radical Impurities are removed by Resolution, not by Concoction as in
Chronical Diseases, as in Falling Sickness, Quartan Agues, Chollick, and (...);
In Diseases of Tartar, as Dropsy Leprosy, etc. If you look to cure these by
Concoction, you may look till your Eyes drop out of your Head. The God of
Nature has left in Nature certain Remedies which speedily cure them by
Resolution, Consumption, and Destruction; and these, Physicians (which build
their Faith upon Galen, and not upon the God of Nature) call (...) Properties.

7 The Effects of some fits, namely, when they cause much heat of Blood, must
be remedied by Concoction.

8 In all Chronical Diseases, as also in some Acute.

First, he sure the Patient go to stool well, before you administer other
Remedies; that so Nature may have a passage to expel her Enemy by, when you
help her to expel him.

9 The Disease being expelled, and the Party cured, strengthen that part of the
Body which was weakened by the Disease.

10 Chemical Medicines are so to be prepared that they weaken not Nature her
self, as well as the offending Matter.

You have the General Therapeutical part in the Method of Physic: the Special
follows.

LIB. II.
Of both General, and Special Evacuation.
1 EVacuation is either of Plethora, or Cacochymia.

2 Evacuation of Plethora is either flow (...) sensible.

3 Slow, is done either by slender Diet and Labor, and the right use of the six
things not Natural.

4 Sensible is either Chyrurgical, or Pharmaceutical.

Chyrurgical Evacuation.
1 Consists in Blood-letting, (...), and the use of Horse-Leeches.

2 The Parts of Chyrurgy are two:

1 Chyrurgical Administrations. 2 Chyrurgical Instruments.
3 Its Administrations are to be considered, as necessary to Life, or to Safety.

4 The way of administering is according to the (...), and of the places
afflicted with the Discase.

5 The Instruments which a Chyrurgion ought to use, ought to be fitted to his
Operations, both Manual, and Medicinal.

The Evacuation of Cacochymia.
1 It is either Universal or Particular; of which, the Universal ought always
first to be used: The Particular are, Purges, Vomits, Provocation of Urine, and
Sweating.

2 Purges are either weak or strong; and are divided into Electuaries, Pills,
Pouders, and Potions; of which, some are Universal which take away the whole
Cacochymia.

3 Vomits, are such as provoke vomiting; which are either Simple, as the
drinking of warm Water; or Mixed.

4 Diuretics are such, which provoke Urine, and break the stone.

5 Medicines which provoke Sweat, are such Simples or Compounds as resist the
French (...), and other Diseases which come of Phlegm and Melancholy, as China,
Sarsaparilla, Box, and Guajacum, and the Decoctions, or Compositions of them.

6 Particular Evacuation of Cacochymia is, that which is done by Purges,
appropriated to certain parts of the Body, both Internal and External.

7 Internal parts of the Body, are.

1 The Head, as Sneezings, Mouth Waters, and such particular Medicines as purge
the Head. 2 The Breast and Lungs, by Pectorals and Lohochs. 3 The Stomach, by
Vomits. 4 The Bowels, by Purges and Clisters. 5 The Womb, by Pessaries and
Injections.
8 The External parts are (...) from Cacochymia, by Sweating, Blisters, and
Causticks.

LIB. III.
Of Medicaments.
1 WHatsoever changes our Body, and brings it from a (...) not Natural, to a
state Natural, is Medicament.

2 In Medicaments are to be considered their Differences and Operations.

3 As Nourishment, so (...) Remedies are threefold,

1 Such as are Nourishing, which increase, restore, and refresh our Bodies. 2
Such as are venomous and spoil our Bodies. 3 Such as perform both, according as
they are used.
4 Of Medicines, some conduce to the Health, others to the addorning of the
body.

5. Such as belong to (...), do it either by Nature or by Art.

6. Such as do it by Nature, need but little preparation of the Artificer and
are taken from Vegetables, Minerals, and living creatures.

7. From Vegetables, are taken either whole bodies, or Parts of them, as Roots,
Woods, Pith, Bark, Leaves, Tops, Flowers, Seeds, Fruts, Juyces, Gum, Rosen,
Liquors, Oils. etc.

8. From living Creatures are taken either their whole bodies or parts of them,
as Horns, Marrow, Flesh, etc.

Or what they engender, as Milk, Eggs, etc.

Or what they labor for, as Honey, Wax, etc.

Or their Excrements, as Urine, Dung, Gal, etc.

9. Medicines taken from Mineralls are either proper or improper.

First, Proper, as Sulphur, Antimony, Vitriol, and Metals, which are no less
than seven, nor no more, viz. Gold, Silver, Lead, Tin, Iron, Copper,
Quicksilver. Secondly, Improper as. 1. Earths, as Terra Lemna, (...), Bole
Armoniack. 2. Stones, more precious and less preti ous. 3. Salts. 4. Iuyces
made thick.

The (...) of all these you may find before in our Vertual Anatomy.

10. Such medicines are called Compounds, when many Ingredients are mixed to
make up one Medicine: And this is the glory of the Apothecary.

11. The art of an Apothecarie consists in composition and preparation of
medicine.

12, This is either common or Alchymical; Both of them either General or
Special.

LIB. IV.
Of the General Composition of Medicine.
1. IN the Composition of a Medicine are requiered, the thing to be composed
and the choice of it.

The thing to be composed is either more or less Principal.

2. The Principal is the (...) from which the Medicine takes his denomination;
as (...) takes its name from the Herb (...) which is in it: And this is first
found out by Indications.

3. Less (...) is, Those which are mixed with the Basis to make up the
Medicine: And it consists of Two Parts, either Mixture (...) Preparation.

4. There are required in Composition of Medicines,

1 Correctives. If the Basis of the Medicine be stronger than it ought to be. 2
Helpers. If they be weaker, thicker, slower than it ought to be. 3 Directors.
Which are appropriated to some certain part of the Body. 4 Such things as are
appropriated to keep the Medicines from putrefaction, as Honey, Sugar, etc.
5. The Requisites of a Composition are Three, Quantity, Measure, and Quid pro
quo.

6. You have the General Composition; The Preparation follows.

The Opinion of Hermetical Philosophers, concerning Composition.
1 The Causes of Composing Medicines which Galenists affirm, Alchymists do
altogether reject.

2 There is no Disease but has his own proper and peculiar Medicine and
Remedy: and every place furnishes you with Simples enough for its Cure. Ergo.
A Multiplicity of huge Compositions is altogether needless.

3 The Malignant Quality of Medicines is no way lessened by their Corrigents,
but increased: As also, That the weakness of a Purge may be amended by stronger
Purges, wants Experience to prove it. Ergo. The Malignity of the Medicine,
(whether it be too weak, or too strong) needs no correction: seeing the
mglignity may be taken away by the Art of an Alchymist, and what is pure,
remain.

4 You need no attenuating Medicines, for if they be rightly prepared by the
Art of the Alchymists, they will be thin and penetrating enough.

5 You need no strengthening Medicines, for if the ill Properties of the
Medicine be taken away, nothing will remain but what is good: and what is good
is strengthening.

6 You need not compose Medicines to make them endure, for it is the ill
Properties of them which makes them to corrupt, which are taken away by the
Alchymists.

7 You need ad nothing to make them have a Pleasant taste, for all Chemical
Preparations are pleasant.

LIB. V.
Of the Common (...) of preparing Medicines by the Art of the Apothecary.
1 IN the Preparations of Medicines are to be considered, The Cause and Effect.
The Cause is either Efficient, or Final.

2 The Efficient Cause is either Active or Instrumental.

Active, is either Primary, as God and Nature: Or Secondary, as the Apothecary.

3 The Apothecary acts by Heating, Insolation, Cooling, Quenching, Moistning,
Nourishing, Infusion, Softning, Melting, Dissolving, making salt, coloring,
perfuming, preserving, cutting, clipping, filing, rasping, washing, beating,
rubbing, scraping, pressing, straining, boiling, putrefying, sifting,
Extracting, scumming, clarifying, distilling by Asconsion, and Desconsion.

4 The Instruments of an Apothecary, are, Stills, Mortars, Knives, Shears, etc.

5 The End is double,

1 The Preservation of Health, and restoring it being lost. 2 The Preservation
of Beauty, and restoring it being lost.
6 The Effects consists in the Remedies prepared; which is,

1 In the Substance. 2 In the Adjuncts: As the Form, Order, Time of during, and
Shop they are kept in.
7 From the manner of the Substance, Compound Medicines, are some for Health,
some for Ornament.

Those which regard Health, are either taken inwardly, or applied outwardly.

The Method of Curing, is, First to take away the Cause, Afterward to correct
the Symptoms.

8 Such as are taken inward, are some Fluid, and some not fluid.

Such as are Fluid, are either more or less Fluid.

9 Such as are more Fluid, are Waters, Wines, Decoctions, (...), Vinegars.

Less Fluid, are Syrups, Julips, etc.

10 Such as are not Fluid, are either Moist or Dry.

Such as are Moist, are Balsoms, Electuaries, Conserves, Preserves, Lohochs,
Rob, Muccilages, Extracts.

11 Such as are Dry, are Pills, Lozenges, Troches, Powders, etc.

12 Such as are outwardly applied, are Oils and Ointments, Bathes, Cataplasmes,
and Plasters, etc.

13 Such Medicines as either preserve or restore Beauty, are either Moist or
Dry, etc.

LIB. VI.
Of the Chemical Preparation of Medicines.
1 ALchymy is an Art perfecting Medicines, reducing pure Essences from mixed
Bodies, That so the (...) may be the purer, healthfuller, and safer.

2 The Object of Alchymy is a mixed Body, which is Dissolvable, and subject to
(...).

3 Mixed Bodies are of Three kinds,

1 All kind of Plants, and all their Parts, as Roots, Barks, Branches, Flowers,
Leaves, Fruits, Seeds, Gums, Rozins, etc. 2 The Seven Metals. All Minerals and
Stones both Precious and not Precious, Salts, and Juyces. 3 Living Creatures
either whole or their Parts, or that which comes of them, as Milk, Eggs, and
Cheese.
4 In Alchymy is to be considered the Signification of the Words and Medicines,
and the preparation of them.

5 In the Preparation we are to consider the Composition and Preparation it
self. Of the Composition or Mixture of Medicines, we have told you before, what
Opinion Alchymists have.

The Requisites of Composition are Measure and Dose.

6 In Preparation consider the Cause and Effect. The Cause is Efficient or
Final. The Efficient is acting or helping: Acting is the Alchymist, who acts
by Solution and Coagulation.

7. The Parts of Chymycal Operation are two, Solution and Coagulation, or if
you please, Corruption and Generation.

8 Solution is the First part of Practical Alchymy, which takes a part the
Compositions of Medicines, and attenuates them.

9 It consists in Calcination, or Dissolution.

Calcination is done by Corroding or Burning.

10 Burning is done either by Combustion or Reverberation, Combustion is
turning into ashes, or into Glass: Reverberation is either shut or open, which
is done by the Fire of the Furnace.

11 Dissolution is when Bodies are dissolved; and it is either Subtle or Fusive.

Subtle is either Microcronical, or Macrocronical Microcronical, is either
Elevation or Descention. Elevation is Dry or Moist. Dry is called Sublimation,
Moist Distillation.

12 Distillation, is either Right or Oblique.

13 Descension, is either Cold or Hot. Hot is that which is usually called
Distillation by Descention. Cold Descention is either Deliquium or Filtration.

All things that are dissolved by Cold, are coagulated by Heat.

14 Macrocronical, is Exaltation or Digestion. Exaltation is Circulation and
Ablution. Ablution is Imbibition or Cohobation.

15 Digestion is either Putrefaction or Extraction. Putrefaction is to change
the old Nature of a thing into a new.

16 Fusion, or Liquefaction is Simple, or not Simple, and performs its Office
either by Ashes or Antimony.

17 Coagulation is the second part of Alchymy, which by privation of Moisture,
reduces moist Bodies into Solid.

18 It is Cold or Hot. To Coagulation is referred Fermentation and Fixing.

19 You have the Efficient Cause acting: The Helping follows, viz. Place and
Fire.

20 The Place, or the Subject of the Matter is, either that which receives the
vessels, as a Furnace: Or that which receives the Matter as vessels.

21 In the Furnace are to be considered the Parts and Differences. The Parts of
a Furnace are four.

22 The Differences of Furnaces are various, according to their different Uses;
of which, some are open, some shut.

23 Such as are open, are called either, Probatorius, Domesticus, or (...).

24 A shut Furnace, is either Simple or Compound. Simple is either for
Calcination, or Dissolution.

For Calcination is either Cementatory, or Reverberatory.

25 Dissolving is either by Ascension or Descention.

By Ascension is either Dry or Moist.

By Descention is that where by we dissolve the Matter by driving the moisture
downwards.

26 Compound Furnaces are,

First, (...): which is also called Phylosophicus, and Arcanus. Secondly,
(...): where, by one fire, and little labor, diverse Furnace are cherished.
Others called Piger Henricus.
27 To these are added Instruments which Alchymists use, as Iron Tongs, Iron
Plates, Bellows, etc.

28 You have the Subject receiving the Vessels into it: The Vessels which
receive the Matter follow.

29 Of the Vessels, some are put to the fire, some are not. Those which are put
to the fire, are either made of one Matter, or else of diverse.

30 Vessels made of one matter, are either of Glass, or Mineral.

31 Of Glass, is either a Phial, or Circulatorium. Glasses are used in
Solutions and Coagulations.

32 The Circulatoria are of diverse kinds; of which, three bear away the Bell: A
(...), (...), and the Phylosophical, or Hermetical Egg.

33 A Mineral vessel, is either Metal or Earth. Metal serves either for
Subtillation or Infusion. For Subtillation is made either of Brass or Bladder:
For Infusion is a Funnel.

34 Earthen Vessels contain either the Matter it self, or other vessels.

35 They which contain the Matter it self, are either Fusory, or not Fusory.

36 Those which contain other vessels are, Kettles, Cauldrons, Earthen Pans,
Crocks, Trevets.

37 Vessels which are chosen according to the pleasure of the Workman, are made
of Earth, Glass, Metals, etc. Some of these are Superior, some Inferior.
Superior, as Alembicks: Inferior, as Retorts, etc.

38 You have the Instruments, and the Place: Heat and Fire follows.

39 Heat is Natural, or Artificial.

Natural is by the Beams of the Sun.

40 Artificial is Simple or Mixed: Simple is by Digestion, or Separation.

41 Digestion is by Anthannor, or Horsedung, or Hay, or Straw.

42 Heat separated is either gentle or strong. Gentle is of a Bladder or Ashes.

Strong is either Impedited or Free. Impedited is of Sand, Filings of Iron.

43 Free heat is of Coals, either with flame, without flame, or Reverberatory.

44 A mixed heat is that which serves both for digestion and separation; and is
called a Bath.

Baths are two sold: Balneum Mariae, and Balneum Roris: namely, when the Vessel
is heated by the Ascending Vapor.

45 You have the Efficient Cause. The final Cause of Preparation is, The
preservation of Health, and other uses belonging to the Life and Ornament of
Man.

46 You have the Cause: The Effects follow; which consists in the Order of
preparing Medicines, and their application to Dileases.

47 From the Substance, some Chemical Medicines conduce to Health, others to
Ornament: Such as conduce to Health, are either fluid or not fluid. Fluid are,
Waters, Spirits, Tinctures, Oils, and Quintessences, etc. Such as are not fluid
are, Balsoms, Extracts, Salts, Flowers, Sublimates, (...), Glasses, Regulus,
and Chemical Pouders, etc.

48 To my God alone in Trinity and Unity, be all Honor and Praise, for ever and
ever.

Amen.
FINIS

