The Sinners ARRAIGNMENT; OR, The Life, Death and Judgment of stubborn and
Incorrigible Sinners.

Wherein first is plainly set forth and descriscribed the Certainty of their
Death: As also many pithy Arguments to persuade men to prepare for it, lest
they fall unawares into the Great Condemnation.

Together with a Pithy Discourse of the last and great Judgment, with a
discovery of the Judge, the judged, and the manner of the pronouncing Sentence,
the Confusion of sinners before the Judgment Seat, being full of Terror and
Amazement; as also followed on with many Directions to sinners, which, if
followed, they may escape the Sentence of, Go ye Cursed, etc.

With some Consolations for Saints, who have overcome the second Death, and may
appear with boldness at the great Day and Receive their Sentence of, Come ye
blessed, etc.

By T. P.

Romans 6.23. For the wages of sin is Death, but the gift of God is eternal Life
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Psalm 1.5. Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the Judgment, nor sinners
in the Congregation of the Righteous.

London, Printed for Thomas Passinger, at the three Bibles on London Bridge.
1668.

The Sinners Arraignment.
Heb. 9.27. And it is appointed to men once to dye, but after death to Judgment.


THe greatest concern of men in this Life ought to be to study so to Live as
they might not be afraid to dye; Now that death is the Lot and portion of all
mankind, both Scripture and Example do sufficiently evince to us. In the
handling of these words, I shall not only show that it is the Lords Decree and
appointment for men once to dye. but also press on some wholesome Counsels and
Exhortations to poor sinful souls to prepare for Death and Judgment. I shall
not touch at all upon the foregoing words, but come immediately to the Text,
and from them draw these two Observations, viz.

1 Doct. That though Death to poor unregenerate souls be terrible, yet being
the Decree and Appointment of God, which is immutable, it is certain.

2 Doct. That after Death comes Judgment.

To begin with the first, which I shall give you two or three Scriptures to
prove, and a few Motives or Arguments to stir you up to prepare for Death; and
then briefly apply it. The Text it self is plain enough to prove it to be a
truth, that it is Gods Decree and Appointment: 1 Samuel 2.6. The Lord kills and
makes alive, he brings down to the grave and brings up. Ezekiel. 18.4.
Behold, all souls are mine, as the soul of the Father, so also the soul of the
Son is mine; the soul that sins it shall dye. Psalm 82.7. But ye shall dye
like men, and fall like one of the Princes.

Death is the certain Lot and Portion of all both good and bad, sinners and
Saints, wicked and godly, but blessed are the dead who dye in the Lord, happy
is their state and condition, they are but gone to their desired home, to an
eternal Mansion, to the everlasting and full fruition of God who is the
chiefest Good, but the wicked shall go down to his own place, the wicked shall
be turned into Hell and all the Nations that forget God. But to come to the
Motives to move you to prepare for Death, and they are such as these:

1 Motive. To prevail with you to prepare for Death. Consider the death of the
Righteous and the death of the wicked, see what the Scripture speaks of both,
though it may be in your Lifetime you will not perceive the vast difference
between the one and the other, yet when Death comes to stare you in the face,
when the King of terrors comes and hangs your head over the Grave and your
mouth over Hell, then you will know and perceive that it is better to dye the
Death of the Righteous than the Death of the wicked, etc. Psalm 11. v. 6. Upon
the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone and an horrible tempest,
this shall be the portion of their Cup.

2. Consider where is the place or what is the condition of the soul after
Death. If thou dye in thy sins, whether does Death hurry the souls of the
ungodly on a sudden in a moment in the twinkling of an Eye, even into the
presence of God, there to receive their definitive Sentence, its presently
adjudged either to everlasting Joy, or to everlasting Torment. Oh unpardoned
sinners and unrenewed souls, Death will be your passage to everlastins misery;
Oh could but Guilty ungodly hearts be sure that there is no more Justice to
take hold on them after Death, no more pain, nor sorrow to be felt after Death,
but that man dye as a beast, that he has no more to feel, or Lose; Death then
might be a tolerable evil, but its a Living Death and a dying Life, and
endless Woe and unspeakable Torment to which Death leads the guilty soul; The
utter darkness, the unquenchable fire, the Worm that dies not, the
everlasting flames of the wrath of God; These are the chief horrors and stings
of Death.

3. Consider Death as our enemy, the which if it do not excite us to prepare
for it, certainly then the foreknowledge of it must needs increase our misery,
its an enemy to Nature; It cuts men off before they have lived half their
days. A beast that knows not he must dye, is not tormented with the fear of
Death; but man knows he must dye: We may see Graves and weeping Friends every
day, and we cannot but know assuredly we must encounter with this Enemy, and
that we shall be foiled by him. Now to come to Application, the Uses are two
only: 1. For Exhortation, 2. For Consolation.

1. I exhort Sinners this Day in the Name and fear of the great and Eternal God
to provide themselves of a Sanctuary and a sure Refuge for their souls against
the day and hour of Death. All men with Balaam desire to dye the death of the
Righteous, oh but how few endeavor to live the Life of the Righteous; and that
you may truly prepare for Death, be first exhorted to avoid the occasion, to
wit, Sin. Sin brought Death into the World with it: Oh foolish man, will thou
still love such a mortal enemy? If a man should Rob thee of a groat, or defame
thee, how hardly would thou be reconciled to him, but oh soul sin deprives
thee of thy Life, and separates thy soul and body in sunder, and forfeiteth thy
everlast-happinesse? and can thou love that which will undo thee? take heed
of jetting at the Door of Hell, drive not away thy own Salvation, harden not
thy heart against the fear of God; had it not been for Sin we had needed no
Coffin or Winding Sheet, nor have been beholding to a Grave to hide our
Carcasses from the sight and smell of the Living, but as Enoch and Elias were
Translated when they walked with God, even so should we: Oh then sinners, use
sin as that will use you, spare it not, for it will not spare you, it is your
murderer, and its the murderer of the World; use it therefore as a Murderer
should be used, kill it before it kill you, and then though it kill your
bodies, it shall not be able to kill your souls.

If the thoughts of Death, and the Grave, and Rottenness be not pleasant to
you, Oh let not the Thoughts of sin be pleasant to you, let this be your Motto
(Memento mori) you love not Death, love not the cause of Death; Is it nothing
to be dead in Trespasses and sins: Oh what a Poison is this that kills so many
millions, that can never be cured but by the blood of Christ; Oh unbelieving
stupid souls that smart and sin, groan and sin, and weep and lament over bodily
Diseases and sufferings, of which sin is the Cause, and yet sin still; What,
fear a Grave, and fear not sin, which will not only send the body to the
Grave, but the soul to Hell; What pains and pleasure do thou take, Oh silly
soul in working the work of wickedness? Do thou not believe the Scripture the
Word of the everlasting God that tells you the wages of sin is Death, viz.
temporal and eternal? Can thou stare and gaze that King of terrors in the
face with Confidence without a firm and well grounded Faith of thy interest in
the Lord Jesus. Consider thy danger oh Sinner whilst without God in the World,
and an Alian to the Commonwealth of Israel at the moment of thy Death. Beware
of the great damnation, Can you hang your mouth over Hell by the single thread
of a frail Life, which you know not how soon you may lose, and Death may in a
moment snap asunder and then you are lost irrecoverably; whilst under the power
and Dominion of sin you are in danger of damnation every day; Oh dreadful, what
at the brink of hell, and not see it; at the very borders of the Lake of
brimstone and not tremble, almost within the hearing of bitter shrieking and
roaring of damned souls, and yet secure. In the fear of God let this exhort you
whilst it is called to Day to hear the Lords voice, and not harden your hearts:
What security can you have when you know not but you may dye to morrow, I
charge you in the name of the Living God, that you rest no longer in a careless
carnal security, seeing the Door is yet open, and Death has not yet closed your
eyes: Return to your God, for in your Fathers House are many Mansions.

2 Use. For Consolation to the Saints, to them who are born from above, and
have gotten the victory over the second death: here is a word of comfort from
ye God of comfort to such souls; Oh, blessed are the dead that die in the Lord,
for they rest from their labors and their works follow them, Rev. 14.13. You
who are dead to sin are alive to God, 2 Pet. 2.24. Rejoice, oh soul, thy name
is written in the Book of Life, God has chosen you and set you upon his heart,
and the sinner shall not intermedle with your Joy. Let Reprobates and fools
passed by, stand trembling; and be filled with horror at the approaches of
Death, but rather let it be your joy, for then your joy shall be full, Death
will be to the Saints but as a Transportation, not into bondage, but into
freedom; for here can those fetch their comfort in that they have peace with
God, and union with Christ, and the assurance of the pardon of their sins, and
the imputation of Christ's Righteousness to them: they can comfortably conclude
that the sting of Death is taken from them. When a Believer looks upon himself
as a dying man, will not this delight his soul that Death comes peaceably to
him. If God be a Believers Friend, Death is so also, Out of the Eater comes
forth meat, yea, there is a food in Death for every believing soul; Death is
the Chariot to carry the soul into everlasting Glory; As for the wicked it
stings them to death for ever, but it does but lay you asleep; it is an inlet
to their real misery, but its but an outlet from your present trouble, and an
inlet to your future happiness, for God hears an especial love to you, oh
Saints and Servants of the most high God; for he has loved you from Eternity
with a Love on purpose to do you good; O then delight your souls here, and
comfort your selves with these words, that though you must go down to the
Grave, yet you shall not go down to Hell. The second Death shall have no power
over you, though you must be reckoned among the Dead, yet you shall not be
reckoned among the damned, when you are going to your Grave, you are not going
to eternal darkness, but to God who is Light, for your Surety having paid the
debt for you, and satisfied Gods Justice, at death you shall be received into
your Masters Joy. Now I come to the second Doctrine.

2 Doct. After Death comes Judgment.

The words of the Text are sufficient to prove this Truth, but I shall give a
Scripture or two more, Romans 14. v. 10, We shall all stand before the
Judgment Seat of Christ 1 Pet. 4. v. 5. Who shall give an Account to him that
is ready to Judge the Quick and Dead; nothing more plain than this Truth.
Therefore we will enquire a little, 1. Who shall be the Judge; and 2dly, Who
shall be judged, and then briefly apply the whole.

1. Who shall be the Judge?

I Answer, God himself by Jesus Christ.

1. Principally God as Creator.

2. As also, God as Redeemer; the humane nature of Jesus Christ, having a
derived and subordinate Power. God lost not his right to his Creature, either
by man's fall, or the Redemption by Christ, but by the latter has a new further
Right, but it is in and by Christ that God Judges; for as mere Creator of
Innocent man God judges none, but has committed all Judgment to the Son, who
has procured this Right by the redeeming of fallen Man, as it is in John 5, v.
22. But yet as the Son judges in the nearest sense, so the Father does it
principally, in that the power of the Son is derived from the Father, and so
stands in subordination to him as Fountain or Efficient. Well then sinners,
though you may hide your Cause from men, yet you cannot hide your Cause from
God, though Devils may be ignorant of your case, yet God knows your thoughts
afar off; but

Secondly, Who are those that must be judged?

For answer, All, every man or woman that has been born upon the earth; but
the first in order to be judged shall be the Saints, and then with Christ they
shall judge the rest of the World: the Princes of the World shall stand before
Christ even as the Peasants. the honorable as the base and poor shall all meet
together, and the Lord shall Judge them all: But to apply the whole, the Uses
shall be three.

1. For Examination. 2. For Terror and Astonishment. 3. For Exhortation. --
Because I Chiefly here intend to speak to Sinners, and if the Lord please to
set home his Word with power to some hearts, it may tend to a waken secure
sinners.

1. For Examination and Trial. Oh sinner, Ask thy soul these questions:

1. Do thou soundly believe the Doctrine which has been proved by Scripture,
viz. That after Death comes Judgment? What say you Sirs? Do you verily believe
that you and I must stand at Gods Bar and be judged to everlasting Joy or
Torment; when I see more Infidelity than Faith among us, it makes me jealous
whether you do firmly believe it or no? What are the effects of your Faith? do
you prepare to look God in the face, and that with comfort? It is the express
word of the God of Truth revealed in his Word, Matthew. 13.38, 39 40, 41, etc.
and Matthew. 25. throughout, John 5.28. and 29. The hour is coming, in which all
that are in their Graves shall hear his Voice and shall come forth, they that
have done good to the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done evil to the
Resurrection of damnation. Romans 14.9.12. So every one of us shall give account
of himself to God; It is as sure as the Word of the Living God can make it, and
dare you doubt of the truth of it? Oh then confirm your souls in the belief of
this as if you had heard Christ, or an Angel from Heaven say to you, Oh man,
thou art hasting to Judgment.

2. Examine your souls, and ask this Question; whether you do soberly consider
of this great Day, and are seriously affected with the consideration of it? Oh
souls, do you when you are alone use to think how certain and how dreadful it
will be, and how fast its coming on, and what answer you shall make at that
Day? Alas Sirs, is this a matter to be forgotten, nay, are you not worse than
mad, when you are going to Gods Judgment and never think of i? Let these words
be often in your thoughts; Arise ye dead and come to Judgment; you have
warning of it from God and man, for the Lords sake don't forget it. Some men may
have heard of this Day by the Ministry of the Word 20. 30. 40 years together,
and the Preacher has told them it was at hand; now to talk of a day of
Judgment, and they all this while see it not nor feel any hurt by it, they
think it is but talk, and so make nothing of it, and this is all the thanks
they give to God for his patience, and long suffering, because entence is not
speedily executed, therefore their hearts are set in them to do evil.

3. You who are not ready, or in a condition whereby you may be safe at that
day; I would ask this Question, How you are resolved to prepare for Judgment
for the time to come? will you do no more than you have done hitherto, or will
you set your selves with all your might to make preparation for so great a Day?
Oh that I could hear you say, Lord direct us what to do; Oh that there were
such hearts in you, that you were truly willing to serve the Lord. If ever you
would look the Lord Jesus Christ in the face with comfort at the hour of death,
or day of Judgment, make ready, and make it the business of your lives to
provide for everlasting.

4 Question. Did you ever set upon your hearts the dreadful evil and mighty
weight of sin, and the misery which it will bring souls to, and did ever see
the need of a Deliverer; if not, dreadful will be the day of Judgment to your
souls, better for you you had never been born, for a soul to appear in the
presence of God clothed with the ugly garments of sin and sorrow, and there to
see him to sit as Judge to condemn him for ever to eternal darkness, who would
have been thy Lord and Savior, thy Deliverer and Redeemer, who would have
Redeemed thee from eternal Death and saved thee to a better Life. Oh this will
mightily astonish thee.

2 Use. Is for terror and astonishment.

The execution of this Judgment is so Certain that nothing is more Certain; no
sooner is the dreadful Sentence past upon sinners but away they must be gone:
There is no delay, much less any Reprieve to be expected; nor no hope of
escape, (if the Judge once say, take him Iaylor); so if Christ once say, Take
him Devil, You that ruled and deceived him, now torment him; Oh soul, after
this all the World cannot rescue you, it will be in vain to look about for
help; Alas, there is none but Christ can help, and he will not, because you
refused his help. It will be in vain now to cry to the Hills to fall on you,
and the Mountains to cover you from the presence of him that sits on the
Throne; It will be in vain now to Repent and wish you had not slighted your
salvation, nor solo it for a little pleasure to your flesh; It will be in vain
to cry, Lord, Lord, open to us, Oh spare us, Oh pity us, Oh do not cast us into
these hideous flames, do not turn us among Devils, do not torment us in these
hideous flames. Consider how fearful the case of that man will be that is newly
doomed to the everlasting fire, that is haled to the Execution without Remedy;
Oh then, what mad men are they who do nothing to prevent such a misery. The
Time was when Repentance would have done thee good, but then all thy Repentings
will be in vain while the day of thy Visitation lasts, had thou but a heart
to pray and Cry for mercy in Faith and fervency through Christ thou might be
saved, but then Prayers and Crying will do no good, should thou roar out in
the extremity of thy horror and amazement, and beseech but the Lord Jesus to
forgive thee but one sin, or to send thee on earth once more to try how thou
would Live, all would be in vain; do not Wonder or Think such that Christ
will not then be entreated by thee, you shall then have a Remember from Christ,
or a Conscience, he will soon stop thy mouth and leave thee speechless, and
say, Remember, I did one day send thee a Message of Peace, and thou would not
hear it; I did once stoop to beseech thee to ^^rn, and thou would not stoop;
I besought thee by the tender mercies of God, and all would not do, yea by my
holy Life and my cursed Death, by the Riches of my Grace, by the Offers of my
Glory, yet I could not get thee to forsake the World, the Flesh, or one beloved
sin; I bid thee return and live, but now it is too late, my sentence is past and
cannot be recalled, Away from me thou worker of Iniquity. Oh how can we
without trembling of heart once think of the condition that such forlorn
Wretches will be in, when they look above them and see the God that has
forsaken them, because they forsook him first: When they look on the one hand,
and see the Saints whom they have despised now sentenced into Glory, and the
Wicked on the other hand whom they have accompanied and Imitated, now Judged
with them to everlasting misery. When they look below them, and see the flames
they must abide in for evermore and when the Devils begin to hale to the
Execution; Oh poor souls, now what would they give for a Christ, or for a time
of Repentance, but it is too late, the Door is shut, and they shut out, it is now
no time for mercy.

3 Use. Shall be for Exhortation. I exhort you this day, as ever you would look
the Lord Jesus Christ in the face at the hour of death, or day of Judgment
with comfort, to make sure of your interest in Christ, and that you may observe
a right manner I shall leave with you a few Directions.

1. Be sure to do all your works as men that must be judged for them: before
you venture on any particular action, enquire whether it will bear weight in
Judgment; Oh that you would remember when temptations are upon you. When you
are tempted to give up your minds to the world, and drown your self in earthly
cares: bethink your self soberly, whether you would hear of this at Judgment,
whether it would stand trial at the Great Day, or no: When you are tempted to
be drunk, or to spend your precious time in Alehouses, or vain and
unprofitable Company, or at Cards or Dice, or other sinful needless sports,
bethink your selves, whether this will be comfortable at the day of Reckoning,
and whether time be no more worth to one that is so near Eternity, and must
give so strict an Account of his hours: Oh Remember we must be judged according
to what we have done, and give an account of every Talent we receive.

2 Direct. Get Faith and Repentance wrought in your souls, and resolve upon the
breaking off former sinful courses. Seeing these Changes must be made, and
these Graces must be had or thou must certainly perish; In the fear of God see
thou give no ease to thy mind till thou art thoroughly changed, be content with
nothing till this be done, delay not another day: get Faith which is the gift
of God, stand fast in the Faith, quit your selves like men and be strong, 1 Corinthians. 16. ver. 13. Without Faith it is impossible to please God. Heb. 10.
ver. 6. and then Repent from your dead works. How can thou live merrily, or
sleep quietly in a carnal condition? If thou should dye without Repentance,
thou would perish for ever; Oh then what will thou do at Judgment? Be
zealous therefore and Repent, Revel. 3. ver. 19. Except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish. Luke 13. verse. 3. Oh, seeing every hour thou art uncertain of
seeing another hour, thou may be presently snatched away by Death; Methinks,
whilst thou art in so sad a case which way soever thou art going, whatever thou
art doing: It should still come to thy thoughts, Oh what if I should dye and
come to the eternal and last Judgment before I be regenerate and have part in
Christ.

3. Establish your souls in the sincere belief of this Judgment and
everlasting Fire. If you do not soundly believe, you will not seriously prepare
for it; Unbelief shuts out the most of the world from Heaven, shut not your
eyes against the Light, believe it, lest you unawares come to feel it, for the
Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire
taking vengeance on them who know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus, who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of
the Lord, and the glory of his Power, even then shall he come to be glorified
in his Saints, and to be admired in all them who believe. Oh, did men believe
the Doom would be so dreadful, the Punishment so sure, the Torment so tedious,
the Place so hot, and the durance of it everlasting, they would never live as
they do, in Chambering and in Wantonness, in Whoring and in Drunkenness, Romans
13.13. Did they believe it, we should not hear so many Oaths sworn in our
Streets, nor the Name of God so vilely blaspheemed as it is this day. Well
sinners, think of these things, now, it will be too late hereafter, time is
spending to day, therefore if thou will hear the Lords Voice harden not your
hearts.

4. And lastly, Think, Oh soul, of the suddenness of this day, and of the
quick dispatch God will make with sinners thereon: the Apostles in their day,
did bid people Repent, using this Argument, the day of the Lord was at hand,
much more near must it be now, when so many of those Signs are fulfilled which
our Savior spoke of in the 24. of St. Matthew, it will also come unexpectedly
before many sinners are aware, 1 These. 5. v. 2.3. For you your selves know that
the day of the Lord comes as a Thief in the night, for when they shall say
peace, peace, then destruction comes upon them as travail upon a Woman, and
they shall not escape; It will take sinners away in their sin, yea in the very
act: Oh sinner, God has appointed one time, one way for thy deliverance, and
if thou fail in that one, thou perishest for ever, and all the world cannot
help you afterward, 2 Cor. 6. verse. 2. I have heard thee in a time accepted, in
a day of salvation have I favored thee; Well then sinners, come and yield,
before God come to Judge, for Judgment is near, even at the door, and the Lord
will make quick work, the hour is coming, in which all they who are in their
graves shall hear his voice and come forth, they that have done good to the
resurrection of life, and they that have done evil to the resurrection of
damnation, Joh. 5.28. and 29. And now I am concluding this Point. I have spent
so much time in the speaking to sinners, (which the Lord grant may be set home
to some hearts, that they may prepare for that great and Terrible Day) that I
have not room left to leave a Cordial to the Saints, only close up all with
one terrifying Scripture or two: Mat. 25. v. 30. Cast the unprofitable servant
into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Mat. 7. v.
21. Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven. Rev. 22. v.
14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments that they may have right to the
tree of Life, and may enter in by the Gate to the City; which that poor sinners
may make have to do, is the prayer of him who is desirous of their Salvation.

T. P.

Books sold by Thomas Passenger, at the Three Bibles on London Bridge.
THe Wise Merchant, Or, The Peerless Pearl. By T. Calvert* Minister of Gods
Word in the City of York. The Christian Combat: Or his true Spiritual warfare.
By C. Love, late Minister of Gods Word in the City of London. The Book of
Graces, with Prayers for Morning and Evening: All but three pence a piece. The
Sinners Warning-piece: Or, Heavens Messenger. By Tho. Robins B. of D. Man's
chief Guide to Salvation. By T. R. B. of D. The Scholars Winter Garment: Or,
The Garment of Righteousness. By T.R. Bachelor of Divinity. Englands Golden
Legacy: Or, A brief Description of the Mercies of God bestowed upon England. By
L. P. A Wonder of Wonders: Or, Gods People the Worlds VVonder. By R. Hough.
Gods Message from Heaven, to Sinners on Earth. By T. P. B. of D. L. The School
of Learning: Being Prayers for Morning and Evening, for every day in the week;
with Graces before and after Meat, and a short Catechism for Children. The
Virtuous Wife is the glory of her Husband: Being a new Book, showing the rare
qualities of the truly virtuous woman. Now or Never: work out your Salvation
with fear and trembling, etc. Gods Call to unconverted Sinners. The School of
Patience. The Door of Salvation opened. Englands Warning, or Englands sorrow
for Londons misery. These thirteen last are but two pence apiece, and very
seasonable for these sinful times, in which we live.
FINIS.

