Imprimatur

November 9. 1663. Roger L'Estrange.

FLORIDON And LUCINA


The Pleasant and Delightful HISTORY OF Floridon and Lucina, Illustriated with
an admirable Description of Loves Paradise.

Wherein you may behold, the abundant Felicity, that true Lovers enjoy, in the
Chaste Embraces of their Dearest Loves, And the sad Effects that most commonly
attends Faithless and Unconstant Lovers.

With Variety of other Passages never before Printed nor Published.

By J. P.

London, Printed by T. Mabb, and are to be sold by William Gilberson, at the
Bible in Gilspur-street, 1663.

The Printer, To the Reader.
KInd Reader,
Thou art here Presented with a small History, which I hope will prove to thy
good liking; It is all new Invention, never before Printed, nor Published, and
will take thee but one hour (of the time which thou sets apart for thy
Recreation) to peruse it.

The Author had an intention to have enlarged it, if unexpected occasions had
not prevented him. But it is an old saying, That the wing of a Lark, is better
then the whole body of a Kite: So it may be, this short Piece, may please thee
better then a great deal of worse matter. I am the more confident, because I
have known, as bad as this, which has been kindly accepted. However it be,
when thou have read it, censure it with discretion, and the Author will
endeavor to please thee better in the next.

And so Farewell.
The Pleasant and Delightful HISTORY OF FLORIDON and LUCINA.
CHAPTER I.
Containing an admirable description of Loves Paradise, with the incomparable
Pleasures and Delights which that place affords.


ONe Morning early, when Beauteous Aurora had newly displaid her radiant beams,
to revive and comfort poor drooping Mortals; I walked into a pleasant Meadow,
near to a delightful shady Grove; where I chanced to espy a beaten path, which
led me through this Solitary Shade into a place of pleasure, frequented by none
but Amorous Lovers. It was called Loves Paradise; A place incomparably
furnished with all the rare delights that could possibly be desired. O in what
Rich Array stood the flourishing Arbours, be^eck't with all sorts of fragrant
Flowers and Garlands. There the Roses and Gilly flowers appeared in their
greatest Beauty, and the murmuring Springs did much delight the Senses of these
Joyful Lovers.

Here was no admittance for rough Martialists, nor Mellancholy Saturnists, such
humors were nothing at all agreeable to the dispositions of these sweet souls.

Nor was it any small delight, to see the Lovers walk Hand in Hand from one
Spring to another, and from one Arbor to another, free from the least dread or
danger that might befall them. Their chaste embraces were so sweet, and all
their Actions so Innocent, their Love so Constant, and their Affection so Pure;
that they appeared like so many Turtles billing to delight each other.

The Grove abounded with Birds of all sorts, which with their mellodious
Harmony, did Ravish the Hearts and Ears of all that heard them. How happy are
those chaste Lovers that enjoy such abundance of delights, without the least
spot of stained affection. Never was a Sweeter place framed by Nature, nor
never was there in (...) content found then in this place. I stood amazed to
behold the rarity of this second Elysium, and to hear the little (...) ^arble
forth their inticeing Harmony.

Many were the Fountains, (...), and Rivolets, that were beset about with Pines
and Alms, to shade them from the parching heat in Summer, and to defend them
from the nipping cold in Winter.

In a pleasant Garden near adjoining, you might behold the weeping Statues of
all such Lovers, as had been divided either by death or misfortune; where the
rest of the Lovers did usually once a day set fall some Tears, compassionating
the remembrance of their forepast miseries.

Not far from this place, stood a Famous Temple Dedicated to Diana, in which
they offered Sacrifice with great Solemnity: returning from thence, they
repaired to certain Banqueting houses, richly furnished with all variety of
delights, fit for their Pastime and Recreation.

Some played on rare Instruments of Music, whilst others walked out to gather
Flowers to deck their Flourishing Garlands, some were angling for the nibling
Fishes in the Crystal Brooks, whilst others were retired into private Arbours
to discourse with their dearest Lovers. Marvelous was the variety of pleasure,
that this place afforded to delight the senses of these Amorous Fancies.

Whilst I stood admiring at their enjoyments, I chanced to hear a pleasing
Melody from one of the remote Arbours, which caused me to draw something nearer,
where I perceived it to proceed from the sweet voice of an incomparable Beauty,
who being all alone, not thinking she had been heard, warbled forth this short
but mournful Dity for the abscence of her Lover.



Shall I lament and mourn alone,
Whilst other Lovers do rejoice,
O! where is my dear Floridon,
That I cannot hear his sweet voice
It would revive my lovesick hears
And force all sorrows to depart;
Some strange disaster does detain
My dearest love from me this time
I Am sure he constant will remain,
His love is fixed and so is mine,
Then why do I thus pine away,
Since long from me he cannot stay.
This lamentation proceeded from the fair Lucina, the occasion of her coming
here, you shall find hereafter.

CHAPTER II.
How Floridon and Lucina, by frequenting Loves Paradise, became Inammored of
each other; and appointed their Wedding day: and how Floridon was surpised by
a company of Outlaws, and carried to a Cave in a solitary desert.


THe Fame of this new found Paradise, being spread about all the Province of
Arcadia, caused whole troops of Lovers to resort thither, for to reereate
themselves with the abundant pleasures that this place afforded.

Thrice happy did they count themselves that enjoyed their dearest Mates, but
most unhappy were they, which had not the opportunity to bear a part in this
Amorous Society.

The most remarkable pair that frequented this place of pleasure, was the
constant Floridon and fair Lucina.

This Floridon was a Person of great Power and Quality in those parts, for he
was richly endowed with natures gifts, and his dear Lucina was nothing
inferior to him, either in Birth or Desert. They lived but a small distance
from each other, by which means, they had oftener meetings, and opportunities
more frequently, to repair to Loves Paradise; where they enjoyed all the happy
content that chaste Lovers could wish or desire.

In this natural Delight, they passed their time, for some years; till at the
last, they desired a more real enjoyment of each other, and so concluding upon
a time for solemnizing their nuptials; they resolved after a small season, to
bid adieu to this sweet society of Lovers. (For you must note, that after
Marriage, none was to be admitted into Loves Paradise.)

This resolution of theirs, was applauded and confirmed by the general consent
of all their Relations; so that there was nothing remi^^^ing, but an
expectation of that joyful day, which they had already appointed, but mark
how Fortune crossed their intentions, when they were even in the very height of
their chiefest hopes.

As Floridon was walking one evening alone to visit his beloved Lucina; he was
set upon at unawars by a company of boisterous Out-law's, who bound him upon a
Horse, and carried him into a solitary Desert, about some twelve miles distant
from his own habitation: In the thickest part of this Wood, there was a Cave of
a vast bigness, into which these Robbers did retire, where they had several
Rooms; some for their own Lodgings, and others to bestow their Booties in;
into one of which, they put poor Floridon, being loath to put him to death,
because they had hopes to make a better prize of him.

These Robbers had one amongst them, which was their Captain, to whom they were
all subject; he had formerly been a Gentleman of good Rank, but having
consumed his Estate, was forced to this kind of unlawful living. He had a
Woman of a rare Beauty in ye Cave with him, whom he kept in a manner as a
Prisoner, she had a great power over him, and could almost persuade him to
execute her will in any thing.

This Gentlewoman took great liking to Floridon at the first sight, which was
ye chief cause that he found better usage then others had done before him;
nevertheless his lodging was very hard, and his allowance poor and small.

CHAP. III.
How Floridon bewailed his sad condition in the Cave, and how Isabella
endeavored to comfort him with hopes of Release.
THe next Morning very early these free booters, went abroad to look out for
another prize, and left the care of the Prisoner to the Gentlewoman and two
servants; but she who had viewed the comely person of Floridon, and perceiving
him to be of no mean Quality; thought the time long until she might have some
discourse with him, intending withal to work his release, provided she could
find him conformable to her desires: To that end and purpose she went to the
Prison door, where before she could enter, she might hear him lamenting his
sad misfortune, in these or the like expressions.



O miserable and thrice unhappy Floridon, that from the height of Felicity art
plunged into the bottom of despair; How am I become wretched, at the same
instant that I expected my greatest happiness? O my Dear Lucina! Thy abscence
does more torment me, then either my Imprisonment or death it self.

What comfort can I receive now I am deprived of thy sweet society, which is as
dear to me as my own soul. To whom will thou reveal thy sorrow for my strange
departure, or how shall thou be informed of my sad mischance?

Here do I languish in the Custody of cruel and barbarous villains, which may
perhaps after a tedious imprisonment, expose me to on Ignominious and shameful
death.

But however they shall be permitted to deal with me, yet shall my true
affection to thee my Dear Lucina remain for ever firm and constant.

Isabella (for so was the Gentlewoman called) hearing his dolorous complaint,
was struck into amazment, for whereas she had some hopes before to gain his
consent to conduct her into Sicily by procuring his release, she was now almost
driven into despair, perceiving that his love was so firm and constant to his
Lucina, that he would never be won to forsake Arcadia, however she resolved to
make trial, if she could persuade him by any possible (...). So she unlocked
the Prison door and went in, where she found helpless Floridon, bewailing his
condition without any hopes of redress.

Isabella seeing him thus overcome with Mellancholy, began to comfort him in
this manner. How now Sir, are your spirits so much dejected with one nights
Imprisonment? cheer up your heart and be merry, for it may so fall out; that a
few days more may bring some comfort to your troubled mind. Floridon marked
her words very attentively, but as yet he could not possibly understand her
meaning, however he returned her this answer, in terms suitable to his present
condition.



(Sweet Lady) What your intent is to honor me with this visit, I know not,
however I am oblidged to your goodness, for endeavoring to administer comfort
to a person in misery. And were I capable of deserving so great favor from
you, I should rest a little satisfied in the midst of my afflictions and
sufferings; but having no other means left me to retaliate your kindness, but by
a thankful acknowledgment; you may please to accept the Will for the Deed at
present, and so by consequence I must remain your debtor. Sir, said Isabella,
My visit is not worthy of such acknowledgment, for we are all bound in charity
to comfort the distressed, in the number of whom I Rank you, though not in so
deep a sense as you believe your self to be: And that you may conclude you are
not alone miserable, I shall tell you by what means, I my self came here, where
I remained for some time in as bad a condition as you are now in. For I suppose
the Captain and his crew will not return until night, so that with your
patience, I shall have sufficient time to inform you of my unfortunate chance.

CHAP. IV.
Here Isabella relates to Floridon the place of her Birth and Breeding, and how
she was Married to Chrisipus who was her playfellow from their childhood.
KNow (Gentle Sir) that my Native Country is Scisille, a place that abounds
with variety of all delights, where I was borne (I speak without boasting) of
honorable and wealthy parents, which Death deprived me of, before I was twelve
years old; but the fates so ordered it, that I was left wholly to the care of an
Aunt (which was my fathers Sister, and had no children) who tendered me as much
as possibly my mother could have done, for what education and breeding was
suitable to my Birth and Descent, I had plentifully bestowed upon me, as well
after as before the Decease of my Parents; so that I quickly found, although I
was left Fatherless and Motherless, yet I was not altogether Friendless. During
the time of my Minorite, it was my use to be often in the company of one
Chrisipus a Gentleman's son which lived near to my Fathers, we were playfellowes
from our childhood, and took great delight on the society of each other, which
innocent familiarity continued and increased until we came to riper years of
discretion; insomuch that we became both deeply inamoured, never counting our
selves so happy as when we were together. After a long continuance of our
amorous meetings, Chrisipus took an occasion to discover his affection to me in
this manner.

My dear Isabella, I know you are not ignorant of the Love that I ever bore
you, since the first of our acquaintance, which I have so long smothered within
my Breast, for fear to offend you, that it has almost consumed me to Ashes;
but in confidence of your goodness, I have made choice of this opportunity to
reveal my passion, rather then to Languish without hopes of redress: Then Dear
Heart, return me an answer according to the desert of my Love, for it is in
your Power to make me either Happy or Miserable; and since the Decease of your
Parents, has left you to your own disposing; I presume more freely to crave
your consent, to bestow your affection upon me; and I shall be ever ready to
recompense so great a favor with the loss of my dearest blood, whenever you
shall please to command me to spend it in your Service.

I stood seemingly amazed to hear this sudain motion proceed from him, (though
indeed it was no more then I desired) so that after a little pause I returned
him this answer.



How comes it to pass Chrisipus, that you are fallen into such extremity of
passion all on a sudden? I must confess I always believed you Loved me, when
we were Children, as a playfellow, and since as an Acquaintance and Friend, in
which sense I have had the same Respect and Love for you; not thinking it would
produce any other effects, then what might be dispenc't with in our usual
familiarity; but I must now acknowledge that I find such an inclination in my
Will, as can no way be satisfied, but by yielding to your Motion; Therefore
dear Chrisipus continue thy affection in sincerity, and thou shall always
find thy Isabella willing to comply with thy desires, so far as modesty will
permit. This answer of mine was no less pleasing to him, then the discovery of
his affection was to me; so that after a short time, we concluded to steal a
secret Marriage, which we might the better bring to pass, because my Aunt was
contented, I should go to a friends house some ten miles distant in the
Country, and stay a week or fortnight for my Recreation.

Chrisipus would by no means have me to acquaint my Aunt with our loves, for he
did believe she would never give consent to our Marriage, in regard he was a
Gentleman but of a mean Fortune, which was no hindrance at all to my affection,
however he thought she would not stand out after it was done and past, which
fell out according to his expectation; for after we were privately married in
the Country, and that I was to return home again, my Chrisipus advised me to
make it known to my Aunt, which I did; and with Weeping Tears upon my bended
Knees, I desired her pardon, for I did it without her knowledge, because I
feared she would not have given her consent.



The good old Gentlewoman seeing me in that posture, could not refrain from
weeping, for she was so tender hearted, and so compassionate, that she did not
show me the least angry countenance; but told me, since the Fates had so
ordered it, she would not be a wanting in any thing that might procure our
content, and thereupon sent for Chrisipus and gave us her Blessing, which was
as great satisfaction to us, as if she had given us the greatest Treasure that
might be imagined.

In this delight and content we lived for the space of two years; at the end of
which time, our joys was eclipsed by the Death of my good Aunt, who had been a
continual comfort to us upon all accounts: we had great cause to lament her
loss, although she left us the greatest part of her Estate, which was the cause
of all our misery afterward, as you may well perceive by this following
Relation.

CHAP. V.
Isabella continues her Relation to Floridon; How Chrisipus flew her Unckles
Kinsman; And how they were forced to take shiping for Arcadia; And how their
Ship sunk, when they were within sight of Shore.
MY Aunt at her death, left a small part of her estate to a Kinsman of her
Deceased Husbands, but he not being contented with what she had freely given
him; laid claim to that which she had given to my Husband and me, whereupon
they fell into a course of Law, which cost them a great deal of Money, but at
the last, my Husband got the better, and enjoyed the Estate, though much
against my Kinsmans will, for he so exceedingly stomack't it, that we should
have it in despite of him, that what he could not gain by Law, he endeavored
to compass by Treachery; for he hired two Villains which being Armed, set upon
my Husband at unawars, as he was coming home one evening, and dangerously
wounded him, and had surely slain him, had not two Gentlemen come accidentally
to his Rescue, who presently apprehended the Villains, and had them before
Authority, where they confessed the whole matter.

Not long after my Husband was recovered of his Wounds, it was his fortune to
meet with his Treacherus Kinsman, who would willingly have shunned him, but my
Husband not being able to govern his Passion, called to him to defend himself,
when he see there was no remedy, he stayed, and both of them drew their Swords,
where after a long dispute, my Chrisipus chanced to kill him. Imediately after
it was made known, they laid wait to apprehend Chrisipus, who fled by night to
a poor woman's house, where he lay secure until the search was over. In the
mean time, they seized on our Estate, all but some Plate and Jewels, which I
conveyed away by two trusty Servants to the place where my husband was, to whom
I came the night following, to know what he intended to do, he told me for his
own safety, to convey himself privately into Arcadia, where he had an Uncle, a
wealthy Knight, with whom he would abide until he might safely return into
Scisily again.

When I understood his resolution, I vowed to accompany him, and to participate
of what Fortune had allotted for us.

When he see there was no other remedy, he sent his Servant to the Sea side, to
provide for our passage, who returned and told him, that the evening following,
we might come to the next Bay, where a Ship-master would expect us, who had
special business into Arcadia. Night being come, we truck't up what we could
possible carry, and with one man and a maid, hasted away to the place
appointed, where according to our desire, we found the Master attending us, who
willingly took us Aboard, after we promised him good pay.



My Chrisipus being afraid to be pursued, persuaded the Master to put off into
the Road, and there to Ride at Anchor until it was day light, which he did,
and then set Sail with a fair wind as could be desired; we had as speedy and
brave passage as we could wish for, until we were gotten within sight of ye
place we intended to land at, when all of a sudden, by what means, I know not,
out Ship sprung a leak, which in less then half an hour after it was
discovered, sunk her quite under Water: then there was shreeking, and crying,
and throwing out Goods to save Life, but all in vain; for I believe the most of
the company, (if not all) besides my self perished: But as the fates would have
it, I happened to get upon a great Chest, in hopes to prolong my life, upon
which Chest, I was driven by the wind almost to Shore, where a Fisherman
espied me, and made what haste he could to help me with his Boat, for I was
almost quite spent. O what cause had I to rejoice for my great deliverance, and
what sorrow did I endure for the loss of my dear Chrisipus; now was I left in a
strange Country, destitute of friends, or any assistance, but only this poor
Fisherman, who took me to his cottage, where I used the best means I could to
dry my clothes, and to recover my faint and overwearied Spirits; I bountifully
rewarded him for his kindness, and agreed with him to conduct me to the next
town, where I intended to use some means to find out my Husbands Uncle, Who I
did suppose might live thereabouts; the poor man was very willing, and lead me
the safest way he could, until we came near this wood where unfortunately we
met this Captain and his followers, who took me and brought me by force to this
Cave, where I have remained almost half a year in this condition as you now
find me.

By that time Isabella had made an end of her story, she heard the Captain and
the rest of them enter the Cave, so that she was glad to retire into another
room, and to leave distressed Floridon admiring at her pitiful relation, and
casting in his mind what the event of his imprisonment would come to. But the
frequent going abroad of these Robbers, might give Isabella another opportunity
to discover her intentions to Languishing Floridon, whom we must leave for a
small time, and return to see what became of his dear Lucina after his
departure.

CHAP. VI.
How Lucina lamented for Floridons departure; And how Sir Malpas, when he could
not gain her affection, surprised her as she came from Loves Paradise, and
carried her to his castle by force.
THe same evening that Floridon was so suddenly snatched away by the Outlaws.
His servants seeing he came not home according to his wonted custom; some of
them went to see what was become of him, but when they found he had not been
with Lucina, they were all struck into amazment; especially fair Lucina, who
was ready to tear her hair for grief. Her friends sought by all possible means
to comfort her, with hopes of finding him the next day; nevertheless she could
take no rest that night, but so soon as morning appeared, she hasted to Loves
Paradise expecting to find him there, but missing of him there, her sorrow was
greater then before. Then was it that she retired her self into a private
Arbor, to lament the abscence of her Lover in the aforegoing Ditty. Never was
Lady in a greater perplexity, nor could be more sensible of so great a loss. At
her return she dispatched messengers to all places round about, with charge to
use all diligence to find him Dead or alive.

They bestowed a great while in a vain search, and at the last was forced to
return without the least tidings, or hopes of finding him. But his sudain
departure being considered by his friends, gave them great cause to suspect, yt
a Knight which lived not far from thence, had wrought his ruin by Treachery.
This Knights name was Sir Malpas, he was a Person of great Authority in those
parts, but of a rugged and stern disposition, Of a middle age, having never
been Married, though he had formerly courted a Lady whose name was Mariana,
until he had won her affection, and at length basely cast her off to her great
grief; This Sir Malpas bore a behement Love to Fair Lucina, and had used all
possible means to gain her affection, but he still found his love slighted, and
Floridon entertained, so that he bore an inveterate hatred to Floridon, which
was the cause he was suspected of treachery (though indeed) he was not at all
guilty of Floridons being surprised.

But it was not long before the news of Floridons absence came to Sir Malpas
ears, so he thought now or never to make his address to Lucina, and to renew
his Suit, which he was in hopes she might now listen too; because she dispaired
ever to see Floridon again. But alas, Sir Malpas was deceived, for Lucina
believing him to be the author of her Loves abscence, would not so much as
endure the very fight of him, but commanded her servants that for the future,
they should never admit him into her presence, which so much incensed ye
Knight, that he resolved, if it were possible, to gain that by force, which he
could not obtain by consent.

In the mean time, his old Love Mariana, hearing that he made suit to Lucina,
was much enraged, and exclaimed against him for his disloyalty in sharp and
bitter terms: but when she understood Lucina's constancy to Floridon, she was
a little comforted, and resolved to cheer her spirits a while longer with that
sweet society in Loves Paradise, until she might see what effects this thing
would produce. Sir Malpas was not at all moved with her sorrow, but used all
endeavors to get Lucina into his possession, and if possible, to win her to
his will, either by entreaty or else by force, which design he put in execution
on this manner.

Lucina (to mitigate her sorrow for the abscence of her Lover) used constantly
to repair once a day to Loves Paradise, and there to condole the loss of her
Dear Floridon, which Sir Malpas observing, and waiting his opportunity, one
evening as she was returning home all alone, he sudainly surprised her, and
with all possible speed, conveyed her to his Castle so privately, as it was
without the knowledge of any, but those whom he might confidently trust.



Now was Lucina in the saddest condition that ever poor creature was in,
having lost her own liberty, and with that, the hopes of ever seeing her Love
again. Besides she was fallen into the hands of him she counted as her mortal
enemy, though he gave order she should be treated with all the civility that
might be, in hopes thereby to win her affection, but it was all in vain, for
the was now ten times more enraged against him then before, so that for all the
means that ever he could use, she would not show him the least countenance that
might be. But O what mourning and lamenting was there for the loss of Lucina
amongst her friends, when they could not find her, for they all conclude she
had made her self away in some desperate manner.

They did not at all suspect Sir Malpas treachery to Lucina, as they did to
Floridon, because be loved Lucina, but he hated Floridon. Nor did any of her
friends seem to be more troubled for her loss, then Sir Malpas, who sorrowed
exceedingly, the better to clear himself from all suspicion, for he had
deprived her of all means and ways to give notice of her restraint; so that she
was now become as wretched as Floridon; neither of them knowing the nature of
one another misery.

CHAP. VII.
How Mariana exclaimed against Sir Malpas for his disloyalty, whom he carelessly
cast off and returned to Lucina, who would by no means yield to his will: And
how he resolved to remove her into Florence.
DUring the time of Lucina's restraint she had too many visits from her cruel
Lover (or rather Iaylor) Sir Malpas who finding her still to persist in her
obstinacy, he resolved to try her by harsher usage, and to that end, he gave
order that she should be very strictly looked too, for he would make her know
what power he had over her, now she was in his custody, and so he presently
went out of the room, and walked abroad into a pleasant meadow near adjoining,
to meditate of his own unhappiness. where in the midst of his Mellancholy
musings, he was disturbed and encountered, by his former Love. The languishing
and almost desperate Mariana.

Who finding him alone in a place so convenient, took the opportunity to accost
him in this manner.

Thou false and disloyal Knight Sir Malpas, shut not thy ears, whilst I justly
complain of thy cruel and perfidious dealings, with thy constant (though
wrongfully abused) Mariana. How long shall I languish under the burden of thy
displeasure, and be slighted and rejected for nothing but too much loving thee.
Have thou forgotten the time that thou sued to me for Love, as much as I do now
to thee, remember unconstant creature that I did not continue so hard hearted
to thee; as thou do now to me. Then observe that I do but desire the like
pity, as I showed to thee in the same condition, which if thou shall refuse to
grant, be assured the gods will not fail to punish thy cruelty, but will pay
thee in thy own coin, for upon whomsoever thou shall cast thy affection, she
shall as much disdain thee, as thou now slightest me.



These last words of hers so nearly touched the disloyal Malpas that he hastily
flung from her without returning her any answer at all, but she took so much
time as to tell him, she did not fear but to see him so verily punished for his
ingratitude and unconstancy. And so she retired her self to enjoy her
mellancholy meditations. And he returned home to try if the disconsolate Lucina
would accept of his service.

This Sir Malpas had in the Caffie with him, a very Ancient woman which had
been his Nurse, whom he now appointed to be Lucina's Guardian, and gave her
directions to use all the skill she could to persuade Lucina to yield to his
Love.

This old piece of Mortality was very well skilled in Women's affairs, and left
no means at all unpractised, which might work for her Masters advantage,
sometimes she used all the mildest persuasions that might be, and promised her
the enjoyment of whatever she could desire, and when that would not take, then
she fell upon her with such grievous and terrible threatenings, that she
terrified poor Lucina almost to death, so that for her own safety she thought
it the best policy to seem a little to comply with their desires, and so
promised the next time he came she would endeavor to satisfy him. When the
old woman found her so pliant, she was very glad, for she did not doubt but the
business was half done already; so that with great joy she told the doting
Knight, that she should find her in a better mind then formerly he had done,
which he was glad to hear, and least by delaying time he should change her
mind, he thought fit to give her a present visit, and to strike the Iron
whilst it was hot; so he presently repaired to her Chamber where he found
sorrowful Lucina, with Tears in her eyes bewailing her Misfortune, to whom he
addressed himself in this manner. Madam, I am very sorry to find you in the same
dejected posture as formerly you were wont to be. I entreat you to cheer up
your spirits, and acquaint me with the cause of your continual mourning, since
you may command me to further your Content and Happiness in any thing which
lies in my power, for you know my Love is devoted to your service, and I should
be heartily glad to find a return answerable to my desire.

After a deep sigh or two, Lucina recollected her spirits a little, and spoke
to him in this wise.

Sir, Whether my answer may prove according to your desires or no, I know not;
but I am sure it will be according to your desert. Can you expect to find the
least Love from a person so much injured as I am by you. Have you not first
deprived me of my Floridon, whose love was more dear to me then the whole world
besides, and since of my liberty; then which nothing can be more sweet and
comfortable. Am I not here mewed up from the society of all my Friends and
Relations, and is that the way to procure my love: Oh no! the remembrance of my
Floridon is more dear to me then so.



Here Sir Malpas called Heaven and Earth to witness, that he knew nothing at
all of Floridons departure, nor was in the least guilty of his loss. And then
he began to excuse himself for bringing her to his Castle against her will;
withal, promising her all the liberty she could desire, and what ever else
might stand with her content, if she would agree and yield to his Love.

She told him, she was very incapable as yet to listen to any such motion, and
desired him to make his love appear by granting her liberty, and time to wear
out her woe for the loss of her Lover, and it might be afterward she might
listen to his Suit. But he would by no means consent to let her have liberty,
but still urged her for Marriage, which she was resolved within her self, rather
to dye then ever to consent to it. She told him, if the fates had so ordered
it, that she must be forced by his means to spend her days in Imprisonment,
she was willing to submit to it, since she could enjoy no comfort in any place
without the society of her dear Floridon, who if he were alive and should come
to the knowledge of her sufferings, she made no doubt but he would take a just
revenge upon the Author thereof; if not, the powers above would never suffer
such Villainous treachery to pass without severe punishment. When Sir Malpas
saw he could do no good of her in that humor, he advised her to consider
better of it, and so took his leave of her, and she was very glad to be rid of
him, that she might return to her wonted sorrow; but he was in such a fret,
that he could not imagine what to do, for to force her to his will, he could
not, but it would be known by her friends that lived so near.

So that he concluded his only way would be to remove her into another Country
for a while, where she might possibly be more willing to consent, when she see
no hopes of ever returning; this resolution pleased him so well, that he
intended to travail into Scisily to visit a brother which he had living there;
but indeed his design was for Florence, where he intended to continue until
Lucina might conform to his will.

CHAP. VIII.
How Chrisipus came to visit his Uncle Sir Malpas, and related to him the means
of his escape from drowning; And how Sir Malpas discovered his design to
Chrisipus of his intent to carry Lucina into Florence.
WHilst he was contriving this plot against the innocent and wronged Lucina,
one of his servants came and told him that a stranger below in the Court
desired to speak with him; Sir Malpas gave order he should come in, and so made
haste to meet him; and as soon as he came near him, he perceived it was
Chrisipus his brothers son of Scicily, whom he kindly embraced, and after
mutual Salutation, desired to know if his Father were in health, to whom
Chrisipus replied that his Father had been dead about half a year, and that
himself had very hardly escaped death by a strange accident. Sir Malpas was
very desirous to hear the relation of his adventure, which Chrisipus was
willing to satisfy him in, and so related to his Uncle the very same story
that his Isabella had told to Floridon in the Cave. First of his Marriage with
Isabella, and likewise how he had slain her Uncles Kinsman, and being forced
(quoth he) to flee to Arcadia for my own safety.

It happened that our Ship sunk, where for any thing I know, all the company
except my self perished, and amongst the rest my dear Isabella; for whilst
every one was endeavoring to save their lives, it was my fortune to bestride
an Empty Hogshead, upon which I was tumbled in the Sea, until by chance, a
crew in a Longboat which belonged to a Scythian Pirate took me up, and carried
me a Shipboard, where they pillaged me of all they could find about me, and
believing that I was so weak I could not live, they left me on shore some ten
miles from this place, where they came to take in fresh water. With much ado I
got to a Farmers house, where I was courteously entertained, until I was able
to find out your Castle, where I should count my self to be exceeding happy
after all my sufferings, if it were not for the grief I endure for the loss of
my Dear Isabella.

Sir Malpas was greatly moved to hear the relation of his Kinsmans sufferings,
and endeavored to comfort him; by promising to send messengers along the
Sea-ceast, to know if they could hear any tideings of Isabella. With such like
discourse they spent the time until it was night, when every one repaired to
their rest, but Sir Malpas could take none, he was so distracted in his mind
about Lucina, one while he intended to impart the matter to Chrisipus, and then
again he doubted that Chrisipus would never consent to assist him in so ignible
an enterprise. At length his will overcame his reason, and finding he could no
way bring his design about; but that Chrisipus would know of it; he resolved to
acquaint him with it in the morning, but in such a manner, as he should not
perceive the action to be so gross as indeed it was. The next morning Sir
Malpas sent for him down into a large Parlour, where after they had taken a
light breakfast, they walked out into a private Garden, which gave sufficient
opportunity to Sir Malpas to discover his intentions in this manner.

Since Chrisipus it is your Fortune to happen hither at this time, I shall
entrust you with a secret that much concerns me, which as yet, none knows but
my self; It is so that I have cast my affection upon a Lady much deserving,
which by accident was brought to my Castle, who is so regardlesse of my love,
that no persuasions will work with her. Now I find my self unable to live
without the enjoyment of her, therefore it is my resolution to remove her from
hence into Florence, and there to remain until I shall persuade her to yield
to my will; not in the least to violate her chastity, but to consent to lawful
marriage.

Chrisipus believing the business to be no otherwise then his Uncle had
related, was loath to enquire further into it, least he should offend him, and
therefore returned him this answer.

Sir if your affection be grounded upon a deserving Subject, and that without
the enjoyment thereof, you can take no comfort; then I suppose you may use any
lawful means to gain her affection, and if you be in hopes that change of
Countries may either mittigate your passion, or make her more inclinable, it
will not be amiss to make trial; and for my own part Sir, you shall find me
ready to assist you in any thing which may suite with your honor and repute.

Sir Malpas was glad to find him so conformable to his will, and thereupon he
told Chrisipus, that he intended to leave him entrusted with all his whole
estate, that he might return him moneys as his occasions should require, and
likewise to manage his business in his abscence, that nothing might be amiss at
his return. And in this resolution they walked in to consult about things
convenient for their design: Where we will leave them making preparation, and
return to the Cave to see how Floridon and Isabella fares, whom we left
separated by the coming in of the Robbers from ranging abroad.

CHAP. IX.
How Isabella dealt with the Captain by policy to preserve her chastity; And
how she went once more to consult with Floridon about their release.
THe Captain of this gang, as I told you before; was mightily indeared in
affection to Isabella, yet he never offered to abuse her honor, in regard she
had in policy promised him to be wholly at his command after one years sorrowing
for the loss of her husband, during which time, she would rather dye a thousand
deaths, then suffer her self to be abused. So that the Captain was contented to
contain himself for so long, rather then to hazard her love for the future,
which he made so full account to enjoy. Isabella on the contrary, desired
nothing so much as to work her release in that time, which she had hopes the
better now to effect, by Floridons assistance, in regard she perceived him to
be a person with whom she might trust her life and honor. She prevailed with
the Captain that Floridon might be civily used, in regard he was a person of
quality, and one that had never offended him in the least. So he gave consent,
that Floridon should not be bound, but have liberty to walk about the room;
notwithstanding, he told Isabella that he intended to sell him to the first
Pirate which happened upon that Coast; for he did not doubt but to receive a good
sum of money for him.

Isabella thought long to have an opportunity to acquaint Floridon with his
intent, which happened the next day, when the Robbers were gone abroad according
to their constant use: then she went to visit disconsolate Floridon, to whom
she revealed this sad news, which so much troubled his mind, that he dispaired
ever to see his Lucina again, who (though unknown to him) was in as sad a
condition as himself.



Isabella seeing him so overcome with grief, endeavored to comfort him all she
could, and told him; that her condition was altogether as bad as his and rather
worse: for though he was taken from his Lucina, who probably is living and in
health, she was deprived of her Chrisipus, who (for any thing she knew) was
swallowed up of the merciless seas: And therefore she desired him to take
comfort and to endeavor their release, to the furtherance whereof, she
promised her utmost assistance, upon condition he would engage to convey her
home again into Scisily, for having lost her Chrisipus, she could not think her
self in safety any where else. Floridon was much revived to hear these
comfortable speeches from Isabella, for he was willing to promise and likewise
to perform any thing to get out of the hands of these wicked wretches, so that
he thus replied.

Courteous Lady, I am bound beyond all expression to your worth and goodness,
for all the civility that I have found since I came amongst these barbarous and
uncivil Villains, so that I am never able to requite your kindness, whilst I
remain in this condition. But Madam, if the Fates shall once free us from this
wretched captivity, I shall to the utmost of my power, strive to serve you in
whatsoever may procure your content.

She courteously thanked him for his Love, and told him she did not fear but
providence would find some way for their release ere long, and so she took her
leave, for fear the Captain should return and find her with him, which might
prove much to the prejudice of them both.

It was not long before the Captain came fretting and fumeing for the loss of
one of his men, which was slain at a skirmish by some travelers, which they
set upon to Robb: so that he had now but six men left, two to guard the Cave,
and four to go abroad with him, to look out for provision. But he did not
much value it, for he trusted most to the strength and obscurity of the Cave,
which was so overgrown with bushes and brambles, that it was almost impossible
ever to find it out. But it is now time to leave them a while to their wicked
practice; and see what preparation Sir Malpas makes for his journey with Lucina
into Florence.

CHAP. X.
How Sir Malpas and his company carrying away Lucina; Was set upon by the
Outlaws, which belonged to the Cave, betwixt whom there was a very sharp
Fight; And how Floridon found Lucina, and Chrisipus, Isabella at this
encounter, where Sir Malpas and the Captain was both slain.
THis Knight Sir Malpas had a long debate, with his Kinsman Chrisipus, in what
manner to break the matter to Lucina; at length it was agreed that Sir Malpas
should go in person, and let her know, that he had an intention for his
recreation, to remove for a small time with part of his family to another
house, which he had at the further side of the Province, where she should enjoy
her liberty and whatever else might yield her either satisfaction or delight.
When he had told Lucina this story and expected her answer; she replied again,
That since by his treachery she was fallen into his custody, he might carry her
whether he pleased by force, but he should never enjoy her company one minuite
by consent, neither did she doubt but the Powers above in recompense of her
wrong, would shower down some fearful judgment upon him before he came to his
journeys end. These threatenings nothing at all terrified the treacherrus
Knight, for he still persisted in his resolution, and kept his answer private
from Chrisipus, smoothing over to him after another manner, so that nothing
remaind now, but to get al things in readiness to set forward. When Sir Malpas
had called his Servants together he gave them all charge to be subject to his
Kinsman Chrisipus until his return, then he gave order to have all things made
ready for so long a journey, and appointed four men to go along with him,
whereof two was to return back with Chrisipus, who would needs go along with
him to see them safely Shipped. All things being made ready, they set forward in
the morning before it was day light, for fear that any body should discover
Lucina to be in his company, who (poor soul) travailed with a sad and heavy
heart, but on the contrary, Sir Malpas was cheerful and merry, thinking he had
escaped all danger; when indeed, it was but just approaching: For by that time
they had rid about twelve miles on their journey, two of the servants being
about half a mile before with the Sumpter Horse, they were seaz'd upon by the
aforesaid robbers belonging to the Cave, and immediately drawn into the wood,
which Sir Malpas and Chrisipus espying with another of the servants; they clapped
spurrs to their horses to pursue in all haste, and left one servant to bring
along Lucina after them, which he might easily do, they made such a noise all
the way they rid. It was not long before they overtook these Robbers, who was
gotten almost to the Cave with such a booty, as they had never yet happened on
before. But Chrisipus told them they should buy that treasure at a dearer rate,
before it proved to be their purchase. So by that time the servant with Lucina
came to them, they were all with their swords drawn, dealing blows very freely;
Chrisipus laid about him like a mad man, and Sir Malpas and his servants
behaved themselves very stoutly, and had much the better of the fray, but the
two thieves which were left to guard the Cave, seeing their Captain and fellows
in such danger, ran with all speed to their succor, and for haste by good
fortune left the entrance of the Cave open, which Isabella perceiving, she went
presently to tell Floridon, that the Robbers were all in fight with a company
of travailers and had left the Cave open, and that now was the time to purchase
their liberty.



Floridon stood not long to pause, after he got out of his prison, but snatched
up a good Sword which he found in the next room and made haste to help the
gentlemen who was almost worsted by the Robbers. But so soon as Floridon came
amongst them, he did so bestir him, that with the help of Chrisipus, they had
quickly killed three of the Villains, but in the mean time, the Captain had
given Sir Malpas a mortal wound in the side, and turning his horse hastily to
strike at Chrisipus, the horse chanced to fall and broke the Captains
thigh bone; the rest of the Thieves seeing three of their company slain, and
their Captain disabled to fight; they fled with speed, but Chrisipus pursued
them, till on a sudden, he met his Isabella coming from the Cave, to his great
wonder and admiration.

But when Isabella saw Chrisipus, she was so transported with joy, that she had
not power for the present to speak to him. In the mean time, Lucina perceiving
it was Floridon which came so fortunately to their aid; she ran to him and had
like to have swooned in his arms for joy. But so soon as Sir Malpas servants
saw it was Floridon, whom their Master so much hated, they all set upon him to
have slain him. Then Isabella cried out to Chrisipus to save him, who presently
commanded the servants to put up their swords, and see what condition their
master was, in whom they found to be dangerously wounded.

Whilst they were busy about Sir Malpas. Floridon had time to embrace Lucina,
and Chrisipus, Isabella, all admiring by what chance they were so strangely
brought together, but had not time at present to relate; only Lucina told
Floridon, how that treacherous Knight intending her ruin had wrought his own
destruction. Isabella desired Chrisipus to accept of Floridon as a friend, and
Floridon knowing Chrisipus to be Isabella's Husband, was heartily glad they
were so happily met together again. Chrisipus craved pardon of Floridon and
Lucina, since what he did to assist his Uncle he did ignorantly, not knowing
any thing of Lucina's betraying, nor of his Uncles Treachery. So that now being
all reconciled, they left the relation of their adventures until a fitter
opportunity, and went to visit the wounded Knight. But when Sir Malpas lift up
his eyes and see Floridon standing by him, he was confounded with shame and
remorse of conscience, for the wrong he had done Lucina; but Floridon seeing
him in that condition, was more willing to pardon his wicked actions, then to
take revenge upon a dying man. Therefore he advised Chrisipus to convey him to
the next Town to have his Wounds dressed, that if it were possible he might live
to repent and amend his wicked life.

When they had set Sir Malpas on hors-back, and a man behind him to hold him
on, and ordered two servants more to attend him to the next Town, then they
went to see what condition the Captain of the Outlaws was in, whom they found
to be stark dead; for when he saw some of his men slain, and the rest fled, and
finding himself in that extremity of pain and torture, knowing the Law would
take his life, to prevent that, he stabbed himself with his own sword; so that
there needed no further administration of Justice, upon so notorious a
Malefactor: When they saw he was dead, Floridon and Chrysipus took away his
Horse and Arms, and went to search the Cave, where they found but very little
of any thing which was considerable, so they locked the door of the Cave, and
taking Lucina and Isabella along, they rode to the next Justice of Peace, and
acquainted him with all that had happened, who presently appointed Officers to go
bury the dead bodies, and to take whatever was in the Cave, to be sold for the
use of the poor of the Parish, and to break up, and utterly demolish the Cave,
that it might not be a shelter to such villains for the future. Then Floridon
and Chrysipus, with Lucina and Isabella, rid to the Town, where the servants
had carried Sir Malpas, to have his wounds dressed; when they came to him, the
Chyrurgion was just searching his wound, and told them he found it to be
incurable, nevertheless he might live two or three days longer: which Sir
Malpas understood and desired he might die at his own Castle, and be buried
with his Predecessors.

CHAP. XI.
How they carried Sir Malpas to his Castle, where he dyed very penitent, and
was nobly buried, and how Floridon and Lucina was welcomed home with great joy,
and how they went to take leave of Loves Paradise.
ACcording to Sir Malpa's desire, Chrisipus took care to provide a Horse-litter
and all things necessary for his removal, and commanding the servants to march
easily along, they all accompanied the wounded Knight; when upon their journey
they had sufficient time to declare to each other all their forepast sufferings
and deliverances. Then Lucina made known all Sir Malpa's Treachery, which so
amazed Chrysipus that he heartily repented that he had ever assisted his Vnke
in so ignoble and base an enterprise. Floridon was very willing for Isabella's
sake, to pass by all his ignorant failings, and so from that time there was an
entire league of friendship betwixt them. By that time they had understood
Lucina's sufferings, Floridon began and told them of his being taken by the
Outlaws and carried to the Cave. And Chrisipus and Isabella, related the means
of their deliverance from shipwreck: With such like discourse they past away
the time until they were come to Sir Malpa's Castle, where Floridon and Lucina
would have taken their leaves, but Chrisipus earnestly entreated them since his
Uncle had so short a time to live, that they would stay to be witness how he
disposed of his Estate at his Death. As it was a reasonable request, so they
could not civily deny it. Then they took wounded Sir Malpas and carried him to
bed, where he lay for a while so stupefied with pain, that he knew not where he
was.

At length when he came to himself, he told Chrisipus he was very glad he had
found his Isabella again, who he feared had been lost* and since he had but a
small time to continue, he was willing to settle his (...) Chrisipus and his
Heirs for ever. And thereupon he made his Will, and gave Legacies to all his
servants, and a good sum of money to the poor, being very charitable at his
Death, although he never was so before. When he had set all things in order, he
then begun to reflect upon his wicked dealings with Floridon and Lucina, and
earnestly begged their pardon and forgiveness, since by his own folly, he had
procured his death, they could desire no greater satisfaction.

He acknowledged it to be no more, but what he had deserved: First, for
deceiving Mariana, and afterward for endeavoring to wrong Floridon and
Lucina, who seeing him so penitent, they were moves with compassion, and freely
forgave him for all the wrong that ever he had done them.

Whilst Sir Malpas lay in this sad condition, just at the point of Death, it
chanced that Mariana heard news of it, and came to visit him; but when she saw
him almost dead, and understood by what means he had procured his own Death she
was almost destracted. When Sir Malpas saw her so near him, whom he had so much
wronged; He with a feeble voice, desired her, Not to disturb him at his Death,
but freely to forgive all his misdeeds, that he might go out of the World in
Peace of Conscience.

She had scarce done speaking to him again, before he dyed, and left them all
exceedingly satisfied by his penitent Death.



Then Chrisipus prepared all things necessary for his Burial, and would by no
means suffer Floridon and Lucina to dep^rt until the Burial were past, which
lasted a week, for he was very nobly Buried according to his Quality.

As soon as Mariana had seen her Beloved Malpas buried, she took leave of the
Company with great sorrow, and retired to Loves Paradise to spend the rest of
her days.

Now was Chrisipus and Isabella possesed of their Unkles Estate, to Floridon
and Lucina's great joy; who having seen all things decently performed,
courteously took their leaves of Chrisipus and Isabella, who would needs go
part of their way with them, but that Floridon would by no means suffer them,
in regard their Uncle was so lately Buried. Very many expressions of kindness
passed amongst them, and as much were they indeared one to another, as if they
had been near Relations.



Now had Floridon and Lucina their hearts delight, and passed cheerfully (...)
until they (...) to their (...) habitations. But to tell with what (...) they
were welcomed by their Friends, Relations, and Servants, it would tire any
tongue to relate. There was Ringing of Bells, and making of Bone-fires, and all
little enough to make known their happy arrival: There could not possibly be
more sorrow shown for their loss, then there was expressions of Joy for their
safe return: Their Friends stood in admiration to hear them relate in what a
strange manner they were surpised and carried away, especially when they heard
of Sir Malpas's Treachery, and of the cause of his Death.

But after Floridon and Lucina had continued a while amongst their Relations,
to rest themselves after all their troubles They agreed to go once more to
Loves Paradise, so take leave of that Amorous Society, which was so sorry for
their abscence: when they were once entered into that delightful place, the
thoughts of all their former sufferings were quite vanished; now they enjoyed
each others company, which they valued more then the whole World.

All the Troup came to bid them welcome, but were very sorrowful when they
understood they came to take their last farewell.



Nevertheless they entertained them with all the choice delights that might be
imagined, so long as they were pleased to continue amongst them: but at length,
Floridon and Lucina being desirous to return, after abundance of Ceremonies
past, and a great deal of sorrow expressed on both sides, for their departure
from that place of Pleasure; they solemnly took leave of that sweet company,
and returned home once more to prepare for their Nuptial Day.

CHAP. XII.
How Floridon and Lucina were Married with great Solemnity, to the exceeding Joy
and Satisfaction of all their Friends and Relations.
THe day being appointed for the Celebration of that joyful Marriage betwixt
Floridon and Lucina, they sent to invite all their Friends and Relations both
far and near; amongst the rest, they did not forget Chrisipus and Isabella, for
they reckoned them among the choice of their guess. Nor did they want the
society belonging to Loves Paradise; but all came to be witness to the joyful
Uniting of so choice a couple. Great provision was made for their
entertainment, and all things provided that hearts could wish or desire.

The season of the year served to furnish them with the choicest Delicates, and
pleasant Fruits; and the flourishing Gardens to adorn them with variety of
sweet smelling Flowers to delight the Senses.

Their Friends being come at the appointed time, Floridon and Lucina appeared
in the greatest Splendour that ever couple was seen in before. O how Lucina
shined with Burnisht Gold and Orient Pearl, enough to Ravish the beholders with
admiration, she looked so like a Creature Divine. Then were they conducted to a
Chapel near adjoining in a Noble Equipage; where after the Solemnity of their
Marriage Rites were decently performed, they returned back again in the same
order. At their return, servants were attending to conduct them into Princely
Romes, where they were entertained with a most sumptuous Dinner, suitable to
the quality of such Noble Guests. There was variety of all things that might
give satisfaction, and plenty of rich Wines to please their Pallats. Besides it
did very much delight the invited Guess, to see every thing brought up in such
comely order.



Dinner being past, they entertaind one another with pleasant Discourse for
some few hours; after which they were presented with a Rich and Costly Banquet,
furnished with variety of all sorts of Delicates, whilst the rarest Music
delighted them with ear-pleasing Harmony. After which, the young Gallants being
desirous to satisfy themselves with some pleasing pastime for their
Recreation: they so ordered it, that all the Beauteous Virgins which were
present at this Marriage, should be seated in orderly Array in a spacious Room,
out of which there should be chosen one to be Princess of Loves Paradise for
the year following, and it should be left to her to make choice of whom she
pleased, to be Prince for the same time. But they were at great debate how this
Princess should be chosen, without giving offense to the rest. When one of the
company told them, there was a Blackamore Boy belonging to the Music, who (if
they were so pleased) might make choice without any partiality. They all
approved of the conceit, and so the Ladies being seated the Boy was brought
into the Room and ordered by his Master (whose Language he best understood) to
take out that Lady by the hand, which he liked best of all that company. The
Boy being amazed to see so many rare Beauties fix their eyes upon him, stood a
while, as if he had been senseless, but being urged by his Master to proceed,
he went from one to another, and looked wishly in the face of every one of
them, until he had taken a view of them all; and at last perceiving one
amongst them, whose hair and eye-brow's were as black as a Raven; he presently
took her by the hand and led her to his Master, which moved exceeding laughter
in the company, to see him refuse the greatest Beauties, and take one which he
thought to be nearest to his own Complexion.



The Princess being thus chosen, she presently made choice of the party she
most affected to be Prince. Then were they both crowned with delicate Garlands,
richly beautified with fragrant Flowers.

After which, the whole company yielded obedience to them, and honored them as
their supreme. Then the Prince gave order, that those which belonged to his
society, should all make ready to depart; they quickly obey's his command, and
after leave taken of Floridon and Lucina, and of the rest of the company; they
walked in decent order to Loves Paradise, where we will leave them to the
enjoyment of their innocent pastime.

Now was Floridon and Lucina left with their dearest Friends and nearest
Relations, whom they would by no means suffer to depart, until their Mirth and
Feasting were all past, which continued for many days. During which time, they
had much discourse with Chrisipus and Isabella about sundry things, especially
about their former Sufferings and Troubles, which afforded them the greater
content, now they were come to the real enjoyment of each other.

After several days past in Feasting, Dancing, and many other Pastimes, the
company began to drop away, and take leave one by one, according as their
business did require; so at last there was but very few left besides Chrisipus
and Isabella, whose occasions called for them at home, as well as the rest; but
when Floridon perceived they were desirous to depart, he endeavored to
persuade them to a longer stay, for he was very unwilling to part with them,
but they could by no means consent, since they had already stayed the utmost of
their time. Then was there (...) promises past on both sides of frequent visits
from each other: And so after a thousand good wishes to every one of their
Friends and Relations, they all courteously took leave of the thrice happy
Floridon and Lucina; whom after all their Troubles, Sorrows, and sufferings; we
leave comfortably united, to their own desires and Hearts Content.

FINIS.
Reader, If my endeavors to please thee herein, may purchase thy kind
acceptance; I shall (God willing) ere long, present thee with a second part,
which I hope may give thee further content.

Vale.

