ADDITIONALS TO THE MYSTERY OF IESVITISME.

ENGLISHED By the same Hand.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston, 1658.

THE REPRESENTATION Of the Reverend, THE CVREZ OF PARIS, To the Reverend The
CUREZ of the other Dioceses of FRANCE, Upon occasion of certain corrupt Maxims
of some late CASVISTS.
REVEREND SIRS,
IF all true Christians, making truly but one Body, are to be guided by the
conduct of the same spirit and same heart, and are, out of considerations of
charity toward God, ^blig'd to be tender of the spiritual concernments one of
another, in those emergencies which Heaven is pleased to present them with; it
must needs be, that all the Pastors of the Catholic Church stand in a far
greater obligation to that duty. For it being expected that their charity
should be much more shining then that of private men, as being the pattern and
model thereof, it is accordingly but just it should more closely cement them
together, and engage them beyond others, to mutual helps and assistances, for
the better improvement and edification and those souls which God has committed
to their charge.

Out of this consideration was it that we were induced to entertain with a
favorable reception, what has been represented to us by our Reverend Brethren
the Curez of Rouen in our late Assemblies. Which was this, That, the Reverend
Cure of S. Ma^lou, one of the most considerable among them, having thought
himself obliged to say something (in a Synodal Sermon, preached before his
Grace the Archbishop of Rouen, above eight hundred Curez, and abundance of
other persons of quality) against the perni^ious Maxims of certain Casuists,
as such as disturb the order of the Hierarchy, and corrupt Christian Morality;
And that, having since declared in a Sermon preached in his own parish, though
he preached against those corrupt Maxims, yet he did not attribute them to any
Order, or to any Community or Body of men, but opposed them considered only in
themselves, The Je^uits of the City of Rouen have nevertheless thought
themselves so much disobliged and injured by the pu^lick disparagement done the
doctrine contained therein, that they presented to his Grace the Archbishop of
Rouen, in the name of Brother John Brisacier Rector of their College in the
said City, a Petition ^illed with injuries and calumn^es against the Person of
the said Cu^e of Saint Maclou; to the end, that, having blasted his credit and
reputation, all others might be deterred from engaging in an attempt so
hazardous as that of the public discrediting of what those scandalous Authors
dare publicly write and openly maintain: That this unworthy treatment of their
Brother had obliged them to assemble together to examine those points in
Morality which had given the first occasions of the difference: That to effect
that, they h^d perused the Books out of which they had been taken, and that
having made faithful Extracts thereof, they had found therein some
propositions so extravagant, and so likely to pervert souls, that it f^rther
engaged them to side with their Brother, to demand all together the
condemnation thereof: That, to that purpose; they had presented a Petition to
his Grace the Archbishop of Rouen, who, having returned them answer, that that
Affair was of general concernment, and ref^ected on the whole Church,
expressed to them his inclinations to have the bus^nesse returned up to the
right Reverend Lords of the General Assembly of the Clergy of France, then
sitting at Paris. And this was it that gave them occasion to address
themselves also to Us, to the end that by mutual and joint assistances, our
endeavors might prove the more effectual to obtain a Censure of these
Maxims, as such as are absolutely opposite to the rules and spirit of the
Gospel, whereof they have sent us extracts, and to check the violence of those,
who^ by their power, would muzzle the P^stors of the Church, who being
appointed by God to be watchmen and Sent^nels to the House of Israel, according
to the words of the Scripture, are obliged to cry o^^ and give notice of
whatever may prejudice those soul^, whereof God will one day demand so severe
an account at their hands.

This advice of theirs, full of prudence and zeal, having had a great influence
upon us, has put us upon a resolution in our late assemblies, not only to
join our endeavors with those of the reverend Curez of Rouen, but also to
imitate them, by communica^ing to you this Affair which indeed is common to
all, since it equally concerns us all that the Church, the chaste and undefiled
Spouse of JESUS CHRIST, whereof we are entrus^ed wi^h the conduct, under the
authority of our Lords the Bishops, should not receive any spot or pollution in
her Morality, by Maxims that are corrupt, and absolutely contrary to her holy
administrations; and that she should not any longerly subject^ to the
scandalous reproaches which her professed Enemies, the Heretics, burden her
with upon this occasion, in that they would have her to be accountable for
those pernicious opinions of certain priva^e Casuists, though she has ever
opposed and condemned them by her Canons and Decrees.

It Is with this design, and purely out of a consideration of doing the Church
some service, and to the end you might be fully acquainted with all that passed
upon this emergency, we send you a copy of the Petition, which the reverend the
Curez of Rouen presented to their Archbishop, with a faithful extract of some
of the Propositions, taken out of a far greater number of others suitable
thereto, which contain such a doctrine, as no man that has ever so little
tenderness of his own Salvation b^^ must conceive a horror at; and among
which we have only put in those that concern Morality, and not those that
concern the Hierarchy. Whereof we hope this effect, that being bound up in the
same spirit of peace, concord and charity, and embarked in the same desires of
cultivating those souls which are committed to us all, you might join with us,
as diverse of the reverend the Curez of other Dioceses have already offered to
do, and accordingly send your Letters of procuration or Attorney to the Syndics
of our Company, authenticated by the testimonies of two public Notaries, and
set at the bottom of the Extract which we send you of the propositions to be
condemned; and to demand and prosecute jointly with us, as well before the
Lords of the General Assembly of the Clergy of France, as elsewhere, as it
shall be thought requisite, the Censure and condemnation of these pernicious
maxims, which corrupt and Poison Christian Morality, and disturb civil
Society, such as are those whereof we send you the extracts, and others of the
same thread.

That so, the people, whom God has committed to our charge, under our Lords
the Prelates, may henceforth be preserved from that mortal venom which
inclines them to licentiousness and Libertinisme: and that we may have
occasion all together to praise and bless the Father of Mercies, for that he
has given us the power and confidence to do that which our duties obliged us
to, without being deterred by any fear or humane considerations; as also for
that he shall have done us the favor to make our endeavors upon this account
isntrumental and contributary to the salvation of those many Souls which have
been redeemed by the precious blood of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST.

Concluded, and signed by order of the Assembly of the reverend, the Curez of
Paris. ROUSSE, Cure of S. Roch^ Syndic. DUPUIS, Cure of the Saints In^
Innocents, Syndic.

Paris, Sept. 1^, 1656.
A COPY OF THE PETITION Presented by the Reverend the Curez of Rouen to their
Archbishop.
To the Right Reverend Father in God, the most Illustrious and most Religious,
the Archbishop of Rouen, Primate of Normandy.
THe Dean and Curez of Rouen, whose names are under written humbly show, That
^or some years past, many great Prelates, and others of the Clergy, men
venerable for their piety and abilities have obse^ved, and accordingly
complained as well in their writings as their discourses, that diverse late
Authors who have treated of Moral Theology and the Cases of Conscience, have
taught in their writings and the books they have set forth upon these subjects,
certain pernicious doctrines, such as corrupt good manners, and are absolutely
opposite to the maxims of the Gospel. That the late Archbishop, your Uncle
and predecessor was one of those, who made the greatest discoveries of the
consequences of this inconvenience, which he bew^yles very much in that
excellent Treatise of his, in^ituled De Rebus Ecclesiae, where, with a zeal^
and earnestness worthy so great a Prelate, he bemoans the corruption of
Morality, and the dissolution of Discipline which has been occasioned by the
destructive principles of the accommodating and complying Th^^logie of the late
Casuists, whose books he compares to those little penitential Treatises which
were heretofore used as instructions to Confessors ^n the administration of the
Sacrament of Penance, into which there crept so many errors and abuses, that
the second Council of Ch^alons under Charlemaigne, and the sixth Council of
Paris under Lewis the Debonaire, thought themselves obliged to condemn them.

But besides these matters of grievance for which we have the complaints of
diverse eminent persons of these times against the C^suists, it has many times
been thought necessary to prevent the further progress of the corrupt doctrine
of some by Censures and other juridicall ways, which course was taken with a
Book writ by Peter Milhard, a Benedictine Monk, entitled, The grand Guide of
the Curez; as also with that of M. Ber^in Berthauld, a Priest of the Diocese
of Coutance^ entitled, The Director of Con^essors, both which received their
censure from the Theologal Faculty of Paris. And since that time has the same
course been taken with the Book of the Summary of Sins, written by Father
Ba^ny, a Jesuit, which has been censured at Rome by the Congregation appointed
for the prohibition and condemnation of Books, and in France by the Assembly
general of the Clergy, April 12. 1642. as containing such propositions as
might incline Souls to libertinisme and the corruption of good manners, and
violate natural right and the Law of Nations, excuse blasphemies Usuries,
Simonies and many other the most horrid transgressions.

And your Grace may take it further into consideration, how that it is
expressed in the Act of Ce^s^re, that our Lords the Prelates had resolved to
have a System of Moral Divini^y composed by ten or twelve Doctors of the most
eminent of the faculty of Paris, which should be approved by the Prelates of
this Kingdom, and received in ^ll their Diocesses, so in some me^sure to
prevent the inconveniences occ^sioned by the multiplicity of books of that
nature. And about two years after this censure was passed, that is to say in
the year 1644. Father Hereau, a Jesuit, Render of the Case^ of Conscience^ in
the College of Clermont in Paris, having entertained his Scholars with
certain propositions prejudicial to the Lives of men, the University put in
an Information against him for it, and presented to the Parliament three
Petitions one after another. In the first whereof, dated March. 5. in the same
year, the University prayes^ That the Jesuits might not be permitted thence
forth to read Divinity in the College of Clermont or any where else. In the
second, the Vnivers^ty represents to the Court, and shows that the Doctrine
conta^ned in the writings of Father Hereau, is not to be considered as the
opinion^ of one particular man, but as the doctrine of several Authors of that
Society. And the dri^t of the third petition, is, to persuade the Court to
suppress that book of Father C^ussinus, which is called, An Apology for the
Religiou^ men of the Society of Jesus, wherein that Jesuit endeavors to
vindicate his Society from the charge put in against them by the University,
and undertake^, ^n that Libell, to jus^ify the pernicious doctrines which had
occasioned the presenting of the two former petitions.

While ^hese things were in agitation, the King having (advice had with his
Council) received notice of the pernicious doctrines taught at the College of
Clermont, sent for the Provincial and superiors of the three houses which the
Jesuits have about Pari^, and discovered to them, in the presence of the Queen
Regent his Mother, how much he was dis^^ti^fied with the Propositions taught by
F. Hereau; telling them that the Superiors were very much to b^ame for
suffering such maxime^ to be brought upon the stage, as whereof the very
knowledge were very dangerous, as being so far from obliging men to a
regulation of their passions, that they encourage men r^ther to comply
therewith. His Majesty further expressed his desires to the Superiour^ of that
Order, that they would for the future be more careful to take notice of the
doctrine that should be either published or taught in their Houses; that he
would not take it for any excuse, they should allege their ignorance of the
corrupt maxime^ that might be treated of by their Fathers; and that he would
call them to account for what ever should be done amiss for the time to come.

Whereupon, as it may be seen in the Order of the Council published
af^erward^, bearing date the 28th. of April 1644. the sa^d Jesuits were, as
they pretended, extremely troubled, his Maje^ty should have any occasion to
take any thing ill as to the carriage of any Father of theirs; they
acknowledged, that the said Father Hereau had not done well in treating
publicly of such Questions, as were complained of; that they disclaimed them,
thinking it very dangerous they should be either taught or treated of; and that
for the fu^ure they wo^ld take such a course, as that in their Colleges there
should not be advanced any thing that might prove prejudicial to the Public.
The effect of these declarations of theirs, was, that the King, with the advice
of his Council sent ou^ severe prohibitions to the Jesuits and all others,
that they should not for the future either in their public Lectures, or
otherwise, treat of any such propositions, with an injunction to the Superiors
to be very watchful that there should not, in any of their houses, things of
that nature be advanced; and in the mean, that F. Hereau should remain
secured in their College, till some fur^her order should be taken about him by
his Majesty^

The noise and stir, which those pernicious propositions of Father Hereau's did
at that time rai^e about Paris, and particularly those that concerned the
killing of evil speakers, revived the curiosity of a many very le^rned and
judicious persons to look more narrowly into the doctrine of the Casuis^s. The
Authors of the books written at that time in defense of the Vniver^ity against
the designs and attempts of the Jesuits, drew up a Catalogue of a many
dangerous propositions, which may be found princ^pally in two Books; whereof
one is instituted, Academicall Truths; and the other, The Answer of the
University of Paris, to the Apologi^ for the Jesuits, written by Father
Causinus. But much about this very time, as also since, there have been
published several larger collections, wherein are rallyed together abundance
of abominable propos^tions, which are, in the said Collections attributed to
the Casuists, and those the most eminent of that qu^lity.

This was it also, may it please your Grace, that gave us occasion, to examine
with the greatest care we could, whether there were to be found in the books
of those Authors, Doctrines so pernicious, ^s those that were cited in the
Collections.

The charge of Pastors which we exercise in the Church under your Authority,
and the obligation that lies upon us, to prevent the Souls committed to our
charge from being infected by this contagion, and the Priests who administer
the Sacrament of Penance in our several p^rishes, from taking for a r^le these
d^ngerous maxims:, and put them in practice in our Confession Seats, have
eng^ged us to join together in this design, and we have with the same spirit
and some heart consulted the books we could meet with, wherein we have ^ound a
great number of erroneous, dangerous and detestable propositions, and have
dr^wn up true co^ies of the same, which we present to your Greatness,
accordingly to obtain the censure thereof.

And whereas this evil has spread it self so far, that it cannot any longer
be either concealed or dissembled, it may be thought high time to hinder its
further progress by some effectual remedy. For, things are come to that
pass, that unless Episcopal Authority interpose it self and ^ise up, to
condemn these lewd propositions, such of the people as are acquainted therewith
might be erroneously persuaded that these opinions, being taught by Catholic
Doctors, and tolerated i^ the Church, are not corrupt, and that they may be
followed with safety of conscience; which, if some sudden provision be not made
against it, may produce very deplorable effects. For those that have but any
thing more then ordinary inclinations to piety, will still be scandalized at
it, the more dissolute will thence take occasion to some with more insolence
and encouragement, and heretics will be sure to make their advantages of it,
that is, think it a just ground publicly to discredit the Catholic Church, by
laying at her door these pernicious maxims, as has been done heretofore by
the Minister Du Moulin in his book O^ Traditions, where he reproaches the
Church of Rome with the pestilent opinions of some of our Casuists.

It is on the other side to be considered, that there never was so much
necessity to abate the confidence of these newly-illuminated Divines, whereof
we find the latter still adding something to the extravagances of their
predecessors; which it were no hard matter to make appear by diverse notorious
examples that will deserve notice should be taken thereof. So that if some
course be not taken to suppress a temerity so prejudicial to the Church^ it is
to be feared, that Time may hereaf^er so^ bring things about, that men may take
for sound doct^in^s and undeniable Truth, abundance of dangerous propositions,
which the more ^eare-conscienced Casuists have not presumed yet to advance
otherwise then as questionable and hardly probable.

Your Grace having taken all these things into your serious consideration. We
are further most humble Suitors to your Grandeur, that you would be pleased to
employ that Authority, and that truly-Episcopall zeal which you have, to weed
these cu^sed ^ares out of the Field of the Church, and to make way for the
purity of Christian Morality to thrive therein, by rooting out these unhappy
doctrines, by a Censur^ worthy your self, that is, such as, no doubt, will
encourage and engage other prelates to do the same thing in their Diocesses;
whereof what can be the consequence, but that the spouse of JESUS CHRIST, being
found incorruptible and without spot as well in her Manners as in her doctrine,
must put her enemies to silence, and inviolably preserve her self and persever
in that purity which her divine spouse has merited for her by his Blood. And
whereas M. John Brisacier, calling himsel^e Rector of your Episcopal College,
has some days since presented to your Grandeur a Petition full of injurious
expressions and calumnies against the person of M. Charles du Four, Abbot of
Aulney, Treasurer of your Cathedral Church, and Cure of the parish of S^.
Maclou; in which petition he treats the said du Four in no other terms then
those of Temerarious, Seditious, refractory, abettor of heresy, and Detractor,
and charges him with a many other scandalous and reviling characters, merely
for having preached, with zeal and earnestness, against these dangerous
doctrines, once in your presence, and before all your Clergy, and another time
in his own parish, explaining to the people the commandments of God, and the
wholesome Maxims of the Gospel, yet without the least derogation or injury to
the Jesuits: And where^s the maine design of the said Brisacier in the
Petition he has presented to you, by way of complaint, is, to stop the mouths
of the Pastors, and to hinder us from instructing the People committed to our
charge in the purity of Christian Morality, and opposing those errors
wherewith some do so much endeavor to corrupt it, it is the humble ^uit of
your Petitioners^ That it may please your Grace to enjoin and order him to make
the said du Four reparation for the horrid calumnies and af^ronts contained in
his said Petition, and oblige the said Bris^cier sincerely to disclaim and
retract, ^s well by writing as by word, those detestable opinions. And in case
you shall think fit to admit him the said Brisacier to plead for himself, that
so there may be a legal proceeding in the business, that you would be pleased
to order, that, before any privilege be allowed him, he be engaged to clear
himself canonically of the character and Censure pa^sed and published against
him by the late Archbishop of Paris, and withal to cause him to be
acknowledged by his Superiors in all his complaints and pleas, and to submit,
in all this^ prosecution to your Tribunal and I^risdiction, and further to
declare from article to article whether he approves or disapproves the
Propositions which the Cure of S. Maclou has publicly cried down in his^
Sermons, whereof there is a catalogue hereunto annexed, and so, that once done,
join issue, and after all things have been fairly debated, to stand to your
judgment upon the whole matter.

And for our parts who are your Petitioners, and call upon you as our judge and
Father, we humbly desire your grace will be pleased to continue us in your
protection, together with the said Cure of St. Maclou, whose case we all make
our own, and, by condemning these pernicious doctrines, keep those qu^et and
silent who would divert us from opposing the same, and discovering to the
people the dangerous consequences thereof. And we beseech you further to
consider, how insupportable it must be to the Pastors and Curez of your
Metropolis, to see, that some particular persons among the Jesuits, should make
it their business to stop their mouth^, and to divert them from preaching the
truth of sound doctrine, and to oppose the extravagances of an erroneous
Morality, while it is suffered that those very particular person^ should
publicly countenance and maintain them, as is done daily by the said Father
Brisacier, as well by writing as discourse, as we shall find it no hard matter
to prove, if he dares deny it^

Nor does he do this himself, but, as if his example were contagious, the same
thing h^th been done, and that with more scandal and danger, by Father de Bois,
Regent in Divinity in your Archi-episcopal College, who, not thinking it
enough, that he had beaten down and endeavored to destroy, as he has done
this last year, that point of Ecclesiastical and Hierarchical discipline that
is the best established in your Diocese, as having made several set discourses
to his Scholars (who are in a manner all Priests well known and respected in
our parishes) against the obligation of hearing parochial Masses, and against
the Authority which the Prelates have to oblige the people thereto, has,
within this month, forborne his ordinary Lectures, out of a design to excuse,
nay, indeed to maintain, the pernicious doctrine of the most disallowed Casuists
of his Order, as having, among others, undertaken to justify that book of
Father Bauny's, entitled, The Summary of Sins, and to make his doctrine pass
^or sound and innocent, though that very book had been censured at Rome, as
also by our Lords the Bishops in a general Assembly.

It was also with the same excess of confidence that the said Father de Bois
has presumed to vindicate Father Amicus, a divine of his Socie^y, upon the
subject of Murder to be committed on those who either calumniate or threaten
to calumniate Priests or Religious men, ev^n to that height, as that in the
last Lectures he read to his Scholars within these few days, he has clearly
maintained, that it was lawful for Priests and Religious men, to defend, etlam
cum morte inva^oris, the reputation they have acquired by their virtue and
prudence, when there is no other course to be taken to divert the detractor.

All which when your grace has taken into serious consideration, we humbly
desire, you will be pleased to order the said Regent publicly to retract and
disclaim the propositions he has advanced, as well against good manners, as
against the order and discipline of your Diocese, and that of the whole Church,
and that a prohibition be issued out, that he may not for the future spread
abroad any such scandalous doctrines, upon pain of those canonical
chastisements incurrible by the contrary.

And in the mean time, we shall pray unto God who is the great Master of all
good and wholesome doctrine, that he would preserve your grace, to ^he end that
puri^ie may be reestablished in his Church, and prosper y^u in all your
undertakings.

And at the bo^tome were their Seals with the names ensuing, ^iz.

Turgis, Dean of Chris^endome, and Cure of St. Vivian. Du Tour, Cu^e of St.
Maclou. Du Perroy, Cure of St. Stephen, Les Tonneliers. Sancier, Cu^e of St.
Deny's. Voisin, Cure of St^ Michael's. Thierry, Cure of St. John's. Chretien,
Cu^e of St. Patrick's. Le Clerc, Cure of St. Andrew's. Picquais, Cure of St.
Savior's. Lorrain, Cure of St. Martin le pont. Avice, Cu^e of St. Lo. De
Sahurs, Cure of St. Peter's du chastel. Le Febure, Cure of St. Vincent's. De La
Vigne, Cure of St. Peter's le Portier: Nicolas Tallebot, Cure of St. Andrew's
pres Canchoise. De La Fosse, Dean and Cure of our Lady'^ Church, dela Ronde. De
La Hay, Cure of St. Amand. Mar^, Cure of St. Martin sur Renelle. Tirel, Cure
of the Holy Cross, des Pelletiers. Le Prevost, Cure of St Herbeland's. Artus,
Cure of St. Vigor. Gueroult, Cure of St. Nicalse. Des Marets, Cure of the Holy
Cross, St. Owen's. Cotteret, Cure of St. Candus the younger. De Fieux, Cure of
St. Laurence's. Teveneau, Cure of St. Stephen's the great Church. Le Cuiller,
Cure of St. Mary's the Lesser. Faucillon, Cure of St. Nicholu^^
The said Petition was communicated to the Proc^or according to the order, of
his ^race the Archbishop of Roven, made at his Archi-episcopal Palace of
G^lllon, August, 28, 1656.

A CATALOGUE of the PROPOSITIONS, Contained in an Extract made of some of the
most dangerous Propositions of diverse late Casuists, in point of MORALITY,
faithfully taken out of their Works.
I.
SAint Thomas, (Aquinas) having ^ clearly taught^ Quodlib. 8. a. 13. and
Quodlib. 3. ^. 10. that the opinion^ of Do^^ors hinder not but that a man may
be guilty of Sin, when he acts against the law of God; these Casuists, on the
contrary, teach, that an Opinion is probable when it is maintained only by one
grave Doctor, and that a man may be confident he does not sin, though he quit
an opinion which he knows to be true, and is the more safe, to follow that
which is contrary thereto, and consequently less probable and less safe. This
is affirmed by FILLIUCIUS, a Jesuit, Mor. Qu. tr. 21. c. 4. n. 128. TANNERUS a
Jes. Theol. Schol. Tom. 2. disp. 2. q. 6. dub. 2. SANCHEZ, Jes. in Sum. l. 1.
c. 9. n. 7. LAYMAN, Jes. Theol. Mor. l. 1. tr. 1. c. 5. Sect. 2. n: 6.

II.
Of a strange imagination which these Casuists have, that their opinions, being
supposed probable do make that, which was sin before, not to be such any
longer. CARAMUEL, in Epist. ad Ant. Dianam.

III.
That the Casuists are at liberty to answer according to the opinions of
other^, though they think^ them erroneous, when they are likely to prove more
acceptable to those that consul^ them, that is to say, they may answer one
while according to one man's judgment, and another according to another's,
though contrary thereto^ LAYMAN, ^es. Theol. M^r^ l. 1. tr. 1. c. 5. Sect. 2.
n. 7. ESCOBAR, Princ. ex. 3. n. 24.

IV.
That the conditions which these Casuists require as necessary to make an
action imputable as sin, may excuse an infinite number of crimes. BAUNY, Jes.
Some. des pechez, c. 39, p. 906. of the 6. Edition.

V.
How they elude and annihilate the laws of the Church in the punishment o^ the
most horrid crimes. Escobar, Jes. Th. Mor. tr. 1. Exam. 8. c. 3. Praxis ex
Societ. Jesus Dec^oribus.

VI.
That one may kill another to pr^vent ^ box^ o'th'^^r or a blow with ^ stick.
Azor^ Jes. Insti^. Mor. Part. 3. l. 2. p. 105. Filliucius Ies. To. 2. tr. 29.
c. 3. n. 50^ L^ssius Jes. de Just. and Iure, l. 2. c. 9. dub. 12. n. 77.
Escobar ^es. Mor. Theol. tr. 1. Exam. 7. c. 3. Praxis Soc. Jesus. Becan. Jes.
Sum. part. 3. tr. 2. c. 64. de Homicid. qu. 8.

VII.
That it is lawful even for an Ecclesiastic and a Religious man to maintain
the honor he has acquired by his learning and virtue, by killing him who
derogates from his reputation by opprobrious speeches and calumnies. Amicus,
Jes. Tom. 5. disp. 36. n. 118.

VIII.
The doctrine of Father Amicus that permits a Religious man to kill him tha^
threatens to calumniate, maintained by Caramuel, as being the only true
judgment upon that case, the contrary being not so much as probable. Theol.
Fundam, Fund. 55. Sect. 6. p. 544.

IX.
That it is doubtful whether a Religious man having made use of a woman, may
not kill her if she offer to discover what passed between them Caramuel ibid.
Sect. 7. p. 551.

X
That as it is lawful for a man to defend his honor against him that would rob
him of it, by charging him with a crime he is not guilty of, so may he do it
also, by killing him. Caramuel. Theol. Fundam. Fund. 55. Sect. 6. p. 550.

XI.
That it is lawful, according to some, in the speculative, and according to
others in the Practick also, for a man to wound or kill one that has given him
a box o'th'ear, even though the other run away for it. Lessius, Ies. de Just.
et Iur. l. 2. c. 9. dub. 12^ n. 79. Reginaldus Jes. in Praxi. l. 21. n. 62.
Filliucius Jes. tr. 29. c. 3. n. 51^ Layman Jes. l. 3. tr. 3. par. 3. c. 3. n.
3. Escobar Ies. Mor. Theol. tr. 1. Exam. 7. c. 3. Praxis. Caramuel, Theol.
Fundam. Fund. 55. Sect. 8. page 551.

XII.
That a man may kill a false accuser, nay, the witnesses produced by him, and
the Judge himself, when they cannot be otherwise diverted from oppressing the
innocent. Tannerus Jes. To. 3. disp 4. q 8^ d. 4. n. 83. Sanchez Ies. Oper.
Mor. in Decal^ l. 2. c. 39. n. 7.

XIII.
That it is lawful to procure abortion before the child be quick in the womb,
to save a Maid's life or reputation. Egidius Trullench in Decal. Tom. 5. l. 5.
c. 1. dub. 4. n. 1. Et. quidam Theologus Socie^a^is Jesus ap^d. Dianam, Part. 6.
Tr. 8. Res^l. 37.

XIIII.
That it is lawful to kill him that gives ^s the Lie, or any way reviles us.
Escobar Theol. Mor. tr. 1. Exam. 7. c. 3. Praxis Reginaldus Jes. l. 2.1. c. 5.
n. 60.

XV.
That it is lawful for us to kill him that takes away our goods from us, even
though he run away to avoid it, provided the thing be of value. Lessius Jes. de
Just. et Iure, l. 2. c. 9. dub. 11. n. 66. and 72. Escobar, Jes^ Theor. Mor.
tr. 1. Exam. 7. c. 3. Praxis.

XVI.
That it is lawful upon certain occasions to accept ^ challenge and to fight a
duel. Escobar Jes: Theol. Mor. tr. 1. Exam. 7. c. 3. Praxis Layman Jes. l. 3.
T. 3. part. 3. c. 3. n. 2. and 3. Hurtad^ de Mendoza Jes. in 2.2. disp. 170
Sec^. 9.. 82. Apud Dianam, Part. 5. tr. 13. Resol. J. 21. Idem Hurtado de
Mendoza Jes. referente Diana, Part. 5. tr. 14. Miscellan. 2. Resol. 99.

XVII.
That it is not Simony either to give or receive a temporal good for a
spiritual, when it is given only as the motive, and not as the price. Grego^ius
a Valentia, Jes. 3. to. 3. disp. 6. qu. 16. P^n. 3. p. 2039. et sequent.
Escobar, Jes. Mor. Theol. tract. 6. ex. 2. c. 6. n. 40. Praxis Mil^ard, Guide
des ^urez. chapter 63. Inst. 1. n. 2.

XVIII.
That it is not simony to obtain a Benefice upon the promise of a sum of
money, when a man has no intention to pay it. Escobar ^es. Moral. Theol. tr 6.
exam. 2. c. 2 n. 14.

XIX.
That a Fortune Tellers is obliged to restore what he has received for telling
ones fortune, ^f he has not advised with the stars, but that he is not obliged
to restitution if he has consulted the Devil. Sanchez Ies. Sum. ( as. l. 2. c.
38. n. 96.

XX.
That a man is not obliged either according to the right of Nature, on
according to the Laws of his Country to restore what he has received for
giving an unjust sentence, or committing an Assassinate, or an act of Adultery,
but may lawfully retain it. L^ssius Ies. de Just. l. 2. c. 14. d. 8. n. 52.

XXI.
The encouragement, and the gap which these Casuists lay open for domestic
frauds. Bauny Ies. Some. des Pech. p. 213, and 214. Edit. 6.

XXII.
That a man is not obliged to make restitution for the Losses which a third
person has done upon our solicitation and procurement. Bauny Ies. Some des
Pech. p. 307, 308. Edit. 6.

XXIII.
That a man is not obliged upon pain of mortal sin to restore the total sum
which he has gotten together by a many little thefts. Bauny Ies. Some. des
Pech. p. 220. Edit. 6.

XXIV.
Usury palliated by these Casuists under the name of Major, upon whom they
impose. Bauny Ies. Some. des Pechez, p. 331. and sequent. Edit. 6.

XXV.
That Envy is no mortal sin when it is conceived only at the temporal good
of our Neighbor. Bauny Ies. Somm. des Pech. p. 123. Edit. 6.

XXVI.
That a Priest who has received money of one man to say a Mass, may afterward
receive of another, as much as that part of the Sacrifice which belongs to
himself amounts to. Escobar, Ies. Theol. Mor. Tr. 1. Axam. 11. c. 4. Praxi^.

XXVII.
That it is a sufficient hearing of the Mass to hear the four parts of it at
the same time. Escobar Ies. Theol. Moral. Tr. 1. Exam. 11. c. 4. Praxi^ p. 146.
Edit. Lugdun. Anno 1644. Bauny Ies. Moral. Theol. par. 1. Tr. 6. de praecepto
audiendae Missae: qu. 9. page 312.

XXVIII.
Relaxations absolutely destroying the obligation of Fasting. Escobar, Jes.
Theol. Mor. Tr. 1. Exam. 13. c. 3. Praxis.

XXIX.
The Casuists have brought the care which Confessors ought to have to judge of
the disposition of their Penitents, to a simple demand whether they are so^^y
for their sins, and have an intention not to fall into the like again; and
pretend, that if they say, Yes, the Confessors are obliged to believe them.
Filliucius Jes. Mor. Quaest. Tom. 1. Tract. 7. n. 354. Suarez Jes. in 3. Part.
Tom. 4. disp. 32. Sect. 2. n. 2.

XXX.
That the Penitent, though interrogated by his Confessor, is not obliged to
acknowledge that the sin wherewith he charges himself is an habitual sin,
into which he is wont to fall often. Bauny Jes. Theol. Mor. part. 1. Tract. 4.
de Poenit. q. 15. p. 137.

XXXI.
That a next occasion of sinning being supposed to be that which of it self
induces a man to commit mortal sin, and in which a man is seldom or never
conceived to be, but he falls into that mortal sin, yet it is lawful for a
man to continue therein, nay, to engage himself in such an occasion, out of a
consideration of the spiritual or temporal good of himself or his Neighbor.
Bauny Jes. Theol. Mor. Part. 1. Tr. 4. de Poenit. qu. 14. p. 93, and 94.

XXXII.
That a man that keeps a Concubine is not obliged to dismiss her, but only to
promise that he will no^ sin with her any more, it being supposed he cannot
enjoy himself, and must lead a melancholy life without her. Sanctius, in
Selectis Disp. disp. 10. n. 20. apud Dianam part. 5. Tract. 14. Resol. 108.

XXXIII.
That the consideration of a temporal concernment may oblige the Confessor to
absolve a Penitent that is in the next occasion of sinning, though he quit it
not. Bauny Ies. Theol. Mor. Par. 1. Tr. 4. de Poenit. qu. 14. page 94.

XXXIV.
That it is lawful for a Confessor to absolve those that are in the next
occasions even of Incest, without obliging them to separate, when their
relapses are not frequent and in a manner diurnall, but only once or twice a
month. Nay further, that a Confessor is engaged, toties quo^ies, to absolve
the young Gentleman, that cannot forsake his Father's house nor dismiss thence
the Servant-maid he ordinarily makes use of, though there be no likelihood he
should forbear sinning with her, though he promise to do it. Bauny Ies. Somm.
des Pech. chapter 46. p. 1089. Edit. 6.

XXXV.
That a Confessor is obliged, toties quoties, to absolve those young people who
grow worse and worse, and are guilty of frequent relapses into the some mortal
sins, though they make it not in the least measure their business to reform
their faults. Bauny Ies. Theol. Mor. Part. 1. Tr. 4 de Poenit. qu. 15. p. 96.

XXXVI.
That a Confessor is obliged not to defer or deny absolution to those who are
fallen into an habitual custom of committing mortal sins, against the
laws of God, Nature and the Church, though they discover not the least hope of
amendment. Bauny Ies. Theol. Mor. Part. 1. Tract. 4. de Poenit. qu. 22. page
100.

XXXVII.
That remorse for sin conceived out of a consideration of the temporal
inconveniences ensuing thereupon, as the loss of a man's health or his money,
is a sufficient qualification for his receiving the grace of absolution; if a
man does but imagine that that inconvenience proceeds from the will of God.
Escobar. Ies. Tr. 7. ex 4. n. 91. Amicus Ies. Tract. 8. disp. 3. n. 13.

XXXVIII.
That we are not obliged by any commandment of charity, to do any act of Love
toward God, nor to observe any precept of his out of any motive proceeding
from that Love, and that we are not so much commanded to love God as not to
hate him. Ant. Sirmond Ies. Deffense de la Virtue, Tr. 2.

A LETTER From a Cure of ROVEN To a Cure in the Country, Giving an account of
the procedure of his Brethren the Curez of the said City, against the doctrine
of certain Casuists; and may also serve for a Refutation to a Libel entitled,
The Answer of a Divine, etc.
ARGUMENT.
A particular account of the difference between the Curez of Rouen and the
Jesuits there, and the proceedings of the former therein. Monsieur du Four Cure
of S. Maclou preaches against the corrupt Maxims of the Casuists, not cha^ging
any particular Order therewith. The Jesuits only take alarm, and put up a
detractive Petition to the Archbishop against him. Whereupon the Curez of Rouen
unite, consults the Casuists, find they maintain the doctrines charged upon
them, and put up a Pe^ition to their Archbishop with a catalogue of the
doctrines thereunto annexed; desiring the censure thereof. He sends up all to
the Assembly of the Clergy at Paris who take cognizance of the business. The
Author of The Answer of a Divine, etc. found an Impostor, and consequently a
Jesuit.

SIR,
I Have received your Letter of the 13. current, wherein you tell me that your
health being not in such a posture as would permit you to come hither to the
Synod, where you were in hopes to understand what had passed between the Curez
of Rouen and the Fathers of the Society of Jesus, a Friend of yours here had
sent you a printed sheet, with this title, The Answer of a Divine to the
Propositions extracted out of the LETTERS of the IANSENISTS, by some of the
Curez of Rouen; which answer has been presented to the Right Reverend the
Bishops met together in the General Assembly of the Clergy.

I cannot but imagine how much you were surprised at the first reading of that
Answer, and how that at the same time your judgment of it was, that it could
be no other then an infamous Libell, and a scandalous Pamphlett purposely
scattered abroad to blast the honor and holiness of the Church, derogating
from the authority of the right Reverend the Archbishop of this place, and
destructive to the innocence of the Pastors who endeavor to serve and maintain
that divine Spouse of JESUS CHRIST.

That you have also understood, how that the Jesuits seem loudly enough to
declare themselves the Authors of that piece, when they cause it to be sold
publicly by the Booksellers belonging to their College, when they distribute
it themselves in the houses where they make any visits, and do so exactly play
the Mercuries to scatter it up and down, that we are obliged to them for its
coming among those that are of our Archbishop's Council.

And lastly, that you expected with some impatience a generous reply from the
Reverend the Curez of Rouen to that injurious and ill-instructed Divine, and
how necessary you conceived it that such a course should be taken, to the end
that all the world might be satisfied of the purity of their intentions in the
cause they are now engaged in, their prudence in point of proceeding, as well
in the enterprise as the prosecution, and the integrity of their Faith, which
it was the main design of that Libell to cast a blemish upon.

To satisfy therefore your desires as to these particulars, and to give you
some account of an affair wherein we are all equally engaged by the common
concernments of their Ministry; I am to tell you, Sir, that the Curez of
Rouen, having taken notice of a sheet that was scattered up and down full of
impostures and calumnies against them, and being in a manner persuaded, as well
by the hints you give in your Letter, as by other too too pregnant
circumstances, that it was a production of the Jesuits, thought fit to make
their complaint against it to the other Archbishop, by a Letter which they
immediately writ thereupon, and to demand justice for the same of his
Official, by a Petition which they presented to him, whereof I thought it not
a miss to send you a copy, that you may see the justifiable motives of their
complaints.

That once done, they had resolved to sit down and be silent, so in some
measure to express their moderation in suffering injuries suitable to the
maxims of the Gospel wherein they instruct their people. They were, I say,
content to be quiet, expecting the public satisfaction and reparation, which
might prove the effect of those juridicall courses they had taken.

But having observed on the one side, that the proceedings were likely to take
up much time, and that the Iesuit^ in the interim made their advantage of their
modesty, persisting still in the distribution of that Libel, giving out where
ever they came that it could not be answered, nay, treating the Curez of Rouen
as such as were to be derided for their weakness and ignorance; and on the
other side, having taken it into consideration that they are obliged to
maintain the dignity of their Ministry, and that it is their duty to hinder
that from falling into contempt, or their persons into disparagement before
their people, through the hor^id calumnies which the pretended Divine loads
them with, representing them as seditious persons, abettors and fautors of
he^es^e; They thought it concerned the honor of the Church and their own
reputation, that the world should be acquainted with the sincerity of their
Faith, as also that the Simple, who might happily be surpised by truth-lesse
suppositions, should be undeceived, and that, by answering that scurrilous
libell with the greatest moderation they possibly could, they might satisfy
and convince all those that are Lovers of Truth and Justice that their
interprise is holy, their proceeding canonical, and that they cannot be blamed
by any for what they have done, but by such as are prepos^essed by passion, or
too violently engaged in the interests of a party they makes some advantages of.

It was upon these reflections, and the wholesome advice in your Letter (which
I have communicated to them) that they enjoined me to write to you what you now
receive, and to entreat you to communicate it to your Brethren, and all other
good people, as we shall do here and elsewhere, to the end that all the world
may be satisfied of the equity of our Cause, and that those persons of quality,
who shall come to the knowledge thereof, may conceive an opinion of us quite
contrary to that which some would have persuaded them to, by atif^ces es and
detraction.

There needs no more then the simple, that is to say, the most sincere and most
faithful relation of what has passed in this emergency on the part of the
Curez of Rouen, to justify their proceedings, and to prove the Author and
dispersers of that Libell guilty of malice and imposture. I shall not say any
thing which cannot be confirmed by the testimonies of persons on whom no
reproach can be fastened, nay, by that of the Archbishop himself; who being
our head, our Judge, and our Father, has also ever been our witness and our
Oracle; and we should justly deserve his indignation, did we any thing without
a relyance on his Approbation and conduct.

The business, as to matter of fact, stands thus. Monsieur De Four, Cure of S.
Maclou (whose abilities and worth are generally known) having preached two
several times (as you have already understood) against those pernicious
doctrines which tend to the corruption of good manners, the Jesuits were
immediately troubled thereat, and made great complaints of it to our
Archbishop, in a Petition which they presented to him in the name of Father
Brisacier, fraught with injurious expressions and calumnies against the said
Monsieur du Four. These things coming to the knowledge of the Curez of Rouen,
they thought themselves obliged to engage in the quarrel of their reverend
Brother, violently set upon in a difference wherein they were all equally
concerned, since it is their duty to be watchful over sound doctrine and the
purity of Manners, as that on which depends the safety of those souls that are
committed to their charge.

But that their proceeding might appear to be such as was the effect of a
serious consideration of the Affair they were to engage in, they had a debate
in one of their Assemblies, about consulting the Books, whence it was
alleged, that the propositions and pernicious Maxims, preached against by the
Cure of Saint Maclou, had been taken, to the end that true copies and extracts
should be made of the same, and accordingly that the condemnation thereof
should be required by Canonical ways, if the^ were found in the Casuists,
what quality or condition soever they were of^ But, on the contrary, if they
were not to be found in those books, that the prosecution might determine as to
the Casuists, and be revived to procure a Censure of the LETTERS TO THE
PROVINCIAL, wherein those doctrines, with the Authors that maintained them,
were cited.

Six of the Assembly were pitched upon and appointed to undertake that
employment. They spent therein a whole month, doing all things with all
possible ^ideli^y and exactness; they sought out the places cited, they found
them, word for word, as they were cited, in the Originals. They drew copies
thereof, and reported the whole to their Brethren in a second Assembly, wherein
for further certainty, it was ordered; That if any among them were desirous of
further satisfaction as to those matters, they would be permitted to come to
the persons deputed, into the places where the books were, to consult them and
compare them as they pleased. This order was put in execution, insomuch, that
for five or six d^yes after, there were seldom less the^ ten or twelve Curez
at a time, searching after the passages, and comparing them with the Authors,
as being satisfied of the truth and faith^ulnesse of the Ci^ations.

What greater circumspection could be used in a proceeding of this nature? And
certainly there needs no more to give an absolute defeat to the imposture of
those, who, purposely to disparage the said Curez, and to rais^ some clouds of
division and Jealousy among them, affirm, that diverse of them were
surpised, and inconsiderately drawn in to engage in that party.

Nor was their prudence less remarkable in the Petition presented to the
Archbishop, in the name name and on the behalf of the said Curez. For, having
been drawn up, and digested into the particulars to be invested on, by some of
their Company appointed to that purpose, it was read several times in two or
three several Assemblies, wherein were present ordinar^ly twenty or two and
twenty Curez, in so much that at the last it was signed by twenty and eight.

This certainly should be looked on as an argument of the union and good
intelligence which is among the Curez of Rouen, and that it is the same spirit
they are guided by; not as proceeding from any combination, as it is
maliciously objected by the Author of the Libell, but from the Love of Justice,
and a tenderness for truth, which thus jointly engages them in this cause.

Five were chosen out to go as Deputies from the Assembly to the Archbishop,
to present to him the Petition and the Extract of pernicious proposition^
gathered out of the Casuists, and that worthy Prelate honored them with so
kind an entertainment, and so favorable a reception; he expressed so much
satisfaction at their piety and zeal; he told them with so much earnestness
and reality that he abhorred those corrupt doctrines, that they could not, from
all, but conceive immediate hopes of happy succe^^e of their enterprise.

In a word, that prudent Archbishop, having first taken the conclusions of his
Pr^ctor-General, and the advice of his Council, it was ordered by him, that
the said petition, with the said ^xtracts, thereunto annexed, should be sent up
to our Lords of the General assembly of the Clergy, to the end, that those
pestilent doctrines should receive a more notorious and solemn Censure, by the
decisions of so illustrious and and venerable an Assembly as that which is the
representative of the Church of France, and whence we derive the Oracles of our
Religion.

But ere things were risen to this height, the reverend, the Curez of Paris
having had notice of what was in agitation in our City about these matters,
were s^irred up by the same spirit, and animated by the same zeal with those
of Roven, they honor them so far as that they write to them, and to give them
thanks for the affection and tenderness they had expressed for the purity of
Christian Morality, they entreat them to send up their collections and
memorials, and appoint eight of themselves, all Doctors of Divinity of the
faculty of Paris to examine them, and accordingly to give the said Curez of
Rouen all the advice and assistance requisite in such a business. Since which
time, being more fully informed and satisfied as to the matter of fact, they
resolved to join with us in this cause, and to exhort the Curez of the other
Diocesses of France, to demand jointly with them, of our Lords the Prelates (in
a spirit of peace and charity, which ought ever to be attended by a true zeal)
the censurt of the dangerous, propositions specified in the Ca^alogue and
Extracts which they sent them.

And our Archbishop himself, for his own part, to show how much he thought
himself concerned in an affair of this importance, and the justice he was
desirous to do the Curez of his chief City, sent up Monsieur Gaulde his Grand
Vicar (whose virtue and abilities all have sufficient experience of) to
present, on his behalf, the Petition, and Extracts made by the Curez of Rouen
to our Lords of the Assembly General with Letters of recommendation worthy his
zeal and earnestness.

Accordingly has that honorable Assembly given ear to these just demands, it
has afforded them a favorable reception, it has even publicly commended ^^e
procedure of the Curez of Rouen, it has judged ^t jus^ifiable and canonical,
and taking cogn^s^nce of the business as such as Religion it self and the
salvation of men's souls are very much concerned in, it has appointed
Delegates, very devout and very able men, to take it into examination. From all
which cirrcumstances, we cannot but raise a certain hope, that God will
strengthen them with his spirit, and fill them with his light, that their
endeavors, to expel this mortal contagion, which tends to the poisoning of
her children, out of the Church, may prove the more effectual, that she may be
maintained in her most holy rules, and may flourish and fructify though the
spirit of the Gospel, whence she derives that incomparable beauty which is so
amiable to the sight, and winnes her the heart of her divine Beloved.

Thus, Sir, have I given you a true and sincere account of what passed in this
Affair on the part of the Curez of Roven. I dare call God to witness, that it
is nothing but the naked truth, and thence you may be pleased to consider,
whether they have had any ground to traduce us; consider, what foundation they
may have to blast our reputation with calumnies as they do in that Libell;
consider, I say, whether it does not even in the title broach three signal
impostures.

For in the first place, the Propositions, which we desire should be censured,
are not extracted out of the LETTERS of the JANSENISTS, as the A^thour sales in
that Pamphlet. But they were taken out of the books of the Casuists; nay, if
what he says were true, the extracts would be ten times larger and of greater
bulk then the whole p^eces, out of which they are taken, as it were easy for us
to demonstrate.

Secondly, this catalogue and the extracts which the Jesuits have so great an
aversion for, and are the ground of all their fury and exasperation, are not
the work of the Curez of Rouen, who only drew up the Extracts which they
presented to their Archbishop, and which the Archbishop has sent up to the
Assembly^

L^stly, it is far from truth, that this Answer of a Divine was ever presented
to the said Assembly. Our Lords the Prelates, whereof it con^ists; would never
have suffered such an affront should be done to the dignity thereof, nay, it is
an act of the greatest contempt that can be committed against such an Assembly
to direct to it a scandalous pamphlet without a name^ such as is that Answer.
No, those who are thought to be the Authors of it, are more prudent and better
advised then ever to have attempted any such thing, though they are not to be
numbered among those that have the most respct of Bishops.

I should be over troublesome to you, and happily exceed the Limits of a Letter,
should I make it my business to refute all the calumnies and impostures which
are scattered up and down the body of that pamphlet, and therefore shall fasten
only on some.

This implacable Pamphleteer says, that we have put in an information against
the Jesuits at the tribunal of our Lords the Bishops, and we may say, on the
contrary, that it is they themselves that have brought the information against
themselves. For neither in our Petition nor our Extracts presented to the
Archbishop do we any where tax the Jesuits by name; if we say any thing of
them, it is occasionally, and by way of instance; all that we desire being only
the condemnation of the pernicious doctrines taught by some late Casuists,
whoever they may be. But they have betrayed themselves by their own complaints
and expostulation, they are wounded by their own weapons, Sagittae ^orum factae
sunt plagae little. Psalm. 63. And they were the only men, who, Satanically
zealous to maintain these doctrines, and to show th^mselves in a manner the
Patronizers of Homicides, Simonies, and other the like crimes, have made all
the noise, and raised that tempest which is likely to ^^ll so heavy upon them.
Besides, we cannot be said to have presented to our Lords of the Assembly any
petition or other piece to bring them into trouble there, it being certain
that it is only the Archbishop him self that has, by his Grand Vicar,
presented them, and consequently this Jesuiticall Secretary does Notoriously
derogate from his Authority, and is not afraid in his Libell to be a little too
peremptory with him and to traduce him under the name of the Curez of Roven.

The next thing he quarrels at is that we are guilty of a frivolous busying of
our selves to weed out the corruptions that may be found in books, while they
grow and thrive in men's souls, whence we should endeavor to root them up.
This is an indeterminate charge of our idleness and want of courage in our
Functions, but without the least consideration, that these Lesbian Maxims
purposely sorewed up to a compliance with sinners (whereof we find the books
of the Casu^sts but too full,) are the fatal seeds of so many corruptions and
^candalls as are predominant in this unhappy age; and that our time cannot
happily be better employed, then in endeavoring to smother them, and to prevent
them from growing out of those Books into men's consciences which are of
themselves inclinable enough to entertain any thing that cherishes the
passions, and complyes with the vergency of corrupt nature.

Then he tells us, that it were a far better employment for our Assemblies to
review the Hours of Port Royal, and adds, that the Faithful committed to our
charge, do to this day repeat, at the feet of our Altars those very prayers
that are contained in that book, to the reproach of Faith and scandal of the
Church. We never had yet the least acquaintance with the Authors of those
Hours, and therefore cannot be said to countenance them, and it is a
prerogative of God only to judge of the intentions of their hearts. But it is to
be hoped, this censorious Libeller will not think it much we should give them a
charitable interpr^tation, and should avoid, upon this occasion, that
reproachable waxinesse of nature (as he observes himself) that is so easily
wrought upon at to hearken to and countenance calumny, though he himself has
not much endeavored to avoid it here. Some more knowing and better Divines
then he differ very much from his opinion of those Hours, because they are not
prepossessed against them as he is, who supposes that the son of God is therein
degraded from the title of the Redeemer of all men, because it is not there
expressed in the Version of certain Hymns, though the same thing be found in
several other places, and particularly in the 7th. ver. of the Te Dum. And we
would gladly refer him to the Hymns of the Roman Breviary corrected by
Urban VIII. of blessed memory. That methinks were enough to give a check to his
sinistrous judgment of the persons that composed them, as to what concerns
that article. And for the other, where he alledge^, that they have therein
followed the version of Mar^t in the 17. ver. of the 138th. Psalm, to take
away the Invocation of Saints; he betrays his want of consicience in imposing
that drift upon them, since he is not ignorant, that though that Version be not
the more ordinary, yet is it approved by above ten modern Jnterpreters,
Jesuits, and others, men very learned and of unsuspected faith, who stick close
to the Hebrew text. Besides that in the Hymns, Litanies and Prayers of these
Hours, the intercession of the Saints is therein very often insisted upon. What
probability is there then, that, if some of our Parishoners make use of them,
it must needs he to the great reproach of Faith and scandal of the Church?

He would ^urther put us into an alarm against the memory of the late Abbot of
S^. Cyran, whom he charges with the reviving of certain propositions of Wiclef
which blast the dignity of our character. But let him take good heed that this
accusation, which he advances to put a flurre upon him, proceed not, either
from want of diligence in the reading of his works, or an excess of passion
against that great man, inclining him ^o disparage them. As there is not hardly
any one that is unaquainted with his excellent and glorious endeavors for the
defense of the Priesthood of Jesus Christ, so methinks should it be heard for
any one to imagine that he had any design to blast it in his Lettters, which
are all most Christian, and full of piety. For, in a word, not to meddle with
the two last propositions, since our Divine has no^ thought to cite the
places, out of a prudent fear that in case we should examine them we might
discover his foul play in falsifying and distorting of them, he has
suppressed out of the first a word that is essential and of importance
purposely to give it a wrong sense, and to make it odious. It Is not our
business to write a panegyric for Monsieur de S. Cyrian, but only to bear
witness to the truth, and the Author of the Pamphlet must give me leave to
tell him, that his way of proceeding is not justifiable. In the 93. Letter,
which he cites, we find, that the Church has a power to take a course with
Priests of ill lives, and to cut them off from any relation to her, if she
think it fit, and that if she do it, they are no longer to be reputed Priests,
but to be looked on as secular persons. This faithful Secretary has left out
the word reputed, which is to be seen in all the latter editions of those
Letters, and was omitted only in the first printed at Paris, through the
Printers negligence, and is accordingly put upon his score among the other
Errata at the beginning of the Book. Let him then but restore that word to the
passage forerecited, and he will find the Doctrine of that Letter to be the
same with what is taught us by the Church in her Canons, that is to say, that
Priests degraded, and such as, for their lewd lives and noto^ious crimes, have
been deprived of Tonsure and the long robe, which are the honorable badges of
the Sacerdotall Function, are not to be looked upon or reputed as Priests, ^^t
such as are reduced to a secul^r qualification; though, all this supposed, they
do not lose the divine Character of their Ordination. The case being thus
^airely cleared up, we are content the Author himself should be judge in the
difference, appealing from himself misinformed to himself better informed,
or less prepossessed, to dec^de, whether such pr^positions as these, are those
of the infamous Arc^ Heretic Wiclif, and whether in our Assemblies, we should
make it our business to conspire their Censure.

He further plays the Admonisher, when he tells us, that our endeavors would
be more serviceable to the public should we prosecute the suppression of the
Scandalous LETTERS; published, (as he says) with so much^ defyance of
punishment ever since so long a time against the honor of Sorbonne and all
Divines. But he says too much to be credited. For were it true, that those
Letters were published to the dishonor of Sorbonne and all Divines, whence
comes it to pass that the College of Sorbonne and all the Divines of the
whole Church do no^ combine against them to have them condemned, prohibited,
suppressed; Whence comes it that the Jesuits (for whom this Secre^ary
apologizes all the way) make it their complaint wherever they come that those
Letters are Levelled only against their Society? Whence comes it that only they
of all others took the alarm ^hereat? And if they are so much employed in
fighting against the Enemies of the Church, and in courageously standing up for
the conc^rnements of Jesus Christ, as this pamphlet would make us believe they
are, whence comes it, that, when they pretend to refute the Letters, which are
so insupportable to them, they direct their Answers only to those which oppose
their corrupt doctrine, and that pernicious^ Libertinisme which they introduce
into Morality? How comes it that they are so silent as to the four first
Letters? How can it be that they have hardly a word to say of them, though they
hold them to be injurious to the Grace of the son o^ God, and the sacred
decisions of his Church? Needs there any more to demonstrate that they, out of
a set design, forsake the cause of Jesus Christ, and flight the advan^ages of
his divine spouse, when it lies upon them to make good their own interests, and
the transient luster of their Society seems to be falling into some eclipse? Is
this the glorious employme^t they make such brags off? But how ere it be, we
declare, that we do not th^nk our selves concerned in those Letters, otherwise
then it may be lawful for all others to be, that is, that we look on them as
such as may somewhat ^urther the discovery of errors, that so they may b^ the
better avoided; leaving the judgment thereof to our Lords the Bishops.

This writer has a further accusation against us, which is, tha^ we blow the
coals of that heresy which is now breaking forth in^o flames in the house of
God, and cruelly persecute those who make it their endeavor to quench it. For
which he adds this reproach, that the unjustice of our prosecu^ion tends to the
prejudice of Faith, and the re-establishment of Jansenisme^ yet further blaming
us, for that we are engaged in a combination, and endeavor to sacrifice the
Masters o^ both ancient and modern Divinity to the passion of the Iansenists,
so to be offered up a^ the public victims of Heresy. And so goes even to the
end with discourses much of the same nature, very unworthy the name of a
Christian, and most injurious to the Pa^tors of the Church.

-- Tantaene animis caelestibus irae?
Who could ever have expected that a Divine should have treated us in these
terms? Or imagine, that a spirit perpetually covered with the robe of Charity
should persecute us with expressions so full of gall and so maliciously
satyri^al? However, we think it no hard matter to forgive him. But when we
truly consider his language (which is far different from that of Heaven to the
anointed ones of the Lord) w^ presently find, that he is but too close an
imitator of those whom he vindicates, and that we may well take occasion to
tell him, V^re et tu unus ex illis es, nam et loquela tua manif^stum te facit.
For when they find themselves called to account, either for attempting any
thing against the Hierarchy of the Church, and the privileges of the Pastors
thereof; or for maintaining the most dislut^ and most extravagant opinions of
the late Casuists, such as are absolutely destructive to the purity of Manners,
they are in a manner reduced (out of an ingenious, but withal a diabolical
p^ece of Reynardisme) to this one evasion, or rather injury of Iansenists,
which they make their bulwark and last refuge^ where being once gotten into,
they think themselves out of all danger, and whence they believe they may,
without any fear, shoot the prisoned arrows of the most cankered de^raction
against those who only quarrel at their errors and irregularities.

And of this I have a clear and pertinent example to give you. For I bese^ch
you, sir, do but consider what relation there is between the Propositions
condemned by the Constitution of Innocent X. which ar^ the subject of
Iansenisme, and the doctrines now in question, and wher^of we demand the
censure? The former are of Grace and Free will; and the latter relate only to
Morality. The former treat of the most sublime, and most mysterious points of
all Scholastical Divinity, such as only Doctors, and the most knowing are able
to look into; and the latter are only decisions relating to the conduct of
Christian life, wherein it is requisite that every one be instructed. What
ground then have the Jesuits to charge us with this injury? Upon what account
do they make it their main business to persuade the people, that their Pastors,
who are their spiritual guides, and on whom depends the salvation of their
souls, according to the Scripture, ex quibus anima populi pende^, countenance
Heretics, and make use of their arms? Or rather why would they have the world
believe that there ^s a new Sect of Heretics, and a sort of enemies now rising
that set the Church on fire? We declare that we know not any, that we do not so
much as see this fire, and that if we could perceive it, we would be among the
first that should endeavor to quench it. Whence comes it then, that they make
such an ignominious parallel as that of comparing Priests and Pastors of the
Church to Huss^^es, Lu^herans, and Calvinists, which is the greatest affront
and de^ogation they could have been guilty of in relation to the character and
employment they have in the house of God? Is it that they would make them
unserviceable in their Functions, and their Ministry, by this injurious
bringing of their faith into suspicion, and by those false impressions which
they so much endeavor to make in those whom God has committed to the^r charge?

But what! Can it be objected to the Curez of Roven, that they are not in an
absolute and perfect submission to all the orthodox truths of the Church? Do
they not instruct their parishoners in the inviolable maxims of the Gospel,
and the adorable Mysteries of Religion? And do they not endeavor as much as
lies in their power to reduce the enemies that oppose them? Is not their
doctrine sound, and their word irreprehensible, as the Apostle would have i^,
in his Epistle to Titus? Is not their Archbishop, to whom they are
accountable, satisfied with their conduct, and the integrity of their Faith? Is
not the whole city a sufficient testimony of their good and whol^ome
instructions? And do not the Jesuits know well enough, that we have all
published the Popes Bull, and the Mandate of our Archbishop concerning the
five propositions justly condemned at Rome? Is there any one among us that has
maintained, taught, or preached any of them? Or has otherwise dissented from
the sacred Constitution of the Vicar of JESUS CHRIST?

Wherein then do the said Curez countenance Heretics? Wherein do they afford
them their name and interest? As in imposed upon them by the Libeller. What is
it that makes them the cruel persecutors of the children of the Church? It is
because they pre^er the most undefiled, and most sacred rules of the Gospel,
before the dangerous instructions of the late Casuists? It is because they are
in love with the holiness of the Church their Mother, and conceive a certain
horror to see her defiled by her own children, through the doctrines of those,
who, incapable of being their Fathers, will needs be their dangerous Tutors and
instructors? Is it because they demand of their Arch Bishop, (the Judge of
sound and corrupt doctrine) the censure of those pernicious propositions that
are the destructive Vipers of all Morality? But are they not obliged to this
watchfulness, to prevent the tears from growing up in their Masters field, and
that the souls for which they are accountable at the Tribunal of God should not
be infected by that mortal poison? I can assure you, Sir, that they were not
stirred up by any other motives in all this affair; that by the grace of God,
they will not be guided by any other, and that if their enemies will not give
over persecuting them and charging them with Calumnies^ they will nevertheless
endeavor the discharge of their duty, and as much as they can reassume more
and more courage, to bring things so about, that Innocence and Truth may
triumph over violence and Imposture.

In the mean time, Sir, let us continue nnited in the spirit of peace and
charity, in the midst of these disorders, which God will, in his good time, put
a Period to. And let us withal generously maintain the concernments of our
common Mother, whose breast, as it ought, so it ever shall even to the end of
all ages, be ever full, as well of the most pure milk, and most power^ul wine,
of the celestial and divine truths of JESUS CHRIST, the Master, Doctor, and
perpetual dictator of his Church, as of the precious treasure and inestimable
riches of his Graces, which he sheds into all souls, but especially the souls
of the Faithful, in the quality of Savior, deliverer, and universal Redeemer.
Sir, be pleased to af^ord me your prayers to him, that I may not be so unhappy
as to resist his Grace, or deprive my self of it by my unthankfulness toward
him, and the abuse of my Liberty.

I am. etc.
A Petition of the Curez of Rouen to Monsieur the Official, presented the 26.
of October, 1656. To Monsieur, the Official of Rouen, or to Monsieur his
Vicegerent. The humble Pe^ition of Master Peter Chrestien Cure of St.
Patrick's, Mr. William le Cler^, Cure of St. Andrew's; Mr. John de Sahurs, Cure
of St Peter's du Chastel; and Mr. Stephen de Fieux, Cure of St. Laurence; on
the behalf of themselves and their Brethren the Curez of Rouen.
Showing,

THat within some few days past the Jesuits of the College that is within the
said City, and particularly Father Brisacier, F. Berard, and F. de la Bri^re,
have dispersed up and down to diverse persons, a scandalous Libel to the great
disparagem^nt of the Petitioners, entitled, The answer of a divine to the
Propositions ^xtrac^ed out of the LETTERS of the IANSENISTS, by a certain Curez
of Rouen; which answer has been presented to the right Reverend the Bishops of
the Assembly General of the Clergy.

That the said Libel is fraught with lies, ^alse reports, impostures, and
bitter calumnies very much to the disparagement of your Petitioners. For the
Author does therein lay it to their charge that they are the first kindlers of
that fire which now begins to break forth in the house of God, and that they
are the cruel persecutors of those who endeavor to quench it. That he further
reproaches them, that though it is their duty to be tender and watchful over
the Church, yet they shut their eyes so as not to see the danger that she is
in a manner fallen into, and that they are so far from making any opposition
against her enemies, that they quarrel with her children. He says that they
insist upon the advantages which Heretics pretend to have against her, and
though he seems unwilling to lay an imputation of Heresy equally on all, yet
would he have them discover strange symptoms thereof in that action of theirs.
He charges them with a reproachful easiness of nature, such as inclines them to
give credit to and countenance calumny. He says that the unjustice of their
prosecution tends in effect to the prejudice of Faith, and the reestablishment
of IANSENISME. He blames them for traducing Monsieur du Val, as a criminel, not
knowing what they do. He says that these Curez, (meaning the Petitioners)
combine together in a design to sacrifice the Masters of both ancient and
modern Divinity, to the passion of the Iansenists, and to offer them up as
public victims to Heresy. He says that they prosecute a charge against all
Catholic Universities, and all orthodox Doctors on the behalf of Iansenisme.
He says that the voice of the Pastors of Rouen is no more then the Echo of
those mali^ious Letters that are written at Port Royal, and sold at charen^on;
that the enterprise which the Curez of Rouen are engaged in, is frivolous, as
to the design, and unworthy the prosecution of a prudent man. To be short, his
writing is filled up with diverse other expressions of the same nature, which
are all most untrue, and tend very much to the discredit of the Petitioners;
and he grounds all his injuries and all his reproaches on a matter of fact
absolutely supposed; that is to say, that the Petitioners have put in an
information against those whom this writer makes it so much his business to
vindicate (whom he sufficiently discovers to be no other then the Jesuits) and
have impeached them at the tribunal of our Lords of the Assembly of the Clergy,
of having corrupted the whole doctrine of Morality; supposing withal, but
untruly, that the petitioners had presented to that honorable Assembly, an
injurious catalogue of the propositions that concern Moral doctrine. Which is a
falsity and palpable imposture, since it is evident, that the petitioners
neither were sent, nor did send to the Assembly, that they have not impeached
any one, that they never presented any catalogue or any propositions.

But the truth, as to the matter of fact, is this, that the Petitioners
desirous to be fully satisfied whether the doctrines that were contrary to the
holiness and purity of Christian Morality, which so many learned and able
persons have so long since quarrelled with these Casuis^s for, were really to
be found in the books of those Authors, some of them, appointed by consent of
their Assembly, had accordingly undertaken the examination thereof: and having
found in diverse books of those writers, the greatest part of the propositions
laid to their charge, they drew a faithful extract thereof, and having reported
the whole business in a^nother assembly, they unanimously resolved to have a
petition presented to the Arch bishop, to demand of him the condemnation
thereof. That this being accordingly put in execution, the Archbishop had sent
up the said petition, with the extracts thereunto annexed, to the Lords of the
assembly held at Paris, as being an affair of general concernment, and such as
the whole church was interes^ed in. And having to that purpose sent up Monsieur
Gaulde, his Grand Vicar to make a report of the whole, with a Letter from
himself, powerful and worthy his zeal, the said assembly took cognizance
thereof, and immediately appointed certain Commissioners to examine the
business, to the end, that upon the return of their report, they might proceed
to judgment.

That the business came to this head as to matter of fact, is a thing so well
known that the Author of the said Libel could not be ignorant thereof. Whence
it may be easily inferred that when he attributes to the petitioners, what has
been done only by the means of the Archbishop, his main design was, to fasten
all the injuries and invectives of his defamatory pamphle^ upon the said
Praelate. For it being a thing out of all dispute, that neither the Curez of
Rouen, nor yet those of Paris presented to the ^ssembly any propositions
concerning Morality, and that there was not any thing of that kind brought
thither, but by the means of our Archbishop, yet does not this detractor think
it much openly to direct his calumnies against him under the name of the Curez
of Rouen; affirming that the Heretics, whom he makes the Authors of the
propositions, daring not to appear themselves for fear of being dismissed with
reproach, yet there has not wanted some that durst present in so honorable an
assembly, what should rather have been cast into the fire.

And it is this bitter re^lection of the Libeller which the Petitioners are
most troubled at, as conceiving themselves less wounded in the disparagement
they receive in their own reputation, then in the injury done their Head, whom
the respect due to his eminent dignity should have secured from all the
assaults of calumny, and that especially in an occurrence, wherein he has been
honored with the elogies of our Lords the Prelates and the most cons^derable
persons in the State, who have highly celebrated his prudence in the management
of this whole affair.

Now though the said Libel be levelled against the said Archbishop after so
audacio^s a manner, yet has not that consideration any way hindered the Iesuit^
(who in all probability are the Authors thereof) from being the dispersers of
it, and bringing it into diverse houses of Quality in this City; nay so far,
that F. dela Briere has distributed of them even in the palace of the
Archbishop, to diverse Eccle^^asticks of his Council.

These things being taken into considera^ion, as also that the said Pamphlet is
derogatory to the honor of our said Lord the Archbishop, that it is fraught
with malicious calumnies against the Petitioners, and falsely supposes that
there are in this Dioce^^e, and within this City such perni^ious heretics as
have sold their Souls to impiety, and heighten the flames of a new heresy,
whereof the Author charges the Petitioners with a design of promoting and
countenancing the re^stablishment, as it is alleged in the said Libell
hereunto annexed; It is humbly prayed, That you would b^ pleased to order the
said Fathers Bri^acier, Berard, and dela Briere to appear^ before you in
person, that they may discover and declare from whom they had that defamatory
Libell which they have distributed to diverse persons, as the Petitioners are
able to prove and make appear, in case it be denied. And that if it fall out,
that the said Jesuits will no^ appear and discover the Author of the said
Libell, that it be taken for granted that they caused it to be writ and
Printed; and as such, and distributers of the same, that they be condemned to
make reparation in point of honor to the Petitioners, as notorious detractors,
impos^ors, and disturbers of the public peace, and other penalties, which the
Petitioners refer to the zeal and prudence of ^he Proctor general of the
Archbishopric to demand against them according to the evidence that be
brought him; and to that end it is desired that he may be appointed to carry on
the bu^^ness jointly with us. And it is further prayed that a prohibition may
be issued out that they may not for the future publish or distribute any such
Libel^ upon p^in of excommunication ^pso facto, and other canonical
punishments specifyed in the holy decrees, against^ the Author^ of s^^ndalous
Libels, and that the Sentence which shall be passed hereupon be read and
publist^d in the several Churches, and other places where it shall be thought
fit, that the people may be undece^v^d, as to the calumnies, injuries, and
defamatory impostures whereby the said Jesuits would blast the reputation of
the Petitioners in the said Libell, And you will do Justice. And signed by the
said Chr^sti^n, le Cler^, de Iaehurs, de Fi^ux; and le Vigner Proctor, with
their several Subscriptions.

A REMONSTRANCE Of the Reverend The Curez of PARIS to their Lords of the
Assembly General of the CLERGY, When they presented to them a continuation of
the Extract of diverse pernicious Propositions advanced by the late Casuists.
MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONORS,
THe favorable reception we have found in your honorable Assembly seems not
to us a less remarkable discovery of your Goodness toward us, then of your
zeal for the undefilednesse of Ch^istian Morality. We have inferred from it, to
our more then ordinary comfort, that all the artifices which some have made use
of to bring an odium upon us, have not proved so effectual as to surprise you,
and to make you in the least measure unsatisfied of our inviolable submission
to Episcopal Authority. And certainly it must needs be a strange thing, that
those who make it their main business to render it as despicable as they can,
and have so often given you occasion to oppose their Attempts against the
Hierarchy, should be guilty of an imagination that they could raise jealous^es
in you of those, who think it a glory to them, that they have not any
privileges whereby they might be exempted from the dependence they have on
their Prelates.

For your Honors may be pleased to consider, that they could not upon any
occasion betray a more groundless pretense of their detraction, since that,
ever since the first breaking forth of this business to the present, we have
not done any thing but what discovers the respect we have for your sacred
dignity. The Reverend Clergy of Rouen who first set this business on foot, and
made the first complaints about it, brought it before their Archbishop; all
the end that we had in countenancing and furthering what they did, was only to
make a joint address to your Assembly; and when we solicited the Curez of the
other Diocesses to join also with us,, we were very far from thinking it should
be done wi^h any derogation from their Bishops. Your honors will, we hope,
have that opinion of us, that we are not to learn the obligations that ly upon
us, or the limits of our duty. We thought it a breach thereof to continue any
longer silent, when we see the Church overgrown with a poisonous Morality,
more corrupt then that of Pagans themselves; nor are we ignorant on the other
side, that we are excusable in the sight of God, by discovering the horror we
conceive thereat in our endeavors to raise an impression of it in all the
souls committed to our charge, and in addressing our selves to the Princes of
the Church, to represent unto them the pernicious consequences thereof.

It lies upon your honors to prevent the ^urther progress thereof by a legal
and authentic condemnation, since it is to your Authority that God has
particularly committed the discernment of sound and corrupt doctrine, and the
care of being guides to the people of God, by rules that are wholly divine,
according to the word of the great Pope, Innocent I. to a certain Archbishop
of France; Disciplin^ deific^ populum ^rudi^^ deb^mus. And that which is added
by the same Pope, in the place before mentioned^ viz^ that it is to be feared,
that the silence of the Bishop^ be not taken for their consent to the
dissolution of Morality, Ne ^ilentio nostro exist^^^^mur his pr^b^^e cons^nsum,
dicente Domino, Videbas ^urem, u^ cu^re^^^ cum ^o, is, at this time, more
considerable then even. For the extravagance of these writers is come to tha^
height, that making their advantages of the lenity of the Church in poin^ of
toleration, they presu^e to affirm it openly, that she co^ntenance^ their
irr^g^l^rities, because she suffers them. This is no more then what has
already been made appear t^ your honors out of F. Baun^ a Jesuit, and what
may be seen yet further in another of the same Society, whose name is
Mascarennas, who being equally d^^^^ou^ in F. Ba^ny to establish this
extravag^nt p^opositio^, That it is sufficient, so as to fulfill the precep^ of
hearing Mass, if a man heare^ ^wo halves at the same (...) from several
Priests, imagines it excellently well maintained by this erroneous and
dangerous principle, That the Church, without any opposition, suffering that
opinion should be published, is an argument that she^ approues i^.

Thi^ Maxim which carries within it, without exception, all the E^rour^ which
th^se C^suis^^ have published, must need^ oblige your honour^ to find out some
speedy remedy against evils that grow daily more and more predominant^ and
which those that introduce them end^avour to establish by principes that make
them incapable of any remedy. For their temerity i^ come to that p^t^^, ^s to
pretend that the Author^ty of the Bishops cannot give them any check. They have
made no difficulty to maintain, ((...) you may perceive by the Extract^ which
we now present you with of a new d^^^^e^) That the Bishop^ cannot prohibit the
Books of the Casuists, such as are those of Diana; (one of the most extravagant
that ever were) otherwise then as Marchandises, or, at the worst, but as
prejudicial by accident, and not condemn them as evil in themselves: and
that, when four or five of these Authors agree in the same opinion, it is so
far probable and safe in point of conscience, that unless the Church mukes the
contrary thereto an Article of Faith, it can no more cease so b^ such, then
four can cease to be four.

Thus is it, may it please your honors, that these writers do at the same time
invest simple private men with a pernicious power to overturn at their pleasure
all Chris^ian Morality, and would divest the Successors of the Apostles of the
right which JESUS CHRIST has endu'd them with, to prevent the extravagances of
man's wit from corrupting the truth of his Gospel. But this also considered
must needs engage you the more to make them feel the weight of that Authority,
which they would deprive you of and receive, to the advantage of the whole
Church, the examples of your Predecessors and your own.

It is not unknown to your honors, how that in the beginning of the Ninth age,
the Church of France did by the severity of her Canons, put a stop to a
licentiousness much less considerable then that which is now so prevalent.
There started up of a sudden a many trivial writers, who put out a sort of
books called Penitentials, to regulate, as they thought fit, the penance to be
inflicted on Penitents, according to the diversity of sins. But having by that
erroneous indulgence deviated very much from the regulations specified in the
Canons, the Bishops of France assembled in the II. Council of Cha^lons upon
S^one, and in the VI. of Parls, ordered, That all Priests should forbear making
any account of those Penitential Book^, as also that they should be absolutely
abolished, nay burnt, to the end they might not prove an occasion to deceive
the Pri^sts that read them, and consequently the people. Whereas there are many
Priests, says the Council of Paris, Can. 32. who either out of negligence or
ignorance inflict penances on those that confess their sins, otherwise then
it is provided by the Canonical Constitutions, making use, to that purpose, of
certain writings which they call Penitentialls, contrary to the holy Canons,
and by that means cure not the wounds made by sin, but cherish and continue
sinners therein by an over-indulgent dressing thereof, drawing upon themselves
that malediction of the Prophet; Woe unto those that sow pillowes to all
Elbowes, and make cushions for the heads of men to seduce them; we have
ordered, by a general consent, that every Bishop shall within his Diocese
cause strict search to be made after those erroneous writings, and having found
them, shall cause them to be burnt, to the end, that such priests as are
ignorant may not any longer make use thereof to the de^^^uction of souls.

Now we humbly intrea^ your honors to consider what comparison there is
between the excesses against which these holy Bishops your Predecessors have
acted with so much zeal, and those whereof we now humbly beg the
suppression? It was not laid to the charge of those composers of Penitential
Directions, that they had excused or authorized crimes, but only, that they had
taught the Priests to inflict pen^nces less severe then those that were
prescribed by the Canons. Nay even as to that point, how much more reserved
were they then those of this age? For the greatest licentiousness they are
taxed with is that which is condemned by the same Council in the 34. Canon,
viz. that they had imposed on a detestable crime a penance of less continuance
then 25. years, which was the time prescribed by the Council of Ancyra,
whereas these now reigning think it not enough to take away all the punishments
imposed by the late Popes on the same crime, but are so presumptuous as to
maintain, that those Confessors that are careful to promote the spiritual
good of men's souls ought to send the Laics to the holy Communion, and the
Priests of the Alta^ the very day, that they had committed those abominations,
worthy of all the fires of Heaven, Earth, and Hell.

Thus have we discovered to your Honors the proceedings of those exemplary men
that have preceded you in the government of the Gallicane Church. They have not
given way, as they say themselves, that the faithful should be abused by vain
hopes, and the deceitful promises, which they might flatter themselves with
out of corrupt Books. And it must needs be by following so wholesome an
example, that you have already broken the ice and put a stop to this torrent of
licentiousness and errors, by condemning the books of the s^id Father Bauny,
who published them in France, as containing Propositions inclining men to
Liber^inisme and the corruption of good manners, and doing violence to the
Natural right, and the Law of Nations, excusing Blasphemies, Vsuries,
Simonies, and diverse other the most ^normous sins, as if they were light
peccadillo'^.

But the inju^ious contempt wherewith your censure has been received by some,
who maintain that Author, even since your condemnation of him, as being not
guilty of any irregularity in point of Morality, and cause his books to be
reprinted without the least correction or alteration, is enough to convince
you, that since the mischief still continues, and grows more and more
predominant by time, there is a necessity the same remedies should be
continued, and that others should be applied that are more effectual.

The eyes of the whole Church are upon your honors in this affair; her honor
is but too much concerned in it, she cannot any longer bea^ either with the
reproaches of heretics her enemies, who endeavor her disparagement by
attributing to her these pernicious maxims, or the temerity of some of her own
children, who conspire with the others to fasten the same scandal on her. For
it is not the greatest scandal that even happened to the Church of JESUS
CHRIST, that, while Heretics are so presumptuous as to impu^e to the whole
body of Ca^holicks the licentiousnesses of some particul^r persons, there
should be, at the same time, whole So^ietie^ that acknowledge them, that
justify their accusation, that would have the stranges^ extravagances
accounted Roman Tradit^on^, and are grown to that height of^ presumption as to
pretend that ^^n cannot quarr^l at these irreg^larities, without being of the
number of the Calvenists, or at least countenancing them?

Will not the Church disclaim these temeratio^s wretches? will she not make a
public discovery of the horror she conceive^ thereat? Shall it ever be said,
that for a man to be a Catholic, he must approve domes^i^k infidelities and
usuries with Father Ba^^y, Simony, with V^lentia, the lawfulness of Murder to
avoid on box of the ^are, with Lessius, Assas^inations for calumnies with Father
Amicus, impostures and false accusations, with Caramuell? Shall it ^e said,
that a man must entertain all the pernicious or extravagant decis^ons of
Escobar for mysteries revealed by^ JESUS CHRIST, and that he cannot make any
complaint against them, but he must be immediately treated as an Heretic? This
is the affront that some would have put upon the reverend, the Curez of Ro^en,
by a virulent Pamphlett, under the form of a Petition presented to your
Assembly, and yet has not any name to it (which is a kind of proceeding never
heard of before) because, as it should seem^ the Authors of that scandalous
piece would gladly have played the wolves with those that hit them in the teeth
with their Morality, and tear them in pieces, but d^rst not discover
themselves, so to avoid the punishment they might deserve for their in^olence.

In that piece your honors may discover some tr^cks of that confidence^
whereby they vindicate their most dangerous maxims, They think it not enough
to maintain them as tolerable, no, they would have them received as articles of
Faith, which a man cannot deny without falling into Lutheranism. This is the
account they get in that Pamphlett, of what is taught by Father Bau^y, That to
make an action impu^able as Sin, it is necessary it should proceed from a man
that s^es, that knows, that considers what there is of good or evil therein,
and that before this sight and reflection of the mind, it is neither good nor
bad. Their proposition, which palpably excuses an infinite number of Sins, and
which, as such, was condemned by the College of Sorbonne in its Censure of the
first of July 1641. in th^se words, falsa, viamque aperit ad excusandas
excusationes in peccatis, is grown up of a sudden, if we believe the partisans
of that ^asuist, a point of the doctrine of the Church, taught by S. Thomas
with all Catholics, and opposed only by Lutherans and ^alvinists. These are
their own expressions but full of falsity and imposture. For where has S.
Thomas ever taught that doctrine, he, who maintains every where, that a man's
ignorance of those things which he ought to have known excuses him not from
sin; 1.2. q. 77. a. 2. and 3. and qu. 78. a. 1. and that men commit an
infinite number of crimes without having any other sight thereof then that, of
complying with their passions, and without making any reflection whether what
they do be good or evil in the sight of God. 1.2. q. 77. a. 2. And how dare
they affirm, that all Catholick^ are of the same opinion, when their own
Casuists, who are the most guilty of dissolution of all Catholics, and the
most inclined to embrace those opinions that flatter the humors o^ men, are
not all of that judgment? For Escobar makes it a point of his problematicall
Theology, Lib. 1. probl. 17. and cites those Divines even of his own Society
who hold the contrary^ to that opinion of F^ Bauny, condemned by the College
of Sorbonne, which yet they now dare impose upon the whole Church.

This your honors may be pleased to look on as a remarkable example of the
original and progress of their PROBABILITIES. They are litter'd at first
imperfectly with some doubt; then are they licked into the degree of probable
and safe in point of conscience; and thence, by the advantage of confidence,
that loses nothing by continuance, they are reduced to the predicament of
certain Truths, and they that oppose them chargeable ^ith Heresy, even after
they ^ad been censured by whole Universities.

Nor indeed do they much dissemble the Novelty of their opinions, or their
first productions. They very sincerely acknowledge that they are ordinarily
ha^ch'd by the temerity o^ some particular person, who, under pre^ence of some
probable reason that comes into his mind, presumes to oppose the common
sentiment of all other Divines, and forms out of his own a probable opinion,
which Time afterward ripens and confirms. This is the acknowledgement of
Escobar, in these words, T^m. 1. in Prael. cap. 4. Though many persons have
treat^d of a matter with great care, and happen to b^ all of the same opinion
after they had well considered the reasons thereof, yet is it my judgment that
a learned man may nevertheless, with some probability, be of a contrary
opinion, if ^e sees there is any reason that is very pr^gnant for his
sentiment, and finds that the others have not sufficiently cleared up the
business. For thus were probable opinions first introduced into the Schooles^
HOC ENIM MODO PROBABILES OPINIONES FUERE IN SCHOLAS INTRODUCTAE^ And to be
short (adds he a little lower) all these opinions, when they come first into
the world, owe their production to ONE SINGLE AUTHOR. Whereupon, another Doctor
agrees with him, because that opinion, though newly advanced seems probable to
him. CERTE quaelibe^ opinio DUM SUSCITATUR, AB UNO Q^TUM HABET AUTHORE. Postea
alius. alii consentiens ideo assensum praes^i^it, quia RECENS ADINVENTA opinio
sibi visa est probabilis.

Nay, this is not always necessary. There are some probable opinions that
proceed from no other dam then blind chance. Be it supposed that a Doctor,
without so much as minding what he did has broached some new and strange
imag^nation, which he himself thought not probable; There needs no more to give
another doctor occasion to make a new discovery in the Country of Probability.
And this is no more then is ingenuously confessed by the same Escobar, in these
terms: I do only conclude an opinion to be probable when he that first found it
ou^, judges it to be probable, and confirms it with a probable reason. But even
when a doctrine, advanced by a doctor, is approved neither by himself, nor any
other as true (ETSI DOCTRINA ADDUCTA A DOCTORE, NEC A SE, NECAB ^LIO VERA ESSE
AFFIRMETUR) but is only proposed as an argument to which an answer is required,
or casually brought in to explicate some other, or happily by way of instance, I
never^heless bring it into the qualification of probable opinion^, when I find
it maintainable by a rational reason, SI RATIONABILI RATIONE INNITI VIDEO.

And yet your Honors may be pleased to take notice, that these fantastic
conceits, which they themselves acknowledge to be new, and newly introduced
into the Schools, which they confess to be the aerial issue of their own
spirits, the most corrupt of all Masters, according to that remarkable
expression of Saint Hierome; non quod a me ipso oidici, hoc est a presumptione,
p^ssimo praec^ptore; these imaginations, unknown, according to their own
acknowledgement, to all antiquity, are nevertheless to be thought certain and
infallible paths to lead men to heaven. For it being their main design only to
flatter men, and to bring them to their lure, they saw well enough, that it
would amount to nothing to invent probable remissions of duty, if those that
followed them drew no other advantage thence, then that they were probably
faved and probably damned. They have therefore thought themselves obliged to
get higher, and by a Mystery unknown to all Divinity and Reason make an
alliance between probable sinning, and the certainty of not sinning^

Be pleased then to consider the strange ratiocination of all these late
writers. If I kill another for a bo^ on the care, it is probable that I shall
not sin, according to Lessius, Filliucius, Bald^llus: it is also probable
that I shall sin, according to all the Ancients; it is therefore certain
that I shall not sin, by the principle of Probability. Whence it may be
further inferred, that when ever they affirm it to be doubtful whether an
action be a sin, and contrary to the Law of God, they with the same breath
maintain, that it is not doubtful, but undeniable, that if a man does it, he
commies not any ^inne in the sight of God.

It Is upon this new kind of Logic, of concluding a certainty from an
uncertainty, that they have laid the foundation of all Christian Morality,
taking this always as an undeniable principle, That all the contrary opinions
of the Casuists are equally saf^. OMNES OPINIONES PROBABILES SUNT AEQUE TUTAE.
Not but that they are very sensible, that, of two contrary opinions upon the
same point of Morality, it is necessary that one be true, and the other false;
that one be consonant to the law of God^ and the other contrary thereto; but
they nevertheless stand upon it, that being both probable; because there are
Cas^ists that hold as well one as the other, the conscience d^^ives equal
sec^rity from both; that the judgement^ of men, even when they are deceaved and
pervert the divine Law, puts us out of all danger as to what we might expect
from the Law of God; and lastly, that we may make as great advantages, in our
journey toward heaven, of a probable falsity, as of the most certain Truth;
UT QUAMCUNQUE, as Escobar affirms, VIARU^ PRIMO DIVERSARUM INIERINT HOMINES,
RECTA TENDANT AD SUPEROS.

What then must we think will become of that terrible saying of the wise man,
which he has repeated in two several places, a^ it were to make a greater
impression thereof in our mind^, There is a way, that seems straight unto
man, and yet is that which leads unto hell; I^ there needs no more then that
a way seem str^ight to some Casuist to lead us in a direct line to heaven,
even when it is not straight in the ^ight of God? And what account will there
be had of these words of JESUS CHRIST, If the blind lead the blind, both fall
into the ditch, if two C^suists, whereof the one is blind the other
illuminated, because the one maintains that which is true, the other that
which is false, are as infallible guides one as another?

We might have produced to your honors a whole blood of Fathers, whose
judgments are absolutely opposite to this so dangrous imagination of these
Casuists; but we have thought it enough to weigh them by the doctrine only of
S. Thomas^ who establishes a quite contrary maxim, which he makes use of as a
certain principle whereby to resolve other questions. For whereas there were
in his time different opinions concerning this point^ viz (...) whether it were
lawful for a man to have a plurality of prehendaries, as he himself
acknowledges quod l. (...) ^^^^niuotur Theologi Theologis, and I^rist (...)
I^risti^ contraria sen^ire. He therefore puts (...) to the question in his
Quod. l. 8. ar^. 13. Whether this contrariety of opinions were a sufficient
ground for a man to forbear the having of more then one, because he could not
do it without running himself into some danger of sinning. Now according to
this new mystery of Probability, there was not the least occasion to make any
such question it being evident, that a man might with safety of conscience
follow whether he thought good of the two opinions so authorized, and that
there were not the least danger of shining in either the one or the other. But
the Divinity of that Saint is far different from this latter, and men were
happily in his time ignorant of this so commodiou^ ^n invention of complying with
all the world^ A m^n, says he, becomes guilty of ^inne, tw^ manner of waies^
one by acting ag^^nst the Law of God, the other by acting against hi^ own
Conscienc^^ NOW THAT WHICH is DONE AGAINST THE LAW OF GOD is ALWAYS EVIL, and
is not to be ^xcused though it be according to a man's Conscience. When
there^^re therefore two contrary opinions of the same thing, is mu^t necessarily
b^, that one is true and the other false^ and consequently, either the opinion
of those Doctors tha^ maintain^ i^ to be ^^lawfull to have several prebends,
it true, and if it be so, he WHO ACTS CONTRARY TO THAT TRUE OPINION, AND
CONSEQUENTLY CONTRARY TO THE LAW OF GOD^ IS NOT TO BE EXEMPTED FROM SIN,
THOUGH HE DO NOT THEREIN ACT AGAINST HIS CONSCIENCE^ But if that opinion be
false, and tha^ it were lawful according to the (...) of God to have a
plurality of Pr^bends, he that should be persuaded of it, should not sin etc.

Now we are to represent to your honors that this erroneous confidenc^ in the
opinions of men, though contrary to truth, which i^ so formally condemned by
S^. Thoma^, after the Fathers, and according to the Scripture, is now become
the maine hindge upon which they pretend that all cases of Conscience ought to
be turned about. These late writers treat as ignorant all those that are not of
their opinions; ^GNORANTIAE INVIDENTI CONDOLEAS, says Caram^^l, upon that
occasion; ^ay they are so far from any fear of the dreadful consequences of
this irrecla^meable liberty they take to reduce all things to the predicament
of Probabilities^ that they ^onceive it to be an extraordinary service done the
Church, to multiply them as much as they can. They out-vy one the other who
shall invent most, and the greate^t panegyricks they make one the other, is
grounded upon their introduction into the world of the greatest number of new
probabilities. I have a reverence (s^ies Caramuel) for the ingenu^^y of the
learned Diana: He must needs be an envious person who does not acknowledge,
that by his i^dustry many opinions are grown probable, which were not such
before him, and consequently that those who follow them sin not, though they
had sinned before. It Is by the means of this infinite multitude o^ different
probable opinions, whereof some are true^ others false, that they so
presumpt^o^sly give out themselves, that they have found several ways to go
to heaven, such as extremely facilitate the salvation of mankind; for that if
there were no other then the path of Truth, which is upon every point, the same
and indivisible, men would find it too great a difficul^y to travel in it, and
one would be forced to jostle the other out of his way.

We cannot without horror and shame entertain your honors with these
extravagan^es; but they are such only in their own principle, since they are
but too too formally inferred from it. For if it be true that the Authority of
these Casuists can make opinions probable, and that it must be supposed that
all probable opinions may safely be followed, as to matter of conscience,
though they permit a man to do that which is evil in it self, and contrary to
the eternal tr^th, they have very much reason to conclude thence that the
whole Church is extremely obliged to them, for that they have made Salvation a
thing so easy for her children to attain to, by the multitude of probable
opinions, which they make it so much their boast that they have lately found
out. But do they not with all give us just ground to complain with the learned
and pious Guigues, General of the Carthusians; O Apostol^rum tempora
infelicissima! O viros illos ignorantiae tenebris involutos, A omni miser^tione
dignissimos ^ qui^ut a^^ vitam pertingeren^, propter verba labioru^ Dei, ^am
d^r^^ vi^^ custodieban^, and hac nostra compendia nesciebant, O how unhappy
were the Apostles in their times! O how did those that lived then grope in
deplorable darkness! How were they to be ^emoan^d that they were not
acquainted with any other way to go to heaven then those rough and austere ones
which were chalked them by the word of God^ and were ignorant of all these
shifts and compendious methods of Probable opinions, never found out till this
age of ours.

We doubt not but your honors are sufficiently satisfied of the strangeness
o^ this doctrine in it self, and to what dre^dfull extravaga^ces it may open a
gap and give encouragement. All errour^ in matter of Morality are very
dangerous, because they corrupt the Judgment, which discernes between good and
evill^ and is the original of all actions. But this principle of Probability
is much more dangerous, in so much that it may be called the general poison of
those en^e^^med sources, which communicates to them a particular infection far
gr^ater then that which they have of themselves. For instance, it must
certainly be a d^mnable extravagance of opinion, to maintain, ^s F. Amicus and
Caramuel^ do, that men that have devoted their selve^ to a Religious kind of
life (and therefor with much mo^^ reason those that are of the world) may kill
those that intend to calumni^te them: But the fear of damnation for following
these ^asuists, might happily stop their hands who were inclined thereto, if at
the same time it were not demonstrated according to the genera^l doctrine of
probability, that, of two probable opin^ons, it is as s^se to follow one as the
other, and consequ^ntly^ that there is as little danger of offending God by
k^lling^ as there is in no^ killing.

It were therefore but to little purpose for the Church to condemn the
pa^ticular ^allyes of Licentiousness which these late C^suis^^ are guilty of,
if your honors do not also take away th^^ roo^ whence they all de^iv^ life and
growth. All the ^cknowledgement they will make of your Censure, shall be to
confess that your sentiment^ are probable, but that they hinder no^ but that
their^ are so too^ Of thi^ evasion of their^ your honors h^v^ daily experi^nce
in their attempts against the Hierarchy. ^or when they would maintain^, for
ins^^^ce, that the Regulars of any Religiou^ Orde^, ^ay wit^ ^ sa^e conscience
m^ke use of those pr^^iledges wh^^^ (...) expressly ^evo^^ed by the Council
of Tr^n^; ^ha^ having presented themselves before you, though you had refused
to approve them, they have neverthel^^^^, ^^ defiance o^ your Authority, a
power to hear Confess^on^; and lastly^ that having been once ^pprov'd, they
cannot be a^ter^^^ds revoked, upon what do they ground all these so illegal
pretentions^ (...) Sanch^^, one Rodrig^^^^ one Villalobos, one Portellus, one
Diana, and others of the same mo^t^ll, which are much more then needs to make
an opinion probable. And if you should oppose your Decrees to the t^merity of
these Casuis^^, all the advantage you shall make of it will be, that you shall
also make your opinion probable^ your honors shall be cited a^ Maintainers of
the negative, and Escobar shall discourse thus upon the whole: Regulares
POSSUNT, ET NON POSSUNT, in foro cons^ientia, sui^ vti privilegis^ quost sun^
express p^r Triden^inum revocata^ Lib. 6^ Probl. 16^ p. 192. SUFFICIT ET NON
SUFFICIT pe^ere ^pprobationem, u^ Regularis, si injust^ ei deneg^tur^,
^ens^a^ur jure approbatus, Lib. 7. Probl. 30. p^ 269. That is to say, in a
word, some hold the affirmative, others the Negative, you may believe^ and you
may do what you think good your self.

Nor is it any more difficulty for your honors to imagine what confusion, and
what dist^rbance^ this principle of Probability may oc^asion in the s^ate^ and
what a bane it may prove to civil Society^ when it shall be joined with their
other maxi^e^^ P^^ the ^ases that Judges have any inclination^ to ^avour their
Friends, or to be revenged of their enemies, what encouragement will they not
find to pervert all justice, with safety of conscience, in this maxim of
Escobar and four other Casui^ts; namely, That they are not obliged to follow
the more probable opinion^ but that they may give sentence for him, who seem
to have less right of his side^ and whose (...) is made good by less probable
reasone? In like man^e^ if the people fall into an humor of Rebellion, what
pretenses may they not find to color their defection, in that other maxim of
the same Author, viz; That they may without any cause sh^wne, choose whether
they will submit or no, (...) to ^he ordinances of their ^rinces, though after
a legal publication thereof; If they have no mind to pay^ Taxes shall they
ever be to seek for a lawful excuse to be exempted; since that to effect it,
there needs no more, according to these Casuists, then a little probability,
even though they cannot deny but that their Prince has as much if not more
reason to impose a Contribution upon them, then they have to deny the payment
thereof? But we shall no^ trouble your honors with any more as to that point.
Wha^ we have, and might say of it, we think two horrid to express. We have
only said a word or too at the beginning of our Extract of Probability, which
is enough to satis^y all those who have any affection for their Prince^ a^ God
oblige^ them to have, o^ what consequence this doctrine is, and how likely it
is to receive, ^n such emergencies^ as cannot be fores^ene, but ought always
to be feared, the detestable maxims of a great number of these Ca^uists,
contrary to the sa^ety of their persons, and the sovereign power which they
derive only from God himself? They may seem to be supp^essed, bu^ they will
never be absolutely extinguished, while they flatter men with an assurance that
they do not sin when they follow these l^te Authors, and that even when what
they teach, is, in effect, contrary^ to the Law of God.

These things well considered, who cannot (...) admire the strange confidence
of some persons, who would have the complaints we have put up to your honors
against these seditious maxims, to be looked on no otherwise then as an
attempt prejudicial to ^he well fare of the state. But our comfort is, that
those who make it their business with so much zeal to promote the security
and agg^andization thereof, are but too well assured of our per^ect and
inviolable fidelity thereto, ever to give any entertainment to those bad
impressions which some would have raised in them of us. It is well known that
in the Assembl^es where we are wont to meet, and which are authorized, not only
by the custom and approbation of our Archbishops but also by the Letters
which it has pleased his Majesty to send us to that purpose, there is not the
least discourse had concerning the public affairs; no, our employment is
about other things; Our thoughts are taken up only with the concernments of our
Parishes, and the spiritual good of the Souls committed to our charge,
because that is the maine design of our Functions.

Nor is it any other interest then that of those Souls, so precious in the
account of JESUS CHRIST, that obliges us to address our selves to your
honors, to beseech you, by the exercise of your Authority, to prevent the
further establishment of these strange corruptions, now so much in vogue, to
the dishonor of C^tholicks, and the scandal of heretics. The Censure you
shall pass upon them must need^ be of extraordinay advantage to the Church,
^^y even to those that are the m^intainers and publishers of them; for if they
acknowledge and submit to your Decrees, they will ret^rne into the way of
T^^th, out of which they had so strangely wandred^ and if they oppose them, as
it is their ordinary course to do, it will be with this disadvantage to them,
that they shall lose that erroneous belief whence they derive a power to
deceive Sou^es, and which is, as well in regard of themselves as of others, of
all misfortunes the most deplorable. How ere it happen, you will deliver your
own soule^ according to the ^ang^^ge of the Scrip^^re, and the sentence of
public condemnation which you shall pass upon these pernicious opinions,
shall prove your vindication before the tribunal of JESUS CHRIST, who will
require a strict account of the Pastors of his Church, for all the abuses, and
all the disorders, which they shall not have endeavored to suppress.

But for our parts, who are only called to the participation of a small glimpse
of that power, whereof your honors shine in the meridi^n luster, all that it
lies in our power to do, is, to let you know, how earnestly we disire and pray
for the reestablishment of Christian Mortality in its pureness and perfection,
and by crying down these unhappy maxims among the people committed to our
charge, preserve nevertheless union and peace even with those that maintain
them, according to these excellent words of St. Augustine. Quisquis vel quod
potest, arguendo corrigit, vel quod corrige^e non potest, salvo paci^ v^nculo,
excludit, vel quod, salvo pacis vinculo excludere, non potest, equitate
improbat, ^^mitate supportat, hic ^st pacificus, et ab isto maledicto quod
Scriptura dicit, V^ his qui dicunt quod nequa^ bonum est, and quod bonum est
nequam, omnino liber, pro^s^s s^cur^s, penit^s ali^nus.

Thus concluded and ordered in the Assembly of the Reverend the Curez of Paris,
and presented to the hono^rable the A^sembly General of the Clergy.

November, 24. 1656. and signed, ROUSS, Cure of St. Roch, Syndic. DU PUYS, Cure
of the Sts Innocents Syndic.


THE PRINCIPLES And CONSEQUENCES Of PROBABILITY, Explic^ted by CARAMUEL, one of
the most eminent among the late Casuists, in a book of his printed in the year,
1652. entitled. THEOLOGIA FUNDAMENTALIS.
THis extract comprehends the general principle of the new Morality, which is,
the doctrine of Probability. The whole doctrine has been taken out of one single
Author, to the end, it might be the better perceived, that they are not loose
and straggling Maxims that are not maintained but separately, and accordingly
are not to be thought to have any correspondence. To that effect, have we made
choice of one of the most eminent and most learned of these Casuist^, named
CARAMVEL, a man yet living, and a person looked upon by the rest, as the ^orch
of all the great Wits of this Age, ingeniorum facem, and one that is of such
account among them, that they cannot be persuaded, that what the great
Caramuel, as they call him, has approved, should be condemned by any one. Nor
is it on the other side to be doubted but that he is excellently well read in
the doctrine of these late Authors, since he openly professes that he reads in a
manner no books but theirs, and that he should think his time lost in reading
the ancient Fathers. This is no more then what he declares himself in these
words p. 22. whence may be given a great guess of the genius of the man. Non
ego multum temporis impendo, aut PERDO, in veterum (Patrum) libris legendis;
non quod contemnam illos, sed quod omnia quae pulchre cogitarunt, jam sint a
junioribus summo studio et ingenio elimata.

For the bett^r understanding therefore of the doctrine of Probability which is
the Troja^ horse wherein is contained all the learning of these Cas^ists, it is
to be observed, that the question is not whether there are probable opinions in
Morality? That there are such, it is generally granted by all, though the
number of them be infinitely less then what is imagined by those who make it
their business to reduce the most infallible rules of manners into
problematical questions, and can, without blushing, put out whole volums full
of such decisions as these, never heard of before among divines; Est, et non
est; licet, et non licet; peccat, et non peccat; tenetur, et non tenetur;
sufficit^ et non sufficit, as if the School of Jesus Christ were of a sudden
degenerated into a School of Sceptick^ and Pyrrhonians.

But the deadly poison of this doctrine consists in the fatal conjunctions of
these four Maxims, which derive their unhappy influences on all the rest.

The first is, that, when there are different probable opinions upon any point,
and that there are some who maintain a thing to be forbidden, others on the
contrary hold it to be lawful, both these opinions are equally false in point
of conscience. And though there is a necessity that one of the two should be
false, and contrary to the law of God, yet may a man nevertheless find the way
to Heaven in either of the two, and may walk as securely in that which is
^^lse, or in that which is true; ut quamcunque du^rum (...) diuers^r^m homines
(...) ^e^dant ad sup^ros^ as Escobar says, Theol. Mor. Tom. 1. in ^r^l. cap. 3.

The second is, that a man is at liberty to make ch^ise of the less proba^le
and less safe opinion, by quitting the more probable and more safe. That it is
to say, that when a man is in some doubt, whether it be a sin or not, to commit
such an action, and that the opinion which maintains that it is a sin to commit
it seems the more probable to him, insomuch, that all things considered, he is
convinced that it is so, yet it is nevertheless lawful for him, with safety of
consolence, to do that action, which he is satisfied is more probably a sin.

The third is, that an opinion is then probable when it is confirmed either by
a reason, or a considerable authority; and that to make it such, there is no
necessity these two conditions should me^t together, either of them being
sufficient to do the business. The former kind of probability, they call
probabilitatem^ intrinsecam, the latter, probabili^atem extrinsecam.

The fourth and last is, that, according to the gene^al consent of all
Casuists, an opinion is then probable^ and may ^e commonly followed without any
fear, when it is maint^ined by four grave Authors, and that there are diverse
who affirm, that the authority of one single Author is sufficient.

It Is in the rivetring and twisting together of these four Maxims that the
doctrine of Probability consists. From the present Extract as well as from those
which we brought in before, may easily be inferred the pernicious consequences
thereof. But to put a gag in their mouths who are so ready to maintain it, we
need only tell them, that as well the state, as Religion, is obliged to crush
the Serpent, for that while there shall be any thing of life in it, it can
never be prevented, but that the detestable maxims, such as reflect on the
safety of sovereign Prince^ and Authority, which have be^n so o^^en condemned
by the Parliaments, the Universities, and Clergy of France, will still con^inue
probable and safe in point of conscience, and will be looked on ^y those that
are instructed in that doctrine, as infallible w^yes to le^d men to Heaven;
especially since they have been taught and maintained^ not only by one, nor by
four, but by above twenty of the most eminent of these Casuists.

To be short, that we may in few words give a preservative against this poison,
which no man can conceive the least suspit^on of, we shall lay down in this
place, a remarkable passage out of St. Thomas, which clear^ up the whole
cont^oversie.

St. THOMAS.
Quodl. 8. Art. 13. Utrum, quando sunt diversae opiniones de aliquo facto, ille
quisequitur minuus tutam, peccet? Ut de pluralitate Praebendarum.

REspondeo, dicendum, quod duobus modis aliquis ad peccatum obligatur: uno
modo, faciendo contra legem, ut cum aliquis fornicatur; alio modo, faciendo
contra conscien^iam, etiamsi non sit contra legem: ut si conscientia dictat
alicui, quod levare festucam de terra sit peccatu^ mortale. Ex ^onscientia
autem obligatur aliquis ad peccatum, sive habeat certam fidem de contrario e^us
quod agit; sive e^iam habeat opinionem cum aliqua dubitatione. Illud autem quod
agitur contra legem, semper est malum, nec excusatur per hoc quod est secundum
co^scientiam^ et simili^er, quod est contr^^ conscientiam, est malum, quamvis
non sit contra legem. Quod autem nec contra conscientiam, nec contra legem est,
non potest esse pecca^um. Dicendum est ergo, quod, quando du^ sunt opiniones
contrariae de ^odem, oportet esse alteram v^ram, et alteram falsam. Aut ergo
ille, qui facit contra opinionem Magistrorum, utpote ha^endo plures praebendas,
facit contra veram opinionem, et sic cum faciat contra legem Dei, non excusatur
a peccato, quamvis non faciat contra conscientiam; sic enim contra legem dei
facit. Aut illa opinio non est vera, sed magis contraria quam iste sequitur,
ita quod vere licet habero plures praebendas, et tunc distinguendum est: quia
aut talis habet conscientiam de contrari^, et sic iterum peccat, contra
conscientiam faciens, quamvis non contra legem; aut non habet conscientiam de
contrario sed certitudinem; sed tamen in quandam dubitationem inducitur
contrarietate opinionum: et sic, si manente dubitatione plures praebendas
habet, periculo se commit^i^; et sic procul dubio peccat, utpote magis amans
benefic^um temporale, quam propriam salutem: aut ex contrari^s opinionibus, in
nullam dubitationem adducitur; et sic non committit se discrimini, nec peccat.

St. THOMAS.
Quodl. 8. Art. 13. Whether, when there are several opinions concerning the
same matter of fact, he who follows the less safe, sin or not? As for instance,
concerning the plurality of Praebendries.

I Answer, and say, that a man may be liable to sin^ two manner of ways; one,
when he does any thing against the law, as, for instance, when one commits
fornication. The other, when he does a thing against his conscience; as^ if his
conscience should tell him, that to take up a straw of the ground, were a
morta^ sin, and he should nevertheless do it. Now a man is subject to sin
against his conscience, whether he be persuaded, that the opinion contrary to
what he practices is the more safe, or do but make some doubt thereof. But
whatsoever is done against the law is always evil, nor is it any way
alleviated or excused, by pretending that it is according to a man's conscience.
And in like manner, what a man does against his conscience is evil, though it
be not against the Law. But what is neither against conscience, nor the law,
cannot be sin. It is therefore to be inferred, that, when there are two
contrary opinions of the same matter of fact, it must necessarily ^e that one
is true, and the other ^alse. He therefore that acts contrary to the opinions
of the more learned, as for instance, has a plurality of prebendries, does
either act against the true opinion, and ^onsequently doing that which is
against the law of God, is not free from sin, though he do not any thing
contra^y to his conscience; for ^o he becomes ^ transgressor of the law of God.
O^ that opinion is not true, but rather the contrary thereto, so as that it is
^ruly lawful ^or a man to ^ave a plurality of prebendries, and then we mu^t
dis^ingu^sh. For, ^ither such a man is convinced in conscience of the contrary,
and so falls into sin on the other side, as doi^g what is contrary to the
dicta^es of his conscience^ though not against the law; or ^e is a^^ured in his
own cons^i^nce that the contrary cannot be ^igh^, and yet is no^ absolutely
sa^isfied but inclines to some doubtfulness by reason of the contrariety of
opinions; and that being supposed, if, continuing in his dou^t^ulness, he has
a plurality of prebendries he puts himself into danger, and consequently does
certainly sin, as one that rather minds the prosecution of temporal advantages
then his own sal^ation. Or^ the contrarie^y of opinions raises nothing of
doubtfulness in him; and i^ so, he neither runs himself into any danger, nor
sin.

A CATALOGUE OF THE PROPOSITIONS Contained in the continuation of the Extract
of diverse corrupt propositions of the late Casuists; collected by the Reverend
the Curez of PARIS. And presented to the honorable the Assembly General of
the Clergy of France, the 24. of November 1656. BEING The Sum of the
PRINCIPLES and CONSEQVENCES of PROBABILITY explicated by Caramouel, one of the
most eminent among the late Casuists, in a Book of his printed in the year
1652. Intit^led, THEOLOGIA FUNDAMENTALIS.
I.
THere are two kinds of Probability, one proceeding^ from Reason, the other
from Authority. That one without the other is sufficient to make an opinion
probable. That all probable opinions are equally safe in themselves. That it
may so happen that the most gentle may be the most safe; And that it is lawful
for a man to follow the less probable. Caramuel Theol. Fundam. p. 132.

II.
That according to the general consent of all Casuists, the authority of four
Authors is sufficient to make an opinion probable; and by a necessary
consequence, one single Author is also sufficient. Caramuel Theol. Fundam. p.
137.

III.
There are three conditions necessary to be supposed ere a man can affirm an
action to be unlawful, and if there be but one of the three wanting, he may
affirm it to be lawful. Idem. ibid. p. 138.

IV.
That Bishops cannot prohibit the books of the Casuists^ otherwise then as
marchandises, or as being accidentally prejudicial, and that they cannot
condemn them as pernicious. Idem, ibid. p. 89.

V.
That it is impossible a probable opinion should be condemned in it self, and
that it is impossible also, that an opinion maintained by several Doctors
should not be probable. Ibid. p. 393.

VI.
That a probable opinion, that is to say, such as is maintained by the most
eminent Casuists can never cease being probable and safe, if the contrary be
not made an Article of faith by a new definition of the Church. And that a
condemnation of a lower degree then that, cannot deprive it of its probability.
Ibid. page 89.

VII.
That things being weighed and considered according to the doctrine of
Probability, whatever some Casuists write to condemn certain unjustifiable
opinions of the others, amounts to nothing; for that does not any way hinder
but that the opinions of those others remain as probable as ever^ Ibid. p^ 652.

VIII.
That, when there is as yet but one grave Author that has purposely and out of
design, treated of a case, his opinion is morally certain, and more then
probable. An instance thereof taken from the doctrine of F. Amicus^ who gives
Religious men a permission to kill those that should calumniate them. Caramuel
Th^^l. F^ndam. p. 545.

IX.
That men ought not to confront the civil and Ecclesiastical Laws against
the new opinions of the Casuists, for that these being of a much later date
then the Laws, it cannot be thought that their opinion^ should be expressly
condemned thereby. Ibid. page 549.

X.
That the inconveniences and dangerous consequences attendant on probable
opinions^ do not any way hinder but that they are still probable as ever. Ibid.

XI.
That Logic must be brought to a reformation, be^^use that which has been
hitherto taught is not sufficiently consistent with the doctrine of
probability. Ibid. p. 550.

XII.
The use of the Doctrine of Probability in order to the authorization of the
most mischievous decisions that may be. Ibid. p. 552. and p. 550.

XIII.
That the civil Magistrate, as, for instance, a Judge, cannot condemn those
that have followed a probable opinion, such a one for example as has killed
another in the defense of his honor; and that as concerning Excommunication
the case is the same. Caramuel. Theol. Fundam. p. 202. Et in Commentario in
Reg^l. S. Ben^dic^^. l. 1. ^. 65.

XIV.
That those that follow the most gentle, that is to say, the most licentious o^
all the probable opinions, such as are those that are approved by Diana, o^ght
to be called, not only generous Soldiers, but also Virgins; because those
opinions do enable men to behave themselves, in all the precepts of the Church
with such purity, that they do not commit hereby so much as ^ ven^all sin.
Car^muel in epistola ad Ant. Dia^^^. page 24.

XV.
That with the assistance of probable opinions, a man do his duty as to what
concerns the divine office, without so much as a venial sin, what
distraction soever he may be guilty of in the performance thereof, nay and that
voluntary too; because a man has no more to do in such a case, but to have a
probable confidence that the Church obliges him not any further then to an
external recitation of it, and expects no^ any internal attention thereto.
Caramuel, the more to recommend ^he advantages of this invention, declares
openly, speaking of himself, that he never so much as once in the year
confes^'d himself guilty o^ the least venial sin in saying over his
Bre^la^y, nay, on the contrary, that he might safely swear, that he h^d not
committed any, though he knew himself charge^ble with many distractions, and
those voluntary. Caramuel. Theol. Fundam. p. 134.

XVI.
That of two probable opinions that are contrarie^, the same person may, as his
humor leads him, one while make use of the one, and immedi^tely after put the
other in practice; what inconvenience soever may h^ppen thereby to his
neighbor, it matters not. That this doctrine is true, what mischief soever may
he the consequence thereof, nay though that by this change of opinion a man
exempts himself from the observation of the commandments of the Church. The
reason whereof^ is, that those commandments are very ancient, and these
compendious subtilties of a very late date; and consequently, that the Church,
having no^ foreseen them, cannot be thought to have ^orbidd^n them. Ibid. p.
143.

XVII.
One example of the precedent doctrine produced by him, is, that a person
having heard the clock strik^ twelve, between Saturday night and Sunday
morning^ and thereupon eaten a good meals meat of Flesh, if, after he has so
eaten, it strike twelve again by some other clock^ he may communicate the next
day, as havin^ ^ot broken his fast at all. The reason whereof is, that these
two clocks are to be looked upon as two probable opinions, and consequently,
that, according to the former, it was lawful for a man to eat flesh, as being
already Sunday morning, and that accordin^ to the latter he might imagine
himself not to have eaten on the Sunday, but only on the Saturday. Ibid. p.
139.

XVIII.
A second example is this^ that an Ecclesiastic taking ship, and having
brought with him only his Diurnal, (according to the opinion of Sanchez, who
affirms that a man performs his duty, as to the saying of the divine office, by
saying only what is in the Diurnall) may, when he is upon the Se^, choose
whether he will say any thing of his Office at all^ by chan^in^ his opinion,
and following that of Sa^cius who saye^ that a man does not perform his duty,
if he say nothing but what is in the Diurnall, and consequently, he who has
only a Diurnall about him, is not obliged to any thing. Ibid. p. 138^ and 13^.

XIX.
That it may be infer^'d from the doctrine of Probability, by a sound and
logical consequence, that the Church can neither command nor prohibit any
action that is done in secret, and consequently, that a man should not commit
any sin in eating flesh on Fridayes, so it be done secretly, or in not saying
over his Breviary, provided no body knew not any thing of it, etc. That these
consequences are improbable, and that nevertheless they are dialectically
drawn from the from the doctrine of Probable Opinions. So that this doctrine
may produce in the Schools a heresy not unlike that of the Independents in
England. Caramuel, page 205.

XX.
Certain ridiculous consequences, though necessary, drawn by Caramuel from an
opinion maintained by above eight Casuists, and consequently probable according
to their Maxims.

1. Consequence, which Caramuel approves in the place hereafter mentioned as
most probable, is this, that a man confessing his sins and thereupon
receiving the communion at Easter satisfies the precept of the Church for two
years, the precedent, and the subsequent. 2. Consequence, is, that if a man say
Mattins and Lands but once, toward the evening, he may satisfy the precept of
saying them for that day and the next. ibid. 3. Consequence, which he does not
approve, but engages himself is rightly drawn from the same opinion, is, That
24. Monks who should say at the same time every one a Lesson and an answer of
Matins, would all acquit themselves of the obligation that lies upon them
concerning the Lessons and the Answers. ibid. p 225. 4. Consequence, is, that,
when two persons say over their Breviaries at the same time, they may repeat
each of them his verse at the same time, not troubling themselves about any
thing of attention to what they do, because it is not any way necessary. 5.
Consequence is, that it is sufficient to say only once, whatever is to be
repeated in several parts of the Office, as the Pater noster, Deus in
adjutorium; etc. This opinion seems probable to him. 6. Consequence, is, that a
man satisfies the obligation that lies upon him to say the Rosary, by saying
only one Pater, and one Ave.
XXI.
An impious objection, grounded on the Doctrine of Probability, tending to
prove, that a man may be saved in any sect or heresy, proposed by Caramuel,
under the name of a Lutheran, without any answer brought by him thereto. page
472.

THE CENSURE Of the books of CARAMOVEL, BY The late Archbishop of MAECHLIN^
WHEREIN The toleration of the new Probable Opinions is particularly condemned.
JAMES, by the prov^dence of God, and the Holy Apostolic See, Archbishop of
Maechlin, to all those to whom these presents shall come, greeting in our Lord
Jesus Christ. Upon information made unto us, that the Booksellers of our
Diocese sold and uttered certain Books of Divinity set forth by John C^^a^ouel
Lobkowits, Doctor in Divinity, contain^ng abundance of Propositions whereat
the more knowing and devout sort of people are very much scandalized; we have
caused the doctrine contained in those books, to be very diligently examined by
several Divines; to the end that if there were any thing of venom therein,
such as might prove destructive to the souls committed to our charge, we might
accordingly apply such convenien^ remedies, as should preve^t their
dest^uction. Having therefore had a faithful report made us by those Divines
of the strict examination they had made, and finding thereby that the said
Author does advance several strang^ and impious propositions, which open a
broad way to c^s^ souls into eternal damnation^ and that he propos^s with an
insupportabl^ im^rudence, many doubts con^^ary to the most certain princi^le^
of Divinity, by opposing weak and trivial reasons there^o, to which he does
not bring any sol^tions; and consequently that the said Author does countenance
execrable opin^ons, such as a man cannot ^eflect on without ho^ou^^ as if he
had mad^ i^ his design to undermine the ^unndations of sound doctrine, that so
h^ might afterward with more ease over-turne the whole superstructure^ and
lastly that in many places he confidently declares, that it is his design to
make ma^y opinion^ probable, so to make abundance of things be thought lawful,
which have hither^o bee^ accounted ^^nne^; by th^^ means making more broad and
more eas^e, every day then other, the way that leads to heaven, as if he could
by his new subtilties put the imposture upon Jesus Christ who says in his
Gospel; Enter in a^ the straight gate; for the gate which leads unto death is
large, and the way that leads thereto broad and spacious, and many there are
that enter in at that Gate. But that the gate which leads unto life, is
narrow, and that the way that leads thereto is straight, and that there are
few that find it. Conceiving our selves therefore obliged out of a
consideration of our pastoral charge, to set as ^ar as we can from this broad
gate and this spacious way, the sheep whereof we are to be accountable, we have
thought it absolutely necessary, to forbid the r^ading of all the books, which
that Author has set out, or shall set out for the future, unless^ it be that
they are approved by us, or such other persons as shall be commissionated by us
to that purpose. We therefore very strictly charge all the faithful of our
Diocese to forbear the Printing, selling, buying reading or retaining any of
all the s^id books, enjoining all those that now have or hereafter may have any
of them, to bring them unto ^s, w^thin fifteen daye^ after the publication of
these presents, to the end that we may dispo^e thereof, as we shall see
con^enient.

Dated at Brussels, the 18. of February, 1955. Signed thus; JAMES, Archbishop
of Machlin.
Brussels, Printed by Martin de Bossuyt, Printer to the City, in the
Stone-Pereet, at the sign of S. Feigr. M.DC.LV.
AN EXTRACT Of certain PROPOSITIONS, out of a very late Author, a Jesuit, named
MASCARENNAS, printed by Cramoisy, in the year, 1656. and not publicly sold but
since October in the said year.
The Book is dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and the Auth^r de^lares in his
Epistle, that he teaches and maintains no more then what he had learned from
her, as his Mistress, and that it was by a certain inspiration from her that he
writ it. Now it may be judged by some of these decisions; whether it be a work
consistent with those pretended inspirations, and the purity of that Virgin to
whom it is addressed.

I.
THat whatsoever the Church suffers to be ta^ght and published by the Casui^ts,
ought ^o be accounted lawful; and consequently, that a man satisfies the
precept of hearing Mass, when he hea^s two halfs thereof from two several
pries^s, whether it be at several times or at the same time. Tract. 5. n. 491.

II.
That either a secular person, or a Priest being fallen into any kind of
impurity whatso^ver, n^y, though such as are against nature, may, without so
much ^s the least venial sin, (nay, are to be commended for it if they do)
communicate the very same day, after they have made their con^ess^o^ th^reof.
That wh^reas ther^ were heretofore laws in the Church contrary to thi^ tenent,
they are now abrogated by the general c^stome o^ the whole earth. That the
confessor ought to advise his penitent to receive the Eucharist the ^e^y day
tha^ he is fallen into such crime^; and that the vow or resolution any one
might have made, not to come to the Lord Table i^ that condition, were null.
tr. 4. de Sacros. Euch. Sa^ram^nto, disp. 5. c. 7. p. 239.

F. Bauny Jes. Theol. Mor. tr. 10. p: 457. tre^ting of the some question, upon
a case proposed of a Priest tha^ should have the confidence to say Ma^se the
same day that he h^d committed some horrid crime, follows the same sentiment of
Sancius, and is approved by Mascaren^as, who very roundly declares, that it is
no more then what may be followed in the pr^ctick.

III.
That sacrilegio^s communio^^ produce Grace as soon as a man has cleansed
himself by confession, and consequently he that had received an infinite number
of such communions, or a Prie^t that had said Mass ten times every day,
contrary to the precept of the Church, and that in a polluted condition, would
become most sanctified in ^ moment, a^soon as he had made an act of contrition,
or of attrition with con^ession. Tr. 1. de sacram. in gen^re dis^. 4. c. 5. p.
47.

IV.
That a Priest, who without a^y necessity, bu^ merely out of pure malice says
Mass in a condition of mortal sin, without making any confession before hand,
is not obliged to sati^fi^ the obligation that lies on him according to the
Council of T^ent, of confessing himself as soon as may be: because the Council
speaks only of such as have omitted confession in a case of necessity, and not
of those who have omitted it out of a malicious de^ign. Tr. 4. de s^cros^
E^ch^r. sacram. disp. 5. c. 6. p. 236.

V.
That, absolutely speaking, it is not so much as a venial sin to omit the
Sacrament of Con^irmat^on; a tenent that has been condemned by the Bishops of
France, and by the College of Sorbo^^e in the cen^ur^ passed on certain books
of the Jesuits of England. Tr^. 3. d^ sacram. Con^irm^^. disp. 4. ^. 3. p. 152.

VI.
That when a man who has committed an action, would, to know whither it b^ a
si^ or no, bring it to the test of several probabl^ opinions, he is not obliged
to confess himself of that doubt^ul sin, even though he inclines more to the
opinion that makes it a sin, then the other. Tra. 4. de sacram. Euchar. disp.
5. c. 4. p. 227.

VII.
That he that goes to Masse^ to take his opportunity to look on a woman with
unch^^t^ desires, and who, were it not for that and, would not go thither at
all, fulfils the precept of hearing Mass, even though he had an express
intention not to ^ul^il it. Tract. 5. n. 518.

A LIST, Of many dangerous Propositions taken out of the Late Casuists, and
particularly, out of the first Tome, in folio, of the new Moral Theology of
ESCOBAR, a JESUIT, Printed not long since at Lions, and dedicated to the
General of the Jesuits.
There is one thing will happily be much wondered at in this List, and that is the
odd style and man^^r of expression familiar with Escobar, as, Licet, and non
licet; peccat, et non peccat. etc. It is therefore but necessary there should
be some account given of his meaning thereby; which is only this, that a thing
is allowable according to some Casuists, and is not according to others. Thence
he concludes that the thing in question is infallibly lawful according to the
principle of Probability, which he lays down as the cornerstone, at the very
beginning of his work, as may be seen by the first proposition. It is not to be
doubted but this manner of treating of Christian Morality will seem ridiculous
to persons of understanding and sound judgment, but it must needs draw groans
from the breasts of those that have any tenderness for piety, and will justify
before all the world, what a right character is given by the late Bishop of
Bellay in one of his Books, of these Refiners of the rules whereby men's
Consciences are to be directed. It Is principally, says he, in that part of
Theologi^ which is called Moral, that they discover the utmost of their
extravagances, playing the Sophisters so peremptorily in things that concern^
the L^w of God and humane actions, that, as they daily find out new sins, and
make new discoveries in the unknown world of Vice, so have they a way to
subdue what they discover, ravelling and unravelling sins as their humor
inclines or diverts them, framing men's consciences, or rather making sport with
them as they please themselves. It is and is not, is the motto and devise of
this kind of science. Would you have such an action to be guilty of any sin?
They will turn that side of the picture toward you which shall represent it
as such. Is it expedient there should not be any sin in it? They will turn
the other side toward you. This is the true Lesbian rule which bends it self
to the thing it is to measure. Every year, what do I say, ^very year? No,
every month, nay, every quarter of the moon, the Society of the Indies
furnishes us with some new Casuist or other. There it is that they twist and
un^wist sins, in so much that what was sin last year, is no such thing
this year, and what is not such this year, shall happily be the next, if there
be any necessity for it.

I.
That all probable opinions are equally safe in point of conscience. Whence it
must needs follow, that, when some Casuists affirm a thing to be lawful, and
others hold that it is not, it is not to be doubted but that it is lawful, and
that all the world may, without any sin, follow such an opinion. Escobar,
Theol. M^r. Tom. 1. l. 2. Sect. 1. c. 2. p. 34.

II.
That it is Carfull to consult several Doctors, till such time as that we meet
with some one that answers us according to a probable opinion that speaks
favorably on our ^ide. Escobar, Theol. Mor. Tom. 1. l. 2. Sect. 2. c. 6.
Probl. 7. p. 39.

III.
That Kings may impose a tribute as just, according to a probable opinion, and
that the people may refuse to pay it, as being unjust, according to another
probable opinion. Escobar, Theol. Mor. Tom. 1. l. 2. Sect. 2. c. 6. Probl. 18.
p. 43.

IV.
That Subjects do not sin, when they refuse, without any reason alleged, to
submit to a Law whereof there has been a legal proclamation made by their
Prince. Escobar, Theol. Mor. Tom. 1. l. 5. Sect. 2. c. 14. probl. 13. p. 160.

V.
That Clergymen are not subject to Secular Princes, and that they are not
obliged to any obedience to their Laws, even though those Laws are not any
way contrary to the state Ecclesiastical, Escobar, Tr. 1. Exam. 1. c. 5. Number.
34. et Sequent.

VI.
That a man proscribed and outlawed by a Temporal Prince may not be killed
out of his territories, but that he who is proscrib^d by the Pope may be killed
in any part of the world, because his jurisdiction extends over all. Escobar,
Moral. Theol. tr. 1. Exam. 7. c. 3. Praxis ex Doctoribus Socie^atis.

VII.
That the Laws which inflict penalties on those that shall do certain
Actions, are not obligatory in point of conscience, even though the matter be
of great importance. Escobar, Theol. Moral. Tom. 1. l. 5. Sect. 2. c. 17.
Probl. 26. p. 164.

VIII.
That a Judge, as well superior, as in^eriour, may give sentence according to
one probable opinion, quitting another opinion that is more probable. In like
manner, that a Physician may prescribe a thing that is less likely to cure his
patient, instead of that which he conceives he may with more probability and
safety administer. Escobar, Theol. Moral. Tom. 1. l. 2. Sec^. 2. c. 6. probl.
14. p. 42.

IX.
That, considering Justice simply in it self, a Judge may lawfully take a
Sum of money to give sentence for which of the parties he pleases, when both
have equal right. Escobar, Moral. Theol. tr. 3. Exam. 2. c. 6. Praxis ex
Societ, Jesus Doctoribus.

X.
That, in civil Contracts, he who had externally obliged himself either by
word or writing, and who had not at the same time any intention to be
internally obliged, is not in conscience engaged to performance, and may
secretly take back again that which he had sold, restoring the price he had
received. Escobar, Theol. Moral. Tom. 1. l. 10. Sect. 2. c. 16. Probl. 20. p.
462.

XI.
That according to a probable opinion, deciding that a tax imposed upon
Merch^ndises is not just, it is lawful for a man to use false weights to gain
the more; and that, if he be charged with so doing, he may deny it by oath,
making use of equivocall expressions, when he is brought upon Interogatories
before a Judge. Escobar Moral. Theol. ^r. 1. Exam. 3. c. 7. Praxi^ ex Societ.
Doctor.

XII.
That a Son, who lives in the house with his Father, may exact a certain
recompense for the services he does him, and in case he do not give him any, h^
may with a safe conscience steal from his Father. Escobar Moral. Theol. tr. 3.
Exam. 9. c. 4. P^axis ex Societ. Jesus. Doctoribus.

XIII.
That a man does not become irregular, that is to say, incapable of
Ecclesiastical administrations, for having procured and been the occasion of
an abortion, if he be in any doubt whether the fruit of the womb were quick.
Escobar^ Moral. Theol. ^r. 4. Exam. 6. c. 5. Praxis ex Societ. Ies. Doctor.

XIV.
That an Ecclesiastic surprised in Adultery, if he kill the womanes husband
whom he has abused in his own defense, is not for that irregular. Escobar
Theol. Moral. ^r. 4. Exam. 6. c. 5. Praxis ex Societ. Ies. Doctor.

XV.
That a man condemned to the Galleyes is not irregular. Escobar, Moral. Theol.
tr. 4. Exam. 6. c. 5. Praxis ex Societ Jesus Doctor.

XVI.
That when the Church, does, upon pain of Excommunication, forbid the reading
of Books written by heretics, she does not in that prohibition comprehend
those who cause them to be read by others; the reason is, that, to cause a
thing to be read is not the same as to read it. Escobar, Theol. Moral. l. 7.
Sect. 2. c. 33. Probl. 59. p. 289.

XVII.
That it is not Simony for a man to give money to another, to the end he might
employ his interest with the Patron of a Living, to procure the said Living
for him. Escobar, Theol. Moral. tr. 6. Exam. 2. c. 6. Praxis ex Societ. Jesus
Doctor.

XVIII.
That a dispensation is in force, though the c^use, upon allegation whereof it
was obtained, be absolutely ceased. For instance, when a man has obtained a
dispensation, not to say over his Breviary, by reason of some inconvenience it
may be to his sight, he shall not be obliged to do it, when that inconvenience
is removed. Escobar, Moral, Theol. tr. 1. exam. 16. c. 4. Praxis ex Doctoribus
Societ. Jesus.

XIX.
That it is not so much as a venial sin to make use of a Dispensation
procured without any legal ca^se alledged^ Escobar, Moral. Theol. tr. 1. exam.
16. c. 4. Praxis ex doctor. Societ. Jesus.

XX.
That where the Pope simply enjoines men to give alms, to gain Jndulgences,
it is sufficient if a man give but a halfe-peny. Escobar, Moral. Theol. tr. 7.
ex. 5. c. 8. Praxis ex Societ. Ies. Doctor.

XXI.
That works, that are good in themselves, but are sins, and those mortal,
by reason of the evil end whereto they are referred, are sufficient, in order
to the gaining of Indulgences. Escobar Moral. Theol. tr. 7. exam. 5. Praxis ex
Societ. Ies^. Doctor.

XXII.
That a privilege is good and authentic, though it be obtained by discovering
but some part of the truth, and in such manner that i^ had not been obtained,
if there had been an absolute discovery made of the Truth. Escobar, Theol.
Moral. Tom. 1. l. 6. Sect. 2. c. 10. Probl. 6. p. 187.

XXIII.
That it is lawful upon occasion of some great feare^ to make use of
dissimulation in the administration of the Sacraments, as for a man to make as
if he consecrated, by pronouncing the words without attention. Escobar Theol.
Moral. Tom. 1. l. 1. Sect. 2. c. 7. P^obl. 26. p. 27.

XXIV.
That it is no sin to contract a marriadge by person^tion, as if it were in a
play upon the stage, by using equivocall expressions to elude the Church, when
one is forced thereto by a great ^eare. Escobar^ Theol. Tom. 1. l. 1. Sect. 11.
c. 7. Probl. 24. p. 26.

XXV.
That, by virtue of the Bull called Crucia^a, a man may be dispensed of the vow
he had made, or o^^h he had taken, not to commit Fornication or any other ^^me;
though a man can not be dispensed of an o^th he had taken about any
concernement of his neighbor. Escobar. tr. 1. Exam. 17. n. 144. Idem, Theol.
Moral. Tom. 1. l. 7. Sect. 1. n. 245.

XXVI.
That, coming to the Preface, a man is not obliged to hear the rest of the
Mass, at a place where there is but one Mass said. Escobar Moral. Theol. tr.
1. Exam. 8. c. 3. Praxis ex Soc Jesus Doctor.

XXVII.
That a man, who has the reputation to be extrea^ly given to Women, does not
commit any mortal sin in soliciting a Woman to condescend to hi^ desires,
when he does not intend to put his design in execution. Escobar Moral. Theol.
tr. 1. Exam. 8. c. 3. ^raxis ex Societ. Jesus doctor.

XXVIII.
That a person, having played the Fortune Tellers through an express invocation
of the Devil, is not obbliged in hi^ Confession to discover any fur^her then
that he has answered a question proposed to him, or told ones fo^tune. Escobar
Theol. Moral. tom. 1. l. 3. Sect. 2. c. 10. Probl. 52. p. 102.

There may be further seen very strange elusions, as to the Si^cerity of
confession, which out of very shame are not brought upon the st^ge; in the same
Escobar, Theol. Moral. Tom. 1. l. 3. Number. 256.294.300.30^.323.

XXIX.
That it is no mortal sin to preach, principally out of a consideration of
v^in glory, or for money. Escobar, Moral. Theol. tr. 6. exam. 7. c. 7 Praxi^, p.
954.

XXX.
That it is lawful for Catholics to appear at the Font, and answer for the
children which the Minister^ bap^ise. Escobar, Moral. Theol. tr. 7. ex. 2. c.
4. Praxi^ p. 980.

XXXI.
That it is lawful for a man to let his house to common strumpets, who, he
knows before hand, will make it a place of public prost^tution, not requiring
so much is any reason why he should be excused for so doing, etiam null^ just^
c^usa ^x^us^nte. Sanchez in Sum. l. 1. c. 7. Number. 10. The same thing is also
maintained by others, Jesuits, as Vasquez, in opusc. de Scandalo. p. 43. ^. 8.
du. 5. n. 48. Reb^lliu^, l. 14. q. 17. n. 8. Castrus Palaus. ^. 1. tr. 6. dis.
9. pun. 12. n. 1. Azor, and V^lentia cited by Sanchez.

XXXII.
The several ways that Servants may conscientiously contribute to the
debauches of their Masters, according to the doctrine of these C^suists. Gaspar
Hur^ado, a Jesuit, apud Dianam 5. part. p. 435. Escobar. Moral. Theol. ^r. 7.
Exam. 4. c. 8. n. 223.

XXXIII.
After what a strange manner these late Casuists do elude and bring into
contempt the most wholesome regul^tions of the Church, and the most necessary
provisions she has made to stop the course of the most presumptuous crimes,
such as are Blasphemies, by falsely affirming that they are abrogated by a
contrary custom. Thomas Sanchez, in Sum. l. 2. c. 32. n. 44.

XXXIV.
That a Cu^e or Pastor of the Church is discharged from the obligation he
stands in to endeavor the instruction of his people, when he cannot do it of
himself by reason of his ignorance, and that he has not the means to have it
done by another, by reason of the small profits of his Cure. Bauny Jes. Tract.
10. De Presbyteris et Parochis. q. 32. p. 448.

XXXV.
That a man does not commit any sin, or is guilty of any ^rreverence toward
God, when he presumes to address himself to him in his Devotions, having an
actual inclination mortally to offend him. Sanchez, Opuscul. Mor. l. 7. c. 2.
du. 9.

XXXVI.
That a Priest who should every day say the Office proper to Easter, without
any reason for so doing, should be guilty only of a venial sin, and that if
he had any reason to do so, he should not sin at all. Caramuel, Theol.
Fundam. p. 520.

XXXVII.
That he who has a will to commit all the venial sins that are, does not
sin mortally. Granados, Diana, Mucha, cited by Escobar, Theol. Moral. l. 3.
p. 83.

XXXVIII.
That it is a scruple very much to be blamed for a man to say in his
Confession, that he has committed a fault, being satisfied in himself that he
did ill. Bauny. tr. 4. de Poenit. q. 15. p. 138.

XXXIX.
That it is no injury done to the paternall power a man has over his children,
for another to persuade his daughter to run away with him, in order to a
clandestine marriage, against her Fathers consent. Bauny, Theol. Moral. tr. 12.
de impedimento rapius, p. 721.

XL.
That it is probable by Authority, and certain in reason, that a husband may
without any sin kill his wife surprised in Adultery, and a Father his
daughter; And that the Laws of the Church, which condemn that action, oblige
only Ecclesiastics [ who cannot have wives or daughters] and not secular
persons. Caramuel, Theol. Fundam. p. 737.

XLI.
That it is lawful for a man, in order to the preservation of his voice, to
make himself an Eunuch, contrary to all civil and canonical Laws, which
expressly forbid it. What good opinions these Casuists have one of another.
Caramuel. Theol. Fundam. p. 555. and 556.

XLII.
That if an Jnfidell find any thing of probability in his own false Religion,
he is not obliged to embrace the Christi^n Faith proposed to him, though he
find himself more inclined to believe the latter, unless it be at the point
of death, according to some, nay, he ^s not obliged even at the point of death
according to others. Thomas Sanchez, Sancius, and Diana, cited by Escobar.
Theol. Moral. p. ^9.

XLIII.
That there is no necessity, that, a man ready to die, should, in order to the
receiving of the remission of his ^i^nes of God, have a true desire to reform
his li^e, if God should spare it him a while; and that he may obtain it by the
absolution of the Priest, though he be in such a disposition as to matter of
repentance, that if he were but confident he should live any longer, he would
neither confess no^ quit his sinne^ at all. P^^rus M^ch^el de San Roman,
Jesu^t, Expedi^, and spir^^ualium Soci^^. Jesus. l. 3. c^ 7. p. 78.

A LETTER, Written by the Reverend Father in God, JAMES BOONEN. Archbishop of
Maechlin. To their Eminences the Cardi^als of the Inquisition at Rome, to whom
the Jesuits had appealed from his Ordinances. Faithfully translated out of the
Latin into French, and out of French into English.
ARGUMENT.
Complaint being made to the Archbishop of Maechlin, of the remisness of
certain Confessors, he causes an Extract to be mad^ of certain Ar^icles or
Propositions maintained and practiced by some, which who would not renounce the
practice of were not to be admitted to hear Confessions. The Jesuits not only
dispute, but m^intain them, whereupon they are denied approbation: they appeal
to the Cardinals of the Inquisition at Rome, who write to the said Archbishop
to approve them, which gave occasion of the ensuing LETTER.

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR EMINENCES,
ON the 21. of May, came to my hands the Letter which your sacred Congregation
was pleased to write to me of the 18. of April, whereby you give me to
understand, that, desirous to sati^fie in some measure the Rector of the
Iesui^s College at Louuaine, which is within this Diocese, you have thought
fit to enjoin me, not to deny such Priests of that College as shall have been
examined and approved, a permission to hear the confessions of secular persons;
unless it were, that, meeting with any thing I should be troubled at in so
doing, I did, within three months, represent unto your sacred Congregation,
the just causes that hindered me from granting that permission; in which case if
I neglect to give you satisfaction, some other Bishop should be empowered to
examine and approve them.

This your Eminences may well imagine must needs be no small affliction to me,
nay, that I cannot but be much more troubled at it then I am well able to
express; since that, being come to the extremities of old age, and upon the
point of my departure hence, to go and give an account to the supreme Judge, of
my administration, I find, that, not only, the world is already full of
malice; but also that it degenerates daily more and more into wickedness,
because charity waxes cold. Desirous to find out some reason thereof, I have
often both observed, it my self, and have it from the information and judgment
of several persons, whose integrity, zeal, experience, and learning I am well
satisfied of, that the principal cause of this deplorable degeneration and
disorder, proceeds from the over indulgence of many confessors who are ready
enough to open trap-doors to let men into dissolution and Libertinisme, taking
for security ^or their so doing some new opinions of certain divines, who,
instead of measuring their proceedings by the practice of Evangelical Truths
and the rules of good life, which have been left us by the holy Fathers, make
it their main business to find out new excuses to confirm those, which sinners
themselves are wont to allege, to palliate their sins, and to cover with the
cloak of Probability, the ignominy and shamefulness of their crimes. It is of
such persons as these that the Prophet Ezechiel has said in the Scripture. Woe
unto thos^ that sow cushions under the elbows of men, and lay pillows under
their heads that they might deceive them.

These perni^ious extravagances are now come to that heigh^, that ^here were
requisite not a Letter, but whole volumes, if a man should make but a simple
extract, out of some of their books and practices, of all those unheard^ of
paradoxes, whereby they at this day elude the precepts of the Church,
concerning the observation of Fasting, Fes^ival days, and the recitation of
the Canonical Hours; whereby they palliate Simonies, private Revenges, Lies and
Perjuries; whereby they e^e^vate, and bring in a manner to nothing the
obligation which lies upon men to avoid the occasions of falling into sin; and
in fine those paradoxes whereby they expose to an evident danger of nullity,
the efficaciousness and power of the Sacraments. Now as it is in a manner
natural to men to approve those dissolute maxims which any way flatter their
irregular apprehensions, so must it needs happen, that those, who are the
Authors thereof, taking it for granted by the easy entertainment they meet
with in the world, that they had done a very considerable service therein,
cannot but presumptuou^ly imagine in themselves, that they daily more and more
enlarge the way to Heaven, by the means of their Probability, that is to say,
take away the bounds and meers of that straight way which leads to life,
planted by the hands of Jesus Christ himself, who is eternal and unchangeable
truth, and remove them out of their places as far as they can by such
inventions, as proceed from no other principle then themselves.

Having received several complaints against this erroneous and dangerous kind
of Theology, from those who have a certain zeal and tenderness for a more
solid doctrine, and a more christian discipline; and finding on the other side,
that the Heretics who are our Neighbors, continual loading us with
reproaches, that some Doctors of our Catholic Church do maintain things so
extravagant in the business of Morality, as that Pagans themselves never
betrayed any thing that may come into comparison therewith; I made it my
earnest business to make a collection of some of the most dissolute and most
dangerous Articles, whereof I have hereunto annexed a copy, taken partly out of
their printed Books, and partly out of what has been observed in the practice
of some of them, whose demeanours I have had a very faithful account of. Having
so done, I thought it not amiss to require the opinions and judgments thereof
of the most knowing men of my Diocese, as well secular as regular. Whereupon
having seen and examined the whole, I resolved to prevent the further progress
of this evil, by the application of the most gentle remedies I should have
thought of; tha^ is to say, by giving notice as well by my self as those who
had managed the examination of the business, that those, who were admitted to
hear Confessions, should beware how they fell into that dissolution of doctrine;
and giving order withal that there should be a learned refutation set forth of
some part of those Articles. B^t having found afterward, that this kind^ of
prevention, was not sufficient, and that reco^rse must be had to more effectual
remedies, I resolved not to grant to any, either Secular, or Regular Priest,
the power of receiving Confessions, if he did not promise and swear before hand
not to put in practice any of all the said Articles.

Much about that time, it happened, that on the 23. day of April 16^2. several
Religions men of the Society of JESUS, presenting themselves to be examined, I
thought it no easy matter to meet with another so favorable an opportunity to
execute the resolution I had taken. And thereupon I began with those, as well
out of an imagination, that if they should willingly comply with, and observe
that oath, the Religious men of other orders would certainly make no difficulty
thereat; as that I had certain proo^s, that the Fathers of that society, were
of all others, the most addicted to invent and to practice those licentious
doctrines. And this among many other examples cle^rly apeared to the Examiners
whom I had appointed to make the examen, on the day before mentioned. For the
Jesuits, having been, of set purpose, examined that day, concerning the
dangerous Articles, they very obstinately maintained the best part of them, and
particularly this, which, I have from very good hands, as a certain Truth, has
been practiced by the Religious of their society, that is to say, that it is
lawful to dismiss those with the sacramental Absolution tha^ have not happily
gone over half their confessions, when there happens to be a great concourse of
Penitents, as it may very well happen upon great Festivals, or at a time of
indulgence: which being tolerated, it would very of^e^ come to pass, that
people would make but half and imperfect confessions, those Fathers drawing to
their Churches a great multitude of Penitents. Another effect of this
toleration would be, that the greatest sinners, out of the fea^e they might be
in to declare the enormity of their crimes, would with no small satisfaction
embrace this convenience of obtaining absolution, when they have happily
confessed but one or two of their most p^^donable defaults.

Upon these considerations was it, that I deferred the granting of ^ permission
to hear the Confessions of secular persons to seven o^ the Religious me^ of
that Socie^y, who in other things had discovered sufficient Learning and
abilities, until such time as they should promise and swear that they would
not proceed according to those Articles in the mannagement of men's Consciences.
And wher^^s I well foresaw tha^ they would not be persuaded to take any such
oath without the consent of their Superiour^, I gave them a copy of those
Articles to be shown them; which they promised me to do. But from that time to
this, I never could have ^^y account or answer, either from them or their
Superiors, Unless it be, that one of them, whom I think to be a Professor of
Lovaine, told me that their Society had caused to be Printed, in France, some
of those very Articles; but that it did not any way concern the Inhabitants of
Flande^^. Whereupon I made him answer, that, it being not the custom to permit
the impressions of books made by those of their Society, without being
beforehand ^pprov'd by three of their Divines named by their Provincial, it
was no longer to be doubted that their whole Society maintained, as probable,
what so many Divines besides the Author of the Book, had thought fit to be
communicated to the public.

All these things considered, I must confess I could never comprehend upon
what these Fathers ground the imagination they are of, that I have done them
any injury, by pressing them to the oath before mentioned. Had they been but
pleased to discover the pretended grievances which they thought so
indigestible. I should have ordered the business to be diligently examined,
and if there had been any thing of reason in their complaints, I should have
thought it no difficulty to quit my former resolution. For it was far from my
design to do ought that might prove prejudicial to them, all may aim being to
prevent the destruction of that flock which was committed to my charge, and to
rescue it from ^he inconveniences consequent to the licentiousness of some
Confessors, which I saw growi^g daily more and more predominant, and, was
justly afraid, proceeded for the most part from that Society.

And whereas I could not imagine they should fly to those shi^ts and evasion^
out of any other pretense, then for that there might be, among the censured
Articles, some which they conceived might be represented as le^se odious by a
favorable construction thereof, or might happily be so far maintained by
plausible arguments, as that they should seem not ^o deserve so severe a
Censure, I thought fit (purposely to avoid being engaged into a multiplicity of
dispute without any hope of conviction) to put those Articles into the hands of
the Theologall Faculty of Lovaine, to the end they might there be maturely
examined, that those only might be censured which should be found undeniably
corrupt and condemnable, and that, if the said Faculty had met with either in
the books, or observed in the practice of Confessors any other opinions,
containing a doctrine pernicious as was that of the Articles, they might be
added thereto, as was accordingly done by the same, both on the 30 of March,
and the 26. of April 1653. when they judged that the XVII. Propo^itions ensuing
were not to be tolerated in the practick, and that it was the duty of
Superiors, to make provision of their Authority tha^ they should not be
taught, as may be seen by the copy of the Decree of the said Faculty hereunto
annexed.

To the end therefore that I might in all things obey the order of your
Eminences directed to me, as far as lies in my power, and at the same time not
omit any thing that my Episcopal Function may oblige me to, as to what
concerns the weeding out of these pernicious Doctrines, I shall be ready to
admit the Religious men of the Society aforesaid, to receive Confessions, when
there shall not be wanting any of the qualifications requisite, provided
always that, being legally authorized, they promise and swear, that they will
never, in the practick, adhere to those XVII. Propositions at least, which I
shall to morrow propose to the Ecclesiastics and Regulars of my Diocese, to
the end they may be abhorred by all, a proceeding I hope your Eminences will
allow as justi^iable.

There are yet two things, whereof I think it not amiss, upon this occasion, to
give your Eminences some account of. The former, is, that the Regulars do not
observe the Decree of the Congregation, made concerning the affairs and
requisitions of the Bishops and Regulars, dated the 15. of June, 1647.
hereafter mentioned; wherein it is declared, That it is not lawful for
Regulars to give absolution in cases reserved to the Ordinaries of the places,
or that might be reserved to them for the future. And consequently, that they
cannot exercise that power, if they have not obtained leave to that purpose of
the Ordinary. Now, though I took great care to have the said Decree
communicated to all Superiors of the Regular orders the 3. of October. 1647. yet
has there been with me but one single Religious man of the Order of S. August.
to desire that power, which I accordingly granted him, because he was a prudent
and pious man. Others there are that pretend they have I know not what
privileges, or communications of priviledge^; nay they disclaim the Decree, as
null, because it was granted without their being heard thereto. Others there
are, that affirm it only to be declarative, and consequently that it is of no
force against their privileges, which, they say, cannot be made invalid, but
by a Decree formally levelled against them. Nay, there are some so teme^arious,
as presumptuously to affirm, that it is not in the power even of our holy
Father the Pope himself, to revoke or abridge their Privileges, as being such
as have been granted them by way of reward for their merits.

The second thing I have to represent unto your Eminences, is, that there are
several Regulars who receive Confessions within my Diocese, though they have
not been approved either by my Predecessors or my self. Upon which account it
was, that, not long since, I caused notice to be given to all the Regulars (as
it appears by the copy of the Mandate hereunto annexed) that they should come
and present the Deed or Writing wherein are to be seen the names, and the time
of Approbation, which they had received either from me or my Predecessors. This
has been done by many; and so that it soon discovered the great number of
those that have intruded into the Office of Confessors within my Diocese,
without the said Approbation. But one thing happened which I cannot
sufficiently admire, that is, that when the Mandate came to the knowledge of
the Abbot of Saint Angelo, Internuncius of his Holiness in the Low Countries,
he sent to me that I should revoke the said Mandate, though it did not
comprehend any thing which had not been observed from all Antiquity, and that
it had been established for a Rule in the Provincial Council of Maechlin, and
confirmed by Pope Paul V. in the title ^. c. 1. of the Sacrament of Penance, in
the terms recited in the Article hereunto annexed. And all this,
notwithstanding the express command of our most holy Father the Pope that it
should be observed, as may be seen in his Brief of the 16. of May 1648.
concerning the cause of the Bishops of Angelopolis. By which Brief, it is
enjoined, that the Regulars, even of the Society of Jesus, approved in a
Diocese by the Bishop thereof, to hear the Confessions of secular persons,
shall not have power to receive the like Confessions in another Diocese
without the approbation of the Bishop of the said Diocese, as I doubt not but
is well known to your Eminences.

And thus much I conceived it my duty to discover to your Sacred Congregation,
in order to the good of Ecclesiastical discipline, having so great a
confidence of your Piety^ zeal, and vigilance, as that you will vouchsafe to
afford me some more effectual means and remedies, whereby I may be enabled to
oppose those abuses which ought not to be neglected. In the mean time, having
with all submission acknowledged the reverence I have for your purple, I remain

Your Eminences most humble Servant, JAMES, Archbishop of MAECHLIN.
^russels, July 17. 1654.
PROPOSITIONS That ought not to be tolerated in the practick, and should be
condemned by the Authority of Superiors.
I.
A Confessor ought not to defer or deny absolution to a Penitent, that goes
on in an habitual course of sinning against the Laws of God, Nature and the
Church, though he discover not the least hope of fu^ure amendment, provided he
only say that he is sorry for what is past and promise to reform himself.

II.
That it is sometimes lawful to absolve a person that is in a next occasion of
sinning, such as, if he please, he may, but will not avoid, nay, though he seek
it, and engage himself therein directly and of set purpose.

III.
To abuse a married Woman is not Adultery if the hu^band consent thereto; and
the rest, too too horrid to be translated.

IV.
It is lawful to dismiss those with the Sacramental Absolution, who had not
said over half their Confessions, by reason of the great concourse of
Penitents, as i^ may frequently happen, for instance, on great Festivals and
days of Indulgence.

V.
That it is law^ul as well in Judgment, as out of Judgment, to swear with a
mental Reservation, without any regard had to the intention of him who obliges
a man to swear.

VI.
It is sometimes allowable, and that so as a man shall not be guilty of any
mortal sin, to kill an adverse party, or to defame him, even by charging him
with crimes he is no way guilty of.

VII.
It is lawful for an Ecclesiastic or a Religious man of any Order to kill a
Detractor, who threatens to discover notorious crimes of him or his Religion,
when there is no other way to prevent it, as it should seem there is not, if
the Detractor be ready, publicly to charge therewith, and that before most
grave men, either that Religious man or his Religion, if he be not killed.

VIII.
The commandment of the Church to observe Festival days, is not obligatory
upon pain of mortal sin; (the case of scandal only excepted) if there be
nothing of contempt.

IX.
There are some who probably maintain, that if the child be not yet quick in
the mothers womb, it is lawful to procure an abortion, to avoid either
scandal or death. Whence it appears that we must not too easily condemn a
wench that compasses the death of the child within her, when the child is not
yet quickened, out of a fear that being found big, she might be put to death, or
come to discredit.

X.
It is lawful for a man to entreat a Conjurer to dissolve a charm laid before
by another of the same profession, if he be willing and ready to do it.

XI.
Those who communicate at the Monasteries of the Mendicant Friars about Easter,
satisfy the commandment of Chuch concerning annual Communion, and are not
obliged to communicate to their parishes.

XII.
When a man has in his Confession concealed some sins, out of a fear of
brin^ing his life into any hazard, or out of some other consideration, he is
not obliged to discover them in any Confession afterward^.

XIII.
It is not only lawful to preserve, by a mur^hering defense, the things we
are actually in possession of, but also those whereto we may make a certain
claim, or have some interest in, and are in hopes to be possessors of
hereafter. Which doctrine allowed, it is lawful ^s well for an heir as a
Legatee to defend himself in that manner, against him who unjustly raises
encombrances to hinder his succession, to retard the exec^^ion of a Will. The
same course is also allowable in him that has a right to a Lecturer's place or
a Prebendry, against another who unjustly disturbs his possession.

XIV.
To call God to witness to a light inconsiderable Ly, is not so great an
irreverence, as that a man should or might be damned for it.

XV.
It Is no mortal sin for a man to accept a challenge to maintain his honor, and
to kill the challenger.

XVI.
A man is not obliged, upon pain of mortal sin to restore what he has stolen
by trivial and inconsiderable thefts, what ever the total sum thereof may
amount to.

XVII.
A person is capable of receiving absolution how palpable soever his ignorance
may be of the Mysteries of Faith, nay, though out of pure negligence, he knows
nothing of the mystery of the most Blessed Trinity, or of the Incarnation of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

ADVERTISEMENTS TO CONFESSORS.
COnfessors are hereby to take notice, that they ar^ not invested with any such
power as that of disp^ncing with the obligation which lies upon men to pay
their debts, or to countenance the delay o^ the payment thereof; or exempti^g
m^n from the obligation of restoring the honor they have taken away from their
Neighbor, or making satisfaction for the injuries they have done him. They are
accordingly to defer absolution, if the Penitents express not a ^^^^^ne^s^
to sati^f^^, whether it be for their debts or the i^juries they have done,
those c^ses only excepted wherein the Laws permit it, whereo^ the Con^e^sors
only ar^ the Int^rpreter^.

They are further to be advertised, that, according to the prescription of the
Council of Trent, they are not to meddle with reserved Cases, and
consequently, that they are not to a^^ume to themselves any po^er of absolution
therein, ^ave only in extreme nec^s^ity.

The Judgment O^ THE THOLOGAL-FACVLTY OF LOVAINE Consulted by the Archbishop
of Macchlin, to know, whether he ought not to enjoin the Confessors to forbear
the practice of the precedent propositions, in the direction of men's
Consciences.
THe s^cred Theologall Faculty of Lovaine assembled ^n the Hall of the
University, the 30. of March, and 26. of April 1653. has judged and concluded,
that the doctrine of these XVII. Proposi^ions is not to be suffered in the
Practick, and that the Superiors ought to employ their authority for the
prevention thereof.

It is also the judgment of the same Faculty, that the two advertisements
subsequent thereto are to be seriously recommended to the Confessors.

Signed below, by THEODORUS LYLVOLTIUS, Dean, in his own name and that o^ all
the other Doctors.

THE END.
The STATIONER to the Reader.
I had once resolved to close up the ADDITIONALS to the MYSTERY of IESVITISME
with the solemn Censur^ passed by the Theologal Faculty of Lovaine, upon
several Propositions, as confining my self to what I found in the
Cologne-Edition of the PROVINCIAL LETTERS. But the two following pieces coming
so opportunely to hand, and being of so much concernment to all the
transactions between the IAN-Senists and the MOLINISTS; it would have argued a
neglect, if not an envy, of thy satisfaction to have slipped the present
occasion I had to file them up. Besides, the IESVITS, for their vindication,
intending to put ou^ THE APOLOGY FOR THE CASVISTS, etc. in English, (to which
these are written by way of Answer) they may prove an Antidote against the
poison, intended the unwary world in that Masterpiece of the SOCIETY.

R. R.
FACTVM, OR A REMONSTRANCE OF the Curez of Paris. Against a Book entitled, An
Apology for the Casuists, against the calumnies of the Jansenists. Printed at
Paris 1657. As also against those that have been the Authors, Printers, and
dispersers of it.
THe cause we are engaged in is that of Christian Morality. Our adversaries are
the Casuists, who corrupt it. The concernment we have therein is derived from
the tenderness we ought to have for their consciences who are committed to our
charge. And the reason of our so earnest appearance against this late Libell,
is, that the con^idence of these Casuists growing every day more and more
insupportable, ^nsomuch that it seems arrived to such a height as makes it
incapable of addition, we conceive our selves obliged to have recourse to the
utmost remedies, and to put up our complaints to all the Tribunals where we
imagi^e we ought to do it, so ^o prose^ute without any intermission the censure
and condemnation of those pernicious Ma^imes.

The better to satisfy the world of the justice of our prete^^ions, we need
only give ^ naked representation of the whole di^ference as it lies between
^s, and an account of the carriage of th^se Casuists from the beginning of
their enterprises to the publishing of this last ^ook of th^^^s, which is
indeed the consummation of all. To the end, that men, having considered with
what an exc^sse of pat^ente they have hitherto been tol^rated in their
pernicious d^signs against the Church, may th^nce per^eive the necessity there
is henceforward to proceed with the greatest rigor against them. But we think
our selves concerned in the first pla^e to make ^ppear w^e^ein the venom of
their mischievou^ doctrines does principally consist, as a thing which the
greatest p^rt of the world does not sufficiently reflect upon.

That which is most highly pernicious in ^h^se new doctrines, it, that their
main design is not only to corrupt good manners, but to introduce corruption
into the very rule of Morality, which is ^ business of ^arre greater
consider^^ion and consequence. For it is much a less dangerous and general
inconvenience to introduce ^rregularity and dissolution, yet with a supposall
of the vigor and existence of the Laws whereby they are forbidden them to
pervert those Laws and to justify those irregularities. The reason thereof is,
that, as the nature of man is even from its first being perpetually inclined to
evil, and that the only thing which prevents him from falling thereinto is
ordinarily the fear he may be in of the Law, so it happens, that, when he has
once shaken off that bridle, he runs at random into all excesses of
concupiscence; so that there is no difference between making all vices lawful,
and all men vicious.

And thence it comes, that the Church has never ende^voured any thing so much
as an inviolable conservation of the rules of Morality, even in the midst of
their disorders whom she could not prevent from a violation thereof. So that
when time has produced Christians of evil lives, it is to be observed at the
same time that there were holy Laws that condemned them and were purposely
made for their reduction. Nor indeed was it ever known before the starting of
these Casuists, that any one, acknowledging himself to be of the Church, did
publicly endeavor to destroy the purity of her rules.

This, it seems, was an attempt reserved for these last times, which the clergy
of France calls the dregs and dotage of the last days, wherein these new
Divines, instead of making the lives of men consonant to the precepts of Jesus
Christ, make it their business to level the precepts and rules of Jesus
Christ to the concernments, passion^ and pleasures of men. It is by this horrid
overturning of things, that some, who go by the names of Doctors and Divines,
have introduced, instead of true Morality, which ought to have no other
principle then divine Authority, nor other end the^ that of charity, a Morality
that is purely humane, such as proceeds from no other principle then that of
reason, nor has other end then concupiscence and the passions most irregul^r
in nature. And this is no more then what they declare themselves with an
incredible presumption, as may be seen by these few maxims, which are most
ordinary among them. An action, say they, is probable, and may be done with a
safe consci^nce, if it be grounded on a ra^ionall reason, ratione rationabili,
or upon the authority of some grave Authors, nay, of one alone, or if it be
directed to an allowable object. Now what they mean by an allowable object may
be seen by the examples they give of it. It is lawful, say they, for us to kill
him that has done us any inju^y^ provided it proceed from a motive of gaining
esteem among men, ad captandam hominum aestimationem. A man may go to the place
appointed with a design ^o ^ight a duel, provided he do it to avoid the
aspersion of a hen-hearted fellow, and to gain the reputation of a man of
me^^al, vir ^t no^ gallina. A man may give money for a Bene^ice, provided it be
^one out of no other reflection then that of the temporal advantages accrewing
thereby, and not out of any thoughts of making a comparison between a temporal
and spiritual thing. A woman may dress her self gorgeously, what inconvenience
soever may happen thereby, provided she do it merely out o^ the na^ural
inclination she has to be vain, o^ naturalem fas^us inclinationem. A man may
eat and drink a^ much as he please, so it be done purely out of vanity, and
without prejudice to his health, because the natural appe^ite may endeavor its
enjoyments in those actions which are proper thereto^ Licite po^est appetitus
naturalis suis actibus frui.

From these few words may a man give a great guess a^ the designs of these
Casuists, and how that, while they destroy the rules of pie^y, they in^roduce,
instead of the precepts of the Scripture, which oblige us to do all things with
an humble compliance to the will of God, a brutal permission to make all our
actions absolutely referrible to our selves. That is to say, whereas Jesus
Christ came to mortify in us the concupiscences of the old man, and to settle
the empire of charity in the new man; these, on the contrary, are come to
revive the concupiscences, and to smother the love of God, from which they give
men a liberal dispensation, and declare it to be sufficient if they hate him
not.

This, this is that carnal kind of Morality which they have furnished the
world with, such as has its dependence only on the arm of flesh, as the
Scripture speaks, and whereof they assign no other ground then the authority of
Sanchez, Molina, Escobar, Azor, So^us, etc. who it seems think it rational;
whence they conclude, that it may be followed with the greatest safety of
conscience, and without running the least hazard of damnation.

It is er^ainly a thing deserves our greatest astonishment to see the
presumption of some men come to this height. But this is done insensibly, and
by degrees that to most are imperceptible; in this manner.

These accommodating or complying opinions were not at their first start guilty
of the excess they are at the present, but seeming not so horrid, and being
advanced only as things doubtful and problematical, ^hey immediately gained
some strength by the number of their main^ainers, whose maxims are of this
quality, that they daily tend more and more to dissolution and libertinisme. So
that there being a considerable body of Casuists tha^ s^ifly maintained them,
the Ministers of the Church somewhat backward to engage against that great
number, and hoping withal that mildness and reason might reduce those wandering
persons into their right way again, have suffered these disorders with a
patience, which the event has discovered to be not only ineffectual, as to
what was expected might be the issue of it, but also prejudicial. For they,
assuming thence a liberty to write, have in a short time spent their venom
into so many volumes, that the Church does at this day groan under the
monstrous burden thereof. The licentiousness of their opinions, which must be
proportionable to the multitude of their Books, is such as does not only hurry
them into pernicious tenants, but gives them withal a confidence to propose
them to the world. Thus the maxims which they had at first only scattered
abroad as simple sen^i^^ents, were, not long after, advanced into the
predicament of probability; thence into the number of such as might be followed
with all safety and serenity of consci^^ce; nay, at last, declared to be as
safe as the contrary opinions, and this with such a palpable discovery of
extravagance, that the Ec^lesiastical powers conceiving a just indignation
thereat have passed several censures on those doctrins. The general assembly of
the Church of France censured them in the year 1642. in the book of F. Ba^ny
which is in a manner a perfect collection thereof: for books of that nature are
but perpetually re^terated copies of the same things, that were extant before.
The college of Sorbonne passed the same cond^mnation on them: The Theologal
faculty of Lovain did the like; and the late Archbishop of Paris passed
several censures upon them. Insomuch that there was some ground to hope, that
so many authorities joined together might retard the further progress of so
growing an in^onvenience; but the Casuists it seems thought not all these
checks worthy their notice. F. Hereau read, in the College of Clermon^, such
strange Lectures in oder to the permission of Homicide; and the Fathers
Flahaut, and Le Court did at Ca^n broach ^^^ch horrid tenants to authorize
duels, that the University of Paris conceived it sel^ there^pon obliged to make
a representation thereof to the Parliament to have some course taken therein,
which occ^s^oned those tedious proceedings that are known to all the world. F.
Hereau being upon that charge by order of the Council, confined to the Jesuits
College as a Prisoner, it abated somewhat of the ea^nestness of the Casuists;
but in the mean time were they preparing new matters, to be spawned into the
world in a more favorable conjuncture of time. Accordingly, it was not long
ere came abroad the works of Escobar, F. Amicus, Mascaregnas, Caramuel, and
diverse others, so ^raught with the opinions that had been already condemned,
nay, with some new ones more horrid then any before; that we, who, by reason of
the over sight and familiarity which we have with men's conscience^, must needs
take notice of the mischiefs occasioned by those irregularities, thought our
selves obliged to oppose the same all that lay in our power. Upon these grounds
was it, that we addressed our selves these last years to the Assembly of the
Clergy then sitting, to demand the condemnation of the principal proposition^
of these late Authors, whereof we gave them a faith^ull extract.

Then was it, that the earnestness of those who would undertake the
maintaining of them, apparently broke out. They left no course unat^empted,
omitted nothing of solicitation to prevent the Censure, or at least to del^y
it for some time, out of a fond hope, that if they could but shift it off to
the rising of the Assembly, there would not be time to take it into
consideration. Their design, in some part, proved effectual; but
notwithstanding all their artifices, and the great af^aires the Assembly had to
dispatch near its closure, nay, though we had not of our side but the bare
truth (a thing not very powerful at this day) yet by the providence of God
things were so ordered, that, contrary to all their endeavors, the Assembly
resolved not to separate till it had given sufficient discoveries of its
indigna^ion against those dissolutions, and its earnest desires to pass a
sol^mne condemnation upon them, i^ they had had time to do it.

To make this the more evident to all the world, a Circular Letter was written
to all the Bishops of the Kingdom, and the Book of St. Charles Borrhom^us,
printed the last year by their order, sent with the said Letter, wherein, the
more to oppose those mischievo^s maxims, they begin with that of Probability,
which is the foundation of all. Their words are these. I^ is a long time, that
it has been the grief of our spirits, to see our Diocesses, as ^o these
matters, no^ only in the same condi^ion with the Province of S. Charles, but in
a much more deplorable. For if our Confessors have a greater talent ^f learning
and abilities then th^se of his time, the dang^r is so much the greater of
their embracing and foll^wing certain modern opinions, which have made such a
strange alteration in Christian Morality, and the maxims of the Gospel, that
the most implicit ignorance is to be preferred far before such a knowledge; as
such as te^ches m^n to be sceptiques in all things, and (...) find out wa^e^,
not to exterminate the corrupt maxims of men, but to justify them therein, and
to instruct them how they may with safe^y of conscience put them in practice.

Then they come to those conveniences and accommodations that are established
upon the principle of Probability. For, say they, whereas Jesus Christ has
left us his precepts and example, to the end that those who believe in him,
might obey him, and regulate their lives according thereto, the design of
these Authors, on the con^r^ry, seems to endeavor a compliance between the
precepts of Jesus Christ, and ^he interests, pleasures, and p^ssions of men; so
ingenious are they in soo^hing their ava^ice and ambition, by ^he
encouragements they give them ^o be revenged of their enemies, to lend out money
upon excessiv^ interest, to get into Ecclesiastical dignities by ways ev^r so
indirect, and to pr^s^rv^ the imaginary honor which is der^ved from ^h^ world
by bas^ and bloody ^ourses^ And after they had made some scornful reflections
on the Casuists meththod of the right direction of the in^ention, they
earnestly condemn their abuse of the Sacraments.

And l^stly, that the Church might know, that what they had done was but little
in comparison of what they would have done, had it been in their power, they
con^clude thus. Several Curez of the Ci^^y of Paris, and of other the chiefest
Cit^ies of the Kingdom, have, by the complaint they have made to us of these
disorders wi^h ^he permission of the Reverend their P^elates, and their earnest
entreaties that some remedy might be though^ on, heightened our zeal, and much
added ^o our attristation and regret. Had their addresses come sooner to our
Assembly then they did, we should, with all possible exactness and diligence,
have examined all the new prop^sitions of the Casuist^ whereof they gave us the
^xtracts, and p^ssed a solemme sentence upon them such as might have hindered
the further progress of that con^agion of men's consciences. But having not the
leisure to take the b^sinesse into examination, wi^h the diligence and
exactness^ which the impo^tance thereof might justly require, we find, that,
for the present, we could not be^hink u^ of a be^t^r remedy for so deplorable a
disorder^ then to give order for the printin^ of the Instructions laid down by
St. Charles Borromaeus, Cardinal and Archbishop of Milan, at the charge of the
Clergy, as being such as wh^nce these Conf^ss^rs may learn^ how they ought ^o
behave themselves in the administration of the Sacram^nt of penance, and to
send them to all the R^verend the Bishops of the Kingdom^.

There being nothing so remarkable from this procedure of our Lords the
Bishops, as that what thy said proceeded absolute^y from the force and
conviction of truth which they conceived obliged them to express themselves in
that manner, we pr^sumed, that the Authors of those novelties would have been
more r^s^rved for the future, and that, having considered that all the Cu^ez of
the prin^^pall Cities of France, and the ^relates, were unanimously resolved
upon the condemnation of their doctrine, they would at length have sat still,
and thought it no small happiness that they had avoided the censure they had
so much deserved, that is, such as must needs have made a noise in the world
proportionable to the extravagances they had committed against the Church.

This posture were things in; and, for our parts, our thoughts were wholly
taken up with a peaceable instruction of our people according to pious and
Christian maxims, without any fear of dis^^^bance, when there comes upon the
stage this new book, we have now to de^le with, which being an APOLOGY for all
the CASUISTS, does alone contain full as much as the rest do put together, and
revives all the condemned p^opositions, and that with an imprudence and
scandal so much the more deserving a seve^e censure, that it dares appear
aft^r so many contemned censure^, and so much the more to be punished for that
it is apparent, by the misca^riage of the remedies already used, what ^ec^ssity
th^re i^ to find out such as may prove more effectu^ll, to put ^t last a ^^nall
period to so dangerou^ and so insupport^ble a mischief.

We come now to the particular reasons we have to prosecute the condemnation of
this Libell. They are indeed many and those very considerable, whereof the
first is the extraordinary confidence wherewith the Autho^^ of that book
maintain the most abominable propositio^s of the Casuist^. Things are now
carried on simply without any pall^ation. The old way of vind^c^tion, which
was, that such and such propositions were imposed upon them, i^ now thought
shifting and ^^asive. No, they deal plainly as may be, they acknowledge and
m^intain them at the same time as such a^ may be followed with a safe
conscience, nay such as are ^^safe, say they, as the contrary ^pinions. It Is
very true, says the Apology in a hundred several places, tha^ ^he, Casuist^
hold these maxi^es, but it is as true withal that they have much reason to
hold them. Nay, sometimes the Author is so free hearted as to acknowledge
somewhat more then they are reproached with. It Is granted, says he, that we do
maintain the proposition so much found fault with, and yet the Casuist^ stick
not to go beyond that too. So that now all the dif^erence as to matter of fact
is taken away; he grants all, he acknowledges, that, according to their
doctrine, there i^ no usury in Contracts though the most guilty of extortion,
through the ways he lays down whereby to avoid it, page 101, 107, 108, etc.
That such as trade in Benefices are not chargeable with Simony, what bargain
soever they may drive, if there be a right direction of the intention; if a man
will trust to what he saye^, page 62. Blasphemies, perjuries, impurities, in a
word, all breaches of the Decalogue are no sins at all when they are
committed by any man out of ignorance, surprise, or passion; page 26.28. It is
lawful for servants to rob their Masters to make their wages proportionabl^ to
their services, according to Father Bauny, maintained by the Author of the
Apology page 81. Women may take their husbands money unknown to them to game
withal, page 1^2. Judges shall not be oblig^d to make restitution of what they
may receive ^or giving an unjust judgment, page 1^3. A man shall not be
obliged to quit those occasions and propositions wherein he runs the hazard of
damnation, if he cannot do it with ease and convenience, page 49. A man does
deservedly receive absolution, and may be ^ worthy communicant, though he be
not otherwise troubled for his sins then out of a reflection on the temporal
inconveniences occasioned thereby, page 162, 163. A man may without any blame
calumniate those who speak ill of him, by imposing such crimes upon them as he
knows they are innocent of; page 127, 128, 129. In a word, any thing shall be
lawful, the Law of God shall signify nothing, and only natural reason shall
be our light and guide ^n all our actions, nay, shall enable u^ to disc^rn when
i^ i^ law^ull, for a private man to kill his neighbor; which cer^ainly is a
thing so pernicious as defies all parallel; and whereof the consequences must
be dreadful. Let it be made apparent to me, says he page 87. etc. that we
ought not to be guided by the dictates of natural Reason, to discern when it
is lawful for a man to kill his Neighbor.

And to confirm this proposition; Since that Monarchs consult ONLY NATURAL
REASON to punish Malefactors, in like m^nner we need no other director then THE
SAME NATURAL REASON to judge whether ^ private person may kill another that
injures him, not only in things that conc^rn his life, but also his reputation
or estate. And to answer what may be press^d on the contrary, viz. that it is
forbidden by the Law of God, he says in the name and behalf of all the
Casuists, We believe that we have ground enough to exempt from ^he penalty of
that commandment of God, thos^ who kill others for the preservation of their
honor, reputation, and estates.

If this maxim be well considered, namely, That it is the proper faculty of
Natural Reason to discern when it i^ lawful or unlawful for a man to kill
his neighbor, and a man add thereto the execrable maxims of some most grave
Doctors, who, by their natural reason, have concluded it lawful, upon certain
occasions, to commit strange parricides against even the most sacred persons,
it might well be judged, that, all this done, if we should be silent, we were
unworthy the Ministry we profess; that we were the destroyers, and not the
Pastors of the flocks committed to our charge, and that God might justly punish
us for so criminal a silence. We therefore discharge our duty, by acquainting
both the people and Judges of these abomination^; and we hope that both people
and Judges will do theirs, the former in avoiding them, the latter in punishing
them according to the quality and importance of what shall be done.

But what is yet a further motive of our earnest appe^rance in this manner, is,
that we are not to consider these propositions as taken out of ^ Book that is
anonymous and without authority, but as extracted out of one maintained and
countenanced by a very considerable Body. We speak it not without regrett. For
though we have from the beginning known well enough who the first Authors of
these disorders were, yet have we thought fit to forbear the discovery of them,
nor indeed should we yet do it, did they not betray themselves, as it were out
of a set purpose to be known to all the world. But since they are so desirous
it should be known, it were to no purpose for us to conceal it any longer;
since it is among them that this Libell has been exposed to sale, that no
other place then the College of Clermont would serve as a ship to put off that
scandalous piece; that such as have brought in their money have carried away as
many APOLOGIES FOR THE ^ASUISTS as the sums amounted to; that the Fathers of
that College have dispersed them among their friends in Paris and the
Provinces; that F. Brisacier, Rector of their College at Rouen, has with his
own hands presented of them to some persons o^ quality in that Ci^ty; that he
caused it to be read in the Refectory, while all were at table, as a piece of
edification and piety; that he desired the permission to reprint it of one of
the principal Magistrates; that the Jesuits of Paris have been very earnest
with two Doctors of Sorbonne for their approbation of it; to be short, since
they are resolved to pluck off the visard, and are willing so many ways to
discover themselves, it is high time we should bestir our selves; and that
since the Jesuits publicly declare themselves the Patrones of the APOLOGY FOR
THE CASUISTS, the Curez declare that they do publicly charge them therewith.
It Is fit all the world knew, that, as the College of Clermont is the exchange
where these pernicious maxims are to be bought and sold, so is it in our
parishes that the christian maxims opposite thereto are publicly taught, that
so it may not happen, that the simple and unwary, hearing these errors so
s^i^ly maintained by so celeb^ious a society, and not finding any opposing
them, might take them for truth^, and be insensibly ensnared thereby, and that
the judgment of God should fall upon both people and Pastors according to the
doctrine of the Prophets, who declare, against these new opinions, that they
shall both come to ruin, the former, for want of having received necessary
instructions, and the latter, for their neglect in giving them.

There is therefore an inevitable necessity lies upon us to speak in this
conjuncture, but what makes the obligation yet more pressing, i^, the injurious
manner whereby the Authors of the Apology fall so bitterly on our Ministry.
For that book, to speak properly, is no more then a scandalous libel against
the Curez of Paris and the provinces who have opposed their disorders. It is a
^trange thing to see how they speak of the Extracts, which we presented to the
Clergy, of their most dangerous propositions, and to consider withal the
miracle of their confidence to treat us, upon no other account, as they do page
^. and 176. with the terms of ignorant, factious, heretical, wolves and false
Teachers. It is a thing which the society of the Jesuits cannot but r^sent (say
they p. 176.) to see that informatio^s are put up against them by a sort of
Ignorants, who deserve not to be numbered among the dogs that wait on the flock
of the Church, whom yet some take for true pastors, nay, they are followed by
the sheep that submit to the conduct of those wolves.

Now this is the consummation of insolence whereto the Jesuits have raised the
Casuists. They thought it not enough to abuse the patience and moderation of
the Ministers of the Church, to introduce their impious opinions, but are now
come to that height, that they will needs force out of the Ministry of the
Church those who refuse their consent thereto.

This seditious and schismatical attempt, which aims at the raising of a spirit
of division between the people and their lawful Pastors, by inciting them to
shun their Teachers as false Prophets and wolves, for no other reason then that
they stand in the gap against a carnal and impure morality, is of such
importance in the Church^ that we could not be any longer serviceable in our
Functions if this insolence were not repressed. For it were as much as to
expect we should renounce our character, and forsake our Churches, if, there
being so many christian^ Tribunals established for the maintenance of
evangelical rules, it were not lawful for us, without fear of being defamed as
wolves and false proph^ts, to tell those whom we are obliged to instruct, that
it is out of all question a crime for a man to traduce hi^ neighbor; that it
is much more safe in conscience for a man tha^ has received a blow on the one
cheek, to turn the other to the smiter, then to ki^l him, though he endeavor
to run away for it; that to fight a duel is an inevitable crime; and that it is
a ^orrid falsehood to say, that it is the part of humane reason to discern when
it is lawful or unlawful for a man to kill his neighbor. If we have not the
freedom to speak after this man^er; but there must immediately come abro^d
Books publicly maintained by the whole body of the Jesuits, representing us as
factious spirits, Ignorants and false-Prophets, it is impossible we should be
f^ithful in the administration of our functions, and the government of the
flocks committed to our charge.

There is no place, though not civilized out of its original infidelity and
barbarism, where it may not be lawful to affirm calumny to be a crime, and
that it is not lawful for a man to kill his neighbor purely to vindicate his
honor. No, there are no places but those where Jesuits are, in which a man
dares not say so much. We must either permit Homi^ides, Calumnies, and the
profanation of the Sacraments, or stand exposed to the ^ad effects of their
vengeance. We are appointed by God to be the messengers of his commandemen^s to
his people, and we must not presume ^o obey him without falling under the fury
of these carnal Casuist^. What a strange posture are we at this day reduced to?
Woe unto us, says the s^ripture, if we do not preach the gospel^ and woe unto
us, say these men, if we do preach it. We are on the one ^ide to fear the
indignation of God, on the other we are threatened by the insolences of men, and
so we are reduced to a nece^^ity o^ either degenerating into false Prophets and
wolves, or being torn to pieces as such by thirty thousand tongues that can
afford us no other character.

This is the ground of our complaints. This was it that obliged us to demand
justice for our selves and christian Morality in whose cause we must needs be
con^^rned. Th^s also has reinflamed our zeal to maintain the purity of manners
proportionably to the attempts of those that would defile it. Morality, the
more powerfully it is opposed, becomes the more endeared to us, to which it
adds some thing that we are alone to defend it. And therefore out of the
satisfaction it is to us, that God is pleased to make our weakness contributory
thereto, we presume to say with the man after his own heart, Lord it is time
for thee to arise, they have destroyed thy law; but it raises in us a greater
affection to thy precepts, and an aversion for all the ways of iniquity.

It is in the mean time a very deplorable case that we should be thus worryed
and persecuted by those from whom we ought rather to have expected relief; so
that we are to engage with the passions of men, not only attended with all the
impetuosity that is natural thereto, but also puffed up and main^ained by the
approbation and interest of so vast a body of Religious men; and that instead
of any advantage we might make of their instructions in order to the
reformation of popular extravagances, we are forced to make the best we can of
that small remainder of pious sentiments there may be in the people, to work in
them a horror for the irregul^rities of those Religious men.

And this posture are our affairs in at the present; but we hope God will
incline the hearts of those, in whose power it is to do us justice, to take our
cause into their consideration, and that they will be the more earnest to
endeavor our vindication, by how much they are otherwise likely to be made
accomplices of these corruptions In this number are comprehended the Pope, the
Bishops, and the Parliament, by that extravagant insinuation wherein the
Authors of the Libel would have it believed as a thing most certain, that the
Bulls of the Popes against the five Propositions are a general approbation of
the doctrine of the Casuists; then which there cannot be any thing more
injurious to those Bulls, nor more impertinent in it self, since there is not
the least analogy between those two things. All that is common between those
five Propositions and those of the Casuists, is that they are all equally
heretical. For, as there are Heresies in matters of Faith, so are there also
Heresies in matter of Mo^ality, according to the Fathers and Councels, and
those such as are so much the more dangerous, in that they are made complyant
with the passions of men and that unhappy leaven of concupiscence, which the
greatest saints are not exempted from. We are therefore to be in some measure
confident that those, who have expressed so much zeal against the condemned
Proposition^, will discover no less upon this occasion, since that the welfare
of the Church, which it may have been then their principal design to promote,
is now so much the more conce^ned, in so much that whereas the Heresy of the
five Propositions is understood only by Divines, and that no body presumes to
maintain them, it happens here, on the contrary, that the heresies of the
Casuists fall within the understanding of all the world, and are publicly
maintained by the IESVITS.

THE ANSWER OF the Curez of PARIS, Maintaining the FACTUM Presented by them to
the Reverend Vicars General, to demand the Censure of THE APOLOGY FOR THE
CASVISTS; Against a piece entitled, A REFVTATION of the Calumnies lately
published by the Authors of the FACTVM, under the name of the Reverend the
Curez of PARIS, etc.
AFter the solemn Indictment we have brought in with so much justice and reason
before the Ecclesiastical Tribunal, against the Apology for the Casuists,
whereof we have discovered the most pernicious maxims and the strange
extravagances which had filled with horror those whom God had inspired with any
thing of love for his Truths, there was some ground to hope, that those, who,
out of an immoderate desire to maintain even the most dissolute of the Authors
(whereof that Book gives the world a faithful Catalogue) were engaged in the
defense of it, would by their humility and silence, have repaired the injury
which they had done all just and indifferent persons by their temerity and
blindness.

And we find to our regret that nothing is able to abate their presumption.
Instead of sitting still, or not opening their mouths, unless it were to
disclaim errors so unmaintainable, and so palpably opposite to the purity of
the Gospel, they have newly put forth a piece, wherein they maintain all those
errors, and fall into the greatest virulence that may be against the FACTUM we
had made, to lay open the corruption of their doctrines.

This is it that obliges us to reassume new courage, and to rise up against
that excessive confidence of theirs, so to take away the reproach which must
otherwise be put on our age, that the enemies of Christian morality had been
more earnest in their attempts against it, then the Pastors of the Church in
the maintenance of it; and that it happen not, that, while the people rely upon
our vigilance, we our selves should fall into that sloathfull indifference,
which the Scripture does so severely condemn in the Pastors.

The writing newly published against our Factum is a mere stratagem of the
Jesuits, who are named therein, and who, that they might with the greater
liberty exercise their detraction upon the piece, without any apparent injury
to our persons, say, that they do not look on it as a thing whereof we ^re
really the Authors, but as a piece imposed upon us.

And though it had been made by us, examined and corrected by eight persons of
our Body appointed to that purpose, approved in the general Assembly of our
Compary, printed in our names, presented by us juridically to the Reverend the
Vicars general, dispersed by us through our parishes, and owned and
acknowledged by all the ways that could be, as it appear^ by the orders of our
Assembly of Ian. 7. February 4. and April 1. 1658. yet it is nothing with them
to affirm, that we never had any hand in it, and upon that ridiculous
supposition they treat the Authors of the Factum wi^h the most injurious terms
that truth could be af^ronted by, and at the same time give us the most
insinuating commendations that simplicity could be surprised by.

So that all that is new, is that their language, as to us, is different from
what it was. In the Apology for the Casuis^s we were false Prophets; here we
are true and worthy Pastors. In the Apology, they hated us a^ ravenous wolves;
here they love us as person^ venerable for their ver^ue and pie^y. In the
Apology they treated us as Ignorant^; here we are a sort of persons illuminated
and full of light. In the Apology, they ^re^ted u^ as Heretick^ and
Schismatick^; here they have a reverence not only for our character, but also
for our persons. But in both the one and the other there is this one thing
common, that they maintain that corrupt Morality as the true Morality of the
Church. Which kind of procedure discovering nothing so much as tha^ it is their
principal design to introduce their own pernicious doctrine, they accordingly,
to effect it, indifferently fasten on those courses which they imagine might
contribute most thereto; so that it matters not much whether they say of us
that we are wolves or lawful Pastors, since they do it as ^hey think it more or
less advantageous for the authorization and maintenance of their Errors. So
that the change of their style is no effect of the conversion of their hearts,
but a piece of Le^erdemaine common in their politics, whereby they put on so
many different shapes, yet still continue the same persons, that is to say,
constant enemies to the truth and those that maintain it.

For there is nothing so certain, as that they are not really changed in
respect of us, and that we are not the persons they commend, but that on the
contrary we are those whom they wreak their malice upon, since that they
commend only those Curez who had not any hand in the Factum, which ca^ h^ve no
relation to us who were all as deeply a^ may he concerned in it, and that they
openly betray their indignation against the Authors and Approvers of i^, which
we cannon be insen^ible of. And thus all the evil they seem^ loath to speak of
us as Curez, they say of us as Authors of the FACTUM, and they do no^ speak
advant^g^ously of us in any sense, but to have the greater oppo^tunity to load
us with injuries and repro^ches in another.

This is a pitiful kind of ^rtifice, and a way to be injurious that is more
base and more picquant then if it were free and open. And yet so irreclaimable
is their presumption, that they make their advantages of it not only against
us, but also against those whom God has r^i^'d into the ^os^ eminent dignitie^
of the Church; for they have no better ^re^tmen^ ^or the Circular Letter,
directed by our Lords the Prela^^^ of the Assembly of the Clergy, to all the
Bishop^ of France, to preserve their Dioceses from the corruption of these
Casuists. They say of that Letter page 7. that it is a surreptitious piec^
without their approba^ion, without order and without Authori^y, though it were
really published by the order of the Prelates of the Assembly, dressed up by
themselves, approved by them, printed at their command, by Vi^re Printe^ to the
clergy of France, with the Instructions of Saint Charles, and an extract of the
verb^l Process of the first of F^bru^ry 1657. wherein those Prelate^ condemned
the dissolutions of the Casuists, and make it a mat^er of very earnest
complaint, that these times are so fertile in the production of m^ximes so
pernicio^s, and so contrary to those of the Gospel, and such as are likely to
prove the bane and destruction of Christian Moraliti^.

But what? the Letter mentioned approves not the doctrine of the Casuists; it is
enough to give the I^suits occasion to treat it as a thing ^org'd and
supposititious, how authentic soever it may be, and how venerable soever their
dignity may be by whom it was sent. Who so blind as not to see in this carriage
of theirs^ that, whatever it may cost them, they would be exempted from the
corrections and superintendency of the Ecclesiastical Ministry, and that they
do not acknowledge it but in what makes for their advantage, as if the
Ministers were in the place of God when they are favorable to them, and are
put out of that place when they oppose their extravagances? This is an ordinary
degree of presumption in them. Because they find themselves grown so powerful
in the world, as to de^y those just chastisements, which would inevitably fall
on any other beside^ them, should he be guilty of far le^^er faults^ thence do
they take the liberty of not receiving any thing from the Church but what they
please themselves. For what else can be their meaning when they say; We have a
respect for our Lords the Prel^te^, and whatsoever comes from them, but for the
Circular Letter sent by their order and under their names to all the Prelates
of France against our Casuists, we honor it not, but on the contrary reject it
as a piece that is forged, and has neither their consent nor authority. And in
like manner, we have a venera^^on for the Reverend the Curez of Paris, but for
the Factum printed under their name, which they have presented to the Reverend
the Vica^s General, we declare it to be a scandalous writing, and that the
Authors of them are men of seditious principles, Heretics and Schismatics.
What should all this signify, but that the world should take notice that they
honor the Ministers of the Church when they disturb them not in their
disorders; but that when they offer to do any such thing, they make them know
by their contempt, by their calumnies, and by their outrages, what is it to
meddle with them?

Thus it shall be lawful for them to say any thing, and the Prelates and
Pastors must not presume to contradict them, but they must withal be
immediately treated as Heretics and factious spirits, either in their persons
or their works. They shall have the privilege to sell in their College, and
to scatter into all our parishes the execrable Apology for the Casuists; and
we must not presume to put ou^ a writing that might in some measure be an
Antidote against so mortal a poison.

They shall have put daggers and poison into the hands of furious and
vindicative men, by declaring expressly That it is in the power of private
Persons as well as Sovereigns, to discern, only by the assistance of the light
of reason, when it shall be lawful or unlawful for a man to kill his
neighbor; and it shall be an excess of presumption in us to put up our
complaints to the Ec^lesiasticall Judges against these murdering maxime^, and
to represent by a Factum the monstrous effects of that bloody doctrine.

It shall be in their hands to invest all men indifferently with all that power
of life and death, which is the most illustrious prerogat^ve of Sovereigns; and
we must not be permitted to give our people notice, that it is a horrid and
diabolical falsehood to say, that it is lawful for them to be their own carvers
in matter of justice, especially when the lives of their adversaries comes to
be concerned, and that it is so far from truth, that one man may, by his own
private Authority, and the discernment of natural reason, kill another, that,
on the contrary, it can never be done but by a divine Authority and light.

They shall have infamously exposed to sale all the dignities of the Church,
and open a gap for all Simonists to thrust into the house of God, by an
imaginary distinction of motive and price; and we dare not publish, that a man
cannot without crime enter into the Ministry of the Church, but by the right
door which is Jesus Christ; and that those who maintain that money given as a
motive is another^ do not make a true door whereat the lawful Pastors may
enter, but a real breach fit only to let in wolves, not to feed, but to
devour the flock he is so tender of.

They shall have freed Detractors from all crime, and declared it to be lawful
(by the authority of Dicastillus one of their fraternity, and above twenty
eminent Jesuits) for a man to impose false crimes contrary to his own
conscience, to bring those into disparagement who would ruin him.

They shall have permitted Judges to detain what they had received for doing
an act of injustice; Women, to rob their husbands; Servants, to purloine from
their Masters; Mothers, to wish their daughters death when they are not in a
condition to dispose of them in mar^iage; the Rich, not to give any thing out
of their Superflui^y; the voluptuous, to eat and drink as much as they please,
upon no other account then that of volup^uousnesse, and to pursue the
enjoyments of the senses as things indifferent; Those who are ensnared in the
next occasions of falling into the most damnable sins, to continue therein
when it may be any inconvenience to them to quit them; those who are grown old
in an habitual course of vicious living, to approach the Sacraments, though
they come with so weak a resolution of amendment of life, that they are
confident it will not be long ere they fall into the same crimes again, and
without other remorse for what was passed, then what the temporal
inconveniences occasioned thereby might have raised in them.

Lastly, they shall have permitted Christi^ns to do what Pagans, Jews,
Mahometans and Barbarians would have had in execration, and shall have filled
the Church with the most palpable darkness that ever came out of the
bottomless pit; and we shall not, to dispell it, ^hed forth the least ray of
evangelicall light but the whole Society taken alarm, and decl^res that they
can be no other then men of seditious principles and H^reti^ks, who speak in
that manner against their Morality; that their doctrine, being the true
doctrine of Faith, they are obliged in conscience, how willing so ever they may
be to suffer and comply with the Cross, to speak against those factious
spirits and Schismatics that quarrelled thereat; that so saying they speak not
against ^s, for we are persons of more piety then to be Authors of a Piece that
should any way oppose them, and that i^ it be otherwise we only are chargeable
with the dist^rbance of the peace and tranquillity of the Church by troubling
them in the free publication of their doctrines. Thus do they endeavor
cra^tily to inveigh against us as the enemies o^ public tranquillity. Who
could have believed, say they, that the Reverend the Curez, who upon the
account of their min^steriall functions are the mediators of peace between the
Seculars, should be the Authors of a writing that might raise a spirit of
schism and division be^ween them and Religious men? And immediately after, Is
the spirit of God and Christian piety now so degenerated, as to engage the
disciples of the Lamb to be ravenous among themselves as if they were so many
wolves? And thus do they make a great deal of noise in discourses, to show,
that they are desirous of peace, and that we are the only disturbers thereof.

What an uncontroleable thing is insolence when backed by impunity! And what a
strange progress will ^emerity make in a small time, when it meets with
nothing that can give its violence any check! These Casuists, after they had
disturbed the peace of the Church by their horrid doctrines which tend to the
d^struc^ion of the precep^s of Jesus Christ, as our Lords the Bishops ^ay to
their charge, have no other shi^t now then to accuse those who endeavor to
reestablish the doctrine of Jesus Christ, as disturb^rs of the Church's pea^e.
After they had put things into disorder of ^ll sides by the publication of
their de^^stable Morality, they treat a^ breakers of the public pea^e, those
whose consci^nces will not suffer them to comply with their designs, and who
cannot endure that these Pharisees of the new Law, as they have called
themselves, should establish their humane Traditions upon the ruins of the
divine.

But they shall make no advantage of this artifice^ We have made a sufficient
d^scovery of our love to peace by our so long silence. We spoke not till ^uch
time ^s that it would have been a crime in us to be any longer silent. They
have abused that peace, to introduce their damnable opinions, and they would
now endeavor the continuance of it, to give them further foot^ng. But the true
children of the Church know well enough how to distinguish between that true
peace which our Savior only can give, and which the world is unacquainted
with, and the deceitful peace which the world may give, but which withal is
hateful to the Savior of the world. They know the true peace to be that which
endeavors the settlement of truth in the belief of men, and that the
deceitful peace is that which aims at the propagation of error in the
cr^dulity of men. They know there is such a consonancy between truth and the
true peace, that they are inseparable; that there is no interposition raised
between it and the eyes of God by the dispu^es which sometimes eclipse it from
the eyes of men, when the Providence of God thinks fit to engage men into a
vindication of his truths from unjust attempts; and that what were then a peace
in the apprehensions of men, would be no other then a war in ^he sight of
God. They know fu^ther that these corrections are so far from being guilty of
any breach of Charity, that it were no les^^ to forbear them, for that it is
the Character of a counterfeit Charity to suf^er the wicked to pursue the
enjoyments of their vices, whereas it is the property of true charity to
disturb that woeful tranquillity, and consequently, that, instead of
establishing the Charity that is derived from God by that apparent mildness,
it were, on the contrary, to destroy it by a criminal indulgence, as the holy
Fathers teach us in those words, H^c ch^ritas d^struit charitatem.

This is also the meaning of what the Scripture teaches us, that Christ came
into the world not only to bring peace, but also a sword and division, because
all these things are necessary, every one in its proper time, for the advantage
of Truth, which is the ultimate end of the faithful, whereas peace and warr^
are only the means, and allowable proportionably to what they contribute to the
advantages and establishment of Truth. They know that it is upon this account
the Scripture says, that there is a time of peace and a time of war, whereas
it cannot be said that there is a time for truth, and a time for falsehood; and
that it is better that scandalls should happen then that truth should be
forsaken, as the holy Fathers of the Church maintain.

It is therefore apparent, that those persons, who are forced to make use of
this pretense of charity and peace, to prevent men from speaking against such
as destroy the truth, discover themselves to be friends only to the deceit^ull
peace, and that they are professed ^nemies to truth and the true peace.
Accordingly has it been the constant practice of the Persecutors of the Church
to make this pretense of peace the stalkinghorse of their most insupportable
violences; th^s have the false friends of peace consented to the oppression of
the truths of Religion, and the Saints by whom they were maintained.

Upon these grounds was it, that St. A^hanasius, St^ Hilary, and other holy
Bishops in their times, were treated as rebellious, factiou^, obstinate men,
and enemies to peace and union; that they were deposed, banished and fo^saken
in a manner by all the faithful, who misinterpreted for a breach of peace the
zeal they had for the truth. Hence came it that the holy and famous Monk
Stephen was charged as a dis^urber of the Church's tranquillity by the 330.
Bishops who would needs have the Images removed out of the Churches, which
certainly was a point not of the greatest consequence to salvation. And yet
because men ought not to shrink from the least truths under pretense of peace,
that holy Religions man publicly opposed them, and it was upon that ground
that he was at last condemned, as may be seen in the Annals of Baronius, Ann.
754.

Thus also were the holy Patriarchs and Prophets charged, as Eliah was, to be
troublers of the tranquillity of Israel, and that the Apostles, nay, J. Christ
himself, were condemned as the Authors of disturbance and dissension, because
they declared a saving hostility against the corrupt passions and the fatal
extravagances of the Hypocritical Pharisees and insolent Priests of the
synagogue. And lastly, all this is no more then the Scripture gives ^s a
general representation of, when entertaining u^ with a character of these false
Teachers, who call by the name of divine those things that are diabolical, as
these Casui^ts do at this day in their Morality, it says, Wisdom chap. 14.
that they also give the name of peace to the most deplorable desolation. The
extravagance of men, says the wise man, is come to ^^t height, that they give
the incommunicable name of the Divinity to that which has not the essence
thereof, to flat^er the inclinations of m^n, and to show their compliance with
the humors of Kings and Princes. And being not content to be so mistaken in
things divine, and to live in that error which is a true war, they give the
name of peace to a condition full of trouble and disorder. In magno viventes
inscientiae bello, tot and tanta mala pacem appellant.

It is therefore a principal truth of our Religion that there are certain time^
wherein it is necessary to trouble the possession of error, which the wicked
call peace, and this is a thing no way to be doubted of after the confirmation
of so many Authorities. Now if ever there was ^n indispensable occasion and
necessity to do it, let us examine whether there could be a greater or more
pressing then there is at this day.

We find the most numerous and most powerful b^dy of men ^n the whole Church,
that which has the disposal of the consciences of all the greatest, bandying
together and conspiring in the maintenance of the most horrid maxims that ever
the Church groaned under. We find them, notwithstanding all the charitable
admonitions that have been given them, both privately and publicly,
obstinately countenancing Revenge, Avarice, gluttony, vain glory, s^lf-love,
and all the exorbitancies of co^^upt nature, the profanatio^ of the Sacraments,
contempt of the ministeries of the Church, and the dispar^gement of the Ancient
Fathers, that they might introduce into their stead such Authors of their own
as are most remarkable for their ignorance and temerity. And yet though we
cannot but see the Church ready to be o^ewhelmed with this deluge of
corruption, we must not presume, for fear of disturbing the pea^e, to call out
to those that ^re en^rusted with the conduct thereof, save us, we perish

The most inconsiderable truths of Religion have been maintained even to the
death, and yet it is expected we should quietly let go the most essential points
of our Religion and the maxims that are most important and o^ greatest
necessity in order to the salvation of men, because it is the pleasure, not of
300. Bishops, nor indeed of so much as one, nor of the Pope^ but only of the
society of the Jesuits, to overturn them as they please.

We desire, say they, to be at peace even with those wh^ are unwilling to have
any. Strange preserve^s of peace who never yet suffered the least writing to
come out against their Morality, which they have not worried with their bloody
Answers, and yet still writing the last they will needs have us to sit quiet
while they remain in possession of their unjust pretentions!

We thought it not amiss to be the more large in the re^utation of this
reproach, because there is not any they seem so much to insist upon against us.
For though there may be few persons whom they can p^rswade, that the Casuists
are holy Authors, yet is it not impossible, but they may meet with some whom
they may cajol into a belief, that we are nev^rtheless very much to blame for
disturbing the peace o^ the Church by our opposition. For the satisfaction
therefore of such, have we thought fit to dr^ss up this discourse, to give them
to understand that there are not two questions to be made upon this occasion,
but only one, and that it is impossible it should at the same time be true,
both, that the Morality of the Casuists is abhominable^ and that we are
blame-wor^hy to disturb their deceitf^l peace in opposing it.

Let it not therefore be expected that we should ever forsake the cause of
Christian Morality; no, we have a greater tenderness for the truth then to be
guilty of that baseness. But to let them know wi^hal how far we are also lovers
of peace, we open them the gate of it as w^de as we can, and declare, that we
are ready to e^tertain them into our very hearts, as soon as they shall have
abjured the pern^cious maxims of their Morality, cited by us in our Factum and
in our Extracts, read in, and taken out of their Authors in their own words,
and as soon as they shall sincerely renounce the pernic^o^s APOLOGY FOR THE
CASUISTS, and the mischievou^ treatises of Divinity of Escobar, Molin^,
Sanchez, Lessius, Hurtad^, Bauny, Amicus, Mascaren^as, and all books of that
nature, which out Lords the Bishops call the Plague of consciences. And thus
stands the case between us. For here is not any thing to do, as they would
maliciously make the world believe, concerning the differences which the Curez
may have with the Religious. The ques^ion now is not about any contestation
concerning the privileges of the Iesuit^, or of opposing their continual
usurpations upon the authority of the Curez. Though their books are ^ull of
mischievous maxims as to that particular, yet did we purposely forbear all
notice thereof in the Extracts we pre^ented to the Assembly of the Clergy,
because we would not bring in any thing into the general cause of the Church
that should concern us in particular. The matter therefore in agitation here is
of the purity of christian Morality, which we are resolved not to suffer to be
corrupted; and we are not the only men eng^ged in this de^ign. The Curez of
Rouen, by the a^thority of their Prelate are ready to second us with a zeal
truly Christian and Pastoral. And besides, we have now in our hands no small
number of Deputations from the Curez of other cities of France, who with the
like permission of our Lords their Prelates, will earnes^ly oppose these new
corruptions, until such time as those who are the maintainers thereon shall
renounce them.

Till then we shall continue to be their Prosecutors, whether they speak well
or ill of us it matters not, and we shall not disclaim the tru^hs which we have
advanced ^n our Fac^um^ to purchase at that price, the commendations they would
then take occasion to give us^ We shall not be diverted by either their curses
or blessings, as the Scripture says. They have not been able to frighten us,
as enemies, nor shall they corr^pt us, as flatterers. The have found us unmoved
at their menices, they shall find us inflexible at their care^^es, and we
shall express our selves equally insensible o^ their injuries, and their
ins^nuations. We shall return the sa^e const^nt countenance to all their
different looks, and we shall oppose, to the duplici^y of the children of this
world, the Simplicity of the Children of the Gospel.

Done by the order of the Company, r^ported in the general Assembly, of Monday
the first of Ap^ill 1658. and reviewed by the Depu^ies whose names are here
under-mentioned.

MAZURE, Doctor of Sorbonne and Cure of S. Paules^ ROUSSE, Doctor of the
Socie^y of Sorbonne, Cure of S^. Roch, and Syndic of the Curez of Paris.
DEBREDA, Doctor of the Society of Sorbonne and Cure of St. Andrews des Arcs.
MARLIN, Doctor of the College of Navarre, and Cure of St. Eustac^e. DU PUIS,
Bachelor of Divinity, Cure of the Sts. Innocents, and Syndic of the Curez of
Paris. FORTIN, Doctor of the Faculty of Paris, and Cure of St. Christopher^s.
GARGAN, C^non Regular of S. Augustine, and Cure of S. Medardes. DAVOLE, Doctor
of the College o^ Navarre and Cure of St. Pe^ers aux Bo^ufs,
It was resolved also by the Company the very same day, that ^n Answer should
be mad^ to another pi^ce newly come abroad against the same FACTVM of ours,
divided into two parts^ and enti^uled^ A Factum; by way of Answer to the
pretended Factum of the Curez of Paris, etc.

THE END.
The names of some of the most eminent Casuists; and others with the places
where they are cited. The Letter A denotes the citation to be in the
Additionals.
AEgidius Trullench^ A. 19.
A
Alby, I^suit^ 254, 255. Amicus, Ies. 97, 98.150.221. A. 18.24. Angelus, Ies.
p. 60. Annat, Ies. 38.153. Anthony Sirmond Jesuit, 152, 153.309. A. 24.
Azorius, Ies. 92.96.134. A. 18.
B
Baldellus, Ies. 93. BASILIUS PONTIUS, Ies. 58.61.147. Barry, Ies. 120, 121,
122, 123. BAUNY, Ies. 37.46.58.62.71.73.76.79.80.105.106.109.127,
131.132.134.140.143, 144, 145, 146, 147.258.260. A. 18.21, 22, 23.55.57.97, 98.
Becanus, Ies. 93.97. A. 18. Bellarmine, Ies. 307.310. Brisacier. Ies
170.253.26^.262. A. 29.44.
C
^^ramuel, 73.98. A. 17, 18, 19.63.70.71.78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83 84.98. Castrus
Pala^s Ies. 78, 103, 109.151. A. 97. Caussinus, Ies. 145.258. Cello^. Ies.
63.67.117.251. Comitolus, Ies. 148. Coninch. Ies. 134.151. Crasset, Ies. 254.
D
Deza, 355. Dian^, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65.69, 70, 71, 72.88.149. A. 52.98, 99.
Dica^tillus, Ies. 251, 252.
E
Emanuel Sa. Ies. 6^.61. E^adus Billus, Ies. 186. ESCOBAR, Ies. 56, 57.58,
59.68.69.70.74.75.78.79.87.89.90.91, 92, 93.97.103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108,
109, 110.112.126.128, 189, 130.132, 133, 134.139, 141.149.151.183.187, 188.216,
217.220.236. A. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.58, 59.60.65^ 66.91.92.
93.94.95.96.97.98.99.
F.
Fagundez, Ies. 107.141.149. F^liutius, Ies. 61.75.93.95
113.115.130.142.144.151.318. A. 17.18.19.22. Flahaur, Ies. 93.
G.
Gaspar Hurtado, Ies. 88.134. A. 97. Garas^us, Ies. 127.170. Granados, Ies.
140.149. A. 98. Henriquez, Ies. 151. Heraeu, Ies. 93.221. Hurtado de Mendoz^,
Ies. 87.88.93.149.151. A. 20.
L.
Laym^n, Ies. 61.89.97.104. A. 17.18.19.20. Le Court, Ies. 93. Le Moine, Ies.
p. 38.124.125.133.135.153.168.169. Lessius, Ies.
87.91.94.95.97.108.110.111.112.115.132.189.213.215.233.235.238. A. 18.19.20.21.
M.
Mascarenhas, Ies. 277. A. 87.88.89. Maphaeus, 355.259. Molina, Ies.
91.96.97.103.111.112.114.235. Meynier, Ies. 282^ Milhard. A. 2^. Navarrus, Ies.
60.90.
P.
Petavius, Ies. 144.336. Petrus Michael, Ies. A. 99. Petrus Hur^ado, Ies. 89.
Pintereau, Ies. 148.153.258.260. Rebelli^s, A. 97. Rebullos^, Ies. 357.
Reginaldu^, Ies. 77.86 87.91.95.97.114.141.218.222.235. A. 19.20.
R.
Ribadeneira, Ies. 357.
S.
SANCHEZ, Ies. 60.61.63.77.78.89.90.91.115.116.129.130.148. A. 17.19.20.97.98.
Sanctius. Ies A. 23. Sot^^, Ies. 91.152. Suarez, Ies.
63.143.14^.146.148.151.152.
T.
Tannerus, Ies. 91.97.184.185.204.206. A. 17.19. Thoma^ Sanchez, Ies. A. 97.99.
Turrianus, Ies. 134. Valderama, 354.356.358.359. Valentia, Ies. 74.150.183.203.
A. 20^ Vasquez. Ies. 61.63.69.109.134.149.151.176.177.178.180.194,
195.196.199.200^202 227. A^ 97.
ERRATA,
In the MYSTERY.
Page 10. l. 8. r. make use. p. 46. l. 30. r. to make an act. p. 50. l. 15. r.
less safe p. 56. l. 10. exhorted. p. 63. l. 20. Casuists. page 64. line
penult. read Fathers page 81. line 25. read Chastelet. page 99. line 17. r.
form^. page 107. line 16. dele it. p. 115. l. 16. r. your. p. 116. l. ult. dele
that. p. 140. l. 27. for warrant, r. grant. p. 143. l. 23. r. whenever. p.
144. l. 22. for the middle and r. not. p. 149. l. 21. r. was, p. 16^. l. 3. r.
Sallies^ p. 196. l. 29^ r. whole. p. 201. l. 1. r. any other. p. 202. l. 20.
for will r. wit. p. 206. l. 19. r. it is not p. 234. l. 36. r. strike. p. 237.
l. 32. r. this. p. 240. l. 6. r. dispense. p. 250. l. 9. r. possible. p. 254.
l. 4. for is. r. as. p. 261. l. 11. r. there were. p. 274. l. 32. r. there, by.
p. 275. l. 3. r. is of. p. 300^ l^ 10. r. loudly. p. 316. l. 7. dele i^. p.
328. l. 6. r^ From the Author. p. 331. l. 1. r. XVII. p. 336. l. 35. r. giving
it. p. 339. l. ult. r. so much. p. 352. l. 28. r. expose. p. 357. l. 31. for
closed. r. cloyed. l. 35 r. revive.

In the ADDITIONALS.
P. 1. l. 14. for and, r. of. p. 10. l. 11. r. entitled. p. 11. l. 1^. for
some, r. sin. p. 27. l. 18. r. our. ibid. l. 25. for the other, r. their. p.
31. l. 3. r. insisted. p 34. l. 12. r. for. p. 40. l. 14. r. di^solute. p. 52.
l. 9. r. ut ib. l. 19. for in. r. with. l. ult. r. draught. p. 53. l. 19. r.
revive. p. 55. l. 1. ^or of. r. to. l. ult. r. is it. p. 56. l. 18. r. a box.
p. 57. l. 4. r. give. p. 59. l. 11. r. do not only. p. 64. l. 1. for A. r. o^.
p. 65. l. 31. r. quae. p. 66. l. 35. r. revive. p. 72 l. 1. for or. r. as. p.
80. l. 13. r. may do p. 82. l. 23. r. Laude^. p. 91. l. 31. r. Lawful. p. 103.
l. 18. dele that. p. 106. l. 35. for of. r. by. p. 112. l. 2. for to. r. in. p.
116. l. 34. for them, r. then. p. 127. l. penult. r. shop. p. 134. l. 1^ ^or
the, r. their.

Books written by D. Hammond.
A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Testament by H.
Hamond, D. D. in fol. the second Edition now in the Press. 2. The Practical
Cat^chisme, with all other English Treatises in two volumes in 4. 3.
Dissertationes quatuor, quibus Episcopa^us Iura ex S. Scripturis and Prim^va
Antiquitate adstruuntur, con^ra sententiam D. Blondelli and aliorum in 4. 4. A
Letter of Resolution of six Queries in 12. 5. O^ Schism. A defense of the
Church of England against the exceptions of the Romanists, in 12. 6. Of
Fundamentals in a notion referring to practice, in 12. 7. Paranesis, or a
seasonable exhortation to all true sons of the Church of England, in 12. 8. A
Collection of several Replies and Vind^cation^ Published of late, most of them
in defense of the Church of England, now put together in three Volumes. Newly
published, in 4. 9. A Review or the Paraphrase and Annotations on all the Books
of the New Testament, with some additions and alterations, in 8.
Books and Sermons written by Jer. Tailor. D. D.
ENla^^os, A Course of Sermon^ for all the Sundays of the Year; together with
a discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity, Sacredness and Separation of
the Office Ministerial, in fol. 2. The history of the Life and Death of the
Ever-blessed Jesus Christ, third Edition in fol. 3. The Rule and Exercises of
holy living, in 12. 4. The Rule and Exercises of holy dying, in 12. 5. The
Golden Grove, or, A Manual of daily Prayers fitted to the days of the week,
together with a short Method of Peace and Holiness, in 12. 6. The Doctrine and
Practice of Repentance rescued from popular Errors, in a larg^ 8. Newly
published. 7. A Collection of Polemicall and Moral discourses, in fol. 8. A
Discourse of the Nature, Offices and Measure of Friendship, in 12. New. 9. A
Collection of Offices or forms of prayer fitted to the need^ of all Christians,
together with the Psalter or Psalms of ^^^id after the Kings Translations in a
large octavo newly published.
Books written by Mr. Tho. Pierce Rector of Brington.
THe Sinner impleaded in his own Court, wherein are represented the great
discour^gements from sinning, which the Sinner receives from Sin it self. 2.
Correct Copy of some notes concerning Gods Decrees, especiall^ o^ Reprobation.
The third Edition with some Additionals, in 4. 3. The Divine Philanthropie
defended, i^ answer to Mr. Barlee, in 4.2 Edition. 4. The Self revenger. to
which is added an appendage touching the judgment of the late L. Primate of
Armagh, in 4. new. 5. The Divine Purity, defended in answer to Dr. Reynolds, in
4. new. 6. The Self-Revenger exemplified by Mr. William Barlee. To which is
added an Appendage, touching the judgment of the right Honorable and right
Reverend Father in God, James Lord Primate of Armagh, and Metropolitan of
Ireland, irrefragably attested by the certificates of Dr. Walton, Mr.
Thorndicke, and Mr. Gunning, sent in a Letter to Doctor Bernard.
The Law of Laws, or, the excellency of the Civil Law, above all other humane
Laws whatsoever: showing of how great use and necessity the Civil Law is to
this Nation. By Robert Wiseman, Dr. of the Civil Law. Sold by R. Royston at the
Angel in Ivy-lane. The Grand conspiracy, by Master John Challington, in 12. The
History of the Church of Scotl^nd by Dr. Sp^tishwood Archbishop of S. Andrews
in fol. Etymologicum parvum, in 8. by Mr. Gregory Schoolmaster of Westminster.
The contemplation of heaven with a descant on the prayer in the garden, in 12.
The Magistrates Authority, a Sermon by Master Lyford, in 4. The Quakers wild
questions objected against the Ministers of the Gospel by Master Richard
Sherlock, in 4. The Communicants Guide, by Master Grove, in 8. The Plain man's
sense exercised, by Master William Lyford, in 4. Anglicisms Sattiniz'd, by Mr.
Willis in 8. The persecuted Minister, written by Master Langly, in 4. Lyfords
Legacy in 12. The Catechism of the Church of England, paraphrased, by Richard
Sherlock 2. Edition. An Apology for the Ministry by William Lyford. The
Examination of Tilenus before the Triers in Vtopia in 12. newly published.
The end of the Catalogue.

