Oeconomica Sacra: OR A Paraenetical Discourse OF MARRIAGE: Together with some
PARTICULAR REMARKS ON THE Marriage OF ISAAC and REBECCA.

Faelices ter and amplius,
Quos irrupta tenet copula; nec ullis
Divulsus quaerimoniis
Supraema citius solvit amor die.
Horace. LONDON, Printed for John Salusbury, at the Atlas in Cornhil, near the
Royal Exchange, 1685.

TO THE Right Honorable JAMES Earl of Salisbury, VISCOUNT CRANEBVRN, Baron
Caecill of Essenden.
May it please your Lordship;
THe Doctrine of Vitality and Vegetation, as it is the Act of an Omnipotent
God, so it is a stupendous Mystery to Man: And as the Divine Institution, and
Legitimacy in prosecuting the Succession of natural Causes, and propagation of
Corporeal Beings, was a clear Indication of Divine goodness, and a public
Manifesto to indulge Mankind in Conjugal embraces; as Antecedents to those wise
and honorable purposes, for which Marriage was ordained; so the Pravity and
Corruption of the humane Nature, is visible in those notorious deviations from
the Primitive Sanction: And the eager pursuit of unlawful and destructive
pleasures does wholly invert the appointed Decorum; and this violence of
appetite continuing, the mind is dealt withal, and prepared to an Assent, and
reason proselyted to the dictates of passion.

The fatal effects of Fornication and Adulteries, are too plainly apparent in
destroying bodily health; the ruin of Families and Kingdoms, the debauching
the generality of Mankind, the Production of a miserable and obscure Progeny,
the Atarchy and Confusion in Government, the loss of Property in the World, the
want of Education and Protection of Parents, the Abolition of Religion and
Devotion; and in short, the Destruction of the Creation: all which are
sufficient Punishments in themselves. Did I say Punishments? I must only call
them Sufferings, Proaemial to Eternal Torments.

How will the wiser Heathen condemn such beastial and irrational Practices!
they valued themselves highly, in hopes of their Elysium, and Life to come, and
disdained the Commission of any thing incongruous to such expectations. The
Holy Resolution of Seneca stands upon record; Faciam omnia tanquam Deus
videret: And hence the Philosopher so much preferred his contemplative,
Aristotle.
before his practick felicity; and the Poet Claudian tells us, That Nature,
meaning the God of Nature, assigns happiness to all men.

-- Natura Beatis,
Omnibus esse dedit, si quis cognoverit uti.
Now who can be so foolish, and act Antipodes to his own Reason; as to
degenerate into Sensuality and uncleanness, which inevitably pulls on
Everlasting Misery? Whereas nothing can more advance the humane Nature to its
primitive Dignity and Happiness, than Obedience to the Supreme Lawgiver; and
nothing can gratify the Senses of a thinking man, but what is licenc't by the
bounty of Heaven.

God having thus admirably consulted the good of Mankind, who would not accept
of such Gracious Invitations, when Conjugal Enjoyments are not only lawful, but
indulged, and man made an Instrument to propagate Posterity, and conferr a
Religious Education to his Children, preserve Honor and Honesty, Peace, and
Concord, good Government and decorum in the World, and all those Placentia's
and Contents of Marriage, are but praelibations of celestial Joys hereafter.

And your Lordships early condescension to the Matrimonial Obligation, has
encouraged this Dedication; that as your Honor is a Noble Advocate for
Marriage, so I have great hopes to presume, that your Lordship will protect
this piece against the licentious humor of a depraved Age; when Marriage is
decry'd, as a restraint upon Liberty, and the beaten path of our wiser
Ancestors utterly exploded.

Your Honor's Most Humble, and Faithfully Devoted Servant, J. P.
E Museo meo Londini, dieMaii, 25. 1685.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THe French first introduced the solemnity of a Preface, and others as well as
they have abused it to a great deal of Vanity; and out of pretended modesty
have largely decry'd their own Works, and the Imperfection of their pieces: Yet
after all, to publish them to the World, is no better than to adventure upon a
Crime, against open Conviction and Acknowledgment.

I would not be here misconstrued, but submit to the favorable censure of the
Judicious; and shall have as low a respect for my own Works as any man.

And as this Treatise was occasioned by my accidental reading the twenty fourth
Chapter of Genesis, and composed for my private Recreation at vacant hours (but
by the importunity of some Friends now made public) so it is recommended to
your vacant time and leisure to peruse it; and if it give you but a small
diversion, and a little benefit, consider, that even that time which was
bestowed on reading of it, might have been worse spent.

ERRATA.
PAge 64. line 19. for Imperial read Empyrean.

OF Marriage.
IT is a Maxim in Nature to affect Happiness and Society, Naturae semper in
meliorem tendit.
and to aim at Improvement and Benefit; this was at first declared by the God
of Nature, It is not good for man to be alone; and has since been practiced by
mankind as the sine qua non, without which the Species could not be preserved;
because the all-wise God having invested the humane Nature with a Potentia, and
Organical helps for generation; and also given those respective Productions an
inherent faculty of life and vegetation, he was not further pleased to
propagate mankind by Creation, as he did the Angels, but even in the perfecting
their first Species; he was not pleased to Create, but form the Woman ex
materia praeexistente, of the Rib of Adam; which also implies, that as there
was an Identity of Materia prima, for constituting Organical Bodies, so there
is also an innate and natural affection and sympathy reciprocal: Now it pleased
God to tie these two pieces of Nature together, by the sacred bonds and
Sacramental Ordinance of Matrimony, whereby God did not only supply Adam with a
meet help for Propagation, but also superadded the Comfort and enjoyment of
Society, the Woman resembling the Man in nature, shape, body and mind, and
there being nothing wanting to Adam for the Consummation of his Happiness but a
Wife, he was made Lord over the Creatures, Heir of of the World, and seated in
Paradise; and God providing him a fit Companion, has abundantly supplied what
he wanted; and man ever since retains such Principles and Inclinations suitable
to the Institution of Nature, which by Philosophers is styled, previous
Dispositions or Aptitudes in matter to attain and seek after; which brings us
to discourse of Marriage, which God Instituted for his own Glory, the good of
Mankind, and benefit of Posterity.

Marriage being the subject of which we are to treat, we will first consider it
in its Institution, and secondly in its Effects. And,

First, Its Appointment is Divine. A priori.
After God had said, It is not good for man to be alone; it follows, Let us
make a meet help for him; (...).
for man is by nature a sociable Creature, and desirous of Company, as a
learned Commentator on the place tells us. An individual makes no Society, Nec
jucundum individuo, nec utile speciei. Piscator in loc.

Tanquam alter ipse specie and forma conveniens. Rivet in loc.


neither is serviceable to its Species; therefore God gave man a Wife, as
another self, of the same Species and Figure with himself; than which nothing
could be so meet an help, both for Society and Propagation of Issue, which was
absolutely necessary for the preservation of Mankind. And in the second Chapter
of Genesis we have an account of the Woman's formation, that she was formed of
the Rib of Adam, and presented to him, and thereupon she becomes aliquid
ipsius, something of him, if not alter idem, another same, which the Schoolmen
declare for; that she being formed out of a Rib, there was both Flesh and
Nerves, which makes her an alter ipse: And she being after the similitude of
man, he might the more affect and approve of her; for humane Nature is taken
with similes, and we are pleased with the reflex of our selves, and like
Narcissus even dote upon identical dilations: the sacred Phrase runs thus, Deus
creavit hominem marem and faeminam. Vulg. lat.

Matrimonium humano generi immortalitatem tribuit. Nevisanus.


God created man male and female. There being then an indentity of constituted
matter, that the love of Society and Conjugal affections might be homogenial
and reciprocal: Whereas if God had given him a Friend only, the Society had
been deficient, neither could the Species be preserved without a Genus: but the
Ordination of God, and current of Nature have made them individually one, God
presented her to man as a second self. Nature and Religion, Law and Policy
strictly oblige them to this sacred Economy: This was visible in Adam's
Apprehension and Approbation of it, as we read 23, and 24. verses; This is now
bone of my bone, Genesis 2.23, 24.
and flesh of my flesh: And in the 24. verse we have the consequents of this
noble and sacred Institution; Therefore shall a man leave Father and Mother,
and cleave to his Wife, and they two shall be one flesh: That is not, Non
loquitur de carnis libidine, sed affectu conjugali. Paulus Fagius, in loc.
as one observes, spoken of fleshly Lusting, but out of Conjugal Affections and
Love to his Wife, who resembles the two branches in Ezekiels hand; enclosed in
one bark, and closing together make but one flesh, as being a Society of the
most endeared Amity and Friendship. Matrimonii symbolum. Ezekiel. 24.26. Micah
7.5. Prove. 5.19.
Solomon speaks thus, Be thou ravished always in her Love: in the Original it
is, Err thou always in her love; velut extra sis ut rerum aliarum
obliviscare; which signifies a very earnest affection, and a respect
immeasurable: And our Blessed Savior himself, when he lived on earth, was
pleased to honor Marriage with his personal attendance; and to put the greater
accent and honor on so sacred a Solemnity, was further pleased, to the
admiration of all Spectators, to work his first Miracle thereat, by turning
Water into Wine; which tacitly implies that Marriage brings honor and
perfection to the humane nature, Faelix necessitas quae ad meliora tendit.
which was shaddowed out by the melioration of water, and was a clear
signification and approbation of those lawful delights and entertainments,
which were suitable and proper to the occasion: this Nuptial tie is Recorded in
Heaven, Solemnized on Earth, and Confirmed by the mutual gages of two united
individuals. This Love is the Harmony, Nil habet natura melius quam ut possis,
neque praestantius quam ut velis servare plures. Cicero.
the Complexion, Genius, and very Soul of Nature; this true Friendship is the
Zodiac wherein the Sun of Truth, Constancy and hearty Affections,
interchangeably complete the whole circle of motion and influence; and is the
Guardian and tutelar Angel of Society, to which Quarles alludes in his
description of Conjugal Love.

They were so one, that none could justly say,
Which of them ruled, or whether did obey;
He ruled, because she would obey, yet she
In so obeying ruled as well as he.
And as it was instituted for Gods glory, and preservation of Mankind, so to
preserve inviolate the Laws of God, by avoiding and preventing Fornication,
Exodus 10.14. Mark 10.19. Heb. 13.3.
which is forbidden by God in several places of Scripture.

We can still describe and represent the primitive rectitude of humane Nature,
though the fall has maimed our perfection, and impaired those glorious Ideas
we had at first, and disposed us to sin, and deviations: At first the action of
sense was appointed to touch the affection, and so present it primarily to the
Understanding, by whose conduct the Passions were subordinate and subject to
its inclinations, and as its Deputies in the administration of such Duties and
Performances, for the Benefit, Service and Happiness of the humane Nature;
which Understanding in the Soul is called an Intellectual Lamp, which God
placed for the admirable government of his Creature; and the Schoolmen call it
Lumen Naturae, the Light of Nature, which St. Chrysostom calls (...), St.
Chrysostom. 13 Orat.
and tells us, that it is a radical and fundamental knowledge planted in the
being of Man, budding and blossoming in his first Principles, flourishing and
bringing forth fruit, spreading it self into all the fair and goodly branches
of Morality, under whose shadow the Soul takes great delight: And tells us
further, that it grows spontaneously, shines out cheerfully and pleasantly;
it is so visible, that the infant age of the World could spell it out, and read
it without a Teacher before Moses was born, or Aaron wore his Golden Bells;
before there was a Prophet or Judge in Israel; and so the learned Grotius
describes it: The Law of Nature (says he) is a streaming out of glorious
Light, Jus Natural, est dictatum, rectae Rationis indicans, actui alicui, ex
ejus convenientia and disconvenientia cum ipsa Naturae Rationali, inesse
mortalem turpitudinem aut necessitatem moralem, and consequenter ab authore
naturae ipso Deo, talem actum aut vetari, aut praecipi. Grotius de jure Natu.
powerfully discovering such a deformity in some evil, as that an intellectual
Eye must needs abhor it; and such a commanding Beauty in some good, as that a
rational being must needs be enamoured with it, and so plainly showing that God
stamped and sealed the one with his Command, and branded the other with his
dislike; to which Plutarch very excellently alludes, (...). This Royal Law of
Nature, says he, was never shut up in a paper Prison, was never confined and
limited to any outward surface, but was bravely situated in the Center of a
rational being, always keeping the Soul Company, for its protection and
direction; ruling all its Subjects (all obedient actions) with a Golden
Scepter, and crushing to pieces its Enemies, that is all rebellious and evil
actions. And Plato tells us, that this Law is founded in Nature, for the
maintaining, ennobling, and the perfecting of Nature. But Tully draws a most
lively portraicture of the Law of Nature: Est quidem vera lex recta ratio,
naturae congruens, diffusa in omnes, constans, sempiterna, quae vocem ad
officium jubendo, vetando, fraud deterreat, quae tamen probos, neque frustra
ju bet aut vetut, nec improbos jubendo, aut vetando movet; Hinc legi nec
propagari jas est, neque derogari ex hac aliquid licet, neque tota abrogari
potest; nec vero aut per Senatum, aut per populum solvi hac lege possimus;
neque est quaerendus explanator, aut interpres ejus alius, non erat alia Roma,
alia Athenis, alia nunc, alia posthac, sed and omnes gentes omni tempore una
Lex and sempiterna, and immutabilis continebit, unusque erit quasi communis
Magister and Legislator omnium Deus, ille legis hujus inventor, disceptator,
lator, cui qui non parebit, ipse se fugiet, and naturam hominis aspernabitur.
The Law of Reason, says he, is a beautiful Law, a Law of a pure Complexion
and Natural color, of a vast Extent and diffusion; its color and beauty
cannot fade, it encourages men in Obedience with a smile, it chides them and
frowns them out of wickedness; good men hear the whisperings of its pleasant
voice, and observe the least glance of its lovely eye; but wicked men sometimes
will not hear it when it comes to them in Thunder, nor take the least notice of
it, though it flash out in Lightning; none must enlarge nor diminish this Law,
neither can the malice of men totally deface its Beauty, neither Prince nor
People, Angels nor Men can absolve you from it; this Law never paints its face,
nor change its color; it does not put on one aspect at Athens, and another at
Rome, but looks upon all Nations and Persons with an impartial eye; it shines
upon all Ages, and Times, and Conditions with a perpetual Light; there is but
one Lawgiver, he contrived and commanded it, and none can be exempted from it,
unless he be banished from his own Essence, and excommunicated from humane
nature. And St. Austin in his Confessions: Thy Law, says he, Tua lex, tua lex
scripta est in cordibus nostris, quam non ulla unquam delet iniquitas.
is written in our hearts, which no Iniquity can blot out. And the wiser
Heathen braved it out in admirable expressions; That Beauty and Goodness was a
sufficient reward and compensation, that the very turpitude of evil actions is
Punishment enough in it self: And what an high pitch of greatness did Plato
attain to, when he calls Laws that were made by man, to preserve Justice, and
Punish Vice, but Hominum infirmiorum commenta, a remembrance for weak men, to
keep them virtuous. And Seneca divinely expressed himself; Licet scirem Deum
ignosciturum and homines ignoraturos, attamen peccare nollem ob peccati
turpitudinem. Sen. Vir bonus reveretur seipsum.
If I were sure, says he, that God would certainly pardon me, and men could
never know of it, yet I would scorn to sin for its foulness and dishonesty. And
what Christian can keep pace herein, endeavoring after such original
rectitude? and when he gave the world that golden Apothegm, That a good man has
a veneration for himself; what strong emulations had he to climb after Original
Purity, and advance Nature to her primitive Dignity! how did he aim after the
Image of his Maker, to preserve that Species of Goodness implanted in him, as
knowing that sins and immoralities were the degenerations of humane Nature, and
would debase him into a Devil.

Now man being a free and voluntary Creature, has a freedom and liberty to
prosecute his own happiness, and having tasted that forbidden fruit, how has he
as it were poisoned himself and posterity! And how has that glorious Picture
of his Maker lost its gloss and beauty, and the oriency of its colors!
Horresco referens! We tremble to relate how that sweet harmony of his
faculties, and subordination of them to each other, is broken; how every motion
of the inferior power has disobeyed that government and direction which the
superior did administer! how has man basely exchanged reasonable and well
ordered Passions for sensual and beastly! Tanta est vis voluptatum ut and
ignorantium protelet in occasionem, and conscientiam corrumpat in
dissimulationem. Tertul.
what crookedness and dissension is there fighting against his reason! what
Solecisms in his manners! what impostures to obliterate reason and original
truth! and the Understanding being cast out, Passion has usurped the Chair,
which judges of things, not according to natural truth, but according to the
Impressions of Fancy, Pleasure, and the dictates of corrupt Nature.

And this Corruption of Nature is particularly seen in Incontinency: God of his
great goodness has given us a lawful and honorable use of those innate
desires, and propensities of nature in mutual enjoyments, ad conversationem
speciei, for Generation sake, but not to satisfy those vile affections of
Lust, as the Apostle speaks; and forsaking the guidance of reason, they
dishonored their bodies amongst themselves, as St. Jude tells; which is styled
by the Philosopher, Aristotle.
Morbid desires; and the Apostle tells us, that he who commits fornication sins
against his own Body. Morbus est affectus contra naturam corpori incidens.
As Fernelius observes of diseases, that they are affections of body contrary
to Nature; so are Adulteries and Fornications. The Poet represented Agamemne,
Os occulusque Jovi par, in his features like Jupiter, in valor like Mars, in
Wisdom a very Apollo himself: But when angry and passionate, transformed into a
Lion, a Tiger, a Devil. So man was created after the Divine Image, and should
preserve the sacred obligations of Marriage Inviolable: but by Fornications and
Adulteries metamorphos'd into a Beast, a Devil; and though the Commission of
Sin at first pleases corrupt Nature, yet the violation of the Divine Law, and
our guilty Consciences, will affright and torture us. The Poet tells us,
Principium dulce est, sed finis amoris amarus,
Laeta venire Venus, tristis abire solet.


This vultures and gnaws the afflicted heart, this brings destruction to Soul
and Body; whence proceeds such Ghonorreahs and Inflammations of Liver, and
brings a sudden Catastrophe to life it self. Suetonius invit. ejus.
It ruined Alexander the Great, Otho the Emperor, Pope Sextus the fourth: Qui
dissessit tabidus voluptate, as the Historian tells us. And as Turtullian
observes, the Body quickly fails the Mind, the Mind the Desire, the Desire the
Satisfaction, and all the man. And how has Gods Judgments pursued the
Adulteror! Suetonius.
Julius Caesar was stabbed in the Senate House, as a just reward of his
Incontinence: And how remarkable was Gods judgment upon the Levites Wife, Judge.
19.20, 21.
that played the Adulteress! and we have an account how she was cut and divided
into twelve pieces, and sent into all the Coasts of Israel. And it would be too
tedious to relate, what misery and destruction it brought to Anthony and
Cleopatra, Augustus Caesar, Mary of Aragon, Rodolphus of Lombardy, and others:
And one wittily expresses it, Non est e terris mollis ad astra via.
the passage to Heaven is all the way up-hill, and the unclean Adulterer with
his rotten lungs cannot climb it up. Sampsons strength was enervated by a
Woman: And Solomon's Wisdom nigh extinguished in the fire of Lust. What a blot
and dishonor was it to Amnon, and how was his Sin aggravated in the case of
Thamar!

Neither does it terminate in personal destruction, but affects Families, nay
Kingdoms and Empires: what misery did David bring on himself and family by
Adultery with Bathsheba! and how terrible the Divine Judgment against him! The
Sword shall not depart from thine house, 2 Samuel 11.10, 11, 12.
because thou have despised the Lord, and taken the Wife of Vriah the Hittite:
and it must needs prick him to the Heart, when Nathan so pathetically
expostulates the case, and sums up Gods great goodness to him, after he had
killed Vriah, Ver. 7, 8, 9.
and done evil in the sight of the Lord: And we find that Idleness was a great
step to this Sin. David walking on the top of his House, saw that Beautiful
Woman: The soul wanting the Salutiferous food of business, preys upon evils; as
the Poet tells us of Aegistus his Adultery, Quaeritur Aegistus quomodo sit
factus Adulter,
In promptu causa est, Desidiosus erat.
It was Idleness administered the occasion of his Sin.

We would therefore more especially recommend Employment and Business, as a
great preservative against those Sins: they preserve the mind against those
sensual solicitations and Siren Enchantments, and fortify the soul against
those fatal Poisons that kill us in our delights, and so preserve it
invulnerable from the Arrows of a Lais or Cleopatra; obstruct those peccata in
deliciis which otherwise might storm and conquer our best resolutions; and like
a Coat of Male which preserves the body, so business preserves the mind from
those fatal Inchantations; Homines ni hill agendo male agere discunt.
but if we give up our selves to Idleness, a hundred to one but some evil
attacks us. As a match takes fire, so Lust overtakes Idleness: hence the Poets
represent all Shepherds lascivious and effeminate, because generally Idle
persons: so Theophrastus defines it, Otiosi animi affectus. And Seneca is in
the right when he tells us, Juventa gignitur, Luxu nutritur, feriis alitur
otioque inter laeta fortunae bona.
Youth begets it, riot maintains it, Idleness nourishes and continues it. How
lustful and effiminate was Alcibiades, Sardanapalus, Nero and others! Whereupon
St. Hierom observes, That wherever Security and Idleness prevails, there
wantonness and lust reigns.

Vbicunque securitas, ibi libido dominatur.
And that it affects Kingdoms and States, we find it in the case of Sodom. God
rained down Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, and destroyed the Sodomites, as
Pererius notes on the Place; Ex eo quod relatione ad Deum sub nomine
Tetragrammaton dicuntur, valde male, and peccatores significatur eo contra jus
naturae valde peccasse. Pere. in Locum.
Giving themselves over to Fornication, and going after strange flesh, they
sinned against the light of Nature: wherefore the Passion and Indignation of
Lactantius is commendable, when he says, That no Indignation against this Sin
of Sodom is enough: and as their punishment was by fire, so it was suitable to
the Nature of their Sin, and burning Lusts, as Gregory expresses it. There was
Lusting without measure, and excess of riot; Sulphur significatus and punitus
fuit peccatorum foetor, igne libidinis ardor. Greg. in locum.
and as their Sins were of a crying and aggravating Nature, so the execution of
their punishment was by Fire, which is accounted most afflictive to Sense, and
a suitable punishment for the greatest offenders. And this fire was a
miraculous fire; the Text says, The Lord rained Fire and Brimstone, from the
Lord: Pererius renders it, E Nostris, it came not from the Strength of natural
causes, but immediately from God himself. God wrought a miracle to punish those
Sodomites, and to put a difference between the ordinary Generation of fire and
Sulphur, produced from natural causes, His verbis significatur quod praeter
naturalem, rerum cursum miraculum operatus est, puniendo iniquos ad
differentiam enim naturalium causarum naturali ordine occurrentium, ad
generandum sulphur and ignem, adjunctum est illud, A Jehova.
it is superadded in the Text, in terminis, e Jehovah, from the Lord; and this
is the sense of the best Interpreters, as Tostatus, Calvin, Musculus, Paraeus
and Rivet.

And what but the Adultery of Paris with Hellena, occasioned the Trojan War,
the Ruin of that famous Kingdom, the Death of Paris, and Hellena, and King
Priamas himself! And Sextus Tarquinius for the Rape of Lucretia, (for which she
slew her self,) was both expelled his Kingdom, and slain by the Sabines; and
the Romans very properly Solemnized their Funeral Rites at the Gate of the
Temple of Venus, to let the World know, that Lust and Incontinence was an
Hastener and Harbinger of Death. Epiphanius relates sad Stories of the
Impurities of the Gnostics, and Clemens Alexandrinus of the Carpocratians:
therefore let us all remember that Poetical Admonition; Corpus, opes, animam,
famam, vim, lumina, Scortum
Debilitat, perdit, necat, aufert, eripit, orbat.


And let us seriously consider the Royal Observation of the Wisest King: Prove.
7.25, and 26. --
She has cast down many wounded; yea, many strong men have been slain by her:
Her house is the way to Hell, going down to the Chambers of Death. We will only
just touch at the manner of the Nuptial Celebration, and so proceed to consider
the Effects of Marriage. The Ancients Solemnized those Sacred Obligations with
such Care, that God himself might be an apparent Witness of that holy Covenant;
and several Nations have observed several sorts of Ceremonies; and we may
suppose them wisely and judiciously instituted, as the Representatives of that
great Mystery. The Hebrews had first their Betrothings, then their Conjugal
Rites: There was a distance of time between their Espousals, and the
Consummation; which is observable from the Answer of Rebecca's Mother unto
Abraham's Servant, that she might remain with her at least ten days after the
Espousals: Several Friends assisted at this Ceremony; and they had an
Epithalamium, or Nuptial Song sung by some particular Friends, styled, the
Children of the Bride-chamber: Mat. 9.15.
And that this Hymeneal Song was no other than a Form of Blessing pronounced on
the new Married Couple, is thus described by Genebrand: The Chief of those
Companions takes a Cup, and Blesses it, saying; Blessed be the Lord our God,
which created Man after his own Image, and has thereby prepared to himself an
everlasting Building: Blessed be thou, O Lord our God, who have created Joy and
Gladness, the Bridegroom and the Bride, Charity and brotherly Love, Rejoicing
and Pleasure, Peace and Society: I beseech thee, O Lord, let there be suddenly
heard in the Cities of Judah, and Streets of Jerusalem, the voice of Joy and
Gladness, the voice of the Bridegroom and the Bride; the voice of Exultation in
the Bride-chamber is sweeter than any Feast, and Children sweeter than the
sweetness of a Song. And he drinks to the Married Couple; -- From which our
vulgar Custom of wishing them Joy and Happiness proceeds. -- They kept their
Marriage Feast seven days; Judge. 14.10. and 11. --
which space of time they observed for mourning, whence came that Jewish
Proverb, Septem ad Convivium, septem ad Luctum: And there was a Wedding Ring
given to the Bride, with this Inscription, Mazal Tob, which the Hebrews call
the Planet Jupiter, according to Munster, which they thought of great Efficacy
and Virtue for Generation. And the Subjection and Modesty of Women in those
days is observable: When the Wife was first presented to her Husband, she
covered her self with a Vail: Thus did Rebecca, when she espied Isaac coming
toward her, she took a Vail, Genesis 24.65.
and covered her self. Now as the Hebrews prayed unto God, so other Nations had
their particular Auspicious Deities, and forms of Invocations; as, at Athens,
Hymeneus; and at Rome, Thalassius; that the Marriage might be happy and
fortunate: And they adorned one Finger of the left Hand with a Ring, as a
Symbol of their great Love to their Husbands; and they were wont to be carried
into their Husbands Houses, to intimate, that they lost their solicited
Virginity not voluntarily. We will not trouble you with the several Customs
which were accommodated to Magnificence and Splendor of the Nuptials, the
Sports of Gladiators, and Preparations of Pastime for the People, which
Theophrastus calls, the Delightful Product of Riches: And for our modern
Customs herein, and modes of Celebration, we pass them over, to hasten to the
Effects of Marriage.

A posteriori.
Secondly, We come to consider the Effects of Marriage: And we are not about
Vmbraticam Causam, needless things; but our design is to blazon the Sacred and
Noble Effects of Marriage. Finis dat amabilitatem mediis.
It Is the End and good Consequence of things that gives the greater Luster and
Loveliness to the Causes. -- Man being a congregable Creature, by reason of his
Speech, the Communative Organ of Society, as Cicero tells us; -- Man delights
in the Company of his own Species, Pares cum paribus sacilime congregantur.
Cicero.
and the Similitude of their Natures has constituted a continued Alliance
amongst themselves. And Tostatus tells us, That that was the Original of Civil
Communication, for the mutual Preservation of Mankind: The happy Effects of it
were seen in the several Families and Associations of the first Age: -- The
first Oeconomies and Institutions for the Government of Mankind, was the
blessed Effects of Marriage. -- Here the admirable wisdom of Divine Providence
shined out, and here the Celestial Proclamation took place; Glory to God on
High, on Earth Peace, good Will toward Men: For, no sooner was Man created for
God's Glory, but a meet help assigned him; and the next thing in Nature after
Generation follows Preservation, Subordination, and Government, as a Pattern to
Succeeding Ages, for the Government of God's Church and People in the World.
Now Self-love being an inseparable Property to all Beings, Amor sui.
we must needs delight in the Preservation of our own Essence, for the Unity we
find in our selves: And when in Nature, or Habit, we find the Similitude and
Character of our selves, the Beams and Powers of our Wills and Affections do
extend and dilate themselves upon those Objects respectively. Now a
Representation is made,

1. In Substance; as the Husband and Wife are One Flesh, and Children the
Branches of their Parents.

2. In Accidents, or Qualities; as one Man is like to another, either in the
Dimensions of Body, Identity of Physiognomy, or mental Endowments; -- all which
prompts Nature to mutual Exercises of Love and Courtesy. And this natural
Civility and Providence extends to other Creatures as well as Man: Elian
reports of the Affection of Elephants to their Young: That the Pelican, if the
Naturallists may be credited, when her young Ones have been bitten, feeds them
with her own Blood, for their Recovery, (which a Portugal Prince made
Emblematical to express his Love to his Subjects;) and other Creatures observe
this Affection, according to Elian: Nay, the most cruel of Beasts, the Tiger,
if Statius be not mistaken: -- Sic aspera Tigris
Foetibus abreptis Scythico deserta sub Antro
Accubat, and lepidi lambit vestigia lecti. Lib. 10.



Nay, what Regiment this affection does obtain upon the whole Classes of
vegetable nature, is pleasant to observe: in the Vine and Elm how great a
sympathy! the Olive and the Myrtle embrace each other. What a story is related
of two Palm trees in Italy by Jovianus Pontanus, in his Poems! Naturalists
allow them Male and Female, and that they will not grow out of each others
sight. The Poet Claudian describes the Passion of Vegetables, thus, Vivunt in
venerem frondes, omnisque vicissim,
Foelix arbor amat, nutat and mutua Palma;
Faedera, populco suspirat populus ictu.


But in Mankind how much greater is this affection, and who can undertake to
describe the extent of Conjugal Love! Man admires her as his meet help; she was
built in Paradise: Nature has given her purer Elements in her Composition, and
sweetened her Countenance beyond the Sternness of a Male Aspect, and has
entrusted her with the Conception, Production and Education of Posterity. And
God gave the honor of our Redemption to the Seed of the Woman; man is more
obsequious to that Sex than his own. For a virtuous and wise Woman is like the
Ambassador of a Prince, held as a Person sacred: man admires her for that
secret sweetness that indulge and gratify all his senses at once in his
Conversation with her; and is sensible of the fruition of so excellent a
Creature without himself, and of the honor he receives by help of Propagation
and parity of natural Union: she is the high Chamberlain of his Soul, Privado
of his Senses, and with the charms of her figure, In tota rererum natura nihil
forma divinius, nihil augustius, nihil praetiosius cujus vires hinc facile
intelliguntur. Socrates.
feature and relation, can persuade him into more than all the intermitted
rethorick of a Masculine friend.

Ab talem uxorem qui praestentissima forma,
Nil mortale refert. --
But it would be too tedious to relate the Examples of Conjugal affection; we
pass over the Love of Abraham and Isaac to their Wives; Ezekiel. 24.16.
of Ezekiel, whose Wife was called the delight of his Eyes; the Vulgar Latin
is, Desiderium Oculorum tuorum. Augustus Caesar died in the kisses of his Wife
Livia. Conjugii nostri mea mor, vive and vale. We pass over the affections of
Theodosius and Placilla his Queen, of Seneca and Paulina, Mansolus and
Artemesia: and it is reported of one that ordered to be writ on his Tomb, That
he had lived with his Dear Wife forty three years eight months, and never fell
out. What a blessed Amnestia does this noble Constitution settle amongst men!
And the Conversation of a good Wife sweetens Life, and banishes vexation; to
whom we may tell our discontents, and have them lessened, and our joys, and
have them multiplied: and he that has a good Wise, has two selves, and
possesses all his faculties double.

Homer brings in Paris kissing Hellena after ten years Marriage, protesting as
much affection as if but newly conjoined. Like the Old man in Ausonius, Vxor
vivamus quod vivimus, and moriamur
Servantes nomen sumpsimus in thalamo;
Nec ferat ulla dies ut commutemur in aevo
Quin tibi sum Juvenis tuque puella mihi.
Dear Wife let us live in love, and dye together,
As heretofore we have in all good will;
Let no day change or alter our affections,
But let us be young to one another still.


Much like the saying of Solomon, And rejoice with the Wife of thy Youth, Prove.
5.19.
let her be as the loving Hind, and the pleasant Roe; let her Breasts satisfy
thee at all times, and be thou ravished always with her Love. Here is a
magnetic and charming quality, a powerful and occult motive; and though he
rule his Wife as head, yet she again commands his Heart; no happiness like it,
placens Vxor, a sweet Wife.

Omnis Amor magnus, sed aperto in conjuga major: No Love so strong as this
Conjugal Love, they being but one flesh are unanimous, and Gerion-like,
Amicitiae symbolum.
Coalescere in Vnum, and have but one Heart in two Bodies.

Corporibus geminis Spiritus unus erat. And so continue in mutual Love,
affection and endearments to each other; according as the Poet personates a
Loving Husband: Propertius. Lib. 2.
Et me ab amore tuo deducet nulla senectus,
Sive ego Tythonus sive ego Nestor ero.
No age shall part my Love from thee, sweet Wife,
Tho I live Nestors, or Tythonus life.


And so e diverso, the Woman also has a great sense of these conjugal
obligations; she admires her Husband as her Head and Protector, and under God a
Melior Natura, an Auspicious Genius, and Tutelar Angel, concerned for her
happiness, and consulting all the honorable methods for her Preservation and
Comfort: And the Care, Diligence and Industry of a good Husband, for the
Preservation and Happiness of her, and hers, recommends him the more to her
Love and most endeared affections. She cannot but adore the Divine goodness,
that when her Parents are dead, and her Friends fail her, that she has a
second Self, who is unhappy if she be miserable; and under God her happiness in
this World depends immediately on the Industry, Sobriety, Diligence and
Providence of her Husband. Man and Wife should resemble the Cherubims in the
Temple, which looked on each other; so they should love and admire each other,
and meet half way in the joint Prosecution of both their good. The Apostle
exhorts Husbands to love their Wives as Christ loved the Church: Ephesians. 5.25.
Col. 3.18.
And Wives to submit themselves to their Husbands, as it is fit in the Lord,
and win them by their sweet Conversation. And the Wise man, 1 Pet. 3.1.
in his description of a loving and industrious Wife; says, She will do him
good* and not evil all her days; And goes on descanting on the particular
parts of her good housewifery: And in the 28 verse, Pronounces his blessing on
her; Prove. 31.10.
Her Children arise up and call her blessed, her Husband also, and he praises
her. We also have read of the constancy of a Ruth, of Sarah and Rebecka's
fidelity to their Husbands; and in the Roman Government, the Bride used to
salute her Husband: Vbi tu Caius, Plutarch.
ego semper Caia.

It was an excellent Character the Holy Ghost gives of Abigal, that she was a
Woman of an excellent Understanding, in Pacifying David, and saving her house.
Phile and Zenobia were exceeding Lovers of their Husbands; and what Lamps of
Female Glory were the Cornelia's, Panthia's, Porcia's, and others! and how
great an Admiration had that Persian Lady for her Husband, when at Cyrus his
Wedding, she was asked, How she liked the Bridegroom; I know not, said she, for
I saw none there, but mine own Husband. And Plutarch relates of the Love and
Wisdom of the Celtick Women, that when their Husbands were involved in a Civil
War, by the endeavors and Solicitation of their Wives, a Peace was made, and
for their Honor and Reward they were admitted to the Council. And it was one
of the Articles made with Hannibal, That if the Cartha^inians had any
controversy with the Celtians, it should be decided by the Celtian Women; and
we find a passage in Euripides to this effect, Optima viri possessio uxor
benevola,
Mittigans iram, and avertens animum ejus a tristitia.
Man's best possession is a loving Wife,
She tempers anger and diverts all strife.


And as in this Conjugal affection, there is such an egress and expansion of
the Heart and Spirits to the object loved, and a Love and respect of that
extent, that an Ovid cannot teach it, nor Solomon describe, nor Apelles paint
it; so an high care and solicitation for the well-being and preservation of
each other: Res est solliciti plena timoris amor.

Ovids Epist.


as the Poet well describes the jealousy of Penelope for the safety of
Ulysses, In te fingebam violentes Troias ituros, Ovids Epist.

Nomine in Hectureo, pallida semper eram.
How often my dear Ulysses did I see
In my sad thoughts proud Trojans rush on thee,
And when great Hectors but touched mine ears,
My cheeks drew paleness from my paler fears.


And as absence is tedious and unpleasant, so their departure each from other
afflictive and uneasy: When Thais took her leave of Phaedria, -- Egone quid
velim,
Noctes diesque ames me, me desideres,
Me somnies, me expectes, me cogites,
Me speres, me te oblectes, mecum tota sis,
Meus sac postremo animus, quando ego sum tuus.
Do ask, my Dear, what service I will have,
To love me day and night is all I crave;
To dream on me, to expect, to think on me,
Depend and hope, still covet me to see;
Delight thy self in me, be wholly mine,
For know, my Love, that I am wholly thine.


But we must shake off this pleasant Argument, for there is no end of it. In
short, how have Philosophers, Historians and Poets celebrated this Alliance,
this Conjugal Economy; this Divine constitution! Dies deficeret and Nox; we
will only give you the rapture of Boaethius.

O Faelix hominum genus!
Si vestros ammos Amor
Quo Caelo regitur, regat.
Now two being become one by this Mysterious Conjunction, they reciprocally
love and mutually affect each other, and jointly promote the happiness of both:
the man is obliged to love his Wife, as Grotius says, Dilectione sincera,
casta and perpetua, and exemplo sanctae vitae uxoribus praebeat. Spontanea
nempe voluntate, agnoscentes ordinationem Dei qui id etiam an te peccatum
constituit.
with a chaste and constant love, and set their Wives the example of a
Religious Life: And the Woman to love, reverence and submit to her Husband,
freely and cheerfully acknowledging the Ordinance of God from the beginning, as
Zanchius directs. And as the Matrimonial honor is to be preserved inviolable,
so the Holy Ghost is pleased to represent the mystical Union between Christ and
his Church, by the semblance and Analogy of Marriage. Quo spectare videtur,
sequens comparatio, de Christo ecclesiamsuam sanctificante. Estius in loc.
Aristotle Pol.


Now this Love and Affection being proper to Mankind, is called Amor
cognitionis. Leon Hebreus calls it Rational love, whereby all the Affections
and Actions are conformed to the Object; and this Love the Philosopher styles,
Debitum Naturae, a Debt we owe to Nature, and the neglect thereof a trespass
against Nature; because God is Love it self; he made the World out of Love, and
wonderfully illustrated this Love in redeeming of it; and the Emanations of it
are visible in his Divine Providence, and in his care and protection of every
individual, and particle of the Creation.

Si rerum quaeris fuerit quis finis and ortus,
Desine, nam causa est unica solus Amor.
Do ask the reason moved God above
To make the world, the only cause was Love.
And here we might enter into a vast and Philosophical Field of discourse, Amor
est voluntatis affectus. Forma est vitalis ^ulgor^ex ipso bono emanans par
Ideas. Plato. Pulchritudo est perfectio compositi, and congruente ordine,
mensura and ratione partium consurgens.
and give you the Definition, division and object of Love; according to Leon
Hebreus, a voluntary affection and desire to enjoy that which was good: Omne
pulchrum est amabile; and the more fair the object, the more desirable. Plato
defines Beauty, a resulting from effased good. Others call it a perfection of
the whole composition; and this Comeliness is called Grace, which joined with
Beauty is like the Shinings that come from a Glorious and Divine Sun; than
which admirable Beauty, says Socrates, there is nothing so majestical, nothing
so sacred, divine and Lovely, and nothing can charm mankind so much. When
Xerxes destroyed all the Temples of the Grecian Deities, he caused the Picture
of Diana, in Integrum servari, to be spared for its Beauty and Majesty: Naturae
gaudentis opus.
But how much more charming is natural Beauty, which Plato calls the
Quintessence and Triumph of Nature. Carneades calls it, Still Rethorick, that
persuades without Speech; it is a Kingdom without a Militia; Gratior est
pulchro, veniens e corpore virtus. Vir. Aeneads.
which made Diogenes call Beautiful Women Queens, because all were willing to
obey their Commands: and the Poet describes Dido's astonishment when she first
beheld Aeneas, Obstupuit primo aspectu Sydonia Dido.

So the Woman of Samaria was transported with the Beauty of Christ; Origin.
he was Fairer than the Sons of men. Joseph's comeliness conciliated his Favor
in the Egyptian Court: Lib. de pull. Jes. and Mar.
How much does P. Morales admire the Beauty and Luster of the Virgin Mary!
Anthony admired Cleopatra, and Theseus was charmed with Hellena. And though the
Mind is not occasioned by the Body, yet Philosophy tells us it follows the
temperament of it; and where the external Qualities are so beautiful, we may
guess at the Judgment, concluding that the lovely dispositions of the Soul
quickneth and animates the outward Graces; and there being so strong a love
between the Body and Soul, we may from thence presume of a similitude in the
Qualities of the Soul, with those lovely impressions of nature we find in the
Body.

Now Leon Hebreus divides Love into three parts, Natural, Sensible, and
Rational: Natural Love is seen in the Elements, Sun, Moon and Stars, in Metals
and Stones; gravia tendunt deorsum; Fire upwards, and in Vegetables, as before.
Sensible Love in brute Beasts, for the preservation of the Species; and
Rational, which was handled before, as proper to Mankind; but then only
respecting Philanthropy, the love of men to their own Species; whereas the
affections of men are likewise dilated on things as well as persons. We admire
Virtue, Wisdom, Eloquence, Profit, Wealth, Honor, Beauty, Friendship, Charity,
and other things, Arts and Sciences; but we only name them, each head would
take up a copious discourse by it self. And pleading Peccavi for this pleasant
digression, we return to prosecute the remaining Effects of Marriage: And the
next is Children.

When he sees those fine and elaborate pieces of himself, whom God has
graciously given him, how does he adore the Divine Goodness that made him a
Father, and Instrument to preserve by a continued Succession Gods Church in the
World! and how is he obliged to give down to his Offspring those Precepts and
Institutes for Gods glory, their good and advantage, he received from his
Ancestors! Children are the blessing of their Parents, and a good Parent a
blessing to his Children. When God blessed our first Parents, 'twas thus: Be
fruitful, Genesis 1.28. Signifi^at secunditatem omnemque favorem, and copiam, and
quae Deus illis omnia laeta, and pausta precatus fuit. Paulus Fagius, in Locum.
Genesis 22.17.
and multiply, and replenish the earth; which Blessing, as a learned man tells
us, signifies all Fruitfulness, Favor and Plenty; and that God would heap on
them all Joys and Prosperity: so that the blessing of Children and all other
Enjoyments, are annexed to Marriage. So when God blessed Abraham; In blessing I
will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the Stars in
Heaven, and as the sand on the Seashore, and thy seed shall possess the Gate
of his Enemies: The words are an Hebraism, verbalia addita verbis; which
signifies Gods earnest resolutions to Bless Abraham, and his Seed after him:
The Hebrews observed a Convenience between the forms of expression and the
thing expressed: So when Christ said, Luke 22. Cordis and Oris orationem notat.
With desire I have desired; Aquinas notes on the place, that the Heart and
Tongue both Prayed: And David expresses the goodness of God to the Seed of
Abraham; Psalm. 105.6, 8, 9, 10, 11.
O ye seed of Abraham his Servant, and ye seed of Jacob his Chosen, he has
remembered his Covenant for ever; the word which he commanded to a Thousand
Generations; which Covenant he made unto Abraham, and his Oath unto Isaac, and
confirmed the same unto Jacob for a Law, and to Israel for an everlasting
Covenant, saying, Unto thee will I give the land of Canaan, the lot of your
Inheritance.

And when God blessed Jacob, I will pour my Spirit on thy seed, Isa. 44.3.
and my blessing on thine Offspring.

Now as these are the Promises and Blessings of God on the one hand, so it is
the Parents Duty on the other to express their Obligations and Thankfulness in
the Education and Care of their Children; Prove 20.3.
like Solomon's Just man, who walks in his Integrity, and his Children are
blessed after him. How does he consult all ways and methods to make his
Children truly happy! By Integrity we may understand that faithfulness a Father
owes to his Children, in giving them a religious and sober Education: Nurture
is as necessary for Children as Nourishment, which if Parents neglect, they are
Peremtores potius quam parents, Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem
testa diu. Prove. 22.6.
rather Paricides than Parents: but the good Father takes Solomon's Advice, and
trains up his Child in the way he should go; and with that wise Spartan
Prince, when he was asked what he should teach his Children, made Answer,
Agesilaus.
Xenoph.
Those things that they should make use of when they became men: For Youth is
like soft Wax, Tanquam abrasa tabula.
takes any Impression; therefore it ought to be seasoned with Religion and
Learning; as the Spring is the fittest seed-time for Grain and Planting, so
Youth is the most convenient season to scatter the Seeds of Knowledge upon the
ground of the mind.

And this Integrity also takes in the good Example of the Parent, for good
Examples are very prevalent with Children. It is recorded for the honor of
Joshua, Magis intuentur quod fecit Jupiter quam quid docuit Plato.
that he took care of his Children, and 'twas his good resolution, That he and
his House would serve the Lord: Lycurgus commanded all his Citizens to dine
publicly, where their Children heard no idle Speeches, but grave discourse
about the Government of the Commonwealth. The good Parent is an utter Enemy to
evil Customs, he well knows what arguments are brought from thence to support
ill actions; for Custom (as the Lord Verulam calls it) is the dumb Idol of the
world, Idolum Theatri.
the great Mart of Error, wherein Men unthriftily take up on trust, and at last
break by too much relying on the bankrupt security of a Fashion; the Ignis
fatuus and blaze men play about, as Flies about a Candle, 'till they burn their
wings: He will therefore be sure to give his Children a good Example, and
abolish bad Customs. Virgil brings in Aeneas advising his Son Ascanius; Lib.
12.
Disce puer virtutem ex me, verosque labores.
Virtue and Patience learn of me, my Son.


So Homer represents Hector Praying for his Son; Let it be said, here is a good
Son indeed,
That did his noble Father far exceed.


And if Heathens professed this sort of Piety, how much more should Christian
Parents bring up their Children in the Admonition, and Fear of the Lord! How
much was it to the honor and glory of Abraham, when God gives this Testimony
of him! For I know him, Genesis 18.19
that he will command his Children, and his Household after him, and they shall
keep the way of the Lord, and do justice and Judgment, that the Lord may bring
upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him. Which was, that in him should
all the Families of the Earth be blessed; As if God should argue, How shall I
fulfill my promise to Abraham, unless Abraham instruct his Children? and what
Parent will Wilfully obstruct his own and Childrens happiness? 1 Kings 2.2, 3.
So David charged Solomon: Be thou strong therefore, and show thy self a man:
And keep the charge of the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, to keep his
Statutes, his Judgments, and his Testimonies, as it is written in the Law of
Moses: and that he might the rather embrace his charge, he adds the reason,
that thou may prosper in all thou do, Majori sollicitudine me parturiebat
Spiritu quam peperat carne, parturiebat carne ut in hanc temporalem nascerer
cord ut in aeternam lucem re nascerer. Aug. Lib. 2. confess. chapter 3.
and whithersoever thou turnest thy self: And St. Austin reports of his Mother
Monica, that she ceased not do her endeavors every way, that he might be truly
religious, and as well Gods Child by Grace as hers by Nature. This is that
Domestic care that is incumbent on all Parents, to teach their Children their
Duty to God himself, to Honor their Parents, to reverence their Superiors, be
courteous to their Equals, and that in all their Actions, they should have
Oculi in Metam, and so be recti in curia: the Wiseman also tells us, what
Instructions he received from his Parents: Prove. 4.
To study Wisdom and to shun the path of the Wicked; and further tells us, that
whosoever loves Wisdom rejoices his Father; chap. 29.
and this Wisdom is the fear of the Lord, as we find afterward: The fear of
the Lord, Prove. 9.10.
that is Wisdom, and the Knowledge of the Holy is Understanding.

The good Parent well considers Religion as most essential to his Childrens
Happiness; that in the end of their days, when all other things fail, then God
may be the strength of their Heart, and their Portion for ever.

That Antistes Sacrorum, the Reverend Dr. Usher, used prayer in his Family four
times a day, and on Frydays Cathechized them; as remembering that charge, which
God commanded the old Israelites, These Words which I command thee this day,
shall be in thine Heart. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7.
And thou shall teach them diligently to thy Children, and thou shall talk of
of them when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the way, and
when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. And next after Religion his care
is manifest, to learn them Arts and Sciences, knowing that Ignorance brings
Idleness, Idleness brings ill Company, which the Devil uses as an Engine to
Dethrone men from the safe and honorable seat of Virtue to the precipice of
ruin and destruction, and so enchanting their Understanding, their Misery
attends them incognito; whereas good and wise Associates are our second Genius
to goodness; Phil. de Comines. Ab. 34.
or as another expresses it, It Is an Indication of a good and virtuous
disposition, to choose learned and virtuous Companions: which made Alexander so
highly esteem Aristotle, Themistocles his Anaxagoras, and Scipio his Canutius.
And he recommends virtue to them, as the complement of a happy life, and only
Immortal thing that belongs to Mortality, and represents it to them with such
Beauty and Majesty, that it must needs conciliate Love and Veneration; and
being a Charm so powerful, the affected Soul admires it, as the Lady and Queen
of an Intellectual Beauty.

He well knows that Nature has, as it were, of purpose left many things for Art
and Industry to finish and make up; and as it is Arts duty to imitate Nature, so
it is its dignity to perfect it: Nature gives in the Oar, but Industry refines
it into Silver. God has bestowed on his Children the Light of Nature, and the
Understanding of a Reasonable Being, and though by Original Sin this Light be
eclipsed, this Understanding and Reason withered, there is the more need of
supernatural accomplishments. Arts and Sciences polish and improve Nature, and
confer a great help and furtherance thereunto, and cure the diseases of our
Minds: as it was said of Demosthenes, that Nature brought forth one
Demosthenes, and Learning another, his Intellectuals were so improved by his
studies. He recommends therefore to his Children the study of the Scriptures
and practical Divinity, commends the devotion of a Numa, the Justice of an
Aristides, the good Laws of a Solon, the Prudence of a Cato, the Courage of a
Scipio, the Moderation of a Fabius, and the public Spirit of a Cicero; and
commends Learning, that is the only thing to enrich their minds with such
precious furniture, that Alexander professed he had rather excel in Wisdom
than Power, and as that which promotes the civil end of our Life: Vt in honor
cum dignitate vivamus; and that a man without Understanding is like the Beasts
that perish: therefore he is highly sollicitous to instruct his Children, with
the Emanations of Divine Wisdom, the Ideas of Morality, the Simples of Science,
the Flowers of Rethorick, Reason and Philosophy, and to build them up into the
Gallantry and Perfection of men. How does he set before them, that Learning was
the Glory of Scipia Affricanus, Charles the Great, Titus Vespatian, Charles the
fifth, and our late King James! and how much Historians, Poets and Philosophers
have celebrated the Glories of the Learned; and by this stir up the genius of
his own Children to an Emulation of their virtues. And we read of great
Personages that taught their Children themselves: Augustus Caesar read Cicero
and Virgil to his Children, and of a Grecian Emperor, that taught his Daughter
himself: and Bishop Jewel cites her in his Apology, as Author of a Church
History: so Paulus Aemilius instructed his Children in the Latin and Greek
Tongues: And Sir Tho. Moor when Lord Chancellor taught his three Daughters,
and Buchanal relates of the admirable Learning of Sir Anthony Cooks Children,
instructed by their Father.

And as these things are incumbent on Parents, so it is the Childrens happiness
to have such Watches over them: having touched at the Just man's Integrity, the
Wise man adds this, His Children are blessed after him. It Is indeed a great
blessing to Children, to have Wise and Religious Parents; and when they sit at
the feet of such Gamaliels, they enjoy that Happiness the Queen of Sheba
pronounced on Solomon's Servants, 1 Kings 10.8.
Happy are thy Men, happy are these thy Servants, that stand continually before
thee, and hear thy Wisdom. And as a grateful acknowledgement of their
Obligations, they ought to give their Parents all Duty, Honor and Reverence.
It Is the Apostles exhortation, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, this is the
first commandment with Promise: And what is that? That thy days may be long in
the Land. And this promise were sufficient if all duty were superseded. And the
wise man exhorts us, Honor thy Father that begat thee, and despise not thy
Mother when old: And indeed the Book of Proverbs is full of ghostly advice to
Children; and it is but common gratitude, to be thankful to them who gave them
being, and by Instruction in Religion and Learning they give them also
well-being; with what ardent affection and ambition ought they to answer the
expectations of their Parents, consonant to the Apostles exhortation; Col. 3.20.
Children obey your Parents in all things, for this is well pleasing to God.

But we will pass on to prosecute our further discourse; only let us hear
Plato's opinion about the Government of Youth: In the Foundation of Youth, says
he, well ordered and taught, consists the flourishing of a Commonwealth. And
indeed he is altogether in the right; for the Education and Government of
Youth, is like the preparing and polishing Stones and Utensils for some
magnificent Fabric: And here we could wish every Family a little Seminary of
Religion and Learning, for the service of Church and State; as our Universities
are for the accomplishment of Persons for Sacred and Civil Offices: And we find
Plutarch of the same Judgment; and tells us, that Education and Learning reform
the Life and Manners, and afford the best advice for the Government of a
Commonwealth: And we thence infer, that a reformed Life and Manners, not only
produce an Excellent Economy and Institution of Government, but are the most
serviceable and adventitious helps to preserve the Unity and Beauty of such
administrations, and infallibly annex Happiness and Prosperity to such a People.

And if good Government and Discipline were observed in Families, how much
would it conduce to public advantage? As in an Army, what glorious encounters
are they sit for, when the General understands his Interest and Station, and
all his Soldiers perfectly understand their Posts, all expert and acute in
Military undertakings. So in a State, when all are sit to rule, and all willing
to obey their Prince; Imperatoris faelicitas in subditorum faelicitate
consistat. Grotius. Lips. Polit.
whose happiness consists in the happiness of his People, as Grotius tells us;
and Lipsius calls it, Verum and legitimum Imperium: A true and lawful Empire so
governed. Now when the People are taught to be religious, Religion must needs
flourish; and when they are instructed in Arts and Sciences, Trades and
Commerce, it must needs conduce to their happiness, profit, honor and
greatness.

We all know, that those States thrived best, that were most addicted to the
service of their Gods: Rome saw her best days when Religion flourisht there
under a Numa, Augustus, Titus, Constantine, Theodosius, and others: And Bodin
gives us the reasons of it; Ab ca enim subditorum fides in Principes obedientia
erga Majestratus pietas in Parents, charitas in singulos, and justititia in
omnes pendet de Rebus. Lib. 7.
From hence, says he, they became Loyal to their Prince, Obedient to the
Magistrate, Dutiful to Parents, Charitable to all, with an equal distribution
of Justice: and by these administrations they exceeded other Nations, as
Martial sets them out.

Terrarum Dea, gentiumque Roma,
Cui par est nihil, and nihil secundum.
Rome of all Nations is the Lady Queen,
To which the like, or second, is not seen.
Hac enim sola Romana gens totam terrarum orbem sub^git. Bodin.
They exceeding other Nations in Piety, as one observes; by this they conquered
all the world besides. And St. Chrysostom tells us, that Princes without
learning and the fear of God, manage but lamely their greatest Affairs, and are
blind in discretion and knowledge: The Piety of an Agesilaus, brought him both
Honor and Success; the Devotion of a Numa and a Fabius, made them formidable
and glorious: And we have read of a Law of one of our Danish Kings, that at the
Assizes the Bishop was obliged to accompany the Judge, that the one might
countenance Gods Law, and the other Man's; in Imitation of Jehosaphat, who sent
the Levites with his Princes, 2 Chronicles. 17.6.
to teach in the Cities of Judah. We pass over the Piety of Charles the great,
who used to set his Crown on the Bible; of Edward the Sixth, and Queen
Elizabeth, who when the Bible was presented to her by the Citizens of London,
kissed it, and laid it to her Breasts: and the Examples of Princes are of great
force to promote Devotion in the People. Regis ad Exemplum, was a saying of
old, and all Ages have confirmed it.

Now when Religion is settled, it produces peace and a general happiness, which
produces peaceable Society, the Improvement of Arts and Sciences, Trade and
Commerce, and on these depend the happiness of a State. We pass over the sad
effects of War and Hostility, of Rapine and Bloodshed, and all those Evertores
horrifici, those Devastations which succeed it. How are Temples and Antiquities
razed to the ground, and Religion spuriated into Heresy and Schism; all which
cease, by reason the cause is taken away, and the State preserved from Foreign
Invasions and Civil Dissensions.

Here we may see how things are chained and linkt together, and how naturally
effects flow from their causes; and how Family-government, where the Father
governs his Children, and they again obey their Parents, bears so strict an
Analogy and semblance between a Prince and his People; and Family-government, a
little Model and pattern of National Discipline, which was erected first from
Paternal Administrations: For 'till Nimrod's time, who Erected the first
Monarchy National, Noah and his Generations, as Paraeus tells us, Par familias
(...) (...) (...). Paraeus in Genesis
did rule gently by their Families.

But in Process of time the World growing exceeding Populous, tho the several
Families of the Earth did, and do retain their Economy, and first
Prescriptions for their particular Order and Decorum; they are since
Politically united, and a whole Land or Nation under an Uniformity of
Government, and as it were so many thousands of Families incorporated into one
Body, for a common Strength and Preservation. Here the Sagacity of Man under
the Divine Conduct is very visible, Vis unita f^^tim. Lord Bacon 's Esssays.
all Estates subscribe to Unity, as the Mother and Foundation of Concord and
Preservation; and by this Polity, not only Sacred and Civil Rights are
preserved, but settled and confirmed; and Nimrod was the first Prosecutor
hereof, and changed the Paternal Government into National Monarchy; and the
Genius of his aspiring Nature instructed him in this principle of Policy; which
very word is derived from the Greek (...), to Sell, whence (...), a City, and
metonymically taken to signify Commerce and Trade in a Society of men, which
did ensue, and was in the greatest measure augmented by National Government.
Now this Nimrod in Scripture is styled a mighty Hunter: Viribus ro^^stis, and
(...) discretus. Tostatus in loc.
And Tostatus speaks of him, being strong in Body, and Discreet in mind, by the
Engine of his Wit, and Art of Gratification, and by heaping good turns on
Injured Persons, did engage a multitude to his Party, Vnde dominandi Occasionem
na^ius, regn^m obtulit. Muscul. in loc.
by whose assistance he pursued men as a Hunter does Beasts: whereupon, says
Musculus, he obtained a Kingdom by his Valor and Victory, the rude and
barbarous People being reduced to Civil Government; Musculus, St. Chrysostom,
Cornelius a Lapide, Mercer and Rivet in Locum.
which Conquest by most Commentators is ascribed to the Vigor of his Body, and
Virtue of his Mind; surpassing others by his Humanity and Benignity, he got
together a Party, whereby he subdued his Opposites, and settled his Government.

But since it has been the general Policy of succeeding Ages, by Marriage and
Affinity to perpetuate that in their Families, which he only obtained by Craft
and Subtilty; witness the Royal Families of the World ever since, a Sovereignty
and Superiority having been generally successive; Moses, Joshua, Samuel, etc.
(except only when it pleased God to inspire and adapt some particular men for
the Government of his People in the Primitive times.) And thus Marriage has
not only Intailed Sovereignty on their Posterity, but also settled the common
Peace, Trade and Commerce of one Nation and State with another; has promoted
Alliances of common preservations, against the Enemies of Gods Church; and
whereby several Countries have enjoyed the Commodities and Manufactures of each
other, for a mutual good and advantage. Solomon Married Pharaoh's Daughter, and
settled a Trade and Commerce with the Egyptians. What reconciled the Chaldeans
to Cyrus but Marriage? what reconciled the Sabines to the Romans? Marriage;
they were Enemies and Friends both in one days time, Salubrem providentiam.
Seneca.
which Seneca styles an healing Providence. What reconciled Pompey and Caesar
after so much Fighting and Bloodshed, but Marriage? Which way did Alexander
reconcile and allye Asia to Europe, but by Marriage? And our Politic Henry the
Seventh Marrying the Lady Elizabeth, Heir of the House of York, ingrafted the
white Rose on the Red, and so put a Period to those Civil Dissentions which had
caused so much Bloodshed; and by Marrying of his two Daughters, entitled his
Heirs to the French Interest and Crown of Scotland: And in short, the Sovereign
Houses of Christendom being a Kin to each other by Marriage, the Peace of
Christendom and other parts have been preserved thereby; Firmissimum Imperii
munimentum, Tacitus an.
and Tacitus calls it the most strong Preservative of Empire.

And if these Obligations were but duly observed by Nations and Families, what
Halcion days would be found on Earth! this Contract of Mankind should be like
that Golden Chain which reaches from Earth to Heaven, preserving the mutual
coherence of the Elements, whereby all things are reciprocally tied together,
and make this lower World like the Imperial Heavens; where all the motions of
the comprehending Orbs, the several Const^^^tions, the various position of the
Stars and Planets produce a ravishing Chorus, and an Harmony truly beautiful:
And what peace and quiet too, as the Emanations of this sacred Friendship,
would be established! and what a series of Hacentia's, and pleasing
Contentations slow from it! 'twould lead us up to the via Lactea, and usher us
with Music to the presence of Divinity.

Having spoken something of the Illustrious Effects of Marriage, we proceed to
inquire what method we are to take to render it blessed, propitious and
satisfactory, which brings us to peruse the Prayer of Eliezer, for constituting
a Family; in which Government was first erected, and if still preserved, is the
best means to preserve National Discipline, which was derived from it.

GENESIS 24. v. 12. And he said, O Lord God of my Master Abraham, I pray thee send
me good speed this day, and show kindness unto my Master Abraham.

THe words contain a pathetical Prayer of Eliezer, Abraham's Servant, for a
good Wife for his Masters Son, I pray thee, etc. The Context and preceding
Verses give us an account of Abraham's direction, and Eliezer's entrance on this
design; here we find Abraham's Servant beginning with his Supplication to the
Lord God of his Master Abraham, for success in this undertaking. The
Explication being so obvious, we only take notice of four particulars.

1. His Solemn Address to God for success.

2. His Prayer is strengthened by this Expression, O Lord God of my Master
Abraham.

3. The Object and Design of his Prayer, to have good success this Day.

4. That particular kindness God would vouchsafe unto Abraham, in the
concession and gratification of his request, And show kindness unto my Master
Abraham.

And First of the First of these, viz.

1. His Solemn Address to God for Success; this is Eliezer's method, and as the
best way and means to accomplish his desires, is to address himself to God, who
is the Author and giver of every good thing: He, and He only can give success
to our Undertakings, or blast and disappoint our most resolved Designs and
Intentions: Prayer is a Duty which keeps the trade of Religion a going, and
it is our happiness that God puts it into our hearts to Pray; which is no other
than a religious Speech, directed to God after a due sort, concerning things
appertaining to his glory and our good; and it is the Key of Heaven, and
Conduit of Mercy, a Perfume and sweet Savor in Gods Nostrils, and the
Messenger of the Soul to the Throne of Grace.

Damascen tells, De Orth. Fid. lib.
that in Prayer the Will is filled with desire, and the desires flame and blaze
upwards to God; and though Prayer is an act of the Will, yet it has its
conception in the Heart, and is serviceable to the Soul, like the animal
Spirits to the Body.

It is, and has been the Method and Usage of Gods Servants in all Ages, to
Pray to God on all occasions. Genesis 13.4.
Thus Abraham for Ishmael, and when he removed his Family to Bethel and
Beersheba, he built an Altar, and Called on the Name of the Lord: And David
after he had settled the Ark, returned to bless his House, that is, to Pray for
his People: so good Nehemiah, First I Prayed unto the Lord, and then I spoke
unto the King: And it is the Apostles Exhortation, In all things, by Prayer and
Supplication, let your requests be made known unto God.

2. His Prayer is strengthened by this Expression, O Lord God of my Master
Abraham: It Is very Emphatical, and gives us to understand Gods great affections
to his eminent Servants, and the seed of the Faithful: And this place more
particularly refers to Gods promise to Abraham concerning Isaac, Genesis 19.17.
and it is very probable this was a great Topic with Eliezer, Isaac being the
Son of the Promise; and such forms of Invocation were very common in those
times: in Abraham's charge to his Servant, Verse 7.
he encourages him in his undertaking, by recounting Gods Promises to his Seed.

And we find often times in Gods appearance to his Servants, he is pleased to
express himself as remembering his Promises: when he appeared to Isaac, Genesis
26.24
I am the God of thy Father, fear not; and Jacob when afraid of Esau,
strengthened himself by this Invocation, Genesis 32.9.
O Lord God of my father Abraham, and God of my father Isaac, the Lord which
said unto me, I will deal well with thee. So Moses fearing the Egyptians would
not believe him, Exo. 4.5.
but God to confirm his Faith and the Israelites, was pleased to work Miracles;
That they may believe (says God) that the God of their Fathers, the God of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, has appeared unto thee.

3. The Object and Design of his Prayer, To have Good speed this day: Fac ut se
mihi ossert quod peto. Zenochius in Locum.
Good speed is an indefinite wish, and refers to several Objects; but here
particularly signifies, success in choosing a good Wife for his Masters Son;
and some render it, That he might obtain what he asked; others, That what he
desired might be prosperous and successeful. Prosperum fac mihi occursum.
Vatablus in Locum.
Both which are Synominous; and it is very aptly and significantly rendered, Good
speed; because the choosing and enjoying a good Wife is so essential a part of
a man's happiness: this prompted Abraham to that wonderful care in seeking out a
good Wife for his Son; Verse 3.
and nothing could be more satisfactory to Isaac, than the enjoyment of this
blessing: Jacobs seven years seemed but a few days, for the Love he bare unto
Rachel. And all Ages of the World have subscribed to this Doctrine.

4. That particular Kindness God would vouchsafe unto Abraham; Fac
misericordiam significat non alio jure fretum hoc audire, nisi qua Deus gratiam
suam Abramae pollitius fuerat.
and show Kindness unto my Master Abraham. We are here to enquire what kindness
the accomplishment hereof would be unto Abraham. And nothing can please better,
and be more acceptable to a Father, than to see his Son happy in a good Wife: A
noter on the place well expresses himself.

And a Father that has taken so much care and pains in the education and
bringing up of his Son, who is so dear to him; and to whom he has given so
good an Example, when his Son is well married, and his Father sees him
prosecuting those admirable Instructions he received from him; and with the
help of a good Wife, how does he esteem himself happy in his Sons happiness;
whose Wisdom and conduct may render even his Posterity happy! To which the Wise
man alludes, Pro. 24.23.
The Father of the Righteous shall greatly rejoice, and he that begets a
wise Child, shall have joy of him.

Having spoken something by way of Explication, we pass on to the Observations,
and each concluded with a short Inference.

Prayer is a great and Indispensable Duty. Observe. 1.


A Tribute we owe in recognition of the Divine Sovereignty; it is the Just
Prerogative God may expect from his Creatures: The other parts and pieces of
the Creation pursue the design of their beings; the Sacred Poet tells us, Psalm.
19.1.
The Heavens declare Gods Glory, the Sun rules the Day, and the Moon the Night;
the Elements observe their appointed Stations, the Earth is Lowermost, the Sea
keeps his bounds, the Air, Aethur, and Superaethur observe their Sphaerical
apartments; the Earth is our Habitation, the Beast of the Field our Food,
Vegetables afford both Medicine and Nourishment, and all things admirably
useful, and adapted for the service of man. Psalm. 19.3, 4.
There is no speech nor language, where their Voice is not heard: Their line is
gone throughout all the Earth, and their words to the end of the World. And are
wonderful Indiciums of Gods Glory and goodness in their serving man; and shall
he only degenerate and prove Anomalous and Skeptical? shall the best piece of
the Creation prove the worst, and unserviceable? The noblest beings show most
Beauty in their operations, and shall man that was created to admire the Wisdom
and goodness of his Maker, be silent, and do less than the dumb pieces of the
Creation? God forbid.

The all-wise God has communicated the sensible and eminent influences of his
mercy, goodness, and bounty, to the rational Nature of man; that so Body and
Soul jointly engaged, might produce an harmony of Praise and Thanksgiving to
the great Creator of the World: wherefore did God give him his Tongue, the
Organ of Speech, but to pray unto his Maker; and with David, O Lord open thou
my Lips, and my Mouth shall show forth thy Praise? God gave him his hands to
lift them up in prayer to him, Tendens ad sydera palmas.
and with David, that his Prayer might come before him as Incense, and the
lifting up his hands as the Evening Sacrifice.

So also the Inorganical parts are to be chiefly employed in our prayers to
God, Elevatio mentis ad Deum.
the Understanding, Will and Affections, without which prayer is insignificant;
it is only the spiritual and fervent prayer that avails, which is called
wrestling, Genesis 32.24. Oration essicax. Beza.
and pouring out of the Soul to God; and it is that which is our indispensible
Duty; all the faculties of the Soul must be engaged herein, to supplicate and
adore the great God, and intentionally with David; exciting all within us to
pray unto that God who gave us our Being, and to Praise him for all our Mercies
and Benefits: Affectus operi nomen imposuit. St. Ambros.
for it is the lively affections of the Soul in a Duty that gives it a Name, and
makes it successful: so Eliezer here prayed unto God for his Masters Son. And
prayer is our Duty, to show our dependence on God; In him we live, move, and
have our Being; our daily exigencies invite us to it.

Inf.
Let us therefore pray daily, for prayer is as useful to us, as our daily bread;
and we are encouraged hereto, for he fills the hungry with good things; and
exhorted to pray without ceasing: In all things let your Requests and
Supplications be made known to God.

That some forms of Invocation and phraseologies, are very prevalent. Observe. 2.


So Eliezer here, O Lord God of my Master Abraham; and this expression is used
to strengthen Eliezers Faith. And we may learn from hence; That upon particular
wants and occasions, we ought to use such Phraseologies, which are analogous to
Gods Promises, or referr to our wants: Thus Joshua, after Israel had sinned:
Josh. 7.8, 9
O Lord, what shall I say, when Israel turns their backs before their
Enemies? That was when they were pursued by the men of Ai; which implies his
earnest Expostulation with God to preserve his own People, and concludes with
this prevailing argument; And what will thou do unto thy great Name? The
Prophet Hosea exhorts the Israelites to renounce in these Expressions their
former Sins. Hos. 14.2, 3.
Take with you words, and turn to the Lord, and say unto him, Take away all
Iniquity, and receive us graciously; so will we render the calves of our Lips.
Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon Horses, neither will we say any
more to the work of our hands, ye are our Gods, for with thee the Fatherless
finds Mercy. So Elijah prayed unto God, 1 Kings 17.20.
Have thou also brought evil upon the Widow with whom I sojourn, by slaying
her Son? Which is as if he remembered God, who commanded him to go to that
Widow for succor, as we find in the beginning of that Chapter: And we read of
Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14.14.
when he went to Battle, he used this pathetical way of expressing himself to
God: Help us, O Lord our God, for we rest in thee, and in thy Name we go
against this Multitude: O Lord, thou art our God, let not man prevail against
thee: and so Jehoshaphat, when the Army of the Heathens were coming against
him, he prayed unto God. 2 Chronicles. 20.6, 7.
O Lord God of our Fathers, art thou not God in Heaven? and rulest not thou
over all the Kingdoms of the Heathen? and in thine hand is there not power and
might, so that none is able to withstand thee? Art thou not our God, who did
drive out the inhabitants of this Land before thy People Israel, and gave it
to the seed of Abraham thy Friend for ever?

Secondly, In our Thanskgiving and Exultation, we should admire and paraphrase
on Gods power, suitable to the Nature of our deliverance: such was the Song of
Moses, after the Children of Isreal's deliverance at the Red Sea, a
paraphrastical Triumph repeating the manner of their deliverance and Pharaohs
overthrow; what pious Airs and Encomiums was chanted out by the thankful
Israelites! And what was Deborahs Song, but the slaming Raptures of a rejoicing
Heart? And the twenty second of Samuel, is a continued thanksgiving of David to
God for his mercies; and the 105, and 106. Psalms, are a History of the
deliverance of Gods People, and David's thankfulness for Gods Mercies.

Inf.
Let us therefore remember the advice of the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5.18.
In every thing give thanks, for this is the Will of God in Jesus Christ
concerning you: And as we expect any blessings, we must pray for them; so also
to improve what we have with thankfulness is the only way to have more.

Observe. 3.
That we ought to pray for each other.

1. Here was good Eliezer praying for his Masters Son; and it is the Duty of
Christians to assist each other with their Prayers. The Apostle bids us make
Supplication for all Saints, and the Apostle prayed for those that had not seen
his Face in the Flesh; and how passionate was he for the prayers of of the
People! and conjures them, For Christ's sake, Coloss. 2.1.
and the love of the Spirit, that they should strive with him in their Prayers
to God for him. Tertullian calls it, Romans 15.30.
An holy conspiracy to besiege Heaven: this Conjunction in Prayer edifies the
whole Church, the Communion of Saints, and is of advantage to every member;
nay, even the wicked have a sense, and need of the Prayers of good men: so
Pharaoh told Moses, Entreat the Lord your God to turn away this death only:
That is, pray unto God for me; and the prayers of Saints are very acceptable:
God would not hear Job's Friends, Job 42.8.
but says God, My servant Job shall pray for you.

2. This praying for one another does not terminate in personal Obligations,
but comprehends praying for Christ's Church and People; for the Propagation of
his Gospel, that God would give him the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the
utmost part of the World for his Possession: and how pathetically did the Jews
in Captivity express their zeal for the welfare of Jerusalem! By the Rivers of
Babylon, Psalm. 137.
there we sat down, yea we wept when we remembered Zion; and so to the end! and
for Nations, it is St. Paul's exhortation, 1 Timothy 2.1.
That first of all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions and giving of thanks
be made for all men: For Kings and all that are in Authority, that we may lead
quiet and peaceable lives, in all godliness and honesty. Nay further, we are
commanded to pray for our Enemies, Mat. 5 44.
and Christ prayed for them that crucified him, Luke 23.34 Acts 7.60.
Father forgive them; and that Protomartyr St. Step^^^, prayed for them that
stoned him. And it is the noble and heroic design of a gracious Heart, to be
serviceable to Church and State, by prayer, either to deprecate Judgments, or
obtain Mercies.

1. To deprecate Judgments. How did Abraham intercede with God for Sodom! and
God was pleased to answer him, Genesis 9.32.
That if ten righteous were in it, he would not destroy it for tens sake! And
how Gracious was God to Jerusalem! And I sought for a man among them, Ezekiel
22.30.
that should make up the Hedge, and stand in the gap before me, for the Land,
that I should not destroy it, but I found none: It implies Gods great respect
for the righteous; which Solomon styles fundamentum seculi, an everlasting
Foundation: public Spirited Persons are like Pillars, to bear up Gods Wrath
from the place they live in.

2. To obtain Mercies; so Elijah prayed for Rain in the days of Ahab, and
obtained it, after three years Intermission; and so Moses that great Master in
Israel, after God had revealed his will to him, he cried unto God for the
Children of Israel, and could bid them Stand still and see the Salvation of
God; and we all know what a glorious Victory followed.

Inf.
Let us therefore upon the whole, Pray for each other, Gods Church and People,
that by the fervency and continuance of our Prayers, we may either stand in the
gap with Abraham, or prevail with Jacob; at least be found among the righteous,
that when Gods Judgments are in the earth, God may say unto us as he did to
Noah, Come thou and all thine house into the Ark, Genesis 7.1.
for thee have I seen righteous before me in this generation.

Observe. 4.
Prayer is the only way to obtain Mercies, or divert Judgments.

How great Privilege is it to be admitted into the Presence of some great
Monarch! but how much greater Prerogative has the devout Christian, that by
fervent Prayers, and ardent effusion of his Tears and Wishes, may freely
conferr with the King of Kings! this penetrates the Clouds and Spears, and
mounts us to the bosom of the great Benefactor; and a Charm that if rightly
performed, prevails on Omnipotency; Oration pura coelos penetrans vacua non
redibit. St. Austin.
this Dove sent to Heaven, often brings an Olive-leaf in his Mouth: This
fervent Prayer (says St. Austin) as it pierces Heaven, so it will not return
without effect. And not only our Duty, but our daily wants put us upon this
undertaking; we are helpless Creatures of our selves, and Prayer is our only
refuge; there is an admirable Economy in the Divine Wisdom, to bring man to
his Duty and Happiness; God tells us, Ezekiel. 36.37.
That for this he will be enquired of by the House of Israel, to do this for
them: And it is but highly rational to confess our dependence upon him that gave
us being. The Kingly Prophet elegantly describes Gods goodness to those that
call upon him in 145th Psalm, from the beginning to the the end: And certainly
it is no Mercy that is not worth seeking to God for; but when sought and
obtained, it makes the blessing the more acceptable, and obliges us to improve
it, with the greater thankfulness and sobriety: we can never lose any thing by
prayer, for we are never out of Gods reach to relieve us; if God please to
answer us, the Blessing is the more safe and sweet, and if denied we are the
more humble, and patient, and content that God should be Master of his own
bounty.

We have the Practice of Gods People recommended to our Imitation, and the
admirable effects of their Prayers recorded for our encouragement: here good
Eliezer prays unto God for good speed; he would not venture on it without
Petitioning the Lord God of his Master Abraham, and the good success he met
with, was the effect of Prayers. Abraham tells him God would send his Angel
before him, and prosper his way; which implies the strength of Abraham's Faith;
and his Servant, after he had prayed, V. 13, 14.
in the very next verses gives us a kind of Prophetic hint of what would come
to pass, and resigns himself up to the conduct of Providence; Behold I stand
here by the Well of Water; and so on: Non tentat Deum cujus instinctu ad hoc
motus fuerat. Junius in loc.
Junius observes, he did not tempt God, because God prompted him hereto; for
such manuductory passages of Providence are but Preliminary to success, and
antecede the effects of our Prayers: Signum quod statuit congruum fuisse, erat,
enim signa bonae uxoris and indolis affabilis, hospitalis and strenuae qualem
noverat placiturum and Isaaco and Abrahamo. St. Chrysostom. in loc.
And St. Chrysostom well observes, The sign, says he, which Eliezer pitched
upon was very agreeable; for those things, as affability and courtesy, are the
indications of a good Wife, and such as would please Isaac and Abraham also.

David alludes to such antecedent Providence: says God, I will instruct thee,
and teach thee in the way which thou shall go, and I will guide thee with mine
Eye; and such gracious dealings of God with his People are our great
encouragement, and the effects of Prayer's miraculous; James 5.17.
as if Elijah could shut and open Heaven at his pleasure. Jacobs Prayer turned
away the Indignation and Wrath of Esau, and his four hundred men: after Moses
had cried to the Lord for the Children of Israel, the Egyptians were drowned in
the Red Sea.

And after David had prayed unto his God, 1 Samuel 17.37.
That delivered him out of the paw of the Lion and the bear, he also delivered
him out of the hands of the Philistine: And when Elijah prays unto God, That
the meal shall not waste, nor the cruise of Oil fail, till the day that God
send Rain on Earth: And when Hezekiah prayed against Sennacherib for
reproaching the living God, the Lord was pleased to answer him, 2 King 19.
that he should not shoot one Arrow, nor come before the City with Shields or
Bucklers, but return as he came; and God smote a hundred fourscore and five
thousand Assyrians, and even Sennacherib himself slain by his two Sons: And let
but those three Servants of that God whom they trusted would deliver them, but
pray to him in the fiery Furnace; though the very heat slay even those that put
them in, yet a hair of their heads shall not be singed, nor shall their Coats
be changed, Dan. 2.
neither the smell of Fire pass on them.: Nay, even the Son of God shall bear
them Company and preserve them. And when Daniel is in the Den of Lions, God
answers his Prayers, and sends his Angel and shuts the Lions mouths, that they
could not hurt him. In fine, by Prayer the Moon has stood still, the Sun gone
backward, the Ravens have brought Food, the Heavens rained Manna, the Rocks
afforded Water, the Fire has given over Burning, the Lions have stopped their
Mouths, Fidelibus totus mundus divitiarum est. St. Austin de Civ. Dei.
and all Creatures shall muster up themselves to defend the Body of Christ;
whereupon says St. Austin, The Saints have all the World at their service: And
gives us the Reason, Domine quis tenet te? Lord, says he, who can hold thee?
who can fetter and restrain Omnipotency?

Nay, even Heathens and Turks have always had a great veneration for Prayer,
which is a reproach to Christians, to be outdone by them. Numa Pompilius
thought it sufficient for his safety, he could answer, At ego rem Divinam facio.
But I nm about the Service of my Gods: And 'twas the Heathen Custom, not to
venture upon business of moment without the Invocation of their Gods: And the
advice of Xenophon was Divine, That in Prosperity they should worship their
Gods, that when they had a more particular need of their assistance they might
with greater confidence approach them at their Altars, commending the success
to the Power and Providence of those Deities they served. Publius Scipio used
always to go to the Capitol before he went to the Senate, and so begin the
service of the Commonwealth with prayer, as Suetonius tells us Been ac
sapienter Majores instituerunt ut rerum agendaram ita dicendi initium a
praecationibus capere. Sueto. in vit. Caes.
: It was the Wisdom of those Governments to commence all their business with
the service of their Gods.

Let us Christians therefore, Inf.
that have the Son of God to intercede for us (he is the Angel standing before
the Throne with the Golden Censer in his hand, Rev. 8.3.
filled with the Odours of his Merits, Ipse solus est cujus gratia Deum habemus
propitium. Calvin.
to offer up with our prayers) be encouraged to come to the Throne of Grace, to
find Mercy and Grace to help in time of need: For he is able to save to the
uttermost all that come unto God by him. Let us come to God in all Conditions.
In our Adversity, God tells us, No good thing will he withhold from them that
diligently seek him: Prayer lists us in the service of the Almighty, and
inrolls us under the Divine Standard, and from whence we may expect the
favorable Protections of Providence.

And in our Prosperity, lest we be full and deny God, let us remember the
Corrective the Roman Emperors met with in the midst of their Triumph and
Glory; Look behind thee, Respice post te and hominem memento te. Suetonius.
and consider thou also art mortal, and subject to misery; for we know not to
what extremities we may be exposed. Let us therefore pray with David, Psalm.
71.12.
O Lord be not far from me, O God make haste for my help: And if we expect good
success in our Prayers, let us be always deeply affected with those things we
pray for. St. Matthew. 22.11.
It is said, The King came in to see the Guests; so in Prayer, the King of
Glory looks into the frame and disposition of our Hearts; let us therefore use
Prayer aright, that it prime our Souls, and preserve us in the Oil of Grace
from Wind and Weather.

Observe. 5.
Gods blessing and providing for Children, is a great blessing to Parents.

1. Jacob tells us, Children are the Gift of God; when he met his Brother he
told him, Genesis 32.5.
These are the Children God has graciously given me; and his great care and
affection to his Children, is a great Pattern to Parents: Now Children being
the same Flesh, and pieces of their Parents, their Affection to them must needs
be very great, and be highly solicitous to promote their welfare; as our
Saviors Parents at Jerusalem, did present him before the Lord for his
Blessing: And we cannot give it you in terminis, for Speech is lame, and words
cannot reach the sense of the thing signified; but most certainly when God is
pleased to answer the Prayers of Parents, and bless and provide for their
Children, it is a very great kindness and Mercy to Parents: We will give you
David's sense of this matter; when Gods Promise was made known to David: 2 Samuel
2.12.
And when thy days shall be fulfilled, and thou shall sleep with thy Fathers,
I will set up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy Bowels, and I
will establish his Kingdom: And we have David's acknowledgment in the following
verses, Who am I, O Lord God, V. 18, 19.
and what is my House, that thou have brought me hitherto! and this was yet a
small thing in thy sight, O Lord God, for thou have spoken also of thy Servants
House, for a great while to come, and is this the manner of man, O Lord God!
Nay in the 20. verse, he wants words to express his thankfulness; And what can
David say more unto thee? for thou, Lord God, know thy Servant: And when God
had placed Solomon upon the Throne, he breaks out into this Elogium, 1 Kings
1.48.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which has given me one to sit upon the
Throne this day, mine eyes even seeing it. Thus the admirable care Abraham took
for Isaac, and his great charge to Eliezer, is an assured Indication of his
great Love and Affection; and that it would please God to answer Eliezers
request, he uses this Expression; And show kindness unto my Master Abraham:
And how did the Heart of old Jacob revive, when he heard of Joseph's being
alive! how did he contemplate and adore the mysteries of Providence, That God
had so miraculously preserved and provided for him; and made him Governor over
all the Land of Egypt! and when he met him, how was he overwhelmed with Joy!
Genesis 46.30.
Now let me die, says he, since I have seen thy Face, and thou art yet alive.

2. As it is a great mercy to Parents to see their Children blessed and provided
for, so on the contrary, undutiful Children are a great trouble and grief to
their Parents. Solomon tells us, The Father of a Fool has no Joy; that is,
has a great deal of Trouble and Affliction: the words are a Meiosis, there is
more intended than expressed. How bitterly did David mourn, when Tamar was
ravished, Amnon killed, and Absalom caught by the Hair of his Head and slain!
And we meet with Augustus, that had foolish and wicked Children, wishing that
either he had lived single, Vtinam ut caelebs vixissem, aut orbus periissem.
or dyed Childless. It Is sad indeed to bring forth Children to the Murderer,
the Devil: and how miserably does the Mother in Plutarch warble out her
mournful ditty; Quo pueri estis profecti! Poor Souls, what is become of you!

Inf.
Let Parents therefore carefully instruct their Children, and be thankful for
the Blessings God bestows on them; and let Children be dutiful to their
Parents, and let both observe David's experience he found of both: Psalm. 37.25
I have not seen the Righteous forsaken, nor his Seed begging Bread.

Observe. 6. and last.
How happy are the Saints, that upon all occasions, they may pray to God to
sanctify mercies!

It is said of the Cherubims, that there were hands under their wings; to
signify, that where there is that ^ight of Knowledge, there should be hands to
put that light into practice: And our Savior tells us, If ye know these
things, Joh. 13.3.
happy are ye if ye do them; so that Happiness (...) pronounced of practice,
and not speculation; and here consists the Saints Happiness, that they improve
their knowledge by prayer and walking with God: And by This the Wise man tells
us, they ^btain favor of the Lord; that is, ^s Mercer glosseth, Id vult quod a
Domino impetrat. Mercer in locum. Matthew. 7.7.
They have as it were what they please of God, and are sure of Gods favor and
protection in all cases, and the promises of God on their side. Ask and it
shall be given you, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall ^e opened unto
you; and nothing can ^estrain Omnipotency but Unbe^ief.

Now, it is as true in Divinity as (...) Philosophy, That Knowledge and Power is
to no effect, unless ^t be produced into Act; for the end of Knowledge is
Action; Frustra est potentia quae nunquam producitur in actum. Arist. Eth.
as if Arts and Sciences: And shall their Votaries improve themselves by all
the advantages and benefits of Action; nay, an Heathen affirm, That felicity
consists not in the Theory, but in the practice of moral Virtues; and tell
the world, that the naked knowledge without the practice of Virtue, is like
those that ask advice of the Physician about bodily distempers, but will no^
suffer any remedy to be administered? And shall the Servants o^ God be satisfied
with the Ideas o^ Truth floating in their Brains, without an influence on the
Heart and Life? No, the devout Christian labors with as much more earnestness,
as his End and Reward is above others; he does not satisfy himself with
Speculation or Ceremony, bare observance will no^ please him; he is altogether
for reality and performance, and ha^ a deeper insight into Divine mysteries
than other men: he wel^ knows, that it is not those tha^ know only, James 1.21.
but those that do the will of God, who shall enter into the Kingdom of his
Father, as Christ tells us.

Most admirable is the advice of Eliphaz to Job: Job 5. ult.
A wise man labors to know the goodness of every thing; and here lies the
happiness of the Saints above other People, even in Creature-enjoyments, that
by Prayer both Mercies and Afflictions are sanctified to them; others in their
enjoyments suck in the S^ing as well as the Honey, it is the good Christian only
that feeds on clean and polite Pleasure: others are misled into corrupt
apprehensions and presumptions of things, the Saints only preserve their
Intellectuals untainted; others in the midst of their abundance prostitute
their Affections, due only to God, to a corruptible Creature; the Saints only
improve their comforts and enjoyments to Gods glory, as they are the emanations
of his bounty, and make the Creatures serviceable to illustrate and set forward
the accumulated glory of their Creator: others take up their rest, and place
their Summum Bonum in the enjoyments of this world, and esteem it their only
Joy when their Oil and Wine increases: there is such Corruption in their
Nature, and Sophistry in the Creature, that from the greatness of their wealth,
they conclude they have much laid up for many years, Luke 12.19.
they may take their ease, eat, drink and be merry; Psalm. 49.11.
and the Psalmist tells us, Their inward thought is, that their Houses shall
endure for ever, and their dwelling places to all generations; and even Deifie
themselves in the reflection of their own grandeur. Psalm 49.14.
Alas! they are asleep in their Tent of Epicurism and Sensuality, and little
think that a day of visitation and recompense for sin is at hand; and on a
sudden mortality overtakes them, as David tells us, Like sheep they are laid
in the grave, death shall feed on them, and the upright shall have dominion
over them in the morning, and their beauty shall consume in the grave from
their dwelling. Then is their mistaken happiness come to a final period, and
their misery commenced ETERNAL; then their Cuts and Complements will appear
nothing else but affected Vanities, their Pride and Luxury, their Swaggering
and their Swearing, their Formula's of Complaisance and Courtship shall then be
pronounced but glittering Abominations: Then Apostles and Saints shall shine in
Glory, when the persecuting Nero's of the World shall be thrown to Hell: And at
last be forced to confess, We Fools counted their Life madness, and their end
to have been without Honor: How are they now reckoned amongst the Saints, and
have their Portion with the Almighty!

But the Devour Christian has Oculus in metam, his eye on the Mark, and steers
all his actions by the Compass of Gods Wo^d; he uses the Creatures with a
critical frui^ion, and as helps only, not Remora's in his passage to the New
Jerusalem; and by Prayer endeavors to reduce the Creature to it is primitive
goodness, that so the Curse being subducted, he may enjoy them with a blessing;
as the Apostle tells us, Every Creature of God is good, being sanctified by the
Word of God and prayer: By which the Creature is sanctified these three ways.

1. In obtaining Mercies: We ought to seek to God, as Eliezer did; and so the
Apostle exhorts us: In all things with Prayer and Supplication, let your
requests be made known to God: And we have the example of Christ and his
Apostles; and God expects that we should acknowledge his Dominion and Power
over second Agents.

2. Prayer sanctifies the Enjoyment and use of them. Solomon tells us, To
re^^ice in our labor is the Gift of God: pleasure is in it self lawful, but
corrupt Nature is apt to make us Love pleasure more than God, therefore we
ought to pray against its prevalency: And our Tables too often are turned into
a Snare; we must pray therefore to use the Creature with that temperance and
sobriety, as may raise us nearer to God in contemplation of the Divine
Providence, and care over us, and as Evidences of Gods Love toward us, without
which worldly abundance may prove but a deceitful argument of Gods favor; and
sometimes Afflictions have proved the dissembled favors of Affection.

3. Prayer sanctifies the Creature, in the R^membrance and Recognit^on of Gods
Mercies in them, and with Thankfulness to improve those Dispensations of Grace
and Favor: Thus did the Holy Psalmist. Psalm. 23.5, 6.
Thou preparest a Table for me in the presence of mine Enemies, thou anointest
my Head with Oil, my cup runs over: Surely goodness and mercy shall follow
me all the days of my Life, and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.

FINIS.
Books lately printed for John Salusbury at the Atlas in Cornhill near the
Royal Exchange.
OEconomica Sacra: Or, a Paraenetical Discourse of Marriage; together with some
particular Remarks on the Marriage of Isaac and Rebecka.

Iter ad Astra: Or, The Portrayture of a Suffering Christian; with an
Introduction of Man's Creation. By the same Author.

Of Contentment, Patience and Resignation to the Will of God: In several
Sermons. By Isaac Barrow, D. D. Never before Printed.

Vnum Necessarium: Or, Christ's Justification of Mary's Choice, and of his
Servants wrongfully Accused: Containing a Resolution of many weighty Cases of
Conscience. Viz. Indifferent Things, Obedience to the Higher Powers, etc. With
some Reflections on Popery, and a brief Account of the many Cruelties committed
by the Papists. By Richard Baxter.

A Second Volume of Discourses: By Hezekiah Burton, D. D. late Rector of Barns
near London, and Prebendary of Norwich.

The true Prophecies or Prognostications of Michael Nostradamus, Physician to
Henr 2. Francis 2. and Charles 9. Kings of France, and one of the best
Astronomers that ever were. A Work full of Curiosity and Learning. Translated
and Commented by Theophilus de Garenci^res, Doctor in Physic Colleg. Land.

The Fifteen Comforts of Rash and Inconsiderate Marriage, or Animadversions
upon the Miscarriages of a Wedded Estate: With the Additions of three Comforts
more.

The Secret History of the most Renowned Queen Elizabeth and the Earl of Essex.
By a Person of Quality.

The Laws and Acts of Parliament made by King James I. and his Royal
Successors, Kings of Scotland. In Folio.


