the hand of god, an allusion to Daniel 5:1-31 Mean Tekel

BEING An ASTROLOGICAL JUDGMENT On the Great and Wonderful Year 1688.

Deduced from the true and Genuine Principles of that Art: Showing the
Approaching Catastrophe of Popery in ENGLAND, etc.

Thou shall not make unto thee any Graven Image.

Thou shall not bow down thy self to them, Exodus xx. v. 4, 5.

They Lavish Gold out of the bag, and weigh Silver in the balance, and hire a
Goldsmith, and he makes it a God: they fall down, yea they worship.

They bear him upon the Shoulder; they carry him, and set him in his place,
Isai. 46. v. 6, 7.

And Jehosaphat said, is there not here a Prophet of the Lord, that we may
inquire of him.

And the King said, there is yet one man, by whom we may inquire, but I hate
him; for he does not prophecy good concerning me, but evil, 1 Kings 22. v. 7, 8.

London Printed by H. H. for the use of J. Gadbury.

(...) Haters of Popery, by what Names or Titles soever dignified or
distinguished.
THus 'twas of old, then Israel felt the rod,
When they obeyed their Kings, and not their God;
When they went Whoreing after other Loves,
To worship Idols in new planted Groves,
They made their Gods of Silver, Wood and Stone,
And how'd and Worship them when they had done.
And to complete their sins in every way,
They made 'em things called Priest, Priest did I say,
A Crew Villians more than they.
Hence sprung that Romish Crew, first spawned in Hell,
Who now in vice their Pedagogues excel;
Their Church Consists of vicious Popes, the Rest
Are Whoreing Nuns, and bawdy Bugg'ring Priests.
A Noble Church! dawh'd with religious Paint,
Each Priest's a Stallion, every Rogue's a Saint.
Come you that Loath this Brood, this mudring Crew
Your Predecessors well their mercys knew.
Take courage now, and be both bold and wise;
Stand for your Laws, Religion, Liberties,
You have the odds, the Law is still your own,
They Are but your Traitors, therefore pull 'em down.
They struck with fear, seek to destroy your Laws
They Are raving mad, you see they fix their paws,
Because from them they fear their satal fall,
And by them Laws, they know you will hang 'em all.
Then keep your Laws, the Penal, and the Rest,
And give your Lives up, ere you give tee Test.
And thou great Church of England hold thy own,
Force you they may, otherwise give up non^e,
Robbers and Thieves must count for what they 've done*
Let all thy mighty pilliars now appear,
Zealous and brave, void both of hate and fear.
That Popish Fops may grin, lie, cheat and whine;
And curse their Faith; while all admire thine.
And thou Brave Oxford, Cambridg, and the Rest,
Great Hough and Fairfax, that durst heard the Beast,
Let all the Just with thanks record their name
On standing Pillas of immortal fame.
Let God arise, and his Enemies peri^^. J U.

JUDICIUM ASTROLOGICUM Pro Anno. 1688.
THE first three Months of the Year are always considered from the positions of
the Suns entrance into the Tropical sign Capricorn, which was [from the
Caroline Tables] in 1687. on the eleventh of December, at 2 hours 24 minutes P.
M. at which time three degrees of Aquary was on the M. C. and 7 degrees of
Gemini on the Ascendent: Saturn is in 23 degree of Libra, in the sixth House:
Mars in 26 degree of Pisces, in the eleventh, and Jupiter in conjunction with
the Sun, in the eighth, in Capricorn his fall; Cumbust and Occidental, and
Venus in the sixth in Scorpio her detriment. So that the two Fortunes are in a
poor week condition, and none of the seven Angular but the Moon. At the
Preventional full Moon all the Plannets were under the Earth, except Mars and
the Moon, and they in a double Square from the tenth and seventh Houses; and
the Sun likewise in Square to Mars. At the Postventional New Moon, the Sun is
in the tenth, and Mars in Aries in the Ascendent, in Square to Jupiter and
Mercury. And now let us examine what will be the effects of these positions.

At the Ingress and the full Moon, the Planets are generally under the Earth,
and in obscure Houses, which shows close Consults, Councils and Cabals in
diverse places and parts of Europe, and that the principal part of this Quarter
will be spent in debates, and affairs of that nature. The things in debate are
two, and those are Religion and Dominion, or rather a power to impose the
former upon mankind, the better to introduce some other projects. And this is
showed by the position of the Sun in conjunction with Jupiter, and he in
Reception with Mars, Jupiter (you must observe) always personates the Clergy
of Nations, and they you know generally love to be concerned in Government, and
accordingly he is here got under the Suns protection, who is the real Patron of
Government and Rule: and Mars is to be his Hector to manage the affair by
force, if no other way will do. But if Bonatus says true, They will be cruelly
disappointed; for he says, the Sun in the eighth House significat depressionem
divitum and magna^um seu Mobilium, etc. and in another place speaking of Mars
in Pisces, he says, Mortem Magnatum and Divitum signficat. So that between
depression and death they are like to lose their long looked for, and wished for
desire, to the great grief of Mother Church and her Babes. But yet to make it
more clear that the thing is Religion, pray observe, that Saturn, who is Lord
of the ninth and tenth Houses, has been lately in Sextile with the Sun; and
Mercury the little foot-post among the Stars, is in the ninth House Retrograde,
and his first application is to the bodies of Jupiter and the Sun: from whence
it is more than probable, that the design is so.

If we consider, that immediately after the Ingress, the Sun, Jupiter and
Mercury meet in the beginning of Capricorn, and this in the eighth House, about
which time we may conclude, that there was some considerable thing taken into
consideration, that is fit and serviceable for the present Juncture of affairs:
but while it is under consideration, the advantage propounded is spoiled. For
Mars comes up presently after to the Square of Mercury and Jupiter, and the Sun
shortly after to the Square of saturn, which divides their Councils, and
destroys the design; so that when Mars comes to the Opposition of saturn in the
end of January, or thereabouts, you may hear of Favorites turned out, and new
ones entertained. Fresh Dragooning in France, or something like it, new
attempts in England, to wheedle the people to choose a Parliament, to
destroytheir Laws and Religion. But under the affects of that Opposition of
Saturn and Mars, will be laid the project or design of some cursed attempt, to
be performed about June following, for that opposition is celebrated upon a New
Moon, from active parts of Heaven, attended by bad Aspects, and the Sun and
Moon at the same time in Opposition to the places of the last great triple
Conjunction in Leo. And Bonatus tells us, that Mars joined to Saturn by
opposition, is of a pernicious consequence. Insurgent enim in eos ex guerris,
and nitentur contra eos; and again he says, Mars in Ariete significat victorium
in bello civibus civitatum illarum: and habit atoribus illarum tregionum super
inimicos eorum, qui venerint de aliis partibus ad illas ceusa nocendi eis. That
Mars in Aries signifies victory to the Citiziens and Inhabitants of those
Cities and Countries under that sign (I suppose he means if they have occasion
to fight) and that they shall put to flight all those that come to offer them
either Violence or injury. And to say the truth I do believe that Opposition
with some other Positions and Configurations, will be the occasion of such
differences, that will come both to blows and blood, in what part of the world
I shall leave to time to show: only this I will say, those Cities and Countries
under Aries and Libr^ will feel the smart of it.

The effects of this Querter will consist more of Consults, than Action, and
the Contrivances thereof will be the work of the following Summer. And so I
come to consider the Vernal Ingress of the Sun, which is March the ninth at 4.
hours P. M. 1688. At the time mentioned of the Suns entrance into Aries, there
is 2. degrees of Gemini on the M. C. and 9. degrees of Virgo Ascending; Saturn
than in 23. degrees of Libra; Jupiter in 22. degrees of Capricorn; Mars in 24.
degrees of Taurus, among the Pleiades; Venus in 18. degrees of Aquary; the Moon
in 11. degrees of Scorpio; and Mercury in 12 degrees of Aries. The first and
the principal think remarkable in this figure, is the Square of Jupiter and
Saturn from Cardinals signs: and this of it self will bear the general sway in
the effects of the three following Months, and ought to be considered two
several ways. First from the Aspect, and secondly their Position. As to the
Aspect: it never gives any thing, that is either sudden or very violent; but it
stirs up differences and Societies, gives Treacheries and Villainies, with the
discovery thereof; gives Nations and Kingdoms suspicions of their Governors.
And this sometimes not without a cause; but it always begets Troubles,
Animosities, Differences, and the like, from whence proceeds greater mischiefs,
which certainly show themselves by some great Irruption in the State, or
alteration in the Government by the death of the then King, Prince, etc. And
this the more certain if there be three Squares of Saturn and Jupiter, as there
are now, and be sure there effects fall always in those Countries subject to
the Signs they are in, or their Quadrangles; but when they happen to be in
Cardinal Signs (as they are now) then is their Effects the more famous and
remarkable. And for the truth of this be pleased to consider the preceding
Presidents of this kind, before the cursed Popish plot in 1678. there was a
single Square of the two Superiors from Gemini and Pisces, here London and
England also suffered sufficiently by that damned design of the Papists, and
those Villains their Accomplices. In 1668. there was a single Square from
Aquary and Taurus, this did not at all concern England, neither was that then
disturbed. In the years 1657. and 1658. there was a triple Square of Saturn and
Jupiter, from Libra and Capricorn, and satura then opposite to the Horoscope of
England At that time there was murmurings and plottings against the then
Oppressors, which at last was concluded with Olivers Death, and a general
mutation in the Government, with diverse others Changes and Alterations, as
those that then lived, can well remember. Likewise when Oliver turned out the
long Parliament, and took the Government on him, it was just after an
Opposition of those two Superiors. In the year 1647. and 1648. there was then
also a triple Spuare of Saturn and Jupiter from Geminy and Virgo; What plotting
contrivances there was then against the Government, let the affairs of Wales,
Lancashire and Colchester inform you, which cost many thousand men their lives,
and last of all the King lost his head. In the year 1637. and 1638. there was a
triple Square of the two Superiors from Libra and Capriocorn, and Scorpio and
Aquary. What murmurings there then was among the People of all sorts, for their
Oppressions they then labored under, let History, inform you, which was at
last followed with a War, etc. I could go further in these Historical passages;
but I think these five Examples are sufficient to prove, that a triple Square
of Saturn and Jupiter from Cardinal Signs does certainly make an Irruption in
the Government of England, and generally turn up the heels of it, especially
when it stands tottering as at this time; and the first of them happens in
March 1688, the second in July, in the same year, and the third the January
following, which by the Grace of God will in time have their Effects also.

Secondly, as to their position, we find the one in the third House, and the
other in the fifth, and nearly in paralld, without any Configuration or Aspect
to any of the other Stars, and both under the Earth, which shows as if there
were some designs in hand, that the Managers are either afraid or ashamed to
have known; that they are few in number is plain from their position sine
Configurationibus, and that they are very private from their being under the
Earth in succedent Houses. In short, the position and the Aspect considered
with other things, does certainly presage some villainous contrivance by the
Papists, which will be the ground of their Ruin, and when their turn is come,
I hope the Protestants will not forget to hang them for all their kindness and
good nature to us. And now if we consider Mars, who is the other Malefick, we
shall find him in Taurus in the 24. degree thereof, and in Trine to Jupiter in
the fifth, the House of Children, Venus in Aquary in the sixth, and the Moon in
the third house cadent in Scorpio, that Villainous Treacherous, Cheating,
Perfidious, Truce-breaking, wHoreing-sign. And the first Aspect the Moon makes
in the Zodiac, is the Square of Venus, then to the Trine of Jupiter, and
lastly to the Opposition of Mars, and all these from that Pious sign Scorpio.
Hence I judge that there is some bawdy project on foot, that must be managed by
such people as are described by the Moon in Scorpio. And this is either about
buying, selling, or procuring a Child or Children for some pious use. Perhaps
it may be nothing else but the taking care of Father Peter's his Child that he
got on Mrs. Betty at the Bath last Summer; and that I may do you all the
service I can, I will here describe what manner of made persons they are that
are to be concerned in this bawdy project. And they are a sort of scandalous,
impudent, mercenary people, that will sell or ruin their own Souls, to serve
the cause they are dipped in, of a fat corpulent Body, not very tall, perhaps but
short; for they are like the Moon in Scorpio, which may give both, but always
fat or inclined to it. For a Man Gadbury the Popes Astrologer is exactly
described both for body and mind, and for a Woman Mrs. Cellier Midwife to the
Popish plot, who does not come an Inch behind him, both for reputation and
honesty.

But besides this, there may be other designs in hand suitable to this
position* and that is some Embassy, or foreign Message, to be negotiated a few
weeks after the Ingress, about a weighty affair now in hand, and since we find
Jupiter, Venus and Mars to be concerned in it, the business may be about money,
Councils and Soldiers. And the reason that induces me to believe it to be
beyond the Seas, is because the Moon is in the third, the House of Journeys,
Jupiter in the fifth, the House of Embassies and Ambassadors, and Mars in the
ninth, the House of Long-Journeys and Voyages by Sea: and that it is about
Soldiers and armed men, because of the Moon and Mars in violent and pernicious
parts of Heaven. But if you consider Mercury swift in motion, in his Oriental
Occidentakity, and separated from the Sun (who is in exact Sextile to the
tenth) and next applys to the opposition of Saturn and Square of Jupiter in the
Zodiac, and to the Sextile of Jupiter in Mundo, all from Aries, the Ascendent
of England. So you will see a fine Issue of these things a few days after the
Ingress, whether it will be Discoveries of Treachery with loss of Honor and
Courtfavour, or Impeachments, or both, I will not take upon me to determine; but
the time you may expect it, will be in April and June. Perhaps when Thieves
differ there may be some work for the Hangman.

But one thing more I shall observe from this Ingress, and that is, when Saturn
and Jupiter make their second Square, which is in July. Then the Sun and Mars
are in Leo, near the place of the last great Conjunction, and they both keep
within ways, during their passage through that sign; why may not the Turk again
feel the force of his Enemies Army, or Italy receive some disturbance from a
neighboring Invader?

In short, the figure of the Ingress does not promise any great Action in
public, that is generous and brave; but abundance of deceit, wheedle,
Tricking, and such kind of base underhanddealing, wrought in the dark, as the
Popish Faction usually do. And now if the Popish Juggler in Brick-Court
pleases to call this in question, that I do this year, I would advise him to
leave off his Cant, and tell his Friends the truth if he is able, before it is
too late, that they may provide for themselves. And so I come to consider the
Autumnal Ingress, and that is, when the Sun enters the first scruple of Libra,
which is this year, September the twelfth at 30 minutes; past six of the clock
in the morning.

In this figure we find Cardinal signs possess the four Angles, which,
according to some learned Coxcombs in our profession, is a mighty thing; but
for my part I know no reason for it, nor they neither; but only some Bouncing
Huffs will impose, and find easy People to believe them. Any signs on the
Angles with Planets in them, are great positions, but cardinal signs there
without Planets, signify little; but si populus vult decipi, etc. but in this
Figure we have three Planets Angular, and yet they signify very little to the
advantage of the position in general. For Jupiter is in his fall in opposition
to the Angle of dignity and grandeur, and in Square to Saturn, and Saturn is in
Lihra his Exaltation, applying to the Mundane parallel of the Sun, and in the
Ascendent also* of which thus speaks Bonatus, Saturnus in Ascendente,
significat maerorem multorum hominum, that it shows much grief and sorrow to
many men. And if other positions and Aspects say true, it is more than probable
too. And he says the same also of the position of Mars in the twelfth, which
must be aggravated and increased by his being Combust, Significat maeorem and
tristitiam venturam: and I judge, he might also have said, Causa Criminum and
Carceris. for Mars in the twelfth house afflicting the Sun, gives sorrow, loss,
imprisonment, and diverse other Calamities of that kind, and this to such
persons as are signified by the sun and Mars.

But what means the sun in the twelfth, within six degrees of the Body of Mars,
and not far from the body of Saturn, and this in Libra his fall? this is a
position of pernicious consequence, of which hear what Bonatus says: Significat
diminutionem atque depressionem divitum and Magnatum. Nobilium quoque and eorum
mortem: corunque dignitatum ablationem: and injurias eis illaturas ab
ignobilibus. It signifys, says he, the fall and depression of great and noble
men, and their death also: Loss of their dignity, and affronts to them from the
common people: and indeed whether Bonatus says so or not, Common reason will
tell any man, that such effects must be the consequence of such a position, if
he understands Astrology: and as the Sun goes from the Body of Mars, so he
apply's to the Body of Saturn, who is Lord of the Eighth from the tenth; and
for that reason also seems to threaten death to great men in this Quarter, and
perhaps a King or Prince too. For the sun signifies Kings, etc. Besides, the
Moon, who is Lady of the tenth, the house of Kings, is hastening to the Body of
Mars and Zodiacal parallel of saturn, which exceedingly strengthens the
forementioned Aphorism and Judgment. I have seen a Nativity of a certain great
Man in Europe, whose fate seems to agree with this position, and I care not
much if I give you the particulars of his present impending directions and
other adjuncts that the common Astrologers know nothing of. He has Leo
Ascending, and the part of fortune giver of Life, which is directed to the
points and Aspects following, with the Arks of directions, and the time thereto
agreeing.

Par. of Fortune ad opposite. Saturn. dd Ark 57. 30 Which gives years 54 And
Months 10 Sol ad par. Satur. in mundo dd Ar. 58. 1 55 01 Par. Fortu. ad sesq.
quad. Mercu mdo. dc Ar. 58. 10 55 03 Jupit. ad par. rap. Saturn. mundo Ar. 59.
0 56 02 Par. fortu. ad par. mund. Jupit. dd Ar. 60. 44 57 08 Par. fortu. ad
Quard. Venus. mundo. dd Ar. 61. 46 58 07 Par. fortu. ad Biquin. Solis dd Ar.
61. 48 58 08 Par. fortu. ad par. Jupit. mundo. dc Ar. 62. 20 59 02 Par. fortu.
ad par. Rap. Martis mundo. Ar. 62. 54 59 08 Par. fortu. ad quadr. Satur. mundo.
dc Ar. 63. 30 60 04 Par. fortu. ad sexti. Martis mundo. dd Ar. 64. 33 61 05
Par. fortu. ad Trinu. Mercur. mnndo. dd Ar. 65. 46 62 08 Luna ad quad. Saturn.
mundo dd Ar. 67. 1 63 05

Thus you see here are 13 directions, and the Major part of them, begin to
operate in and about the Month of October this present year, and the Question
is, whether they have power to Kill or not? I answer, yes, they may kill, and
there is but one objection to hinder an Artist from being positive, and that is
the pars fortunae ad par. Jupiter mdo. dd. according to Ptolemey, Lib. 3. Cap.
14 and indeed it might be Judged, that the direction would have defeated all
the rest, with the assistance of the Square of Venus, had not Jupiter at the
same time been directed to the Parallel of Saturn in mundo motu Rapto, and
Venus by the same motion to the Square of Saturn in mundo: but perhaps some may
object, and say, that I mention some directions that are far distant in
degrees, and therefore they cannot signify much: to those I answer, let them
read and study well that Chapter in Ptolomey, de numero annorum Nati, and
perhaps they may understand it so far as to be satisfied. If they do not, it is
not my fault: But I will here speak something in particular as an Artist, but
it will be wholly different from the Common Astrological cant now in use.

The Part of fortune is Giver of Life, out of the Ecliptic, and in a violent
parallel in Square to the Moon, and in opposition to Mercury: and therefore
violently placed, Saturn the principal Planet directed in this figure is in
Sagitary, a sign of a Contrary nature to him, and there in Conjunction with the
Scorpions bears according to Longitude. In a mundane Square with Mars, and
under this qualification is the part of fortune directed to him as you have it
before, and this assisted by the Sun to the Mundane parallel of Saturn, pars
fortunae to the Sesquiquadrate of Mercury, and to the Mundane parallel of Mars
motu Rapto. With these Consider that at the Moment of the Revolution the Sun is
Eclipsed; in Conjunction with Saturn in the twelfth house, as in this Ingress
of the Sun into Libra he is with Mars, and all this in a Climacterical year.
But that which is most Remarkable, Saturn at the same time by direction
afflicts two of the prime Hylegiacals, and the only two assistants. And in the
Revolution he afflicts the Sun and Moon by his presence, he being within 4
degrees of them, the Radical part of fortune by parallel, the Midheaven by
opposition: and the Horosoope by Square. Now suppose the question was Asked,
Whether a man of 55 years of age, under such a Crowd of directions, could live
or not? why really I must needs say, if it was my own Brothers Case, I should
not think it was possible for him to Escape with his Life.

But to Conclude the Judgment of the whole year, and (...) quarter in
particular, I shall only add this, that there (...) various and many mutations
at hand, and I believe the Effusion of some Blood also.

Observations on the twelve Months.
JAnuary: at the beginning of this Month the Sun meets the Square of Saturn,
from which you may Expect some damnable intrigue of the Papists, newly
Contrived of which you will hear more toward the End of the Month. But besides
this, it shows the death of some old infirm statesman, or else he is turned
out and discarded. It Likewise gives ground for new differences between great
and eminent men, and that there shall arise quarrels between those that least
expected it, according to that of Bonatus, Erum vixa atque discordiae inter
divites and Magnatus.

But at the New Moon in January we find ^n opposition of Saturn and Mars from
the first and seventh Houses, and Mercury in the fourth, in Sqaare to them
both, the Effects of which particularly concern England. And it has two sorts
of Effects attend it: the first is, great differences among those of the
Government [as they call themselves] by which means their present affairs are
either neglected or put to a stand, and perhaps some Contrivance about a
foreign Army next May or June. The second is, turning out di^^^s of their
Creatures, either because they are not able or not willing (...) serve them any
further, so that in February you may Expect that the Eastwind will rise and
send in a new cast of Catterpillars.

Feburary: at the beginning of this Month we find the Sun in Trine to Saturn
which promises preferment to some old Cunning Hypocrite, that was formerly
Kicked out, is now received to Court again upon promise of obedience, you know
to what. This month is spent in preferments to those that are quallified with
virtues fit for it, and diverse new players are brought in about this time.

March: The first thing Considerable here is, the Sextile of the Sun and
Jupiter, and the Square of Saturn and Jupiter: now if you make your Compute
right between these two Aspects, it will make a very pleasant mixture fit for
the time it falls in, Sextile is great generous, and brave, but the Square is
all trick, Cheat, Hypocrisy, etc. So that I Conclude there will be about this
time some Clergymen prefered, men of Excellent parts and great proficients in
Atheism, Socinianism and Popery: For Example, suppose Sam. Parker of Oxford, or
Cartwright of Chester: but whether it is from their preferring these Scandalous
villains, or any other intricate cause I cannot say, but about this time the
Popish Councils in England go on but Heavily, some designs takes air to soon,
others are frustrate, and some of their own Creatures disappoint them in their
service, tho many of them are Rogues Enough. The Last Monch seemed to the
Countenance a Approaching war with some neighboring Nation, and much talk
there was something to be done by Sea and Land, but now all that noise is Laid
aside, and perhaps those preparations then vissibly may be employed to some
other Cursed design, which is not yet publicly known.

April. From the opposition of the Sun and Saturn at the End of the Last Month
you may Expect more changes and Turnings among those called Ministers of State,
and if I mistake not, there is ^^w some new regulation among the Ecclesiastical
Commissioners, and the Square of the Sun and Jupiter tells you for what, that
is, there are now new Orders and Commands sent down to Oxford, and those new
Gamesters are to Execute them; but this is Certain, there is now some new
villainy to be acted by the Papists at Oxford, by what Persons or what Authority
I will not be positive. Besides, this Square of the Sun and Jupiter does also
pretend some difference among the Clergy and Courtiers, or else some
Considerable Clergymen turned out of favor, perhaps both. Mars now in Gemini
puts the City of London in fear, and there is good ground for it too. The
Sextile of Jupiter and Venus speaks great things about Liberty, Religion, and
Privledges but believe it who pleases; but the double square of Jupiter and
Mercury gives some contentious Books and pamphlets about Religion, and the Suns
Eclipse threatnens Ireland.

May will not afford much action nor cause for it, but the affairs of this
Month depend on the Influence of the last, only the Trine of the Sun and
Jupiter gives some Loyal Fellow preferment in the Law, and it is to serve a
particular end too: there is also at this time great Endeavors used to prepare
the way for some precious Villainies to be acted in the next Month. The Trine of
the Sun and Saturn gives some old renegado preferment in the City of London:
alas poor old Fop: thou have lived to a fair age, turn -- at last.

June. This is a Month of Action with a Witness: the square of Saturn and Mars
will (you need not question) give villainy enough, now they use Violence to
prepare for Wheedling; for it is best Fishing in troubled Waters: new
Inventions trumpt up, Privileges and Laws invaded more than formerly; Popery
appears more barefaced than it used to do. Some Child topt upon a Lawful Heir
to cheat them out of their Right and Estate, God preserve the Kingdom of
England from Invasion. For about this time, I fear it in earnest, and keep the
Protestants there from being Dragroon'd. A Great Glergy-man or Lawyer dies, and
perhaps it may be judged by Poison. About the End of this Month or the
beginning of the next, a great Man in England will be indisposed and sick,
which will make many ready to Besh -- themselves, but I will comfort them, the
time is not yet come.

July, Is not less active than the preceding Month: the Square of the Sun and
Saturn will again put things into a strange and unusual Ferment, differences
between great men grows still higher and more violent and public: the Popish
shams will not do, neither will they pass upon the people as they expected; and
indeed they are too fulsom to be endured. With this the Opposition of Jupiter
and the sun takes place, and perhaps you will think it strange, that a great
man should quarrel with his Priests, or they with him. But some such things
will be, and also some Rogues lately taken in turned out again. These positions
considered with the Square of Saturn and Jupiter the second time, and Mars on
the place of the last great Conjunction, will put things into a very violent
posture and strange disorder. Those that are dipped in Treason, now begin to be
desperate, believing the Gallows to be their due if the design perish, as it
undoubtedly will let them try all the Tricks they can, and make use of all the
treasonable practices that Gadbury and the rest of the Villians can put them
upon: for they are almost come to their ne plus ultra.

August, The square of Saturn and Jupiter puts the whole faction upon Council,
and the Question is, what shall be done next. The Sun and Mars in Leo on the
place of the Conjunction seems to show their Councils incline to violence, and
blood, and rather because in Leo the Ascendent of Rome. But their Councils are
divided, and they cannot yet thoroughly agree; but on the 15th. day there is a
violent Lunation in Virgo, and a Conjunction of the Sun and Mars a few days
after in the same sign, in square to Gemini the Ascendent of London, if ever
the Papists put it upon a bloody desperate issue, it is now at this time. But I
think they will not, because I believe they have not courage and impudence
enough to do it, but I am sure they are willing. Sol and Mars conjuncti in
Virgin, significat Effusionem sanguinis, and the reason is because it is a
humane sign. Yet I am of the opinion that there will be diverse sorts of
Violence attend it, and blood may be as well shed by the Law, out of a
Malicious design, as if it were done publicly by the hand of Mars.

But I would now advise the People of England to provide themselves with Nets
of all sorts, for they will shortly have great occasion to use them. Your
Priests Nets ought to be made firm and good, and as strong as if you were to
Catch foxes and wild Boars in them, for they are a Crew of plaguey strong
Rogues, Especially those that C^^ry saints about with them, and for this sort
of Game let your Nets be spread at Charing Cross, London-Bridg, Gravesend,
Dover, and Portsmouth.

But the Judg-Nets need not be altogether so strong, such as you used to Catch
Owls and Buzards which will do well enough: and your best places to spread
them in are the Temple-stairs, Sergeants Inn-Gates, and Chancery Lane; You may
also try your Nets to Catch three or four Bishops, but in my opinion you had
better Angle for them, and your best Bait, is a Cardinals Cap, with which you
will be sure to Catch them: you must be also provided for some Mushroom Lords,
it was the way formerly to Catch them by their Honor, but now you must not
trust to that, for these never had either honor or honesty, and therefore your
Nets and Tackling must be good. And for the rest of the Crowd, whether they are
Knights, worthless Gentlemen, or any of the new Converted Tender conscienced
Catholics in gross, you may Catch them as they do Larks in Winter with a Low
bell supposing it calls them to Mass. And when you have taken your game, pray
be careful and kind to to George Jefferys and Sam. Parker, for they deserve
abundance of Respect.

September, The trine of the Sun and Jupiter at the End of the last month seems
to indicate preferment to some Lawyer or Clergymen or both: and the Trine of
Jupiter and Mars at the beginning of this Month gives advancement to a
Soldier, for some Eminent service by him done either by Sea or Land. And also
there seems to be a noise and report of some great body of men to meet about
matters of State, either in Parliament or some other great Councils, etc. Mars
keeping Company with the Sun so Long will give an unwholesome and an unhealthy
season. Perphaps some new kind of Fevers, or a Distemper of the Bowels may
ensue. The Conjunction of Mars and Mercury in Libra will Lay some knavish
design either for Cheating or Thieving. But their being so near the Sun Beams,
it may be discovered before they are aware, and they rewarded before they are
willing.

October, Here are no less than five of the seven Planets in Libra, and
suddenly after four of them in Scorpio. And all of them out of their dignities
[terms excepted] this can be no other than great and frequent meetings to
Consult upon some affairs that seem to require both Speed and Secrecy. The
Planets are Saturn, the Sun Venus and Mercury; here are People of all sorts
concerned in it: old Young, Noble, Ignoble, Men, Women, Lawyers, Statesmen,
etc. well let them go on with their design, and manage it as well and as wisely
as they and their Counselors can Contrive. But in the next place we find the
Sun in Conjunction with Saturn in about 27 degrees of Libra, this is an
untoward position, and I doubt will make some peoples hearts ache Saturn,
according to the Common notion in Astrology is strong in Libra, it being his
Exaltation, and the Sun is weak there, it being his fall. So that the Sun is
afflicted by the presence of Saturn, and I Expect the death of some great Man
for that reason, etc. the Eclipse of the Sun does also show the same, it being
in the beginning of Scorpio among violent stars, and his death will be of the
nature of Saturn, Mars, and Mercury, the Square of Jupiter and Mars from
Capricorn and Libra* shows some great Lawyer or Clergyman, or both, to be in
an ill Condition; when the heavens frown, then it goes hard. In short, I can
tell you that this will be a Month of more talk than trade, Farewell.

November, This Month begins with two remarkable Aspects, the first is the
sextile of the Sun and Jupiter; this shows that there is a ^ery great Lady in
Europe, that shall now Ascend to a very great degree and Honor and Grandeur,
and long may she enjoy it with peace and plen^y, it is the Essects of her
Mid-heaven to the body of the moon and sextile of Venus, the trine of Jupiter
not being far of: the second is the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars on the place
of the last Eclips; This shows the ruin and destruction of many men that a few
months ago did little think thereof, and these men of no small quality; it
falls in Scorpio the dignity of Mars and a fixed sign, and will be therefore
both violent and durable: Let them look to the Consequence thereof. These two
Aspects would take up a whole treatise to Explain them, but I am Confined to a
small space of Paper, and I need not tell you any more Effects of this Month,
for these very actions will drowned all other affairt. God keep all quiet at
home.

December Concludes this wonderful year, and indeed of the whole, the latter
part is most to be admired, because of the variety it produces; for we find
Venus on that Great Lady's Mid-heaven in sextile to Mars, and Jupiter on the
place of her Radical Moon in Conjunction with Venus, and about three Months
preceding, Jupiter Stationary of the degree [almost] of her Mid-heaven; greater
positions cannot be to concur so Exactly, and I doubt not but their Effects
will be as considerable, and glorious. Nay I might add yet another, and that is
on Jupiter on the place of her Radical Moon in sextile of Mars, who is in the
beginning of Sagitary, in Exact sextile to her Radical Mid-heaven, and this
near an Eminent fixed star of the Nature of Mars and Jupiter: and so I will
Conclude with that passage of the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 66. v. 10. Rejoice ye
with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that Love her: Rejoice for joy
with her, all ye that mourn for her.

(...) Synopsis of the whole (...) by way of CONCLUSION.
COme Painter: Take a prospect from this Hill,
And on a well-spread Canvas show thy skill.
Draw all in Colors as they shall appear,
And as they stand in merit place them there.
Draw, as the Heralds do, a spacious Field,
And as directed do, so let that be filled.
First, draw a Popish Army Brisk and Gay,
Fighting and beat, destroyed and run away.
Then draw a Hearse, and let it stand in view
The Mourners more, far more than they are in show,
Cursing their fate, their Stars, and in this fear
Show if thou can how these damned Sots prepare
To Run, or stay, and Sculk in holes alone,
By them this Motto, Gallows claim thy own.
Now to the Life, let thy brisk Pencil show,
Distinctly, who they are, and what is their due.
Now draw a Crowd of Priests prepared to run,
Like broken Merchants when their stocks are gone.
Some Howling out their Prayers, forget and say
Save us Saint Ketch, are all our Saints away?
Draw 'em in hurry, running to and fro,
Posting to Dover, Porismouth, Tyburn too.
Next draw a Crowd of Lord, this Label by
The gre^ a^desing is lost. Alas, they Cry
Who'd serve a Cause of such cursed destiny!
Now draw four Priests, show how they Rome adore,
And each man's Scarf, hang to be seen before.
Two brace of Bishops, fallen to despair,
Armed Cap a pe, but going God knows where.
Now show the Judges, and with them thy skill
That all who see it done, may say, it is well.
In Caps and Gowns, as they in order sat
Twixt Heaven and Earth, do thou 'em Elevate,
Their Learned Noddles can Dispense with that.
Now draw the Little Rogues, the Scoundril Crew,
Knights, Knaves, and Beggars, they must have their due
Gadbury, Butler, Ay and Roger too*
Amidst this Crowd, on a fit Spot of Land
To Crown the work, let a large Gallows stand.
All trembling by, Armed with their Guilt and fears
Kneel to t^ Image, and pour out their prayers.
And then dye by suffocation.


