NEBULO ANGLICANUS* Or, The First Part of the BLACK LIFE OF John Gadbury.

It is the Same JOHN GADBVRY That was in the Popish Plot to murder Charles II.
in the Year 1678.

It is the Same JOHN GADBURY That was accused of being in another Plot, to
dethrone and destroy King William, in the Year 1690.

It is the Same JOHN GADBURY That at this Time is so strait-lac'd in Conscience
that he cannot take the Oaths to their Present Majesty's.

Together with an Answer to a Late Pamphlet of His.

By J. PARTRIDGE.

I have fought with Beasts after the manner of Men, etc.

London: Printed, and are to be sold by the Booksellers of London and
Westminster, 1693.

Merlinus Verax.
a specic^ protestant.

Good People pity me, for I Am half mad,
Both Fool and Knave, and every thing that is bad:
Beget by Chance, my Stars with Loves soft arm
(No Priest concerned) gave Figure to the Sperm.
My Furious Form thus laid, her sullen Womb,
Preserved the wonder of the Age to come;
I Have lived in Vice and Tricking all my days,
And I Will be any thing to live in Ease;
I Will be a Heathen, Protestant, or Jew,
A Turk, a Papist, any thing that is new;
Let but the Priests of my Religion say it,
Go Swear, or Kill, I Will certainly obey it;
My Crimes (Pox take my Fate) I cannot disown,
There Is nothing vexes me, but that they are known;
Nay, many Vices more infect my Will;
But my Discretion keeps them seeret still;
Well, pray for me (Romes Saints) it is that I crave,
A poor fallen Brother, but all over Slave;
And in my good old Shape too, I Will appear,
Your Thimble Prophet, and your Bodkin Seer.
TO THE Most Exquisitly Accomplished IN Plotting, Tricking, AND INGRATITUDE, My
Honored Friend, Mr. John Thimble, of Brick-Court.
May it please Your Insolency,
OVT of a horrible respect to Your Ignorance, and want of Merit, as well as
Virtue and Honesty, I have made bold to borrow a Grain from your vast Treasury
of Impudence, to qualify and render me more acceptable to your superbious
Tutorship; and that by the help of your Frowns I may more carelessly approach
your Imperious Carcass, to kiss your Fist of Violence with this small bundle of
Gratitude, and with a great deal of Submission (for I know you expect
Surreverence;) I humbly desire you to remember how grateful you were to Mr.
Lilly, your Kind and Generous Master, that rescued you from the
Thimble-Dispensation, and taught you how to get meat to your Bread, that being
(you know) the First and Second Course, when you lived within less than a Mile
of Strand-Bridge; and after this and abundance more of Kindness, which you have
acknowledged in Print, the worst Word in your Budget was too good for him; and
you have abused him who was your Master, as much as you have done Me, that You
say was your Pupil. Hah Jack, Gratitude, Gratitude! Master and Pupil both
suffer alike, no Mercy in Brick Court. And so I take my Leave of my
Confoundedly Learned Pythagor-Ass, and both with Goad and Awl I shall attend
your Thimble and Bodkin, and am ready to serve You, while I am

J. P.

To the Impartial READER.
Friend, or no Friend,
I Have lately met with a Scandalous Invidious Pamphlet, sent into the World
without a Name (called Merlini Liberati Errata) as if the Author of it, either
for Scandalous Crimes, or other Villainies, were ashamed to let the World know
from whence it came, and also would very fain have the World believe it was
done by some Friend to J. G. one that is willing to defend him, that is either
unable, or ashamed to defend himself: But whosoever has had any Conversation
with Mr. John Thimble, will easily guess who spawned this spurious Brat, for it
is as like its Dad, as if it had been dug out of his A -- with a Pick-Axe:
In a word, it came from our Popish-Protestant Conjurer in Brick Court.

And therefore, good Reader, pardon the Entertainment I must here give you of
such a Fulsome and Nauseous Subject; and pray pity me that must endure the
Stench of raking into the Vicious Actions, and worse Conversation of a
Dunghill Fellow, that stinks in the Norstrils of all good and sober people: A
Fellow that is a Scandal to Humanity, a Satyr upon Virtue, a Hater of Truth, a
Promoter of Slavery, a Protestant in Masquerade, a Renegado in Religion; unkind
to those that have served him, unjust to his Wife, unchaste in his Conversation,
unfaithful to his Friend, treacherous to his Prince, and a Sworn Enemy to the
Religion and Liberties of England.

I know very well that Contention of this nature is never welcome in Print to
Mankind in general; nor had I took the pains of writing, or given you the
trouble of reading these Sheets of Controversy, had it not been to justify my
self from the Aspersions of my Adversary, who has bespattered me with
Falsehood; and to tell you the Truth, he is a Common Liar.

If you meet with any Rough Words, or Personal and Mechanical Reflections in
the Pages following, I desire you to read the mover with a charitable and
friendly Censure; for I do assure you there is not any thing of that nature but
what falls from my Pen unwillingly, and was forcibly drawn from me by his soul
and scurrilous Language; and in reference to Mechanical Reflections, as my Pen
never quarrelled till his threw down the Gantlet, so I never touched upon those
till he broke the Ice: So that you see he is still the Aggressor in all things
of this Nature.

As to his Unskillfulness in his Profession, his Self-contradiction, False and
Ignorant Assertions in Astrology, and Confused Rules and Aphorisms, stolen,
asserted, and applied, I do not think fit to publish them in such a Treatise as
this is, but in one where they shall remain not for a Year, but for an Age, and
to be read by such persons as will be competent Judges in the Matter, whether I
speak Truth, or not.

But I will here take the Liberty to remind him and the World of one thing,
since he has endeavored to make me appear so ignorant and silly a Fellow as
he does; and that is in his Epistle to my Vade Mecum; where he says, This
Learned Epitomy of Astrology, here presented unto thee (Worthy Reader) is a
most Exact and genuine Piece of Art, free from Impurity and Falsehood; Thou have
here the Oar of Science without the Dross; the True Wine without the Dregs; and
all the Parts of this Most Excellent and Useful Learning so well and
judiciously methodised, and so neatly and curiously handled by our Author, in a
Vein so modest and taking, without perplexing his Matter with any thing
impertinent and useless, that this Book alone is sufficient to make thee a
Competent Artist in every part of Astrology -- -- In a word, there is nothing
wanting but our Thanks to the Author for his Great Care* and Pains taken
therein. Now I suppose no man will doubt but he meant what he said at that
time; if so, it is a wonder I should be so much altered (as he seems to infer
and prove in his late Libel) and grown less skilful. If I did deserve that
Commendation then, he is an ill man to endeavor to pro^e the contrary now; if
I d^d not deserve it then, he was a Fool or a Kn^ve to give it.

But in a short time you will have a full and a fair Account of our Brick-Court
Astrologer, where he shall appear the most Ignorant man that ever pretended to
the Art in Print.

By Your Friend J.P.

A Short ACCOUNT Of a Few REMARKABLE PASSAGES IN THE EDUCATION and LIFE Of
Honest J. G.
WE see plainly that Nature has not bound her self to a particular Method in
the Order and Way of Generation in all Creatures, but sports her self in the
Variety and Order both as to Time, and Method, just as she does in the Colors
of Herbs and Flowers: A Fly-blow on a Cabbage turns to a Maggot, and afterward
to a Butterfly with curious Colors. Serpents lay their Eggs, and they are
hatched by the heat of the Dung, or some other hot Soil; They tell us of a sort
of Creature in India, that when they conceive, the Female bites off the Male's
Head; and when the young ones are ripe for Production, they are not brought
forth like other Creatures, but gnaw their way through the Damm's Belly. Cats
are very modest in Coition, and always do it privately; but Dogs and their Kind
generate openly in the Streets with a sort of Impudence, as some other
Creatures do. Hence the Poet Vipers bring Vipers forth, by this I find
Bitches get Puppies to supply their Kind.


It is no Scandal for any of the Divine Vrania's Servants either to be a
By-blow, or got, or born at a venture, without the consent either of Priest or
Parish; nor is every one bound to wait for the Convenience of
Chamber-Furniture, or the Invitation of the Kindred; Sometimes a Tailor waiting
to try the Lady's Stays, lets fly at the Game, and receives the Fertile Product
of his Labor at Nine Months end. They say an ill Bird lays an ill Egg: If so,
the Brood must be of the same Nature that is thence produced. You see Children
born of dull heavy Parents, how stupid and blockish they naturally are; and
that Bastards are generally brisk and airy, and also promoters of the same way
that gave them their Being. I know a Hero born of an Illustrious Dam, who had a
peculiar way to consecrate Nosegays to borrow money with; you will wonder how,
I Will warrant you; and indeed so you may very well; -- and so let us enter Don
Phylo Mathematicus, Secretary and Buffoon to the Divine Urania, who was born
December 31st. between the Old Year and the New, as if Nature had formed him
for a Squint-eyed Proselite, always looking two ways; or like a Waterman, that
looks one way, and rows another; one that was doomed by his Stars to draw his
Religion once a year, as people do Valentines by lot; and also defends the
Faith he has drawn, till the Season comes again for him to draw a new one.

This Little Furioso, while in Swaddling Clothes, gave early Demonstrations of
his respect to Religion; for wherever he saw a Cross (especially a gilded
one) he would always make a Reverend Bow to it, which gave his Mother (who was
a Papist) mighty hopes of his future Perfection in the Old Faith; nor did there
want early Arguments of his Fertile Fancy, and Quick Parts, for they say he
would often B -- two or three Clouts before his Nurse could wash one. Likewise
when he did arrive at the growth of a Standing-Stool, he was immediately
hammering at the crabbed Expressions of Silly-gisms, Dilemma's, Arks and
Semediameters; so that his indulgent Parents began to think of sending this
little Elf to the University of Oxford, before he was corrupted with the
Education of his Hornbook.

And indeed this was soon put in practice afterward, and away they sent him to
St. Nicholi's College, where by the help of a good Tutor, and a whetting Diet,
this little Thief grew as sharp as a Needle, to the admiration of all the
Fellows of that House, and the circumadjacent Colleges, who spent their time
in that kind of Study; so that it was generally agreed on as a Gratitude to his
Merit, and for the Reputation of his Parts, to confer on him that Honorable
Title of Lousy Jack; and under this Reputation he was for some time made Runner
General for the whole Society, where he spent a few years to make him fit to
take his Degrees at London; to which place he came at a good suitable Age, as
you shall suddenly hear more at large.

To complete his Crimes in the future part of his Life, to London comes our
Academian, and put himself a Club (he knows the Term which is common among
Philosophers of that Sect) to a Merchant Adventurer, whose Name was Thorn,
living near Strand-Bridge: These Merchants do generally use a Sparing Diet
about July and August, walk with their Hands in their Pockets, and suddenly
after go a Nutting: With this Master he continued some time, and in conclusion
(being moved by a pious Inclination) entered into the Holy State of Matrimony:
But under what Circumstances he was afterward, I shall forbear to mention, as
being unwilling to reflect on those Accidents that naturally attend the Order
of Nature, and the Fate of Mankind, Poverty and Necessity being liable to every
man at one time or other of his Life, and he that never feels the smart of it,
may be reckoned among the happiest sort of men in this World: And indeed here
must I put an end to the more innocent part of his Life, and also make a bar
between the former and the latter; for now he puts on the Armor of a bad
Conscience, to justify and defend his worse Crimes, and also a Vail of Piety,
alias Hypocrisy, to be thought a Man of great Religion and Virtue in his new
Undertakings; For now he resolves (as his Actions prove) to be aut Caesar, aut
Nullus, and to want no Preferment that Crimes can procure.

And to qualify him for the Excellence of such Undertakings, he falls in with
the then Presbyterian Congregations in London, and afterward with the
Independants, as himself says in his Doctrine of Nativities, page 262. About
the 22d year of his Age (he says) he was almost mad about the Doctrine of
Predestination, because he could not find in himself those signs of God's Love
and Favor which they told him of; and therefore sometimes concluded that he
was in a state of Damnation. But this Religious Strain did not hold long, for
indeed it was too hot to hold; and if you do but observe, you will for the most
part find such Young Zealots as he was, are generally more Whoremongers than
Divines; he suddenly thinks of hunting for a new Religion, and it must be such
a one too that must secure him from the fears of Damnation under his greatest
Crimes and Villainies; and the first he met with, and most suitable to his
Humor was the Family of Love, Ranters, or Sweet-singer of Israel; Coppe at
that time being the Head of them, and my Friend John's, Spiritual Father; and
as the Cant then run, He begot him in the Lord; which was as much as to say, He
converted him: This was the only fit Faith and Religion that ever my Friend
found, for never was Halter and Thief better matched, than John and this Family
of Love; for Lewdness, Whoredom and all Vice, were the Principles and Practice
of this Zealous Crew, they holding all things in common, from the Purse to the
Placket; now our Friend begins to put himself forward, and show his Parts by
instructing the rest of the Crew; and to that end, being more than half drunk,
at London-wall he undertook to preach from that Passage in the 11th of Judges,
and the 1st. ver. And Jephthah was the Son of a Harlot; a very proper Text for
Mr. John to discourse to the people, and especially if he does but consider how
plaguey doubtful his own Birth was (he knows the meaning of it) and recollects
the Passages that then occurred.

This sort of Faith-jobbing did not content him long, and therefore some new
thing was to be again found out; and to that end, when Cromwell came to be
Protector, he begins to insinuate at Whitehall, in order to make an Interest,
to dedicate his Book, called the Doctrine of Nativities to Oliver; to which end
he tells how he had been a Sufferer, and lost his Fortune and Estate by the
Royal Party; and that he was ready to engage all that he had left to serve that
Interest; but somebody cut the Grass under John's Feet, and no Butter stuck
upon his Bread at that time, so that then he thought it most convenient to turn
Book-wright for a Spiritual Livelihood.

The Protector going off the Stage, and Charles II. coming in, John then falls
in, Hand and Heart, with that Government; Turns Church of England Man, and it
was Charles the Martyr at every Word; then he called the Nonconformists, Rebels
and Rascals, and railed like a Butter whore at them in defense of the Church;
and by this way of Insinuation he was at last taken notice of by some of those
then Red hot Saints, and from Jewin street in 1666. he comes to Westminster,
where he did generally appear at the Abbey once every Sunday, to cheat Mankind
into a good Opinion of his Sanctity; when to say the Truth, it was no more but
a Hypocritical Paroxism, as you will see hereafter.

About the Year 1667. he fell mightily in love with the Gardiner's Daughter,
who was another Man's Wife at that time, who by Vocal Conversation, and Amorous
Letters, and Copies of Verses, he persuades her to leave her Husband Bed, and
come and keep him and his Wife company; the silly woman complies, and was by
his mountain Promises deluled, and by the help of Don John, under his Wife's
Nose, she humbly conceived in a little time; then he decoyed her to Mrs. W's,
with great Promises to take care of her, and visit her often, but after he had
got her out of his own House, he never went near her: This put her into a deep
Melancholy, which made Mrs. W. ask the reason, which when she knew, went to
John, and acquainted him with the Matter; Ay, says he, has she told it? then
let her go like a Whore as she is; a true Scorpionist. The poor Woman made hard
shift to subsist, and at last was brought to Bed; and when she was up again,
three Whores (you may guess by whom employed) met her in the Evening, and had
like to have killed her: After this her Husband indicted this Friend of Mine at
the Sessious, for debauching his Wife, and a few days before it was to come to
a Trial, he was murdered privately, and it is forty to one but you will guess
who did it, or at least had a hand in it: A True Blew Catholic Saint, and all
this time one of our Church, and at the Abbey almost every Sunday. Monstrum
horendum! Can any man sleep in peace that has the gashly Ghost of a murdered
man in his mind? or appearing before the Eyes of his wretched restless
Conscience: It is no wonder to me, to see men run and rush into the most
flagitious Crimes in Nature, that have been once flusht in the Blood of
Mankind, and what is a leader to it, Subornation of Perjury; two such Crimes,
that all Christian Governments have provided the severest of Laws for their
severe punishments.

From this time forward for some years together, he was ruffling all Mankind,
vindicating Scorpio, and promising us his Body of Tautology: Not to mention any
thing of the Two By-blows that were at Nurse in Tuttle-fields, where his Friend
Baxter told me he had been with him diverse times; nor the Friendship and
Intimacy he then contracted with the Traiterous Popish Priests, from whom he
learned the Murdering Principles afterward discovered in the Popish Plot, as
you may see by Mr. Dangerfield's own Words, in his Animadversions on Gadbury's
Almanac for 1682. his words are these, speaking to John Gadbury.

That you and I, upon, or about the 2d of September 1689, entering into
Discourse, I perceived your Countenance to change; when looking very angrily on
me, you told me, That you wondered that I would offer to displease the Lords in
the Tower, especially the Lord Castlemain (then out upon Bail) who designed to
advance me in the World, and help me to make my Fortune. To which I replied,
That I was not a little surprised to hear such words from you, and asked you if
you knew the ground of their displeasure; you then replied yes, yes, you did;
and then falling into a great Passion, said, It was because I would not kill
the King; said you to me, I admire at your Ingratitude, that when you could not
propose to your self any possible way of getting out of Prison, etc. that you
should offer to refuse it; Nay, said you to me, I might have done it with all
the ease in the world, for no manner of hurt could have befallen me: Why, said
I, would not Death unavoidably have been the consequence of it? No, said you,
for before I was released out of the King's Bench, you had an exact account
from Mrs. Cellier, of the Year, Month, Week, Day and Hour I was born in, and
the Countess of P. ordered you to calculate my Nativity; And it is so clear,
said you to me, that you are by all adjudged the Person allotted for that bold
and daring Enterprise. This is the Attestation left by Mr. Dangerfield; So that
you see he is not content to be padling in Blood himself, but for persuading
others to engage in those Black Crimes also; for which he was taken into
custody the 2d of November, Anno 1679. And this is the first notorious Plot
that we find him engaged in against the King, Religion and Government of
England, at which time he was certainly a Papist; he having at, or about that
time told a Friend of mine, That under this last Conjunction in Leo, and its
Effects, all Europe would be subjugated to the Romish See, and that it was good
policy in all wise men to turn betimes, and so advised him. Hence you may be
certain, that he who advised others, was without doubt of that Persuasion
himself. Yet for all this, he denied it before the King and Counsel, and
forswore it upon the Sacrament, in his Magna Veritas; and yet in 1685. I heard
him own it; and afterward he openly professed himself a Papist. And after all
this Hypocritical Faith-jobbing, I hear he is turned Protestant again, and a
special one too, no doubt, and it is indeed, the fifth or sixth time he has
found it convenient to change his Religion, if ever he had any.

While he was in Prison, he sent his Maid with a Present of Plate to Sir T. D.
to get his Pardon, but he finding the Case so soul, refused to be concerned in
it; however he trebled the value of his Present, and sent it to another (now
dead) by whose means, and some Popish Interest, his Pardon was produced: Yet
during his Confinement he had accused Dame Cellier of some soul Treasonable
Crimes before the King and Council, which he gave under his Hand; but when she
came to be tried the Summer following, in Westminster Hall, and he called to
justify what he had before sworn against her; He told the Judge, He did not
remember any such thing; he owned it was his Hand, but his Memory was bruised
by being in Prison, and he could not say any thing to the Matter: A very honest
Fellow! For this and some other Popish Services he received 200 l. In the Year
1681. a certain Member of the Church of Laodicea, that lived within a mile and
a half of Strand-Bridge, and well known to my Friend J. Gadbury and my self,
for many virtuous Qualifications, drew up in a Paper certain Articles, of
several high and Treasonable Crimes against Sir T. D. and then brought these to
Mr. Sprigg in King Street, Westminster, and desired him to go before a Justice
of Peace, and make Affidavit of its Truth, but Mr. Sprigg desired a little time
to consider of it; which being granted, away he came to me, and asked my
Opinion what he should do in it? I asked him if it was true? he said, No; Why,
then said I, do not you by any means oblige a Villain with a False Oath, to
rui^ any Gentleman's Reputation and Estate, and perhaps life too. But, said he,
I owe him Money, and am afraid, if I do deny this thing, he will arrest me. No,
said I, never fear that, for this thing of Subornation will keep him in awe I
dare engage; and from that time this Laodicean did differ with Mr. Sprigg for
refusing this horrid thing, and Knave and Villain were the best Words he could
give him; and there are several yet living, that know this Villainous thing from
Mr. Sprigg's Relation, etc.

In the Year 1681 and 1682. his Maid took an occasion to leave her Master (he
then being a Widower) I think twice, Ay, says, he to his Kinswoman, let her go,
she will be glad to come again, when she finds she cannot mend her self: And
truly just as he said, so it fell out; for after she had been gone about three
Months, she returned much slenderer than she was when she went away, for I
suppose she had been cured of a Timpany, or some other disease of the Bowels;
perhaps some Tumor or Excrescence in her Womb, of which she did very well, and
was fit to follow her former Employment again. Now what man of Sense can doubt
his being a Conjurer, for how should he know else she would come again? he must
have this from some plagny cunning Star, such a one, I suppose, as he predicted
the Prince of Wales by, in 1686. Ah John, did you ever know an Owl and a
Sparrowhawk build both in a Hole? pray where was your Handmaid church'd after
the cure of the Timpany that you infused into her?

In the Year 1684. he was frequently conversant with the Popish Priests, and no
doubt but he could have given us an account of the fatal Stroke that was given
the 2d of February following, if he had thought it convenient; Popery was his
Darling, and it must be brought in, though the Nation was washed in Blood for
its Entertainment.

In the Year 1685. he was extremely full of Business, the Nation being then a
Sacrifice to Popery, and he as a Servant to the Idol Priests, did expect a
share in the Offerings; it was now time for him to show his early Complyane
with the Enemies of England, and show early Signs of his Conversion; for it was
his Maxim to several at that time, That none should be preferred but Roman
Catholics, and such as would be so when the King pleased, Ergo, etc. Now it
was that he told Mr. B. That the first time he went to Mass, there were twelve
English Peers there at Mass at the same time, and now was the time for him to
make his Calling and Election sure. A pious hopeful Christian! And the better
to pave his way to Prefer^^nt, he now undertook the Office of a Runner, and an
Informer, in order to ruin five or six Gentlemen in London, by a Scandalum
Mag. for publishing Mr. Dangerfield's Narrative; this was a blessed time. But
to say the truth, John got 20 per Cent. by it. And who of John's Persuasion
would not be a Villain for that Wages? when, for ought he knew, there were half
a dozen men to be ruined for it. But no matter for that; were his Father now
living, and a Protestant, he would betray him too, rather than miss getting the
Money; I know his Principle so well.

In 1686. and 1687. Mr. Bounce went about like a Roaring Lion to make Converts
for his old Granny the Whore of Babylon; now it was that he told Mr. B. He must
be forced to have him to Father Petre, and Father Ellis; those two who he had
brought him to before, being not able to convert him. Now it was that he
impudently said, It would never be well till that King laid by Parliaments, and
ruled by his Absolute Power. Now it was he said, The Kings of England were not
obliged by Law, to take the Coronation Oath; Reply, page 8. Now it was he
promised the Papists, An Eternal Settlement in England, and that their Cause
and Power would be as durable as the Sun, Epistle to his Almanac* 1686. But
alas, they had nothing to say for it, but Honest Jack's Word: His Word, What Is
that worth, when the Nation knows he is a -- Now it was that he told us, There
never was a^y such think as a Plot by the Papists, in King James the First's
Time, Reply page 3. which I suppose* implies a Reason why he always omitted it
in his Almanac every Year. Now what think you of my Dark Lanthorn Conjurer, is
he not a Seraphick Youth? at this time I can assure you he was an Impudent,
Insolent, openly-profess'd Papist, and talked both like Knave and Fool. Now it
was that he railed and raved against the Church of England in defense of
Popery, as he used to do against the Nonconformists and Fanatics, in defense
of the Church of England, after Charles the Second came in: Now it was that all
were Villains and Traitors (in John's Opinion) that would not submit against
the Laws to a Popish King, and give up their Liberties, Estates, etc. to Old
Granne Church again, to maintain Abbey Lubbers, and Whorish Nuns, John's
peculiar Saints; and now it was he wanted to be a Justice of Peace.

In 1688. when the Party began to apprehend a Storm, Jack's Business was to
support them with Promises, and apply warm Clouts to their Capacities, while
his own trembled like an Apsenleaf; see his fulsome Almanac for that Year. Now
it was he gave a written Paper out among the Papists, wherein were Words to
this purport, the Prince being then coming; He hoped to see him, and his Great
men with him, brought to make Speeches at Tower Hill and Tyburn: you see Honest
John was then for making thorough Work; whoever affronted him, or Granne Church
at that time, he scorned to give himself the trouble to contend, or talk out
his Thoughts to them, or convert them, but throw a Halter, a Hatchet, or a
Gallows at them, and then their Work was done, and they were certainly dead in
Law; What! Affront Jack, or his Church!

In 1689. John was come to his Ne plus Ultra in Popery, and for a long time
never said his Prayers, because he did not know what sort of them he should
take up with next; for he resolves to go to Heaven by no other Religion than
that which is in fashion; no matter if it be Mahumetism, that will do according
to John's Notion in his Epistle to his Almanac, 1682. where he says, That God
always sends Kings of that Religion which he expects those Nations to be of,
where they govern: This is a very honest Fellow, he came raw into the World,
and will never go roasted out for Religion, I will pass my word for him.

In 1690. about June, John was caught at the Post Office, in sending a Bundle
of Treason to some of his Popish Friends, in which was one of King James's
Declarations, a Treasonable Copy of Verses against the King and Queen, which he
promised his Friend, should be printed in a short time; but above all, a most
Villainous Letter against the Government, in which he assured his Friend, that
King J's Declarations were set up on all the Church Doors in Devonshire and
Cornwall, and that they had agreed with the French King to take off all their
Tin at a certain rate, and they had all declared for King James; and to use his
own Words for it, he said, King J's Interest was like a Cart overthrowed, and
therefore they must get a considerable help to set it upright on its Wheels
again, and then drive on as before.

Now I would ask him if this Rebellious Principle is agreeable to his old N
isey Doctrine of Non-resistance, when he asks, what is Passive Obedience turned
into, bearding, upbraiding, and dethroning of Kings, Rep. page 21. But at that
time John was a Popish Casuist to defend a base and Villainous Cause, the shaven
Crowns, and their Dowbaked Gods; the very Treason that he was taken in that
Year, in the Late bloody Reigns would have hanged any man: The D. of Monmouths
Declaration took away Will. Disney's Life; and Colonel Sidney died for
publishing a Book in his Study; Mr. College for carrying a Regiment of men in
a Portmanteau to seize the King at Oxford; but John met with a more merciful
Government, and a better Fate, but how he deserved it, I will leave you to
judge.

In 1691. his time was employed in supporting the Party, and giving them
assurances of their old Master's Return, and this by the power of the Stars. In
the end of 1688. he did assure them he would be here again by Christmas, or to
use his own words for it, For a New-years-Gift; that failing, he engaged he
would be here at farthest, by Easter, in 1689. but that also failing; and then
he was certain he would not fail of being here by Michaelmas, and then he put
them off till Easter 1690. and because he would be sure of it then, he was in a
Plot himself to restore him; just like Young Nostradamus, they tell of, who
predicted the burning of a City, and rather than have his Prophecy want
success, he fired it himself, for which he was hanged.

In 1692. he had a fresh Ferment in his Conscience about Religion, and having
not confidence to go to the Abbey where he used to go, when he was a supposed
Protestant before, I hear he comes now to St. Margaret's Church as a
Protestant, and with abundance of Devotion, you may be sure; where he certainly
lies purdue, to watch for another Opportunity to change his Religion, or rather
to shape his Conscience according to the next New Cut of Faith that he finds
suitable to his Advantage and Interest, they being the two main Arguments of
his Religion and Piety; and notwithstanding he is again turned a Mungrel
Protestant of the Church of England, I have heard very lately, that he has
trumpt up a New Argument, to encourage the Papists, and their Accomplices to
expect their Old Master next Year, 1694. and that is from the MC ad: but the
Lord help his Ignorance and his Folly, and pity those that are deluded by him,
for that Direction will not come up before he is almost 69 years of Age, in the
year 1702. and for the MC. ad that comes up not till 1709. so great is his
Ignorance and Confidence, to comfort the Party with Lies and Juggles.

Thus I have brought this worthy Gentleman to the 65th Year of his Age, and
very fairly given you the Account of his Life, as to those things I treat of,
and do really think I have not done him any Injury in relating Matter of Fact;
if I am any ways out, or amiss, it is only in being short, and not relating his
Crimes to the height they were acted by their Author; and therefore I had
rather modestly screen his Villainies with a deficiency in Relation of them,
than to abound in their History at this time; and this the rather, because the
very Glimpse of them in this short Account, will give him so foul, and so black
a Character, that all men of Honesty and Honor will detest his Principles, and
conclude him to be the greatest -- in the world. What will you say to him that
enticeth away and steals his Neighbor's Dog? Why, you cannot call him less
than Thief; but then what will you judge him to be, that by Amorous Letters,
Copies of Verses, and Vocal Persuasions, enticeth away his Neighbor's Wife,
takes her to his House, gets her with Child, and then kicks her out of Doors
again, to the mercy of the wide world, and the fury of her Husband, not to
speak a word of the Murder of Mr. G. and these are so well known, that there
are many in Town acquainted with each Particular; and indeed I know something
of the matter my self, having had the Honor to see her at his House at that
time.

What will you think of him that hunts for a New Faith, sometimes once a Year,
but for the most part, once every Seven Years? What will you think of him that
was in a Plot to murder the King he always pretented to support? what think
you of him that was in another Plot, to murder and dethrone that King that had
before pardoned him, and forgave all his Villainies and Treasons against him?

What will you think of him that railed and raved at the Royal Party in 1657.
that railed at the Fanatics from 1660. forwards; that railed at the Church of
England in defense of Popery, in the

Year 1687. and now curses his own Stars that he wants power to be a greater
-- than he is.

What think you of him that would have suborned a man to h^ve sworn Crimes
against a Gentleman, even to Life, Liberty and Estate? This is such a Villainy,
that none but such who are perjured themselves, would ever attempt; Suborners
of Perjury! why they are worse than Highway-men and H^use-breakers; for we may
be safe from one sort by strong Doors and Walls, and from the other by staying
at home; But who can be safe against false Oaths? who can be safe when two or
three conspire together, and are willing to take a False Oath at the price of
their own Damnation and Eternal Ruin: What shall we say? when a Man has his
Life snatched from him, by the False Oaths of two perjured Villains, and dies
an Ignominious Death, for a Base and Scandalous Crime that he was never guilty
of! (The Lord remember the sufferings of the people in the Late Bloody Reigns.)
Perjury is such a Crime, that next to Murder, our Lawgivers have thought fit
to make a severe Act for the punishment of such Offenders; and yet you see when
Malice rides abroad Rampant, and Conscience stays at home, it is no hard thing
to find a certain Saint, that used to go with abundance of Devotion to the
Abbey, who is willing to undergo not only the Drudgery of Swearing, but Swearing
falsely, or at leastwise to persuade others to do it, which if there is any
difference, is the worst Crime of the two; and I doubt not but every one who is
willing to persuade others to such Offenses, are ready to do it themselves, or
else have been guilty of the same Crimes formerly. Who can have the impudence
to look God or Man in the Face, without blushing, or a dejected Countenance,
when he knows his Soul is loaded with such a horrid Villainy, and his Conscience
tells him every moment, that he deserves the punishment due to so heinous a
thing; or else on his Knees he ought to confess it, and beg the Gentleman's
Pardon, if he is not past Grace and Repentance.

And so I come to consider a Pamphlet lately sent forth into the World without
a Name, as if the Author of it was either afraid or ashamed to own what he had
done; or else by reason of other Crimes, he thought his Name, instead of making
his Book sell, might have damned it to a perpetual oblivion and have saved us
the labor of reading it; Ex pede Hercules; by the Man you may know the Matter;
and you may be certain that J. G. can as soon eat that Paper, as write a
Treatise without his Two Martyrs in it; just like Roger wedded to Forty One.
And tho it comes without the Author's Name in the Title Page, yet I can without
the help of the Stars, tell it came out of Brick-Court, and that John Gadbury
is the Author of it; which he calls Merlini Liberati Errata; which I will
consider, and give an Answer to his material Objections therein alleged
against me; and do assure him, that as I have already made him appear a Knave,
so I will show the World he is also a Fool, especially in that Profession he
pretends to, which is the Art of Astrology; and likewise how silly, as well as
false, the most part of his Objections are, passing by his wittyc^sms, as well
as his Reflections, being sensible that the best of Authors, nay, the Word of
God too, has been defamed and abused by the Witty Jests, etc. of Debauched
Men; and by some in particular, of J. G.'s Acquaintance that I could name.

AN ANSWER TO HIS Idle PAMPHLET.
IN his Title Page I perceive he is an earnest Honourer of his King, etc. I am
glad to hear of such a Reformation, for it is not three years since he was
accused of being in a Plot to dethrone and murder the King; and to this day he
cannot in conscience take the Oaths to Their Majesty's, and yet an earnest
Honourer of the King, etc. It would be convenient, I think, to ask him, What
King? for I am sure our King is not his, if he cannot take an Oath to be true
to Him.

In his Epistle to the Reader, he complains of my Brutish Bawling, and Beastly
Language, which is needless (if true) seeing he pretends to be my Master;
having taught me one by his Bouncing Empty Writings, and the other by his
Debauched and Beast-like Life and Conversation. In the very next Words he takes
care of the Church and State; meaning, I judge, that of France; for a Papist
can never intend the Church of England; if he does, and designs what he says,
he is damned by his own Principles; but you may see he has undertaken to patch
up the Cause, and therefore let it be so; and for his two Martyrs, I refer my
Reader to M. G. Ludlow's Letter for the one, and to the Cruelties of the
Star Chamber (especially Dr. Layton's Case) for the other; for I have something
else to do, than to spend my precious Time about such things as are not to my
present Purpose. And at last of all, he calls out to the Church of England for
help; one would think he might call to his own Church, if he knew which it was,
which I doubt he does not, after all this choping and changing of his
Religions; for he always serves his God in the newest Fashion; and so I come to
the Matter it self.

Page 6. The first thing he falls foul on shows the Fellow to be top-full of
Malice; and what little things must serve him to make a noise with in my
Epistle; I said, This little Book will run the Nation thorough; but that way
did not please him, it seems, to express it; and therefore after a great deal
of noisey stuff, he puts me, as he thinks, in a better way, to say this little
Book shall run thorough the Nation; a very Learned Distinction, and after his
usual Banter, he advises the Nation to be provided of good Surgeons, I suppose
he means Cloath-Surgeons, alias, Srand-lane Garret-men: As for the Cause of our
Difference mentioned in that Page, I shall take notice in another Place, more
proper than this, and also set the Goad and the Awl he mentions there against
his Bodkin and Needle, and let his Sixfooted-straglers take which they please
to contend for their Master's Honesty, when he was saving the Remnant; in the
same Page he quarrels because I say, there were no material Rays and Positions,
etc. and then the Blockhead with his Rumbling Nonsense, draws an Inference, as
if I said there were no Rays and Positions. I said there were no Rays material,
to give any kind of remarkable things in the Air, or Mundane Affairs; but our
Popish-Jugler is for any thing, so he can but make a noise: Oh the Impudence of
the Fellow!

Page 7th. In February. I wonder he should be so impudent to deny there was a
Popish Plot going on in February, according as I predicted it, from the
preceding Conjunction of Mars and Saturn, in the Gadburian Sign; when he knows
he himself (like an ill man) was taken a few Months afterward, as he was
sending Treasonable Letters, Popish Declarations, etc. to his Popish
Conspirators, to embroil the King and Government; here it is plain the Design
was then going on, or else I must conclude John made a Plot himself, on purpose
to verify my Prediction, and now takes this Opportunity to let the World know
how kind he was to me; it is strange that Nature, his Stars, his Parents, and
his Profession, should all conspire to complete this Monster of Mankind; he was
doubtfully begot, painfully b^^n, th^^vishly bred, whorishly vicious,
impudently lives, and doubtless will as knavishly die; And then for the Story
of the Stars giving. I will talk with him by and by. Page 7. In March he tells
me, I mention a great Congress of the Planets in Pisces, which is a most
notorious Falsehood: My words are these, We here find no less than six of the
Seven Planets in Watery Signs, etc and at that time they were all in Watery
Signs, except Mars, and not one Word of a Congress there, till you come to the
next Paragraph, where the word Congress is used, and I suppose not improperly,
when there are Five Planets in one Sign; Ah my Popish Apostate! thou have been
always gifted with Lying and Treason, ever since you gave over going to the
Abbey Church.

Page 8. April. He makes a great noise about the Word give; I having said, The
Planets give such, and such things; methinks the Word may do well enough, tho
the Stars have no hands: What think you John? We give a man a good Word, Why
has the Tongue Hands? You gave the Wench a Clap, What has your Belly Hands? I
give my consent, Prithee how shall this be done? perhaps I go to do it, Has my
Feet Hands? my Brain contrives it, Has that Hands? at last my Tongue actually
does it, and yet no Hands; so that we shall set the Members together by the
ears, who it is that gives this Consent, and this may be done by a man that
has no Hands: Well, but I am condemned for a Fool and Blockhead, to use it,
and that it is a very improper word: Let it be so, I will find a Companion
presently: There was a Sorry empty Treatise a few years since, wri^^^ by an
Impudent Fellow in Brick-Court, and called a Collection of Nativities, in which
he printed a hundred Aphorisms; and no less than seven of those Aphorisms have
the very same word, and just so applied; as it is by me, as in Aphor. 13. Fixed
Stars on the Angles of a Nativity, give the Native eminent honor, etc. Apho.
22. again gives the Native, etc. Apho. 50 and the in the Second, give the
Native an Estate. Apho. 67. In the Houses of gives an Excellent Understanding;
and so in the 68. and 82 Aph. It seems when that Fellow writ these Aphorisms,
this was a very good and proper way to express things, but now Jack, and the
way of expressing things are changed. Well, what say you; are you and I
Brother-Blockheads or not? remember the old Adage, Turpe est Doctori cum culpa
re darguit ipsum; what! correct me, Jack, and guilty thy self of the very same
Crime? and indeed it is so in most of the rest, if I had but time to examine
all thy old Nonsense; thou have lay so long by Inops mentis, that thou art
really mad thy self, and I fear thou must be sent to the College in
Moor-fields, to have thy Senses restored, and thy Memory too, if possible: St.
Paul and you, seem to be parallel in your Cases, but differ in the Terms; for
Festus told him, That much Learning had made him mad; but that is none of your
Crime; a great deal of Knavery and Impudence makes you so, with the want of the
other.

Page 8. May. Indeed John you fib, for when that Almanac was writ, there was
no War in Ireland, for your Master had not been long landed then, but there
were Wars and Confusions too; yet it is no matter, I must allow my Friend the
use of his Talent, Lying, etc. It seems Mercury has affronted him, or else I
have, for using the young Gentleman's Name; for he says, That Merlin is
constrained by the power of Mercury, to utter Lies, as Honest J. G. was to go
to Mass in 1686. or to get his Maid with Child in 1681. And now I must show my
Parts in teaching my Master, for here he asks me a Learned Question, How in
Taurus comes to concern Ireland and France? Why I will tell you John, because
you are a Friend, and because I would willingly keep your Friendship; All
Countries do suffer, and are concerned for Good or Ill, according as the
Princes Nativities are affected or afflicted, not that I reject the Radical
Figure of that Country, if it can be had: And now I think on it, Pray what
Direction had Jamaica at the time of its Earthquake, by the Nonsensical Table
of Directions that you bubbled those Gentlemen into a belief of? what must we
say, was its Nativity false, or the Directions false? or did not J. G. know how
to work them true? which is most likely, for he is a very Ignorant Fellow, and
also very Impudent, or else he would be ashamed of this, as well as of his
Prediction, That Dr. Oats should stand in the Pillory every year on certain
days, and this as long as he lived; but he has lived to see himself proved
Fool and Liar.

Page 9. June. Here our Popish Juggler would be nibling at something, if he
knew what, but it is not a rush matter, so it makes a noise, whether it is to
the purpose or not; his Noisie Objections are so silly, that I do not think it
worth my Answer, for every Reader may easily see both his Folly, and his
Malice: But for a Confirmation of his Skill in Astrology, I will here relate a
short Story of his Confidence in one of his groundless Predictions, about his
Friend Mr. Lloyd of Wales; The poor Gentleman having lain some time ill of a
Hectic, was at last given over by his Doctors, but he was unwilling to take
the Sentence of Death from them contentedly, till he had acquainted his Friend
Gadbury with what they said, and to request his Opinion about his Life or
Death, and so writes him a Letter, and sent it to him by the Post; which being
done, his Friends prevailed with him to make his Will, which he did, in which
be gave J. G. 40 Shillings for his Judgment on his Case; so Mr. G. writes his
Answer, and told him, That his Doctors were Fools, and did not understand
either his Case, or their own Business; and also assured him upon the
Reputation of a Brick-Court Juggler, that he would live two years, and some few
Months, and of this he was certain; so away went the Epistle; but before it
came to hand, his Friend was dead; and the Copy of his Letter is now in Town,
in a Physician's hand, who told me the Story, and perhaps it may be printed for
the use of him and his Friends. Now pray tell me what is J. G's Credit and
Reputation worth in Astrology? for he assured him on his Reputation, etc. but I
can tell him, he is far better at Faith-Hunting, than at reading a Lecture on
the Effects of the Stars.

Page 9. On July. Here our Paraphrastical Coxcomb would be writing a Comment on
he knows not what, and repeats my words about the two Lights being in a Mundane
Parallel with Jupiter, and tells his Reader the Reason why it cannot be so, and
that is because the Lunation did not fall in Cancer, but Leo; Ha, ha, he! Did
ever Soul hear such Ignorance and Nonsense, set off with so impudent a
Flourish; and I am certain he knows not what a Mundane Parallel is, nor how to
work it; and yet this is the Fellow that sets up for my Master; but Ignorance
seldom goes without Confidence and Lying; and this being proved false, all the
rest he says on that Month is of the same Stamp, which he had by the help of
his old Friend, the Father of Lies.

Page 10. In September. Here he charge me with Lying; he might indeed with a
Mistake; for the Moon did apply first to the Sextile of Saturn; I own that, but
it was a Mistake, and no design to do it; but I shall be even with him by and
by, and I suppose he knows I will.

Page 9. In October. He quarrels with something, but what he cannot tell: I do
say, That there were five violent Lunations, and most of them in Libra: It is
true, What would my Popish Prophet be at, I wonder? there was one on September
15. one on Septem. 22. a third on Septem. 30th. and a Fourth on October the
8th. and all these were in Libra, and all of them violent; therefore the most
of them were there, as I said before, which is the very thing he carps at; but
any thing to make a noise with; be sure the empty Cask makes the greatest
sound; Why does not he clear that thing to the world, that I have charged upon
him, about the MC. to the Body of Saturn in his own Nativity, that came up, as
he affirms, in the Year 1670. and is a most ruinous Direction, according to his
own Rule, page 189. in Doc. of Nativ. and yet gave him nothing but Grandeur,
contrary to its Nature, and his Rule; then it was every one pulled in his horns
at the dash of his Pen, not daring to p^ep out in their own vindication: Is it
so now too? I think not.

Page 9th. In Novem. Here the word Wretched affects him; I suppose it is
because the word best suits his Inclinations, for he is a Wretched Fellow, as
you may see by the Actions of his wretched Life, that precede this Part.

Page 11. December. In his witty Harangue on this Month, he first makes a
Puppet of his own, and then sets it up and laughs at it; it is he indeed that
makes the Nonsense; I do quote these words, Significat bellum, eff^si^nem
sarguinis, ac mult^tudinem Febrium, and do say the French King would feel its
Effects; for a Prince may suffer by the loss and destruction of his People, as
well as in his own Person; so after he has in his way ridiculed, these things,
he condemns our poor Merlin for a very silly ignorant Fellow, and gives the
Chair to our Blackthumb'd Merlin, and then I am sure he will choose a couple of
Lowsy Strand lane Sentinels with Bodkins in their hands, and a Case of Needles
by their sides to be his Guard, and Verax in Brick Court is to be the
Right Hand man; so now I think we are all fitted with Places, and being
provided, I hope we shall be contented, and live lovingly as we used to do; and
so I come to the end of his Opinion on my Twelve Months; and now to show you he
is a very silly ignorant impudent Fellow, I will give him a home-thrust at
once, and expose him to the world, tho I think I cannot make him more notorious
than he is; yet I will give my Bodkin-Prophet a Glimps of his Skill, which I am
sure he cares nor to hear. In his Epistle to that Ephemerides that he stole
from H^cker, he tells Sir Frech. Holles; he should live some Decades of years;
First here is his Impudence, he affirms he should live some years; secondly his
Ignorance, the Gentleman died within Six Months after: Is not this a very sine
Astrologer, and fit to be a Corrector of others? In his own Nativity he tells
us he passed the MC. to the Body of Saturn 1670. and gave h m nothing according
to its Nature. In the Nativity of the Princess R yal Collect. Genitur. page 20.
he says she married on the Mi^heaven to the Body of Mars, and yet he sends
Bishop Laud to the Tower on the very same Direction, page 90. of the Collect:
And he kills Charles Gustavus, King of Sweden on the MC. to the Body of Saturn,
which in his own gave nothing at all. Certainly whoever reads these
Contradictions, must judge Astrology a very idle Study, or else our supposedly
Learned Thimble Conjurer to be a very Ignorant Fellow. How John! you my Master,
and guilty of this Nonsense! My Master was no Faith-hunter, but a Man of a
steady Reputation, one that understood Astrology better than this, and how to
teach it better than you do: Before you quarrel with me in point of Art, I
challenge you to make these Things clear to the World, in an Astroligical way,
which if you do not, you must expect to hear from me about them another time.
You the Top-man, and Bell-weather of the whole Society of Astrologers! Are not
you a fine Reputation to your Profession? you shall have the Chair, but it
shall be to sh -- in, not to read Astrology, unless it is a Nonsensical one.

Page 12th. On the Winter-Quarter. Here he shows himself in his True Colors,
and to any one that understands what a Mundane Parallel is, he will soon appear
to be what he really is, a Malicious silly Fellow; and therefore I will not
spend time about this, for it answers it self, and does not want mine.

Page 12. On the Spring-Quarter: Here my Thimbletenian does charge a
notorious^ie upon me; for he says that 24 of ascends, etc. when I say 19 of US
does; pray you that understand how to set a Figure, enter the Column of Time
from Noon, with 15h. 25m. and see if the 24th Degree of will not be on the
Tenth House, and 19 of Capricorn ascending; if so, What does the Fellow make a
noise about? you see he sticks a Feather in his own Cap, and laughs at his own
Folly; for he says himself, that I give the Ingress at 15 h. 25 m. PM. and for
my saying there may be a mistake of a Sign, two or three in the Ascendant, when
Signs of short Ascension rise in the East, is no strange thing; for Operations
of that nature being wrought by diverse Tables, will differ one or two Hours in
time, perhaps more; and it is well known to all Pretenders to Astrology, that
and are but 4 hours ascending, and two of those Signs but 50 Minutes a piece,
which proves what I say; and so he goes on to ridicule me for Mundane Aspects
and Parallels, which I am sure he does not understand: And now pray do but
observe the Ignorance and Impudence of this Fellow that pretends to correct me,
that am more true and exact than himself.

In his own Popish Almanac, page 4th. He says that the enters, no March the
9th at 6 Hours, 42 Min. afternoon 1693. and how he will prove this, seems
strange to me, without some Popish Miracle; for in his Almanac the Sun at
Noon, wants 16 Min. to enter Aries, which gives in time 6 Hours and 30 Min.
which falls short of 6. 42. and therefore if you examine Shakerly's Tables, the
Sun by them enters at 7 hours 10m. PM. and these are the Tables which he
pretends to go by. Hence it is plain he has impudently imposed a time upon us,
not agreeable to his own Almanac, nor the Tables he pretends to, which shows
him both ignorant and confident. He understand the Stars! he knows better how
to cuck-cold his Wife, and lie with his Maid (as he called her) than to work
any Mathematical Operation: The Fellow is certainly mad, and how it came to
pass I am not certain, unless his Priests made him so when he was a Papist, or
that he has taken a Frenzy by Contaction, in lying by his Mad Wife; for in
1686. or 87. for the lucre of a little Money, he married a Woman that was
really mad, and so she is still, and a Papist.

Page 14. On the Summer Quarter, he here carries on the Rattle as before, and
the principal thing is to prove my Figure false, and wittily objects at my
Saying, where Armies are in the Field; and asks me, If ever I knew Armies in a
House? a very wise Question; but I shall answer my Popish Laplander, with an
Examen of his most erroneous Calculation, for the Summer Ingress, 1693. which
he tells us, Is at 8 hours 48 Min. PM. June 10th. Now if you will but work that
Ingress by Shakerly's Tables, you shall find that it is at 43 Min. past 9.
differing almost an hour in time from his, and this from them Tables that he
pretends to work by: and I hope his Worship will allow that an hour in time,
makes a great alteration in a Figure of the Twelve Houses. What think you now
of my Corrector, is he ignorant or impudent? I judge it was from such Rules and
Grounds he promised the Papists, That Popery should continue in England for
ever.

Page 14. In the Autumn Quarter; that is to say; in his Dialect, Cucumber-Time,
here he is upon the old Rumble again, and as true as the former: But prithee
John, Why shall I not be true to my Wife, if I marry? Here you might have
forborne that especially, when you consider how you used your first Wife; Take
one into the House, and get her with Child under her Nose; What do you mean by
being just? it is not in your Nature; you were never just to God nor man, Ergo
not to your Wife. And for my coining of false Books, that charge lies at your
Door, not mine: And let me tell you, I have begun to publish a Doctrine that
shall stand when you and I are gone; but I will take care to give the World an
account of what you have writ, and that very speedily too. But you, Mr. John,
would do well to have your Calculations done better next year, for at the
Winter Ingress, by the Suns place, it is at three quarters past 12 at Night;
and Shakerly at half an hour past one; but an hour is a small matter in John's
Calculations.

Page 15. Of the Eclipses. I will answer the first in your own Almanac for
1693. page 4. You say the will be eclipsed near out 4 in the Morning, and yet
in January you say the full Moon is at 3 in the Morning; in the same page you
say the Sun will be eclipsed the 16th of December, at our Midnight; and yet in
Dec. you say it is at one in the Morning; what! is there the difference of an
hour between the Full Moon and her Eclipse, and between the New Moon, and the
Sun's Eclipse? for shame do not be guilty of these fulsome Contradictions;
prithee forbear correcting others, till you mend your own Faults, and
understand better, or else you and your Family must go to the College in
Moor-fields: With these fulsome Errors, remember you tell us in your lying
Ephemerides, That the Sun's Eclipse in June will be almost total. And in your
Popish Almanac for 1693. you say, it will be but half a Digit: What Stuff this
is to come from John Gadbury? fie John fie, are not you ashamed of this? I am
sure you may, only I think you are past shame.

And for the Quotation Jack carps at, I do assure him he is mistaken; and
whosoever will look into Ptolomy, Lib. 6. Quadripar. they will find the same
Words, only in another Language; but for that Book I am sure, John understands
it not, nor never will; and therefore Proclus and Ptolomy are indeed all one to
him.

And as to the Second Eclipse I mentioned, I did not take it from the patched
up 20 years Ephemeridies that he falsely calls his, but from Mezzavachis, who
does assure me it was almost 7 Digits and a half, and said, almost three Parts
of the Moon's Body would be darkened: Pray then where is the Error that this
foolish Fellow makes a noise about? In the two other Eclipses he shows his
Malice and his Ignorance in carping at my Quotation of Junctine; for the Texts
there alleged, he knows very well they are printed by Junctine in his
Speculum; and if so, Where is the cause for this silly rattleheaded Fellow's
Noise and Clamor? I am afraid really the Fellow must to Bedlam, and his Family
too, if the Mad-Moon does not prove the more kind to him; and so I come to the
NB.

Page 17. Here he wriggles about, and I cannot tell well what he would be at,
but at last he quarrels with my false Grammar; pray see his Ability to correct
me, in page 81 and 82. opus Reformat; but at last he concludes my measure of
Time is mortal, because I use the word Expire: Pray Jack tell me if your
Measure of Time does not expire, how do you know when your Direction begins to
operate? for according as I understand it, when the measure of an Ark of
Direction is out, or the Years, Months, and Days, are expired, allowed by that
Measure, then the Direction begins to show its Effects; if so, I am right in
the Word Expire; and again, if your Measure is as you say, Immortal, and has
no End, how is it a Measure? for Time it self, that is to be measured, is not
immortal, then how can your Measure be so? and every Measure is extremely less
in length, than the thing measured; but this Objection is one of the exquisite
Points of your Nonsense; and besides, thou art one of the impudentest Fellows
in nature; for I say, at the of, the same is on the Moon's radical place, she
at his Birth being near 6 degs. in, and when the Sun came to six in, he was
applying to the Square of Saturn, within about five Degrees: What! does such
silly Cavils as these become the Great man in Brick-court? Fie for shame, learn
more wit, or else more modesty.

Page 18. I do confess the French King's Nativity is as certainly mine, as the
Merlini Liberati Errata was Jack Gadbury's; nor do I disown any of it, tho I
confess it was done by the approbation as well as the instigation of J. G. nor
do I deny his Nativity to be a great one; but this does not hinder him from
being a Tyrant and an Oppr^ssor, and I was deluded by Jack at that time, to
print that Tyrant's Nativity, and it was he that provided me a Book seller,
with whom I suppose he agreed to bubble both the Printer and the Author, for I
never had a penny for my Copy, tho perhaps he had; Remember Stow's Chronicle,
Jack.

At the same time that he encouraged, and put me upon doing this thing, he then
also gave me a Copy written by himself, called Vtrum horum; Rome or Geneva,
Never a Barrel better Herring; designed against all Religions, but most chiefly
against the Reformed Protestant Profession; this he bid me carry to one Mr
Reynolds a Bookseller (which I did) and desire him to print it with my Name to
it; but he refused to do it (asking me; If I knew what it was?) I told him, I
knew nothing but the Title (believing my Friend J. G. would not have put an ill
thing upon me); he said, It was an ill thing, and against Religion, and
therefore he would not print it; and the Copy I bell eve I have by me still; and
had this Villainous Book been also done in print, I doubt not but he would abuse
me for it, as well as he does for the other; and to say the truth, it is his
Doctrine and Method, but both false; yet it was my Labor and Pains taken in
the compiling of it; all which I do at present disown in this my Practice,
having a Method more agreeable to Nature, and the real Motion that we all
contend for; and let this Fellow, if he can, show what I have said in any
Predictions about him, that is opposite to the very matter he relates. -- But
at the bottom of that page, he says, He owns it his duty to serve the King and
Country in Purse and Person, and this he resolves to do cordially: You serve
the King both with Purse and Person! yes, so you did in 1690. with your Popish
Declaration, and your Treasonable Letter. You boast of your Loyalty! I suppose
you mean to your Popish King: Do you think Non-resistance is not a Duty now, as
well as it was six or seven Years ago? leave off your canting and your lying,
and learn your Duty to God and our King, without Popish and Knavish
Equivocations.

Page 19. If there were nothing else to prove that Pamphlet writ by J. Gadbury,
this Page of it self is sufficient; for I think no man but him has a Face so
qualified, to put such a Falsehood upon the World, and to entertain his Reader
with the relation of a Story, that gives the lie to his own knowledge, at the
same moment; and therefore I do refer it to every, or any Reader for judgment,
provided he has not been of too many Religions. He charge me with saying,
That I knew no ground of a difference in the Year 1690. and now in 1693. I
pretend to find one: I stand amazed to think any man should have such a Stock
of Impudence to tell such a notorious Lie with so much Confidence, and
therefore pray hear the Story fairly. In the Epistle to my Almanac 1690. I
have these Words, The Ground of our Difference I know not, and would desire him
to tell that; but when I was beyond Sea, and he thought he should never see me
more, he wrote a Book against me, called a Reply, so full of Malice, Ill
Language, Lies, and malicious Expressions, almost impossible to be believed, or
that a Villain should be so ungenteel to a man in Tribulation, that never gave
him the least occasion imaginable; if I did, let him speak, etc. Now it appears
that he takes the first six or seven words of the Paragraph, and from thence
says I tell the world, I know no cause of difference: It Is true, I say so
still, I know no cause he had to begin that Quarrel with me; and he knows he
began, for he printed first, and abused me basely, and that was the Cause on my
side; but the Cause on his, and the reason why he writ that villainous Reply in
1687. I know not, and therefore would desire him to tell it, for it is not his
Impudence, and Popish way of lying shall silence me, so long as I have Justice
on my side: The first occasion of our difference did indeed appear to me, in
the end of September 1680. he and I then being in company, I called his Cousin
Cellier (so he then owned her) a hard Name, for which I thought he would have
beaten me, but that I was not willing to it: There was also another Reason
about that time; for one day he told me in some Anger, That I had spoiled my
Fortune by writing against Popery in my Prodromus, a little thing that was
published about the time he was in Goal; these things might broil in his
Stomach all this while, as indeed I know they did; and tho I have heard by
others of his scurrilous Reflections on me, I always spoke of him with respect,
and gave him a good Report; and however these might be the occasion of
difference on his side, I did not take notice of any thing t ll he printed in
1687. and that was the cause I contend with him; but what cause and reason he
had to write that I know not, and desire him to tell me; for the cause of that
Book must be the cause of our difference.

But at last he quarrels with Merlin's Black-Thumb! Alas, poor John! set
Merlin's Black Thumb against Jack Thimble's Black Life: What! meddle with my
Trade, when you know what a Broadside I have at you? indeed John I thought you
had been better furnished with Sense, than I find you are; remember from whence
you came, you are indeed hot and heavy, like a Taylor's Goose; and therefore
have at you in your own Way, and your old Trade.

It Is a Champion great,
My M^se does relate
With St. George and the rest of the Fighters
How with Finger in Neck
He did boldly attack
His Bosom Friends, and his Backbiters.
Cross-Legg'd on his Throne,
He governed alone,
Notwithstanding his Hell was so near,
He called for his Bodkin,
And Thimble, that odd thing
And obediently both did appear.
And because he shall not think I am grown dull and barren in Anagrams, I Will
give him one in answer to his, tho not so Gallows high.

John Gadbury Buried in a Hog.
As Hell of old did to the Swine retire,
So the old Sow did the young Boar inspire
She got the Swine, Hell formed this vicious Bog,
And all her Pains was buried in a Hog.


Page 20. As to the Book he here rails at, and reviles, there are more
A^trological Truths in that contemptible Treatise, than ever he knew, or was
able to inform the World of; and for his calling it a railing beastly Treatise,
I shall only say this, That I have a Nasty beast-like Fellow to deal with; and
let him, if he thinks fit, answer the Astrologick part, and let that which he
calls railing alone; and I do assure him, I shall kiss his hand in Print again
very speedily.

At last he asks me, if J.G. is so bad a man as I represent him to be, how
does he keeps clear of the Law, etc. Why John! were not you indicted by Mr.
Godden for debauching his Wife? Were not you taken up in Charles the Second's
Time, and kept in Prison 8 or 10 Weeks? Were you not taken up in the Summer
1690. and in custody 8 or 9 Weeks, and both these for Crimes against the
Government; and do you call this escaping the Law all this while? take your
self by the Memory again, and consider. And whosoever will but consider the
number of men destroyed in 1685. Blood being then spilt in Pastime; and the
Blood-hunting then, and in some Years before, he will soon be able to tell
whether they were Bloody Reigns or not?

I find in the Conclusion that Mr. J. G. is going to publish a Book called the
Ungrateful Demon dispossessed, I believe it will be a mighty ingenious thing,
because it is founded upon Conjuring; for whoever goes to dispossess a Demon,
in English a Devil, must do it by Prayers, or by Conjuring; by Prayer he
cannot, his Life and Conversation is too wicked to effect such a thing; but by
Conjuring I cannot tell what to say to it, because it is a new Trade he has
taken up, and that he learned it of his Priests, with their Hoc est Corpus: But
methinks if he could do it by Conjuring, he might have cast the Devil ^ut of
his Wife by this time, she being mad, and he having had her about six years,
long enough to have done that, which to this day he has not done; I am afraid
he is a mere Juggler, and cannot conjure: However I will at the End of my Book,
give him a Copy of Verses to put at the beginning of his; And they are as
follows:

In Commendation of J. Gad. and his New Conjuring Book.
CALL good Assistance in, the Men of Note,
Go fetch the Tapers, Rod and Conjuring-Coat:
Now draw a Circle, draw it plain and fair,
And in the middle place our Conjurer;
Make all the horrid Signs and Characters,
To raise in the Spectators dreadful Fears;
Write all the Thundering Frightful Names thereo n,
Of Anael, Raphael, Zadkiel, Metroton,
Pauiel, Cassiel, Tetragrammaton:
With Rod and Book in hand, let him appear,
Armed with the Cross, that makes his Devils fear:
Now is he safe, now let the Work begin,
Now let him call his Captain Devil in,
With all his Rake-hell Tribe, Old Satan by,
And bring with them Hell's Grand Artillery.
His Joyful Fiends thus met, with fury hurled,
We'll leave them now to dispossess the World;
Go call Queen Mab, and Great King Oberon,
And ask them what the Devil they have done?
To send a Fool, a Fool that prides himself,
Of being Chief, nay, the Chief Sovereign Elf;
Satan's Successive Heir, the Errant Fairie,
That pinched by Night the Thighs of Joan and Mary;
This Prince of Demons, that commands each Elf,
What! cast them out of others, not thy self?
The Reason's plain, he to himself is civil,
He is a Compound, and the most part Devil:
Then who can think the Elf from's self will run,
That Satan e're will dispossess his own.
What! cast out Demons now, is Trade grown slack,
True Juggler still, here is honest Conjuring Jack.
Your Wife is mad, pray let your Skill appear,
Begin at home, cast out the Devil there.
But hold, to give Advice in that I Am loath,
You Two being one, one Devil serves you both:
Nay, it is a frugal way, can you agree,
One Single Devil serves a whole Family.
But what is one Devil to the mighty Host,
When Jack himself can of his Legions boast.
Well, by these Titles now may thou prefer,
Thy Prince's Slave, and Hell-born Conjurer.
Go Curse and Conjure with your Popish Crew,
Your Cross, your Dagon-Deity and You.
FINIS.

