THE EPITOME OF Man's Duty. BEING A Discourse upon Mic. 6.8. where the
Hypocritical people are briefly directed how to please God.

Qui in vitiis sibi placent, non credent nobis, etiamsi Solemn manibus gestemus.

Lactant. LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Francis Tyton, and are to be sold at the
three Daggers in Fleetstreet near the inward Temple Gate, 1660.

The Epitome of man's Duty.
MIC. 6.8. He has showed thee O man, what is good: and what does the Lord
require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
thy God?


THAT there are Laws of God engraven upon the tables of our hearts, Men would
willingly please God and themselves too.
both the light of nature, and the holy Scriptures plainly tell us. Whenever
we raze out or blot any of these Laws, we prick our consciences, and draw blood
of our own souls; and we become traitors also to Gods Majesty, whose image and
superscription we vilely deface; and we know very well that we have incurred
his high displeasure. Now it has been the enquiry of all men how to heal these
wounds and gashes in the conscience, and how to pacify the wrath of God, and
obtain reconciliation with him. Yet such a love they have to their old
traitorous practices which they are loath to leave, that they would willingly
find a way to please God, and to please themselves both together. They will
spare no cost to be at peace with God, so it may not cost them the life of
their sins, and they may still be at peace with them. This is too manifest in
the story of Heathens, Jews, and Christians.

The Heathens knowing that they had offended their Gods, Appatent from the
Heathens.
but having no mind to be perfect friends with them, invented all the ways
they could think of to get their good will, and obtain a grant of them to sin
and not be punished, a license to follow their own desires without any
disturbance. This was the original of the multitude of Gods, of uncouth
ceremonies, horrid mysteries, Panick terrors and affrightments: for they stood
in a terrible dread that the Gods intended some mischief to them which they
knew they deserved. The Athelians (for example) worshipped many Gods, who they
thought might do them either good or harm: and least there should be any that
they performed no devotion unto, and therefore might owe them a spite, they
made an Altar to an unknown God. Or as we may gather from Diogenes Laertius,
there being a great mortality among them, and they obtaining no ease by all
their prayers and sacrifices to the Gods of their own country, they imagined
that it came from some unknown hand, and so worshipped that God whosoever he
was, that he might be reconciled to them.

Just such likewise was the humor of the Jews, From the Jews.
though better taught by God. They could contentedly bestow any thing upon him,
so that they might but have their own wills; And when their sacrifices were
costly and expensive, they hoped God would be well satisfied; and account
himself no loser by their sins which brought him in so many fat services. And
if these would not give him full content, rather then he should not be
satisfied, and rather then their sins should be sacrificed, they would offer
their own children unto him. They ask him if he would have their first born (as
it was the manner of some heathens to sacrifice men and women upon their Altars
to their Gods) If he desired, the fattest and fairest child in the flock should
be made an oblation to him; or if he would have all their estates evaporated in
sacrifices; all their riches smoke in his holy fires. It is the art of the
superstitious man to flatter God and fawn upon him; to bribe him (as it were)
with a rich and gaudy worship at some seasons, that he may have liberty at
other times not to worship him nor serve him as he ought. And this being a
timorous disposition of soul, it makes the man very scrupulous how to please
God, and very lavish in his expenses, out of fear that he will otherwise be
very troublesome to him if he be not pleased.

There is still the same disease in the soul of most that are called
Christians. And from the Christians.
They know that they have sinned, and that God is very angry; and they know
that he is very powerful and able to tear them in pieces: that he is a
consuming fire, and can devour them in a moment; And this fear makes them sigh
and weep, knock their breasts, and make a mournful noise; fast and pray, run
from Church to Church, to offer him sacrifice: hear Gods word and read it, or
do any other thing but only do the will of God according to what they hear and
read to be their duty. For they do not see any such goodness in God that should
attract their love, and make delight in his life, and accord with his will; but
they are only amazed at his greatness, and tremble to think of the evil that he
can do them. They will give him (as it were) the fruit of their body, they will
pine and starve their corpse with fasting, if the doing that penance will
satisfy for their surfeiting and drunkenness, or for their greedy, ravenous,
and devouring covetousness. They will spare no ballowed breath, if their
prayers may but blow away the infection of their oaths, lies, corrupt
communication that comes out of their mouths. If he will have a drink offering
of their very tears, they will not grutch it, so be it that they may drown the
tears of the oppressed, or wash off the stains of cruelty and unmercifulness.
They will mourn and lament; they will cry and houl upon their beds; they will
sigh and groan; they will walk heavily and sadly; they will shut themselves up
from company; they will make large confessions of their offenses; I cannot tell
what it is that they will not do; but all is to entreat the Lord not to be
angry with them for their rebellions: and if ever they commit the like again,
they promise to make him as good an amends as they do now, and resolve to fast
and mourn and bewail the fault; so that he shall not say, they did nothing to
please him.

And the reason of all this is, The reason of men's endeavor to please him
without leaving their sins.
because men love their sins well themselves; and think that God can love them
also if he will, and that he need not be so offended and distasted unless he
please. They hope therefore that ^hey may entreat him to be more kind then to
take away their beloved lusts from their embraces, seeing it is not his nature
but only his imperious will (as they imagine) that sets him so against them.
And hence it is that they earnestly beg his pardon for what his past: and for
to incline him to condescend to their desires of not being angry with their
sins, they are willing and ready also otherwise to gratify him; and to give
him something that may please him as well as their forsaking of them. And at
last by long use and practice they grow to this conceit, that they cannot
imagine what God would have more then that they should confess their sins and
be sorry for them. And they live as if they could not devise what should be
more pleasing to God, nor what he should require further of mortal creatures:
Whereas my text tells you plainly that it is the corruption of their wills
rather then the weakness of their understanding, that makes them judge thus
perversely, For it is plain enough what is acceptable unto God, The Lord has
shown thee o man what is good; and what else is it but to do justly? etc. Thou
need not ask so many questions, (as they do, ver. 6, 7.) as if thou knew
not what God would have, nor what thou should do to him more then thou do,
unless thou should offer thy children to him, or all the beasts in thy
pastures, etc. For a little inquiry will acquaint thee that God is very well
pleased if thou will be just, merciful, and humble.

That seems to be the very true sense and meaning of those words foregoing, The
sense of the words from their dependence on the foregoing.
Wherewithal shall I come before the Lord, etc. ver. 6, 7. For this chapter
contains the pleading of God with his people: in the first verse of which he
calls to the Prophet as his Attorney to manage his plea which he puts in
against them. And the Prophet in the second verse calls for silence whiles he
pleads in open court in his behalf. After which in ver. 3, 4, 5. he opens the
case, and shows how guilty they were even from their own confession, that God
had never given them any cause to be weary of his service; but rather that he
had done them all the good that they could desire. And he leads their memories
back as far as Egypt, and the wilderness, where his mercies were wonderful to
them, bidding them testify against him, and put in their plea also, if they
had any thing to say in justification of their defection from him.

Now in those words, ver 6, 7. the Prophet seems to bring in the people
interrupting of him in this complaint against them; saying for themselves in a
grumbling manner, What would you have us do? what is it that you would have us
give to God? Do we not offer him sacrifices, and bow our faces before his
dwelling place? What would he have more then this? What better provision shall
we make for him at his house? They speak like men that knew not how to please
God, and as if he was such an one that no body knew what would content him.
Will he be pleased (say they) with a thousand of rams? What, would he have all
the sheep in our flocks driven to his Altars? Would he have all the oil in the
land run in a stream to his house? or would he have our first born children now
sacrificed, which formerly we might exchange for some thing else? Would he have
them in kind now offered up unto him? or would he have all the fruit of our
body, the blood of all our children one and other sprinkled before him to
expiate for our sins? No, what need all this language (says the Prophet here
in my text) why, do you make your selves so strange to what I say? As though
you could not tell without all these aspersions cast upon God what he would
have you to do? He has showed thee O man, who talk in this sort, what is
good; And tell me what thou think in thy own conscience it is that the Lord
requires of thee. Is it any thing else but to do justly, to love mercy, and
walk humbly with God? Their silence and not answering to the Question argues
that it is unanswerable; and therefore the Prophet goes on in the rest of the
chapter without any interruption from them, to lay open their sins and
punishments. It is not such a difficult matter to please God as men make it;
they know well enough what it is that he requires, if they have any mind to do
it: and it is no such strange thing that they should wonder he requires it at
their hands.

In the words you may observe these six things.

1. Six observations from the words.
That there is some duty to be paid to God by every one of us.

2. That it is easy to know this duty.

3. That God exacts of man nothing in his duty which is unequal or unjust, and
therefore it is easy also to do it.

4. That a man's own conscience will be witness against him if he do not perform
this duty which God requires.

5. Justice, mercy and humble deportment before God are the sum of it.

6. These things were always more valued by God then sacrifices, and other the
most costly services.

All these lie plainly before your eyes, as you may soon discern in the text:
or they will all manifestly appear to him that will seriously attend these
following considerations which I will offer to his thoughts upon every one of
them.

FOR the truth of the first, That there is something owing by every one of us
unto God, The proof of the first, from four things.
I need not search all the divine writings to make out Gods title to man's duty;
here are evidences enough for it within the compass of the text.

First he is our Lord [What does the Lord require of thee? He is our Lord.
] and that by a title Paramount to all others. He gave us our being; and it is
one of the Regalia of the crown of heaven, that all the Subjects of that
kingdom are perfect creatures. We are all his vassals, and can no more be
absolved from fealty and homage to him, then we can cease to be when we are.
All the tenures, you know, among us were held by some services: and that of
pure Villenage made a man most at the will of the Lord: now such is that which
we owe to God, but more pure and absolute then any other can possibly be. For
our persons are tied and bound to him, and not only our services; and we are
not bound by our own consent only, but we are Servi nati, born his servants;
yea more then so, we are Servi creati (a title peculiar to him) created
servants, who owe their whole selves to him.

To deny therefore all obedience unto God, is to say, we are our own, who is
LORD over us? It is the highest piece of pride and insolency, an unpasalleld
rebellion against our natural Sovereign; a crime never to be pardoned but by
his infinite clemency, and our unseigned subjection to him as long as we live.

2. We are men.
We are men [he has showed thee O Man what is good] and as we are reasonable
creatures, (1) We are endowed with more excellent powers of obeying God then
other creatures: we are tied to him in the most noble services, and fitted for
the most honorable employments. (2) And being reasonable creatures, we
likewise have a sense above all others of our obligations to the supreme Lord
of the world; and our own consciences give us the lie, if we say that we are
free to do what we will. We know very well that when we took a being from him,
we took an oath of faith and service to him. There is (...), Hierocles.
as an Heathen himself could say, an oath inessenced and consubstantiated with
mankind; an oath of allegiance included in our very being; a Sacrament which we
took to God in our mothers womb when we had first leave to become men. Our very
reason and conscience is that (...). (in Arrians Phrase) that promise and
engagement whereby we swear to God before we can speak, as soon as a soul is
breathed into us. He that breaks this sacred oath or promise, does unman
himself as much as he can, and becomes unreasonable. And (3.) as reasonable
likewise, a man can soon tell himself, that since he requires service of
persons and things below him: he is much more bound in service to the Most High
who is the creator of us all.

3. God requires something of us, God makes demands.
which he would never do if it was not his due: He is not so unjust as to make
demands where he has no right: nor so needy as to beg that which is none of
his own: nor so unkind as to follow us with continual arrests if we were his
neighbors only, and not his tenants and debtors: nor so unwise as to maintain
officers and servants where he has nothing to receive. These are the words of
the Prophet of God to men: now why should God send his messengers and
Ministers, and call upon men so earnestly, but that there are some services
incumbent upon them, of which they ought to be highly sensible? What King makes
proclamation where he expects no subjection? What Lord issues out commands, and
sends out his servants, where he has no tenants that hold of him? It would be
in vain to make such loud cries to men, if God expected nothing, but that men
should please themselves, and do to him as they thought good. And it is too
late to ask quo jure, by what right God requires our obedience: for I have
already mentioned a title that comprehends all in it.

4. The worst of men confess his right.
The worst of men confess his right. They that will not love him, will flatter
him; they that will not give him all, will give him some: and they that have
been negligent, seek to make him satisfaction. The Jews to whom the Prophet
here speaks, that would not do all his will, yet offer him large sums to buy
off the punishment for their faults. As they who are bound by their tenures to
personal service in the wars, would many times rather send their servant in
their stead: so would these men gladly give God content by sacrificing of their
beasts, when they had no mind to offer up themselves. And all the ways whereby
the poor heathen study to make him reparation for their wrongs, and atone him
to them, are plain confessions of this truth, that we owe something to him.

In a matter so clear, Application, against the professedly profane.
I will not hold a candle to the Sun, but First I shall rather wonder that
there should be any such persons in the world that live like bruites; as if God
required nothing of them, but had made them to fill their bellies, and their
purses, and had given them leave not to be men. Sons of Belial they are (as the
ancient Scripture calls them) men under no yoke or government, unless it be the
tyranny of their own lusts and passions, which domineer over them. Men that
hate instruction and scorn reproof, as if we did them wrong when we tell them
God requires that they should be better. Men that lift up the nose, like the
wild Ass in the wilderness which snuffs up the wind at her pleasure, and say,
who shall command them? I wish there were no such Monsters in the world, that
shake off the government of God, and say of Christ, this man shall not reign
over us: that take it ill to be touched in the tender interest of their sins:
that think (it is plain) neither God nor man can require more of them then they
will give them.

Take heed that all this be not true in your lives, if not in the temper of
your spirits. Remember seriously this fundamental truth which you all know
well enough already, That you are not at liberty: that there are some
indispensable duties he upon you: that you are tied to God in the most sacred
bonds: and that it must be your greatest care to see them well discharged.

And secondly; And against pretended Saints.
if this be true, let the Libertines of this Age look to it, who think that all
duty smells of baseness and servitude (for by that name they have learnt to
call all our services) and that Christ came to free us from obedience to God
himself. And let us look to them also: for if God must expect nothing from
them, then what presumption is it for us poor mortals to imagine that they must
be just or faithful, or any thing else to us. And therefore you may observe,
that at the same time that men began to think there was no obligation lay upon
them of duty to God, they began to imagine that all their Landlords also were
usurpers, and that they had no rights but what the corruption of ancient times
had given them.

But Christ did not make us the less men, by making us to become Christians. He
has in his title the name of our Lord. Duty and true grace are it no such
difference as silly people imagine. Our obligations are not diminished, but our
strength and power is increased; the service is not altered, but love mixed with
justice makes it more easy. We are not discharged from our work, but our
reward is swelled to an unmeasurable disproportion to it.

But I pass by this, because I hope there are none that hear me, who set God
and Christ at odds, and rob him of his creature under a pretense of making him
a Christian.

THE second truth, The second obse^^^ prov^ (...)
viz. That it is eafie for men to know their duty, is clear from two passages
in the text. 1. The Lord has showed it to them. He has demonstrated it, and
made it very plain so that if a Law do not bind till it be promulgated, that
injures not Gods title at all; for he has shown and proclaimed his mind. 2. It
is so shown, that men cannot but see it and take notice of it, as the manner of
words by way of Question does clearly intimate, What does the Lord require of
thee? As if he should have said; thou know very well, I need not tell it
thee, It is sufficient only to put thee in mind of what thou art well
acquainted with, even to do justly, to love mercy, etc. And indeed it is so
plain, that God shows it more ways then one.

1. God shows man his duty by his Conscience.
He shows it in our own consciences by the light of reason. That the Question
supposes, and the Apostle expressly says, Romans 1.19. Because that which may be
known of God is manifest in them, for God has showed it unto them. Romans 2.15.
Which show the work of the Law written in their hearts, their consciences also
bearing witness, etc. (1) Man's soul does not come out of Gods hand like a sheet
of white paper, in which there is nothing writ, or printed; but it is as a book
impressed with many sacred letters and divine characters. And (2) this book is
not shut and claspt, but it stands open to every ones search. Nor (3) is Gods
mind writ in some corner of the book, and wrapped up in leaves of darkness, but it
shows it self, and the letters are so great, that they will be read Nor (4) Is
the sense of this writing hard to be understood, but we call them Common
notions, first principles which must be easy, and perspicuous at the first
sight. Nor (5) need we go to the learned for their Comments upon them; or as
Tertullian speaks, we need not appeal to a soul that has been formed in the
Schools, bred in a Library, and fed with Academical notions, De test. Animae,
cap. 1.
but simplex and rudis, and impolita, and idiotica, illa ipsa de compito, de
trivio, de textrino, the most simple and rude, the most impolished and
illiterate soul, the veriest highway soul; the soul that is bred in the shop or
in the street, will testify to these things, as well as that which is brought
up in a Study, or learned retirements. Nor (6) is this book so blotted by our
fall into the dirt, but that the great lines of our duty are fair and legible.
Just as we see the Sun in a cloud casts forth a light whereby we discern in
waht part of the heavens it is; or as a pearl will shine though it lie on a
dunghill; so will these golden letters shine and glister in men's fouls, inan
heap of rubbish: and this light will break forth through a veil of darkness.
And (7) where there are any lacunae, any gaps or breaches in a particular soul,
by comparing all the Coppies, and consulting with one another reasons, we
should soon find the true sense. Yea (8) more then this, it is not in the power
of any of you to raze out these characters. They are not at your liberty to
expunge or alter. For they are not so much scriptae as natae, written as born:
we did not put them into us, but we find them in us. Though I might here cry
out as Tertullian in another case, O anima naturaliter Christiana! O soul, who
naturally art a Christian! yet let us look further and consider,

2. By his word in the Scriptures.
That in the Bible God shows our duty more clearly by the light of revelation.
Here we are informed so exactly both what God is, and what man is: that he must
be blind that does not see that it is Gods word, and that man's obedience is due
unto it. The very style wherein it speaks is, Thus says the Lord, a form of
speech not to be found in other books. The contents of it about our duty are so
clear and plain, that we may say with Solomon, Prove. 6.23. (...) lex est lux,
the Law is light. Or as it is said in the vision of Habakkuk, which God bid him
write and make plain upon tables, ( chap. 2.2.) he that runs may read it. And
again these plain things are so agreeable to the connate principles of our
mind, and the natural sense that we have of goodness, that he has put his laws
into our hearts; and we need not say one to another (as if it was a strange
thing) know the Lord, for all of us may know him from the greatest to the
least. In short, this word is compared to a glass which shows unto us all our
own deformities, and represents unto us likewise the face and image of God,
whereby we should dress and compose our selves to be beloved of him.

3. By his Ministers.
He shows us our duty by his Ministers in the light of preaching. Cry aloud,
spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their
transgressions, Isa. 58.1. Will thou judge the bloody City? yet thou shall show
her all her abominations, Ezekiel. 22.2. If there be any thing in this book, that
is not so plain and clear: God has set them to expound and unfold it. If any
thing be dark, they are to manifest it. They open to men Gods word, and let
them into the inwards and secrets of it. And by manifestation of the truth,
they commend themselves to every conscience of man in the sight of God, as the
Apostle says, 2 Cor. 4.2. i e. men know in their consciences that what we say
in these matters, is the very truth of God.

4. By his Works.
The works of God in the world abundantly show it by the light of providence.
Those exemplary punishments I mean upon notorious offenders, which speak the
finger of God; and his rewards to the righteous, which have many times no less
of God in them. By these God vindicates his authority, and shows that he is the
supreme Governor; and that these are his Laws from which we ought by no means
as we love our selves to swerve, or stir a foot. And so God says, the
wickedness of Judah was discovered, Ezekiel. 16.57. when he punished her for her
iniquity: It had often before been discovered by the preaching of the Prophets,
but when that would not prevail, he laid it open in a more dreadful manner by
the voice of his judgments, which bid all men mind their duty better.

5. By the Church.
All the people and Church of God do show it in the light of their lives. Their
light shines before men; Math. 5.16. 1 Pet. 2.9.
they show forth the praises or the virtues of him that has called them out of
darkness into his marvelous light. Men cannot but see that there are many in
the world, that run not with them into the same excess of riot, that pray
continually, that make a conscience of every word they speak; that are full of
love and pity; that are ready to do good; of a peaceable and meek disposition,
and ready to forgive, etc. These show to men what is good, and they have them
continually before their eyes. It is well if it be not so plain, that they
become an eyesore to them: if they do not shine so bright in contradiction to
their lives that they are offended at it. The Church of God is called the
pillar and ground of truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. because it does hold forth the truth
to men: and support it in the world, even as a pillar does a proclamation which
is affixed to it, so that all that pass by may read it. And this it does not
only by preaching and outward profession, but by the sincere practice of a
multitude of professors. So that it is as easy for men to know their duty, as
to know what a Kings proclamation is, which is not only cried, but likewise
posted up in the marketplace, that all may read it.

Let us not then be so dull as to think on the one hand to plead Ignorance, or
weakness of parts, or insuffici^ncy of light in excuse, for neglect of our
duty: or so wild, We cannot then plead Ignorance, we need not be Seekers.
as on the other hand to turn Seekers in Religion, as though no body could yet
find the way to heaven. The Lord has showed thee O man, what thou have to do;
and therefore thou shall not be able to pretend that thou wantedst the means of
knowledge, and had no body to inform thee in thy duty: And he has shown it
so long ago, that the world cannot be at this day to seek how to please God, as
if no body could tell what his mind was. To pass by the former; let it be
considered concerning the latter, that they he shrewdly to be suspected to
believe no God; or else not to know what they mean by the name, who are to seek
what Religion to be of. For no man can be rationally persuaded of the being of
a God, and not be persuaded that he governs the world: And if he govern the
world, it must be by Laws; And if those Laws are uncertain, they are no better
then none. And if they be made for all his subjects, they must be plain,
because many of them understand but little.

It is an easy thing to find what Gods will is, if we be but impressed with
such a sense of our dependence on him as begets that reverence and fear of him,
and that love and affection to him, which easily and naturally flows from the
sense of our dependence. Gods mind is laid before us, we need only open our
eyes and look no further. The way is plain, though it be narrow; the gate is
open, though it be strait. You may easier find the way then walk in it, you may
sooner see the gate then enter in at it. It is to be feared that they who seek
for some new way, find this too strait and narrow which they have been in; and
they would have a greater liberty to themselves, then formerly their
consciences durst let them take. And then the Devil may soon show them the way
wherein they should walk, and by a new light discover to them the paths of
darkness. But I dare say if any man have a mind to live godly, to deny himself,
to walk humbly with his God; he need not go to seek any further then this book.
There he may behold so much to be practiced, that if he will seek no further
till he has done that, I may warrant him from being of the number of any other
seekers then those that seek the Lord continually, that they may walk in all
his commandments blameless. They are exceeding broad, they are to have an
influence into the whole life: so that if the doing of those be our end, we
need seek for no more, for they will hold us at work all our days.

THE third observation is, The third observation proved.
That Gods demands are not unequal, or that he does not exact of us any duty
that is hard and rigorous. They are not Draco's Laws cruel and tyrannical:
nor the heavy yoke of Moses, grievous, and painful; but the gracious commands
of Jesus Christ, the Laws that God himself lived by when he was in the flesh:
Co^in germans to those that rule in heaven. Two things in the text likewise
speak this, besides that which is mainly intended.

First the Prophet calls it Good which the Lord shows to us. He requires
nothing that is for our harm, or our real damage, or which a man should refuse
if he was left to himself, did he rightly understand. And secondly, the
question likewise speaks it, What does the Lord require of thee? As if he
should have said, what great matter does he look for? what can thou except
against it? is it any thing strange and uncouth, that was never before heard
of? Did thy mind never give thee notice of it? Is it some monstrous task, that
the mind of man could never conceive it, nor think of it? No.

1. God exacts not things impossible.
God requires nothing impossible, as is apparent from two things which the text
suggests to our thoughts. 1. He does not bid men offer their children to him,
which perhaps they have not. He does not bid them buy them (as the Heathen
sometime were fain to do) for perhaps they are not able. He does not exact of
men (as the Prophet before said) a thousand rivers of oil, which a whole Town
or Country cannot afford: But as Moses says, The commandment is not hid from
thee; neither is afar off: It is not in heaven that thou should say, who
shall go up to heaven, and bring it to us, that we may hear it and do it?
Neither is it beyond the sea, that thou should say, who shall go over the sea
for us and bring it unto us that we may hear it and do it? But the word is very
nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou may do it. Deuteronomy.
30.11, 12, 13, 14. He does not bid us all be Scholars, and understand all the
books of nature: He bids us not to climb up to heaven, and follow the chariot
of the Sun, and track the paths wherein the Moon walks, and number all the
heavenly bodies, things which all men's parts and employments will not reach:
but he says plainly, do justly, love merty, walk humbly with God; things
within us, which we know well enough he requires of us. And secondly, you may
observe that he says, What does the Lord require or thee O man? He does not
bid us make other men do justly and love mercy, etc. He does not command us to
quell other men's passions, but our own: nor govern other men's desires and
lusts, but those that are in our selves. He exacts not of us their duties,
whether it be of our children or servants, or any such impossible task, but our
own duty toward God and them. When we have done what we can to make them
understand and do their duty, then says the Scripture, God will not require
their blood at our hand: But the soul that sins, that shall die, and every
soul shall bear its own iniquity.

2. Nor things unreasonable.
He requires nothing unreasonable, for he speaks to us here in the Text as men.
He bids us only love a greater good more then a less; a better thing more then
a worse; God more then the world; the soul more then the body. To do to others,
as we would they should do to us; to provide for a long life more then a short;
to lay up treasure where none can take it away. He never bids us pray, unless
we be in need; nor give thanks, but when we have received a blessing. Do but
show that you are not in perpetual want, and he will not ask you to pray
without ceasing; Do but make it good that you receive not innumerable blessings
every day, and he will not require you to give solemn and hearty thanks. Do but
show that it is better to be drunk then to be sober, and you may take your
fill; that a man can write better then God, and then you need not read his
Word; that all time is your own, and then you may sit at home, or recreate your
selves on the Lords day. And so you may say of every other duty; not one of
them is unreasonable to be expected from us; for he commends the best things to
us, and prefers a good to us before an evil; or a greater good before a less.

3. Nothing that is unnatural. Nor things unnatural.
I do not mean to corrupt nature; for so the most reasonable thing that is may
seem unnatural; as to provide for our parents; to keep our word when it is to
our damage, etc. But to nature as God made it, and to renewed nature, God
requires nothing that is contrary. It cannot be unnatural to trust God more
then our riches; to live by faith in God; to depend upon his promises; yea to
leave all for his sake; and to trust him with our lives, as well as our
fortunes; to trust him till another world, as well as in this. That which seems
the hardest thing in Religion, is to lay down our lives if God call for them:
to forsake every thing, rather then break the least of his Commandments; and
yet there is nothing unnatural in it, but it is according to the right
constitution and nature of our souls, to let him dispose of our lives and
goods, who gave them to us; to trust him with them, and with our selves. It is
not unnatural to give our lives to the God of Life; especially since he has
promised a better life, which makes it infinitely reasonable, and so far from
being unnatural, that it is desirable to do and suffer what he pleases. (...).
in Epist.
(...). Nothing puts us so much out of all fear, as to stand in the fear of the
Laws. And nothing puts us in such possession of our selves, as to give our
selves to him.

But you must not think that when I say it is thus good, A caution.
there is nothing in it that is harsh and sour; for as the worst things may be
grateful, so the best things may be unsavory to a bad palate. To the flesh
these things will not seem good till it be tamed and subdued, and then even the
body will think it self bettered by them. Many sorts of poison are sweet in the
mouth, and many good medicines are as bitter. Many sins are pleasurable in the
acting, though they be rank poison, bitterness and gall when they are gone down
and swallowed into the conscience: And on the contrary, many things are uneasy
and distastful, which afterward yield the rarest delights, and the greatest
benefits. We must not think that our duty is such, that we shall find no
labor, no reluctance in it. No, it is not so easy as to eat our meat, or
drink our drink; but being spiritual, it will find resistance from the flesh,
and we must do some violence to that at the first for our souls good. And then
when we are used to our duty, it will be as natural to us as to eat; and though
to put forth such acts of obedience may not be so easy as to go to a feast,
yet in the acting, they will be no less sweet then our meat and drink.

And if God require no unequal thing, No man then shall dare to plead his want
of power to do Gods commands.
let no man think to plead his own inability, to do Gods commands. Why should
God give us a charge, if it were impossible to be kept? what good or wise
master would require tasks that can never be performed? And besides, is it not
as possible to forbear sin for Gods sake, as out of reverence to a person whom
thou fear? Can thou not as well do what God commands, as what a friend
enjoins? Can thou not as well forbear to be drunk, when none but God sees, as
thou can when the Magistrate or Minister is in company? And if thou can be
sober to day, then why not to morrow also? If for a week thou can give thy
self to reading and prayer, then why not for a month, and so for a year, and
so for ever? If thou can be silent and hold thy tongue, why can thou not
keep from Oaths and evil language when thou speak? And for other matters
that are higher, if thou can do these lower even by an ordinary grace, why
can thou not do them by the mighty power of Gods holy Spirit? If a man can
abstain from much evil by himself, then why should he not be able to do good
through God? There is no man shall have this pretense for himself at the day of
Judgment, that he was unable to do what he knew; for then it will appear to
all others and himself also, that he could have done more then he did. God
required many things within himself; and for the rest, the Spirit of God that
moved him to them, would have assisted him in them. Yea, even now it appears to
men's own consciences, that they can have no such excuse; for that is the fourth
Observation.

THat men's own consciences will speak against them, The fourth observation
proved.
if they do not what God requires. This is but a deduction from what has been
said, and is plainly also supposed in the text. For first you have seen that
men have a full knowledge of their duty. They need not be told it; but the
Question only being asked, it is supposed they can readily make an Answer. Or
being named, it need not be proved, their own hearts instantly giving an
assent. And therefore secondly, they must needs witness against themselves: for
as they know what they ought to do, so they know when they do not as they
ought. And they know without any information, so that if you do but ask the
Question, they are sufficiently reproved of their negligence. And so thirdly,
they will condemn themselves; for it is contrary to the mind, to approve of
that which it knows it ought not to have done. As it is a witness against it
self in matter of fact, so it will be a Judge, and condemn it self as to matter
of right. And this is a great deal more then the Devil can do against any man
of us. For though he may inform and accuse, yet he cannot sentence or condemn.
And if a man's own conscience was clear, he need not fear all his plaints, all
the bills that he is able to put in against him. But the conscience is not only
Informer, and Accuser, and Witness, but Judge also, and it sentences and
condemns us. And that first of all as unjust to God; and secondly false and
cruel to our selves. For there was a debt owing unto God, and therefore we were
unjust to him in not paying of it; and our own consciences told us of it, and
therefore we were treacherous, false and barbarous unto our souls, in violating
their light, and acting contrary to those known principles that are within
them. They will always be telling us of it, they will lash us with everlasting
torments, and after they have, being their own Judges, they will turn
Executioners and Tortors likewise of themselves. So that every wicked man is
worse then a Devil to himself, and he carries his own hell about with him.

And therefore every one of us had need take heed how we render our selves
guilty before God; The danger of sinning against our conscience.
for he need but send to our own souls and rouse them up, and they will become
our greatest tormentors. As we set our selves against God, so will God set our
selves against our selves. And as we are ready to impeach him of hardness and
severity, so shall we most miserably indite our selves of cruelty and
hard-heartedness to our own souls. And as we are apt to count him unreasonable
in his demands, so shall we accuse our selves of unreasonableness; and our
souls shall fall out with themselves as they did with him. Such a confusion
does sin make in the world, and in our selves. When we cease to be friends with
God, we shall never after be friends with our own souls. When peace is broken
with heaven, all the world is disturbed, and there is peace with nothing, no
not with our own minds. Therefore as we love our selves, let us endeavor to
live in all good conscience before God. Let us not do the least evil, for to
avoid the suffering of the greatest evil; and let us not neglect any good, for
the purchasing of the best good the world affords. Take the heathen man's
counsel, which it is a shame Christians should not follow. (...). Chilo apud
Laert.

(...).
Choose any loss, rather then a dishonest gain; for that will trouble thee once;
but this for ever. It cannot be long before thou feel that occultum
flagellum, that hidden whip, the cords of which thou art continually twisting
for to lash thy self; and though it scourge thee with a silent stroke which no
body hears, yet it will make thee cry and roar in an eternal misery. Then thou
that would not do justly to others, shall do justice upon thy self; and thou
that loved'st not mercy, shall be able to show none to thy self; and thou that
behaved'st thy self proudly and contemptuously against God, shall seem the
vilest creature in thy own eyes, and not have so much comfort, as to conceive a
good opinion of thy self.

But that all this which has been thus briefly discoursed, may more fully and
clearly manifest its truth, pass we to the fifth observation, which is mainly
intended.

THat the duties which God requires of man, The fifth observation.
are, justice, mercy, and humble walking before him. These three are the things
which I say are so plain, so good, so necessarily incumbent upon us, that our
consciences cannot deny their obligation. These are the Pandects that contain
all the Laws whereby we are to live; or rather, they are the Brief, the Summary
of all those Laws. God has at large delivered his mind, and shown his will in
the Bible; but sometimes he does epitomize it, and contracts the sum of our
duty into a few commands, which are as it were the quintessence and heart of
the whole. The Hebrew Doctors observe, that there are in the Law of Moses, six
handred and thirteen precepts. All these (say they) David comprehends in the
compass of eleven, Psalm 15. Our duty is sometimes reduced to a few heads in
the holy Scripture.
The Prophet Isaiah again brings them into a smaller compass, and reduces them
to six heads, which you may read in Isa. 33.15. V. Gemara in Maccoth. cap. 3.
In Micah they are more compacted into three, naming this place which I am
discoursing of. In Isaiah again they are brought to two, Isa. 56.1. Keep ye
judgment, and do justice (though our Savior has better epitomized them, Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc. and thy neighbor as thy
self) And then comes the Prophet Amos, and he thrusts all into one, Amos 5.4.
Seek ye me, and ye shall live. But the Prophet Habakuk comes after and does it
better (according to some of their opinions) saying, The just shall live by
faith, Hab. 2.4. which last place is much cited by the Apostle Saint Paul, and
you see what is the sense of some of the Hebrews concerning it; that it is a
compendious manner of speaking, and includes in its comprehension all that
which God speaks in other places. Thus much false Christians might learn of
their enemies, that faith is not such a lean and meagre thing as they make it,
but is full of obedience to all Gods will. And according to this notion, I must
look upon this part of my Text, as expressing in a few words, that which we
must seek for at large in other parts of holy Writ, as representing to us our
whole duty toward God, and toward all men, yea and toward our selves also.
For the opening of which, three things may be expected to be distinctly
handled. 1. What it is to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
God. 2. That God requires these things of us. 3. That they are Good, and it is
no unkindness in God to exact them. But for brevity sake, I will do all these
three together, and as I show what is meant by doing justly, etc. subjoyn some
arguments for their being due to God, and likewise good to us.

TO do justly, What it is to do justly.
is to give every one that which is his own. And it contains in it all the
duties of the second Table, especially of the eighth Commandment. Sometimes
justice or righteousness is taken largely for all Religion. Sometimes more
strictly for our duty toward our neighbor, as to matters of right. And
sometimes most strictly, for the duties of the eighth Commandment, to defraud
no man, to withold from none what we owe them; nor rob them, or take away
from them that which they have in their possession. And here it may possibly be
taken in the strictest sense, so that all the rest of those Commandments must
be included in the phrase of walking humbly with God. But if it be extended to
all of them, then by virtue of the fifth Commandment, to do justly, is to give
our parents due honor, whether they be natural, civil or spiritual. And in
respect of the sixth, it is to preserve the life of our neighbor, and to have
a care that we injure him not in his being. In reference to the seventh, it is
to preserve his just relations, and not to touch them, or cause the violation
of their faith to him. And in reference to the eighth, it is to preserve his
estate, and not meddle with his goods. And the ninth requires that we preserve
his good name, and not defame him, nor do any prejudice to his credit, no more
then we would to his estate. And by virtue of the tenth, we are to moderate our
very desires, so as not to envy to him that which is his, and long to have it
in our possession. And thus in General I may give you some remembrances of this
part of our duty.

1. That we must not withold from any man his due, if it be in our hands.
Whether it be due by our Promise, or by his Labor; by his trust reposed in us,
or by our offense against him; for we are bound in this last case to make
satisfaction and reparation to him.

2. We must not take from any man that which is his own, whether in his or any
other man's possession. Neither by our words, as through lying, falseswearing,
etc. nor by our deeds, as stealing, robbing, or any other ways.

3. And we must not desire or covet that which is another man's, nor look with
an evil or greedy eye upon any thing that he enjoys. For this is justice in our
souls, as the other two are in our outward actions: and it is this base
covetous and having disposition, which makes men that they cannot forbear such
violent actions.

Now how plain is all this to be understood, It is no injustice to require it
of us.
and how meet is it to be done? What injustice do you find in God, for
requiring justice at your hands? The very definition of this act, is to give to
every one their due, or letting men have what is their own. And if it be
reasonable in others toward you, then it is most reasonably required of you
toward them. And if you may demand it from them, and they from you, then much
more may God demand it of you all. The relation that is between us and others,
requires it of us; and God made both them and us, and those relations; and
therefore he may require this of thee, O man, whosoever thou art. He does but
bid thee do what any heathen will tell thee is thy duty, if thou ownest thy
self to be a man, and intendest to live among men, and not to be destroyed as a
beast of prey. Aristotle or any Lawgiver, could not call for less justice then
God does; only God requires it in words of greater force to engage us to it. It
is well observed by a most learned Divine of our own, D. Saunderson. Sermon. in 1
Pet. 2.17.
that what Aristotle calls (...), to give a man his own, the holy Apostle
calls, Romans 14.7. (...), to render him his dues or debts. Both these words of
the Apostle are more significant then those of the Philosopher's, which may
teach us that Christianity requires under stricter bonds that which morality
demands. For (...) a debt, or that which is owing, is more expressive of our
obligations then (...), his own, or his property. We are debtors unto justice,
and stand bound to our neighbors by our own act and deed, so that he may soon
prove it is his own which he requires. And then (...), to render or restore, is
more full of justice then (...), to give or distribute. For it signifies the
returning of that which we have borrowed of our neighbor; and therefore he
says in the next verse, Owe no man any thing, but to love one another. Every
act of Justice is but the paying of what we have received; for he does justice
to us, and therefore we owe it back again to him. We do but pay him with his
own coin, and discharge that duty which not only God, but he has obliged us
unto. Not that it is lawful to cozen them that cozen us, and thus to render men
as we receive; for that is but to be as dishonest as they who would not pay us
that debt which we took our selves to be bound in unto them. And there is a
public justice likewise to which we owe much; for it preserves our estates,
and from thence we look for satisfaction for our wrongs.

And he is some savage wild creature, And it is very good for us.
who sees not all this to be good. For our neighbor, no question, it is good
that we should do justly; and if for him, then for us; for in his welfare, our
own welfare consists, we being both members of the same body; and in his
honesty is our safety. And therefore they that will not be honest themselves,
would have all men else honest, and think that it is the best thing in the
world that all should deal justly with them. But how can any man expect that
from another, which he will not vouchsafe to him? or by what reason is it that
we must ingross all good to our selves, and let our neighbor have none of it?
If we would have the monopoly of it, we shall never purchase it, for men will
destroy such Wolves and Foxes that raven for themselves, and do no good at all
to others. Or if they do not spy their subtilty, but it is covered in darkness,
God will tear the prey out of their mouths, and the righteous Lord will make
them know that it is bad to do unrighteously. For commonly we see that they who
do wrong to others, are in themselves or posterity laid open to the violence of
such like unjust persons. And so the Eastern Fable taught the people, that the
Woolf having soln a Pigg, was met withal by a Lion, who took it away from him,
and it was a wonder that he was not himself also torn in pieces. That which was
not well gotten, could not well thrive; and men might consider in the midst of
a violent act, that if they can find in their heart to be dishonest, there may
be others in the world of the same mind, that will make no consci^nce to deal
with them as dishonestly. (...) am very much pleased therefore with the
Northern proverb, That it is good sport to be honest: The world may smile a
while upon men in their dishonest gain, and they may laugh at their good
fortune; Job 20.5.
but the triumphing ^f the wicked is short, and the joy of the hypocrite is but
for a moment. If a man have but a little that is justly gotten, it is a great
treasure; for he gains a good conscience, which will continually ^east him. But
wickedness, though it be sweet in the mouth, yet it is the gall of Asps within:
and besides, the riches that such a man swallows down, he shall vomit them up
again: Job 20.12, 14, 15.
God shall cast them out of his belly.

And it is no less good for whole Nations, Good for whole Kingdoms, as well as
for private men.
then it is for private men, to do justly; for they subsist by it, and it is
the pillars of government, of peace and tranquillity. Every act of Justice is
as a pin in a building, which joins the parts of it faster together, and
maintains the intireness of the whole body. And when any man defrauds another,
he pulls out a little pin, loosens the joints, and does what he can to bring
all things to ruin. Either men become enemies to each other, and are in a
state of war when wrong is committed; or else they stand at a distance, and
will have nothing to do with each other any more; and both ways Society is
dissolved; that Communion which is the foundation of Commonwealths is
over-turned.

But see what the Scripture says in all these cases; where many blessings are
promised to just men, and curses are threatened upon all others, Prove. 3.33. The
curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked, but he blesses the babitation
of the just. A curse indeed, enough to make a whole volume, for Zachary saw a
flying roll, a sheet of parchment as large as our Books, writ on both sides
with woes against the thieves and false swearers, Zach. 5.3, 4. A place which I
have taken notice of in the foregoing papers, and I will add by the way here,
That a flying roll may not only denote the speed which that Book full of curses
would make to come upon them; but also that the volume was open and spread
forth, so that all might read it. For you know when a sheet is not rouled up,
but hangs expanded, it is moved by the wind, and flies as it were up and down
in the air. Believe therefore the same wise man who says, Prove. 10.25. As the
whirlwind passes, so is the wicked no more: but the righteous is an
everlasting foundation. If you compare this verse with the second, it will seem
likely, that by a righteous man, he means one who does justly, and thereby
takes a course to settle himself; and by a wicked man, an oppressor, who may
soon lose all that he has unjustly got. Unrighteousness you see will be our
own loss, more then any other man's; and therefore to do justly, is not more
another good and gain, then it is our own. And so you may read, Prove. 11.11.
Prove. 14.34. where he shows the general concernment of Cities and Nations, of
lesser and greater Communities in righteous dealing. King Canutus knew this so
well, that when he had condemned many malefactors, and one desired it might be
considered he was of the blood royal, and have some favor: He said, So he
shall; let him be hanged upon an higher Gibbet. That Justice which he observed
in punishments, if all would observe in their promises, Covenants, contracts,
and all their dealings and intercourses, they would banish suits, quarrels,
wars and tumults out of the world. Peace would grow and flourish on this root;
and how great a good that is, Psalm. 85.10.
we in this Nation by this time may have learnt. This would make our swords
rusty, and our armor good for nothing but to hang up in our houses, and show
that we were once miserable. All that the thunder and lightning of our Guns
tells us, is the worlds injustice, from which we must either be defended or
delivered: Let this cease, and they will all be silent. This will put out the
fires which nothing else will quench; and bury the enmities which else will
always be maintained. It was a wise and a true answer (with which I will
conclude this) which Agesilaus gave to one, who asked him whether Fortitude or
Justice were the greater virtue, (...): We should have no need of your valor,
if we were all just.

AS to do justly, What it is to love merey.
is to give to men that which is their own; so to love mercy, is to give to
others that which is our own. Or rather Justice renders, and mercy gives to men
that which is their due. For that which is ours may be due to others who are in
need, though not by man's Laws, yet by Gods. And there is a kind of Justice even
in mercy, in so much that in Scripture Language, righteousness frequently
signifies giving of Alms, and a Just man, signifies one that is Good. But as
these two stand distinguished, justice requires that every man have his due;
and mercy, that he have what is not by mere justice due to him. Three sorts of
men there are, say some of the ancient Hebrews, and every one of them has his
peculiar saying. The first is the unjust, and he says, That which is mine is
mine, and that which is thine is mine. The second sort is the just, and his
saying is, That which is mine is mine, and that which is thine is thine. The
third sort is the good or merciful, and he says, That which is thine is thine,
and that which is mine is thine. He will not take away from others what is his,
but give to them what is his own; and the Apostle is thought by some to allude
to this distinction of men, when he says, Romans 5.7, 8. Scarcely for a
Righteous man will one die: yet peradventure for a good man some would even
dare to die. I should prolong this discourse beyond its just bounds, if I
should mention all the particular acts of mercy: Let it suffice therefore in
General to tell you,

1. We must not always exact our due.
That sometimes we must let go our own right, and those dues which in justice
others are bound to pay unto us. Strict justice may sometimes be a kind of
injustice, i. e. it may overthrow the ends of justice, which is preserving of
humane society. And all will confess that it is so hard, severe and oppressive
to the parties of whom it is exacted, that what mercy requires in this case, is
very much like the demands of Justice. This bids us to make abatements
sometimes of what in strictness we might ask; and to deal favorably and gently
with all men. Where men have had great losses, and their estates are much
broken, we must not hold them rigorously to agreements. Neither must we take
all advantages of our Brethren, nor seize on a mortgage when they cannot pay;
nor sue a bond, nor turn a man out of his lease, when he misses his day. And a
thousand such like cases there are, wherein mercy calls for that which is named
kindness and favor.

But secondly, We must give to others what they need.
as we must not always require what is our own in other men's hands, so we must
always give to the poor what is in our own hands. We must relieve the
distressed, defend the fatherless, plead the cause of the widow, visit and
help the sick, deliver the prisoner and captive; and be so far from requiring
in some cases what others owe us; that we must give them more to support their
feeble estate withal. Many actions of mercy there are to men's souls, which I
shall not mention, but in general tell you, that under this word are included
all actions of Charity, pity and compassion toward our neighbor. And we must
charge our selves with them, as we do with actions of Justice. And be as
careful not to withold supplies from the poor, as we are not to steal: and
not to say them nay when we are able, no more then we must lie to our Brother:
and we must make provision for them, and do them good, as diligently as we
watch over our selves, that we take not away from them, nor do them evil. The
covetous is abhorred of God, as well as the thief; the unmerciful as well as
the murderer. And therefore a man must not content himself that none can charge
him with doing wrong: but his light must shine before men, and he must give
Alms of such things as he has. And likewise he must deal fairly with all men,
and not with a griping hand, and an overreaching head; and he must be ready to
forgive all them that have trespassed against him, and not hold them to
over-strict satisfaction.

There are many blind worldlings, Too many think it sufficient to be just; but
it is hard so to be, if we be not merciful.
many moles and earth-grubbers, that pudder and scrape in the earth all their
days, and they do not invade any of their neighbors possessions, nor encroach
upon their ground, but content themselves in their holes: and yet they do no
good at all, nor bring any benefit to the world. They seem not so bad as rats,
that eat our meat, and clothes, and books; but yet none is the better for
them: and at last many are much the worse. As the mole, though she take nothing
away from our ground, but seems to raise it higher; yet in time she destroys
it all, by her hills which she casts up: So these men, though they do not
plainly pick men's pockets, and rob them: though they raise fair houses, and
seem to make Towns more splendid where they live, yet they secretly work out
all the old inhabitants, and make it all their own dwelling. They are as the
spleen in the body, and draw all they can from others to fill their own bags;
and the hard conditions which they hold men unto, with their obstinate refusal
to relieve a decaying person, undoes many round about them.

But that it is meet we should do otherwise, appears not only from that great
rule of our Actions, God justly requires mercy of us.
to do to others as we would they should do to us, were their condition ours,
and ours theirs: but also from the great mercifulness of our God to us. We
stand in need every day of Gods mercy, both in giving and forgiving, and why
should it be thought hard that he bids us relieve the needy, when we our selves
are in so much need, and he thinks not much to relieve us? But besides, if it
be hard for us to part with a little out of abundance; how hard is it to them,
to want not only the abundance, but that little? And again, since God gives all
to us, he may entail it upon us and our heirs, on what conditions he pleases,
and what great matter is it, if this be one, that we give some of it away to
others? And truly this is one of the things that makes it good; Mercy is for
our good.
for there is no such way of saving and preserving, as by giving: and no such
way of losing, as by unmerciful saving. This cuts off the intail from many a
fair estate, that the last Lord of it was a covetous miserable wretch. And
besides, God bids us here love mercy, which we could not do if it were not
Good. Neither will God tie us, as you heard, to such hard conditions, as to
delight in our own mischief. And therefore all ingenuous heathens have counted
it a piece of singular contentment to do good, and some looked upon it as a
becoming little gods in the world. This, if any thing, likewise, will draw the
love and affection of others to us, not to say their perty adorations. A great
light and splendour such actions cast abroad, when they are not done out of
popularity and vainglory, but out of love to mercy, and to God the father of
mercies; and they get a man honor without desiring of it, or taking any other
pains to seek it. And there is not only pleasure and credit in this noble
virtue, but as much profit as heart can desire. It must needs be good, because
it is called in Scripture doing of good; and though the phrase properly imports
the good of others, yet let me tell you, we hereby bestow no small boons upon
our selves. God so loves it, that he loves those that love it, and has
promised great rewards to them and theirs, in this world, and in the world to
come. With the merciful, he will show himself merciful, Psalm 18.25. Blessed
are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy, Mat. 5.7. There is that
scatters, and yet increases: The liberal soul shall be made fat; and he that
waters shall be watered also himself, Prove. 11.25, 26. His righteousness
endures for ever, his born shall be exalted with honor, Psalm 112.9. This is
an argument upon which I might dilate till night: For there are no less
treasures for the merciful man, then the rich man has of wealth in his house;
yea infinitely more, for he lays up his treasure in heaven; where God has
bound himself to pay him with usury and increase.

AND now for the third thing, What it is to walk humbly.
What it is to walk humbly with God? it is not fit that I should give you much
more then the heads of discourse, unless I intended of a Sermon to make a
treatise.

First therefore, To think meanly of our selves.
think lowly of thy self, which is a great part of this duty. So the word
humbly is often taken, especially in compare with God, from whom we and all we
have do come, and on whom they continually depend. As thou give to others
their own, yea thine own; so assume to thy self no more then is thine own: yea
call nothing that is good thine own; but acknowledge God in all, be it riches,
or beauty, or learning, or health, or grace it self. When thou exercisest
justice and mercy, do not take it to be a matter of high desert: but think that
thou only do as becomes a man, and thou do thy self a great deal of right
and kindness in it: and what thou do, it is from God, who gives both the will
and ability to do it.

2. Bewail thy imperfections.
Mourn and lament over thy self. Think lowly of thy self, when thou art at the
best: and then moan over, and bemoan thy self, that thou art no better. This is
called in Ahab, humbling of himself, which though it were but outward, yet was
answered with an outward blessing. And thus they are joined together, Jam. 4.9,
10.

3. Obey Gods commands.
Readily subject thy self to all Gods commands. He that truly mourns and is sad
that he is no better, strives most sincerely, and uses all means to be as good
as he can. His heart rises not against any of Gods commands, he thinks nothing
too strict which God enjoins. He willingly gives up his liberty and choice to
God, which is an act of the greatest humility imaginable. Not my will (Lord)
but thy will be done, is not only his language, but the sense of his soul. And
what greater subjection can there be in a man, then to have no will of his own,
but to part with it unto another? This makes all sin so abominable, because it
bids defiance to God, and disowns in a proud sort his authority: and this makes
goodness so acceptable, because it makes us lay our selves at Gods feet, to
know his pleasure, and debases us to nothing. We claim no power over our
selves, or any thing that we have, own no right at all to dispose of any thing
as we please, when we humbly walk with God.

4. And in particular, Worship him with reverence.
we must reverently worship him by all Acts of prayer and praises. O come let
us worship, and bow down, let us kneel before the Lord our maker, Psalm. 95.6. A
Psalm not unfitly appointed to be used heretofore in the beginning of divine
service, to remember us how reverently and solemnly we should address our
selves unto Gods worship. And let me tell you this, that it becomes us to enter
into the place where we tender out services unto God, with more humility and
composedness, then ordinarily now appears. It is not a sign of a good Spirit,
to come either with an haughty and high look, or with a careless and garish
eye, much less laughing and talking, when we are going to humble our selves,
and fall down before the Lord. But we ought to enter even into the place where
we intend to perform our obeisance to him, with reverent thoughts, submissive
looks, and a bashful countenance, as being deeply sensible of our unworthiness
to approach into his presence. There is a tradition among the Hebrews, that
David learnt but two things of Achitophel, and he made him his master, his
friend, and his privy-counsellour for them. And the one of them was by way of
reproof, because he came into the School, the house of Teaching, ((...)) with
his head lifted up, V. P. Fagium in Pirk. Av. cap. 6.
which had the face of rashness and pride in it. Oh that men would now profit
so much by reproofs, and count them their friends that tell them of their
faults; and that they would learn likewise to come into the house of God with
more becoming reverence in their faces then ordinarily they do!

5. Exercise meekness in afflictions.
Meekly submit to Gods corrections. As thou must not choose thy work, so neither
must thou choose thy usage. All impatience comes from pride, and our murmurings
are bred by too goodly thoughts of our own selves. Alas! what are we, more then
many others, that we should expect to be so tenderly handled? What great
matters can we do with that health, or riches, or credit, which we would never
have to absent themselves from us? Nay, what condition is bad enough for such
wretches? What a wonder is it, that such unprofitable creatures are not
banished out of the world? If we thought thus oft-times with our selves, we
should become very humble; i e. meek, patient, and contented under all that
befalls us. One act of humility begets another; and he that thinks meanly of
himself, will not be angry that he is afflicted.

6. Subjection to our Governors.
Be peaceable and obedient to Governors, who are gods in the world, and to whom
God has bidden us, that we should subject our selves. Submit your selves to
every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as
supreme, or unto Governors, etc. 1 Pet. 2.13. It is an high act of pride and
insolency, to control the authority that is over us, and to set up our own
wills above Gods vicegerents. For it is a great contempt of the majesty of God,
whose image they more remarkably bear, and with whose effigies they are more
visibly stamped then other men. We must always therefore do what they command us,
or else suffer what they inflict upon us. And if we choose the latter, we must
suffer as meekly and peaceably, as if it was an immediate hand of heaven upon
us. For if Solomon say of every man, That proud and haughty scorner is his
name, who deals in proud wrath, Prove. 21.24. then much more is he to be
branded in the for-head, for a man superlatively proud, who cannot endure to be
touched in body or estate, but it casts him into the highest inflammations of
anger, even against the highest powers.

7. Temperance and sobriety in the use of what we enjoy.
Moderately and temperately use Gods mercies. The word (...), which signifies
to be temperate, is applied frequently to the mind, in opposition to pride and
self-conceitedness. For sobriety indeed proceeds from an humble sense, that
nothing is ours, but all that we have is Gods; and that we have right to
nothing, but what he gives, and as he allows. And all drunkenness, wantonness,
and whatsoever other intemperance there is in the world, is commonly the issue
of an haughty, giant-like temper of spirit, which makes men look upon
themselves as Lords and owners; and all creatures as their proper goods, which
are perfectly at their disposal. The crown of pride, and the drunkards of
Ephraim, are both names for the same persons, Isa. 28.1, 3. For besides that
such men have no regard to a supreme being, they look bigg upon all their
inferiors; and no beasts likewise do kick more against the reproofs or
counsels of Gods Prophets, then such as they.

8. Modesty in looking for a reward.
Modestly expect a reward from God, when thou have done these and all other
good actions. That word which is here in my text rendered humble, does
frequently occurr in the Jewish writings, for shamefac'tness and modesty. And
therefore I add this at the last, as the top of all, that when we have done all
our work with the greatest strictness; yet we must look for our wages from mere
mercy and benevolence. This humility is the greatest ornament, and the fairest
of all the graces in Gods sight. We never look more beautiful, then when we
blush at our own defects, and dare not cast our eyes confidently upon God. The
highest act of Faith, is a piece of the lowest humility. When we rely most upon
Gods mercy, we utterly disclaim all our own merits.

But as that act of Faith, whereby we cast our selves on Gods mercy, is not all
the acts of it, but supposes many others foregoing; even so it is in this act
of humility, whereby we acknowledge our selves unworthy to receive any reward
from Gods hand: It is so far from being all the humility that God requires,
that there must precede all the other acts which I have mentioned, before this
can take its place. Many men can easily disclaim all trust in their own
righteousness, because they have none to trust in. But they are truly humble
men, that are just and righteous, and yet trust not in that for their
acceptance with God to salvation. You cannot say, that a man is wise, because
he holds his peace, when he is dumb and tonguetyed: But he is a wise person,
who can speak well, and yet silently hearkens. No more can he be deemed poor in
spirit, who has no riches nor treasures in his soul to brag of; but he only,
who is enriched with knowledge, and faith, and love, and all good works, and
yet is lowly in heart, poor in his own thoughts, and acknowledges that he is
but an unprofitable servant.

Now all this is but just, The justice and goodness of all this.
because of our dependence on God, his superiority over us, and his excellency
above us. On all which when we look, we must say with Job, 42.5, 6. Now mine
eye sees thee; and therefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes.
And it is no less good, then it is just. For first, He that lies low, lies
safe. He cannot fall far, who stands on the ground; but whether can he fall who
lies already upon it? We shall not be in danger to tumble down from great hopes
and expectations, if we be so humble as to have no high opinion of our selves
and deservings. The lowest valleys are the safest from wind and storms; and God
has promised to preserve the meek, and that they shall inherit the earth. Who
will harm modest and submissive persons; that had rather put up an injury, then
do any; that are loving, peaceable, and quiet in the Land? None but those,
against whom no men be defended. And secondly, He that lies low, is most
fruitful. The mountains are commonly barren, and the valleys are most richly
laden. For the Lord resists the proud, but he gives grace to the humble. And
thirdly, He that lies low, is blessed from above with all that is good for him.
The less he expects, the more he shall have; the more unworthy he judges
himself to be, the more fit he is to have his emptiness filled. The showers
that run of from the high heads of mountains, run down into the bosom of
valleys. Most of heavens plenty falls into the lowest places; and so do most of
Gods favors and blessings fall into humble souls. They that behave themselves
as it becomes them, in meekness, moderation, obedience, modesty, etc. God will
make good his Word unto them. The meek shall eat and be satisfied, and praise
the name of the Lord; They shall lie down, and none shall make them afraid. He
will keep them in perfect peace, in a sweet serenity and quiet of Spirit. He
will exalt them in due time, and open even the gate of heaven unto them; not to
pour down blessings on them, as now he does; but to receive them up to his
blessings. This discourse would swell too much, if I should particularly show
the goodness of every one of the forementioned acts of humility; and therefore
it shall suffice to have given these light touches upon some of them.

NOW if these things be so as I have discoursed; Application.
then first let us begin to put in practice a part of the duty last mentioned,
Be humbled for sins against these commands.
by being deeply humbled for all our sins, against these plain and familiar
commands Let every man search into himself how far he has gone along with the
stream; for it is manifest, that covetousness and oppression, hard heartedness
and cruelty, pride and irreligion, have come in like a flood upon us in this
Nation, and born many away before them. As for Justice, we may take up the
complaint of Petrarch concerning the Age wherein he lived, that hunters and
fowlers use not greater cunning in laying their nets and snares for wild beasts
and fowls, then crafty men do to inveigle and ensnare the simple and
plain-meaning people. Or we may say with one of his Contrymen (which is now
become a proverb in Italy) That by deceit and cunning, men live half the year,
and by cunning and deceit the other half. And Mercy is such a stranger to men's
hearts, that we count him a person of great tenderness, that will not deceive
us at all; and a very merciful creature, who will not deceive us as much as he
can. So little kindness and good nature is stirring; that we are apt to suspect
them of designs, who make much of us; and we dare scarce receive men's
courtesies. And what is a great deal of our Religion, but an humoursom kind of
devotion; a proud self conceited pleasing of our selves, with a fastidious
contempt of all others? Where is that awefulness in men's countenances when they
converse with God; that tenderness of heart at the mention of any of his
commands; that bewailing of their sins; that patience, peaceableness,
acceptance of the punishment of their iniquities that ought to appear? We may
almost say with this Prophet in the next Chapter, The good man is perished out
of the earth, Mic. 7.2.
and there is none upright among men. For could there be so much spoil (think
you) committed in the midst of us, and no injustice? Such estates so quickly
gotten, and no covetousness? So much blood shed, and no hatreds? So many
contentions, quarrels and hot disputes; and no uncharitableness? So many vain
opinions, and no pride? Such unsteadiness in the ways of God, and no
self-conceitedness in men's hearts? Such contempt of the Ministry and all that
is sacred, and no irreligion? We must begin therefore to amend, by
acknowledging these sins, and seriously bemoaning them, either in our selves or
others.

But our amendment must not end here, Amend in all these things.
nor must we think by blubbered eyes and lamentable groans, to draw God to be a
party with us in these sins. No, we must sincerely proceed to a practice of all
these duties, which the Prophet and our own consciences loudly call for; and
the rather, because they have been so much laid aside and neglected, or at
least, some of them set up to thrust out all the rest.

And first for Justice, let us put away all iniquity, if there be any in our
hands, and all covetous desires which we find lurking in our hearts. First be
more just.
Let every one say as the Psalmist does, Psalm 139.23, 24. Search me O God, and
know my heart, try me, and know my thoughts: And see if there be any wicked way
in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. If thou have wronged any man, make
him satisfaction. Owe nothing to any man, but to love one another. Detain not
the wages of the hireling. Let no man go beyond his Brother, or defraud him in
any thing. Let his relations, and goods, and every thing he has, be as an holy
thing to thee, which thou may not lay thine hand upon. We are told of an
heathen people who were so just, Aelian. var. hist. l. 4. 1.
that if they found any thing in the highway, they would not take it up,
thinking the owner would come ere long to seek it, to whom it did of right
belong. I wish there were but half so much justice among Christians, who not
only cozen others when it comes in their way, and have fair opportunities
presented, but use all sorts of circumventions, and will go a great way about
to seek an occasion to deceive them. It is grown to be an art and a study how
to cheat a neighbor; and whereas those heathen boggled at an (...), (as they
called it) a thing which was found, and thought it an injury to take it up;
Christians make no scruple of a (...), (as I may phrase it) an injustice which
they seek for, and are inquisitive to find ways of bringing it to pass. And
sad it is to consider, for how little men will venture to displease God, and
what a small gain will tempt them to do unjustly. If a man could get all the
world by one act of unrighteousness, he would be a great loser by the bargain;
but there are such vile and cheap souls, that will not stick for a small sum of
money, perhaps for no sum at all to do not one, but many injurious acts to
their neighbors. A little consideration (methinks) would amend men in such a
matter as this; and the thoughts only of its folly might work a cure upon them
without a Sermon against it. Fear of losing all might make them careful not to
have a farthing that is got unjustly, if they had but so much observation as
little children, who use to say, that after they once cheat, they never thrive
in their games. I know it is a desire of being rich, and indeed of being rich
presently, that thrusts men forward into such base and unworthy courses; But
God does so order it, that nothing more hinders the accomplishment of their
defire, then the way they take to attain it. There is a great truth in the
Spanish proverb, that He who will be rich in one year, shall be hanged at the
half years end. Exceeding greediness may make men do such villainous acts that
they cannot be endured, but are brought to ruin by them. But howsoever in the
Proverb of the wise man, there is an infallible verity, Prove. 28.22. He that
hastes to be rich, has an evil eye; and considers not that poverty shall
come upon him. See also v. 20. and chap. 20.22. Put away therefore all
falsehood and guile; all covetousness and violence; if it be but to save the
estate that you have, and that you may get more, and have it last longer: But
you will consult better for your selves if you do thus out of obedience to God,
and respect to your Brethren; as it is a part of that duty which God and man
oblige you unto.

And as for Kings and Princes they are engaged above all other men to do
justly, seeing they are the leaders of the people, by whose examples they are
inclined to live, V. Cardinal. de Ossat. Epist. 66. part. 1. and Epist. 81. Les
Roys and autres primes Sovereigns se permettoient toutes chooses qui tournoient
a leur profit, etc.
and by whose righteous management of things they live happily. It was a most
pernicious Maxim, and altogether unworthy of a good man (as one of his own
party in express terms acknowledges) which Pope Clement the eighth had often in
his mouth, viz. That Kings and Sovereign Princes may do any thing which will
make for their profit. And a shame it is to their religion that he could add in
justification of this saying, that matters are come to such a pass, that it is
not at all imputed to them, nor redounds to their dishonor, if they break
their faith, forswear themselves, lie, betray their allies, and do any other
thing of like nature. But these wicked principles which he made use of on
purpose to persuade the King of France to break his league with England, are
most excellently confronted by a golden speech of that Cardinal who reports
these things, Epist. ^77. part. 2. au Mons. de Villeroy.
in which all such persons are much concerned. At the foot of the account says
he (speaking of King James his moderation when he came to the Crown of England)
You shall find, that the better and more justly any man shall rule, to the
honor and glory of God, and to the comfort, profit and happiness of his
subjects; the more assured his estate shall be; the more strong, the more
beloved and blessed shall he be of God, and men: in which consists the true and
lasting grandeur and puissance of Kings, and the assurance of their posterity.
Nay Agesilaus had better notions of Divine things in this particular then that
Pope, Plutarch. in Vi^. Ages. and in Apotheg. (...).
who when some told him the Great King ( i. e. the King of Persia) would have
it so; answered, How can he be greater then me, unless he be more just and more
sober? Upon the mentioning of which, Plutarch gives this excellent admonition,
By justice, as by a royal standard, we should take the measure of men's heights
one above another. If we were in a state of war, and one should make a motion
to such great persons to do justly, perhaps he might receive such an answer as
Antigonus gave a Philosopher who presented him with a treatise of this subject;
Thou art a fool to give me now a book concerning justice, when thou see I am
besieging other men's Castles, and making war upon their Cities: But when things
are settled, and when it is apparent that violent dealing comes upon men's own
heads; then sure a man may be believed, if he say, that there is no other way
to thrive, nor can a Prince live by any such prosperous doctrine as that of
Justice and piety. Then sure, if not at other times, one may propose the
example of an heathen Emperor to them, Alex. Severus. Quod tibi fieri non vis,
alteri ne feceris. Al. Lamprid.
who was so taken with that saying of our Saviors, Math. 7.12. that he caused
this sentence to be writ in sundry places upon the walls of his palace, Do not
that to another, which thou would not have done to thee.

And all underofficers and ministers of public buisiness had need hear this
doctrine continually sounding in their ears, because it is so contrary to their
worldly interests to practice it exactly. When men have power and opportunity
to gratify their covetous desires, they will find that they need a very divine
power to enable them to deny them. Balzack.
It is very strange (says the Master of modern Eloquence) that the great Turk
can entrust his wives to the vigilance of others, and assure himself their
chastity will thereby be conserved; yet that Kings know not to whom they may
safely encharge their treasures. But the true reason is, for that an honest man
is by so much more difficultly found then an Eunuch, by how much miracles are
more rare then Monsters. Great fortitude is requisite to the obtaining of
honesty, but the will only suffices to become covetous. And therefore seeing it
is necessary to do some violence to our selves, to keep us from doing violence
to others; such persons have great reason to thank those who will lay their
hands daily upon their corrupt affections by holy admonitions and counsels; not
only to restrain and setter, but to slay and mortify them.

And to conclude this; let us all be sure to remember it is not enough to
praise justice, and make speeches in its commendation; nor to have some
affection to it by convictions in our minds of its reasonableness and profit;
but we must do justly, as my text speaks: and all our actions must be conform
to the principles which we praise. This I say the rather, because it has been
noted that men of excellent intellectuals have had bad moralls: and those who
have writ books for the preservation of honesty, have not preserved themselves
from corruption.

Now Secondly, for Mercy, Secondly, Let mercy be joined with justice.
it makes a more special claim to our favor, because we stand so much in need
of it every day, if not from other men, yet from God. And it is to be observed
that the Prophet, though justice is to be loved, yet does not say Love justice,
but Love mercy; because he would recommend it to our dearest affections. For
there are more just men, then there are merciful in the world; it being easier
to give men their own, then to bestow upon them what is ours. Oh, to part with
this earth, this Idol of Gold and Silver, is a hard lesson: to give to him that
asks, to do good to him that does evil to us, is an harsh saying. But remember
what Zacheus says, Luke 19.8. Not only I restore four fold to him whom I have
wronged; but half of my goods I give to the poor. Of such a charitable
disposition must you be, if you hope to go to heaven, and care no more for
riches then do your little children. You must not make hard bargains with poor
men, nor think every penny overplus too much for them. You must use sometimes
to give more then you have agreed for; that so you may be ready and disposed to
do an act of charity when the poor call for it. I know it has been frequently
pleaded, that the times are hard and dangerous, and that men's estates are much
impoverished. But then (1) they are harder you may be sure with the poor, if
they be hard with you who are rich. If they make you cry, they make them groan.
If they pinch your purse, then they squeeze and drain their very houses. And
(2) mercifulness is the way to make them better. When they have made us better
and become more charitable, then they themselves will grow better, and become
more peaceable. He that has a bountiful eye shall be blessed. He that has
mercy upon the poor, happy is he, Prove. 14.21. Prove. 22.9. And (3) the worse
and more dangerous they are, the less we should be in love with riches, and the
more we should give away to them that need. For it is likely we cannot keep
them or by giving some away we may secure the rest. As men that are afraid
their goods will be lost by storms at Sea, give so much in the hundred to
assure them; so should we assure our goods and estates with God when the times
are tempestuous, by giving him a large sum for his uses. A wiser man then any
of us makes the badness of the times an argument unto charity, howsoever now it
is a motive to many to shut their hands. Give a portion to seven, and also to
eight, for thou know not what evil shall be upon the earth. Eccles. 11.2.
His meaning is, the time may come when thy treasure shall be taken from thee,
and how much better is it to part with them voluntarily? Thou can not tell
how much danger all thou have will be in: and therefore it is wisdom to entrust
God with it, and give him something in hand, that he may save the rest. And
(4.) if God do not save thy riches, yet he may wonderfully save thee. For he
has promised ( Psalm. 41.1, 2.3.) to preserve the merciful men in time of
trouble and sickness. Or (5) if he take such men away, it is when he intends to
destroy a place, and then who would desire to live? Isa. 57.1 If they be taken
away from the evil to come, then death does them a great deal of good, and God
is very merciful to such merciful men, in not letting them see the desolation
of their country. To all which add, that while we live, we have no more then
we do enjoy, and then we give away for Gods sake. And there is no less of mercy
in forgiving of men, then in giving to them, in passing by the evil they do to
us, then in doing good to them; but lest this discourse should proceed to over
great a length, I must leave you to judge how much we should love it by what
has been said of this.

And then thirdly for walking humbly with God, And thirdly, humble walking with
God be joined with them both.
let me only suggest these two things from the word walk, which I have not yet
taken notice of. First, it signifies more then one single act, and engages us
to a continued motion in the ways of humility. Our demeanor toward God must
be a life of lowliness, meekness and patience; a course of contentedness and
sobriety, modesty and moderation; a constant series of such actions as I have
named. And if we think to come to heaven by taking a step or two in this way,
or by fierce running at sometimes, we shall be but like to a traveller who fits
still the most of his day, and thinks to come to his journeys end by some
sudden spurts toward night. To maintain a constant sense of our dependence on
God; a continual converse with him: and to have a perpetual care in all things
to please him, by conforming our wills to him; are things so necessary, that we
are but nominal Christians without them. And secondly, to walk humbly signifies
more then an inward persuasion, and denotes something outward that is to be
seen by the world. God will not accept of that which people call a good heart,
a pious resolution and right meaning; but he will have us walk before all men
in the way of his commandments, and publicly appear in opposition to the
wickedness that is in the world. If we think one thing and do another, the
greater is the sin, and the greater will be the condemnation, because we know
so well and do so ill.

Not to mention any thing besides that may be included in the phrase; I beseech
you put these things in practice. These things must be done, and not only
praised.
I have persuaded you enough, do but persuade your selves. All men commend
justice, yet they do unjustly. Virtue has every ones good word, though they
live ungodlily. The proud man commends humility; and the covetous man praises
Charity; and the unrighteous man speaks for honesty. Men complement with
godliness, and they court virtue, but none will have her. She is poor, and will
not consent to their base desires; and so though they extol her beauty, they
will none of her. So in Italy they have a proverb among the husbandmen,
laudandos esse montes, sed a planitie non recedendum. Commend the mountains,
but live in the valleys. It is fine sweet air that breaths on the top of hills
and affords a pleasant wholesome dwelling; but keep there where most profit
dwells, and that is in the bottom. It is sad that men should extend such a
proverb as far as heaven, and commend the holy hill of God, and all the graces
and pleasures that stand on the top of it; but resolve still to dwell below,
and love the things that are beneath, better then all those that are above. Yea
though it be a mere dunghill, they will embrace it, if it be but fat, and will
yield them plenty of worldly increase. They like goodness when they consider it
alone; but when they consider it with other things, they take their ease and
profit to be much better. So Soph^cles said in that advice which too many
follow, -- (...)
(...).
Praise righteousness, but stick fast to thy gain. Let it have thy good word,
but do as thou see good for thy self. But I beseech him that reads these
things, that by what has been said, he would rise above approbations and
commendations of godliness, and heartily subject himself unto the power of it:
or if he love a softer word, let him embrace it, and marry himself to it; let
the match now be made up, if he be yet but a complementer in Religion, and not
really wedded to it.

I will only add, They must not be divided from each other.
that all those three are so linked and chained together, that they are
inseparable, and we cannot take one but we must have all. He cannot walk humbly
with God who observes not all the rules of justice and common honesty, with
mercy also toward men. God will give him no thanks that goes against his
conscience and known Laws to do him service, (as they are pleased to style it.)
No, (...), Plato in Critone.
etc. Let neither thy children (says Plato) or thy life, nor any thing else be
deerer to thee then justice, that thou may have wherewith to answer for thy
self when thou come (...) into the other world. Else we (say the Laws which
he there introduces speaking their part) shall be thy enemies, and more then
we, (...) our Brethren will be against thee: the Laws in that world will not
courteously receive and treat thee. (...).


And then on the other side, we cannot be just and merciful to men, unless we
walk humbly with God. Justice it self should spring from a sense that we are
under a divine Law, and are subjects to the heavenly Sovereign. And true
godliness is but a piece of justice toward God, as honest dealing in affairs of
the world is justice toward men. We do a manifest wrong to God, and deal
dishonestly with him, if we detain from him solemn and constant worship of him.
We are base cheaters and defrauders, when we let our worldly business, though
never so justly managed, rob God of our best thoughts and affections. And what
highway robbers then and notorious felons are those who suffer their sports
and pleasures, if not their more beastly lusts to do violence to all religious
duties? Many of this sort are so highly injurious to God, that they not only
steal all they can from godliness and piety, but they wound and stab it with
the sword of their tongues; and if they were able, would strike it dead, as
they oft-times leave it gasping for life. And this they do with an high hand
and great insolency; as if those who most humbly submit themselves to all
Christ's commands, and are most fearful of doing any wrong to God, were to be
esteemed our greatest enemies, and those that should suffer all wrong from men.
That Noble Philosopher I just now mentioned, has a lesson for them as well as
for the former, if they will be so just either to God or themselves as to learn
it: In my opinion (says he) piety and holiness about the service and worship
of God is one part of justice; and the other part of it is concerned in the
serving of men. Let no man therefore pride himself in this, that he is not
liable to the charge of any creature, when God has so much to say against him
for neglect of praying to him, Plato in Euthyprone, (...), etc.
reading his word, praising him for every good thing he receives, if not
mocking at all these. And let this be esteemed true excellency (which we should
have the fortitude to maintain in the worst of times) not to blush at Christian
virtues, nor to boast of moral ones.

3. And when we have done what we can upon our selves and those under us, then
let us pray for others; especially those that rule us, Let us pray for others,
and principally for our Rulers, that they may do these things.
that we may have just, merciful and religious Governors. Our prayers will be
the more acceptable for them, when we pray but for that which we do our selves
in our own places; and their justice and goodness will be the more sweet to us,
when it is the fruit of our earnest prayers. Let us beseech therefore the great
Lord and Governor of the world who rules the Nations in righteousness and
truth, that all those who do or shall bear any part in the government of these
Lands, may be such as will take away no man's rights, defend our Laws, pity the
poor, and not exact great fums merely to support their own greatness. Let us
pray that those may rule us who are ruled by their maker, that will do good
even to enemies, walk humbly with their God, be poor in spirit, not given to
the vanities and excesses of the world; that will sympathize with a poor Nation
in its poverty, pity it miseries; not prodigally wast its treasures: and such
as will love Religion, and make the worship of God reverent and the practice of
all Christian duties had in high esteem.

Such Rulers the Lord will love and bless: See also Prove. 28. 15, 16. Prove.
29.14. Prove. 20.28. Amos 5.14, 15.
and both Prince and people will feel the blessing that is in them. For so the
wisest King that ever was tells us, Prove. 25.5. That if the wicked be taken
from before the King, his throne shall be established in righteousness. And if
it be so established, then the King by judgment establishes the Land, Prove.
29.4. All the people rejoice when the righteous are in authority; and by a man
of understanding and knowledge the state of a land is prolonged, Prove. 29.2.
28.2. That which the Bishop of Elvas said to the estates of Portugal after they
had restored that family to the Crown which had long been excluded by the
Spaniard, is the greatest commendation of a Prince to the peoples affection,
next to true piety; His Majesty (said he) does not esteem those tributes
lawful which were paid in tears; and he will not reign over your goods, nor
over your heads, nor over your privileges, but over your hearts. He that by
such a government as this does seat himself in the affection of God and his
people: his throne shall be est ablished for ever, and his children are blessed
after him, Prove. 29.14.20.7, 8. I will conclude this with the words of the same
wise King, which concern every man of us: He that follows after righteousness
and mercy, finds life, righteousness and honor, ch 21.21. By humility and
the fear of the Lord, are riches, and honor, and life, Pro. 22.4.

And when God has heard these prayers, may we be so wise and happy as to choose
such Representatives in future times, as consist of persons just and righteous,
merciful and tender of all men's interests and concernments; and that walk with
God, not living in any sin; and that walk humbly with him, not being puffed up
with a conceit of their own godliness: That are neither ungodly themselves, nor
call all others ungodly who are not of their mind; That love not those who are
bad; nor scorn any that are good; And in brief, that are not swollen with a
belief of their own excellencies, nor grown heady and proud in opinions; but
men of a sober Religion toward God, joined with justice and charity toward man.

I Shall not exercise the Readers patience any longer about these matters, The
sixth Observation.
when I have but briefly opened the sixth observation which naturally arrises
from the discourse of the Prophet, viz. That these things [to do justly, to
love mercy, to walk humbly with God] were always more valued by God then
Sacrifices, or any other bodily (though costly) services. It is the very intent
of the man of God in this place to disparage all outward worship though of Gods
own appointment (and much more all their own devised services) if it were not
joined with true purity of heart and piety of life. For there is nothing
reaches the soul but these things that I have been treating of; nothing but
these conform us unto God, who is a pure spirit: nothing is everlasting and of
an immortal nature but this image of God; and therefore this he would work in
us that we may be blessed. But I need not proceed in this manner to give you
the reason of it, you will presently conclude the truth of the observation if I
do but show you first that these are the things which God always required above
all the other: Two things to be proved.
and secondly that all the other things did tend to the advancement of these.
You may well expect I should take this method, for your own souls will bid you
enquire, why God did appoint sacrifices, circumcision, abundance of washings,
and other ceremonies, if he was not mightily pleased with them.

Therefore first I shall demonstrate that God was not pleased with sacrifices
and things of that nature, Sacrifices not so pleasing as holiness.
separated from justice, mercy and godliness: but that rather they were an
abomination to him and like the stinking carcass without the soul, when so
separated.

1. Look into the times before the law, and you shall see that there is no body
commended for offering sacrifices, or for loving any of these outward shadows,
but only for these substantial virtues which my Text speaks of. It is said of
Enoch, that he walked with God. and that God took him, Proved from the times
before the Law.
Genesis 5.22, 24. but it is not said that he was very liberal in slaying of
beasts, and that he ascended to heaven in the smoke of sacrifices. And it is
said of Noah, that he was a just man and perfect in his generations, and one
that walked with God. Genesis 6.9. but nothing is there said where he is commended
of building Altars, and making great store of oblations to God. Though they did
these things, and it is recorded of them that they did them: yet their
character is not fetched from such things, nor do you read that God commends
them upon their account. And so of Abraham, it is said that he left his own
country and believed God: and this says the Apostle, was accounted to him for
righteousness. His high thoughts of God, his submission to him, his dependence
on him, his forsaking all for him, his trusting of life and every thing he had
in his hands: his obeying God and following of him whithersovever he would lead
him: and in short his absolute resignation of himself, child, and all things
else to Gods will. These were the acts for which God accounted him his friend.
But we do not read that God or the Apostle commend him for being circumcised:
no, circumcision was but the seal of the righteousness of that faith which he
had in uncircumcision, Romans 4.11. i. e. It did but testify to him that his
faith was good and sound, because God hereby took him into a covenant with
himself: or, it was that mark and outward token whereby God did assure him of
his acceptance into a covenant of great blessings for himself and seed, because
he had believed on him, and was righteous before him.

2. And not to proceed any further to others that succeeded presently after
him, And from the times when the Law was given.
but to look to the time of the Law: You may observe that the ten commandments
were given by God before he gave any of the other Laws, Exodus 20. And likewise
you may take notice of the ordinary style of Moses when he speaks of these
things, which runs thus; These are the Commandments, the Statutes and the
judgments, Deuteronomy. 6.1. or keep his Commandments, his Statutes and judgments,
Deuteronomy. 30.14. the like to which you may read, Mal. 4.4. In all which places, and
many other, Commandments are put first, which word comprehends the moral and
everlasting precepts: and then follows Statutes, which denotes the Ordinances
and institutions about Gods Worship; and after that Judgments, which signifies
the Laws about matters of civil right, both which were alterable and not
eternal. Yea the whole book of Deuteronomy (or the second Law as the word
signifies) seems to be added after the other, to teach them that it was
obedience to his voice in all things that God did most regard. And therefore
Nazianzen reckoning up the privileges of the Jews, says that they had (...),
a double giving of the Law, Orat. 13. one (...) in the Letter, the other (...)
in the Spirit. Which may be interpreted of that in mount Sinai, and of the
other in the plains of Jordan.

3. And so after the Law was given, And from the succeeding Ages.
all the people of God understood that the things chiefly intended by him, were
their inward mortification, their purity and integrity of soul: a spiritual
worship, and a life of temperance, sobriety, justice, mercy, humility and all
other virtues. To this there are a multitude of places in holy Writ that will
testify and bear witness. Has the Lord as great pleasure ( says Samuel) in
burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to
obey is better then sacrifice, and to hearken then the fat of ramms. For
rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubborness is as iniquity and
idolatry, 1 Samuel 15.22, 23. Samuel a witness of it.
Saul thought that God was delighted, if they feasted him with a multitude of
sacrifices, and that nothing distasted him if they had a care not to entertain
Idols with the good cheer at the Altar: and therefore Samuel tells him that God
took the greatest pleasure in an hearty obedience to his commands, which was
better then all the outward worship that he had appointed; and that rebellion
against Gods commands, was as bad as Idolatry and worshipping of stocks and
stones. From the Prophet Samuel let us go to Asaph, And Asaph.
who lived not long after, and he tells us, Psalm. 50.7, 8, 9, etc. that God did
not hunger after the flesh of beasts and foul, nor thirst after the blood of
Bulls and Goats: nor did he fall out with them for the neglect of this kind of
service; but that which he required of them was to pray to him, and praise him,
and perform all their vows promises to him, which was the best of offerings,
ver. 14, 15. And that which he reproves and chides them for, was that they
hated instruction, and made nothing of all his commands for the regulating of
their words, desires and actions, ver. 16, 17, 18, etc. He asks them how they
dare be so impudent as to pretend be in covenant with him (though they brought
him never so many fat sacrifices) seeing they could not endure any of his
counsels, but were unjust, unclean, liars, swearers, slanderers and backbiters.
As long as their evil affections and desires were unmortified, he cared not for
the death of so many of his creatures. And so you may read the sense of David
in the next Psalm, Psalm. 51.15, 16, 17. And David.
O Lord open my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise. For thou
desire not sacrifice, else would I give it: thou delightest not in
burnt-offerings. The Sacrifices of God, are a broken spirit; a broken and a
contrite heart O God thou will not despise. There were no Sacrifices indeed
appointed for murder and adultery (to which he has a particular respect) but
they made a man obnoxious to death by Moses his Law; Yet he says in General,
that God did not delight in burnt-offerings, and so his words may be extended
farther than that one case of his. That which pleased God was holy praises, and
the sacrifices of a broken heart and contrite spirit. There may be an allusion
to the ceremonial worship in the words broken and contrite; the former of which
may refer to the sacrifice of beasts, the latter to the perfume that was put
before the testimony of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, Exo. 30.35, 36. And
the words may signify as if he had said, that brokenness of heart, and an holy
shivering of the spirit in pieces, so that it shall never be set together in
the same frame wherein it was before, is far better then the cutting and
chopping of the flesh of beasts in pieces. And as spices when they are beaten,
smell the sweetest; so when your hearts are thus bruised and laid in their own
dust by sincere contrition, it is a more grateful perfume to me then the
beaten spices which were called most holy. If you look likewise into Psalm.
69.30, 31. You shall find that to praise God with a song, and magnify him with
thanksgiving, please the Lord better then an Ox, or Bullock that has horns and
hoofs. From him pass to Solomon his son, who is of the same judgment; for he
says expressly, That to do justice and judgment is more acceptable to the Lord
then Sacrifice. And Solomon.
Prove. 21.3. Yea that the sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the
Lord, especially when he brings it with a wicked mind, v. 27. And therefore
in Eccles. 5.1. he bids us be more ready to hear ( i. e. to obey) then to offer
the sacrifices of fools. A fool is one that has a body without a soul: and
such a carcass of religion are all sacrifices without obedience: A mere skin
and husk of devotion, which God can no more be pleased with, then we are with
the gifts of a fool, who knows not what he does. If from thence you pass to the
Prophet Isaiah, And all the Prophets.
he speaks so fully to my purpose in the first chapter from the eleventh verse
to the twenty-first that I need not gloss upon his words. And chap. 63.1, 2, 3.
the Lord tells that people who boasted so much that they had provided him with
an house, and furnished his table continually with sacrifices, I need no house,
nor am I beholden to you for a dwelling; for the heavens and the earth are
mine. And I tell you there is no man loves me like to him that is poor in
Spirit, humble and obedient to my word. Though you think that you please me
mightily by the large provision you make at my house: believe it, without this
contrition, poverty and holy trembling at my commands, he that kills a whole Ox
is so far from doing me any service, that it is as bad as an act of murder:
(because he is an hypocrite and a base flatterer) And you may as well bring a
dog or a pig to me (which was forbidden by the Law to be offered) as a lamb:
Swines blood (which was the most detestable creature among them) is as good
meat to me as the very best of your oblations: And you may as well fall down
before an Idol and bless, as offer to me any incense. For indeed they made God
but a great Idol, that could not see, nor hear their words and actions, much
less their hearts and thoughts; and that would be pleased with any thing, and
let them use him as they list. In the Prophet Jeremiah also the Lord complains
that they had not hearkened to his words, nor to his law, but rejected it, 6.19.
and lest they should return to this exprobration, that they had been very
obedient in offering of sacrifices, he faith, v. 20. To what purpose comes
there to me incense from Sheba, and the sweet cane from a far country? your
burnt offerings are not acceptable, nor your sacrifices sweet unto me: Which is
as if he should have said; Though you are at great cost and charges about this
outward worship, yet these are not the things that I so much expect: though you
fetch me perfumes from foreign places, yet there are things nearer hand that
are far more sweet unto me. And he deals more plainly with them, chap. 7.21,
22, 23. etc. saying, put your burnt offerings to your sacrifices, and eat
flesh, etc. The burnt offerings you know were to be wholly consumed in the
fire, and the people were to have none of them; but of their peace offerings or
sacrifices of praise they did eat: Now says God, Take all if you will for me;
I care not for your burnt offerings: you may eat them your selves as you do the
rest, seeing you so little regard my other commands. Never think to flatter me
with these, for I can be content if you feast upon them your selves. I am not
so greedy of yourf ar sacrifices as you imagine: no, it was not about them that
I spoke with your fathers when they came out of Egypt: but this was the thing
that I commanded them, that they should obey my voice in all things. But did
not they ask leave of Pharaoh (may some say) to go and offer Sacrifices in the
wilderness? and did not God give them a Law about them? Yes, He did speak to
them indeed about those things, but they were to be done in conjunction with
better obedience: and comparatively with the other things, he did not command
them. It was never intended that these should be their righteousness, and the
things that they should above all others perform: but obedience was the chief
thing even in these that God respected. For so the words of Jeremiah may be
understood, I did not command your fathers merely concerning burn-offerings and
sacrifices, but the thing I aimed at, even in the appointing of them, was that
they should be obedient to my voice. To all this you may add that famous place
cited by our Savior Hos. 6.6. I desired mercy and not sacrifice, and the
knowledge of God, more then burnt offerings. I do not remember that the Prophet
Ezekiel speaks any thing of this matter: which might be perhaps, because he
wrote in the land of their Captivity, where sacrifices were not offered. But
lest those of the captivity should think as their forefathers had done, that
their sacrifices were the things that he most delighted in: and that therefore
he brought them from Babylon that they might offer them to him: He tells them,
Isa. 43.23, 24. that they had not brought him any Sacrifices, nor honored him
with any offerings since they came to Babylon, and yet he would deliver them,
which was a sign that those were not the things which he stood so much upon.
No, instead of loading and wearying him with their Sacrifices (as their
ancestors had done) they had rather made him serve with their sins, and wearied
him with their iniquities; So that it was only for his own names sake that he
blotted out their transgressions, and did not remember their sins, v. 25. And
to conclude, an honest Scribe in our Saviors time acknowledges the truth of
all that I have said, when he makes this reply to one of our Lords answers,
There is one God, and there is none other but he. And to love him with all the
heart and with all the unaerstanding, and with all the soul and with all the
strength, and to love his neighbor as himself; is more then all whole burnt
offerings and sacrifices, Mark. 12, 32, 33. Where we have a full confirmation
of the words in my text and of that also which was said a little before, that
these duties contained in the ten commandments, are the first and chiefest of
all. For the Question of this Scribe is, which is the first commandment of all?
and our Savior does not say, to offer Sacrifices, which is neither first nor
second neither: But to love God he says, is the prime and chiefest of all, and
next to that is the love of our neighbor. V. Hierod. and Porphyr. (...). Plato
Alcibiad. 2. Eusebius..3. praep. Evang. C. 3.
I might add the sense of sober heathens, who thought that no sacrifice would
please God, but the oblation of a devout soul to him; and who looked upon these
burnt offerings but as a needless butchery, as (...) the food of the fire, and
nourishment of the flame: but then I should too much exceed the just bounds of
this discourse, considering also that there remains something due to that great
enquiry, which is, For what end were they and such like things appointed by
God, if they were not very pleasing to him?

2. THE truth is, Sacrifices tended to promore toward holiness.
those heathens did commonly stretch this notion so far, as to condemn all
sacrifices; V. Eusebius. L. 4. Praepar. Svang. cap. 10. and 14.
some of them out of Ignorance of their true use, and others out of false
principles which they had imbibed; and therefore (waving other ends, and
keeping only to the purpose of my text) I laid down this as a Second truth to
be proved, that Sacrifices and such like outward services, did tend to keep men
from sin, and to advance justice, charity and piety.

1. And first it seems to me as though there was the very spirit and reason of
these three things in the threefold sacrifices that were appointed. Their
sin offerings which were to reconcile withal, may be looked upon as a piece of
Justice, and to be given by way of satisfaction unto God for the offenses and
wrongs done unto him. And the peace offerings, as a piece of love and gratitude
to God the author of all Mercies: and as a piece of charity and kindness to the
poor, who in many cases were partakers of them. And then their whole
burnt-offerings were tokens of their obedience, and humble acknowledgements
that he was their great Landlord of whom they held the land of Canaan, and from
whom they received whatsoever they did enjoy.

2. And so Secondly their Sacrifices taught them to consider that they should
consecrate and offer themselves unto him, seeing that they were his, no less
then their sheep or calves which they brought to his Altar. These sacrifices
being their tribute which they paid to their supreme Lord, did express that
they were tied to him in any services that he would require of them. They could
not think that he would be pleased with an Ox, more then with a man, and that
he would hold them excused if they rebelled against him, to whom they made
these constant acknowledgments. They did not hereby pay their debts, but
confess that they were indebted: They were not discharged by these from all
obligations, but testified a sense that they and all theirs were engaged to him.

3. And Thirdly, they promoted true holiness as they showed the hatefulness of
sin, and the guilt which it brought upon those that did commit it. For what
need was there that these poor creatures should suffer for their faults, if God
was not much offended by their disobedience? The cries and struglings of the
beasts might put them in mind what necessity sin brought upon them of
suffering, and how cruelly it would use those who continued in it. And it would
be easy to show, that there was no punishment threatened for the breach of any
of the ten commandments, whether stoning, or strangulation, or cutting of the
throat, or burning (for there were but these four) but it was represented in
the death of these beasts, which were thrown on the pavement, tied about the
throat, slain and burned either in whole or in part upon the Altar.

4. And fourthly these Sacrifices and all other outward ceremonies might well
teach them how far they ought to keep from all inward difilements, who were to
be so remote from all fleshly pollutions. They that were under such a constant
discipline of God, and taught by such holy men, could not whithout a strange
neglect be so sottishly stupid as to imagine that God took no care of the soul,
who would have the body so clean and pure. If a beast must not have any blemish
in it, nor the man that offered it any legal uncleaness upon him: he might
easily think that God expected his mind should be holy, and not in a worse
condition then his beast or his body. If they were to wash themselves and their
sacrifices, then the soul sure was not to be dirty and impure. If they were to
be separated from all unclean persons, then much more from bad company. And if
they might not so much as eat with a Gentile, then much less might they partake
with them in their sins and impieties. Apud Photium in Biblioth. page 887.
I know not what truth there is in the observation of Eulogius; but he wonders
why there being so many clean creatures allowed by God to be eaten in the Law,
there were only five, ( viz. a Goat, a Sheep, an Ox a Turtle and a Pigeon)
which were used in sacrifices; unless it had an aenigmatical and figurative
meaning, to denote our five senses, which we are to purify and cleanse, that
we may adhere to God, and be fit to draw near unto him.

5. And therefore fifthly we may look upon the law of ceremonies as an hedge to
the Law of moral precepts, (...).
or the ten commandments. Some things as Aristo^le well observes, are good in
themselves and to be beloved (...) for their own sakes, L. 1 Ethic.
and others are good and lovely (...) for the sake of the former; as they are
either (...) effective and operative of them, or (...) in some sort a
preservative and guard to them; or as they are (...) hindrances of their
contraries, and forbid that which would destroy them. Now though the things
that we are speaking of were not good in themselves, nor had any proper worth
in them, as justice, mercy, and humility have: yet they were of this latter
sort of goods, and served to maintain these greater things in their sacredness,
and to prohibit them from infringing any of the rights belonging unto them. God
kept the Israelites at a great distance from violating these commands, by
making them observant of lesser injunctions. Their fear of these meaner
offenses was intended as a guard and security to the greater sanctions and
commands. As a man that dare not leap over an hedge into our pasture, will not
venture one would think to climb over the wall into our garden: so he that
durst not break through and transgress the bounds of these outward precepts; it
was to be presumed would never be so bold as to tread under feet and contemn
the more divine Laws. God intended mainly to preserve the holiness of the moral
laws and spiritual precepts: and so he set the ceremonial as a thornie fence
about them, to keep them from being broken. Their not eating of blood must
needs make them to have a natural abhorrence of murder ( Genesis 9.4, 5.) and
their not marrying within such degrees of consanguinity, was an exercise of
their chastity, and a great security against adultery and such like wickedness.
Their taking no use of their poor Brethren, and leaving them the corners of the
fields when they reaped, etc. was a means to make them not to covet nor be
greedy of the world. Their observing of so many days in memory of Gods
mercies, must needs teach them to have the Sabbath in great reverence, which
was in memory of the creation of the world, and their deliverance out of
Egypt. Seeing they must break down so many mounds and banks as were cast up
about the eternal Law: it might reasonably be supposed that they would never
attempt to destroy it, at least not as long as they kept these entire.

6. And in particular these things kept them from Idolatry, which was the
highest contempt of God that could be. Orat. 42.
They were (...) (as Nazianzen says of the whole Law) a wall set up between
God and Idols, to keep them from running unto strange worship: A partition
which they must break down before they and the Gods of the heathens could meet
together. And this Maimon does conceive to be the reason of those precepts
which carry not their reason in themselves: that God might make them abhor to
participate in the Religion of the nations that were about them. For he well
observes, that God commands them such things as were quite contrary to their
practice: so that what the heathens loved, that they were to abominate: and
what they reverenced, the Jews were to have for daily use; and they were not so
much as to worship toward the same quarter of heaven; but whereas the world
generally had their holy place in the East, God placed his sanctuary in the
West. But it is not his observation alone; for Justin Martyr long before in his
disputation with the Jew, Dialog, cum Tryph.
says that the Israelites making a golden calf and offering sacrifice to it
after the manner of Egypt, God did accommodate himself to them, and commanded
them to offer him sacrifices, that so they might not give away his worship unto
Idols. And more plainly in his answers ad Orthodoxos (if that book be his) he
says that the Egyptians taking all living creatures (except a Swine) to have
something of Divinity in them: Respons. 35. ad Orthod.
God distinguished between the clean and unclean, and permitted the one to be
offered in sacrifice, but the other he forbad to be so much as eaten; By both
showing that they were unworthy of the honor or name of gods, which might
either be slain and eaten, or else were to be reputed of as unclean.

And Theodoret asserts it still more particularly, L. 7. de curat. Graec.
affect.
that the Egyptians worshipping a Goat and a Sheep, as well as a Calf or
Heifer: and likewise holding the Turtle and Pigeon among the birds in greatest
veneration; God commanded the Israelites to sacrifice these rather then any
other, that so they might learn how vile the Religion of those people was,
whose gods were continually slain and eaten by them. And for this cause also it
was (as he thinks) that God would not let them eat Swines flesh, because the
Egyptians (...) abstaining from the rest as gods, did think it lawful to eat
of this creature only. But if it should be thought that the Egyptians did not
worship a Goat, as it is certain they did a Cow, yet the Jews confess that the
Zabii or Sabaeans who were their near neighbors, did give divine honor to it,
and against their infection they were no less to receive an Antidote then
against the other. And this perhaps may be the reason why God loaded them with
such a world of ceremonies, that they might be so constantly employed, as not
to have time to think of adding any other devices of their own or others to his
service, having enough to do already. Only his infinite. Wisdom made these
things serve to teach them higher duties, and to be shadows also of most
glorious things to come, which I am not now to treat of.

7. But seventhly, as they put them in mind to consecrate themselves to God, so
they remembered them to give him the very best, and the secrets of their souls.
For it is well observed by Cyril Alex. that though God suffered them to offer
sacrifices as other Nations did, yet not after their manner, but so
artificially and skilfully ordered, that (as I just now said) they did (...)
travel with the form of a spiritual and intellectual worship in their womb, L.
9. Contra Julianum.
of which they are now at last delivered. Their whole burnt offerings which
ascended entirely to heaven, and were to be chosen out of the best of their
beasts, fruits or liquors, might well carry along with them the chiefest of
their thoughts and affections, yea their whole souls toward God, in whose
service they were to spend themselves. And when they sacrificed peace
offerings, they were to give to God the kidneyes or reins, which are the seat
of carnal pleasure; and the heart (as some think) which is the fountain of all
living motions, and the seat (in the ancient language) of the thoughts; and
then the blood of the beast, which might well teach them to offer even their
lives to him (who gave life to them) as well as all other things which were
most dear in their eyes.

8. To which it may be added, that the sacrifices could not be accepted, unless
the person as well as the beast which he brought were clean and holy. So that
the offering did not make him good, but supposed him to be so already. Plutarch
gives us to understand how exact the Egyptians were about the red Cow which
they had decreed was to be offered to Typhon, L. de Isid. and Osir.
when he says that if there were but one hair black or white, she was judged
to be (...) unlawful to be offered in sacrifice. But he tells us likewise (in
the same place) that the person who brought it was to be sound and in a good
state of health; for they thought that that being which is most pure, undefiled
and without blemish, ought not to be served (...), with bodies or souls that
were full of putrefying sores or diseases. You cannot think that the Jews were
no less intelligent then these heathen; especially since God required of the
man that offered them, that he should be so far from greater pollutions, that
he should not lie so much as under any ceremonial defilement. Or if there were
any secret naughtiness lying in his heart while his outward actions were
unbl^mable, yet the sacrifice of such a wicked man was an abomination to the
Lord, who knows the heart, Prove. 15.8. And therefore you may observe that after
the Psalmist had said, Psalm. 51.17. The sacrifices of the Lord are a broken
Spirit, etc. and desired acceptance with God for him and his people, ver. 18.
he adds, Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifices of righteousness, with
burnt offering, etc. ver. 29. As if he had told us first, that a broken and
contrite heart must go before, else no sacrifices could be accepted to do the
soul good; and then secondly, that in the time of offering they must be
accompanied with righteousness, i.e. the man's soul must be holy and devout, and
have a good affection in it unto God.

9. And after this they could not be accepted but by the mediation of the
Priest, which taught them great humility, even when they were at the best, and
in the greatest purity of body and soul.

10. And again there were some sins for which no sacrifices would be admitted,
nor no Priest could intercede; which both taught them humbly to wait on the
mercy of God, that he would find out a sacrifice and a Priest to expiate them;
and likewise to take great heed how they fell into those sins.

11. And the sacrifices themselves are to be considered as a part of their
civil righteousness; for by the giving of these to God, and observing the rest
of Moses his Laws they had a title to the Land of Canaan. If they kept
themselves from defilements, or brought these oblations, and observed the
feasts, and kept the outward part of the ten commandments, they were saved from
being cut off by the Magistrate, or cast out by God from the possessions that
he had given them. But God did not intend that this should make citizens of
heaven, or give them a right to the celestial inheritance; Canaan it self
being but a type of heaven, and these ritual observances but shadows of more
heavenly performances, whereby they were to seek that better country.

12. And yet when they performed these acts with an holy heart, in obedience to
Gods command, and as a part of his will: not relying on them, nor contenting
themselves with them alone: they might be accepted as a piece of diviner
righteousness, as Isaacs offering his son was, merely because God required him
so to do. For then they were converted to have something of spirituality in
them: and became of another nature: Then he that calls himself the righteous
Lord, and the holy one of Israel, styles himself also by this name, The Lord,
whose fire is in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem, Isa. 31.9. Those divine
Acts which render us acceptable in Gods sight might be employed in these things
as well as in others, that faith, obedience, resignation, humility, liberality,
etc. which God requires, might be exercised in these observances, as well as in
another matter; and for them (not merely for the sacrifices, etc.) they were
commended.

AND now how well will all this pains be bestowed, if every man who reads these
things will never content himself, nor be at rest without a state of inward
purity and conformity to the divine will, and a sincere obedience to every part
of that Law which our Lord has given us! Do not I beseech you cover your
selves with the leaves of piety, nor shroud your selves under the empty shadows
of Religion: but put on the Lord Jesus Christ, bring forth the real fruits of
justice, mercy, and humble godliness; let the life of God possess your souls,
and the divine spirit actuate and inform you as living members of his body. We
have our washings, and our sacrifices, and our days of rest as well as the
Jews had: let us have a care that we use them out of a sense of that duty we
owe to God, and as means to exercise and increase our graces; and not pride our
selves as they did in outward performances, and an heartless sanctity. If we
glory merely in our Baptism, in our being of such a party and persuasion, in
going to our Churches, hearing of Sermons there, and repeating them at home,
receiving of the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, praying, singing Psalms,
and offering praises: We do but mock God with outward shows, and bring him to
an Idol as Michal did Saul's messengers instead of a man. Nay, it is a greater
shame and more damning for us to mistake so grossly and to think to please God
with such trivial things as words and outward gestures, when we know more then
they did, and have their miscarriages laid so plainly before us. If God did not
only despise but hate the Jewish service when not joined with obedience to his
eternal precepts, then much more will he loath all ungodly men now with all
their worship which they bring him, though never so pompous and ceremonious.
For their Religion was full of shadows, ceremonies and outward signs, but ours
is a Religion of more simplicity, and therefore we can be the less tempted to
formality. And besides we being eased of that burden, of that heavy yoke which
lay upon their necks, the heartier obedience in other things may be more justly
exacted of us, and expected from us. Let me conclude therefore with the words
of the Apostle of us Gentiles, and beseech you by the mercies of God, Romans
12.1, 2.
that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God,
which is your reasonable service. And be not conformed to this world, but be ye
transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good,
acceptable and perfect will of God.

FINIS.

