THE DEVOUT CHRISTIAN Instructed How to PRAY and give THANKS to GOD: OR, A Book
of Devotions FOR FAMILIES: AND For Particular Persons IN Most of the concerns
of Humane Life.

By the Author of the CHRISTIAN SACRIFICE.

1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Pray without ceasing.

18. In every thing give thanks.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty.
MDCLXXIII.

depiction of Jesus Christ offering up prayers Non magna loquimur sed vivimus.
QUI SEQUITUR ME IN TENEBRIS NON AMBULAT. Cum clamore valido et lachrymis preces
off^ens exauditus est pro sua reverentia

THE AUTHORS PREFACE.
I Need not tell the well disposed Reader, there being so much said and writ
continually in this Argument, how natural and necessary it is for all rational
creatures, to look back upon all occasions to the Author of their being; that
they may make him their hearty acknowledgements for all the benefits they have
received from him, and still recommend themselves and all their concerns, to
his continued Grace and good Providence. Nor shall I go about to show how much
the Public Service of God in his own house is to be preferred before the
private Devotion of Families at home: there being no reason, as far as I
understand, to make the latter necessary, but only because, in most places,
Christian people cannot meet together, at the Church, every day Morning and
Evening, to give to God the glory that is due unto his Name.

My business is to desire him to remember, how natural it is likewise to all
mankind to take such good advice beforehand, when they have any petitions or
thanks to prefer unto earthly gods, as that they may be delivered in a decent
and grave form of words, as well as after a reverend manner: and to consider
therefore, with what sober and prudent care all those expressions ought to be
weighed, wherein they present the humble desires and grateful affections of
their hearts, to the most High God, the eternal Majesty of heaven and earth.

It has not proved I am sure an honor to Religion, that men have learnt to be
less solicitous about the one, than they are about the other. But such have
been the licentious rambles of their fancy in sudden Prayer, so bold and rude
have their descriptions been of Almighty God, so rash their affirmations
concerning him or concerning themselves, and so many untrue or doubtful things
have they uttered; that it is sufficient, in my poor judgment, to blast the
credit of that way of address to him, as it has done, alas! with too many, the
credit of Christian Piety, which has suffered extremely by such extravagance.

I know there are great numbers that will be ready to oppose me in this
particular, with whom I list not to dispute in this short Preface. Let me only
beseech them to use so much moderation, as not to discourage honest-hearted
people from performing their duty to God, by disgracing any longer, as they
have been wont to do, all Book-prayers. Which if they have not the advantage
(as I think they have) of sudden conceptions and expressions, yet are so
necessary in the Church, that without them many persons cannot pray at all. And
I hope they will confess, upon due deliberation, that though some few may have
attained an habit of uttering their desires freely, and becomingly upon any
occasion, yet as the use of it before others is too apt to minister to pride,
vainglory, and self-conceit; so most people are so defective both in their
conceptions and utterance, as not to be able to discharge this holy duty as
they ought, without such assistance as is here offered them.

How well I have performed what I have undertaken, I must leave to the
judgment of others. I am sure I have proceeded with deliberation; and studied
faithfully to avoid all affected expressions, fantastical allusions,
insignificant allegories, pretended wit, and elegant conversions of sentences,
and rash application of the holy Scripture to my present purpose: which have
been the vices, perhaps, of some forms, though not so frequently, as well as of
men's hasty inventions.

I have labored also to gratify the Reader with some variety; not because I
think it is always best to use it, but because some weak and squeamish
appetites will not be satisfied without it. And besides Prayers for Families, I
have composed a great many other for particular persons; wherein if I have
failed in the clearness and perspicuity of my expressions, it was much against
my will: and being admonished of it by my friends, I will reform it, or any
thing else that is amiss.

But the length, or the brevity of the Prayers sure will not be accused,
because there are of both sorts; that they who like not the one, may make use
of the other.

Some, I doubt not, will complain that they find not a Prayer for some
particular want of theirs, not here named; but that is a defect which could not
be remedied. For I knew not where to stop, if I had extended my thoughts beyond
those necessities which are most common; and the rest, I hope, may be
reasonably well supplied out of that which I have done to serve the other.

It is possible also that some may judge this whole Work to be but a needless
labor: since they have the Book of Common Prayers at hand, which they can use
at home, as well as in the Church. With these persons I shall not contend; but
only deliver my opinion freely about this matter. Which is, that the reverence
due to that Book will be best preserved, by employing it only in the public
Divine Service; or in the private, where there is a Priest to officiate.
However, the design of it is not to furnish the people with Prayers, for all
those particular occasions, wherein devout souls would make their requests to
God. And the constant opinion of pious Divines, in this and in other Churches,
we see, by their writings, has been; that other Books of Prayers, which they
have composed, are necessary for the Flock of Christ, besides their public
Liturgy.

That which remains, is only to entreat those who will make use of this Book
which is here tendered to them; First, to stir up their hearts to offer their
Praises, Thanksgivings, and Prayers unto God our heavenly Father, with fervent
devotion of spirit. And then, not to imagine the reading them out of a Book is
any hindrance to Devotion; but rather a considerable help, and much better than
trusting the memory even with a form. For a man's mind has nothing to do, when
he has the words before his eyes; but wholly to intend it self, to the raising
of its affections unto the greatest height and ardency of desire, and love, and
joy, that it is able.

But take heed, I beseech you, in the last place; lest the performance of these
holy duties, with some affection, deceive you into the neglect of all the rest.
Our Prayers will be fruitless, if they be not attended with our serious study
and earnest labor, to attain that which we beseech God to bestow upon us. And
therefore with a sincere hatred of all sin, and a spirit armed with hearty
resolution against it, invoke the Divine Grace for your assistance.

If you be true Christian Soldiers, that manfully fight under the banner of
our Lord, call to him for aid, with your weapons in your hand. With a mind bent
to consider, desire God to enlighten you. And with an heart stored with the
treasures of Divine Truth, beseech him to quicken and enliven you. And with
close and urgent applications of them to your heart, entreat him to enable you
to form and shape your whole man, spirit, soul and body, according to them. For
God is not hard to be entreated, since he entreats us to come to him, yea gives
a great deal of his grace without asking: but it is the faintness or
inconstancy of our endeavors to comply with his grace, and our own petitions,
that makes them no more prevalent.

They that had no other Director, but the light of their own minds, saw this
well enough, and were so sensible of this truth; that they were wont publicly
to declaim (as we find in Aristides his Oration to the Rhodians concerning
Concord) against the absurd folly of those, who were perpetually importuning
the Gods with their Prayers, but would do nothing for themselves; (...), etc.
no, not those things which they knew the Gods had put in their power.

And in the same manner Demosthenes in one of his Philippicks, chides the
Greeks; comparing them to men, who seeing great Hailstones fall upon their
heads, prayed that they might be preserved in safety; but would not run away to
secure themselves from harm.

And therefore Clemens Alexandrinus, Lib. 7. Strom.
justly commends the wisdom of those, who made the Laws of the famous Olympic
Combats: By which he that entered the lists, having for a long time before
exercised his body to feats of activity, was ordered before he began to contend
for the Prize, to stand right over against the Statue of Jupiter, and to say
this Prayer. O God; if I am in all regards duly fitted and prepared, as I
ought, for this Combat; vouchsafe, in thy righteous judgment, to grant the
victory to me. Even so, says he, may a man cheerfully approach to God, who,
faithfully and with a good conscience, does all that he can both to learn his
will, and to exercise himself in good works, that are pleasing to him: for he
shall have all that can be wished for the perfecting of his Salvation. Just as a
Physician (as he goes on) restores health to those, who cooperate with his
medicines: so will God give his eternal salvation, to them who work together
with him, both unto knowledge, and unto well doing.

As for those who do not live well, it is plain, says he in another place,
Lib. 6. Strom.
that they do not so much as know what things are most profitable for
themselves. And if so, then it is manifest likewise that they cannot tell how
to pray to God to receive good things from him, being ignorant of what is good.
Or if they should receive them, they would have no sense at all of the gift,
nor use it according to its worth and dignity; and that for the very same
reason, because they understand not its value.

Inspire therefore, O God of all Grace, I most humbly beseech thee, both my
heart and the hearts of all others who shall read this Book, with such a godly
will, to endeavor zealously in all things to do what is well pleasing in thy
sight; that we may comfortably expect the constant and powerful presence of thy
holy Spirit with us, to help us in the performance of our duty, till we have
perfected holiness in thy fear. And the sincerity of that love to thee, which
we profess in our Prayers, being testified by an unwearied observance of all
thy commands; we may be able also to wait with an humble confidence for thy
salvation: who have graciously promised to reward our weak and short obedience
in this life, with inconceiveable and endless joys in a better World. Amen.

Imprimatur.

Sam. Parker Rmo. in Christo Patri ac Domino, Dno. Gilberto Archiep. Cantuar. a
sac. Dom.
Ex Aedib. Lambeth October. 21. 1672.
ERRATA.
PAge 41. line 8. read abundant. p. 50. l. 3. for thou, r. the. p. 51. l. 11.
r. consecrate. p. 84. l. 9. r. devote. p. 92. l. 24. r. children. p. 135.
penult. dele to. p. 258. l. 7. for who, r. thou. p. 265. l. 8. for bountiful,
r. beautiful. p. 495. l. 5. r. every one.

PRAYERS FOR FAMILIES.
On the LORDS DAY In the MORNING.
ALmighty and Eternal God, the Lord of heaven and earth: we thy creatures are
here prostrate before thee, to express our humble and grateful sense of our
dependence on thee; to honor thee with our Praises, and Thanksgivings, and an
hearty oblation of our selves, our souls and bodies, to thy service. We are
unworthy, we confess, to be admitted to speak unto thy Majesty, nor can our
thoughts or words add any thing to thy greatness, happiness and glory: but
since thou art pleased in thy infinite goodness to do us the honor, not only
to admit, but to invite our addresses unto thee, that our spirits may be
bettered by lifting up themselves to thee from whom we come, by meditating thy
praises, by exciting our love, and praying our acknowledgements to thee; we
most humbly and thankfully receive this thy great grace and favor toward us.
Remembering withal, that it is but just and reasonable we should pay thee our
vows which we made the last night, being so graciously raised up in soundness
of body and mind, to see the light of this day, which our Savior has made,
that we may be glad and rejoice therein.

We laud and magnify therefore thy most holy Name, thy infinite Power, Wisdom
and Bounty; which all the world proclaims with the highest praises. We bless
thee in behalf of all thy creatures, as well as of our selves (to whom thou
have given dominion over the works of thy hands) for Psalm. 145.15,16.
the eyes of all look unto thee, and thou give them their meat in due season.
Thou openest thy hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing. But
above all we acknowledge thy inestimable benefits bestowed upon mankind in
Christ Jesus, the Son of thy Love, whom thou wast pleased, in thy infinite
mercy, to send among us in our own likeness, to assure us of thy good will
toward us, and to instruct us in our duty toward thee, and to give us hope of
no less than immortal life, by patient continuance in well doing.

We remember with all thankfulness his miraculous Birth, at which the Angels
rejoiced; his most holy Life; his bitter Agony, and bloody Death; his glorious
Resurrection upon this day from the grave; his Ascension into the heavens, to
fit on the right hand of the Majesty on high; his Triumph over all the powers
of darkness; and his Sovereign Dominion over all Angels, Authorities and
Powers, whom thou have made subject to him. 1 Pet. 3. ult.
O God, how great was thy love to the sinful sons of men! which moved thee to
pass by such innumerable offenses, whereby they had provoked thy severest
displeasure. How great was that love! which has honored our mortal nature
with so high a glory; and committed the care of our immortal souls to one so
mighty to save, and so full of kindness, and most tender charity toward us. O
the greatness of thy love! which has chosen us to be thy sons and heirs,
together with Christ Jesus; and set such an high Priest over thy house and
family, to make intercession for us, to dispense all divine blessings to us,
and send forth Angels themselves to be Heb. 1. ult.
ministering spirits for them who shall be heirs of salvation. Who can
understand the exceeding riches of thy grace in sending the holy Ghost to be a
witness of our Saviors Resurrection and Exaltation; and to make us abound in
hope, Romans 15.13.
that we shall be one day raised from the dead, and carried to heaven, and keep
a perpetual rest, after our short labors here, with our blessed Lord and
Master, in his eternal glory?

O that we could begin it this day, in devout Meditations of these things, in
unspeakable joy and satisfaction of heart in the assured hope and expectation
of them, and in blessing and praising thee, who have given us such good hope,
and everlasting consolation. Lift up our minds, we pray thee, this morning,
above all these little things here below, which are apt to distract our
thoughts, and turn away our eyes from that heavenly bliss. And keep them above
in the serious contemplation of it; till we be in love with it, and our hearts
be fully bent and resolved to seek it every day in those ways wherein Jesus
has gone before us, though it should be with the loss of all that we here
possess. It is but meet and fit that we should wholly quit our own will, and
devote our selves to follow thine; especially since thou have shown such
unusual kindness toward us, as, if we had been innocent, we durst not have
presumed to expect from thee.

We are ashamed, O Lord, to think that ever we have disobeyed thee, to whom we
stand so deeply indebted, both as we are thy creatures, and as we are redeemed
by the precious blood of thy Son Jesus. It grieves us, that we have
transgressed any of thy righteous and good Laws, by which it is our happiness
as well as our duty to be governed. We abhor the thoughts of ever breaking
them any more: beseeching not only thy gracious pardon, but thy acceptance of
our entire resolution to agree with thy Will in all things, for the time to
come. We here again most solemnly dedicate all the powers of our souls and
bodies to thy service: desiring unfeignedly that all the thoughts and designs
of our minds, all the affections and passions of our hearts, and all the
actions of our life and conversation may be pure, holy and unreproveable in thy
sight.

For which end we most humbly implore the assistance of thy good spirit, which
our Lord has encouraged us to hope thou will give to those, that ask and seek
it with their whole heart. O let thy mercy be upon us according to thy word,
according as our hope is in thee, and our hearts sincerely and steadfastly set
to keep thy Commandments. Psalm. 139.23,24.
Search us, O God, and know our hearts: try us, and know our thoughts. And see
if there be any way of wickedness in us, and lead us in the way everlasting.
Fill our minds with awful and reverend thoughts of thee, as our Sovereign Lord
and Judge. Settle in us an immutable love to thee; and the highest esteem of
thy favor and grace, as better than life it self. That so we may study above
all things to approve our very hearts, and all our actions to thee; and feel
the sense of thy acceptance of us, giving us greater pleasure, than all the
world can afford us. Make it our delight to praise thee, to call to mind thy
loving kindness, to offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and to
meditate on thy precious promises. Help us to Luke 21.34.
take heed to ourselves, lest our hearts be at any time overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and the inordinate cares of this life: Heb. 13.5.
To have our conversation without covetousness, and to be content with such
things as we have: 1 Thessalonians. 4.4.
To possess our bodies in sanctification and honor: Rom 13.9.
To love our neighbors as our selves; Matthew. 7.12.
And as we would that others should do to us, to do even so to them: Romans 12.18.
To live peaceably, as much as in us lies, with all men: 1 Pet. 3.4.
To put on the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit: Jam. 5.12.
To take those who have spoken in the name of our Lord, for an example of
suffering affliction, and of patience: 1 Pet. 4.16.
And when we suffer as Christians, not to be ashamed, but to glorify thee our
God on this behalf.

And accept, good Lord, of all the praises and acknowledgements of all thy
people met this day together, according to thy Will: and assist us to render
thee still more hearty and affectionate praises, in that holy Assembly, to
which we are going to join our selves. O that all people on the face of the
earth were united together, likewise, in one body to show forth thy praise. O
that thy way were known upon earth; thy saving health among all Nations. And
that all Christian Kings especially, may be filled with thy holy Spirit; and
think it their Crown and their Glory, to be the devout worshippers and faithful
subjects of the Lord Jesus, the King of kings, and the Lord of lords. Psalm.
132.9.
O that thy priests may be clothed with righteousness, and thy Saints shout
aloud for joy. That all who are in distress and misery may rejoice also, in
hope that all afflictions shall turn to their good, and Heb. 12.11.
afterward yield the peaceable fruit of righteousness. O Lord, hear us; and
make thy face to shine upon thy servants: that we may enter into thy gates with
thanksgiving, and into thy courts with praise: that we may be thankful unto
thee, and bless thy Name. 100.4,5.
For the Lord is good; his mercy is everlasting: and his truth endures to all
generations.

Our Father, etc.

At Night.
O Lord most high; the Holy One, who inhabitest Eternity, who only have
immortality, and art most blessed in thy own incomprehensible perfections. Thou
art to be feared and loved, and worshipped and praised, by us and all
reasonable creatures, who have any knowledge; how great, how mighty, how wise
and merciful thou art. All thy works praise thee, O Lord, and we more
especially ought to bless thee; whom thou have made to understand thy most
adorable excellencies, which are far beyond the highest of all our thoughts.
And we have yet a more particular obligation to thee, for thy marvailous love
in Christ Jesus, whom thou have sent in great humility to visit us, who are but
dust and ashes; to make his abode among us; to testify thy great love to us;
and assure us of thy good will, notwithstanding our many offenses; and to make
us exceeding great and precious promises, to invite us to approach thee, and to
encourage our obedience to thee. We thank thee that he has sealed them with
his blood; and thou have confirmed them by his Resurrection, and Ascension, and
the coming of the holy Ghost; and that thou have given us so many happy
opportunities to acquaint our selves with the truth and purity of the Christian
Religion: which comforts us in this state of mortality and misery, with the
blessed hope of eternal life.

Blessed be thy goodness for that great consolation; and that thou have shown
us the way to it by his doctrine and example; and assured us of the assistance
of thy holy Spirit to enable us to follow after him, to that glory which he
possesses. Blessed be thy goodness, that we have felt it so often in our minds
and hearts; inspiring us with holy thoughts, exciting in us devout affections
and godly resolutions, filling us with Divine Joys, and with comfortable
expectations of the glory that shall be revealed. We thank thee, that thou have
permitted us this day to attend upon thee, together with our Christian
Brethren, in the public Duties of thy Worship and Service. And that there we
have received any good instructions, any holy exhortations, and Christian
encouragements, to proceed and go forward in the course of well doing: and have
begun in any measure that eternal rest, which we wait for with all the
faithful, when we shall praise, and thank, and love thee our heavenly Father,
better than we can do now, whilst we are in these frail bodies, and absent from
the Lord.

We can do no less than offer up again our souls and bodies to thee, to be
ordered and governed by thy blessed Will, and not our own: that so we may be
every day more prepared for that happy state, and draw nearer and nearer in the
disposition and temper of our spirits, to that immortal blessedness. It is our
satisfaction, our security, the ease and joy of our hearts, to be under the
conduct of thy unerring wisdom; to follow thy counsels, and to be determined in
all things by thy holy Will: who art so good, and have given us such large
demonstrations of thy abundant kindness and good will to us, as will not let us
distrust thy tender care of us; whatsoever it is thou would have us do or
suffer in this world. O God, purify our minds and thoughts more perfectly,
that we may never conceive amiss of thee; but have right apprehensions in all
things: and all our passions and affections likewise, that we may entirely love
thee; and rejoice in being beloved of thee; and humbly confide in thee; and
absolutely resign our selves to thee; and be filled with constant devotion
toward thee, our Almighty Creator, and most merciful Redeemer. Possess our
hearts with such a lively sense of our relation to thee in both respects, and
of the honor thou have done us in preferring us so much above the rest of our
fellow creatures; that we may ever behave our selves suitably to the dignity of
our Nature, and of our Religion.

O that we may never degenerate into a base and unworthy love of any thing here
below: nor be oppressed with the burden of the cares of this life: nor sink
under the weight of any affliction: nor be vainly puffed up with the greatest
fullness of earthly goods, if thou art pleased to bestow them on us. But assist
us with thy grace, to Romans 12.9.
abhor that which is evil, and cleave to that which is good. Dispose us to a
discreet and temperate use of all the pleasures of this world. Indue us with
true modesty and humility of spirit, that we may Romans 12.3,10,16.
not think of our selves more highly than we ought to think; but think soberly,
according to the measure which thou have dealt unto us. Keep us from being wise
in our own conceits: and enable us so to order our selves, that Phil. 4.5.
our moderation may be known to all men. Make us kindly affectioned one to
another in brotherly love: To delight in doing good; Tit. 3.2.
to show all meekness to all men: Romans 13.7,8.
To render to all their dues: Tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom
custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor: and to owe no man anything,
but to love one another. Make us so happy, that we may be able to Matthew. 5.44.
love our enemies, to bless those that curse us, to do good to them that hate
us, Romans 12.15.
to rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep. Compose
our spirits to a quiet and steady dependence on thy good providence; that we
may not Matthew. 6.25.
take too much thought for our life, nor be careful for any thing: Phil. 4.6.
but by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, still make known our
requests to thee our God. And help us Luke 18.1.
to pray always, and not faint: 1 Thessalonians. 5.18.
In every thing to give thanks, Heb. 13.15.
and offer up the sacrifice of praise continually: 1 Pet. 1.17.
To pass the time of our sojourning here in fear: Romans 5.2.
To believe those things which we do not see, and to rejoice in hope of thy
glory: Luke 21.19.
To possess our souls in patience: Phil. 4.11,12.
And to learn in whatsoever state we are, therewith to be content: Make us know
both how to be abased, and how to abound: every where, and in all things
instruct us, both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer
need: being enabled to do all things through Christ which strengthens us.
That we feeling the joys of uprightness and integrity of heart; our Religion
may be the greatest comfort and pleasure to us, and we our selves an ornament
to our Religion.

O that we could always by an innocent, good and useful life, commend the
Doctrine of God, our Savior, to those who converse with us: And that the light
of all Christians did so shine before men, that others beholding their good
works, might be moved to glorify thee, and heartily to believe on the Lord
Jesus. Send forth thy Light and thy Truth into all the dark corners of the
Earth: That Psalm. 72.11,12,13,14.
all kings may fall down before him, and all nations serve him. And indue them
whom thou have placed in such high Authority over others with that divine
Spirit which was in him: that they may deliver the needy when he cries; the
poor also, and him that has no helper. That they may spare the poor and needy,
and save and redeem their soul from deceit and violence: and their blood may be
precious in their sight.

Bless these Kingdoms wherein we live; and as thou have long continued to us
the knowledge of thy Truth: so give us grace to bring forth fruit becoming the
Gospel; that thou may not cut us down as barren trees, which cumber the
ground. Lord, save the King, and establish his Throne in righteousness, that we
may see many happy days under his government: and be Psalm. 90.15.
comforted now after the time that thou have plagued us; and for the years
wherein we have suffered adversity. Prosper the pious endeavors of all those,
that faithfully feed and instruct thy people; and increase the number of them.
O that the seed which has been sown this day, may take deep root in all our
hearts, and bring forth fruit abundantly: that being not Jam. 1.25,26.
forgetful hearers, but doers of the work, we may be all blessed in our deed.
Help us in all the week following, to Psalm. 141.3,4.
set a watch before our mouth; and to keep the door of our lips. Preserve us
that our heart incline not to any evil thing, to practice wicked works, with
men that work iniquity: but we may be always 1 Pet. 3.13.
followers of that which is good; 1 Thessalonians. 4.1.
and as we have received how we ought to walk and please thee our God, so we
may abound more and more.

Protect us, we beseech thee, and all our friends every where, this night.
Grant us quiet and undisturbed rest and sleep: and awaken in the morning these
good thoughts and desires again in our hearts; Joh. 15.7.
that the words of our Savior may abide in us, and we in him; till we come to
endless life together with him; by whom we are encouraged thus to address our
selves unto thee, and to continue to pray, as he has taught us in his holy
Gospel, saying,

Our Father, etc.

A shorter form of Prayer for the Lords day Morning.
O Most holy and eternally Blessed. Deuteronomy. 10.14.
The heaven, and the heaven of heavens is thine, the earth also with all that
therein is. Thou art every where, and can not be excluded from any place: but
art present to the greatest secrets of our souls, and see the closest and
most retired thoughts of our hearts. Thou know very well with what designs
and affections we now bow our selves before thee, and can not be deceived by
any words that we are able to speak in thy praise, whilst our hearts are far
from thy fear and love.

Behold, O Lord, our hearts are full with desires to be possessed with a mighty
reverend sense of thee, and all the benefits thou have bestowed on us: and to
be lifted up to heaven in love to thee, and joy in thee, whilst we bless and
praise thee, and speak good of thy Name. We here remember with all humility and
thankfulness, that thou art our Creator. And acknowledge thy care and
providence over thy ancient people in blessing and sanctifying a day, wherein
thou thy self restedst from thy works, that they might cease from all other
employments; and admire thy wonderful works, extol thy power, bless thy
goodness, and be astonished at thy wisdom, in making, preserving, adorning and
governing this excellent frame of the world. The heavens declare thy glory, O
God, and the firmament shows thy handiwork. The Sun, the Moon, and all the
host of Heaven proclaim the greatness and splendour of thy Majesty. The Psalm.
104.24.
whole earth is full of thy rich goodness: so is the great and wide sea,
wherein are things moving innumerable, both small and great living creatures.
There is nothing but what speaks of thee; and above all, the children of men,
whom thou have wonderfully made, and curiously wrought, and impressed with
thine own Image; that they might understand thee, and love thee, in all and
above all things.

The variety, the order, the stedfastness of all thy works in this great world,
abundantly utter thy adorable perfections. But thou, O Lord, by thy goodness in
giving thy Son for us, and then raising him up from the dead, and setting him
at thy right hand, have given us new matter of wonder and praise; and
consecrated a better rest and holy day of rejoicing; wherein we should behold
the glories of another world, and have before our eyes the happiness thou
intendest for us there, together with all the excellent means which lead unto
it. Thou give us occasion not only to reflect upon all the good things thou
have provided for our bodies; (which we can never acknowledge enough; the very
health and ease of one day deserving the thankfulness of many) but we must also
remember, that we are thy redeemed ones, and that thou have done great things
for our souls in thy Son Jesus, who is entered into the heavens for us, and gone
to prepare a resting place for all those that follow him. This exceeding riches
of thy grace infinitely surpasses all our acknowledgements; since all the
praises we are able to render thee, are less than is due for thy temporal
blessings. To this love we ^owe the knowledge of thee, the true and only God;
our freedom from Idolatry, and a vain conversation; the true principles of holy
living; the benefit of repentance; the promise of a pardon; the assistance of
thy holy Spirit; the ministry of thy Angels; the hope of immortal life; and the
pledges our Lord has left us of his endless love. To this we owe thy
forbearance in the days of our ignorance; thy unwearied patience toward us in
a continued rebellion; and thy earnest entreaties of us, when we were
passionately bent upon our own destruction. Thou have sent us, in much love,
many holy Instructors and guides to blessedness. We have had the benefit of
sundry pious Sermons, good Examples, wholesome admonitions, and serious
counsels, of the power of the Holy Ghost, and diverse restraints of fear, and
shame, and love: and thou still pursuest us with thy merciful kindness, and
beseechest us to attend to thy call, and receive thy blessings, and make thee
our choice, and be eternally happy in thy Divine favor and likeness. What
shall we render to the Lord for all his benefits toward us?

O help us to manifest our real and unfeigned desires to make some worthy
returns to thee, by our careful improvement of the holy opportunity which thou
this day put into our hands. O that our minds may be more enlightened to
understand the truth, as it is in Jesus; that our wills may be more steadfastly
resolved to cleave unto it; that our affections may be excited to a stronger
and more ardent love to thee, and to a greater delight in thee; and all the
powers of our souls disposed to serve thee at all other times, more cheerfully
and readily, in all the Duties of Piety, Soberness, Righteousness and Mercy. So
that every day may become an holy rest to the Lord, by ceasing to do evil, and
constantly doing well: and we ^ay glorify thee throughout our whole life; in
all our actions 1 Pet. 2.9.
show^ng forth thy praises, who ^ast called us out of darkness into thy
marvailous light, according to thy abundant mercy in Christ Jesus. By whom thou
have given us a good hope in thee, that thou will hear our prayers, and do for
us above all that we can ask or ^hink; which we humbly beg in those holy words,
which he has ^aught us, saying,

Our Father, etc.

Another at Night.
O Most blessed for evermore; the Father of Mercies, and the God of all
Comfort. How precious are thy thoughts to us ward? how great is the sum of
them? Thou renewest thy favors continually, and art still pouring upon us
innumerable benefits: of which this is not the least, that thou give us leave
to come into thy presence, to call thee Father, and to make known our requests
to thee, by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving. We accept, O Lord, with
all thankfulness this thy great grace and loving kindness to us: and are here
again prostrate before thee this evening, to acknowledge thy goodness in making
us such excellent creatures; capable to know thee, and acknowledge thee, and
love thee, and by being made like thee, to be eternally happy with thee.

Blessed be thy name, that we are now alive; and that we have lived so long in
health, and strength, and peace, and plenty of all good things: whereas our
eyes might have been consumed with grief, our bones sore vexed, and we might
have mingled our drink with continual weeping. We are bound unto thee for the
free use of our understand^ngs; for the good inclinations we find in our wills;
for any devout ^ffections which are stirring in our hearts; for all the
advantages we have had by our education, good company, and holy examples: And
more especially for the illuminations of the holy Ghost by thy blessed Gospel;
the breathings of it frequently into our spirits; the importunities thou have
used to draw us to thee; and the great and precious promises whereby thy love
in Christ Jesus constrains us to resign our selves entirely to the obedience of
thy Precepts.

We ought likewise to admire and praise thee, for thy goodness to all thy
creatures, who live daily upon thy bounteous allowance. Psalm. 145.
The eyes of all wait on thee, and thou give them their food in due season.
Thou diffusest thy blessings in several streams to every one of them, according
to their needs. 104.28.
That thou give them, they gather: thou openest thy hand, they are filled
with good. We give thee the glory of the plentiful provision thou have made for
them: and more particularly admire thy great liberality to the children of men;
under whose feet thou have put in subjection, all sheep and oxen, yea and the
beasts of the field, the fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea, and
whatsoever passes through the paths of the waters. O Lord, we praise thee for
thy goodness to those who praise thee not themselves. Be thou adored and
acknowledged in thy bounty, which bestows so many blessings unasked and
unsought; and continues them notwithstanding abundance of provocations, and
most high offense that they have given to thy merciful kindness.

And let thy goodness to thy Church be never forgotten by us, which thou have
in all ages protected and defended: in a marvailous manner propagating the
Gospel of our Savior, confounding its opposers, and spreading it by the power
of the holy Ghost over the face of the earth. We thank thee for thy singular
favor to these Countries wherein we live. To whom these glad tidings of
Salvation have reached; and who have long enjoyed a more glorious light than
many other places; and been delivered from the darkness of Popish superstition,
and from sundry attemps that have heen made to bereave us of this happiness;
and are again settled after many confusions in a peaceable enjoyment of thy
true Religion: which thou have also continued to us, though we have not brought
forth fruit worthy of the Gospel of thy Grace.

O that all thy undeserved goodness may have this effect upon us; to make us
heartily love thee, and devoutly worship thee, and zealously obey thee, and
steadfastly trust and hope in thee for ever. That by a careful improvement of
the knowledge of thee our God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom thou have
given us all things that pertain unto life and godliness; we may still enjoy
this inestimable treasure, and all thy love to us may at last be finished in
those eternal joys, which he has promised to the faithful. And as we have been
taught, exhorted and encouraged this day out of thy holy word; and have
likewise publicly acknowledged our obligations to thee, and made profession of
love, and gratitude, and dutifulness to thy Divine Majesty: So help us all the
week following openly to testify the truth and honesty of our hearts, in all
this, by a blameless conversation; in all humility, meekness, temperance,
righteousness, charity and peace, with all them that call on the Lord out of a
pure heart.

Bless our Sovereign, the Defender of the Faith we profess; and all employed
under him, in their several offices: that they may be instruments of continuing
to us these holy opportunities; with all other good things that may make these
Kingdoms happy. O that all our Friends may be thine: and if we have any
enemies, Father, forgive them. Comfort and support the sick, the needy, and all
other distressed persons, with an immovable belief of thy wise and good
providence: to which give them grace patiently and obediently to resign
themselves. And when all our senses this night shall be bound up with sleep, be
thou, O Lord, our keeper: and after the refreshment of that repose, and this
holy rest from our labors, raise us in the morning to return unto them with
cheerful minds, and ready wills; praising still and magnifying thy multiplied
mercies to us in Christ Jesus, by whom we present our selves and petitions to
thee: saying further, as he has taught us.

Our Father, etc.

Another for the Afternoon, or any other time of that day.
O Most Holy, Glorious and Blessed. Thy Name is excellent in all the earth; and
thou art for ever praised by all the host of heaven, who are never weary of thy
service. We thy creatures, sinful dust and ashes, have many times professed it
is our happiness, to join with those heavenly inhabitants in admiring,
worshipping, blessing and loving thee, the great Lord of all; with pure hearts,
in unity of spirit, sincere friendship, and brotherly accord one with another.
We have often spoken great things of thee; and declared thy service to be the
sweetest pleasure, and one hour spent in holy meditations, devout affections,
and cheerful thanksgivings, to be far better than all the time we spend in
other employments. How much then, if we mean sincerely, and according to our
words, should our hearts rejoice that we may spend a day in thy Courts, and are
invited to a longer attendance on thy divine Majesty, in the duties of thy
worship and service. We are ashamed that any weariness should seize on our
spirits; and that it should be irksome to us, to renew our thoughts and
acknowledgements of thy infinite goodness. Behold, O Lord, we are resolved
again to address our selves unto thee with praise and thanksgiving, for giving
us such opportunities to look back to thee, the Author of our being; to lift up
our souls toward our heavenly Country; and unite them to the first and
chiefest good; from whence we derive whatsoever we have, or hope to enjoy.
Beseeching thee to help us to draw near unto thee, with hearts full of wonder
at thy incomprehensible Majesty; full of love to thy most wise and Almighty
goodness; full of thankfulness for thy benefits; full of desires to be what
thou would have us; and full of joy that thou would have us be so happy, in
being made thy children, partakers of a Divine Nature, and heirs of immortal
life.

We admire thy glory, O great Lord of heaven and earth, which shines in the
whole Creation; thy greater glory in the work of our redemption, by the
miraculous Birth, Life, Death, and Resurrection of Christ Jesus; and the
greatest of all, which we hope and wait for at his appearing, when he shall
come to be admired in his Saints, and glorified in all them that believe. Thou
have done great things for us already: thou have promised to do greater: and
thou art daily performing thy promises, and preparing us for the accomplishment
of them all, in the highest blessedness. O God of all grace, make us wiser
Stewards, than we have been, of thy manifold gifts and graces, which we are
entrusted withal. Help us carefully to husband this sacred opportunity which
thou continuest to us, to the best advantage of our immortal souls. Gather in
our thoughts from our ordinary business. Fix them on thy self; and hold them in
the contemplation of thy infinite mercies, and of those divine Truths which
represent our duty, and thy exceeding love and kindness toward us. Chase away
all worldly affections, and overawe our spirits with a sense of thy divine
presence; that by serving thee with a religious reverence this day, we may be
disposed to walk in thy fear all the rest of our lives: Having a grateful
remembrance of thy benefits; a deep and serious reflection upon our own
resolutions, and thy gracious promises; an holy jealousy over our selves, lest
we should be unfaithful to them; and a pious care in all things to approve our
selves the constant and diligent servants of the Lord Jesus.

O that our thankfulness, and good affections, and zealous desires, may not end
with our prayers, nor conclude with this day: But we may be possessed with such
a strong and habitual sense of thee, and of our obligations to thee; that we
may every day earnestly and heartily serve thee in all the actions of Christian
piety, and be unwearied in well doing unto the conclusion of our lives.

Another.
O Most holy, great and glorious Majesty of heaven and earth. To whom all the
blessed company above do, with the highest admiration and love, give continual
praise, and thanks, and honor, and worship, and obedience; acknowledging thou
art above all that they are able to speak of thee, or ascribe and render to
thee. Much more art thou exalted above the thoughts of such poor mortals as we,
who are clothed with flesh, and live far remote from the throne of thy glory.
And yet, such is thy goodness, thou condescendest to admit, nay, to draw us to
a fellowship with those holy spirits; that we may thereby be made happy, and
called thy servants, though, when we have done the best we can, very
unprofitable.

What is man that thou art mindful of him? what are the sons of men that thou
do at all consider them? Thou have crowned us with glory and honor here
below, and raised us to a Dominion over the works of thy hands. Thou have
endued us with understandings to know thee, and with wills to love thee; whose
most excellent wisdom, Almighty power, and surpassing goodness, we discover in
all thy works of wonder. But what is sinful man, that thou should so much
regard him, as to send after him, to seek and save him, when he was lost? Lord!
what grace was this, that thou should vouchsafe to speak with us, and
communicate any thing of thy mind to such forgetful and ungrateful wretches?
But that thou should speak to us by thy Son, and declare thy mind in such
words of grace and favor, and publish such kind intentions toward us, and
recover us with so much cost, and purchase us to thy self with the precious
blood of thy Son Jesus, and send thy holy Spirit to purify us; that we might
have thy Image renewed in us, and be made fit society for thy self again, and
restored to immortal life: Lord! how much does it exceed all belief, had thou
not given us, in tender mercy, such abundance assurance of it? We have those
reasons to bless thee, which the Angels have not. We must admire thee, not only
as the great Creator and Preserver of all things; which we heartily do, and
give thee the glory of all thy marvailous works: but also as the Redeemer of
mankind out of a forlorn condition, by the manifestation of thy self in our
flesh, by the blood of thy Son, the constant breathings of the holy Ghost, the
light of thy Gospel, and an unwearied patience, which has waited on us, and
propounded to us no less happiness, than to sit together in heavenly places in
Christ Jesus; who is advanced far above all principalities and powers, and
every name that is named, not only in this world, but in that also which is to
come.

We praise thee, O God; we magnify thy most holy Name; we confess our selves
bound to thee, above all other creatures, that we have any knowledge of: for we
are twice thy creatures; and thou have a double title to all we have. O stir up
all that is within us to bless thee, and love thee, and offer up the sacrifice
of thanksgiving to thee. Fill our hearts with joy and gladness, that we have
another opportunity, wherein to recount thy mercies to us; to be further
instructed in thy mind and will declared by our Savior; and to be under the
comfortable influences of heaven, to cherish those holy thoughts, affections,
and resolutions which are begun in us, and to promote our growth and increase
in all wisdom, goodness and virtue. Possess us with such a strong sense of thy
continued love toward us; that we may testify our true and hearty
thankfulness for it, by attentive consideration of all that we hear out of thy
holy Word; and by laying it up in our hearts; and esteeming it more than the
greatest treasures of this World; and endeavoring every day to have our
conversation as becomes the Gospel of Christ. That so our praises being not
merely words, but real deeds, and all the fruits of righteousness; we may be
blessed in our deed, and at last hear our Lord speaking to us in those gracious
words, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from
the beginning of the world. Amen.

A Prayer for the Morning when there is a Communion.
O Most holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty; the Father of mercies, the God of
peace and comfort: by whose power we, and all things else, were created, and by
whose good providence we are all preserved and maintained. Be thou eternally
blessed and praised, worshipped and served, with the most ardent love, who have
made mankind so like to thy self, and ordered so many of thy creatures to serve
us, and chosen rather to make us anew, and create us again Ephesians. 2.10.
in Christ Jesus unto good works, than let us be undone by our shameful
disobedience to thee. For thou Joh. 3.16.
have sent thy only begotten Son into the world (adored be thy inconceiveable
love) that whosoever believes in him might not perish, but have everlasting
life. And he has laid down his life for that end, and redeemed us by his blood
from the hands of our enemies; and triumphed over them all most gloriously; and
in token thereof ascended into heaven; and possessed the Crown of immortal
Life, and sat down at thy right hand, and obtained dominion over Angels, and
Men and all Creatures.

We have felt the blessed fruits of his Death, and Resurrection, and Royal
Power, whereby Heb. 7.25.
he is able to save to the uttermost all them that come to thee by him. Thy
holy Spirit has breathed often into our hearts: we have been instructed in the
Gospel of thy grace: and thy Servants, the Ministers of thy Word, have not
ceased to call upon us, yea, to importune us, to follow after our Savior, to
that heavenly bliss in which he lives. And now again thou vouchsafest to us an
happy opportunity to improve our selves in Christian Wisdom, Devotion and
holiness; and we have received thy kind invitations to the nearest approaches
to thy divine Majesty.

O fill us, we pray thee, with a lively and strong sense of thy bounteous
goodness, which has been so many ways expressed toward us. Fill us with pious
dispositions to receive more of it, according to thy precious promises in
Christ Jesus. Stir up in us such thankful acknowledgements to thee, such
hearty resolutions to obey thee, such earnest desires and longings to partake
more and more of thy divine Nature, such love, delight, and joy in well doing;
that our souls may be lifted up above, to that glorious place where our dear
Savior is; and we may comfortably expect, and be truly prepared for, a blessed
translation thither at the great day of his appearing.

Our great unfruitfulness, we confess, in the knowledge of Christ, may justly
make thee deny thy gracious influences from heaven upon us. But, O God of all
grace, who multiplyest mercy, and delightest in doing good, pardon us and make
us better, both at once. Quicken our souls to hear thy holy Word with greater
fear and reverence; to sing thy praises with greater cheerfulness and gladness;
to pray to thee with more earnest affection and steadiness of mind; to approach
to thy holy Table, with the deepest humility and devotion of spirit; and to
receive the renewed pledges of thy love, to our very great increase in Faith,
and Hope, and Love to thee, and to all the world: That so this may be a good
day to our souls, and we may be disposed and enabled to spend the rest of our
days better, as becomes the redeemed of the Lord, who have tasted how gracious
he is, and who have received the earnest of eternal life. O that our
conversation may be in heaven, by the constant love and exercise of purity,
righteousness, mercy and godliness: That we ever studying to glorify thee, our
heavenly Father, by bearing much of this good fruit, may have the more assured
hope, that thou will glorify us with thy self.

And inspire, we beseech thee, the hearts of all others that meet together this
day, to magnify thy great and glorious Name, with the like religious
affections toward thee: That we may all Romans 12.1.
present our selves a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto thee, which is
our reasonable service.

Help us all to Coloss. 3.10,11, etc.
put on (as thy elect children holy and beloved) bowels of mercies, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering; forbearing one another, and
forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any; even as Christ
forgave us, so incline us also to do. And above all these things to put on
charity, which is the ^ond of perfectness. And let the peace ^f thee our God
rule in our hearts, ^o which we are called in one body; and ^ake us ever truly
thankful. Hear ^s, we beseech thee, O most merci^ul Father; and after we have
per^ected holiness here in thy fear, bring ^s all to complete our praises and
^hanksgivings to thee, in the great ^ssembly of Saints and Angels, through
Christ Jesus our blessed Lord and Savior: 2 Pet. 3. ult.
To whom be glory both now and for ever. Amen.

Our Father, etc.

A Prayer at Night when there has been a Communion.
O Eternally blessed Lord God; the Creator of the world, the Father of Angels
and men, the King of infinite Majesty and Power, who can do what thou
please every where. 2 Chronicles. 6.18.
The heaven, and the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; who art inthroned
only in thy own greatness, and crowned with the glory of thy own uncommunicated
perfections. There is nothing can be added to thee, by us or any other
creatures; of whose services thou have no need; seeing thou art absolutely
happy in thy self, Act. 17.25.
and give to all life, and breath, and all things. But it is our perfection
and happiness to admire and praise thee whom we cannot comprehend; to love thee
as much as we know thee; and to obey thee as much as we love thee, 1 Chronicles.
28.9.
with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind: for the Lord searches all
hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts.

We praise thee therefore, O God, we acknowledge thee to be the Lord. We give
thee the glory that is due unto thy name: and with hearty love offer up our
selves again intire^y unto thee, whose we are, and for whom we were made.
Justice and gratitude, fear and love, hope and interest, whatsoever has any
power to move our hearts, do all press, and mightily urge us constantly to
devote and consecreate our souls and bodies to thy faithful service. We cannot
neglect thee, unless we will cast away our selves; nor sin against thee, unless
we will be our own accusers, judges and tormentors; and throw our selves into
the greatest miseries. Thou have been so good to us, that if we should not
become good likewise, we must hate and abhor our selves; who cannot but love
and delight in those who show us any kindness, and bestow any benefits upon us:
though they are but thy Ministers and Servants, that have nothing, and can do
nothing, but what thou have given them, and inclinest them to do.

By thee we were formed and brought out of our Mothers Womb. And by a greater
mercy were early born again, and made thy children in Christ Jesus. We have
been thy care ever since; and been instructed in that Covenant of Grace (into
which at our Baptism we were received) by the knowledge thou have given us of
thy blessed Gospel. Wherein we read the great love of our Savior in dying for
us; and have the promise of his Spirit to sanctify and govern us, his holy
Precepts for the rule of our actions, his glorious Example to excite and
quicken us, and the hope of eternal bliss, by his Resurrection from the dead,
to encourage and comfort us in well doing. And in the mean time we enjoy the
society of thy Saints, the ministry of thy Angels, and the direction and
assistance of thy faithful servants, the Ambassadors of peace and
reconciliation with thee. All which fruits of thy wonderful love we have long
enjoyed; and thou have this day entertained us at thy Table: where thou have
refreshed us with the Communion of the body and blood of Christ Jesus; the
earnest of a blessed resurrection, and the pledge of immortality. Besides
innumerable good things, which thy most tender mercy has been pleased to
bestow upon our bodies, to make our passage to that blessedness, through all
the troubles and dangers of this life, the more easy and delightful to us. And
all this thou have done for those who have been too idle and useless, cold and
dull, inconstant, and soon weary of their duty, forgetful of benefits, and
unfaithful to their own promises. But thy infinite goodness still continues to
do it; to make us more diligent, more zealous, more steadfast and immovable,
more mindful of thee, and of our own holy purposes, that we may be abundant, as
there is reason, in the work of our Lord, knowing that our labor shall not be
in vain in the Lord.

And that is the most sincere and fervent desire of our souls likewise, who
here most humbly beseech thee, by the power of thy holy Spirit to preserve in
us a perpetual and affectionate remembrance of all thy undeserved kindness to
us. Stir up all that is within us every morning to bless and praise thy holy
Name: That by a renewed, serious acknowledgement of thy benefits, we may be
more and more stirred up to love and to all good works. O that the Lord Jesus
may be always in our thoughts, and in our hearts; that we may make him our
pattern, as he is our hope! O that nothing may be so dear unto us in this
world, as his holiness, his humility, his goodness and charity, his meekness
and patience, his entire trust in thee, and resignation to thee, his delight to
do thy will, O God, in hope of that Tit. 1.1.
eternal life, which thou who can not lie have promised to us. Fix our minds
and affections more steadfastly on that glory wherewith he is crowned, by his
obedient suffering of death, that we may never be weary nor faint in our minds
under any sufferings for well doing: but continuing faithful to the death, may
also receive the Crown of Life.

Accept, we pray thee, of this our bounden duty and service; pity our great
weaknesses; pardon all our sins and negligences; and deny us not the grace of
thy holy Spirit, which we have implored, to enable us to amend our lives
according to thy holy Word: But after thou have refreshed us with quiet sleep
this night, let us feel it moving our hearts to the same holy thoughts,
acknowledgements, desires and resolutions which it now works in us; through thy
mercy declared to us in Christ Jesus. In whose words we conclude our Prayers,
saying, as he has taught us.

Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name: Thy kingdom come; Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread;
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us: And
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, etc.

PRAYERS FOR FAMILIES.
MONDAY MORNING.
WE humble our selves, O Lord of heaven and earth, before thy glorious Majesty;
we heartily acknowledge thy Sovereign Dominion over us and all creatures; we
praise and magnify thy eternal Power, Wisdom, Goodness and Truth; and we
render thee our most unfeigned thanks for the innumerable benefits which thou
in thy bounty have loaded us withal: Above all for the gracious declaration
thou have made of thy good will to us in Christ Jesus; by whom thou have
invited and encouraged sinners to return to thee, and directed them in the way
to everlasting bliss.

We blush to think of our shameful forgetfulness of thee, and ingratitude to
thee; to whom we owe all that we have in this world, and all our hopes in the
next. We most humbly implore thy tender mercies in the forgiveness of all our
sins, whereby we have offended, either in thought, word, or deed, against thy
just and holy Laws. For we are truly sorry for all our mis-doings: we utterly
renounce whatsoever is contrary to thy will: and here devote our selves
entirely to the obedience thereof. Accept, O most merciful Father, of this
renewed Dedication, which we make of our whole man, body, soul and spirit to
thee. And as thou do inspire us with holy resolutions, so accompany them
always with the assistance of thy grace; that we may be able every day to offer
up our selves more sincerely, and more cheerfully to thee: with more pure
affection, and hearty devotion, and ready disposition to thy service.

We adore thy great grace which has brought salvation to us, and Tit. 2.11,12.
teaches us that denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously and godly in this present world. We will endeavor, O
Lord, to preserve a grateful sense of thy mighty love in our mind, and to
follow the doctrine and example of thy Son Christ Jesus; as becomes those who
have such a blessed hope, and look for so great Salvation at the day of his
glorious appearing. We desire above all things to be so pure and undefiled, so
meek and gentle, so humble and lowly, so just and merciful, so peaceable and
patient, contented and thankful as our blessed Lord and Master was: And we hope
that thou will fulfill all the gracious promises he has made to us, which we
esteem far greater treasure than thousands of gold and silver. They are the
support, the comfort, the satisfaction of our hearts. We ask nothing, but that
it may be to thy servants according to his Word.

Thou have mercifully kept us the last night, blessed be thy continued
goodness, and raised us again to see the light of this morning: Receive us
likewise all this day into thy protection, to which we most humbly commit our
selves. We trust our selves and all belonging to us with thee our Creator and
Redeemer. We submit to thy orders, and are willing to do and suffer what thou
please: Jude 21.
Waiting for the mercy of our Lord Christ Jesus unto eternal life.

And we desire, thou know, the good of all mankind, as well as our own;
especially of all Christian people: that they may all walk worthy of the
Gospel, and live together in unity and godly love. For which end, we pray that
all Christian Kings, Princes and Governors, may be wise, pious, just and
merciciful; endeavoring that all their subjects may lead peaceable lives under
them, in all godliness and honesty. And more particularly that our Sovereign
may be blessed with a religious, quiet, long and prosperous Reign: and that all
his Ministers of State, and Officers of Justice may conscientiously discharge
the trust that is reposed in them; seeking in their several places how to right
the oppressed, to comfort the afflicted, to provide for the poor and needy, and
to relieve all those that are in any misery. Bless all our spiritual Pastors
and Instructors: succeed their labors; and give us grace to follow their godly
admonitions, 1 Thessalonians. 5.13.
to esteem them very highly in love for their works sake; and to be at peace
among our selves. The same blessings we crave for all our friends, relations
and acquaintance; that we may all live in perfect love and peace together:
doing our duties to thee, to each other, and to all men so faithfully, that we
may give a comfortable account of our selves, and rejoice together at the great
day of the Lord Jesus. In whose holy words we beseech thee to help us still
more heartily to offer up our desires to thee.

Our Father, etc.

At Night.
ALmighty and most merciful Father; by whom we were made, and in whom we live,
move, and have our being: to whose tender compassions we owe our safety the day
past, together with all the comforts of this present life, and the hopes of
that which is to come. We praise and laud thee, O Lord, the Creator and
Governor of the world. We ascribe all Greatness, Might, Majesty, Wisdom, Riches
and Bounty to thee; whom all the host of heaven continually admires and
acknowledges with the most joyful reverence. We bow our selves likewise before
thee, and worship thee, in an humble sense that we are nothing in compare with
thee, and have nothing but what we receive from thee. Psalm. 75.1. Psalm. 43.4.
68.19.
Unto thee do we give thanks, unto thee do we give thanks, O God, our exceeding
joy, who daily pourest thy benefits upon us. Blessed be thy great goodness, for
our continued health, for our food and raiment, our peace and safety, the
society of our friends, the love of our neighbors, and the success of our
honest labors: But above all things, for sending Jesus Christ into the world
to dwell among us, to dye for us, and to direct us in the way to immortal life.
We thank thee that we feel in our hearts any motion toward thee, and that we
have made the least progress in those paths of life. O Lord, we present our
selves here before thee to be inspired with such a vigorous and full sense of
thy love, as may move us more powerfully toward thee; and put us forward with
a greater earnestness, zeal and diligence in all our duty. There is nothing in
heaven or earth that we can desire, but to be beloved of thee; who possessest
both, and art able to make thy friends as great and happy as thou please.
Assist us therefore still by thy grace to the recovery of such a lively Image
of thee in all righteousness, purity, mercy, faithfulness and truth; that we
may know thou love us. O that Jesus, the hope of glory, may be formed in us,
in all humility, meekness, patience, contentedness, peaceableness, and absolute
surrender of our souls and bodies to thy holy will and pleasure: That Gal. 2.20.
we may no longer live, but Christ may live in us, and the life we lead in the
flesh may be by the faith of thy Son, O God, who loved us, and gave himself for
us. The remembrance of that love is most dear and precious to us. We cannot
often enough make mention of so great kindness, as his making himself freely an
offering for our sins. It moves us, again to offer up our selves sincerely to
thee, to do thy will, O God, as our blessed Lord and Master did. We repose also
an entire confidence in thee, and still trust our selves with thee, who have
Romans 8.32.
not spared thine own Son, but given him up for us all. We will humbly and
reverently accept of whatsoever thou sendest us; and 1 Thessalonians. 5.18.
in every thing give thanks, which is thy will concerning us in Christ Jesus.
We hope thou will never leave us, nor forsake us: but conduct us safe through
all varieties and changes of our condition here, in an unchangeable love to
thee, and an holy composure and tranquillity of mind in thy love to us, till we
come to live with thee, and enjoy thee for ever.

And now that we are going to lay our selves down to sleep, take us into thy
gracious protection; and settle our spirits in such quiet and delightful
thoughts of Jesus, that we may be willing to leave this world and go to him: 1 Thessalonians. 5.10.
Who dyed for us, that whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with
him.

To his blessing we commend all mankind, of whatsoever rank and condition they
be; high and low, rich and poor: that they may all be so happy as to do their
several duties carefully, and to enjoy contentedly whatsoever is needful for
them. We leave all we have with thee, especially our friends and those who are
dear unto us; desiring that when we are dead and gone, they may lift up their
souls in this manner unto thee, and teach those that come after to praise, love
and obey thee: and that, if we awake again in the morning, our mouths may
likewise praise thee again with joyful lips, and we may still offer our selves,
a more acceptable sacrifice to thee through Christ Jesus. In whose words we
beseech thee to hear us, according to the fullest sense and intention of them.

Our Father, etc.

PRAYERS FOR FAMILIES.
TVESDAY MORNING.
ALL honor, glory and praise be given to thee, O Lord, our Creator, Redeemer
and Comforter, by us, and by all the world. Thou art worthy of all our love,
service and obedience, being most excellent in thine own nature, and of so
abundant kindness to us thy creatures. Who most humbly therefore prostrate our
selves before thee this Morning, to make thee our thankful acknowledgements for
all thy benefits, and tender thee our most hearty and affectionate service, and
wait upon thy bounty for the continuance of thy grace and mercy to us. Though
we are not worthy, we confess, of the least regard from thee, whom we have so
much neglected, and whose love and clemency we have too often abused; yet we
hope thou will accept of this small oblation which we make of our selves, our
souls and bodies, with unfeigned devotion to thee. Pardon and forgive us, we
most humbly beseech thee, all our past offenses; the remembrance of which is
grievous and bitter to us: and vouchsafe us the grace of thy holy Spirit to
enable us to do thy will with greater care and diligence for the time to come.
Let it ever accompany and assist us, according as thou see us sincerely
desirous and studious to please thee, in all the actions of an holy life, in
chastity and temperance, justice and fidelity, mercy and charity, meekness and
humility, patience and contentedness, ^nnocency and peace; and in conti^ual
prayers, praises and thanksgi^ings to thee, the Father of mercies in Christ
Jesus our Lord.

We see how frail and weak our bodies and all their enjoyments are; and
therefore we the more earnestly desire to have our souls enriched with those
immortal treasures of thy Divine Grace. O that we may never cease most
zealously to seek and pursue them; and that we may think our selves happy
enough in the possession of them; and may rejoice in nothing so much, as in
Romans 6.22.
having our fruit unto holiness, that in the end we may attain eternal life.
Suffer not our spirits to sink too deep into the love of any, the dearest, good
that we have in this world: But rather by all these earthly things, which thy
goodness affords to us for our support, ease and delight, raise our minds and
hearts to those Celestial enjoyments which will yield us eternal pleasure and
satisfaction. Set our affections principally on things above. Make us so wise
as to provide our selves friends that never dye; and to be still preparing our
selves by all divine qualities for their company and society: that so they may
Luke 16.9.
receivs us, when we remove hence, into their everlasting habitations.

Thus now we commend our selves this day to thy most gracious protection,
guidance and blessing: hoping that the same good providence which preserved us
and our habitations the last night, from fire, and innumerable other dangers
(for which we thank thee) will guard us this day from all evil and mischief,
and bring us in safety of soul and body to praise thee in the Evening. Help us
thankfully to receive, and soberly to use all thy mercies; quietly to do our
own business, and bear our several burdens; to be just in our dealings;
innocent and harmless ^n our conversation; well pleased ^ith the prosperity of
our neigh^ours; desirous of the good of all ^he world: especially that they may
all love, and honor, and join together in magnifying and praising ^hee, our
Lord and Governor, whose name is excellent in all the earth.

More particularly, we implore thy mercies toward these Kingdoms wherein we
live. Remember not against us our high provocations. Spare us, good Lord, and
have patience with us; if perhaps we may bring forth better fruit, becoming thy
holy Gospel, and all the care thou have taken about us. Indue our Sovereign
with much Wisdom from above, that he may always discern what is most profitable
for us, and earnestly pursue it to the utmost of his power. Bless him in his
Relations; in his Counselors; in his Judges, and all other Officers; in all
the Nobility, Clergy, Gentry, and Commonal y of the Realm: that every one of
them may uprightly and zealously do their duty, to the maintenance of thy true
Religion, and the increase of Piety, Honesty and Brotherly love among us.
Comfort and relieve all those that are in any distress, trouble or anguish,
either of body or of mind. And give us tender and pitiful hearts toward them,
ready to help and ease them according to our abilities: That we following the
example of our merciful and compassionate High Priest Christ Jesus, may have
now the benefit of his intercession for us, and at last be admitted into the
high and holy place where he is. In whose blessed Name and words, we conclude
our Prayers.

Our Father, etc.

At Night.
WE fall down before thee, O Lord of heaven and earth, and worship thee in the
deepest humility of our souls: acknowledging that we are thy creatures, who
stand infinitely bound unto thee, by innumerable blessings and favors which
thou have conferred upon us, out of thy mere bounty and goodness. We owe our
lives to that alone, and all the comforts of them; together with all the hopes
we have hereafter either in this world or the other. And blessed, for ever
blessed be thy merciful kindness, for giving such glorious hopes by the Lord
Jesus: By his Death, and Resurrection; by his Ascension, and being inthroned at
thy right hand; and by the coming of the Holy Ghost to be a witness of his
Majesty and Glory. We rejoice, O Lord, in that great salvation which thou have
sent unto us; and cannot but be still praising thee, whose love has so
abounded toward us, beyond all our thoughts and desires. Pardon, we most
humbly beseech thee, out of the same grace and mercy, all our past neglects of
thee, our insensibleness of thy benefits, our carelessness, or inconstancy in
our obedience, and particularly whatsoever we have done or omitted this day,
contrary to those holy purposes and resolutions wherein we stand engaged to
thee.

And vouchsafe us the assistance of thy holy Spirit to enable us to perform
those vows better, which here we renew of greater gratitude, and more cheerful
and steadfast obedience to thy divine Majesty for the time to come. Awaken our
minds to frequent and serious reflections upon thy undeserved and most
bountiful mercies toward us. Touch our hearts with such an ingenuous and
dutiful sense of them, that our wills may be overcome to yield themselves
wholly and absolutely to thee. And that we may feel them constantly provoked to
love and good works, help us ever to set our Lord and Master, by whose name we
are called, before our eyes; and to admire his unspotted purity, his
condescending humility, his tenderhearted charity, his meekness of wisdom, his
hearty trust in thee, and resignation to thee, his forgiveness of injuries, his
patience under reproaches and cruel torments, his peaceable and contented
spirit, his acknowledging thee in all things, and ever seeking thy Honor and
Glory: That being in love with all these, and valuing them more than life it
self, we may never cease our endeavors till this Image of our dear Lord and
Master be formed in our hearts.

O Lord Jesus favorably behold these holy desires, wherewith our souls aspire
toward thee. Preserve and maintain them; encourage and increase them; make
them restless and unwearied till they be accomplished in the enjoyment of this
great blessedness.

Thou who have begun a good work in us, finish and complete it, we most humbly
and earnestly beseech thee. Give us thy grace continually for our seasonable
relief and succor: that we persevering in well doing, may have a solid and
lively hope in our death, of coming to see thee in that high and holy place
where thou live and reignest for evermore.

As for all the things of this life, we most heartily refer our selves to thy
Fatherly Wisdom and Goodness, O Lord God Almighty: trusting thou will order for
us that which is most convenient, and bless our honest diligence with such a
competent portion of them, that we may have the more leisure to give continual
praise, honor, blessing and thanksgiving to thee whose mercies endure for ever.

Accept, we pray thee, of our thankful acknowledgements at this time, for those
which this day has added to the rest of thy benefits, which thou have been
continually heaping upon us ever since we were born. And let all the people of
the earth praise the name of the Lord, which is highly exalted above all
blessing and praise. O that all the Kingdoms of the World would become the
Kingdoms of our Savior Christ: and that all they who acknowledge his authority
would religiously obey his holy Laws; that all wars, oppression and cruelty may
cease among Christian people, and they may live together in brotherly love and
unity. Make our Sovereign and all his Realms happy by a great increase of true
knowledge, godliness and virtue every where. Bless all our friends; forgive our
enemies; requite all the kindness of our benefactors; comfort every one of thy
desolate and afflicted servants; and turn their mourning and heaviness, into
joy and gladness at the last.

And now that we are going to repose our selves; keep us, we beseech thee, and
all belonging to us, in safety. Refresh our wearied spirits with comfortable
rest and sleep; and when we awaken again in the morning, direct our thoughts
immediately to thee, our merciful preserver; and help us to employ all our
renewed strength to thy honor and glory, according to thy will declared by
Christ Jesus; in whose blessed Name and Words we commend our selves to thy
infinite Mercies.

Our Father, etc.

PRAYERS FOR FAMILIES.
WEDNESDAY MORNING.
O Most great and mighty Lord; the Possessor of heaven and earth. All the
Angels worship and adore thy incomprehensible Majesty with the humblest
reverence; and rejoice in rendering praise, blessing, and thanksgiving to thee,
the Father of spirits: For thou have created all things, and in wisdom have
thou made them all, and spread thy tender mercies over all thy works. It is no
less our happiness than our duty to join our hearts and voices with that
heavenly host, most gratefully to acknowledge thy bounty to us among the rest
of thy creatures, and thy particular grace and favor in our Lord Jesus Christ,
our most merciful Savior and Redeemer. We can never sufficiently admire that
love which gave him to dye for us, and has made him the Lord of life and
glory; that he may be the Author of eternal Salvation to all those that obey
him. All the love we have is too little to give thee, to whom all our services
are due by a former title. Our highest praises fall infinitely short of thy
most excellent Majesty; and we are ashamed of the most affectionate thanks we
can render to thee for those inestimable benefits which thou have conferred on
us, and so long continued to us.

How much greater reason then have we to be abashed at our shameful ingratitude
and disobedience to thy divine Majesty; for which we are heartily sorry, and do
now most earnestly repent our selves of it: unfeignedly resolving, and
protesting to be more faithful to thee for the time to come. Pardon us
therefore, Good Lord, and receive us unto thy mercy. Accept of our renewed vows
to study and do our duties conscientiously, toward thee, and toward all men.
And as thou have excited these holy desires and purposes in our hearts, so
enable us to perform them constantly in the whole course of our life.

Our blessed Savior has told us, thou will as readily give thy holy Spirit to
them that ask it, as a Parent will give bread to his hungry children. O Father
of mercies, let it be unto us according to his Word. Cherish these little
beginnings of goodness which thou see in our souls; and prosper all our
endeavors to attain a greater measure of it. And since at the best we are but
unprofitable servants, and can do no more than was our duty to do: enable us to
do every thing, which thou have commanded us, heartily, with good will, and
true love to thy service. We know this is all that can, in the least, commend
us to thy free grace and favor: and therefore we most humbly again dovote our
selves to do thy Will, with a cordial affection to it. We would ever approach
unto thee with delight and pleasure: and feel it the joy of our hearts to think
of thee, to praise thee, to give thee thanks, and to offer our selves with
absolute resignation to thee. O that Mercy may always please us as it pleases
thee! that we may be strictly just and righteous; may cheerfully pass by
injuries; freely deny all desires of sinful pleasures; willingly submit to thy
fatherly corrections; and perform the duties of our several relations, with
singleness of heart. Render us so mindful of the great love of our Lord and
Master Christ, that we may be zealously concerned for his glory, and use our
utmost diligence to do Him and his Religion some honor in the world:
delighting to commemorate his Death and Passion, making a joyful sacrifice of
our souls and bodies to him, and desiring most earnestly that his kingdom may
come, and all mankind submit themselves to his Government.

Fulfill, most merciful Lord, all our petitions; and as thou have mightily
protected us, and our dwellings this last night from fire and thieves, and
whatsoever might disturb our repose (blessed be thy goodness) so accompany us
all this day with thy blessing: that we may please thee in body and soul, and
be safe under thy defense; who art nigh to all those that call upon thee, that
call upon thee in truth. And O that all those who are forgetful of their duty
to thee, may be awakened to a lively sense of all thy benefits, and fill the
whole world with thy praises. Stir up especially the minds of all Christian
people, to inquire after and follow the Truth, as it is in Jesus: abandoning
all vice and wickedness, and exercising themselves to have consciences void of
offense, toward thee, and toward all men. And dispose the hearts of all their
Kings and Princes, to make themselves the greatest examples of Christian Piety
to all others. Bless these Kingdoms, and indue our Sovereign with such
excellent Wisdom, and holy Zeal for thy honor and glory; that we may see many
good days under his Government. O that true Religion, Justice, Mercy, Brotherly
kindness, and all things else that are praiseworthy may so flourish among us,
that we may enjoy the blessings of peace and plenty, and there may be no
complaining in our streets.

We recommend to thee all our friends and neighbors; all the poor, the sick,
and other afflicted persons: desiring those mercies for them which we should
ask for our selves, were we in their condition; encouraged hereto by the large
declarations which thou have made of thy abundant goodness to mankind in our
Lord Jesus. In whose words we conclude our humble supplications unto thee;
saying,

Our Father, etc.

At Night.
ALmighty and everlasting God; the Sovereign Lord of all creatures in heaven
and earth, and our most merciful and gracious Father in thy Son Christ Jesus.
We most heartily acknowledge that our beings, and all the comforts of them
depend on thee, the Fountain of all good. We have nothing but what we have
received thence: and is owing entirely to thy free and bounteous love, O most
blessed Creator; and to the unsearchable riches of thy grace, O most blessed
Redeemer. To thee therefore be given by us and all creatures, whom thou have
made to know how great and how good thou art, all honor, glory and praise; all
love, service and obedience, as long as we have any being. It is but meet,
right, and our bounden duty, that we should at all times, and in all places
give thanks unto thee, O Lord; and devoutly resign both soul and body to thee,
to be absolutely governed and ruled according to thy holy will and pleasure. We
are heartily sorry that we have not done it, from the very beginning of our
lives till this time. We are ashamed to think of our injustice and ingratitude,
in following our own desires so long, and rendering our selves, no sooner, most
humbly obedient in all things to thee. Our hopes are only in those infinite
mercies, which have spared us notwithstanding, and opened our eyes to see our
errors, and touched our hearts with some sense of our duty.

And we hope in them not only for a pardon, which we earnestly implore
according to thy gracious promises made in Christ Jesus, but for the power of
thy holy Spirit, to further and promote those godly resolutions, which we feel
already in our hearts, to live as becomes thy creatures; and as becomes the
Disciples of Jesus Christ, who were early dedicated to thee, and have often
since vowed themselves to thy service. As thou have made us to understand the
reasonableness and goodness of all thy Laws: so make us more and more in love
with them; that they may be writ upon our hearts, and our wills may cleave unto
them, as our very life. Keep alive such a powerful sense of thee, and of the
love of our Lord and Savior in our mind; that we may naturally fear and
reverence thee, and study to be approved of thee, and beloved by thee, and
account it our highest perfection and happiness to be like thee.

O that it may ever be the joy of our hearts to be Righteous as thou art
Righteous; to be Merciful, as thou our heavenly Father art Merciful; to be
Holy, as thou who have called us art Holy, in all manner of conversation; to be
endued with thy divine Wisdom, and to resemble thee in Faithfulness and Truth.
O that the memory of our blessed Savior, and his admirable example may be
always dear unto us: that we may cheerfully follow him in his Humility,
Meekness, Patience, Contentedness, Peaceableness, and Delight to do thy Will, O
God, in every thing as he did. Accept, we most humbly beseech thee, of these
desires of our souls after thee; and graciously assist and strengthen them,
according as we unfeignedly offer them up unto thee. Accept likewise of our
thanks for thy merciful preservation of us all this day; by which we are come
in safety to the conclusion of it, and are here before thee with a new load of
thy benefits upon us, added to other innumerable blessings which thou have
formerly bestowed. We are bold again likewise to commit our selves unto thee
this night; and to trust in thy merciful protection and care over us, when we
can take no care of our selves, or any thing else belonging to us. Defend us
from all the powers of darkness, from evil men, from fire and all such sad
accidents: and raise up our spirits, together with our bodies, in the morning,
to such a vigorous sense of thy continued goodness, as may provoke us all the
day long to an unwearied diligence in well doing.

And the same Mercies that we beg for our selves, we desire for the rest of
mankind: especially for all those who are called by the name of Christ. O that
every member of that body, of which He is the head, may do their duties with
all fidelity, according to the several offices to which thou have assigned
them. That Kings may be tenderhearted, as the Fathers of their Countries; and
all their subjects may be dutiful and obedient to them as their children: That
the Pastors of the Church may feed thy flock with Wisdom and Understanding; and
the people may all submit unto them, and follow their godly counsels: That the
rich and mighty may have compassion on the poor and miserable; and all such
distressed people may bless the rich, and rejoice in the prosperity of those
that are above them. Give husbands and wives, parents and chidren, masters and
servants, the grace to behave themselves so in their several Relations, that
they may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things; and being an
honor to his Religion here, may receive immortal honor and glory hereafter
from the hands of Christ Jesus; in whose holy name and words, we continue to
beseech thy grace and mercy toward us, and all thy people every where: saying,

Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name: Thy kingdom come; Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread:
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us: And
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, etc.

PRAYERS FOR FAMILIES.
THVRSDAY MORNING.
O Lord, the high and holy One, whose Psalm. 148.13.
glory is above the earth and heaven. We thy creatures prostrate our selves in
the humblest adorations of thee: ascribing to thee all Power, Wisdom, Riches,
Might, Majesty, and Dominion; and acknowledging that to thee of right belongs
all Worship, Blessing, Thanksgiving and Praise; together with all Honor, Love,
Service and Obedience for evermore. Blessed be thine Omnipotent goodness, which
has advanced us to such a degree of being, that we are capable to look back to
thee from whom we come; to know thee, to love thee, to acknowledge thy great
bounty toward us, and to resemble thee in Wisdom and Goodness. All that is
within us blesses thy Holy Name, for breathing into us immortal spirits, that
we may eternally admire thee, praise thee, love thee, and joyfully render those
grateful acknowledgements which we owe unto thee. We can never sufficiently
magnify thy mercies toward us; especially those in the Lord Jesus, in whom
thy Grace has so exceedingly abounded, as to surpass not only our deserts, but
the largest of our desires. Blessed, blessed, for ever blessed be thy fatherly
goodness, who have sent him from heaven so unexpectedly to visit us vile
wretches, who dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust. Lord!
what is man, that thou art mindful of him; or the son of man, that thou did
thus visit him? We thank thee, according to our poor ability, from the very
bottom of our hearts, for his manifestation in our flesh; for the charitable
testimonies he gave of his love to mankind in the course of his life; for that
astonishing grace in submitting himself to dye for us; for his glorious
Resurrection and Ascension to heaven; for the Sovereign Power and Authority
which thou have given him at thy right hand; for his compassionate intercession
for us; and the assurances we have received of his being the King of glory, and
of his continued kindness to us, by the coming of the Holy Ghost. We will never
cease to bless thee for that great salvation, Heb. 2.3,4.
which was first preached by the Lord, and was confirmed by them that heard
him; and for the witness which thou barest to them, both with signs and
wonders, and with diverse miracles and gifts of the holy Ghost, according to thy
own will. We rejoice in the Light of thy holy Gospel; that we see the way to be
happy both by the Doctrine, and example of thy Son Jesus; that we have the
encouragement of his precious promises; and such good hope of remission of sin,
and eternal life, in the day when he shall judge the world in righteousness. O
how much are we bound unto thee, for that comfortable hope which thou have
given us, of seeing our dear Savior in all his glory, and being there where he
is, and reigning with him for ever! We again render thee our most hearty
thanks, for that everlasting consolation and good hope through grace, which
thou have given us: and for all those benefits likewise, which thou art pleased
to bestow upon us, to make our stay here on earth the more convenient and
delightful to us. We are every way obliged to thee, beyond all that we are able
to express or conceive. Thou feedest us, and clothest us; thou preservest our
health, and our strength; thou have delivered us from innumerable dangers; and
when thou have chastised us, it has been in great mercy and clemency, and not
according to our deserving.

O that all the world would show forth thy praise, and devote themselves to the
service of our Lord. Let all Kings of the earth submit themselves unto him, and
glory in the name of his obedient subjects. High and low, rich and poor, let
them praise the name of the Lord, from this time forth and for evermore.

Accept, most gracious God, of these unfeigned desires of us thy servants; who,
for our parts, entirely dedicate our selves, both souls and bodies, unto thee:
Resolving in all things to walk worthy of thee, who have called us to thy
Kingdom and Glory, and blessed us also with many other good things which make
this life to be a more easy passage to a better. We will never forget how much
we are indebted to thee: but study to express our grateful remembrance of thy
mercies, by living Tit. 2.12,13.
soberly, righteously and godly in this present world; looking for that blessed
hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ. Favor, we pray thee, these holy purposes with the constant assistance
of thy good spirit; that we may be able to accomplish what we have begun, and
to perfect holiness in thy fear. Help us to 2 Pet. 1.5,6,7,8.
add to our faith, virtue; and to virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge,
temperance; and to temperance, patience; and to patience, godliness; and to
godliness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness, charity. That these
things being in us and abounding, they may make us to be neither barren, nor
unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Preserve us this day especially; that we swerve not presently from these pious
resolutions: But may give such a proof of their sincerity, by our being
steadfast and immovable in all well doing, notwithstanding any temptation to
the contrary; that we may have the better hope we shall persevere to the very
end, through thy continued grace in Christ Jesus; in whose words we desire all
that thou see needful, either for our souls or bodies, saying,

Our Father, etc.

At Night.
WE are here again prostrate before thee, O Lord of heaven and earth, to join
our selves with all that holy company, Revel. 4.8,11.
who rest not day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which
was, and is, and is to come. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, honor,
and power: for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and
were created. Blessed be thy divine goodness, which has made the children of
men but little lower than the Angels; and crowned us with such glory and
honor, that we are capable to accompany that heavenly host in giving continual
thanks and praise unto thee. Praised be thy name that we are now alive; and
that we have the use of our reason and understanding; and enjoy so many of the
comforts and conveniences of this present life; and have attained a good hope
through Christ Jesus of being immortally happy. O how great was thy love which
sent him into the world to direct us in the way to that happiness by his holy
doctrine and life; and to be a propitiation for our sins by his death; and to
Act. 26.23.
be the first that should rise from the dead, and should show light unto the
world. We rejoice in that light of life: We most cheerfully devote our selves
to be the faithful Disciples of him, the Prince of peace, the Lord of life and
glory. It is our happiness as well as our duty to be governed by him, and obey
his commands. We are sensible that they are all equal, just and good: and that
thou have done us an infinite kindness, in teaching us to deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
world.

And therefore we here again most heartily surrender our wills to thine:
desiring that we may unchangeably cleave unto it, with the greatest and most
entire love and affection to all its commands. O that there may abide for ever
in us such a strong and powerful sense of thy mighty love toward us in Christ
Jesus, as may constrain us freely and willingly to please thee in the constant
exercise of piety and devotion; righteousness and mercy; temperance and
chastity; meekness and patience; truth and fidelity; together with such an
humble, contented and peaceable spirit, as may adorn the Religion of our Lord
and Master. O God, that these holy desires and inclinations may never dye, nor
languish in our hearts: but be kept alive in their vigor and force, by the
perpetual inspirations of the holy Ghost.

We wait upon thee for that promise of our Savior, to assist and promote our
sincere endeavors, to preserve our souls unblameable in the love of thee our
God, and of all mankind. We heartily desire the prosperity and welfare of every
one of them, as well as our own. O that they were all so wise and happy as to
acknowledge and submit themselves to thee, by obeying thy holy Laws. Especially
we desire that all Kings and Princes may become our Saviors Subjects; and
conforming themselves to his will, may be rendered thereby most excellent
examples to all other men. Indue our Sovereign with abundance of the Spirit of
counsel, and judgment, and the fear of our Lord. Make him happy in wise and
faithful Ministers; in loyal and peaceable Subjects; and in the good success of
all his enterprises, for the honor of Religion, and his peoples tranquillity.
We commend to thy mercies all our friends, relations, and benefactors: desiring
that all who have done us good, may be requited an hundred fold here, and
obtain at last eternal life. And all that have done evil to us, as we heartily
forgive them, so we earnestly desire they may obtain thy gracious pardon.
Together with these we remember likewise all that are in affliction, whatsoever
it be either of soul or body: to whom we wish ease, and* comfort, and
seasonable relief* that they may rejoice in the end for the days wherein they
have seen adversity.

In these holy thoughts and desires we now are bold to commend our selves to
thy protection this night; who have preserved and blessed us (we most
thankfully acknowledge) all the day past. We repose our selves in the belief of
thy good providence; with which we entrust our selves, and all belonging to us.
We would lay down our selves to sleep, with hearts full of love to thee, and
humble faith and hope in thee: Desiring we may awake again in the same manner,
and find that we are still with thee. Dispose us, good Lord, by the rest thou
give us always to serve thee more zealously with our renewed spirits: that
after the few days and nights we have to pass in this world, we may come to thy
eternal rest together with Christ Jesus. In whose blessed name and words, we
still recommend our selves to thy mercies.

Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name: Thy kingdom ^ome; Thy
will be done in earth, as it ^s in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread:
And forgive us our ^respasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us: And
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from ^vil, etc.

PRAYERS FOR FAMILIES.
FRIDAY MORNING.
O God, most blessed for ever: whose the world is, and the fullness thereof; who
need not any thing that we can give thee, for thou give us whatsoever we
enjoy. We prostrate our selves before thee to make such poor expressions as we
are able, of the sense we have of thine infinite bounty to us. It is but fit
and meet that we should acknowledge and praise thee, though we can thereby add
nothing unto thee. It is our happiness to have a grateful remembrance of thy
goodness to us: and to be knit unto thee in hearty love, and dutiful affection
all the days of our life.

We thank thee therefore, O Lord of heaven and earth, who have loaded us
continually with thy benefits. They are great, and many more than we can
number; both toward our bodies, and toward our souls; for the comfort of this
life, and our everlasting Salvation in the Life to come. For ever adored be thy
love in Christ Jesus, who has given us an undoubted testimony of thy fatherly
care and providence over us: and encouraged us, though we have offended thee,
to address our selves to thee, with good hope of thy gracious acceptance of us
into friendship with thee again. We love thee, O Lord, above all things. We
freely offer our spirits, souls, and bodies to thee, with most sincere
devotion, and the heartiest affection to thy service. There is nothing we
desire and long for so much, as to have a lively sense of thy marvailous love
always possessing our hearts; that may still constrain us to love thee, to obey
thee, to trust in thee, to be content with the portion thy love allots unto us,
and to rejoice even in the midst of all the troubles of this life.

We cannot choose, O Lord, when we seriously think of what thou have done for
us; but absolutely commit our selves to thee, and entirely confide in thee for
the time to come. Since thou have Romans 8.32.
not spared thy own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall thou not
with him also freely give us all things? We depend upon thee especially for the
grace of thy holy Spirit; for the power of which in our hearts, exciting these
holy desires and godly resolutions, we most humbly thank thy divine Majesty. O
that we may feel it perpetually bearing us up by the strength of our most holy
faith, and by the power of love and hope, above all the temptations, which at
any time assault us. That we may keep our selves unspotted from the world; and
no appetite of pleasure, of glory, or of riches may ever carry us from our
duty: but we may still cleave to thee in Righteousness, Purity, Humility,
Charity, and all other divine virtues, of which our Lord has given us so great
an example.

For his sake we hope for a favorable acceptance of these our praises,
acknowledgements and prayers. For we must be still beholden to thine infinite
goodness, for the least regard to any thing that we can do, who are but
unprofitable servants. And we wait upon the same goodness for thy blessing to
accompany us all this day; that we may do nothing, but what we know is pleasing
to thee, and may be so prospered, protected and assisted by thine Almighty
power, that we may return with our hearts full of love and thankfulness to thee
in the evening, again to praise and magnify thy continued kindness to us. Unto
which we commend most heartily the rest of mankind: desiring that they may all
know thee, the true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: whom to know is
eternal life. And O that all Christians would walk worthy of thy high and
heavenly Calling; that others seeing their good works, may be invited thereby
to acknowledge and glorify thee our heavenly Father. More particularly we
desire the increase of wisdom and goodness, to all Christian Kings and Princes;
and a plentiful portion of the Spirit of thy Grace to all Christian Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons: that they may be eminent instruments of thy honor, and
their peoples good, by the authority of their Doctrine and godly Example. Make
our Sovereign and us all happy in each other; by the faithful discharge of our
several duties, in the places wherein thy most high wisdom has set us. And we
desire the comfort of those that mourn, the ease of those who are in pain, the
health of the sick, the release of poor prisoners and captives, the quiet and
satisfaction of those who are in trouble and anguish of mind, and the true
content of all men in whatsoever condition they are: that we may be all
continually giving thanks to thee, the Father of mercies, for the joy thou have
set before us, and the hope we have, by running our Christian race with
patience, to come to that blessed place into which Jesus our forerunner is
already entered for us. By whom we continue to desire, in his own words, that
thou may be glorified every where, in our well doing; saying as he has
taught us,

Our Father, etc.

At Night.
O Lord, the Almighty Creator and Governor of the world. Psalm. 104.24.
How great and manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all. 74.16.
The day is thine, the night also is thine: thou have prepared the light and
the Sun. We thy creatures, a small part of mankind, prostrate our selves before
thee this evening, in the humblest adoration of thy divine Majesty: praising
thy incomprehensible perfections, and rendering thee our thanks for all the
benefits thou have bestowed on the whole world, especially on us whom thou have
called to the knowledge of thy grace in Christ Jesus. It is a marvailous love
wherewith thou have loved us. Thou have not dealt so with all people; and as
for thy great and precious promises they have not known them.

We are bound therefore more particularly to offer up unto thee continually
spiritual sacrifices by Christ Jesus; and to laud and bless thy great and
glorious Name in the behalf of our selves, and the rest of mankind: among whom
thou have left innumerable testimonies of thy careful providence, in that Act.
14.17.
thou do them good, and give them rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons,
filling their hearts with food and gladness. We praise thee, we bless thee, we
magnify and extol thy wise and powerful goodness, we thank thee for thy never
ceasing bounty toward us; especially that thou have vouchsafed to send Jesus
Christ to restore us by his appearing among us, and his humbling himself to the
death for us, and his glorious Resurrection from the grave and Ascension on
high, to a blessed hope of thy mercy unto eternal life.

We can do no less than devote our selves, souls and bodies, eternally to thee:
returning, what we have received from thee, back again with the greatest love,
and most grateful acknowledgements. Accept, we pray thee, O most gracious and
merciful Father, of this small oblation we make thee, of our most hearty and
unfeigned resolutions to worship and serve thee; in the constant exercise of
righteousness, mercy, meekness, patience, humility, and purity, with whatsoever
is lovely and of good report. And we humbly beg thy holy Spirit may constantly
accompany us; inabling us to think of these things, to cleave unto them, to
delight in them, and to persevere in a free and willing performance of all our
duty toward thee and all men to our lives end.

And we most heartily desire the rest of mankind may at last be so happy as to
come acquainted with the exceeding riches of thy grace in Christ. O that Psalm.
67.2.
thy way may be known upon earth, and thy saving health among all nations: Romans
15.10.6.
that all the Gentiles may rejoice with thy people, and we may with one mind
and one mouth glorify thee our God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
O that all Idolatry and ungodliness, all cruelty and filthiness, all rapine and
violence, may be abolished and rooted out of the earth; and true piety,
righteousness, holiness, and brotherly kindness may flourish in the room
thereof. For which end we beseech thee indue all Kings and Princes, especially
those that are Christian, with a great sense of thy Sovereign Authority over
all; that they may humbly obey thee, as they desire others should obey them;
and govern all their people with great wisdom, uprightness, and a tender
compassionate care of their welfare. O that no covetousness, ambition, or
revenge may rule in any hearts, provoking them to war and bloodshed: but there
may be great peace in all Lands, by observing the holy Laws of the Prince of
peace, Christ Jesus.

More particularly we recommend unto thy blessing, these Kingdoms wherein we
live: beseeching thee to be merciful to our sins, in giving us grace to repent
of them, and to bring forth fruits meet for repentance and amendment of life.
Bless our Sovereign, and all that are employed under him, either in Spiritual
or Civil affairs, with all those graces which are necessary for the right
discharge of their duties in such high places. Prosper all their pious
endeavors for the good either of men's souls, or outward estates; that true
Religion and Virtue increasing, and all ungodliness and vice being put to
shame, we may become a renowned Nation, and a praise in the earth. We commend
to thee also, O Father of mercies, all those who are in a distressed and
sorrowful condition: most earnestly desiring their seasonable relief and
comfort; with their release from those troubles, when thou please. And now
that we are going to lay down our selves to sleep, we put our selves and our
habitations, with all that belong unto us, into thy most gracious protection:
hoping thou will take care of us, when we cannot so much as think how to secure
our selves from any danger that may approach us. Thou have been our helper,
keeper, and defender, therefore under the shadow of thy wings will we still
rejoice. When we close our eyes, let these holy thoughts of thee, and
affections toward thee, still remain in us, and possess our hearts; that they
may awake again with us in the morning, and send up our souls in renewed love,
and thanks, and praise to thy divine Majesty by our blessed Savior and
Redeemer Christ Jesus. In whose words we continue to implore thy mercies
toward us.

Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name: Thy kingdom come; Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread:
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us: And
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, etc.

PRAYERS FOR FAMILIES.
SATVRDAY MORNING.
O Lord; all thy works praise thee, and declare the greatness of thy Majesty,
Power, Wisdom and Bounty which surpass all understanding. Thou art good unto
all, and thy tender mercies are over all thy works. Thou art holy in all thy
ways, and righteous in all thy doings: and keep truth for ever. Thy Kingdom
is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endures throughout all
generations. We all decay and perish; the heavens themselves wax old like a
garment: but thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end.

We adore thee, O Lord most high, and most willingly join our hearts and voices
this Morning together with all the host of heaven and earth, to laud and praise
thy glorious Name; and give thanks unto thee, whose mercy endures for ever. We
think our selves happy that we know thee; and that we live under the care and
providence of thine Almighty and most wise goodness; and that we have a good
hope, not only of thy blessing and favor here, but of life for evermore.
Blessed be thy Name for sending thy Son Jesus, to give us these hopes, by his
Death, and Resurrection, and Ascension to heaven, and the coming of the holy
Ghost. Blessed be thy Name who have trained us up in his Religion, and given us
the means and opportunities to know that love of thine which passes knowledge.
We thank thee for all the blessed operations and motions of thy holy Spirit in
our hearts: and that thou have so early inclined us to fear thee, and love
thee, and place our contentment and satisfaction in thy love and favor, which
is better than life it self. And that thou have also added a number of other
mercies, for our comfortable subsistence in this world: having granted us so
long health, peace and plenty; a great many friends, loving relations and
acquaintance; and continued the enjoyment of them to this day, though we be so
unworthy of the least of thy favors. We thank thee, O God, that now thou have
graciously renewed thy kindness unto us, in protecting us the last night from
all the powers of darkness, and every evil accident; and raising us up this
morning in health and safety to praise thy goodness.

More especially we praise thee for any sense we have of these thy mercies:
humbly waiting on thee for the increase of it, and for thy gracious pardon of
all our unthankfulness and undutiful behavior toward thee; which we most
heartily bewail, and desire, and will endeavor to amend.

And for that end we implore the help of thy holy Spirit, which our Lord has
encouraged us to ask of thee; and told us thou will not deny to those that
earnestly seek it, and continue to knock importunately at the gate of Mercy for
it. We believe all his promises to be faithful and true; and therefore humbly
depend on thy mighty Power to strengthen and enable us to do our duty toward
thee, and toward all men; with care, and diligence, and zeal, and perseverance
to the end. Indue us, good Lord, with a spirit of true and servent devotion, to
thee our Creator and Redeemer: with upright, just, and charitable hearts to all
our Neighbors: and with temperate, contented and humble minds, in every
condition and state of life, unto which thou shall please to call us.

Help us to be meek and gentle in our conversation; prudent and discreet in
ordering all our affairs; good and useful in every relation; observant of thy
fatherly providence in every thing that befalls us; grateful for thy benefits;
patient under thy chastisements; and readily disposed to every good word and
work. Preserve in us a constant remembrance of thine all-seeing eye; of the
many promises and vows we have made of fidelity to thee; of thine inestimable
love in Christ Jesus, whereof thou have given us so many pledges; and of the
great account we must give to him, the Judge of all, at the day of his
appearing: That so we may continue steadfast and unmovable, and be abundant in
the work of the Lord; knowing that our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.
Deliver us, we beseech thee, from all inordinate cares and desires; from vain
hopes and causeless fears; and so dispose our hearts that death it self may not
be dreadful to us: but we may welcome it with a cheerful countenance, when and
howsoever it shall approach.

O that our hearts may be so firmly settled and established in the true
Religion, and our minds kept so free from all delusions; that nothing may
afright us, or shake our constancy: But we may rather choose to dye, than
dishonor our Savior, who dyed for us. We resign our selves to thy wisdom and
goodness, who know what is best for us: hoping thou will 1 Corinthians. 10.13.
never suffer us to be tempted above what we are able, and wilt with the
temptation also make a way to escape, that we may be able to bear it.

We commend unto thee, likewise, all mankind, especially thy Church and chosen
people: these Kingdoms more particularly, of which we are members; that we may
be all faithful to our Lord Christ, and zealous of good works. Bless our
Sovereign, his Counselors, his Ministers, and all employed in public
business, whether Spiritual or Civil; that they may be conscientiously
industrious, and whatsoever they do may prosper, for the good of all those who
are committed to their charge. Be gracious to all our friends, and those who
are dear unto us. Keep us all in thy fear, and love, and obedience while we
live; and make us willing to dye, and to be with Christ which is best of all.
Guide us, good Lord, and govern us by the same spirit of wisdom and goodness,
that we may be so united to thee here, as not to be eternally separated, when
thou art pleased to order our departure hence: But that we all at last may have
an happy meeting in the other and better world; to dwell with thee in love and
joy, that shall never dye, through Christ Jesus our blessed Lord and Savior,
in whose words we still beseech thee to hear us.

Our Father, etc.

At Night.
ALL honor and glory, thanks and praise, love and service be rendered by us,
and all other reasonable creatures to thy great and glorious Majesty, O Lord;
who have brought us into the world; and preserved our life most tenderly to
this moment; and made it easy and comfortable to us by more mercies than we
can number. And to all the former have added those of this day, which we have
passed in peace, and health, and safety; blessed be thy never-ceasing goodness.
Above all we acknowledge thy unconceiveable love in Christ Jesus, by whom thou
have made a gracious provision for our souls, and their everlasting happiness
in the other world: Having sent him to us with the promises of eternal life;
and to be the Way and Director to it; and given him to dye, that he might seal
his promises with his blood; and raised him again from the dead, that our faith
and hope might be in thee, O God.

1 Cor. 2.9.
Eye had not seen, nor ear heard, neither did enter into the heart of man the
things which thou have prepared for them that love thee. We love thee, O Lord,
and give our selves, both souls and bodies to thee: most earnestly desiring to
be inspired with such a sense of thy infinite goodness, that we may love thee
more, and serve thee better; with all our heart, and with all our soul, and
with all our strength.

We confess we have not walked worthy of the great benefits we have received;
and therefore may justly fear thou should withhold thy tender mercies, and
shut up thy loving kindness in displeasure. But the desires and holy
resolutions thou have wrought and continuest in our souls, to amend and become
still more fruitful in all good works, encourage us to hope in thee for pardon
through the blood of Jesus Christ; and for the assistance of thy holy Spirit,
to enable us to accomplish that which we intend and purpose, to grow more and
more in wisdom and knowledge, and in righteousness and true holiness. O that
this Image of thine may appear every day fairer and more beautiful before thee,
and in the sight of all men! That so we may adorn the Religion we profess; and
be a good Example unto others; and have a solid foundation of peace and comfort
in our own hearts; and be able to hope in thee for thy future mercy in Christ
Jesus, even unto eternal life.

We commend our selves to thy wonted grace; and in a sense of what thou have
done already for us, and what thou have promised to do, depend on thy goodness
for what thou see profitable and conducing to our chiefest good: referring
our selves wholly to thy wise will and pleasure; and resolved contentedly to
submit to thy appointments, thankfully to receive thy mercies, and to rest
satisfied with our portion, whatsoever it be that thou orderest for us. Make us
but steadfast in thy faith and love, unwearied in well doing, patient and
constant under all sufferings, full of a lively hope in thy mercy, and willing
to dye when and as thou please; and we have enough.

In confidence that thou hear us, and art every where, and never slumberest
nor sleep; we commit our selves to the custody of thy watchful providence
this night: to be secured and protected by thee, when we cannot at all attend
to our own preservation. May it please thy goodness to give this whole family a
comfortable rest and repose; to defend this habitation, and all about us from
fire and such like sad accidents; to deliver us from the power of evil spirits,
and of evil men; and to raise us in health and cheerfulness to praise thee, and
to glorify thee, both in soul and body the next day. Psalm. 59.16,17.
Then will we sing of thy power; yea, we will sing aloud of thy mercy in the
morning: because thou have been our defense, and our refuge at all times. Unto
thee, O our strength, will we sing: for God is our defense, and the God of our
mercy. 111.1.
We will praise the Lord with our whole heart, in the assembly of the upright,
and in the congregation. 92.1,2.
For it is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto
thy name, O most High: to show forth thy loving kindness in the morning, and
thy faithfulness every night.

24.1.
The earth is thine, and the fullness thereof; the world, and they that dwell
therein. 22.27,28.
Let all the people praise thee, O God; let all the people praise thee. O that
all the ends of the world would remember and turn unto the Lord; and all the
kindreds of the Nations worship before him. For the kingdom is the Lords; and
he is the governor among the Nations. Bless especially all Christian Kings and
Princes; that it may Prove. 16.12.
be an abomination to them to commit wickedness; and their thrones may be
established by righteousness. And incline the hearts of all those who have any
authority in these Kingdoms to love and hold fast thy true Religion, and to
live according to to it; that 20.28.
by mercy and truth the king may be preserved: and his throne be upholden by
mercy.

We heartily desire the ease, peace and satisfaction of all those who are in
pain, trouble, and perplexity: and that all poor miserable people may find
supply of their wants from thy bounty, and the charity of those on whom thou
have bestowed plenty and abundance. We humbly also wait for thy blessing upon
all our Relations and Friends: trusting in thee for such a measure of health,
and all other good things, as thou judge useful for us; and especially that
the Lord Jesus 1 Timothy 4.8.
will deliver us from every evil work, and preserve us to his heavenly kingdom:
To whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Our Father, etc.

A shorter Morning Prayer for any day in the week, when there is not time, by
reason of some extraordinary occasions, for the other.
O Most great and glorious God, the Sovereign of the World: Upon whom we
continually depend; to whom we owe all the love, the service, and the praise
that we are able to render to all eternity. We adore thy infinite mercy, from
whence we have received so many blessings for the comfort of this life; and by
which we have a sure Hope of good things, in the life to come. Blessed be thy
goodness, which has not suffered us to wander without instruction, after the
foolish desires of our own hearts: but has clearly shown us where our
happiness lies. We receive with all thankfulness those holy words, which teach
us the blessedness of poverty and contentedness of spirit; of meekness and
humility of mind; of hungering and thirsting after righteousness; of
mercifulness and purity of heart; of peaceableness, and patient suffering, for
doing the will of our Lord Christ.

O that we may have grace to labor always to be in the number of those blessed
Souls, that never set their hearts on any thing so much, as these heavenly
virtues! O that we may ever think and feel our selves happy, in the comfort of
those great and precious promises, of being made the children of the highest,
the heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven, and at last of seeing thee our God. It
suffices, O Lord, that we have these glorious hopes hereafter: which make us
believe, thou will not let us want what is necessary for us, whilst we continue
here. We commend our selves, with an humble confidence, to thy watchful
providence this day: beseeching thee to guide and assist us, that in all our
desires, words and actions, we may keep our selves innocent, and undefiled
before thee; and be disposed to do all good, as we have opportunity.

And we heartily desire that all mankind may be filled with the same devotion
to thee: and especially that all Christian people may glorify thy Name, and be
joyful in thee. And the greater any are in Dignity and Power, raise their
spirits to the greater pitch of Wisdom, Mercy and Piety: that they may right
those that suffer wrong; and defend those that have no helper; and provide for
the ease and comfort of all miserable creatures; to the utmost of their power.
In this ardent charity we commit both souls and bodies to thee; beseeching thee
to increase our love to thee, and to all men, till we be fit to be translated
to the region of love and joy, and perfect satisfaction, through Christ Jesus:
who has taught us, when we pray, to say

Our Father, etc.

Another short Prayer for the Morning.
O Blessed God; be thou acknowledged, praised and loved by us, and all the
children of men; on whom thou pourest continually thy benefits. They are great
and many: we know not the sum, nor understand the value of them. The Angels
themselves admired thy love to us in Christ Jesus; and are become ministering
Spirits to them; who are heirs of Salvation. We enjoy the continual fruits of
thy watchful providence; by which we have been kept in peace and safety the
last night, and are raised this morning in health and strength, both of body
and mind: beholding all things belonging to us, just as we left them with thee,
when we went to sleep.

Accept, we most humbly beseech thee, of this poor tribute of praise and
thanks; together with the hearty oblation of our souls and bodies, which we
here dedicate again to thy service. Vouchsafe us the continued assistance of
the grace of thy holy Spirit; to enable us to make good those vows that are
upon us, of obediently keeping thy holy will and commandments, and walking in
the same all the days of our life. Pardon, good Lord, all our breaches of this
Sacred Covenant. Deal not with us according to our sins, neither reward us
after our iniquities: But in the multitude of thy tender mercies pity our
errors and wanderings; and help us against our infirmities.

Give us leave this day to put our selves into thy powerful protection, and to
depend on thee for thy merciful guidance and assistance; that we may be more
faithful to thee in the discharge of our duties, and never swerve from the
rules of Sobriety, Righteousness, Charity and Godliness. So shall we return
with joyful hearts to praise thee in the Evening: and teach those who shall
come after us, to continue thy praises in the next generation. Amen, for thy
mercies sake in Christ Jesus; in whose words we present the earnest desires of
our hearts for our selves, and all our Brethren; saying

Our Father, etc.

A short Prayer for the Evening, when there is not time for the longer.
O God; we thy creatures, who have tasted liberally of thy bounty many ways;
and been blessed in our several employments, and mercifully preserved from
several dangers this day; are here met to join together, in most hearty
thanksgivings to thy divine Majesty; which with one accord we offer up unto
thee. It is the greatest happiness of all, we acknowledge, that we have any
sense of thee in our minds; any love to thee in our hearts; any remembrance of
thy benefits; any holy dispositions to obey thee; and any hopes that thou will
pardon our sins, and make us partakers of eternal life.

All that we desire of thee, O Lord, is the continuance and increase of this
happiness: that we may be possessed with a stronger sense of thy Majesty, thy
Sovereign Power, thy unsearchable Wisdom, Goodness and Truth; and be filled
with a more ardent love to thee, and to all righteousness; and delight to do
thy Will in every thing, and rejoice in hope of thy immortal Glory. As for all
the things of this life, in a grateful remembrance of thy many past mercies, we
entirely trust thee for the time to come: referring our selves to thy Wisdom,
and resolving to be content with that portion, which thy good providence is
pleased to assign us. Help us but to be steadfast and unmovable in the work of
our Lord, to bring forth all the fruits of the Spirit, love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness and temperance; and we
shall think our selves rich enough, and well provided for in every state and
condition of life.

In these holy thoughts and desires we commend our selves to thy gracious
protection this night; hoping to find them fresh and lively in our souls, when
we awake in the Morning: and desiring withal the happiness of the rest of the
world, that they may know thee, and acknowledge thee, and be guided unto, and
walk in the way that leads to everlasting life, through Christ Jesus our
blessed Redeemer. In whose powerful name, and comprehensive words, we continue
to pray as he has taught us; saying

Our Father, etc.

Another for the Evening.
IN an humble and thankful sense, O Lord of heaven and earth, of our entire
dependence on thee, and of the duty we owe thee, and the many promises and vows
wherein we stand engaged to thee, we fall down before thee, this Evening, and
with all reverence worship thy divine Majesty: Giving thee the glory that is
due unto thy Name, and acknowledging thy multiplied mercies to us, particularly
those of this day; to the conclusion of which thou have now safely brought us,
with new resolutions in our hearts to continue for ever in thy faith, and fear,
and love, and obedience.

It is but just and reasonable, and we feel likewise, by daily experience, that
it is our happiness, to keep thy Commandments; and to maintain cheerful
thoughts of thee, and an hearty friendship with thee, by complying in all
things with thy holy Will. O pardon our folly, most gracious God, in forsaking
at any time that perfect Rule, to follow our own unruly desires. Pardon us, we
beseech thee, for we know not how to pardon our selves such ingratitude to
thee, and cruelty to our selves. It is the grief of our hearts, that we have,
in the least, offended thee; and our most earnest, unfeigned desire to be
preserved hereafter in an exact conformity to our Rule in every thing. Yea, we
would delight to do thy Will, O God, and take such a pleasure in all the acts
of righteousness, mercy, meekness, and gentleness to our Neighbors; and in
praising and acknowledging thee the God of all grace; and in living in an
humble sense of thy bounty and our own undeservings, and in a temperate and
thankful use of all thy blessings; that we may have the continual feast of a
good conscience, and the constant comfort and satisfaction of having thee always
for our friend, and our gracious Father in Christ Jesus.

O thou who art the Inspirer of such holy counsels, desires and purposes, keep
them for ever in our hearts. Encourage, strengthen and increase them; that
after the refreshment of a quiet sleep this night, we may feel them lively and
powerful in the Morning: and with renewed joy we may still devote our selves to
thy faithful service. O that our friends, and all thy people in every place,
may partake of the same mercies we desire for our selves: and howsoever we are
severed one from another in this world, grant us an happy meeting at the day of
our Lord, in whose words we pray thee to hear us.

Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name: Thy kingdom come; Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread:
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us: And
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, etc.

PRAYERS For particular PERSONS.
A Prayer for the Morning to be said by any Person alone.
O Most holy, blessed and glorious Majesty of heaven and earth. Who art before
all things, because they all received their being from thee; and who art of thy
self, infinite in all perfections. Before thee, who art so great and
incomprehensible, I most humbly prostrate my self this Morning; rejoicing in
this happy liberty which thou vouchsafest me, of retiring my thoughts a little
from this world, to look up unto thee, the Father of my being. I adore and
praise thy eternal Power, Wisdom and Goodness. I heartily acknowledge the duty
which I owe thee, both as I am thy creature, and as I am a Christian. I bewail
all my neglects of it, my backwardness unto it, or coldness in it. I entreat
thy gracious pardon, and engage my self, for the time to come, more heartily
and firmly to thy obedience: beseeching the grace of thy holy Spirit to enable
me to perform all those engagements which are upon me. And blessed be thy
Fatherly goodness, which has so often prevented me with that grace. I owe to
it all the good thoughts and inclinations that are in my heart; all those
motions that I feel in my soul toward thee, as my chiefest good; with all the
effects and fruits of them in my life and actions: which encourage me to hope
in thee for the constant help of it, to further me in well doing unto the end.

O thou who have sent thy Son from heaven to dwell among us, who have not
spared his life, but given him up for us all, who have raised him from the
dead, and made him heir of all things, who have given him all power in heaven
and earth, that he may bless us and do us good; deny not the desires of a soul,
that offers up it self entirely in sincere affection to thy service. But assist
me so mightily from above, that I may make thee my constant acknowledgements
likewise, for the sensible fruits of his Life, Death, Resurrection, and
Exaltation produced in my heart: growing more and more in all Wisdom,
Righteousness, Purity, Humility, Goodness, and every other divine Virtue. For
which end preserve me always in such a serious temper of mind, that the sense of
my duty to thee, may make me always ready and forward to it; and the sense of
my weakness, may make me watchful and diligent; and the sense of my former
negligence, make me fervent in spirit; and the goodness of thy commands may
render me more fruitful and abundant in the work of our Lord; and the great
danger I have escaped, and the blessedness before me, may make me persevere
most patiently in all well doing, with joy and thankfulness. So that I may be
like to Christ Jesus my gracious Lord and Master, and do him honor here in
this world, and walk worthy of the great privileges he has bestowed on me,
and make grateful returns for all the vast receipts I have had from thy most
bounteous mercy. O that all my acknowledgements, and pious affections may be
turned into actions of holiness and piety; and all my actions may be spirited
with zeal; and all my zeal be regulated with prudence; and my prudence be void
of all guile, and joined with perfect integrity of heart: that adorning my most
holy faith and profession by a religious, upright, charitable, and discreet
conversation whilst I am here, I may receive approbation and praise, at the day
of the Lord Jesus; and be numbered among thy Saints in glory everlasting.

This, O Lord, is the sum of all my desires. Dispose me, by every thing that
befalls me, for eternal life, and it suffices. I wholly leave my concerns in
this life to the wisdom of thy goodness; that thou may order what thou
judge to be fittest for me. I trust thee with my self, and all I have: hoping
thou will preserve me from all things hurtful, and lead me to all things
profitable for my salvation.

The like I wish to all the world; that unbelievers may be translated out of
the kingdom of darkness; into the Kingdom of thy dear Son; and they who are
called by the name of Christ, may depart from all iniquity. Inspire all Kings
and Princes of the earth, with great wisdom and charity; and make them like to
thee, the Lord of all: who art good unto all, and pleased in mercy. Indue all
our Pastors and Guides with true knowledge, piety and zeal; and give me, and
all Christian people grace to receive their instructions with a meek, humble
and obedient heart. Thou know the sorrows, troubles and perplexities of all
afflicted persons; for whom I implore thy compassionate relief. Support them
with a lively faith and hope in thy precious promises; dispose them thereby to
a more strict observance of thy holy Commands; and convert their present
sufferings into endless joys; when they have brought forth the peaceable fruit
of righteousness. And whilst thou art pleased to continue to me that ease,
plenty and prosperity which I enjoy; fill me with such a sense of thy
undeserved goodness, that I may be the more ready to do good to those, who are
in misery; and by a sober and moderate use of thy blessings, be prepared to
endure patiently whatsoever change, thou shall be pleased to order for me, into
a worse condition. Preserve me all this day in innocence, and in love to thee,
and to all men. And since in all my ways I acknowledge thee; do thou direct my
paths, and teach me to guide my affairs with discretion. Prove. 3.6. Psalm. 112.5.
Thou art my hope and my confidence; my satisfaction and my peace; my glory and
my joy; therefore never leave me not forsake me, but conduct me safely by thy
counsel through all the businesses and enjoyments, through all the temptations
and troubles of this life, to that blessed place where our Lord Jesus lives
and reigns with thee in the unity of the same spirit, world without end. Amen.

Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for the Evening.
O Lord, the Creator of the world, and the Redeemer of mankind. Who know all
things; and can do what thou please; and wilt do that which is best for thy
children; and have done us a world of good already; and promised to do more for
us, if we be obedient, than we can ask or think; and have given us the greatest
assurance of the truth of those promises by thy Son Jesus; who dyed for us, and
whom thou have raised from the dead, and given him the promise of the holy
Ghost, which he has poured forth abundantly, to shed abroad thy love in our
hearts. I fall down before thee in the lowliest manner, to express my fear and
reverence of thy Almighty Power; my admiration of and submission to thy
unsearchable wisdom; my hearty love, and thankful acknowledgement of thy
wondrous goodness; my trust and confidence in thy faithful Promises; with my
readiness, and sincere purposes to perform all obedience to thy holy Commands.

There is nothing, O Lord, so afflictive to me, as the remembrance that I have
any time offended thy Sovereign Authority. I am heartily sorry for the breaking
of any of thy sacred, righteous and good Laws. I abhor the thoughts of doing
so again. And protest eternal enmity to all that is contrary to thy blessed
Will: addicting my self with most hearty affection to thy true and faithful
service. Pardon me therefore, most gracious and merciful Father, and accept
these holy resolutions which thou have inspired me withal. Strengthen, I
beseech thee, and further them with thy continued grace, that no sudden
desires, vehement inclinations, ineffectual purposes, no nor partial
performances, may deceive and lead me into a false opinion of my self: but I
may bring forth actually, and with a constant spirit, all the fruits of
righteousness, which are by Christ Jesus to the praise and glory of thee, my
God. Possess me with such a deep and strong sense of thy supreme Authority over
all, of the obligations I have to thee, and the great kindness thou have done
me in engaging me to be thy servant; that Religion may be the very business of
my life, and my greatest pleasure may be to please thee in every thing, and my
highest design to attain that blessed immortality, which Christ Jesus has
promised.

O lift up my affections more and more to those things above, where he is: That
heaven may have my heart, while this world has my body; and I may have perfect
contentment of mind in well doing and patient suffering; and the good hope I
have of being eternally beloved of thee, the Lord of heaven and earth, may make
me rejoice evermore. Free me from all inordinate cares for the things of this
life; from all distrust of thy good providence; from all repining at any thing
that befalls me: and enable me in every thing to give thanks; believing that all
things are ordered by the greatest reason, and shall work together for good to
those that love thee. I doubt not of thy Fatherly affection to those that
study, in all sincerity, to approve themselves unto thee: and therefore still
resolve to leave my self entirely to thy wise Counsels, that thou may dispose
me into such a condition as thou see best in this world. Remember me but of
my duty; quicken and excite me to it; strengthen me in the doing of it; support
me under all discouragements; advise me in all difficult cases; and comfort me
with a steadfast belief of thy holy Word; and I shall ever be giving thanks and
praise unto thee, who dealest so bountifully with me.

Into thy hands I commend this night, both soul and body, which have been
mercifully preserved in safety all this day. I repose my self in the belief of
thy watchful providence; and that thou give thy Angels charge of us, and art
about our beds, and about our paths, and spiest out all our thoughts. O
continue these holy thoughts and desires in me till I fall asleep: that thou
may have a soul full of love to thee in thy custody; and I may receive the
light of the Morning, if thou prolongest my life, with new joy in thee, and
thankful affection to thee.

I most heartily desire likewise, O merciful God, the good of the whole world.
Pity the follies of mankind: deliver them from their sins, and from their
miseries. Hear the groans of every part of the creature, that is yet subject to
the bondage of corruption, and bring them all into the glorious liberty of thy
children. Hear the daily prayers of the Catholic Church. Free her from all
foul and dividing errors: Let the Truth, as it is in Jesus, prevail, and peace
be in all her borders. O that all Christian Kings and Governors, may follow
after peace and ensue it. Make thy Ministers the Messengers of peace: and
dispose the hearts of all Christians to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the
bond of peace. Inlighten the minds of all Jews, Turks and Infidels with the
knowledge of thy Truth. Give repentance unto sinners; and increase of grace and
strength to all thy faithful servants. Reduce those that wander out of the way:
raise up those who are fallen: confirm and settle those that stand; and grant
them a steadfast resolution to persevere in faith, love and obedience. Relieve
and comfort all those that are in any distress. Make the earth to bring forth
her increase in due season. And let all honest and industrious people be
succeeded and blessed in their labors. Remember all those to whom I am
indebted for my birth, education, instruction or promotion: Thou who art rich
in mercy, reward and recompense their care and love. Grant forgiveness and
charity to all my enemies. Continue good will among all my kind Neighbors.
Assist those who are dying and leaving this world. Fit them for a better place;
receive the souls which thou have redeemed with thy Sons most precious blood,
and sanctified by the holy Ghost; and give us all a glorious resurrection and
eternal life. Amen, Amen.

Our Father, etc.

A shorter Prayer to be used by any one alone in the Morning.
I Adore thee, O Lord, the possessor of heaven and earth; who surpassest all
our thoughts, and do us good beyond all our desires. There is all reason,
that I should acknowledge thee continually; that I should worship, and praise,
and love, and obey thee, whilst I have my being. I cannot but witness against
my self, whenever I neglect thee; much more when I oppose thy most high
Authority, by doing contrary to thy Laws. For thy Almighty Goodness gave me my
being; and by that alone have I been maintained and liberally provided for:
yea, it has born with me very patiently in my rebellion, and used
extraordinary means to make us friends, and ceases not its entreaties after
many unkind denials; but continues to importune me, till my heart consent to
yield it self entirely to thee.

I cannot withhold my self, O Lord, from thee, when I consider what thou art,
and what thou have been to me: such a tender, gracious and compassionate
Father, as my greatest affections cannot find words to express. I must again
surrender soul and body into thy hands, which have been so long, so lovingly
stretched out toward me: resolving to stay with thee, and never to depart away
from thee. For the more I know of thee, the more I find that I must needs love
thee: and the more I love thee, the more I desire to love thee, and to resemble
thee, and to be beloved of thee. O that I may feel the power of thy love so
great in my heart, that it may govern the rest of my passions and affections:
and nothing in the world may tempt me to displease thee, but every thing
provoke me more to love thee, and delight in thee, and obey thee. For whom is
there in heaven that I can desire but thee, or on earth besides thee? who art
the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and the Lord of lords; who
only have immortality: and designest by thy Son Jesus to raise us sinful dust
and ashes, to a kingdom, glory, honor, and immortality in the heavens. I most
earnestly beseech thee that this sense of thee, may accompany me wheresoever I
go, and in whatsoever I do this day. That approving my self to thee in such a
godly, sober, righteous, charitable and prudent behavior, as may adorn the
Gospel of my Lord and Master Christ Jesus; I may have a greater assurance of
thy good will toward me, and an undoubted hope of thy mercy in him to eternal
life. In whose most blessed name and words I humbly recommend my self, my
friends, and all thy servants to thy infinite charity; saying as he has taught
us.

Our Father, etc.

Another for the Evening.
BLessing, Glory, Honor and Praise be again returned to thee, O Father of
mercy, from a most thankful heart; which offers up it self also in holy
devotion to thee. Who art my Sovereign Lord, my most loving Savior, my
Deliverer and Benefactor; the Fountain of all the good things I enjoy at
present, and the hope of my soul for ever and ever. Blessed be thy renewed
kindness to me this day past; both to my self and my relations, to my soul and
my body, in my transactions with men, and in the liberty thou allowest me of
addresses to thy self. Pardon, good Lord, whatsoever has escaped me in
thought, word or deed, contrary to my duty: And accept of those sincere
intentions, and unfeigned purposes, which were, and I hope shall always be, in
my heart, to study to approve my self to thee in all well doing.

It is but just and reasonable that I should follow thy will, and not my own:
and in a grateful sense of what I have received from thee, I ought to be moved
to employ all the powers of my soul and body for thee. But such is the goodness
of thy will, that it is for my ease and pleasure, and greatest happiness, to be
absolutely led and governed by it. I am sensible, O Lord, how much I am
indebted to thee for teaching me by Christ Jesus, and also strongly obliging
me, to exercise my self to all godliness, purity, righteousness, humility,
goodness and truth. And accordingly I thank thee, above all things, for his
holy instructions and example; for the hope thou have given us by his blood
that thou will be so merciful to our sins, as not to deny us the power of thy
holy Spirit to enable us to follow him, and obey his commands; and for that
exceeding great and precious promise which he has given us of immortal life,
to encourage us to follow him willingly and cheerfully, even to the death. O
that I may feel a lively and steadfast faith in his Word, continually working
with great power in my heart; exciting me to an unwearied diligence, and zeal,
and love, and patient continuance in my duty toward thee, and toward all men:
That so my hope in thee may grow and increase, and I may joyfully expect that
hour which shall translate me hence to the eternal happiness of the other
world. And during my stay here, I commend my self to thy good providence, which
has hitherto been so tender of me. I trust thee wholly with my self, and all
belonging to me: and am willing in every thing to be disposed of, as thou see
good. This night (...) fly unto thy Almighty protection; hoping thou will keep
me safely, and whether I awake in this or the other life, I shall still be
praising thee; whose Mercy endures for ever. Amen; for Christ Jesus his sake;
by whom thou have encouraged me to hope in thee, and taught me to call thee
father; saying,

Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name: Thy kingdom come; Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread:
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us: And
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, etc.

THat time which is wont to be spent in the Church, in talking or looking
about, before Divine Service begin; may be better employed in private Prayer,
to dispose us to join with greater seriousness in the Public. And indeed our
business being there with God alone, and that place being separated to his
service only; the custom, which now universally prevails, of entertaing
discourse one with another, is very undecent (to say no worse) and ought to be
reformed. We have other times and places enough to confer with our neighbors;
and therefore have no temptation to pervert the use of this: which is set apart
for devout intercourse with God, and none else, by speaking to him in Prayer
and Praises, and hearing him speak to us in his holy Word. It is fit to silence
all other speech; and therefore here follow some helps for that purpose: which
I hope all good Christians will endeavor to use, or imitate; and not despise
this loving admonition.

Private PRAYERS IN THE CHVRCH.
A short Prayer before Divine Service begins.
BEhold, O Lord of heaven and earth, a Soul prostrate before thee; desirous to
be filled with such an awful sense of thy divine Majesty, that no other thing
may interpose it self, while I am in thy presence. Fix my inconstant thoughts
in a steadfast attention to thy most holy Word. Inspire me with devout
affections, when I set forth thy praise, and render thanks for all thy
benefits. And excite in me such fervent desires for all those things, which I
ask of thee; that I may feel my self better disposed by these addresses to
thee, to every Christian duty the rest of this day; through Christ Jesus our
Lord and Savior. Amen.

Another.
IN an humble and thankful sense of thine infinite goodness, which honors us
so much as to speak to us, and gives us leave to speak to thee; I bow down my
self before thee, O most high and holy Lord, the Creator of the world, desiring
my mind may be possessed with such great thoughts of thee, whom the heaven of
heavens cannot contain, and who openest thy hand and fillest all things with
good, that I may most reverently worship thee; and affectionately acknowledge
thy bounty; and set my heart open to receive thy holy Word; and my mouth may
praise thee with joyful lips. Silence all other thoughts and desires in me,
while I am here in thy presence. And lift up my heart so toward heaven, that I
may feel it united to that glorious company above; who perpetually praise thee,
and rejoice in thee, and do thy Commandments, harkening to the voice of thy
Word. Which I humbly beg in the name of Christ Jesus, which is ever dear unto
thee; and by whom thou have promised to hear us. Amen.

Or those words of the Prophet David (which you read, Psalm. 5.7. 17.1. 118.28.
119.47,48, etc.) may be a little altered, in this manner:
IN the multitude of thy mercy I am come into thy house: and in thy fear will I
worship toward thy holy place. Attend unto my cry, O Lord, and give ear unto my
Prayer that goes not out of feigned lips. Thou art my God, and I will praise
thee; thou art my God, and I will exalt thee. And I will delight my self in thy
Commandments which I have loved. My hands also will I lift up to thy
commandments which I have loved: and I will meditate in thy statutes. Let thy
tender mercies come also unto me, O Lord; even thy Salvation according to thy
Word. Look upon me, and be merciful unto me, as thou usest to do to those that
love thy Name. Order my steps in thy Word: and let not any iniquity have
dominion over me. Amen.

A longer Prayer in the Church, when there is time for it, before the beginning
of divine Service.
I Cast down my self, O Lord, in an holy fear and humble adoration of thine
incomprehensible Majesty, who fillest heaven and earth; but delightest to make
thy self more peculiarly present to those that acknowledge and praise thee, and
are desirous to be filled with a constant sense of thee, and entire love to
thee. Blessed be thy infinite goodness, which has encouraged such wretches, as
I am, by the declaration of thy good will to us in Christ Jesus, by thy most
gracious invitations and precious promises, and by the long experience I have
had of thy kindness, to approach unto thee, O Lord most High.

I accept most thankfully of this freedom and liberty of access with confidence
by the faith of Jesus; and am here to join with the rest of thy servants, in
extolling and magnifying thy eternal Power, Wisdom and Goodness; in giving
thanks to thee for thy innumerable blessings; in hearing thy most holy Word;
and making our humble supplications, for the continuance of thy undeserved
grace and favor toward us. Compose mine and every one of our thoughts, to the
most silent admiration of thee: Strike our Spirits with a reverend apprehension
of the surpassing greatness and glory of thy Majesty: Raise our affections to
the highest pitch of love and gratitude to thee: bow our wills to the most
cheerful submission to all thy holy commands: and touch us with an unspeakable
joy, when we read and hear thy exceeding great and precious promises.

Vouchsafe, most loving Father, the power of thy holy Spirit to attend upon me;
to draw my mind from all other things, and to give me such a lively taste of
the pleasures of thy house, as may make me ever delight to attend upon thee
here, and walk with thee, in every other place, with a perfect heart. That so
my own 1 John 3.21,22.
heart not condemning me, I may have more and more confidence toward thee,
that whatsoever I ask I shall receive of thee; because I keep thy commandments,
and do those things which are pleasing in thy sight. Psalm. 62.1.
O my God, truly my soul waits upon thee; from thee comes my salvation. 61.1.
Hear my cry, O God, and attend unto my prayer, for the honor of our Lord
Jesus, and the love thou bear to him; who has bid us ask, and we shall
receive; seek, and we shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto us. Let it
be to thy servant, I most ardently beseech thee, according to his Word. Amen.

Another more large.
O Lord of heaven and earth, who art infinite and incomprehensible in thy
being, eternal in thy duration, and unchangeable in thy Nature: who can do
what thou will; and delightest in doing us good. By thy Power I and all
creatures were made; by thy Wisdom we are governed; by thy Goodness and Bounty
we are provided for; under thy Sovereign Dominion we live; and unto thy Majesty
we owe all reverence, service and faithful obedience. I adore and humbly
worship thee. I acknowledge my self bound by innumerable ties to fear thee, to
love thee, to praise thee, and to serve thee with all my heart, and soul, and
strength. Blessed be thy Goodness that I have any hope, thou will accept of
such a worthless thing as my love. Blessed be thy Goodness. I admire at the
riches of thy Grace, that thou do not reject all the service that I can
tender thee. Nay, it is to be ascribed to this alone, that I am alive to
worship thee, and have the doors of thy house stand open to me; and that I have
any heart to enter into it, to offer up spiritual Sacrifices by Christ Jesus.

O God, I offer thee here my whole self, which is all due to thee, because I
received it all from thee: beseeching thee most earnestly to make me feel that
I am not mine own any longer, but thine; by taking off my thoughts and
affections from all other things at this present, and filling me with such a
reverend apprehension of thee, such hearty devotion to thee, and heavenly joy
in thee; that I may every day offer up my self to thee more holy and more pure,
more meek and merciful, more humble and thankful, more cheerfully disposed to
every good work, and better prepared to bear a part in the praises and services
of the glorious company above.

Thou know the weakness of our nature, how soon our thoughts are tired and
apt to start aside when we direct them toward heaven: Vouchsafe me therefore
the assistance of thy holy Spirit to compose my mind to the most serious, the
most earnest, the most devout and cheerful attention, in all the parts of thy
Divine Service. That I may have the liveliest sense of thy glorious perfections
when I praise thee; and the most delightful remembrance of thy Mercies, when I
give thee thanks; and the most thirsty desires to be conformed to thy Will, and
to feel more and more the influences of thy Grace, when I hear thy holy Word,
and present my prayers and supplications before thee.

Accept, O blessed God, of this good will and sincere affection that I have to
thy service; though performed with broken and distracted thoughts, and with too
great listlessness and dullness of spirit. And help me continually to out-grow
this weakness, and to present thee with an heart more quiet, calm and fit to
receive thee; more perfect and entire in ardent love to thee; and more settled
and fixed in thee, as its chiefest joy and happiness. That so all the rest of
the actions of my life may be a more constant and even performance of my duty,
according to the command and example of my blessed Lord and Master Christ
Jesus. In whose name it is that I am bold to approach into thy presence:
believing the Power and Authority thou have given him over all, to bless us,
and to do for us exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think. By him be
glory unto thee, O Father Almighty, in the Church, throughout all ages, world
without end. Amen.

At the conclusion of Divine Service after these words, The grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, etc.
Say, Amen, with the heartiest and most earnest affection. And add some such
words as these.

BLessed be thy name, O God, for the good hope which thy infinite charity has
given us; by thy great grace in Christ Jesus, and the plentiful communication
of the holy Ghost. O let thy mercy be upon me according as I hope in thee.
Preserve me always in thy love, through that abundant grace in thy Son Christ,
and the powerful presence of thy holy Spirit working in me mightily, this day
and ever.

Or, after The peace of God which passes all understanding, etc. you may say
as the Apostle St. Paul, (2 Thessalonians. 3.16.) and the Psalmist 115.12,13,18.
NOw the Lord of peace himself give me peace always, by all means. The Lord be
with us all. The Lord has been mindful of us, he will bless us. He will bless
them that fear him, both small and great. And we will bless the Lord from this
time forth, and for evermore. Amen.

A short Prayer for the Lord's Day, or any other, to be used at home before
Morning Service.
O Lord, the Almighty Creator of the world, and the merciful Savior of
mankind; who art above all our thoughts, and excellest the praises of the
highest Angels. Thou art greatly to be feared in the assembly of thy Saints,
and to be had in reverence of all those, that are about thee. I most humbly
desire leave to join my self with all those holy ones, to worship thy most
glorious Majesty, to express the due sense I have of all thy benefits (by
paying thee my most thankful acknowledgements for them) to make thee the best
oblation I am able, and devote my self entirely to thy obedience. Since thou
have graciously inclined me to go into thy house, and there to set forth thy
praise, to declare thy loving kindness, to resign my self to thy Will, to
recommend my self to thy Wisdom, to submit to thy Government, to approve the
justice and goodness of all thy Laws, to profess that I am thy servant, to
renounce all thy enemies, and to testify my continued purpose to follow thee
against all the temptations of the world, the flesh and the Devil: be pleased,
good Lord, to pardon all my former failings, and at this present to accept my
holy intentions, and to inspire me from above, that I may cheerfully perform
all these acts of devotion to thy Divine Majesty.

And vouchsafe more fully to inform me in my duty, to correct and amend what is
amiss in me, to encourage and strengthen my good resolutions, and to assist me
in all well doing. Fill me with a great love to thee, and to my blessed
Savior; to thy holy Word, and to all holy duties; to Christian people every
where, and to all mankind. Perfect me in Wisdom, in Holiness, and in Goodness.
By all thy instructions, by all thy mercies, by all thy chastisements, and by
all my prayers, praises and thanksgivings to thee, the Father of mercies; make
me such as thou can love, and delight in, and reward at the great day of the
Lord Jesus. Amen.

A short Prayer at home, after we are come from Church; before Dinner.
I Adore thee again, O Lord of Life and glory; I acknowledge my dependence on
thee. I thank thee for thy mercies, which thou never ceasest to heap upon me.
Accept, I beseech thee, of that dedication I have made of soul and body, with
praises and thanksgivings, unto thee in the public Congregation. Be merciful
to all my sins: and indue me with the grace of thy holy Spirit, to enable me to
present my self, when I appear again before thee, a more holy and devout
Sacrifice unto thee; steadfastly resolved, and cheerfully disposed, in every
thing to be ordered by thy Will. For which end be pleased to settle and root in
my heart a stronger belief of thy holy Gospel, and to fix my thoughts and
affections upon that unseen happiness and bliss where our Savior is: That
nothing here below may either allure or affright me from my duty, nor ever make
me remiss or negligent in it; but I may be zealous of good works, fervent in
spirit serving my Lord, from whom I expect the reward of an immortal
inheritance.

Preserve in me always a Religious sense of thee. And make me now so thankful
and sober a partaker of the refreshments of my body, that they may not damp the
devotion of my soul: But I may rather return to worship thee with greater
cheerfulness and gladness of heart, after thou have added the good things of
this world, to those of the other; according to thy abundant love in Christ
Jesus. Amen.

A Prayer in private before the Evening Service.
O God who art rich in mercy to all that call upon thee, and have bid us 1 Thessalonians. 5.
pray without ceasing, and rejoice evermore. In obedience to thy command, and
encouraged by the goodness of thy Nature, thy gracious invitations, thy most
precious promises, and the long experience that I and others have had of thy
bounty, I am bold again to approach into thy presence; to renew my requests
unto thee, to bless thy holy name, to make profession of my love to thee, and
readiness in all things to obey thee. Quicken my thoughts and affections, O
Lord, to a free and joyful attendance on thee in all holy duties: that no
dullness nor weariness may seize upon my spirit; but such a fervent love to thee
may possess my heart, as may render all the employments of Religion my delight,
and the doing thy Will both now and always my greatest pleasure.

And pass by, I most humbly beseech thee, all my unwilling indispositions.
Accept of such service as I am able to render thee. And dispose me by all my
addresses to thee, to be more circumspect and watchful, more diligent and
industrious, more forward and zealous in the performance of every part of my
duty. That being led by thy Counsel, governed by thy Spirit, and preserved by
thy gracious Providence, I may at last be admitted into the company of the
blessed; there to perfect my praises and acknowledgements, and to receive the
reward of patient continuance in well doing, through Christ Jesus. Whose grace
be with my spirit. Amen.

Another after the Evening Service is done, as soon as there is opportunity to
retire alone.
I Acknowledge thy manifold blessings, O Lord, which are renewed upon me every
moment. I owe my life continually to thee, with all the comforts of it. If I
had no more to thank thee for, but the mercies of this day, they are so many,
so great, that I could never thank thee enough for them. Thou take care of my
body, and of my soul. Thou feedest me at thy house, and at my own. Thou let
me taste the bread of Life which came down from Heaven, besides the many
supports and refreshments which thou affordest for this natural life. Several
of thy creatures lose their lives to preserve mine, and thy dear Son has not
thought it too much to lay down his precious Life for my sake. Thou speak to
me, and give me leave to speak to thee. Thou instructest me in my duty, and
have made those things my duty, which are really my happiness. Thou ingagest me
to do my self good here, by promising a greater good hereafter.

I praise thee; I thank thee; and will be ever speaking good of thee. And it is
a new favor that I may thus praise and bless thee, both in the assemblies of
thy people, and in my own retirements. O give me an heart to delight in it, and
in all other duties of a Christian life. That obeying thy holy Gospel in all
things, and being never weary in well doing, I may find thy unwearied goodness
extending it self to immortal life and bliss through Christ Jesus.

O blessed Jesus that thy holy Laws may be more deeply engraven on my heart! O
that every truth I have learnt this day, may be so faithfully preserved and
kept in mind; as to become the rule of my life, or the ground of my hope, and a
powerful motive to universal and uniform obedience to the end of my days! O
that the remainder of my days may be the better for this day: and the holy rest
we observe here on earth may be a beginning of the eternal rest which we wait
for at thy second coming. Amen. Come Lord Jesus.

A Prayer upon any Festival in remembrance of our blessed Lord and Savior.
O Most glorious God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of
lights, Jem. 1.17.
from whom comes every good, and every perfect gift; with whom there is no
variableness, nor shadow of change. Thou always wast, and ever wilt be happy
without us, or any of the praises that we or any other creatures are able to
render unto thee. But it is our duty, our perfection, and high ^riviledge,
constantly to acknow^edge thee, with joy and exultation ^f spirit; in
remembrance of thy in^nite bounty to us, and to all world. Every day tells us
how good thou art, and every one of thy creatures calls upon us to magnify
thee, and love ^hee, and serve thee; who have made ^o many of them to serve us.
But ^his day gives us occasion to remember thy more special and extraordinary
kindness to us the children of men; which calls for our highest and most
exalted praises, to be joined with those of the blessed company above, who are
never weary of giving honor, glory, blessing and thanksgiving to thee, not
only in their own behalf, but even for thy goodness to us thy unworthy
creatures.

O how great was that love, which an Angel came to give notice of! and which a
multitude of an heavenly host celebrated with songs of praise, when thou
sentest thy dear Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and in the form of a
servant, to minister to our necessities, to relieve our misery, and to be the
way to everlasting life! O the riches of thy grace, that after mankind had
forfeited all the rights of thy creatures, and had contemned and despitefully
used many of thy messengers, thou would in much mercy create us again unto
good works, and for that end appear thy self most gloriously among us, in the
person of Jesus Christ! I thank thee, O Lord, that thou have assumed our Nature
unto such a nearness to thee, as we are not able to understand. I thank thee
for the glad tidings which Jesus has brought us from heaven, that thou will be
reconciled unto us, and admit us again into thy favor: and that he has
fulfilled all righteousness; and shown us in our likeness what thou art, and
what thou would have us to be. I thank thee for the redemption which he has
wrought for us by his blood. And I rejoice in the victory which he has got
over hell and the grave by his Resurrection from the dead; and in his glorious
triumph, when he ascended up on high, and led captivity captive; and in his
royal Power wherewith he was invested, when he sat down on the right hand of
the Majesty on high; and in those gifts which he received for men, even for the
rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell among them.

Blessed be thy eternal goodness, which has made him a most merciful and
compassionate High Priest; and given us so great assurance, that he is become
the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him.

Blessed be thy goodness, which has sent the holy Ghost; and continued to us a
succession of Pastors and Teachers, to be the Guides of our Souls, and to
minister to us those pledges of thy love, which our Savior has left us, in
the Communion of his Body and Blood.

O God, that my heart could ascend up to heaven in these devout meditations,
and in ardent love to thee, who have loved us in such a mavelous manner! O
that it might never come down again to this world, but with desires left in it
aspiring toward heaven! Touch my soul so powerfully with a sense of these
things, that with an hearty and zealous affection it may ever look toward
thee, and toward my dear Lord and Savior Christ Jesus. O ^ix mine eyes on
him, as he was here on earth, that I may learn of him, his humble and meek
obedience to thy commands: and as he is now in heaven, that I may trust him for
the performance of his precious promises, and patiently wait till he carry me
to that glorious place where he is inthroned. Since he appeared among us to
destroy the works of the Devil, and died to redeem us from all sin, and rose
again that he might bless us in turning every one of us from our iniquities,
and is made Lord of all that he may govern us by his Laws, and reward and
punish us according to our works; preserve in my mind, I beseech thee, a
constant and lively sense of this great end of his whole undertaking for us:
That he may see the fruit of the travail of his soul in me, and my whole life
may be a serious study and endeavor to imitate him, by purifying my self, as
he is pure.

O that thy fear and love, and an holy joy in thee, may preserve me this day,
from abusing any of the good things which thou allowest me for the refreshment
of my body. Give me such a savor and relish of thy Divine Truths revealed to
us in the Gospel, that I way not glut my self with any fleshly enjoyments, as
if I knew no pleasure more excellent. But raise up my mind by them to better
delights: that I may enjoy them with thanksgiving to thee, with bowels of mercy
to those who are in need, with a taste of spiritual and heavenly joys, and with
hunger and thirst after the fullness and perfection of those joys, when our Lord
Jesus shall come to show us his glory, and entertain us with eternal
satisfaction in his incomprehensible love. Amen.

A PRAYER ON GOOD FRIDAY
In the MORNING.
O Most holy and eternally blessed; the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom I am encouraged to come unto thee. And how shall I come, O
Lord, but in the lowest prostrations of my soul and body; with mine eyes full
of tears, and my heart full of grief and sorrow, because I have been so
undutiful to thee, whose grace and mercy has so exceedingly abounded toward
us! When I cast mine eyes upon my Savior, and upon my self, with the rest of
the children of men, I am astonished at the wonderful greatness of thy love,
which surpasses the thoughts of men and Angels.

For what were we that thou should make thy dear Son a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief, for our sake? That he should become poor and mean, not
having where to lay his head; and endure likewise cruel mockings and
buffettings; and be spit upon and abused; yea, sorely wounded and bruised; and
drink that bitter cup, the vile and accursed death of the cross; where he shed
his most precious blood, and gave himself a ransom for us? O Lord, what was
the whole race of mankind worth, that thou should purchase them with so dear
a price? and by the obedience of thy Son Christ Jesus unto the death, grant a
pardon for their rebellion? and seal a new Covenant of Grace in his blood? and
by the same blood consecrate him to be an High Priest with royal Power in the
heavens, to give repentance and remission of sin? and all this, so freely, that
we did not so much as desire it, nor did it enter into the heart of men to
conceive, that thou should be so gracious to them? O blessed God, how rich
is thy goodness, that lets us withal enjoy a great plenty of worldly good
things; much of that ease and pleasure which was denied our dear Savior? and
yet we are sinners, and he had no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth:
yea, we are ungrateful sinners, so far from being sensible as we ought of such
infinite loving kindness; that we may justly fear lest this goodness of thine
which was designed to save us, should through our unthankfulness and
negligence, prove the occasion of our greater ruin.

I most heartily bewail, O most merciful Father, my shameful forgetfulness of
so great benefits, or my cold and dull remembrance of them. I lament all the
errors and miscarriages of my life, which are the more heinous, I acknowledge,
after such a plain declaration of thy displeasure against sin, and of thy
mavelous love to us sinners. I am afflicted for the hardness and stupidity of
my heart, which, alas! is oft-times little pierced and wounded, when I reflect
upon his sorrow and pain, and anguish for the sake of sinners: and for the
listlessness and backwardness of my will to give up my self absolutely to him,
who so willingly gave himself an offering for our sins. I blush to remember how
weak and short my thoughts have been; how transient and ineffectual my
passions, when I have meditated on his bloody death and sufferings: And am
confounded when I think how suddenly I have started from those holy purposes
and resolutions, which the sense of his love has sometimes begot in my heart.

I cannot but accuse and condemn my self here in thy presence; but I likewise
condemn every sinful desire that is still remaining in me, to dye and be
crucified together with him. I would have nothing contrary to thy Will, to have
any power, or live any longer in me: and therefore here yield up my self
entirely into thy hands, to be conformed in all things to Christ Jesus who dyed
for me. Fix my thoughts so constantly upon his dying love, and affect my heart
so mightily therewith, that I may cheerfully undergo any pains to be made like
unto him in his humility; in his obedience; in his resignation of himself to
thy wise will and pleasure; in his patience; in his meekness, in his charity,
and forgiveness of his enemies; in his willingness to quit all things for thy
names sake, and to trust both soul and body with thee, in well doing and
contented suffering, whatsoever it be that thou requirest of me.

I desire not to live, O Lord, but that I may live to him that dyed for me. I
refuse no reproaches, no poverty, no pain or trouble, if thy will cannot other
ways be accomplished by me. Do what thou please with me, so that I may but be
perfected in holiness, and obtain thy gracious pardon through the redemption
that is in Jesus.

I believe the virtue and power of his Sacrifice to be everlasting; and that
when he had by himself purged our sins, he sat down on the right hand of the
Majesty on high: And therefore I look for the constant assistance of thy good
Spirit, which he has bid me ask in his Name, to enable me to purify my self,
and to tread in the steps of his humble, meek and patient Charity; that so I
may be presented unblameable and unproveable in thy sight at the day of his
appearing. Great is the wisdom of thy love wherein thy grace has abounded
toward us in Christ Jesus! Great are the encouragements which thou have given
us, by his laying down his life for us, that he might take it again and live
for evermore! Great is the boldness that we have to enter into the holiest by
the blood of Jesus; by a new and living way, which he has consecrated for us
through his flesh! Give me the grace, I beseech thee, wisely to consider and
ponder the merciful design of thy Grace; to walk circumspectly and exactly, as
the redeemed of the Lord, as an heir of his love, that hopes to see him in
immortal glory. O that the comfort and joy of this hope, to see Jesus who was
so scorned and abused, sitting upon his throne, and triumphing over all his
enemies, may so raise and enlarge my mind by the power of it, that I may
overlook and despise all the petty temptations of this world: looking still
steadfastly unto him, and following him with unmovable resolution; till I come
to possess that which I hope for, and rejoice eternally in his love.

Hear me, O Father of mercies, and deal graciously with me far beyond all my
thoughts and desires, for his sake; who is the Author and the finisher of our
faith, who dyed once for us, and now lives for ever to make intercession on our
behalf: By whom all honor, praise, thanksgiving, love and obedience be
rendered to thee by me and by all mankind both now and for ever. Amen.

A Prayer on Good Friday in the Evening.
O Most holy, most gracious, the only wise God, most blessed for ever. We
cannot conceive the greatness of thy perfections, nor is there any thing to
which we can compare them. Thy holiness is more unspotted than the light of the
Sun: Thy goodness spreads it self more largely than its beams: Thy Wisdom
pierces into those secrets which are buried in darkness: and though all things
alter and wax old, yet thou art the same unchangeable being, whose years have
no end. How shall such a vile wretch as I am take the boldness to look toward
thee, and speak unto thee, who art so great, so glorious, and dwell in light
not to be approached?

Adored be thy wonderful love, who have encouraged our approaches to thee, by
humbling thy self to look down upon us, and by appearing graciously to us in
our own flesh. Blessing, Honor, Glory and Praise be eternally ascribed unto
thee, who did not abhor us, and utterly cast us out of thy sight, when we had
turned our backs upon thee; but sent thy only begotten Son into the world, to
call us again unto thee, yea, to beseech us, and oblige us, by laying down his
own life for us, to return unto thee and live.

No thought can comprehend the unsearchable riches of thy Grace manifested unto
us in the Lord Jesus, who was pleased to be vilely entreated, and shamefully
used, to suffer the reproach of the Cross, and to shed his dearest blood; that
we might not suffer the pain of eternal death, but be restored to the dignity
of thy children, and advanced to honor, glory and immortality together with
him. Thou have found out a way to manifest thy most tender love to us, without
the least suspicion of approving and loving our sins; and to preserve thy
Sovereign Authority, without destroying those who were in rebellion against it.
Thou have ordered such a chastisement of our iniquities, as might save and
deliver us, who deserved to be punished: and so disposed the means of our
redemption, as to pardon and amend us, both at once.

O the wisdom of thy Love, which has made him to be sin for us, who knew no
sin, 2 Cor. 5.21.
that we might be made the righteousness of thee our God in him! O the riches
of thy Grace, which has abounded to us in all wisdom and prudence! Healing us
by his stripes; 1 Pet. 2.24.
and condemning sin in the flesh by his sacrifice for sin; Romans 8.3.
and making him a curse for us, Gal. 3.14.
that we might inherit a blessing, and receive the promise of the Spirit,
through faith in him. I see, O Lord, how infinitely I am indebted to thee. I
behold the design of thy wise goodness in giving him for us, that he might
redeem us from all iniquity, Tit. 2.14.
and purify us to himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. I thank
thee with all my soul, for his bearing our sins in his own body on the tree, 1
Pet. 2.
that we being dead unto sin, should live unto righteousness. There is nothing
I can more desire than by doing righteousness, 1 John 3.
to become righteous even as he is righteous. Assist me, I beseech thee, to
attain this end of his death and passion, by the power of that holy Spirit
which he has thereby purchased for us, and has likewise promised to us, and
is able to bless us withal.

I dread to think that his precious blood should be lost and spilt in vain for
me; that so great a price should be cast away, wherewith thou have bought me,
to glorify thee with my body and spirit which are thine. O God preserve in me
such a lively sense of his grief and sorrow, of his pain and anguish; that I
may bitterly hate the cause of all his torments, and look on every sin, as the
most fearful curse that can befall me. Preserve in me a constant sense of the
great value of my soul, for which he paid so dearly: and a great esteem of that
purity, righteousness and goodness, for the restoring of which he made himself
of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was obedient to
death, even the death of the Cross. And especially raise me to a great height
of love and gratitude to thee, and of hope and confidence in thy infinite
mercies; of which we have such strong assurance, by his being delivered for our
offenses, Romans 4.25.
and raised again for our justification. Make me more and more in love with
that lowliness of mind, that tender and compassionate charity, that meekness,
patience and forgiveness which shone in his sufferings. And subdue my will so
perfectly; unto such an absolute, quiet and ready submission to thy holy Will
in every thing; that my hope in thee may increase exceedingly: and not only so,
but I may also joy in thee my God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5.11.
by whom we have now received the atonement.

Hear, Good Lord, the prayers of the whole Church, which thou have purchased
with thine own blood. O that every member thereof may serve thee purely and
orderly in the rank and condition wherein thou have placed them, to their
mutual benefit and comfort, and to the conviction of those who are enemies or
strangers to the Name of the Lord Jesus; that they seeing our good works may
glorify thee our heavenly Father, and acknowledge that thou art among us of a
Truth. Bless all the Ministers of Religion or Justice: and endue them with a
great love to the honor of our Savior, and with a great zeal to make his holy
Laws understood and observed. That as he gave himself for his Church, Ephesians.
5.26,27.
that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word,
and present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or
any such thing: So all that name the name of Christ may depart from all
iniquity, and endeavor to be holy and without blemish, and be found of him in
peace at the day of his appearing.

Now unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and
has made us kings and priests unto God and his Father; to him be glory and
dominion for ever and ever. Amen. Rev. 1.5,6.

A PRAYER ON ANY SAINTS DAY.
THou art to be praised, O Lord of heaven and earth, in all thy works of
wonder, which declare the astonishing greatness of thy Majesty, Power, Wisdom
and Goodness, throughout the world. One generation praises thy works to
another, and declares thy mighty acts; especially the manifold wisdom of thy
incomprehensible love in the salvation of mankind by Christ Jesus; who has
brought us the glad tidings of peace and reconciliation with thee, and the
promise of immortal life and glory, if we will be obedient to thee. An
innumerable company of holy Souls have in all ages since most thankfully
received and acknowledged this thy grace and tender mercy; being obedient to
the very death, and leaving us an excellent example of pure love to thee, and
constant affection, and hearty devotion, and ardent zeal for the honor of our
Lord and Master Christ Jesus. I add my poor tribute of praise and thanksgiving
to all that has been rendered unto thee, O God, who in the beginning
commandedst the light to shine out of darkness, and have now shone into the
hearts of thy holy ones, to give the light of thy divine knowledge in the face
of Jesus Christ.

Thanks be to thy infinite goodness, as for that glorious manifestation of thy
self in our flesh, and the eternal redemption that the Lord Jesus obtained for
us by his blood, and the power and dominion which thou have given him at thy
right hand after his Resurrection from the dead, and his compassionate
intercession on our behalf: So for all those gifts which he gave unto men;
whereby he made some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors
and teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministry,
and the edifying of his body. Blessing, honor, glory and praise be to thee, O
Father of mercies, for all those great instruments of the holy Ghost, the
illustrious Ministers of thy grace, the Ambassadors for Christ, and the blessed
Champions of his holy Truth, who have communicated the light of thy glorious
Gospel to the world, and overcome the kingdom of darkness, by the blood of the
Lamb, Rev. 12.11.
and the word of their testimony, not loving their lives unto the death.

Adored be the mightiness of that Grace, Psalm. 8.2.
which out of the mouths of babes and sucklings ordained strength. Glory be to
thee, O Christ, 2 Cor. 2.9.
whose strength was made perfect in weakness. Glory be unto thee, who did
commit this heavenly treasure unto earthen vessels; 2 Cor. 4.7.
who approved themselves the ministers of God in much patience, 6.4,5.
in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments,
in tossings to and fro, in labors, in watchings, in fastings, that the
excellency of the power might be of God and not of men. I heartily submit to
the power of that Divine Truth, for which they suffered the loss of all things,
Phil. 3.8.
and counted them but dung that they might win Christ, and be found in him. And
I rejoice that thou have had so many faithful servants who have loved thee, O
Lord thou lover of souls, more than their own lives; most earnestly desiring to
be inspired with the very same spirit which was in them, that I may leave some
example, though never so small, of hearty and universal obedience, to those
that shall come after.

Accept, good Lord, of my sincere resolution to be a follower of them, even as
they were of Christ, in pureness, in knowledge, in long-suffering, in kindness,
1 Cor. 11.1.
in love unfeigned: That my rejoicing may be this, 2 Cor. 6.6,7.
the testimony of my conscience, 2 Cor. 1.12.
that in simplicity and godly sincerity, 8.21.
not with fleshly wisdom, but by thy grace, I have had my conversation in the
world; 1.5.
providing for honest things, not only in the sight of our Lord, but also in
the sight of all men. Make me constant and courageous in the profession of thy
holy Truth; and to be willing to pass through honor or dishonor, through good
report, or evil report; for the Lords sake, hoping that if the sufferings of
Christ abound in me, my consolation also shall abound by Christ. Stir me up, I
beseech thee, and quicken me that I may show the same diligence that thy Saints
have done, to the full assurance of hope unto the end; that I may not be
slothful, Heb. 6.11,12.
but a follower of them who through faith and patience inherited the promises.
2.3,4,5.
How shall I escape if I neglect so great salvation, which at first began to be
spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed by them that heard him, God also bearing
them witness with signs and wonders, and with diverse miracles of the holy
Ghost, according to his own will? O continue the mighty assistance of that
divine power with me, that behaving my self so holily, justly and unblameably
as they did, 1 Thessalonians. 2.10.
I may rest at last together with them, 2.1,7,9.
when our Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels, to
be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them that believe.

And now preserve me this day from dishonouring tha^ worthy name, Jam. 2.7.
whereby w^ are called; knowing how we ought to follow them, 2 Thessalonians. 3.7,13.
who behaved not themselves disorderly among those that believed. That by this
rest from my ordinary labors, I may not learn idleness, nor grow weary of well
doing; but be better disposed in my mind by all the refreshments of my body, to
do my duty in the place and relations wherein thou have set me, with greater
cheerfulness, fidelity and diligence to the end of my days. O that it may be my
highest pleasure to attend on thee and praise thee in the assemblies of thy
Saints. Give me such a sensible delight and joy in reading and meditating of
thy holy Word, and in the remembrance of all thy mercies, that nothing in this
world may make me forget the sweetness of it: but every thing may excite me
more to praise, extol and magnify thy loving kindness to me; and to express my
thankfulness in a free and ready obedience to thy commands; till I be made fit
to be admitted into the company of the blessed, there to praise thee world
without end. Amen.

A PRAYER Upon the day of ones BIRTH.
O Most mighty Lord, the Former and Preserver of all things: All thy works
praise thee, and do declare thy infinite greatness, wisdom and bounty; and do
call upon us likewise to magnify thy Name with our continual praises and
thanksgivings. I humbly bow my self before thy glorious Majesty who inhabitest
eternity; acknowledging that it is but a little time since I was not; and that
I am not gone down again into silence is to be ascribed only to thy Omnipotent
goodness, which brought me into being, to praise the^ among the rest of thy
creatures.

I thank thee, O Lord, by whom I was fearfully and wonderfully made, Psalm.
139.14,15.
and curiously wrought in my mothers womb. 22.9.
Thou art he that took me thence; thou did make me hope when I was upon my
mothers breast. 71.6.
By thee I have been holden up ever since; and most carefully provided for,
when I could not think at all of thy tender mercies toward me. And therefore
now that I am grown to the use of my reason, my praise ought to be continually
of thee. O bless the Lord, my soul, 103.1,2.
and all that is within me bless his holy Name. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and
forget not all his benefits. While I live will I praise the Lord; Psalm. 146.2.
I will sing praises to my God while I have any being. Pardon, I beseech thee,
my ingratitude, in that I l^e no earlier remembered thee my Creator, in whom I
live and move, and who give me all things richly to enjoy. Accept of my
unfeigned resolutions to preserve hereafter a more grateful sense of thy great
goodness to me, and to glorify thee with my body and with my spirit, which are
thine. Vouchsafe me the assistance of thy heavenly grace, that I may return
them back unto thee pure and undefiled; full of wisdom and spiritual
understanding; full of love and devout affection to thee; full of all good
works and the fruits of righteousness, Ephesians. 2.10.
to which thou have created me again by Christ Jesus, that I should walk in
them.

Blessed be thy Name, who have sent him to give me a new and better life. I
thank thee for all the helps and comforts of his Religion. O that my heart may
be possessed with such a strong belief of it, and such a sincere love to it,
that I may feel indeed that I am born again and made a new creature: meditating
daily of thy mercies; breathing forth my soul to thee, in prayers, and praises,
and thanksgivings; walking in the Spirit of goodness, righteousness and truth;
Ephesians. 5.9.
and proving what is acceptable to our Lord. All the thanks and services, I
acknowledge; that I am able to render to thee, are nothing worth: but the
longer I live, I most earnestly desire the more hearty, and the purer they may
be; and the more I may be enabled to do for thy honor and glory. If thou
suffer me to continue in this life another year, O that in the conclusion of
it, I may present my self unto thee again more improved in all that is praise
worthy. The time past is too much to have misspent; O that I may suffer no
more of my precious hours to run waste, but that they may all be taken up, and
carefully laid out in well doing. Help me diligently to husband so great a
treasure, which thou intrustest me withal, and to employ it in order to a
blessed Eternity. Let not the cares of this world, and the deceitfulness of
riches, Mark 4.19.
and the lusts of other things entering in, choke those good seeds which thou
have sown in my heart, so that they become unfruitful: but enable me as I grow
in years to increase also in love, joy, peace, long-suffering, Gal. 5.21.
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, and all other fruits of thy
holy Spirit.

And since I have been thy care so long, I will still hope in thee continually,
Psalm. 71.14.
that I shall yet praise thee more and more. 9.17.
Cast me not off if I live to the time of old age, forsake me not when my
strength fails. O God, thou have taught me from my youth, and hitherto I have
declared thy wondrous works. Hold me up still, Psalm. 119.117,133.
and I shall be safe. Order my steps in thy word: and let not any iniquity have
dominion over me. That so if the evil days come, and the years draw nigh,
Eccles. 12.1.
when I shall say, I have no pleasure in them; 7.1.
I may rejoice in the remembrance of a well-spent life, and, having a good hope
in thee, the day of my death, may be better than the day of my birth. O that
death may never surprise me, nor find me unprepared. Help me to walk always so
circumspectly, and to be so mindful of my latter end, that when death comes it
may be no stranger to me; but I may entertain it as an acquaintance, and a
friend: and with the same cheerfulness put off my body, and lay it down in the
grave, that I put off my clothes and lay my self down in my bed. I commit my
self entirely to thee, both now and ever; waiting for thy mercy in Christ
Jesus, at that great Day, when thou shall awake us out of the dust. O that I
may then be numbered among the Just, and stand at the right hand of my Savior,
and hear that joyful voice, Come ye blessed of my Father, Matthew. 25.34.
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. Amen.

THat we may be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
here follow particular Prayers for that grace; and, in case of any failing in
our duty, for repentance, and pardon, and an heart sensible of the divine
goodness, and more considerate and careful for the time to come.

A PRAYER FOR RESOLVTION IN WELL DOING.
O Most blessed God, the fountain of wisdom, power, strength, and all other
perfections: from whose bounty I have formerly received, and at present enjoy
innumerable blessings; and have no hope for the future, but what arises from
the same everlasting spring of all good, which is never weary of deriving its
benefits unto us. I ought in a sense of my entire dependence upon thee, to be
very humble; very thankful; exceeding solicitous for thy favor, and desirous
of thy good will; sorrowful for my neglects of thee; ashamed of the pitiful
returns I have made to thee; and most peremptorily resolved, and zealously bent
to approve my self hereafter to thy Divine Majesty, in all well doing.

Accordingly I am now prostrate before thee, to implore the continued powerful
presence of that infinite grace, to which I owe these holy thoughts that are in
my mind, and by which alone I can hope to perform and accomplish them. Possess
me, O God, with such a full and lively sense of thy undeserved and unwearied
love and kindness to me, in passing by so much ingratitude, and so many
transgressions; in laying on me such strong and manifold obligations to be
happy by obeying thee, and in affording me such powerful assistances to attain
that happiness; that I may love thee proportinably with a more constant and
steadfast affection, and feel an unalterable will settled in me, to do the duty
thou requirest of me; into whatsoever state and condition of life, thou shall
be pleased to dispose me.

When we have loved thee all that we can, I am sensible we have loved thee but
a little; because we, and all that we can do are so inconsiderable. How small a
thing then is it, how poor and contemptible, that we return unto thee; when we
love thee not so much as we are able! O blessed God, cause such a delightful
sense of thy goodness to fall upon my heart, and to abide with me, that all the
powers of my soul may strain themselves to love thee, and unite themselves unto
thee, in an unalterable choice of thy Will, to be the sole governor of all my
designs, and desires, and actions throughout the whole course of my life. I
love my self most, I see, when I love thee entirely: and serve my self, by
doing thee all faithful service. In union with thee I am at rest and peace; and
in constant adherence to thee consists my eternal safety and security. To thee
therefore, with the deliberate and full consent of my will, I devote my self;
resolving to love and serve thee, with all my heart, and with all my soul, and
with all my strength. I vow unto thee, as I have done often, all sincere
obedience; and protest against every thing that is contrary to thy holy
commands, as contrary also to my own sense and judgment, to my most sober and
serious thoughts, and to my most advised counsels and resolutions. They all
acknowledge how just and reasonable, how good and pleasant, how profitable and
beneficial, how honorable and glorious it is to be a doer of thy Will, which,
besides the present contentment and satisfaction of it, has a great recompense
of reward. O preserve in my mind a constant remembrance, how dearly I am bought
by the precious blood of thy Son Christ; how early I was dedicated to thy
service; how often I have since found abundant cause to determine I would be
thine; how I have condemned my self for the breach of those holy purposes, and
what great satisfaction of mind I have had in the keeping of thy Commandments:
That so I may never wilfully offend against so many forcible reasons obliging
me to my duty; but be swayed by them, notwithstanding all the temptations of
the world, the flesh or the devil, to persevere in a resolved obedience to thee
for ever. And by the power of thy holy Spirit, I beseech thee to make them
clearer, stronger and more effectual; that I may have the same thoughts,
passions, inclinations and purposes now, which I shall be apt to have when I
come to dye. For which end, help me often to place my self before thy Judgment
Seat, and to consider that I must give an account for all that I have received;
for thy holy Gospel; for thy divine inspirations, for the counsels and
exhortations of thy Ministers, for all the means and helps of growing better,
and for all the encouragements I have even from the good things of this life,
which thy bounty bestows upon me. That by a careful preparation for such a
reckoning, I may be kept close and steadfast to my duty; in hope of that
exceeding glorious reward, which our Lord will bestow upon all his faithful
servants, at the day of his appearing. Amen.

Another to the same effect.
O Most great and glorious Majesty of heaven and earth: who art of unspotted
purity, and in whom there is not the least shadow of change. I know that all
the resolutions of thy Wisdom are most just and equal; and I cannot choose, when
I am in my right mind, to be guided by any thing else, but thy holy Will: who
designest, I see, in all the revelations thou have made of thy self to us, to
make us like to thy own, most blessed, Nature. I do here own and acknowledge
most heartily the righteousness and goodness of all thy Laws; I admire the
loveliness of thy Image, in wisdom, righteousness and true holiness; I loath my
own deformity whilst I am unlike to thee; I implore thy renewing grace as the
greatest blessing I can receive from thee; and I bind my self to the faithful
improvement of it, as the weightiest employment of my life.

I am abundantly satisfied in the declaration thou have made of thy gracious
purposes toward us. I renounce all thoughts and desires that are contrary
thereunto; and resolve that holiness and eternal life shall be my design and
study. I expect no pardon, O my God, but in ways of sobriety, righteousness and
godliness. I hope for a blessed immortality, only by patient continuance in
well doing. I consent to every part of thy holy Gospel: and add my testimony to
the truth of its words, that none of thy commandments are grievous; but thy
yoke is easy, and thy burden light. I hope, O Lord, by thy grace I shall never
contradict my self, by disowning in my practice, these free and serious
professions: But that I shall every day so call to mind my own protestations
and resolutions, as to continue with an unwearied diligence in steadfast
obedience to thy commands, and to grow still stronger in the grace of the Lord
Jesus.

O that every such address as this unto thy Divine Majesty, may leave a greater
sense of thee, and of my duty, and of my happiness, and of my manifold
obligations, and repeated promises, upon my heart. That I may always go out of
thy presence with my mind more toward heaven; with lower thoughts of all the
enjoyments of this life; with a greater relish of piety and holiness; and more
passionate desires to become every way such as thou can approve, and love and
delight in for ever. And assist me, I humbly beseech thee, so constantly from
above, that whatsoever good thoughts are at any time in my mind, they may grow
to fixed principles: and all heavenly affections may become a new nature, and
the constant temper of my spirit: and all my purposes and resolutions may
advance into a serious practice and exercise of godliness: and all the actions
of an holy life may grow more free, cheerful, vigorous, and full of delight,
till they be completed in everlasting bliss, through Christ Jesus. Amen.

A PRAYER After RELAPSE Into any SIN.
I Cast down my self before thee, O most holy Lord of heaven and earth, with an
humble sorrowful and penitent heart, adoring thy infinite grace which suffers
such a vile and miserable sinner to approach into thy presence. I am thine
indeed, dedicated long ago to thy service, which I have since chosen, as the
most perfect freedom: But so much the greater reason I have to be abashed
before thee, and to be astonished at thy forbearing mercy; which prolongs the
life of such an one as I am, who have been so false to thee, and to my own
resolutions. I remember, in the bitterness of my soul, how many obligations
thou have laid upon me to observe and obey thee; how often I have acknowledged
the justice and goodness of thy Precepts; and how frequently I have promised
and vowed to conform my self unto them; and what great and precious promises
thou have made to me of invaluable blessings: And yet, wretch that I am, I have
been drawn aside from thy ways by easy and slight temptations; and for a small
and momentary pleasure or gain, Here mention the particular sin.
have ventured the loss of thy favor, which is better than life it self.

O God, that thou should have patience with so perfidious, so ungrateful, so
senseless a creature as I am! That thou should permit me to see the light of
the Sun, and have not condemned me to utter darkness, in weeping, wailing and
gnashing of teeth! But that thou give me leave to look toward heaven, and
that I have any heart to speak unto thee, and still may call thee, Father,
saying, Father, I have sinned against thee, and am no more worthy to be called
thy son; O the riches! O the unsearchable riches of thy grace! I can never
sufficiently admire thy exceeding great long-suffering toward me in Christ
Jesus. Nor sufficiently abhor and loath my self for my foul revolt from thee,
who art so kind and gracious: especially if I should still continue to abuse
such tender mercy and compassion toward me. Tribulation and anguish,
indignation and wrath, I acknowledge is the due portion of those that do evil:
and if thou should abandon me, and cast me out of thy sight, I must confess
that thou art righteous, and that I reap but the fruit of my own ways, and
suffer the deserved punishment of my late iniquity.

But thou, O God, delightest in mercy, and there is forgiveness with thee, that
thou may be ^eared. Psalm. 130.4.
Thou have sworn that thou desire not ^he death of a sinner; Ezekiel. 18.32.
^ut rather that he should return and ^ve: And have sent thy Son Jesus, ^ith
the most indearing arguments ^f the greatest love, to persuade us ^o return
unto our duty. Behold, O Lord, I return; with grief and ^ffliction of spirit
that I have offend^d thee: detesting the thoughts of ^oing the like again, and
resolving ^o be more careful, and diligent, and ^rcumspect for the time to
come. ^ let me live to the praise of thy ^mnipotent Grace, inabling me to
^erform these resolutions in a more ^rict and exact obedience to thy ho^
commands, the rest of my days. ^ercy, mercy, I most earnestly beg, ^ Father of
mercies, for the sake of him that dyed for me; not merely for the pardon of my
sins, but for a Divine Power to enable me to subdue them. I desire not thy
infinite goodness to bear me out in rebellion against thy righteousness, purity
and truth; but that by thy goodness I may be partaker of them; that my
repentance may be accepted; and that it may be hearty and steadfast, never to be
repented of. I desire no peace, quiet and ease in my heart, but in a constant
and resolute opposition of all the temptation of the world, the flesh and the
devil; and in the hope I have, tha^ through thy gracious assistance i^ shall be
victorious.

O settle me, I beseech thee, in thi^ holy disposition, that I may preserv^ an
entire friendship with thee here^ after, by an happy agreement wit^ thy will
and pleasure in every thing* And for that end mak^ me strong in the Lord,
Ephesians. 6.10.
an^ in the power of his might: That b^ing sensible of my own great weakness, I
may more earnestly depend upon thy aid from above, by an humble and vigorous
faith in thy Almighty goodness. Maintain such a clear light in my mind, that
may keep me from being deceived with the vain shadows and empty appearances of
satisfactory pleasure in any thing of this world. Fortify my will with the
power of thy Divine love, that may overcome all sensual affections that arise
in me at any time against thy sacred commands. And possess me with such a
lively hope of those good things which Christ has promised in the other life,
that may make me active and zealous, steadfast and unmovable, ^lways abounding
in the work of the Lord, knowing that my labor shall ^ot be in vain in the
Lord.

Thou know the secrets of all ^earts; let thy mercy, O Lord, be upon me,
according as I deliberately and sincerely choose to cleave unto thee with
purpose of heart. Act. 11.23.
Psalm. 51.9,10,11.
O cast me not away from thy presence; and take not thy holy Spirit from me.
But hide thy face from my sins; Psalm. 119.80.
and blot out all mine iniquities. Psalm. 19.13,14.
Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a constant spirit in me. Make my
heart to be sound in thy Statutes, that I may never be ashamed. Keep back thy
servant also from presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion over me. Then
shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from the great transgression: The
words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart shall be accepted in thy
sight, O Lord my strength, and my Redeemer. Amen, Amen.

A THANKSGIVING To the DIVINE GOODNESS For any hope of a PARDON After such
RELAPSE.
O Eternally most blessed God, the Fountain of all good; from whence all
creatures derive whatsoever they enjoy. They are all poor and indigent things,
full of necessities and wants, which are continually supplied out of thy
fullness. But the wants of our souls are the most lamentable: because, besides
the poverty of creatures, we have made a great many needs to our selves by our
wilful departure from thee, in whom we live, and move, and have our being. We
stand in need of thy Pardon, of thy converting grace, and the greater supplies
of thy holy Spirit: which we know not how with any confidence to expect, but
that all these wants are not too big for thy infinite goodness to relieve; and
that thou have been pleased most compassionately to consider our miserable
condition, in sending Christ Jesus into the world, and filling him with all the
treasures of thy grace and mercy, that he might dispense them to us, according
to our several necessities.

O how excellent is thy loving kindness, O God! How surpassing is thy love!
that will pass by the insolent offenses of thy creatures against thy high
authority, and Sovereign goodness; and not let them eternally perish without a
remedy in that forlorn condition into which they have brought themselves ^
Blessed, for ever blessed be thy sparing Mercy; which has delivered Christ
Jesus for our offenses; and testified thy acceptance of his Sacrifice of
himself, by raising him again for our justification. Blessed by thy name, for
the gracious declaration which thou have made, that if any man sin, we have an
advocate with thee, 1 John 2.1,2.
Christ Jesus the righteous, who is the propitiation for our sins. I most
thankfully receive these glad tidings, which are worthy of all acceptance, 1 Timothy 1.15.
that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. Thanks be to thy tender
mercy, which has restored us to a possibility of recovering thy grace and
favor. The smallest hope of it, I acknowledge, is more valuable than the
greatest abundance of all the enjoyments and pleasures of this present life.
What praise therefore, what love, what obedience am I bound to render unto
thee, who have given me such a good hope of peace and reconciliation with thee;
and thereby delivered me from the horror of my own guilty mind, remembering that
I have adventured to oppose my will to thine? I ought for ever, with the most
zealous devotion of a grateful and obedient heart, to admire and stand amazed
at thy inconceiveable Grace, which will not strictly mark what is done amiss;
but accept of our repentance and amendment, in stead of an entire and constant
performance of our duty to thee. O the height, the depth, the length and the
breadth of thy love in Christ Jesus! which is the satisfaction of our heart,
and the joy of our lives; which would otherwise be intolerably grievous and
burdensome to us, whilst we remember that we are sinners.

Fill me, O Lord, with a most ardent love to thee, now that I here offer up my
self, in truth and sincerity of heart, to be wholly disposed by thee. Behold, O
Lord, my will lies at thy feet: I would have no will of my own; but desire only
that thy will may be done. And fill me with an holy fear of thee, that thy
indulgent mercy may not make me remiss, and negligent, and presumptous again to
offend thee: But a perpetual sense of my new obligations to thee, in reviving
my hopes, which I had forfeited in thee, may render me more watchful, more
diligent, more earnest and solicitous, more humble and distrustful of my self,
and more fervent to implore the powerful succors of thy divine Grace. O that
it may be as natural to me to pray to thee, as it is to breath. And thou who
fillest the hungry with good things, pour into me life, and strength and vigor;
in a constant dependence on thee, and an hearty endeavor to do thy will.
Ephesians. 3.16.
Strengthen me with might, by thy spirit in the ^inner man: That
notwithstanding the strongest temptations wherewith I may be assaulted, and
notwithstanding the weakness and feebleness of my own spirit to resist them, I
may persevere courageously in well doing unto the end; and finish my course
with joy; and lay my self down to rest in an holy hope, that I shall enter into
a state of safety and security from all danger, and remain for ever in the joy
of our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for the Divine Grace.
O Most blessed God, the high and mighty One, who inhabitest eternity; and art,
what thou always wast, and ever wilt be, the mos^ perfect power, wisdom,
goodnes^ and truth; the fountain of all the perfections that are in us. We
ough^ to address our selves to thee in the greatest humility of spirit: having
nothing to present thee withal which we can call our own; and being unable by
all our righteousness to profit thee, who stand in need of none of thy
creatures. But alas! O Lord, we have robbed thee of that which we have received
from thee; and are so far from giving thee any thing of ours, that we have not
returned to thee that which is thine. O the miserable condition therefore into
which we have brought our selves! who are not so much as fit to receive any
more from thy divine bounty; and, which is worse, have been too unwilling to
partake of thy favors! O thy infinite love in Christ Jesus, which has
bestowed the richest grace upon us, whether we would or ^o! Thou have honored
our nature with thy divine presence, dwel^ing in it. Thou have delivered him ^o
dye for our sins. Thou have given us (...) blessed hope in thee, by his
Resur^ection from the dead. Thou have ^nt him to bless us, in turning every one
of us from our iniquities: Act. 3.26.
And given him all power in heaven and earth; that he may succor and
strengthen us when we are tempted, and enable us to overcome.

I thank thee, with all my soul, for this abundant grace, so freely and
undesired, conferred upon us. Which incourages me to hope in thee, now that
thou inclinest my heart toward thee, and have given me a thankful sense of thy
love, and some will to obey thee, and holy resolutions to cleave unto thee in
well doing; that thou will not deny me the constant assistance of that good
Spirit which our Savior has bid us ask of thee; to strengthen, confirm and
settle what thou have begun to do for me, in a perfect love and steadfast
obedience to all thy holy commands. O God of all grace and might, the root of
our life, and power and strength; without whom all good desires and purposes
wither and die: withdraw not the sweet influences of thy holy Spirit from thy
unworthy servant, who entirely confides in thee, and has no hope but in thy
infinite Mercies. Remember not against me former iniquities; let not my late
backsliding and return to folly, cut me off from the communication of thy
grace: which is wont to press into those souls that open themselves to receive
it, and seriously thirst after it. My soul thirsts for thee, O God; that I
may be more firmly united to thee, and be made more exactly like thee, in
unchangeable righteousness, purity and goodness.

Cherish and increase the most faint but sincere motions, which thou see in
me, toward a more complete participation of thee. And especially preserve in
me a full confidence in thy Almighty Love, as ready to accomplish the desires
and endeavors of all those, who yield up themselves unto it, in hearty
willingness to be governed by it. That being born up by this strong hope in
thee, my helper, and exceeding great reward, no temptation may be able to
prevail over me: but I may walk steadfastly and evenly with thee, in all
conditions and circumstances of life. Make me feel so much of the comfort of
this faith and love, and hope and obedience, reviving me to a delightful sense
of a blessed immortality; that whatsoever allurements or discouragements I meet
withal in this world, they may only provoke me to give a greater proof of all
these in a constant adherence to my duty; and occasion the increase of my
unspeakable joy and satisfaction.

And enlarge my heart thereby to such a measure of Christian piety, that I may
not only be innocent and harmless, but forward also to do good; and not only be
contented with my portion, but rejoice in our Lord always: and rejoice not only
to do thy will, but to suffer also for righteousness sake; knowing that great
shall be my reward in heaven. Bless my endeavors to add to faith, virtue; and
to virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance,
patience; 2 Pet. 1.5,6,7,10,11.
and to patience, godliness; and to godliness, brotherly kindness; and to
brotherly kindness, charity: That, doing these things, I may never fall; But an
entrance may be ministered to me abundantly, into the everlasting kingdom of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

A short Prayer when any man's occasions call him to a place where he fears
danger.
O Almighty God; who art every where, and more especially present to those
souls that look up unto thee, with an high esteem of thy favor and grace, and
with hearty desires to continue in thy love by patient continuance in well
doing. In this humble faith in thy Divine goodness, and with a due fear and
reverence of thy glorious Majesty, I prostrate my soul and body before thee; to
put my self into thy most gracious protection, and to beg the powerful
assistance of thy holy Spirit, to preserve me wheresoever I am, in a dutiful
observance of all thy holy commands.

I am sensible, O Lord, that we live in a world of temptations, and that our
nature is weak, and ready to yield to them; and that our affections are apt to
wander after vanity, and that sudden passions oftentimes transport us from our
duty. But I know withal that a sense of thy all-seeing eye, and of the life to
come, and of the rewards and punishments which thou will render according to
our works; will certainly overawe all sinful motions in me, and break the force
of the strongest temptations that assault me. And therefore the greater the
danger is, the more earnestly I sue unto thee, to be possessed with a piercing
sense, and lively remembrance of these things, which may abide with me always;
and especially this day, in every place and company into which I shall come. O
that I may not be so forgetful of thee, and of my own good, as for the small
and momentany pleasures of this world, to hazard the loss of those great and
eternal joys, which we expect in the other life. But enable me, O most gracious
God, so to behave my self, that when I have passed through all the employments
and occasions of this day, I may bring my self back again into thy presence, so
pure and undefiled; that I may begin those joys which are to come, in cheerful
praises of thee; and in a comfortable sense that thou dwell in me, and art
leading me by thy holy Spirit to immortal happiness, through Christ Jesus. Amen.

A Prayer for serious and effectual Consideration; the better to establish all
good resolutions.
O Most glorious Majesty of heaven and earth: who art above the highest of all
our thoughts, and much more beyond all our words. But that thou art great and
mighty, we know by thy works of wonder which we behold. And the admirable
disposure and government of all things tell us, that thou art infinitely wise
and know all things. We see how good thou art, by the large provision which
thou have made for all thy creatures, every where. Thy Precepts teach us how
just and holy thou art; and by thy Promises we know that thou art gracious and
bountiful; and by thy Threatenings that thou hate iniquity; and by thy
executing of both, that thou art faithful and true, and wilt save the godly and
punish evil doers.

When we consider all this, we may justly wonder at our selves, that we should
not fear thee, and reverence thee, and love thee, and seek thy love and favor
above all things; by studying to please thee in universal obedience to thy
blessed will; which designs to employ thy Almighty Power to make us so great,
so happy, and so glorious. And there is no other reason, I see, why we are no
better affected toward thee, but because our thoughts are exceeding short, and
light and vain; and we so seldom consider and deeply ponder, what, we confess,
thou art, and in what relation we stand to thy Divine Majesty. Vouchsafe
therefore, O God of all grace, to awaken my mind to a more lively and steadfast
remembrance of thee, my Creator, my Redeemer, my daily Benefactor, and my most
loving and tenderhearted Father, in Christ Jesus. O that no day may pass
without some serious and considerate thoughts of those things, which so nearly
concern my everlasting welfare. And by thy powerful presence with me, inlighten
my mind to a clearer sense of them. Quicken and inliven that sense, I humbly
beseech thee, and make it so strong and moving; that it may press upon my heart
and affections, till it overcome me to surrender soul and body absolutely unto
thee.

Pardon all my former neglects of thee; and let them not hinder the influences
of thy holy Spirit upon me, by which I may be changed into thy image and
likeness. Sanctify my understanding, that I may rightly conceive thy holy
Truths, and fully apprehend them. Sanctify my memory, that I may keep in mind
all that I know of thee, and of thy blessed will revealed to us in Christ
Jesus. Sanctify my will, that I may cheerfully embrace, and entirely consent
to thine, in all things. And sanctify all my affections, that I may love thee
with all my heart, and soul, and strength; and delight in thee more, than in
all the contentments of this life; and hope more for thy glory, than all
worldly preferments; and fear thee more than the greatest potentate upon earth;
and take more care for my soul and eternal things, than for this body and all
its momentany pleasures; and hate all sin, more than my greatest enemies: yea,
help me to love mine enemies; to do good to them that do evil to me; to bless
them that curse me, and pray for them that despightfully use me. For which end,
sanctify all my Passions; that I may be angry at nothing so much, as that I
have displeased thee; and in an holy indignation at my self, and in revenge of
my former negligence and disobedience, may be more strict and severe in the
performance of all my duty for the time to come. Sanctify me throughout in
body as well as spirit; that I may possess it in holiness and honor: and all
my senses may administer occasions to my mind, to remember thee, to praise
thee, and to bless thee, who every way so liberally providest for me. Sanctify
all my conversation with others, and all the employments of this life; that I
may still be heavenly minded, and have a respect to my last end, and
everlasting good. Sanctify all the blessings of health, and strength, and
peace, and plenty, and friends: yea, and all the crosses and afflictions of
this life; that they may make me more serious and considerate, and help more
perfectly to purify my spirit, and dispose me for the happiness of the other
world.

Raise me, O Lord, to such an exceeding great delight in these holy thoughts
and meditations; and entertain me with such a blissful sense of thee, when I
address my self unto thee: that I may rather be unwilling to depart from thy
presence, than weary of conversing with thee. And when I return to my other
employments again, O that my mind may be often looking back toward thee, my
God, my exceeding joy; desirous to be always with thee, and longing to enjoy
thee in unchangeable love, and perfect likeness to thee: Unto which I most
humbly beseech thee to bring me, for thy mercies sake declared in Christ Jesus,
who lives for ever to make intercession for us. Amen.

THe better to preserve a constant sense of God in the mind, and pious
dispositions in the heart: Here follow certain short Ejaculations (as we are
wont to call them) in which, upon several occasions, any man may lift up his
soul to God: And if he do it fervently, may find it of great effect.

EJACVLATIONS.
When he awakes in the morning, he may say, I Laid me down and slept; I awaked,
for the Lord sustained me, Psalm. 3.5. How precious also are thy thoughts unto
me, O God? how great is the sum of them? If I would count them; they are more
in number than the sand: when I awake, I am still with thee, Psalm. 139.17,18.

When he is dressing himself. O how bountiful is the ornament of a pure,
humble, meek, patient and charitable spirit! Help me, O God, to put on the Lord
Jesus, in these and all other virtues.

When he goes into the Church, or his Closet. My heart is fixed, O God, my
heart is fixed: I will sing and give praise, Psalm. 57.7.

When he begins any business. My help comes from the Lord, which ^ade heaven
and earth, Psalm. 121.2. The Lord Jesus Christ be with my spirit, 2. Tim. 4.22.

When he goes forth of his doors. Hold thou up my goings in thy paths, that my
footsteps slip not, Psalm. 17.5. Order my steps in thy word: and let not any
iniquity have dominion over me, 119.133. Give thy angels charge over me, to
keep me in all my ways, 91.11.

When he walks abroad and beholds all things round about him, he may say as it
is Psalm. 104.24. O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made
them all: the earth is full of thy riches, etc.

At Meals. O taste and see that the Lord is good. He fills our hearts with
food and gladness, Psalm. 24.8. Act. 14.17. Blessed be the Lord, who daily
loadeth us with his benefits, Psalm. 68.19.

At Candlelight. Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us,
Psalm. 4.6. Or, God be merciful unto us and bless us, and cause his face to
shine upon us, 67.1.

When he goes to bed. I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep: for thou,
Lord, only make me dwell in safety, Psalm. 4.8. He that keeps me does not
slumber. The Lord is my keeper: the Lord is my defense, who neither slumbers,
nor sleeps, Psalm. 121.4,5.

In the Night season. O happy souls, that rest not day nor night, saying, Holy,
holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, which is, and is to come! Rev. 4.8. O
great God! the darkness hides not from thee; but the night shines as the day:
the darkness and the light are both alike to thee, Psalm. 139.12. My soul shall
be satisfied as with marrow and fatness; and my mouth shall praise thee with
joyful lips: when I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the
night watches. Because thou have been my help; therefore in the shadow of thy
wings will I rejoice, Psalm. 63.5,6,7.

On a sickbed, or in other affliction. It is the Lord: let him do what seems
him good, 1 Samuel 3.18. It is good that a man should both hope, and quietly wait
for the salvation of the Lord, Lam. 3.26. Blessed be the Lord for my long
continued health and all his other benefits. Let the remembrance of thy former
mercies refresh my soul, and encourage my hope, and strengthen my patience,
with quiet resignation of my self to thy good pleasure.

At the point of Death. I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord, Genesis 49.18.
Into thy hand, O Father, I commend my self, who breathedst into me the breath
of Life. Lord Jesus receive my spirit, which thou have redeemed by thy precious
blood, and sanctified by the holy Ghost.

When he hears a Passing Bell. Verily, every man at his best state is
altogether vanity, Psalm. 39.5. O teach me so to number my days, that I may
apply my heart unto wisdom, 90.12.

In a time of Plague. O Lord, correct us, but with judgment; not in thine
anger, lest thou bring us to nothing, Jer. 10.24.

In a time of War. O Lord, arise, help us and deliver us for thy names sake.
From our enemies defend us, O Christ. Graciously look upon our affliction.

King Asa cried unto God in this manner when he was going to give battle to a
million of enemies. Lord, it is nothing with thee to help, whether with many,
or with them that have no power. Help us, O Lord our God, for we rest on thee,
and in thy name go against this multitude, 2 Chronicles. 14.11.

In any other public Calamity. Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thy
heritage to reproach, Joel 2.17.

A great Offender may often say with the Prodigal, Father, I have sinned
against thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son. And with the
Publican, God be merciful to me a sinner.

After any mercy received. What shall I render unto the Lord, for all the
benefits that he has done unto me? Psalm. 116.12. Every day will I give thanks
unto thee, and praise thy name for ever and ever, 145.1.

I shall mention no more, because I would not invite the Reader to make this
sort of Prayer too common. For by that means, it will be in danger to grow
cold, and lose its force and efficacy, by growing fashionable. To that purpose
I remember a devout Prelate of our own (Bishop Hall) somewhere delivers his
judgment about this matter. But if any one find that he can with profit turn
his thoughts this way, upon all occasions; he may easily invent more
Ejaculations. The measure of them is, (as that forenamed person speaks) to
preserve our hearts in a constant tender and godly disposition; which shall be
further actuated upon all opportunites, by the exercise of our more enlarged
and fixed devotions.

A Prayer for Submission to God, in case of any great loss in a man's Estate,
Relations or Friends.
O Most Holy, holy, holy; the Supreme Lord and Governor of the world: who are
unsearchable in thy Wisdom, unspot^ed in thy Justice, and irresistible in ^hy
Power: whose goodness has no ^ounds, but what thy wise and holy Will gives
unto it; and art immu^able in these and all other perfections, the great God,
most blessed for ever. It is most reasonable and agreeable to our nature, most
profitable and convenient to our interest, most satisfactory and suitable to
our wisest choice, by an absolute and ^uiet submission in all things to thy
^overaign Wisdom, Justice and Goodness, to declare our fear and reverence of
thee; our unfeigned love to thee, and desires to please thee; our trust and
confidence in thee; and ready disposition to obey thee.

Thou art too great, I know, to delight in grieving us thy poor creatures; and
have other ways of procuring thy own pleasure, than by our misery, pain and
torment. And therefore in a full persuasion of thy unerring providence over us,
and infinite Charity toward us, I here most humbly and freely resign all my
thoughts and desires unto thee: submitting my self entirely to thy Orders, and
resolving by thy gracious assistance to rest contented with whatsoever thou
appointest. The Lord gave, Job. 1.21.
and the Lord has taken away; blessed be the Name of the Lord. Blessed b^ thy
name, who have continued to me so long, the enjoyment of so many good things.
Blessed be thy name^ that I had any thing to part withal whereby I may testify
my faith in thee, and affection to thee. Blessed be thy name, that I have any
of the comforts of this life still remaining, and that they are not all taken
away from me. I have nothing too great, or too dear to be resigned to thee:
from whose bounty I received all I have; and who art my best, and my eternal
friend.

O that no repining thoughts may arise in my heart, to disorder and discompose
my duty toward thee, or toward my neighbor. But help me rather to think
wherein I have offended thee, and carefully to amend it; to place my affections
more steadfastly on those unmovable things which are above; to lay up my
treasure and hope in heaven; and to prepare my self, by perfecting my purity,
and thankfulness, and pa^ience, and all other virtues, to be translated
thither, where our life is ^id in thee with Christ Jesus. I ^hank thee, O
Father of Mercies, that thou have given us such everlasting consolation,
through thy Grace, in him. Every day will I bless thee, and I will praise thy
name for ever and ever; for those exceeding great and precious promises which
thou have given us to support and comfort us, in all the troubles of this life.
Increase my faith; strengthen and confirm my hope; lift up my spirit
continually to that blessed place where Jesus is: that I may rejoice in hope of
that immortal life, when all tears shall be wiped from our eyes, and there
shall be no sighing nor sorrow any more; but we [ This clause to be used only
in the loss of Friends or Relations.
who are now parted asunder] shall meet together to acknowledge, with eternal
praises, thy wise and merciful providence, which by ways most contrary to our
desires has brought us to endless and undisturbed bliss.

Thou know; O Lord, the weakness and frailty of our nature, and therefore
vouchsafe me the constant assistance of thy good Spirit, (for which I depend
upon thee) to enable me to continue in this humble, quiet and dutiful
submission to thee: waiting for that peaceable and joyful repose, in the
eternal rest which thou have prepared for thy people; through thy mercies in
Christ Jesus: By whom all glory, honor, love and obedience be rendered to thee,
by me and all mankind, both now and for ever. Amen.

A Prayer which a pious soul may use, that is full of doubts, and much troubled
in mind.
O Lord, 2 Cor. 1.3.
the Father of mercies and the God of all comfort. I acknowledge and adore thy
eternal Power, Wisdom and Goodness. I render thee my most hearty thanks for all
the benefits thou have freely bestowed on me, from my first coming into the
world until this time. Many, O Lord my God, are thy wonderful works which thou
have done, and thy thoughts, which are to us ward, they cannot be reckoned up
in order unto thee: Psalm. 40.5.
if I would declare and speak of them, they are more than can be numbered. Above
all I bless thee for that great demonstration of thy love and good will to
mankind by Christ Jesus, whom thou have sent into the world to save sinners:
and for bringing me to the clear knowledge of him, faith in him, and some love,
I hope, toward him, and unfeigned affection to thy holy will, declared to us
in his blessed Gospel.

O God, thou have taught me from my youth up, and hitherto been marvailously
gracious to me. Hide not, I beseech thee, thy face now from me; and put not thy
servant away in displeasure. Thou have been my help: leave me not, neither
forsake me, O God of my salvation. But, for Jesus Christ his sake, I humbly
entreat thee to pardon and pass by all my neglects of thee, and unthankfulness
to thee, and offenses against thee. And as I here sincerely devote and dedicate
my whole self, soul and body, to thy service; so help me, O my God, and further
me in the performance of my duty, by the grace of thy holy Spirit. To thee all
hearts are open, and from thee no secrets are hid: deal with me according to
the earnest desire and full purpose of my soul, to conform my self in all
things to thy holy Will.

Settle in me an unmovable faith in thy infinite Mercies, a constant love and
cheerful affection to my duty, and a readiness of heart to obey thee, and to
submit to thy wise appointments in every condition. The whole earth is full of
thy Mercy: thou openest thy hand and satisfiest the desire of every living
thing: O refuse not the humble desires of my poor soul, which gaspeth after
thee, even as the thirsty land. Thou who give to the Beasts their food, and
to the young Ravens when they cry; O satisfy me early with thy Mercies, that I
may rejoice and be glad all my days. Compose my broken and disturbed thoughts:
quiet my troubled and disordered spirit; and appease all the ragings and
tumults there, by a sweet sense of thy most tender mercies, which have been
ever of old, and endure continually. Banish from me all causless fears and
jealousies: deliver me from all unprofitable sadness and dejection of spirit:
keep me from rash judging of my self, and much more from charging thee
foolishly. Bestow upon me a cheerful spirit, by an humble hope in thee; and by
referring my self wholly to thee. Endue me with such wisdom and uprightness,
that I may neither neglect my duty, nor suspect thy gracious acceptance of me.
Give me an hearty zeal to do the best that I am able; and a settled persuasion
that thou requirest no more of me. Defend me, O my gracious God, from
dishonouring thee and my Religion; by distrusting thy goodness, and calling thy
loving kindness in question toward those, that are sincerely bent to please
thee. Remove all troublesome imaginations from me; and give me a clear
understanding of thee, and of my self. Or when I am in darkness and confusion
of thoughts, grant me so much light and judgment, as not to conclude my self
forsaken by thee, but to reflect upon thy long continued favors to me and many
deliverances of me; that so I may resolve still to hope in thee, to bear my
present trouble patiently, and to resign my will absolutely to thy good
pleasure. And, good Lord, enable me to look beyond these clouds, to that
blessed state whither my Savior is gone; in which there is no darkness at all:
and in an humble hope of coming to the same place where he is, to content my
self with any condition whilst I am here, so far remote from that Region of
light and glory.

Hear me, most loving and merciful Father, I most humbly beseech thee. Pity my
great dullness and deadness of heart. Strengthen my weak and feeble endeavors.
Support my fainting spirit; and cause it humbly to hope in thee for ever.
Confirm and establish every good thought, desire and purpose which thou have
wrought in me. Perfect that which thou have begun. Make me to grow in wisdom,
faith, love, and willing obedience. Conduct me hereafter so evenly and
steadily, so peaceably and quietly, so cheerfully and securely in thy ways;
that I may glorify thee whilst I live, by encouraging others to accompany me
in thy service. And when I come to dye, may resign my soul unto thee with an
undisturbed mind; and in an holy hope also of a joyful resurrection of the
body, at the great day of the Lord Jesus; to whom be glory and dominion for
ever. Amen.

A Prayer to be said by others for one that is troubled in mind.
O God, the only Hope, the Refuge, the Comfort and satisfaction of our souls:
Of whose Goodness and tender mercy all the world has so many testimonies, and
we our selves have had such long experience, that we are encouraged thereby,
though most unworthy, to make this humble address to thy Divine Majesty.

Thou see, we know, and pittiest the misery and torment of this afflicted
spirit; none of his Or her.
sighs or groanings are hid from thee: But to express also our charity and
compassionate concernment for him, we are bold to recommend him to thy favor,
as a great object of the bowels of thy mercy, which are in Christ Jesus.

We ought indeed, above all things, to admire thy most wise goodness, which
has set forth him to be a propitiation, Romans 3.25.
through faith in his blood; and invited even the greatest sinners to return
unto thee and live. Blessed, eternally blessed, be thy great and glorious
grace, which has sent us such glad tidings of peace and reconciliation, and
assured hope; that if we obediently believe thy holy Gospel, thou will be
merciful to our sins, and remember our iniquities no more. Heb. 8.12.
O Father of mercies, who openest the eyes of the blind, Psalm. 146.8.
and raisest them that are bowed down; open the eyes of this thy servant, that
he may see thy marvailous love revealed in Christ Jesus. Touch his spirit with
such a powerful sense of it, that he may both heartily and absolutely consent
to be governed by thy Laws, and likewise be revived with a comfortable belief
of the truth of all thy precious promises.

Free him from all confusion of thoughts, and bestow on him a clear and
distinct apprehension of all things belonging to his peace. And as thou have
wrought in him a fear of thy Divine Majesty, and many holy desires after thee;
and persuaded him, we hope, to be willing in all things to live godlily: So
possess him with an humble belief that thou will always enable him to do
accordingly; and never fail to strengthen him against all the power of the
enemy, till he has got the victory, and triumphs in hope of thy salvation.
Raise up his spirit, most mighty Lord, by the power of a most strong faith in
thine Omnipotent Goodness: which delights to cherish the least gaspings and
pantings in us after true righteousness. Bear him up by this above all the
clouds wherein he is encompassed, into a clear heaven of light and joy. Quiet
and appease all his tumultuous passions, that he may silently listen to thy
voice in thy holy Gospel, saying; Come unto me all ye that labor, Matthew. 11.28.
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Thou who searches^ the hearts,
know that he unfeignedly submits himself to the yoke o^ thy Laws. It is the
present grie^ and affliction of his soul, that he is no^ more perfectly subject
to it. O refresh him with the belief, that tho^ art more desirous than he that
ther^ should be a perfect reconciliation o^ his very nature and disposition t^
thee: and that therefore thou will n^ deny him the assistance of thy might^
grace to help him to fulfill thy whole good will and pleasure.

O that he may take courage from this hope to begin to do thy will; and
continuing in well doing, and growing more and more in strength and power to
perform his duty, he may be delivered from all slavish fears, and jealousies,
and distrust of thy divine goodness. Especially keep him from despair of thy
mercy, as the greatest dishonor to thee, and to thy abundant grace in the Lord
Jesus.

O thou who did invite even those great sinners, who by wicked hands took and
crucified thy dear Son, Act. 2.23,38.
to repent and be baptized for the remission of sins: Lift up this dejected
soul to an humble confidence in thee, that thou will not deny him the same
mercy. And as thou have sworn that thou have no pleasure in the death of the
wicked, but that he should turn from his evil way and live: so be pleased,
blessed God, to make him sensibly feel his soul is turning to thee; since he
can find no comfort and satisfaction, but only in thy love and favor, which he
esteems better than life it self. And that he may obtain thy pardon, help him
from his heart to forgive every one that has trespassed against him. Matthew.
18.35.
And if he have taken any thing from any man wrongfully, Luke 19.8.
grant him grace to restore it to him: 11.41.
To give alms likewise of such thing as he has, Dan. 4.27.
Job 33.26.
and to break off his sins by righteousness, and his iniquities by showing
mercy to the poor; that thou, who art rich in mercy, may be favorable unto
him, and he may see thy face with joy.

Hear us, good Lord, and give every one of us grace to walk exactly, and to
keep pure consciences, void of offense toward thee and toward all men: that
so we may live and die in peace; looking for thy mercy in Christ Jesus unto
eternal life. Amen.

Another for a person in the same condition.
O Lord, the Father of spirits, the Lover of our souls: who ^rt pleased best in
our love and hearty affection to thee; and would have us delight our selves
in the ^houghts of thee, and rejoice con^inually in thy holy name. Give us
^eave to render our humble thanks ^o thy divine Majesty, for this know^edge
which thou have given us of ^hy blessed Nature; and in imitation ^f it, to
recommend with most fer^ent charity, this desolate and af^icted soul to thy
tender Mercies. ^e is filled with trembling thoughts ^d frightful apprehensions
of thee. ^he dread and terror of thy displeasure has overwhelmed his spirit.
He is troubled, Psalm. 38.6.
and bowed down greatly; he goes mourning all the day long. O that thou
would be pleased so to represent thy self unto him, that he may be possessed
with the same sense which thou have wrought in our minds; that thou art Love,
and desire to be loved, and cheerfully served by all that worship thee.

Thou have graciously wrought in him already a sense of his duty toward thee.
Great sorrow overflowes his soul for his neglects of thee, and offenses against
thee. And out of this depth he sighs and groans and cries unto thee with earnest
desires and purposes to live more holily for the time to come. Awaken his mind,
good Lord, to very sensible and thankful reflections upon this grace which thou
have begun to show him. Bless all the pious counsels and instructions which
thou likewise vouchsafes^ unto him, to the encouraging of his hope in thee,
that thou who have begun a good work in him wilt perfect it even until the day
of Jesus Christ. Philip. 1.6.
Remember him that as thy Majesty is, Ecclus. 2.18.
so is thy mercy: and that thy power delights to show it self in doing good
unto thy creatures; especially to the humble, the thankful, and the willing
persons, who are ready to submit themselves to thy blessed Will. O that this
divine faith may banish all those fears that drive him from thee: and that he
may rather fear lest he should offend thy Divine Majesty, by not confiding in
those promises of mercy, which thou have made in thy holy Gospel to all
returning sinners. O that all his thoughts and care hereafter may only be to
make his purpose of pleasing thee in all things, serious, hearty and unfeigned:
believing that thou will graciously accept such holy resolutions, and certainly
further and succeed them as the effect of thine own inspirations.

Suffer not his spirit to be oppressed under the sense of his great weakness;
or discouraged, though he fall short of his present holy desires, purposes and
endeavors: But bear him up in a strong persuasion, that by sincere, constant
and unwearied diligence in well doing, he shall at last obtain the victory;
through the power of thy holy Spirit assisting of him. Make him see how
reasonable it is most gratefully to acknowledge thy infinite Mercies, if after
much pains, many conflicts and long patience, he may recover a state of
friendship with thee. That so he may not spend his time in dejected complaints,
nor ever faint in his mind, or despond in the Christian course: but still
pursue the complete mastery over himself, in assured hope that thou will be
with him, and never leave him or forsake him.

We bless thee for that instance of thy exceeding grace to the chiefest of
sinners, which thou gave in thy holy Apostle of us Gentiles: Who was a
blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious; 1 Timothy 1.13,16.
but for this cause obtained mercy, that in him Christ Jesus might show forth
all long-suffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe on him
to life everlasting.

Above all we bless thee for our Lord Jesus himself, whom thou sentest in our
flesh, that he might save sinners. We bless thee for all the miraculous cures
which he wrought on miserable creatures, whereby he demonstrated his great
charity toward us: For the gracious proclamation he has made of thy pardoning
mercy: and for the Universal invitation which he has given to every one, Rev.
22.17.
that is a thirst to come and take the waters of life freely. 1 John 2.2.
We thank thee for his death upon the Cross, Luke 23.34.
that he might make a propitiation for the sins of the whole world: Act. 5.31.
2 Cor. 5.18.
for his great love in praying then for his bitterest enemies, Matthew. 26.28.
Heb. 7.25.
that they might be forgiven: 2.17.
4.15.
for his resurrection and exaltation at thy right hand, to be a Prince and a
Savior, to give repentance, and forgiveness of sins. And that he has given to
his Apostles, the Ministry of reconciliation; and admitted us into a Covenant
of mercy and forgiveness by Baptism into his Name; and hat^ left us the cup of
blessing, which is the New Covenant in his blou^ for the remission of sins; and
given power and authority to his M^nisters to absolve all those who heartily
repent, and unfeignedly believ^ his holy Gospel. We thank thee, O Lord, for the
assurance we have that he lives for ever to make interce^sion for us, and is
able to save to the uttermost all those that come to the by him: and that he is
a merciful and faithful High Priest, to make reconciliation for the sins of the
people; being touched with a feeling of all our miseries.

We cannot doubt, O blessed God, of thy gracious intentions and desires to
pardon us, and to make us better, when we seriously meditate on all these
testimonies of thy Divine love; and on that easy and gentle yoke, which thou
layest on us to love thee with all our heart, and our neighbor as our selves:
and on the promised assistance which we have hopes of from above, to inspire,
inliven, and strengthen us, to all well doing, and patient suffering. O that
this languishing soul may likewise feel the comfortable influence of all these
heavenly Truths reviving and chearing his spirit into a good hope in thee; that
thou will mercifully accept the oblation which he is willing to make of himself
to thee, and also constantly enable him to offer himself with greater affection
and more pure devotion to thy service. Scatter all the clouds that darken his
mind, and lift upon him the light of thy countenance. O give him the comfort of
thy help again, Psalm. 51.12.
and stablish him with thy free spirit. 143.11.
Quicken him, 4.7.
O Lord, for thy names sake: 85.6.
for thy righteousness sake bring his soul out of trouble. 2 Thessalonians. 1.11.
Put gladness into his heart, 1 Timothy 1.14.
and revive him again; that he and we may rejoice in thee. Amen; Amen, O God of
all grace; fulfill in him all the good pleasure of thy goodness, and the work
of faith with power: that the name of our Lord may be glorified in him;
according to that grace which was exceeding ahundant, with faith and love which
is in Christ Jesus; To whom be glory and praise for ever and ever. Amen.

WHen sickness arrests any person, it is time for him presently in the very
beginning of it to search and try his ways; sorrowfully to confess the sins of
which he finds himself guilty, with a full purpose of amendment; to advise with
his Spiritual Guide; and before his spirit be feeble and broken to recommend
himself heartily to our blessed Savior, by receiving the Communion of his body
and blood; thereing making a commemoration of his wonderful love, and devoting
himself again to his service: And having set his house in order (as the Prophet
said to Hezekiah, Isa. 38.1.) and settled his estate, to acknowledge Gods great
goodness to him hitherto, and to submit himself wholly to his good pleasure, in
such manner as follows.

A Prayer in the beginning of a Sickness.
O Lord, the Sovereign of the world; who do what thou please in heaven and
in earth; Psalm. 135.6.
and delightest most in acts of bounty, as all thy works every where declare;
and art full of compassion and mercy, Ecclus. 2.11.
long-suffering and very pitiful, and forgivest sins, and savest in time of
affliction. I acknowledge my self, among the rest of thy creatures, to be most
deeply indebted to thee: whose life thou have prolonged to this time in much
health, plenty and peace; together with the enjoyment of spiritual blessings in
the Lord Jesus. I thank thee, and praise thee; all that is within me blesses
thy holy name: to whose wise and good Providence I wholly refer my self for the
time to come; placing my entire trust and confidence in thy almighty Goodness,
Faithfulness, and Truth, which endures for ever.

I ought to receive with all thankfulness whatsoever comes from thy hand; and
believe that to be good for me, which thy infinite wisdom and kindness orders
and allots for my portion. Accordingly I accept with all humble and dutiful
affection, this thy Fatherly chastisement. I acknowledge thy care of me, and
submit to what thou will be pleased to lay upon me. If thou think good to
exercise me with a longer sickness, and to let the present indisposition of my
body, proceed to a greater disorder; not my will, but thine, O heavenly Father,
be done. I only wait on thee for the comfortable presence of thy holy Spirit,
to support my soul by faith, and hope, and patience, under all the pains I may
endure. Lay no more upon me, O Father of mercies, than I shall be able to bear;
and lay upon me what thou please. Free me, for the present, from all
murmuring and repining thoughts; and for the future, make the sickness and
anguish of my body, a blessed instrument to purge my spirit more perfectly from
all pride and vanity, from all covetousness and worldly-mindedness, and from
all inordinate love of any of the pleasures of this life. I believe, O blessed
Jesus, that thou live for ever, who sufferedst and dyedst for us: and that
thou have a great compassion toward those, who would gladly follow thee,
though it be through sufferings. Behold, Lord, I commend my self to thy mighty
Love, desiring above all things to be made conformable to thee, in meekness, in
humility, in patience, in entire resignation to Gods holy will and pleasure,
and in perfect satisfaction in his Fatherly love and kindness, whatsoever my
condition be.

I am sensible, O God, that I have not employed my time to the utmost advantage
of my soul, and to thy honor and glory: but have wasted many precious hours,
and several ways neglected my duty toward thee Here reckon up the sins you may
have committed.
, and been but an unprofitable part of this world; so that I am not worthy to
continue any longer in it. But I hope thou will vouchsafe me thy gracious
pardon and receive me to mercy, if thou call me hence (for into thy hands, O
Father, I commend my spirit, who have redeemed me by the precious blood of
Jesus Christ:) And that if thou prolongest my days on earth, I shall serve thee
with greater diligence, and strictness, and zeal, and cheerfulness, to the end
of my life.

I desire not to live, but that I may perfect holiness in thy fear; and secure
to my self, by doing more good, an happy entertainment into the society of the
blessed, in the other world. I see already the emptiness and insufficiency of
all enjoyments upon earth. All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness of it, as
the flower of the field. The grass withers, Isa. 40.7.
the flower fades: Psalm. 119.50,81.
But thy word stands fast for ever. In thy word therefore, O Lord, and
gracious promises, is my hope. This is my comfort in my affliction. And my
perfect contentment, I see, lies always in thy love and favor alone, which is
better than life it self. O settle me in a certain and unmovable possession of
it, by what means thou please. Do but love me, and preserve me in a lively
sense of thy good will toward me, and dispose of me as thou think good. In
the multitude of my thoughts within me, Psalm. 94.19.
thy comforts shall delight my soul. Romans 5.2. 8.28.
I will rejoice even in the midst of tribulations, Psalm. 23.3.
30.10.
and glory in thy holy name, who make all things work together for good to
them that love thee. Though I walk through the shadow of death I will fear no
evil: for thou art with me; thy power, and tender care, they shall comfort me.

Accept, Good Lord, of these my desires and resolutions. Hear me, O God, and
have mercy upon me. Lord, be thou my helper; for Christ Jesus his sake, my ever
blessed Redeemer. Amen.

IT will be seasonable here to put the Devout Reader in mind, that when he is
in distress and desires Mercy of God; it ought to excite his charity to others
that are in misery, and dispose him to show mercy to them. For though that be
not Canonical Scripture which we read, Tob. 12.9. Alms does deliver from death;
yet this is; With the merciful God will show himself merciful. ( Psalm. 18.25.)
Blessed is he that considers the poor; the Lord will deliver him in time of
trouble. (41.1,2,3.) If he do not preserve him and keep him alive; yet the Lord
will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing; he will make all his bed in
his sickness. Therefore as thou recommendest thy self to God, and desire
others to pray with thee, so remember that, Prayer is good with fasting, and
alms and righteousness, Tob. 12.8.

A Prayer to be said by the Family, with the Sick person.
O Lord, the Father of our spirits; who give to us and all creatures, life
and breath, and all things. We sinful dust and ashes blush to lift up our eyes
unto heaven, when we consider our vast distance from thee; and reflect upon thy
unspotted holiness, and our impurity; thy infinite wisdom, and our wretched
folly; thy power and our weakness; thy Eternity of life, and our short
continuance. We are but of yesterday, and know nothing, Job 8.9.
because our days upon earth are a shadow. Psalm. 39.11.
When thou with rebukes do correct man for iniquity, Job 25.6.
thou make his beauty to consume away like a moth: Surely every man is vanity.

But so great is thy condescending grace, that thou have assured us thou will
not despise such worms as we are. Nay, thou have encouraged us, blessed be thy
goodness, to approach unto thee with some confidence, that thou will mercifully
receive us, though we have highly offended thy Divine Majesty: Having sent thy
dear Son into the world to save sinners; to purify our natures, to indue us
with a divine understanding; to strengthen our weakness, and to comfort us with
the hope of an immortal life.

Behold, O Lord, the oblation which we make to thee of most thankful hearts,
devoted to thy service: whose love and tender mercies have so exceedingly
abounded toward us. We will praise thee, and glorify thee as long as we have
any being, for this great salvation which Christ Jesus has brought to light,
by his resurrection from the dead to an eternal Kingdom in the heavens. We are
humbly bold to hope in thee, that thou who have not spared thy own Son, Romans
8.32.
but delivered him up for us all, wilt with him also freely give us all things.
O thou Father of mercies, and God of all comfort, who have not thought a Crown
of everlasting life and glory too much to promise us: we believe that thou will
not deny us what is needful and fit for us, both for our souls and our bodies,
in our passage through this world to that honor, glory and immortality.

In this confidence we more particularly recommend this thy sick servant to thy
infinite and most compassionate mercy. Settle in his Or her.
soul a steadfast faith, that thou do not willingly grieve the children of
men; but intendest good to him by this affliction. And now that other pleasures
and enjoyments fail him, represent thy self effectually unto him, as his true
happiness and satisfaction. Wherein soever he has neglected thee, or committed
any offense against thee, make him deeply sensible of, and heartily sorrwful
for, his folly. And as he earnestly desires pardon and forgiveness of thee; so
work in him a serious resolution to live more circumspectly and exactly in time
to come. Assist him graciously, O Lord; that he may give a proof of his sincere
intentions hereafter to submit himself in all things to thy will, by his
patient submission to thy fatherly correction now. O that he may so quietly, so
meekly, so humbly and cheerfully resign his will unto thee to suffer what thou
inflictest; that he may be the more disposed readily to deny his own desires in
doing whatsoever thou command.

For which end make him thoroughly apprehensive of thy sovereign power and
authority over all creatures. Possess him with a great reverence of thy wisdom
and justice; with an entire confidence in thy goodness and charity; and with a
thankful remembrance of all thy past mercies to him, which have been
innumerable. That so he may the better endure what thou layest upon him at
present; and ever choose to follow thy directions, and submit to thy orders, and
love thy commandments, and delight to do thy will, O God.

Bless and succeed those remedies that are used, for the restoring him to his
former health; that he may live to perform his holy purposes. Or if thou have
otherwise appointed, accept of them graciously; and dispose him to return back
his spirit willingly unto thee who gave it; and with great humility, and deep
sense of his own undeservings to expect thy mercy declared in Christ Jesus, who
has so highly merited of thee. Fix his mind steadfastly upon him, who has led
the way through the grave unto heaven: that he may not be affrighted with the
approaches of death; but looking beyond it to that high and holy place where
the Lord Jesus is, may rejoice in hope of thy eternal glory.

And give every one of us, in our best estate of health, to consider
perpetually how frail and weak we are. That so we may not abuse our selves by
an intemperate use of any of the pleasures of sense; nor load our minds with
the cares of this life; nor spend our days in a vain pursuit of the honor and
glory of this world: But may pass all the time of our sojourning here in fear,
1 Pet. 1.17.
Tit. 2.12.
and live so soberly, righteously and godlily, in this present world, as
becomes those who expect shortly to give an account to thee, who wilt judge all
men according to their works. Hear ^s, O Lord, we most humbly beseech thee,
through Christ Jesus our merciful and compassionate High Priest; who sits at
thy right hand, and lives for ever to make intercession for us. In whose name
we continue to recommend our selves, and friends, and all thy people to ^hee,
as he has taught us; saying;

Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name: Thy kingdom come; Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread:
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that ^respass against us: And
lead us not unto temptation, but deliver us from evil, etc.

If the disease proceed to such an extremity, that in all appearance the Soul
is ready to depart, there is a Commendatory Prayer appointed in the Public
offices of Devotion, to be said by the Minister, whose assistance then sure
will be desired. And besides, the sick person himself, as long as he is able,
may thus recommend his soul unto Almighty God.

A Prayer when a person is giving up the Ghost.
I Resign my spirit, O God, most cheerfully into thy hands: hoping to find
mercy with thee through Christ Jesus. I know no other name under heaven whereby
I may be saved, but thine alone, O blessed Jesus; who wast dead, and ^rt alive
again, Rev. 1.18.
and live ^or evermore. I come un^o thee, O Lord, confiding in thy ^ost
precious promises, which I be^ieve are faithful and true as thou art, ^or
pardon and for immortal life.

Accept, I beseech thee, of my most ^earty thanks for all thy mercies to ^e,
from the beginning of my life to ^his moment. Pass by all my ingra^tude and
disobedience. Receive ^e into the company of the spirits ^f just men made
perfect, to give thee ^hanks for ever.

And as I desire to find mercy with ^ee; so I forgive all my enemies:
^eseeching thee likewise to forgive ^em; and to bless and comfort all ^y
friends, and to make thy whole church glorious; and to bring us ^l at last to
live together in everlasting love and joy, through Christ Jesus. Amen.

IF God be pleased to restore the sick person to a state of health, public
Thanksgivings ought to be rendered to Almighty God for it. And together with the
Sacrifice of praise, which is the fruit of our lips, ( Heb. 13.15,16.) he ought
not to forget to do good, and to communicate to them that are in misery: for
with such sacrifices God is pleased. And to preserve a grateful remembrance of
Gods mercy; here follows a Form of Thanksgiving to be used in private by
himself, and by his friends, that are concerned in his recovery.

A Thanksgiving after recovery from a Sickness, to be said by the person
himself who is restored to health.
O God, the fountain of life and of all good; who art continually more and more
pouring forth thy benefits upon us. I thy poor creature, whose life thou have
mercifully spared when I deserved to be cut off, prostrate my self, in an
humble sense of thy divine goodness, to render thee my most hearty thanks, and
to renew my vows, which I made in the day of my distress.

Bless the Lord, O my soul: and all that is within me, Psalm. 103.1,2,3, etc.
bless his holy name. Bless the Lord, O my soul, 34.8. 118,17,18.
and forget not all his benefits. Who forgiveth all thine iniquities: 111.1.
who heals all thy diseases. Who redeemeth thy life from destruction: who
crowns thee with loving kindness and tender mercies. Who satisfies thy mouth
with good things: so that thy youth is renewed like the Eagles. The Lord is
merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy. He will not
always chide; neither will he keep his anger for ever. He has not dealt with
me after my sins; nor rewarded me according to my iniquities. But as far as the
East is from the West: so far has he removed my transgressions from me. O taste
and see, my soul, how gracious the Lord is: blessed is the man that trusts in
him. I shall not die, but live, and declare the works of the Lord. The Lord
has chastned me sore: but he has not given me over unto death.

I will give thanks therefore unto the Lord with my whole heart; secretly among
the faithful, and in the congregation. I can do no less than dedicate this new
life, which thou have bestowed upon me, entirely to thy service: resolving to
employ more vigorously all those powers of soul and body, which are so
graciously restored unto me, unto thy honor and glory. For which end I most
earnestly desire, to have a lively sense preserved in my mind, of those things
which were most powerful to move my heart toward thee, in the time of my
sickness. O that this world may ever appear unto me, as it was then represented
to my mind! That I may never set my heart too much upon these perishing
enjoyments, and short satisfactions; nor ever neglect thee, whose favor and
grace I then sought so earnestly as my chiefest good: But remembering how little
comfort I could find in any thing here; what a joy it was to have any hope in
thee, the eternal God; and how that in my best estate I am but altogether
vanity; I may most seriously apply my self to work out my salvation with fear
and trembling; and give all diligence to settle a steadfast hope in thee, that
never may be shaken. Make me often to remember that my days are but like a
shadow that declineth, Psalm. 102.11,12,27.
and that I wither like the grass. But thou, O Lord, shall endure for ever, for
thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end. That so, I may neither seek
my happiness in this dying life, but in thy endless love and favor; nor be
slothful in business; Romans 12.11.
but fervent in spirit, serving the Lord.

Blessed be thy goodness that I feel these holy thoughts and desires still
remaining in me. Excite me, I humbly beseech thee, continually to renew them:
that no day may pass without serious reflections upon thy patient and
long-suffering kindness toward me; upon the shortness o^ this life, the
uncertainty of all earthly comforts, and the happiness of having a good hope in
thee, by steadfast continuance in well doing. And let these thoughts be so
deeply imprinted in my heart; that my affections may be weaned thereby from all
things here below, and set on things above, where Christ is at thy right hand.

O that I may desire and covet those heavenly things for my portion, more than
I do to eat and drink, or enjoy any other pleasure of this life. Make me to
rejoice in them, more than in a whole world of other comforts: and to stand in
greater fear of losing them, than I do to dye, or endure any misery. Preserve
in me, good Lord, such a sober and considerate disposition of mind, that I may
never be proud, who am, I see, but dust and ashes: nor confident of my own
strength and power, which is but weakness and vanity: nor distrustful of thee,
who art so gracious and merciful, as well as mighty to save. Suffer me not to
sink under any discouragements, who have the everlasting arms under me, the
wisdom of heaven to direct and guide me, and the infinite treasures of goodness
to supply all my necessities.

And more particularly, I beseech thee to give me grace by my late confinement,
weakness, dullness, want of appetite and rest, to learn to value very highly the
benefits of liberty, strength and quickness of all my senses; and to bless
thee, more than ever I have done, for the constant refreshments of my food in
the day, and of undisturbed sleep in the night, together with the rest of the
pleasures of life, to which thou have restored me with my health. Make me
perfectly contented in any state and condition, whilst I enjoy so great a
blessing as that; which comprehends so many others in it. And when thou art
pleased to take it again away from me; O that I may be able to be contented
then also, in a remembrace of all thy past kindnesses to me, and of a
well-spent life, and careful improvement of this renewed health; and in hope of
thy continued mercies to me in Christ Jesus, even to eternal life. To which I
humbly beseech thee to bring me, by an unchangeable love and obedience to thee
in all the changes and alterations of this mortal life; for his sake who loved
me and gave himself for me. To whom with thy self, in the Unity of the same
spirit, be glory everlasting. Amen.

A Thanksgiving to be said by the Family.
O Most holy, great and glorious God; the Almighty Creator ^f heaven and earth:
who upholdest ^ll things by the word of thy power, and governest the whole
world with admirable wisdom, justice and mercy. Thou deservest the highest
acknowledgements of all thy creatures. The Praises of Angels are not worthy of
thee; nor any of their thoughts equal to thy infinite Majesty. What can we
vile creatures then speak of thee; or what thoughts shall we frame of thy
perfections? Especially of thy transcendent love, which has moved thee in much
compassion to consider our weaknesses, and help our infirmities? Thou have
taught us by our Lord Jesus what we should think of thee: having vouchsafed to
dwell among us, and make thy self visible unto us, not only as the most Wise
and Mighty; but as the most Holy, Righteous, Gracious and Merciful Lord, who
designest the greatest blessings to us.

But now that we see thee, we have the greatest reason to abhor our selves in
dust and ashes; when we consider how unlike we are unto thee in those excellent
qualities, wherein thou have made thy self known unto us; and how unthankful we
have been unto thy divine goodness, which has so strangely condescended unto
us, who are unworthy of the least regard from thee. And yet such is thy tender
mercy and pity toward us, that thou have declared thy self willing to
entertain even the greatest sinners into thy favor, by making them better. We
our selves have received innumerable tokens of thy great clemency, patience and
forbearance. And now ^ately thou have been pleased to give us a new instance of
thy loving kindness, and of thy desire to win our hearts unto thee, in rescuing
one of as from going down into the grave, and restoring him to health and
strength again.

The living, the living, O Lord, shall praise thee, as we do ^his day: Yea,
Isa. 38.19.
we will ^less thy name as long as ^e live, Psalm. 104.33.
and sing praises unto thee, Psalm. 86.12,13.
as long as we have any being. We will praise thee, O Lord our God, with all
our heart: 118.14,15.
and glorify thy name for evermore. For great is thy mercy toward us: and
thou have delivered the soul of thy servant from the lowest hell. The Lord is
our strength and our song: and is become our salvation. The voice of joy and
health is in our dwellings: the right hand of the Lord brings mighty things
to pass.

O that there were such an heart in every one of us, as to study seriously to
know thee better, to meditate continually on thy benefits both to our souls and
bodies, to love thee entirely, and to endeavor to be like unto thee; which is
the design of thy goodness toward us. Empty our hearts of all other things*
and make room for thy self to dwell there, in wisdom, righteousness and true
holiness. Dispose every one of us to follow Jesus Christ our Master in
lowliness, patience and charity; and to be ordered by the governance of his
holy Spirit; Common Prayer Book, in the Commination.
seeking always his glory, and serving him duly in our vocation with
thanksgiving. Help us so to employ our time in our health, prosperity and
pleasure, that we may have nothing to trouble us in the time of sickness,
affliction and sorrow: But we may quietly and cheerfully bear what thou layest
upon us; looking unto Jesus, who for the joy that was set before him endured
the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at thy right hand.

O blessed Lord, deny us not the constant assistance of the holy Ghost, to
cherish, confirm and strengthen our holy resolution; to succeed our pious
endeavors; to give us a quick sense of all thy mercies, and a lively
remembrance of all thy fatherly chastisements; whereby we may be more and more
excited to diligence, watchfulness, and zeal in thy service. Preserve us from a
slothful and negligent spirit; and awaken in us such a sense of thee, and of
our duty to thee, that we may search after thy Will diligently, and believe it
heartily, and practice it carefully, and watch against all temptations
heedfully, and pray fervently and frequently, and ponder seriously and
thoroughly all the instructions we have received from thee, and our many and
great obligations to thee. O that it may be our choice to attend on thee; and
that our hearts may be still with thee, when our necessities require our
attendance to other things! That so we may not be too deeply engaged in the
affairs of this life, to the prejudice of the eternal life of our souls: but we
may go on to make it our great business to be truly godly, according to the
pattern which our Lord has left us; till we be fit to be lifted up to that
high and holy place where we believe he is, and see the glory which thou have
given him.

Now to him that holds our soul in life, and suffers not our feet to be
moved; Psalm. 66.9.
to the God of our salvation, 68.20.
to whom belong the issues from death, 30.11.
Jude 25.
who has turned our heaviness into joy, and put off our mourning, and girded
us with gladness; to him that does wondrous things, the only wise God our
Savior, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and ever. Amen.

A Parents Prayer for a Sick Child.
O Lord, by whose infinite goodness I was brought into this world, and by whose
indulgent care I have been continued here unto this time; in the enjoyment of a
great many blessings, of the least of which I am unworthy. I thank thee that to
all other comforts of this life thou have added the gift of this child; whom
thou have preserved in its birth, and ever since, by a mavelous providence. I
am sensible that all I have is thine: and that I am but entrusted with this, as
with all other good things, which I must return to thee whenever thou
please.

Lord, assist me with the grace of thy holy Spirit (which I know thou art more
ready to give than any other blessing) that I may resign this child to thee, if
thou art pleased now to call for it, with an humble; contented, patient and
thankful mind: believing thou know what is better for me, than I do my self;
and wilt certainly recompense such meek and quiet submission to thee, with as
good or better enjoyments than those thou take away. But if thou think
good still to prolong its days, and continue it with me; Behold, O Lord, the
unfeigned purpose of my heart, faithfully to discharge my trust, and to bring
it up in the fear and nurture of our Lord.

Endue me with principles of true wisdom and prudence, that I may educate it
aright. Help me to give it a good example; and to use all diligence that it may
serve its generation according to thy will, and at last be returned back to
thee, wise and pure, and just, and good; fit for the company of the blessed in
endless life. Unto thee, O Lord, I most heartily recommend both it and my self;
whose wisdom knows where it is best to place thy creatures, whether in this or
in the other world; and whose goodness designs to make us happy in both. To
thee, the only wise and good God, be all Praise, Honor, Glory and
Thanksgiving; with Fear and Reverence, Love and cheerful Obedience, both now
and eternally. Amen.

HEre follow Prayers and Thanksgivings on sundry other occasions, which we may
meet withal in the course of our life. In which it will be fit particularly to
acknowledge God, and implore his mercy toward us. And let it be remembered, as
I said before, that it is a part of Christian Piety to take care that alms and
acts of Charity to others accompany our addresses to God. They are then
certainly most seasonable, when we desire special favors from him, or return
thanks for them. And hereby ( as old Tobias said, 4.9,11.) We lay up a good
treasure for our selves against the day of necessity. For alms is a good gift
unto all them that give it, in the sight of the most High.

A Prayer to be used by one that is going a long Journey.
O God, who art alike present unto all places: who preservest man and beast:
for thou art good to all, Psalm. 36.6.
and thy tender mercies are over all thy works. 145.9,10.
All thy works shall praise thee, O Lord, and thy Saints shall bless thee. They
shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and declare thy power.

Blessed be thy name for the knowledge thou have given me, of thy wise and
merciful providence incompassing all creatures. And more particularly I rejoice
in the revelation which thou have made, of thy Fatherly love and care over us
the children of men, in Christ Jesus: Who makes his Angels Ministering Spirits
for them, Heb. 1. ult.
that are heirs of Salvation. Psalm. 18.30.
In an hearty belief of thy holy Gospel, and a sincere resolution to be
obedient unto it in hope of that eternal life; I commit both my soul and body
to thy most gracious protection: who art the defender of all them, that put
their trust in thee. I trust thee, O Lord, with my self and all belonging to
me. I entirely depend on thy goodness, to be with me and prosper me, in the way
that I go. Give thy good Angels charge of me: And especially accompany me with
the presence of thy holy Spirit, to preserve my soul in safety, from all evil
thoughts, desires or passions, that may any way betray me in word or deed, to
offend thy Divine Majesty. Deliver me from the danger of any evil company into
which I may fall: that I may not frame my self to the humors of profane
persons, but by a pious and discreet behavior rather reprove them. And give me
grace thankfully to embrace the company of those who are good, if I be blessed
with it: that I may rejoice in their society, and improve it to my increase in
wisdom or pious affections toward thee.

Bless this habitation also, which I leave, and all remaining in it: that at
what distance soever we be one from another, we may all live and walk in the
same spirit of Faith, and Love, and Holiness. Give us an happy meeting together
again in this place, if it be thy good will and pleasure, to pay thee the vows
which I make of greater care and diligence in thy service, and greater charity
toward all my neighbors. Howsoever, in the end of our pilgrimage, bring us
all together in that blessed rest which thou have prepared for thy people,
after all their travels and labors, through thy mercy in Christ Jesus. To
which I commend my self and all mine, both now and ever. Amen.

A short Prayer in ones Inn, or at the end of the Journey.
BLessed be thy goodness, O Lord my Creator and continual Preserver, by which I
have been led it safety to this place; and am not only alive, but sound and
unmaimed* To thee, O God, will I sing and give praise, who have dealt so
bountifully with me. For thou have delivered my soul from death, Psalm. 116.1.
7.8,9.
mine eyes from tears, Genesis 15.1.
and my feet from falling. 17.1.
I love the Lord because he has heard my voice, and my supplications. Because
he has inclined his ear unto me, therefore will I call upon him as long as I
live. I will walk also with a perfect heart before the Lord; who is my shield,
and my exceeding great reward.

Preserve in me, I beseech thee, a pious remembrance of all thy mercies, and of
all those holy resolutions, which they excite in me. Take me still into thy
Almighty protection. Continue me in thy fear, and love, and faithful obedience.
That, having finished this journey in peace, I may return to the place from
whence I came, full of thankful affections to thee, and zealously disposed to
perform my vows, in a careful discharge of all the duties, which my place and
relations require of me. And enable me, good Lord, ever to perform them with
uprightness of heart and good will, as becomes the servant of Christ Jesus.

To the same merciful providence which has watched over me all this day, I
commend my self, and all my relations and friends every where, this night:
Beseeching thee to awaken in me in the morning, the same love, and
thankfulness, and humble confidence, which I now find, and desire ever to have,
in my heart toward thee, my gracious Father, Savior and Deliverer. To whom be
glory, honor and praise everlasting. Amen.

A Prayer in case of any hurt from Thieves, or otherwise.
O Most merciful Father, for so I ought ever to acknowledge thee, without whom
one of the smallest creatures cannot fall to the ground, and to whom we are of
more value than many of them; Matthew. 10.29.
I humbly and meekly submit my self to this cross in my way, which thou in thy
wisdom have suffe^ed to befall me. I know that thou ^rt able to make even this,
with all ^ther things, work together for my ^ood. And therefore I beseech thee
^ut graciously to pardon my sins which deserve greater punishment, and to
preserve my soul still in safety ^om all murmuring and repining at ^y
providence, by a steadfast faith and trust in thee, and an absolute re^gnation
to thy holy will and plea^ure; and I shall not cease to ^less thee, and to
speak good of thy ^ame.

Help me to learn by this to live in constant sense of the uncertainty ^f all
worldly hopes, to set my affe^ions more perfectly on unchangea^le enjoyments,
and to place my ^appiness only in cheerful obedience and contented patience, in
all estates and conditions of life. I remember ^at we are all but pilgrims and
stran^ers whilst we are here; subject to many other changes and chances i^ this
mortal life. And therefore whatsoever I, or those I have left a^ home, may
further suffer before m^ return, Lord, assist us all to take tha^ patiently
also: And as we have received so many good things from thee, to receive
likewise that which is evil; giving thanks to thee the Father of mercies, who
have give us such a good hope of perfect sec^rity, peace and joy in our
heave^ly Country, when we have do^ and endured all thy pleasure. (...) the
expectation of which blesse^ state I will continually rejoice praying thee to
purify me more a^ more, that I may be prepared f^ it, and at last by thy mercy
ent^ into it, to give thee eternal praise Amen.

A Prayer to be said for a Friend in a Journey.
O God, whose Almighty Power, and wise Providence, and Omnipresent Goodness, is
the security, support, and comfort of all those that know thee. It is the
highest satisfaction of our souls to have a lively hope in thee of eternal life
in the other world. And to be persuaded that thou love us, and wilt take care
of us, and bless us whilst we continue here, and that nothing can befall us
without the knowledge and consent of thy infinite goodness, gives the most
solid peace and repose unto our spirits, in all the alterations and changes of
this life. I rejoice in the belief, that I live in a world, which is full of
thee; that I am always under thy eye, and have thee near unto me; as to observe
me, so to help, protect and defend me.

And I beseech thee, fill the mind of him Or her.
, who is now gone from me, with the same sense of thee; that he may carry along
with him every where, this steadfast faith and hope in thee* as the stay, the
rest and the refreshment of his soul. How far soeve^ he be from me, O that he
may be nigh to thee, in frequent, serious thoughts of thee, and hearty love to
thee, and perfect trust in thee* and a constant disposition of mind and will to
do and be what thou please. That traveling under the shadow of the Almighty,
no harm may come to him: but even those things which we account the greatest
mischiefs, if they shall betide him, may be humbly accepted by us all, with
fear and reverence, and cheerful submission to thee; as becomes those who
profess our selves thy friends, as well as thy servants.

No Thieves, Murderers, or other evil persons or things, can approach him, I
know, without thy leave: who governest and over-rulest the motions of every
creature at thy pleasure, to which we ever ought ^o submit our own. But if thou
^hinkest good to restore him hither ^gain untouched by any of them, Lord, help
us to be so much the more thankful to thee; who dealest with us according to
our own hearts desire. O that the sense of ^hy goodness then, may so power^ully
affect our hearts; that we may ^e moved thereby to a greater zeal and freedom
of spirit in thy service, and be the more forward to imitate ^hee in doing
good, and showing mercy to all men! O that thy benefits may never slip out of
our minds! O that the medi^ation of them may be ^weet unto us! Psalm. 104.34.
and we may learn thereby to ^rust in thee at all times, 62.8.
and pour out our hearts before thee: Tob. 4.16.
7.12.
for thou art a refuge for us.

Now the merciful God give him good success in all things! These last words may
serve for a short Ejaculation in his behalf at any time of the day.
The God which dwells in heaven, prosper his journey, and the Ange^ of God
keep him company! Amen.

A Thanksgiving after a safe Retur^ home.
IN an humble joyful sense of the fatherly care and providence over me, ever
since I went from thi^ place (to which thou have brought m^ back in peace and
safety) I cast dow^ my self at thy feet, O Lord God o^ heaven, praising thy
Almighty goodness, with an heart full of love an^ devotion to thee. It is of
the mercy alone that I am not consumed, and because thy compassions fail not.
That I am not groaning under sick^ess, or wounds and bruises in my body; nor
sighing for the loss of my goods either at home or abroad, is ^o be ascribed to
that tender mercy which spreads its self over all thy works; and has been a
covering to me night and day, in every place where I have been, from I know not
how many dangers. I thank thee ^lso for letting me see the faces of my
relations and friends again, and that no evil has come nigh their dwellings:
but especially for preserving my soul in integrity and uprightness before thee;
and for delivering me from the power of temptations, and from wounding my
conscience, by any wilful offense against thy Divine Majesty.

It is too little to render to thee my Praises and Thanksgivings; I will pay
thee my Vows wherein I stand engaged to thee; and here offer unto thee my self,
soul and body, t^ be made a more pure, perfect and acceptable sacrifice unto
thee through Christ Jesus. Maintain, I beseec^ thee, such a lively and lasting
remembrance of thy kindness in m^ heart, as may both provoke me t^ love and to
good works, and als^ strengthen my faith and hope i^ thee on all occasions for
the time t^ come.

I ought not to forget, now that ^ mention thy late deliverances, a^ the rest
of thy mercies: which ar^ so many and so various, that, alas ^ we take little
notice of many o^ them. In the constant and undisturbed course of them, we are
ap^ to be less sensible how much w^ stand indebted to thee for them* Yea, they
have been so long continued to us, and we are so far from the beginning of
them, that we are too prone to forget the head and fountain from whence they
spring* O how sad is it, that we should love thee less, because thou love us
so much! and that we should think the seldomer of thy bounty, because thou
constantly rememberest us and do us good! How much should we praise thee for
our health and ^ease, if we were sick or in pain but a few days! And yet now we
praise thee but a little, though we are well many years. How thankful should we
be, if we were freed from the Devil, after he had affrighted and ^exed us but
one night! and yet now, alas! we scarce mind thy goodness, which perpetually
preserves us from his assaults. Endue me, O God of all grace, with a more
serious spirit, often reflecting and meditating upon thee, and upon thy
benefits, both to my soul and body, for this ^ife and that which is to come.
That I may not be taught the value and number of thy blessings, by being
deprived of them; but in their constant use and enjoyment may ever duly ponder
them: extolling and praising thy infinite goodness, with sensible love to thee,
and delight in doing of thy Will. For which end, I beseech thee to indue me
with power from above, that I may not deceive my own soul with some passionate
desires, transports of joy, or sudden resolutions: but deliberately and with
the full consent of my heart devoting my self to thy service, I may
conscientiously study to improve all thy mercies to the honor and glory of thy
Name, the credit of my Religion, the good and profit of my Neighbors, and my
own solid peace and comfort at present, and eternal joy at the day o^ the Lord.

And bless all others, I beseech thee, that desire the same mercy, o^ which
thou have made me partaker* Receive them into thy protection (...) conduct them
safely to the end o^ their journies: Make them eve^ mindful of thy loving
kindness* and careful to remember that every new benefit is a new bond to
better obedience. Unto which, good Lord, incline us all more and more, for thy
mercies sake in Christ Jesus; by whom and for whom thy glorious Name be blessed
and praised for ever. Amen.

A Prayer to be said by one going a Voyage on the Sea: Which may be used, with
a little alteration, by his Friends for him.
O Most mighty Lord, the God of our salvation; who art the confidence of all
the ends of the earth, Psalm. 65.5.
and of them that are afar off upon the Sea: Under whose powerful protection we
are alike secure in every place; and without whose providence over us, we can
no where be in safety. I am sensible of the tender care thou have long taken of
me, and that I have been preserved by thee from innumerable dangers, both in my
infancy and childhood and ever since; for which I have not thankt thee as I
ought. I most humbly beseech thee graciously to pardon this and all other my
offenses, which might justly weaken my confidence in thee; did I not feel thy
grace in Christ Jesus, who dyed for us, to be so great, as to fill my heart not
only with unfeigned sorrow for them, but with holy resolutions to be more
grateful and dutiful in time to come.

This emboldens me, with an humble faith in thy Almighty goodness, to commend
my self still to the conduct, guidance and blessing of thy merciful Providence.
O God receive me, though a sinful creature, into thy favor and grace. Purge my
heart from all affection to every thing that is evil; that I may not carry the
sense of any guilt unrepented of, along with me in my voyage; but have my heart
settled in such an unmovable love to all piety, righteousness and sobriety of
mind and life, that no storm or tempest or other danger may dismay me and make
me afraid. They are all, I know, in thy hands; to which I commit my self with
an entire trust in thee, that nothing shall hurt me while I follow that which
is good.

If thou art pleased to bring me to my desired haven, Lord, possess me then
with these good thoughts and affections which I feel at present in my heart
toward thee: That my chief joy may be in thee, and in the love I find in my
heart to thee; and I may never forget thee by intemperate mirth and pleasure in
any other enjoyment. But if thou think good otherwise to dispose of me, thy
will, O Lord, be done. I commend both my body and my spirit into thy hands; who
art able to make the Sea give up her dead, by thine Almighty Word. Help me
always to hold fast that hope of eternal life as an anchor of my soul both sure
and steadfast; Heb. 6.19,20.
which may preserve me in unshaken comfort and joy at the hour of death it
self. And looking up to that quiet place whither Jesus our forerunner is
entered for us, I may begin those Praises and Thanksgivings which I hope shall
have no end; but be continued for ever in the company of the blessed in the
other world. Unto which I beseech thee of thine infinite mercies to bring me,
through Christ Jesus; who is made an high priest for ever. Amen.

A Thanksgiving after it is finished, and the party returned home again.
O Blessed Lord; Thou art great and greatly to be praised; for by thy word the
heavens were made: Psalm. 48.1.
33.6,7.
and all the host of them by the breath of thy mouth. 135.6.
107.24, etc.
Thou did gather the waters of the Sea together, as an heap: and laidst them
up in the storehouses of the deeps. They are all at thy command, and
whatsoever thou please, that do thou in heaven and in earth, in the Seas
and all deep places. I have seen thy works, O Lord, and thy wonders in the
deep. For thou spakest the word, and the stormy wind arose, which lifted up the
waves thereof. And again, when we cried unto thee, thou made the storm a
calm, so that the waves thereof were still. Blessed be thy Almighty Goodness,
which carried me safe through such great and dreadful dangers. Blessed be thy
goodness that the deep has not swallowed me up, and that I am not gone down
into silence. Blessed be thy goodness, that neither my body, nor my goods,
became a prey to unreasonable men; but that thou broughtest me to the haven
where I would be, and have now returned me home in safety.

O God, that I may never forget the vows, which I was forward to make when I
was in trouble! Preserve in me for ever an awful sense and apprehension of thy
great power, who bring the wind out of thy treasuries; Psalm. 135.7. 89.9.
and rulest the raging of the Sea, Jer. 5.22.
and stillest the noise of its waves. Psalm. 120.11.
Who would not fear thee, O Lord, who would not tremble at thy presence? who
have placed the sand for the bound of the Sea, by a perpetual decree that it
cannot pass it; and though the waves thereof toss themselves, yet can they not
prevail; though they roar, yet can they not pass over it? O possess my heart
with a greater reverence of thy divine Majesty, that I may ever serve thee with
fear, and rejoice before thee with trembling. Especially make me fearful of
offending thee, who art so great and powerful; and have done such great things
for me; and can do greater; and wilt do them, as thou have promised, by
Christ Jesus; Philip. 3.20.
who has power to subdue all things to himself. Heb. 2.3.


Blessed be thy infinite grace, which has wrought such a mavelous redemption
for us by him. How shall I escape, if I neglect so great salvation? How
miserable shall I be, if, after all the dangers from which I have now been
rescued, I should for my ingratitude and disobedience be cast into the lake of
fire and brimstone? O God, that all thy mercies and deliverances here may, by a
thankful remembrance and careful improvement of them, only prepare me for that
glorious deliverance at the day of the Lord Jesus! And as by thy good
providence thou have saved me from the violence of storms and tempests, and
other hazards: so by thy grace deliver me from the power and violence of all
temptations; and enable me steadfastly to persist in well doing, and patient
suffering unto the end.

Endue me with such a right sense of my Religion as may make it to be my
delight; that so I may be out of all danger of being prevailed withal, to
forsake that which is so sweet and pleasant to my soul. O that it may be my
guide in prosperity, and my comfort in adversity; the rule of my life, and my
great satisfaction in death! Sanctify every condition unto me; that sickness
or health, poverty or riches, honor or disgrace, may prove real blessings to
me, and make me profit in piety and virtue. And let a great sense of thee, and
of Religion intermix it self with all my employments. Teach me so to behave my
self that I may be acceptable in thy sight, not only when I make such addresses
as these unto thee: But whether I eat or drink, or whatsoever I do else, I may
abide in thy love, and be approved by thee for a good and faithful servant. All
which I most humbly beg of thee, and whatsoever thou see good for me, in the
name of the Lord Jesus; by whom and with whom, in the unity of the holy Ghost,
all honor and glory be unto thee, O Father Almighty, world without end. Amen.

A Prayer to be used by a woman with Child.
O God, the Author of our being, the Fountain of life and all other good; who
have begun an excellent work in me, which no eye but thine sees, and no hand
but thy Almighty power can finish. I adore thy great and glorious Majesty in
this and in all other thy works of wonder. Thou do great things without
number: but art more particularly to be acknowledged in the formation of
mankind, who are fearfully and wonderfully made, after thy own image and
likeness.

Be pleased, O Lord, in thy infinite goodness to perfect and complete that
which thou have begun. Preserve the smallest degree of life, which thou have
inspired. Bestow upon it intireness of all its parts: and prepare a convenient
habitation for an understanding spirit, capable of the best wisdom, and
inclinable to virtue and goodness. Prevent, good Lord, the miscarriage of my
hopes; and ripen them to a good issue. And the nearer they come to their full
growth; strengthen the more my humble trust in thee, and submission to thee,
and hearty desires to increase the number of thy faithful people, together with
my own Family.

That ought to be the chiefest desire of my soul, to be formed my self in all
things, according to the mind and will of thee, my God; that so I may be an
instrument of doing good to others. O thou who have wrought many holy purposes
and resolutions in my heart, preserve and confirm them, that they may not prove
abortive; but bring forth continually the fruit of good living. Perfect me in
Knowledge, in Faith, in Love, and in Obedience. Enable me so discreetly and
carefully to discharge the duties of all the Relations wherein I at present, or
shall hereafter, stand; that I may be a comfort to them, and a credit to
Religion. And howsoever thou disposest of me or them, Lord, make me well
contented, and in every condition to give thanks unto thee, and rejoice in thy
holy Name, and in the hope of eternal life; through Christ Jesus my most
blessed Lord and Savior. Amen.

A Prayer when the time of he^ Travel draws near.
O God, the helper and del^verer of all those that trust i^ thee; by whose
power I was formed in my Mothers Womb, by who^ care I was brought from thence,
an^ by whose merciful kindness I have been preserved in many dangers since. I
praise and magnify thy great and glorious Name; and am encouraged by the
remembrance of thy mercies, which have been ever of old, to implore thy
compassionate help in the approaching time of my need; pain and danger.

Thou art present to all thy creatures, and hear the cries of the beasts of
the earth, which all wait upon thee. O be not far from me, when trouble is
near: but hearken unto me, and save me, when I call upon thee! Shorten my
pains, or lengthen my patience; which thou please. Bear up my spirit in
submission to thy will, and in some humble hope that I shall forget my anguish
for joy that a man is born into the world. Joh. 16.21.
Psalm. 138.8.
22.4,5.
Forsake not the work of thy own hand: but in due time perfect it, and bring
forth that which thou have wrought in secret, into the light; that we may all
see the wonders of thy wisdom, and praise thy goodness and thy power.

My parents trusted in thee; they trusted, and thou did deliver them. They
cried unto thee, and were delivered: they cried unto thee, and were not
confounded. In thee likewise do I humbly put my trust and confidence: which
nothing disheartens, but my own great unworthiness; by reason of my
forgetfulness of thy benefits, and unthankful returns for former mercies
bestowed upon me. But thou have taken care that this should not discourage me
neither, by proclaiming a gracious pardon, by him that was born of woman and
dyed for us, unto contrite and reforming sinners. Accept, I beseech thee, of my
sincere resolutions to preserve hereafter a more affectionate remembrance of
thy love to me, and to dedicate my self and all I have to thy service, 1 Timothy
2.15.
in faith, and charity, and holiness, with sobriety. Or if thou art pleased
o^herwise to dispose of me, I resign ^y self heartily unto thee. Lord, ^eceive
me to a better life, where all ^ghing and sorrow shall be done away, and
eternal joy entirely pos^ess our hearts. Amen, for Christ Je^us his sake. Amen.

(...) Prayer to the same purpose to be said by her Relations.
O Most mighty Lord; who have already given us innumerable ^ledges of thy love,
and many ar^uments to trust in thee for ever, and to expect with quiet and
patient ^inds the issue of thy wise and good ^rovidence. Thou have respect to
all ^e works of thy hands; especially (...) the sons of men, and to those above
the rest, who seek thy favor, ^d give thee the glory of all thy ^ercies, and
are resolved to devote ^emselves, and their children and all they have, to do
thee honor in the world. We most humbly commend thy servant, drawing near the
time of her Travel, to thy care and blessing: beseeching thee to give her a
gracious deliverance, and to ease her of the burden, wherewith she labors.

We our selves are monuments o^ that mercy, which we beg of thee* Thou
broughtest us into this world and did unloose the bands wherewith we were
swadled in our mothers womb. We have had long experience also of thy readiness
to succor us, and to do us good eve^ since; many times beyond our desires and
hopes, and always beyond our deservings. We dare not bu^ commit our selves and
every thing belonging unto us, most heartily into thy hands: remembering that
thou have the same power and goodnes^ still, by which we came into the light of
the living; and that thou still exercisest them, as thy wisdom thinks most
meet. We cannot desire to be better provided for, than as thy infinite
understanding and counsel judges most convenient for us. Unto that we refer our
selves: beseeching thee, if it be thy good pleasure, that her deliverance may
be as speedy as her cries unto thee, or her patience as great and long as her
pains. Thou who ripenest the fruits of the earth, and then give us to gather
them to our comfort; blast not our humble hopes of the fruit of the womb: But
after thou have brought it to maturity, deliver it into our hands, as a new
pledge of thy goodness to us; for which we will ever thankfully acknowledge and
praise thy Name.

Or if thou have otherwise determined; Lord, give us grace to submit to thy
holy will, and to rest satisfied in thy wise appointments, and never to
distrust thy goodness and care over us. Yea, help us still to bless thee, and
to speak good of thy Name, saying; The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away;
blessed be the name of the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. Amen.

A Thanksgiving to be used by those present after her safe Deliverance.
WE thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, for thy long continued
goodness to us thy creatures, who are unworthy of the least of thy favors. In
thee we live and move, and have our being. And it is only of thy mercy, that we
have not lived in perpetual pain and torment, spending our days in sighs and
lamentations: but have enjoyed much health and ease, and had innumerable
occasions to praise thee, and to rejoice in thee; who loadest us daily with thy
benefits. Blessed be thy Name, O Lord, who forgivest all our iniquities, and
healest all our diseases. Who redeemest our life from destruction, and crownest
us with loving kindness, and tender mercies. More particularly we thank thee,
that thou have heard the humble supplications of this thy servant; to whom thou
have now granted a gracious deliverance, and turned her sorrow and heaviness,
into joy and gladness. We thank thee, that thou have sent her seasonable
helpers, and blessed their endeavors for the preservation of her, and of the
fruit of her womb. And that thou likewise vouchsafest her all needful things,
for her refreshment in this weak condition wherein she lies; waiting upon thee
for the perfecting of thy mercies toward her.

Accept, we beseech thee, of our hearty acknowledgements, of thy powerful and
good providence over her, and over any person here present, in the like
necessity; which we now thankfully call to mind, and desire may never be
forgotten. O that a lively remembrance of this, and all other thy mercies, may
so mightily affect our hearts; that we may be moved thereby to fear thee all
our days, and to love thee, and to put our trust in thee, and with quiet and
resigned minds to cast all our burdens and cares on thee, in a constant and
cheerful obedience to all thy holy commands!

And since thou have begun to be so gracious to this thy handmaid, grant unto
her and her relations further favor; Tob. 8.16.
and finish their life in health, with joy and mercy. Renew her strength daily:
and as that increases; so make her thankfulness and pious affections toward
thee, and serious resolutions to obey thee faithfully, grow up together
therewith. Refresh her spirit, while she lies on this bed of weakness, with
many heavenly thoughts and delightful meditations of all thy mercies toward
her and toward mankind: especially with a sense of thy wonderful love in
Christ Jesus; who was pleased to be born of a woman, and to become like one of
us; that we might be assured of thy care over us in every condition, and be
made thy children, and at last be heirs of everlasting life. And when she has
recovered her former strength, make her to feel this love still more powerful
in her heart; exciting her to serve thee carefully in all righteousness,
sobriety, modesty, devotion and readiness to assist others, especially the poor
and needy, in the same distress wherein she has been her self.

We commend likewise this little one, which thou have blessed her withal, unto
thy tender care and fatherly love: beseeching thee, that it may live to be
dedicated unto thee, and to be instructed in the knowledge of thee, and to
praise thee, as we now do, for bringing it into the world; and for making it
partake^ likewise of thy grace in Christ Jesus* Or if it shall seem good to
thee, to let either of them fall into any further danger, enable her to endure
i^ with patient submission to thee* trusting, even in death it self, in thy
good providence, and in thy precious promises, who never failest those that
faithfully seek thee.

Hear us, O Father of mercies, and pardon our offenses; pity our infirmities;
make us more thankful for what we have received; and more fit for thy future
mercies, either in this life, or in the next, through thy infinite love
declared to us in Christ Jesus; in whose holy words we conclude our prayers,
saying, as he has taught us.

Our Father, etc.

A Thanksgiving to be used by the person her self, when she is able.
UNto thee, O God, do I give thanks, unto thee do I give thanks: for that thou
art near, thy wondrous works declare. Psalm. 75.1.
In my distress I called upon thee and my cry came unto thee. 18.6.
34.4.
I sought thee, O Lord, 138.3.
and thou heardest me, 30.3.
and deliveredst me from all my fears. 66.20.
56.12.
In the day when I cried, 104.33,34.
thou answeredst me, and strengthenedst me with strength in my soul. Thou have
brought up my soul from the grave: thou have kept me alive, that I should not
go down to the pit. Blessed be God, which has not turned away my prayer, nor
his mercy from me. Blessed be God who has preserved the fruit of my womb, and
made me the joyful mother of a child. Thy vows are upon me, O God, I will
render praise unto thee. I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live; I will
sing praises unto my God, while I have my being. My meditation of him shall be
sweet, I will be glad in the Lord.

Accept, O most merciful Father, of these thankful acknowledgements; Psalm.
17.2. 57.2.
which go not forth out of fained lips. And be pleased graciously to preserve
such a lasting and fresh remembrance of thy great mercies in my heart; that I
may always be joyful in thee, and speak good of thy name, and trust in thee at
all times, and still cry unto thee, O God most high, who performest all things
for me. Make me studious likewise and forward to bring forth all the fruits of
righteousness, throughout the whole course o^ my life; which may witness the
truth and sincerity of my thankfulness to thee. O that I may never be less
earnest and fervent in the return of obedience, than I have been in desires and
prayers to receive thy blessings! Dispose me to have a kind and tender care of
this infant, which thou have committed to my charge. Make me willing to
undergo, to the utmost of my power, the pains that accompany its education. Let
not the love of ease and pleasure breed in me an aversness to any duty, to
which both Nature and Religion incline me: or give me grace, by sober thoughts,
and a thankful remembrance of the late pain from which thou have delivered me,
to overcome it. Especially indue me with the greatest love, to its precious and
immortal soul. And help me so to grow and increase in Christian wisdom and
goodness, that I may be able to instruct it, when it is capable, in the fear of
our Lord; and by meek and gentle admonitions, together with a good example in
all things, to win it to the love of true godliness. Or if thou art pleased to
take it from me, who deserve not the least of thy mercies; Lord, so moderate my
affections, and bring them in subjection to thee, that I may not undutifully
repine at thy providence: but in an humble adoration of thy unsearchable
wisdom, and a steadfast confidence of thy good will toward me, resign it unto
thee from whom I received it.

And I also beseech thy Divine goodness, when thou shall restore me to the
public assemblies of thy people again, to give me grace to receive that mercy
with exceeding joy. Prepare my heart, with enlarged affection to offer unto
thee not only the sacrifice of praise, giving thanks unto thy name; but all
other oblations which ought to accompany such addresses to thy glorious
Majesty. That they may be but an earnest of my future diligence and zeal in thy
Divine Service, and o^ my readiness to do good, and communicate unto others:
whereby I may lay up in store for my self a good foundation against the time to
come, 1 Timothy 6.19.
that I may lay hold on eternal life, through Christ Jesus. Amen.

A Prayer for good success in some extraordinary business.
ALmighty and most merciful father, the supreme Governor of the whole world:
who disposest and orderest all things in heaven and earth with admirable
judgment; and can not possibly err in what thou do, nor fail of what thou
designest. I adore, in the humblest reverence of my soul, thy most glorious
Majesty; thy eternal Power, Holiness, Goodness and Truth, which are all beyond
my comprehension. And more particularly I adore thy unspotted Justice, and
all-seeing Wisdom, which penetrates into the deepest secrets, and spies out all
the ways of the sons of men, and renders to every one of them according to
their doings.

Jer. 10.23.
I know, O Lord, that the way of man is not in himself: Prove. 16.9. 19.21.
it is not in man that walks to direct his steps. Tob. 4.19.
The success of all our counsels and actions depends on thy pleasure; and when
we have devised the way we intend to go, thou give it what issue seems good
in thine eyes. There are many devices in a man's heart; nevertheless thy
counsel, O Lord, that shall stand. I will therefore bless thee, O Lord my God,
always, and desire of thee that my ways may be directed, and that all my paths
and counsels may prosper: for thou thy self give all good things, and thou
humblest whom thou will, and as thou will.

Accordingly I now most earnestly recommend my self, and all my concerns to
thee; who have bid me in all my ways acknowledge thee, Prove. 3.5,6.
and thou will direct my paths. I trust in thy wise and good providence with
all my heart, and lean not unto mine own understanding. I hope in thy mercy
that thou will so direct, assist and prosper all my thoughts, designs and
endeavors, that they may attain their desired end. And above all things I
desire that I may have grace, to design and seek for nothing, but what is just
and honest, pious and charitable, praise worthy and of good report. Bless me,
good Lord, with that integrity of heart, in which thou so much delightest: and
then bless me with wisdom and good understanding in all my affairs, that I may
guide them with discretion. Wisd. 7.15,16.
For it is thou that leadest into wisdom, 9.10.
and directest the wise. Ecclus. 23.1,5.
In thy hand are both we and our words: all wisdom also and knowledge of
workmanship. Leave me not therefore; O Lord, Father and Governor of all my
whole life, leave me not to my self alone: but send out thy wisdom from the
throne of thy glory, that being present, she may labor with me. And turn away
from me vain hopes. Indue me also with a patient, contented, and untroubled
spirit, that I may wait on thee as long as thou please: And whatsoever the
event shall be, enable me to rejoice in thee as my portion, and to rest
perfectly satisfied in thy love, and in the assured hope of good things in the
other world.

I humbly recommend likewise to thy merciful guidance, all those with whom I
have entrusted any of my concerns; that they may manage all their undertakings
with skill and prudence, justice and fidelity; and do for me, as they would
that I or others should do for them. Make us all ever mindful, that all our
works are as the Sun before thee, Ecclus. 17.19.
Ephesians. 3.20.
and thy eyes are continually upon our ways; Romans 16.25,27.
that we may never dare to do any thing but what thou approvest, and of which
we may give a comfortable account, at the great day of judgment.

Now unto him that is of power to do for me exceeding abundantly above all that
I ask or think, to God only wise, be glory through Jesus Christ for ever. Amen.

A Prayer when one intends to live Unmarried.
O Lord, the lover of souls; for whom they were made, and in whom alone they
can be happy. There is none I have in heaven but thee, Psalm. 73.25.
nor on earth that I desire besides thee. Who art the perfection of wisdom,
power and goodness; and the fountain of all the good that is in us. Thou art
able to raise us, to what degree of wisdom, strength and goodness thou
please: and have promised us thine assistance to make us like unto thee; and
assured us we shall be immortally blessed, by a glorious participation of thee.
Thou drawest us so mightily, that we have no power to resist thee; when our
minds turn themselves toward thee, and reflect upon thy most excellent Nature,
which discovers it self, in all thy bounty to us, and the rest of thy
creatures. We cannot but love thee, when we think of thee; and when we love
thee, we cannot but again think of thee, that we may have the pleasure still of
loving thee more. O fix my mind, I beseech thee, in a more steadfast
contemplation of thee, and of all thy gracious communications to me, that I may
spend my days delightfully in a perpetual meditation of thy mercies, which I
have received in such abundance from thee!

There is nothing I know more natural and more easy, than to think of the
kindnesses of those that love us; especially theirs to whom we bear a mutual
love. O how great, how free and undeserved is thy love to us! What infinite
reason is there that we should love thee, with all our heart, and with all our
soul, and with all our strength? Inspire me, O God, with such a lively sense of
thy goodness in my creation and ever since, both to my soul and to my body,
that I may ever preserve a sweet and grateful remembrance of it; and may feel
it provoking me daily to commemorate thy loving kindness, with the most ardent
love of thee, my most bountiful benefactor. O that I could love thee, in every
thing that I see and enjoy! being led by it to the thoughs of thy admirable
wisdom, which astonishes us in the least of thy creatures; and of thy matchless
goodness, which has provided such variety of pleasures for all our senses.

Possess me with a great and strong admiration of the excellency of wisdom;
that I may be a lover of her beauty, Wisd. 8.2,3,9.
and seek her out from my youth; desiring to marry her to my self. For thou the
Lord of all things thy self love her: And therefore I purpose to take her to
live with me; knowing that she will be a counselor of good things, and a
comfort in cares and grief. But especially overpower my heart with a strong
and lasting sense of thy exceeding abundant kindness in Christ Jesus; in whom
thou have chose^ me, Ephesians. 1.4,8.
that I should be holy and without blame before thee in love. Let me never
think of that, bu^ with such great transports of love* and joy, and
thankfulness unto thee* as may make me then forget all other things. And make
me to understand more and more how thy love in him has abounded toward us in
all wisdom and prudence. That so I may be the more moved to admire it, and
delight to meditate upon it, and be still searching into those treasures of thy
Wisdom, and unsearchable riches of thy Grace; till I come to be filled with all
the fullness of thee, my God. Ephesians. 3.19.


Translate all my affections from these lower objects, to him that is fairer
than the children of men: Psalm. 45.2.
who loved me so much as to dye for me; who is risen again, and sits at thy
right hand in incomparable Majesty and Glory. Raise up my thoughts as high as
that heavenly place where he is, and where I hope one day to be; equal to the
Angels, Luke 20.36.
who neither marry, nor are given in marriage. Help me to begin that happy
state in separating my self frequently from all this world, and joining with
that blessed company above, in praising thee, and giving thanks unto thee,
whose mercies are great and endure for ever. And when I am about any other
employment; help me cheerfully to attend it; and with a willing mind to perform
the duties belonging to it. Possess me with such an hatred of idleness and
sloth, that I may always be busied about some good or innocent thing.
Especially dispose me to exercise my self in works of mercy and charity; and to
take all opportunites of doing good, to the bodies or souls of my Neighbors.

Indue me with prudence and discretion in the choice of my company and friends:
and give me wisdom to improve their society to the best purposes. Make my mind
more heavenly: and when any thoughts contrary to my inclinations and
resolutions arise in me, turn them immediately to thy self, and my blessed
Savior. Open my eyes to behold the things that are not seen: And put out the
splendour of all those things that dazzle our eyes here, by the appearance of a
brighter and more glorious good. Which may raise my designs higher than this
world; and make all my passions and affections more equal and moderate; my
discourse more profitable; my behavior more humble, modest, and such as
becomes Saints; and all my actions more conformable to thy will, and more
exemplary to those whom I converse withal. The very God of peace sanctify me
wholly; 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
and preserve my whole spirit, and soul, and body blameless unto the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ!

O that my love to any thing here may not turn into wantonness and folly; nor
my joy and cheerfulness, into lightness and vanity; nor my seriousness or
sorrow, into melancholy and discontent; nor my just anger, into hatred and
contention; nor industry in my business into carefulness, distrust and
earthliness of mind; nor my discretion and prudence, into craft, dissembling
and deceit! Dispose my heart that I may so mind heavenly things, as to be very
humble and lowly in my own eyes; and be so humble and sensible of my own
unworthiness and weakness, as to make my addresses to thee continually, with
the greater earnestness, for thy merciful help and supply. Teach me so to pray
and call upon thee, as to labor and strive my self; and so to labor and run,
that I may obtain. Let faith in thy good providence and precious promises be my
comfort; and hope of thy glory make me rejoice; and a great love to thee make
me unwearied, and fill me with the consolations of the holy Ghost. O that my
Religion may become my Nature; so that it may not be my burden or trouble: and
help me so to look upon it as my duty, as withal to account it my honor,
privilege and happiness.

O that I may never desire any thing but to be so pure as thou would have me;
and to enjoy those rewards of holiness, which thou can and wilt bestow upon
me. This is the sum of my desires; that whatsoever I do may please thee, and
whatsoever thou do may be pleasing to me. Lord, hear me and answer me
graciously. And if I shall see any cause hereafter to change my condition,
preserve in me ^n unchangeable love to thee above ^ll things. That still I may
please ^hee* and be acceptable in thy sight: delighting my self in wisdom, and
^eposing my self with her; Wisd. 8.16.
^or her conversation has ^o bitterness, and to live with her has ^o sorrow,
but mirth and joy. In which happiness, the Lord vouchsafe ^o keep me, whatever
my condition ^e, for Jesus his sake. To whom with thee, O Father, and thy
blessed spirit, be everlasting praises. Amen.

A Prayer when there are any thoughts of changing that condition, and
deliberations about Marriage.
O Lord, my most gracious and merciful Father; of whose tender care and good
providence I have had so long and abundant experience, that I should be
extremely ungrateful if I should not acknowledge thee, and love thee, and trust
in thee, and upon all occasions call upon thee, and seek thy favor for ever.
There has no day passed since I came into the world, but it has brought along
with it many tokens of thy love which thou art still renewing in every moment
of my life. By thee I have been carried through all the dangers of infancy and
childhood, unto this age of understanding and reason. And thou have blessed me
many ways since that time; especially with some remembrance and sense of thy
self, from whom I came and on whom I depend; which I account the greatest
benefit of all. Blessed be thy goodness that I am not a perfect stranger to
thee: but that thou have made me to know something of thee, and of thy infinite
goodness; who alone art able to make me happy, both here and eternally.

I hope in thee, O my God, that thou will never forsake me: but be my guide
even unto death. Pardon, I beseech thee, all the sins and negligences, of which
I have been at any time guilty: and let them not hinder the continuance of thy
mercy and favor toward me, on which all the comfort of my life depends. Leave
me not to my self and the weakness of my own counsels; especially now, in the
greatest turn and change of my life: but vouchsafe to direct my thoughts, and
all the motions of my heart aright, to that which will be most profitable for
me, and conduce every way to my future comfort and satisfaction. Lead me in the
way wherein I shall go; and guide me for thy names sake. Indue me with such a
serious, considerate and discerning spirit, that I may not follow the
inticements of any fading and perishing good: but cleave to that which is
unchangeable and never dies. Favor thou have taught me, is deceitful, Prove.
31.30.
and beauty is vain: but one that fears the Lord shall be praised. O possess
my heart with an holy fear of thee; that nothing may appear so amaible in mine
eyes, as true Religion, Piety and Virtue! Make me in love with the beauties of
Wisdom, (for thou love none, but him that dwells with wisdom, Wisd. 7.28.
to be allied unto which is immortality; 8.17,18.
and great pleasure, I know, it is, to have her friendship) and with the
beauties of sobriety, meekness, mercifulness, humility, and all those things
which are the image of thy goodness. That being inclined by these in my choice,
I may find a fit person to be the guide of my youth [or an help meet for me]
the delight of mine eyes; in whose society I may enjoy a constant relief, ease
and pleasure, and be set forward thereby in the way to heaven.

Assist me, I beseech thee, in all my deliberations about this change; that I
may soberly weigh every thing which is offered to my thoughts. And after all
the dangers which, by thy goodness, I have escaped, I may not be so unhappy
now, as to fall into the saddest of all; by the strength of fancy, by rashness
and unadvisedness of mind, or the violence and unruliness of any passion: but
may dispose of my affections to a person worthy of them. Help me, blessed Lord,
to make so wise a choice, that I may never repent of it afterward. Direct and
govern likewise the minds and hearts of all those [Parents or Friends] that
transact any thing on my behalf. That they may have a respect chiefly to those
things which endure for ever: and settle me there, where I may most glorify
thee, and do most good, and increase in wisdom and virtue, and live in peace,
cheerfulness and contentment to the end of my days. Which mercies, and all
others, that thou see requisite for me, I most humbly beg of thee, for Jesus
Christ his sake, the Lord of peace; to whom, with thy self, and good Spirit, I
desire to give, as is most due, eternal praises. Amen.

A Prayer when a person is about to enter into the state of Marriage; [and may
serve for any other new condition of life.]
O Lord, the Guide and Director, the helper and comforter of all those that
seek thee, and depend upon thee with their whole heart. In a serious sense that
nothing can make me happy without thy love, favor and blessing, I humbly cast
down my self before thy divine Majesty; imploring thy gracious presence with
me, to instruct, govern and assist me in that condition, into which, under the
conduct and protection of thy good providence, I am about to enter. Great and
many have been thy mercies toward me hitherto, ever since I was taken by thee
out of my mothers womb. Thou have nourished and clothed me: thou have brought
me up to some knowledge of thee and of the duty I owe thee: thou have shown me
the path of life, and prevented me early with thy Grace, to dispose my heart to
walk in it. And, though I have not made, I most sorrowfully confess, such
returns unto thee as I ought to have done yet, it is some comfort to me, to
feel my heart inclined and resolved to be more thankful and and dutiful
hereafter; and to pass the remaining part of my sojourning here in thy fear and
love, and steadfast obedience.

Pardon me therefore, O most merciful Father, according to thy promises made in
Christ Jesus, to penitent sinners. And vouchsafe me the grace of thy holy
Spirit, to lead me to a clear and full understanding of all the duties that
belong to the state and relations in which I have now chosen to serve thee.
Indue me with a sincere and hearty affection to them; and enable me carefully
to perform them with a willing mind, and a cheerful unwearied spirit, as long
as thou think fit to continue me in that condition of life. Bless me with a
wise and observant heart, to discern and mark the nature and dispositions of
those, to whom I shall be joined, in any bonds of love o^ duty: That I may
delight to please them to the utmost of my power; and study their content and
satisfaction; and bear with their infirmities; and choose the fittest
opportunities to do them good, and amend what is amiss in them. Free us all,
who shall stand related to each other, from all peevishness and unreasonable
passions: let no mistake or causless jealousy spoil the entireness of our
affection: indue us with great purity of heart, and a chaste conversation: And
bestow upon us such meek, sweet and compliant dispositions, that this may not
prove a state of temptation and sorrow, but of godliness and holiness, to our
mutual joy and happiness.

Make us ever mindful of the Covenant wherein we stand engaged to each other;
especially of that sacred Vow wherein we stand bound to thee, by our being
baptized into the Name of Jesus Christ; that we may faithfully keep and perform
it. Tie us so fast together in unity of spirit, that we may have the same
common cares; and bear one another burdens; and endeavor to increase each
others joys, and lighten each others sorrows; and in all the changes and
alterations of our condition we may religiously preserve an immutable love unto
and delight in each other, to the end of our days. Especially help us to stir
up one another to the love of thee, and our blessed Savior; and to do all good
offices to our neighbors: that after we have enjoyed the comfort of a sweet
society, and been a blessing to all that are near unto us; we may finally part
in peace, and rest in a good hope to dwell together for ever, in happy
friendship with thee, and with our Lord, and all the holy ones. Amen, Amen.

A Prayer of Parents for their Children when they are grown up to some
understanding.
WE humbly worship thy glorious Majesty, O Lord most high; we acknowledge thy
infinite goodness, that thou art pleased to give us leave to call thee Father,
who art the possessor of heaven and of earth. We thank thee for thy most tender
care over us ever since we were born. More especially for the knowledge thou
have given us of thy great love in Jesus Christ: And that thou have so timely
prevented us with thy grace; and inclined our hearts to thy fear, and love, and
service.

Vouchsafe, we beseech thee, O most merciful Father, to take our Children also
(which we have already dedicated unto thee, and commended to thy care) into the
protection and guidance of the same gracious providence, which has been so
watchful over us. Thou know the great weakness of our nature; how foolish
and inconsiderate we are (especially in our younger years) how violent in our
passions; how apt to listen to temptations, and easy to be seduced by them;
how ready to flatter and abuse our selves with vain hopes; and how unwilling to
believe what is contrary to our desires. And therefore we the more earnestly
implore thy blessing upon our endeavors to season their minds betime with a
Religious sense of thee their Creator, and of their duty which they owe thee,
and of that good in which their true happiness lies. And we beseech thee
likewise to excite our hearts to the greater diligence and thoughtfulness and
care, to imitate thy fatherly love toward our selves; by watching over them to
do them good, and to train them up in thy fear. Indue us with wisdom and
prudence to give them wholesome and seasonable instructions: and dispose their
hearts to receive and remember them. Help us to govern exactly all our
affections and passions; that we may neither embolden them to any thing that is
evil by too much indulgence, nor discourage them in their duty by too much
severity: But be examples of godliness and virtue to them, by a sober, grave,
gentle, humble, and devout behavior and conversation. Work in them a great
reverence to all their governors, teachers, and spiritual Pastors; and bless
their godly admonitions to them, that they may follow and obey them. Direct us
also in the choice of fit persons to assist us in their Education; and in the
choice of fit employments for them; whereby they may prove useful and
profitable members of Church and State.

Blessed be thy goodness that they have escaped the dangers of infancy and
childhood. Good Lord, preserve them from all the evil and mischief to which
the rashness and indiscretion of youth may betray them. And fortify their
minds against the power of all allurements to sin; that we may live to see them
thy dutiful and obedient children, and may leave the world in hope that they
will continue so, unto their lives end. Or if thou take us away before they
come to their full age, we commend them with the more ardent affection, to thy
never failing mercy and compassion. O thou who art the Father of the
fatherless, Psalm. 68.5.
be their God, and let them find mercy with thee, Hos. 14.3.
according to thy word. Dispose of them so, that by loving and careful
governors, holy examples, innocent and good company, pious and discreet
counsels, with the help of thy divine grace, they may ever be secured in their
duty, and follow after us to eternal life; through Christ Jesus. Amen.

A short Prayer for the use of a little Child.
O Lord, my most loving Savior and merciful Redeemer; who commanddest that the
little children should come unto thee, and did take them up in thine arms,
lay thy hands upon them, and bless them: Look graciously upon me, I humbly
beseech thee, and bless me; who am one of thy children, dedicated to thy
service. Pity the weakness of my tender age, and prevent me betimes with thy
grace. Make me seriously to remember my Creator in the days of my youth. Indue
me with the fear of my God: and make me always mindful of the Vow and Promise
that was made in my name, when I was baptized; to forsake the Devil and all his
works, to believe in God and to serve him.

Make me dutiful (as thou O Lord Jesus wast) unto my Parents [loving to my
Brethren and Sisters] obedient to my instructors: thankful for the good counsel
of my Friends: humble and reverent to my betters: and meek and gentle to all
men. That as I grow in years, so I may grow in wisdom and favor with thee, and
with all those who are good.

Preserve me from all dangers; let thy good Angels be my keepers and defenders;
and guide me by thy holy Spirit; that the longer I live, the better I may be:
to the comfort of my Parents, the honor and glory of my God, and my own
happiness, here and for ever, Amen.

A shorter.
HEavenly Father, who despisest nothing that thou have made, but take care of
the beasts of the earth, and of the fowls of the air: bless me thy child, whom
thou have made in thy own Image. Preserve me this day from all evil, both in
soul and body. Give me what thou see good for me. Especially an heart to know
thee early, to be thankful to thee, to love thee, and to do thy will, as well
as I am able. Bless my Father and my Mother, and all my friends: and make me a
follower of those who are good; for the sake of my Savior Christ Jesus the
Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for the use of a Child that has lost its Parents.
O Lord, who never failest those that seek thee: but give to the beast his
food, Psalm. 147.9.
and to the young ravens which cry. I cast my self upon thy infinite goodness,
with whom the fatherless have been wont to find mercy. Be thou, Ecclus. 23.4.
O Lord, Father and God of my life, a most merciful and gracious Father unto
me: and provide what thou see, in thy wisdom, to be necessary for me.
Especially bestow upon me some faithful friend, that will admonish me, and take
care of my soul, to bring me up religiously in the fear of thee my God.
Preserve me from all distrust of thy good providence. Give me favor in the
eyes of others, by an humble, submissive and good behavior toward them. Make
me diligent and industrious in some honest calling. And bless my labors and
endeavors, that I may not be a burden unto others. But whatsoever my portion
be in this world, give me grace to live so piously, justly and soberly, that I
may not miss of that incorruptible inheritance, which fades not away, 1 Pet.
1.4.
reserved in the heavens for us; through Christ Jesus. Amen.

A Prayer to be used by a Widow.
O God, by whose wise providence, which I humbly adore and reverence, I am left
without my dearest companion and guide in this our pilgrimage; and thereby
deprived of the sweetest comfort of life: behold the desolate and sorrowful
estate of thy poor handmaid, who supplicates thy tender mercy and compassion
toward her. Comfort me, good Lord, with a delightful sense of thy Divine
Presence with me; and draw my heart the nearer to thee, in holy love and devout
affection, and a lively hope that thou will never leave me nor forsake me.

I ought to thank thee at all times, for the many tokens of thy love toward
me; and particularly for lending me this blessing so long, the value of which I
now feel, by the want I am in of its support. Pardon me, I beseech thee, that I
have not been so thankful for it, and the rest of thy mercies, as I ought: nor
so carefully improved them, as I might have done. O take not away thy loving
kindness from me in displeasure. But vouchsafe still the continuance of thy
favor toward me; especially the support of thy Divine Grace by the power of
the holy Ghost, to enable me to bear this affliction with an humble, meek and
patient spirit. Moderate all my passions. Free me from all discontented and
distrustful thoughts. Help me to cast all my care on thee, who relievest the
fatherless and widow, Psalm. 146.9.
and carest even for the strangers. Fix my mind upon thy love in the Lord
Jesus; in whom thou would have us to rejoice always. Lift up my thoughts to
those heavenly enjoyments in that blessed place where he is; [to which I hope
my husband is departed.] And help me to follow after him with all diligence in
a pure, grave and godly conversation; and by a careful education of my
Children, to endeavor that they may be also with us in that glory.

Let thy blessing ever rest upon them. And now that they are left to me alone,
give me so much the more wisdom to instruct and govern them aright; and so much
the more love to them, and tender affection to their good and welfare. Make
them to be a comfort to me in my Widow-hood by their increase in godliness;
that we may cheerfully serve thee together, in Prayers, and Thanksgivings, and
reading of thy holy Word, and Communion with our blessed Savior, and all other
actions of a Christian life. Prepare us for whatsoever condition it is, into
which thou shall be pleased to bring us; that neither fullness nor poverty,
honor nor reproaches, health nor sickness, may ever separate us from thy love
in Christ Jesus: but we may persevere in patient obedience to thee, till we
receive that crown of life which he has promised to them that love thee. Amen.

A Prayer for the use of a poor Servant.
O Lord most high; who ar^ the Maker of the rich and of the poor; Prove. 22.2.
with whom there is no respect of persons: Look graciously upon me, I humbly
beseech thee, who here cast down my self before thee; acknowledging thy
Sovereign power over all, and thy wise providence which has disposed all
things into several ranks and orders, for their mutual help and benefit. I
humbly submit to the state and condition wherein thou have been pleased to
place me, below many others. I thank thee that I live; and that I live in
health; and have strength of body; (great and invaluable blessings!) and that I
have so much liberty as to make my requests unto thee, and acknowledge thy
mercies; and that I have any hope thou will never cease to do me good, till
thou have crowned all thy mercies in eternal life.

Good Lord, pardon me, if I have at any time murmured and repined at my
condition, or envied the higher estate of other persons. Pardon all my other
offenses, whatsoever they have been: and vouchsafe but to deliver me from the
bondage of sin, and to make me a Servant of Righteousness; and I shall not only
be contented, but perpetually rejoice in thy Salvation. Indue me with a right
understanding of my duty in this relation wherein I stand. That according to
thy command, I may account those whom I serve worthy of all honor; being
careful to please them in all things, 1 Timothy 6.1.
never contradicting, Tit. 2.9,10.
nor purloyning: Ephesians. 6.5,7.
but showing all good fidelity; and with good will and singleness of heart
doing service, as to the Lord and not to men. Help me to demean my self so
humbly, Collos. 3.23,25.
and whatsoever I do, to do it so heartily; that I may obtain favor in their
eyes. Or if they be froward and hard to please, O God, preserve me from all
unseemly passions, and disrespectful behavior toward them. And make me so
much the more diligent in their business: remembering that I serve the Lord
Christ from whom I expect to receive the reward of the inheritance. Coloss.
3.23,25.


If thou art pleased any other way to afflict me, with sickness or pains ^n my
body, which may hinder my ^abour and cast me into poverty, Lord, still
strengthen my faith and confidence in thee. And help me to ^ear it with a
patient mind; looking unto Jesus, who took upon him the form of a Servant, and
became poor, and suffered much for our sake: but how is therefore highly
exalted to ^uccour and comfort all those that ^ollow after him contentedly in
welldoing. In his Name and Words I ^ecommend my self unto thy mercy, saying,

Our Father, etc.

A Prayer of a poor Prisoner for Debt.
O God, who art present to us in all places, and have regard to the sighs and
groans of the miserable, who humbly implore thy pity and compassion toward
them* Vouchsafe to look graciously upon thy afflicted servant in this place;
which is most desolate and comfortless, unless the light of thy countenance
shine upon me. I confess that I have too much abused the liberty which I
formerly enjoyed; and did not so carefully improve, as I ough^ to have done,
those happy opportunities, which therewith were pu^ into my hands. Many ways, I
am sensible, I have offended thy Divine Majesty Here acknowledge the
particulars.
for which I am heartily sorry; and acknowledg^ my self infinitely indebted to
thy goodness, that I am not plunged into the depth of misery, to bewail my sins
in the bottomless pit.

I thank thee, O Lord, with all my soul that I am not shut up in the place of
outer darkness; and that I have any hope to obtain the benefit: of the
redemption, which is in Christ Jesus. In whose Name I beseech thee to pardon
me; and likewise to sanctify these straits wherein I lie, to the freeing my
soul from the bond of all iniquity, and the restoring me to the glorious
liberty of thy children. Help me seriously to follow the direction of thy
Providence in this restraint; and now that I am so much alone by my self, to
descend into my own heart, to search and try my ways, and unfeignedly to turn
to thee, my God. Enlarge my spirit more than ever, now that my body is
confined, in fervent Prayer for thy Divine Grace, and in cheerful Thanksgivings
for the innumerable benefits that I have received from thy bounty, and in
tender pity and commiseration of the sad condition of all distressed people.
And be pleased to touch the hearts of my Creditors also, with a sense of my
miseries: incline them to accept of what I am able to pay, and make me willing
conscientiously to satisfy them to the utmost of my power.

In the mean time bestow upon me the blessing of a contented spirit. Help me
patiently to endure the inconveniences of this place. And preserve me from the
danger of all the temptations, which I meet with in it: especially from seeking
a remedy of my sorrows, in the pleasures of intemperance, or evil company, or
any profane mirth whatsoever. Be thou my comfort; O God, my exceeding joy; and
the full satisfaction of my soul, in all conditions. And when thou art pleased
to deliver me from this place, and restore me again to my desired freedom: O
Lord, make me ever mindful of the vows, wherein I am now forward to bind my
self. Dispose my heart then to be so sensibly affected, with the least of those
mercies which formerly I have little regarded; that I may never forget to
praise thee even for the benefit of a sweeter air than now I enjoy, and to
acknowledge thee in the night season upon my bed, and to thank thee for the
coursest food; and especially I may rejoice to go again into the great
Congregation to praise thee with the most ardent love for all spiritual
blessings in Christ Jesus.

Preserve in me also a grateful remembrance of the kindness of my Friends and
Neighbors: especially of those persons to whom I stand particularly indebted,
when by their charity I shall be released. And whatsoever loss they sustain by
my poverty, good Lord, make it up abundantly to them and theirs, out of thy
rich grace and mercy. Requite their love with plenty and prosperity in this
world; and give them the reward of eternal life and glory in the world to come;
through Christ Jesus. Amen.

A Prayer of a great Malefactor in Prison.
O Most holy and righteous Judge of the whole world; give a sinful and
miserable wretch leave to prostrate himself before the Throne of thy Grace, and
implore that mercy which formerly I have despised or abused. I am not worthy, I
confess, to lift up my eyes toward heaven; and it becomes me in the greatest
dejection of spirit to sigh and groan under the load of my sins: which have
been so great and many, so bold, so presumptuous and shameless, that when with
an awakened mind I reflect upon them, I am ready to sink into hell, and utterly
despair of any mercy. O God, how have I hated instruction, Prove. 5.12,13.
and my heart despised reproof? And have not obeyed the voice of my teachers,
nor inclined mine ear to them that admonished me? How swift have my feet been
to run into evil? and how backward and averse have I been to any thing that is
good? O the injuries which I have done my Neighbors! the abuse of my self and
of thy good creatures! The profane contempt or neglect of thee and the duties
of thy worship and service! Here let him reckon up the blasphemy, debauchery,
and violence that he has been guilty of.
The remembrance of all this is dreadful: the burden of it is intolerable.

How shall I appear before thee, at whose rebuke the Mountains quake, since I
cannot think of appearing before an earthly Judge without shame and
affrightment of spirit? O Lord, work in me a greater dread of thee, with a
greater shame and confusion of face; now that I am in thy presence. For which
end, be pleased to represent unto me effectually, the wickedness, the baseness
and vileness of all my evil doings, as well as the guilt and just desert of
them. O that I could hate and abhor them, more than that death, Or punishment;
when the crime is less.
which I expect shortly to suffer for them! Bestow on me that ingenuous and
godly sorrow which works repentance, and unfeigned purposes of amendment of
life. They come too late indeed, I may justly think, to find acceptance with
thee: and therefore, not without fear and trembling, and a great sense of my
undeservings, I look up unto thee; acknowledging thy infinite goodness, if thou will vouchsafe but the smallest hope of mercy.

Mercy, mercy, good Lord: cast me not quite out of thy sight, for Jesus Christ's
his sake, who gave himself for us to redeem us from all iniquity. It is the
beginning of some mercy, and an earnest, I hope, of more, that thon have made
me sensible of mine offenses; and that thou have wrought in me a resolution to
forsake them, and some love to a godly, sober and righteous life. Help me to
manifest the sincerity and uprightness of my soul in these resolutions, as much
as I am able; by giving thee hearty thanks that the hand of justice has
over-taken and laid hold upon me, and put a stop to the further mischief which
I might have committed; and by making a free and open confession of my crimes,
and taking the shame which belongs to me, before others; and by acknowledging
that I am unworthy to live; and by earnest admonishments to all, to be warned
by my example, and to cease betimes to do evil, and learn to do well. O God,
that I could glorify thee a little in my latter end, after this manner. And
till I come to receive my deserved punishment, help me to spend my time in
bewailing my sins; in humbling my self before thee for them; in setting my
heart against them; in studying and admiring with the greatest affection the
holy life of the Lord Jesus; in calling other offenders to repentance, and
exhorting them thereby to give thee glory. Deny me not the grace, I beseech
thee, to enable me thus to employ my self; that I may have some taste of thy
mercy, and the fear of death may be abated by some hope, that when my soul
shall be parted from the body, thou, O blessed Jesus, wilt receive it, though
so unworthy, into some of the heavenly mansions. Amen, Amen.

A Soldier's Prayer that fights for his Country.
O Most mighty Lord, the Fountain of life and strength, and courage; whom all
the host of heaven continually obeys. I prostrate my self before thee in a
religious sense, that the fear of thy divine Majesty, a pure conscience, and a
strong hope and confidence in thy Omnipotent goodness, will give the most
assured resolution, valor and boldness to our spirits, in all dangers. Most
humbly beseeching thee to purge my heart from the love of every thing that is
offensive to thee; to pardon all my former sins, negligences and ignorances;
and to indue me with the grace of thy holy Spirit strictly to amend and reform
my life, according to thy holy Word.

Many temptations, I am sensible, will continually assault me, in this state of
life wherein I am engaged. But I as earnestly beseech thee to defend me from
the power of them, as I desire to be defended from death, and to be covered by
thee in the day of battle. O that no covetous desires or greediness of spoil,
no ambition or vainglory, no hatred or malice, may push me forward in any
enterprise! But give me the victory over these and all other vile affections
and passions, before I meet with any other enemy. And graciously bless and
prosper our arms, for the defense of our Country, and the preservation of our
Religion, Government, Laws and Liberties. And whilst we fight for the
preservation of good Order, Lord, give us all grace to be examples of it our
selves, That abhorring all blasphemy and profaneness, all riot and
lasciviousness; Luke 3.14.
and doing violence to no man, accusing no man falsely, and being content with
our wages, we may adorn both our Cause and our Religion: and whatsoever the
issue be, we may have peace in our own hearts, and living or dying may be
accepted with thee; through Christ Jesus, the Prince of peace. To whom, etc.
Amen.

A Prayer for the use of one that is Aged.
I Adore thee, O Lord of life and glory; who art from everlasting to
everlasting, and changest not: beseeching thee to look graciously upon thy
unworthy servant, whose hope is only in thine infinite mercy; by which my life
has been prolonged to old age, and which is able to make me eternally blessed.
I thank thee for thy inconceiveable love in the Lord Jesus, who has given me
such a solid and steadfast ground of hope, to suppport and strengthen my heart,
when all the comforts of this life fail me: and likewise praise and magnify
thy bounteous goodness, for those innumerable blessings, which, time after
time, thou have bestowed upon me, from the beginning of my life till this
present Let them be reckoned up as particularly as you can.
.

O my God, help me always to solace my self, now that the days are come wherein
I have no pleasure, with a perpetual remembrance of all thy past loving
kindnesses to me; and with those hopes which I have of thy endless love in the
other world. And the more my outward senses decay, vouchsafe me the quicker and
more lively sense in my heart of those good things which thou have laid up
there, for those that fear thee. Preserve me from all discontented thoughts,
and peevish passions. Make me an example unto others of Holiness, discretion,
temperance, gravity, Tit. 2.2,3.
peaceableness and patience: Prove. 20.29.
that so I may with the more authority be a teacher of good things; Ecclus.
25.4.
and my hoary head may be a crown of glory, being found in the ways of
righteousness. O how comely a thing is judgment for gray hairs; and for
ancient men to know counsel! Pardon me, good Lord, that I have made no better
improvement of my time and experience; for the furnishing of my mind with this
wisdom, and with those virtues. Pardon all my negligences, and all my offenses.
Remember them particularly.
And fill my heart with a comfortable sense of thy pardoning mercy in Christ
Jesus: that having no other burden, but that of age, to oppress my spirit, I
may rejoice in thee as long as I live, and at last lay my self down to rest in
peace, and return my soul back unto thee cheerfully, whenever thou call
for it; in sure and certain hope of the resurrection of the dead, and of that
glory, honor and immortality, which thou have graciously promised us by thy
dear Son, my most blessed Lord and Savior, Christ Jesus. With whom I desire to
live to give thee eternal praises. Amen.

A large FORM OF DEVOTION.
When any person is disposed to spend a day, or part of it, in Devotion: the
usual addresses to God in the morning, may be continued in this manner.
O Most High and holy One, who inhabitest eternity, and art God over all, most
blessed for evermore. Happy are they who stand continually in thy presence, and
are always admiring, praising, loving and obeying thee; and rejoicing in thy
love and favor toward them! The highest Angels can desire no greater bliss,
than to be thus knit unto thee, and to live in such constant union and
friendship with thee. An happiness, I am sensible, that is above our reach, who
dwell in houses of clay, and groan under the burden of this flesh: but which we
aspire toward, and our uncloathed spirits hope for, in the other world. And
blessed be thy infinite goodness, we are encouraged by Christ Jesus to look up
unto thee, for the beginning and taste of this happiness; whilst we remain here
below, at this great distance from the Throne of thy Glory.

And accordingly I humbly prostrate my self before thee at this time,
beseeching thee in the name of my dear Savior who gave himself for me, that
thou will graciously vouchsafe to inspire me with such delightful thoughts of
thee, and such a transforming love unto thee, as may fill my heart with
unspeakable joy and satisfaction, whilst I am in thy presence to admire and
adore thee; to praise thy incomprehensible perfections; to acknowledge with all
humility my entire dependence on thee; thankfully to remember all the benefits
thou have done unto me; sorrowfully to bewail my ungrateful behavior toward
thee; most earnestly to deprecate thy displeasure; to implore thy grace and
favor; and to make an absolute surrender of my self to thee, with most hearty
Devotion to thy service.

It is the unfeigned desire of my soul to spend some time in attending wholly
to these duties; the better to dispose me to serve thee, in the rest of my
life. But alas! O Lord, what am I, or what can I do, unless thou will make thy
self present to me; and send down thy holy Spirit upon me! My thoughts and
affections are exceeding dull and heavy; and they will soon flag and grow
weary; unless thou will be pleased by thy Almighty Power to raise and bear them
up toward heaven. I most humbly therefore again beseech thee, in thy infinite
mercy, to touch my heart with such a lively sense of thy Divine Majesty, as may
fix my wandering thoughts, and compose my tumultuous affections, and stir up my
flat and cold desires, and may make me feel the power, and taste the sweetness
of every Divine Truth; whilst I read or meditate in thy holy Word, and whilst I
pray to thee, and praise thee, and bless thy holy Name. O that all other things
may be shut out of my soul, and that I may be so alone with thee, as to be more
apprehensive of thy greatness, and of thy goodness, and of thy purity, and of
my near relation to thee, and the innumerable obligations which I lie under to
be thine entirely! O that nothing may be so bitter to me as to think, that I
have in the least offended thee! and that nothing may be so mavelous in my
eyes, as thy exceeding abundant love in the Lord Jesus, by whom thou have
encouraged sinners to place their faith and hope in thee!

Help me, O my God, through that new and living way which he has consecrated,
to draw nigh unto thee, and to throw down my self at thy feet; waiting for a
gracious look from thee, resigning my will to thee, strongly uniting it in
hearty affection to thy holy Will, and resolving never to rise up any more in
opposition to it, but to live in thy love, and in sincere obedience to all thy
commands.

So shall my soul bless thee as long as I live; I will always be speaking good
of thy Name, and will show forth thy praise, as well as I am able, to all
generations. Amen.

AFter this short address to God for his assistance; consider a while who it
is, to whom you have begun to speak. Cast your eyes upon the heaven and the
earth, and think of the glory of that Majesty, which fills all things, and
cannot be contained in any. Then labor to affect your heart with your own
mean, vile and sinful condition. For which end examine what particular sins you
have been guilty of. Set them down in writing before your eyes, that they may
be confessed and lamented. And likewise consider in the same manner, what
particular blessings you have received, that they may be most thankfully
acknowledged. In all which you may assist your selves and be much excited, by
reading some of the Psalms of David, and some part of such pious Books as you
are acquainted withal. After which, proceed to express the sense of your heart
to God, with the greatest deliberation, in the manner following: pausing a
while, and ruminating upon what you have said; at the end of every part thereof.

I.
O Most glorious Majesty of heaven and earth, upon whom all creatures depend
for life, and breath, and all things. I most thankfully embrace and desire
wisely and faithfully to improve this happy leisure, which thou vouchsafest me,
of retiring from this world, and making my resort to thee, 2 Cor. 1.3.
the Father of mercies, Rev. 5.13.
and the God of all comfort. Psalm. 48.1.
Thou art worthy, Rev. 4.8.
O Lord, to receive from me and from the whole world, blessing, 1 Samuel 2.2.
Psalm. 145.17. 45.7.
and honor, and glory, and power; Job 37.23.
for thou art great and greatly to be praised. Psalm. 19.1.
All the host of heaven continually praises thee; Job 42.2.
Psalm. 135.6.
and so ought all the Church on earth, 148.5,6. 147.5.
saying; Holy, 104.24,27,28,31.
holy, holy, Lord God almighty, which is, which was, 145.4,13. 102 27. 119.89.
146.2. 111.1. 148.13.
and which is to come. There is none holy as the Lord, for there is none
besides thee. Thou art righteous in all thy ways, Job. 11.7.
and holy in all thy works. Thou love righteousness, and hate iniquity; and
art excellent in power, and in judgment, and in plenty of justice. The earth
is thine, and the fullness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein. The
heavens declare the glory of God, the firmament shows his handiwork. The
sun, moon and stars praise the name of the Lord; for he commanded, and they
were created. He has also established them for ever and ever: He has made a
decree which shall not pass. I know, O Lord, that thou can do every thing;
and that no thought of thine can be hindered. Whatsoever the Lord pleases, that
does he in heaven and in earth, in the seas, and in all deep places. For he is
great, and of great power; his understanding is infinite. Praised be thy
Sovereign goodness and tender mercy, which spreads it self over all thy works.
O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all. And they
all wait on thee; that thou may give them their meat in due season. That thou
give them they gather: thou openest thy hand, they are filled with good. The
glory of the Lord shall endure for ever: the Lord shall rejoice in his works.
Thou always wast, and ever wilt be the most holy, powerful, wise and good. Thy
kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endures throughout all
generations. One generation shall ^raise thy works to another, and shall
de^lare thy mighty acts. They all pass away like a shadow; but thou art the
same, and thy years shall have no end For ever, O Lord, thy word is settled in
heaven: Thy faithfulness is unto all generations. While I live, there fore,
will I praise the Lord: I will sing praises to my God, while I have any being.
I will praise thee, O Lord with my whole heart, whose name i^ exalted above all
blessing and praise For we cannot know the Almighty to perfection: His wisdom
is unsearchable, and his ways past finding out His name alone is excellent, his
glory is above the earth and heaven.

II.
O what high dignity is this! tha^ I am admitted into thy presence t^ speak
unto thee; the blessed and only Potentate, 1 Timothy 6.15.
the King o^ kings, and Lord of Lords who only have immortality! O how happy
ought I to think my self, tha^ I may draw thus nigh to thee, wh^ dwell in
light unapproachable! who art so happy in thy own most blessed Nature; and who
if thou do but open thy self to any soul, and fillest it with a great sense
of thee and affection to thee, thou let heavenly joys into it, and make
it happy beyond expression! For heaven cannot be separated from thee: but
wheresoever thou art, there is peace and satisfaction, joy and gladness, and
unspeakable bliss. Adored be thy divine goodness, which has made me so happy
this day, as to feel some sense of thee begin to shine in my soul. Adored be
thy goodness, which incourages me still to look up unto thee, that I may feel
more of thee; yea, has engaged me by innumerable Mercies, to continue these
addresses to thy divine Majesty: O how excellent is thy loving kindness, Psalm.
36.7.
O God! 139.17.
How precious are thy thoughts unto me! how great is the sum of them! Psalm.
46.5.
Many, O Lord my God, 22.9,10.
are thy wonderful works which thou have done, and thy thoughts which are to
me-ward: they cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee: if I would declare and
speak of them, they are more than can be numbered. By thee I was fearfully and
wonderfully made in secret. Thou art he that took me out of my mothers womb;
and did make me hope upon her breasts. I have been cast upon thee ever since,
and thou have been my gracious God unto this moment. My infancy and childhood
was attended with a very careful providence. And thou have blessed my riper
years with a continued health and strength of body and mind, and abundance of
good things to support and refresh me in my pilgrimage through this world to a
better life. I never have wanted my daily bread, even when I was not able to
ask it of thee. And thou have bestowed on me many friends and kind benefactors.
And prevented me likewise by a timely grace, and sent me many instructors; that
I might remember thee my Creator, and Jesus Christ my Savior. Into whose
family, blessed be thy Name, I was early adopted, and assured of thy fatherly
love and tender mercy toward me. O how deeply do I stand indebted to thee for
all those, by whose Counsels, or Sermons, or Writings, or religious Society, or
godly Examples, or charitable Prayers, I have been helped forward in my way to
heaven! Blessed be thy Name for all the means whereby I have been led to the
knowledge of thy great love in the Lord Jesus, which passes knowledge. For
ever blessed be thy Name, for sending him into the world, born of a woman, to
be a teacher of righteousness; to go before us, and leave us a pattern of a
most holy life; to dye for our sins; and to rise again for our justification;
and then to ascend into the heavens to prepare a place for us; where thou have
advanced him above all principalities and powers, Phil. 3.10,11.
and given him a name above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee
should how, and every tongue confess him to be the Lord, to the glory of thee,
O God, the Father Almighty. I glorify thee, O heavenly Father, with all my
heart and soul, for inspiring thy holy Apostles and Prophets; 2 Cor. 4.6.
and shining into their hearts to give the light of the knowledge of thy glory,
in the face of Jesus Christ. I thank thee for calling me to faith in thee; for
making such great and precious promises to encourage our hope, and for
disposing me, in any measure, to be an inheritour of them. I thank thee for
granting such power to our blessed Lord, to fulfill his word; for making him a
royal High Priest, and appointing him to bless us, here and eternally. Glory be
to thee, O Lord most high, who have so often favored me with the gracious
visitations of thy holy Spirit; inlightning my mind, drawing my will toward
thee, exciting in me holy desires, working many pious purposes and resolutions
in my heart, giving me a taste how gracious thou art, setting before me the
hope of eternal life, and persuading me by innumerable arguments to entertain
those blessings, which I should have been forward of my self to have desired.
Who can utter the mighty acts of the Lord! Psalm. 106.2.
who can show forth all his praise! How often have thou spared me when I
deserved to be punished! How many dangers have I escaped! From how many
assaults of the enemy have I been guarded! And how many of his designs have
been defeated by an invisible and unobserved goodness, which ought for ever to
be acknowledged! Mention all the particular mercies you can remember: and then
proceed still to admire his loving kindness, in all those you took no notice
of, or have forgotten.


III.
O my God, with what awe and reverence ought I to make mention of thy name, who
dwell in eternity, whose throne is inestimable, whose glory cannot be
comprehended, 2 Esd. 8.20,21.
before whom the hosts of angels stand with trembling! With what humility of
soul, ought I to acknowledge thy Divine Grace, that thou who art so great and
highly exalted, wilt humble thy self to take notice of such poor things as we
are! Thou art to be admired with our highest thoughts: thou art to be loved
with all our heart, and soul and strength. We ought to render thee most
cheerful service; and confess that we never serve our selves more, than when we
even lose all thought of our selves, and forget all things here, in admiring,
loving, praising, and giving thanks to thee. All that is within me ought to
bless thy holy Name. O how great ought my joy to be in thy love, and in thy
Salvation: who art worthy to be praised with all pure and holy praise. Tob.
8.16.
Therefore let thy Saints praise thee, 12.6.
with all thy creatures. And let all thine angels, and thine elect praise thee
for ever. It is good to praise God and exalt his Name, and with honor to show
forth all his works; therefore be not slack to praise him. Yea, to thee, O
Lord, I ought to resign my self with the greatest willingness of heart; to
trust and hope in thee at all times; to excite all others to show forth thy
praise; and to study to glorify thee more and more, not only by my words, but
with my body and soul, in all the actions of a sober, righteous and godly life.
I can desire no greater honor in this world, than that I may live to the
praise of the glory of thy grace in Christ Jesus; walking worthy of thee, who
have called me to thy Kingdom and Glory; and behaving my self in all things, as
becomes one that has received such pledges of thy love already, and looks for
thy mercy unto eternal life. All thy Laws, I know, are just and good. Thy ways
are ways of pleasantness, Prove. 3.17.
and all thy paths are peace. Psalm. 19.10,11.
More to be desired are thy commandments than gold, yea, than much fine gold:
119.165.
sweeter also than honey, 84.11,12.
and the honey comb. By them does thy servant shine gloriously; Ecclus. 4.12.
and in keeping of them there is great reward. He that loves them, loves
life; he that holds them fast shall inherit glory; and wheresoever they enter
the Lord will bless. Great peace have they that love thy Law: and nothing shall
offend them. The Lord God is a sun and shield: the Lord will give grace and
glory: no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly. O Lord of
host, blessed is the man that trusts in thee!

IV.
But the more, O Lord, I speak in thy praise, the more I am sensible, I
reproach my self; who have not given thee that honor and glory, that fear and
love, that hearty service and cheerful obedience, which is due unto thee, so
many ways. I stand condemned out of my own mouth, of most fearful ingratitude
to thee, from whom I have received so many, and such inestimable benefits. How
seldom have I thought of them? Or how little have they affected my heart? How
loath have I often been, to dispose my self to commemorate the greatest love of
my dearest Savior? And how soon am I weary, even of the most delightful
employment, of praising and blessing thee? With whom I profess that I desire
and hope to live for ever, and praise thy Name. O the vanity of my mind! the
looseness of my thoughts! the inordinateness of my desires, and unruliness of
my passions! the discontent of my spirit! the unstedfastness of my resolutions!
the breach of my promises! the coldness of my prayers, and the dullness of my
meditations! the loss of my precious time, and neglect of good opportunities!
my eagerness after these worldly enjoyments, and feeble endeavors after heaven!

I am astonished to think, that ever I should distrust thy providence, who have
been so tenderly careful of me; or be unthankful for thy benefits, which are
every moment poured forth so plentifully upon me; or be uncharitable to my
Neighbors, when I stand in so great need of mercy my self, and live
continually upon thy bounty; or abuse any of those blessings, which thou can
so easily deprive me of, or wholly spoil the comfort of them. And yet alas! how
prone have I been to deceive my self with shadows of Religion and Devotion
toward thee? and to content my self with the praises of those divine
perfections, which I have not so zealously studied to imitate? O how unlike am
I to the humble, the meek, the pitiful, and the patient Jesus? Yea, how
insensible am I of his incomparable love, which made him to lay down his life
for me? How many ways have I injured my Neighbors, or neglected to do them
good? I am conscious to my self of sundry offenses, not only against the rules
of righteousness and mercy, but of sobriety and godliness Here mention the
particular acts of intemperance, uncharitableness, or any else you have been
guilty of.
. And thou to whom all things past are present, who searchest the hearts and
tryest the reins, know a great deal more. My secret sins are no more hid
from thee, than those which are most open and manifest. And they are all the
more grievous, because a petty temptation has too often prevailed to make me
neglect my duty toward thee. O how shameful is it, that a small gain, or a
momentany pleasure, or the good word of men whose breath is in their nostrils,
should be preferred before that honor which I owe to thee, and those infinite
treasures of thy grace in Christ Jesus, and that immortal life and glory, which
he has promised to the faithful! And all this against the clear understanding
which thou have given me of thy will; against many holy purposes, resolutions
and vows of absolute obedience to it in all things; and against the tastes I
have had how gracious thou art, and how good it is to keep thy commandments.

V.
I blush, O Lord, to lift up mine eyes toward heaven. To me belongs nothing
but shame and confusion of face; in which I ought to lie down before thee, if I
reflected only upon the baseness and vileness of my descent; being the
offspring of disloyal parents, who were rebels and traitors against thy divine
Majesty. This is a just reproach and disgrace to the best of us. We were
tainted in our first Father, who has left a foul blot and stain upon our
Nature: and we feel that weakness in our reason, that strength and violence in
our passions, and that forwardness in our wills to follow them, and to be led
by them, which is sufficient to humble and lay us low in our own eyes. With
what dejection of spirit then ought I to mention all those offenses, whereby I
or others have justified that first rebellion, and still taken part with the
Devil and his Angels, against thee and the motions of thy holy Spirit in our
hearts!

Thy mercy indeed is so much the more miraculous, which has bestowed such
great benefits, as I have acknowledged, upon such vile, such sinful, such
unthankful wretches, and at the best such unprofitable creatures; whose
understandings are so shallow to comprehend and admire thy love; whose
affections are so heavy, so listless, and so unapt to lay it to heart; and who
when they have done all that they can, have done no more than was their duty to
do. But the greater reason there is that I should be confounded at the
remembrance of my disobedience to thee, notwithstanding such unexpected, as
well as undeserved, demonstrations of thy love and grace toward mankind. It
becomes me to bow my self lower than my knees before thee; and to debase my
self as much as I am able in thy presence; since I am but sinful dust and
ashes, that deserves to be cast down, even into the pit of destruction. The
very multitude of my offenses is enough to amaze and perplex my thoughts; the
weight of them, did I always feel it, may well depress and sink my spirit into
the greatest horror and affrightment; but the baseness and ingratitude of them
to so gracious a Father, O how --

VI.
I am not able to express, O Lord, the shame, the consternation and the trouble
of my spirit, at the thought of that ingratitude. I loath and abhor my self, as
unworthy to live and breath upon the face of the earth. I am astonished at thy
wonderful patience, and long-suffering, which not only endures such a wretch as
I am; but permits me to speak unto thee, and to cry for mercy to that love,
which I have so much abused. O that I were sensibly affected with something of
thee! That at least thy sparing and forbearing mercy did mightily move, and
everlastingly possess my heart with admiration of it! That so I may with the
more ingenuous sorrow and grief bewail mine offenses, against such tender
bowels of compassion toward me. Jer. 9.1.
O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might
weep bitterly for my unkind requitals of the infinite bounty of thee my
Creator, and of the inconceiveable love of my blessed Savior, and of the
unwearied grace of thy holy Spirit, which I hope I still feel working in my
heart! Fill me, O God, with the saddest remembrance of all my follies; and
possess my reason so much against them, that I may have an utter hatred and
detestation of them, as the greatest offenses to me, as well as to thy divine
Majesty. It is easier, I know, to make large confessions, than to be truly
contrite and broken in heart: and we are more inclined to sigh and groan under
the sense of thy displeasure, than to abhor that which is evil, and to cleave
to that which is good. Romans 12.9.
Be thou therefore pleased, Psalm. 42.8.
O Lord the Father of our spirits, to wound my soul with a lively sense of the
vileness of my behavior toward thee, Dan. 5.23.
the God of my life, in whose hand my breath is, and whose are all my ways.
Estrange me from every thing, that will not let me love thee with all my heart,
and soul, and strength; by whom it is that I have power to love any thing at
all. Set my heart in such a perfect enmity to all things contrary to thy
blessed will, that I may never be reconciled to them any more. And dispose me
to such an entire affection to all thy commands, that none of them may be
grievous to me, but I may account thy yoke to be easy, and thy burden to be
light.

And then be merciful unto me, good Lord, according to thy loving kindness:
Psalm. 51.1.
according unto the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions.
25.7.
38.18.
Be merciful unto me for Jesus his sake, 32.5.
who came into the world and dyed to save sinners. 143.2.
O remember not the sins of my youth, 130.3,4.
nor the transgressions of my riper years: 86.5,6.
25.11.
according to thy mercy remember thou me, for thy goodness sake, O Lord. For I
confess mine iniquity, and am sorry for my sin. I acknowledge my sin unto thee,
and mine iniquity have I not hid. Enter not therefore into judgment with thy
servant: for if thou, Lord, should mark iniquities; O Lord, who shall stand?
But there is forgiveness with thee: that thou may be feared. Thou art good
and ready to forgive: and plenteous in mercy unto all them that call upon thee.
Give ear therefore unto my prayer, and attend to the voice of my supplications.
And for thy name sake pardon mine iniquity, for it is great.

VII.
Great are thy tender mercies, O Lord; who have not yet cast me away from thy
presence, nor dealt with me after my sins, nor rewarded me according to mine
iniquities. Adored be thine infinite goodness, that I am so far from being cast
into the place of weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth, that I do not yet
suffer here the pains, and the anguish and misery, which mine offenses have
deserved. I might have been lamenting them in those doleful complaints of thy
ancient servant; saying, thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presses
me sore. There is no soundness in my flesh, Psalm. 38.2.3.6. etc.
because of thine anger: 88.16,18.
neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my sin. I am troubled, I am
bowed down greatly; I go mourning all the day long. For my loins are filled
with a loathsome disease: and there is no soundness in my flesh. I am feeble
and sore broken: I have roared by reason of the disquietness of my heart. But
thanks be to thy most long-suffering goodness, thy fierce anger goes not over
me; thy terror has not cut me off. Lovers and friends have thou not put far
from me; nor mine acquaintance into darkness. Yea, thou declarest thy self
willing to accept me again into friendship with thy self. And have in the most
loving manner invited me to come unto thee, and bid me hope for a pardon
through thy mercy in Christ Jesus. O how sweet are those gracious words; Come
unto me all ye that labor, Matthew. 11.26.
and are heaven laden, Heb. 8.10,12.
and I will give you rest! How precious are thy promises, Act. 26.18.
that thou will put thy laws into our mind, and write them in our hearts: And
be merciful to our unrighteousness, and remember our sins and iniquities no
more! Mavelous was thy mercy, O Lord Jesus, who sent thine Apostles to open
men's eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan
to God, that they might receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among
them, who are sanctified by faith that is in thee.

VIII.
I receive with all thankfulness this thy exceeding great grace, which has
declared, that if we walk in the light as thou art in the light, 1 John 1.7.
we shall have fellowship one with another, Ecclus. 17.29.
and the blood of Jesus Christ thy Son shall cleanse us from all sin. I admire
thy incomprehensible love. O how great is the loving kindness of the Lord our
God, and his compassion unto such, as turn unto him in holiness! It constrains
me to offer up my self with the heartiest affection to thy service: resolving
hereafter to be more watchful, more diligent, more zealous in the performance
of my duty; and to walk more circumspectly as a child of the light, and to make
it my delight to do thy will, O God. Behold, O Lord, my heart is bent to resign
it self perfectly into thy hands: and to make a new dedication of all the
powers of my soul and body, to be employed continually in well doing. I have
sworn and am steadfastly purposed to keep thy righteous precepts. Psalm. 119.30.
31.11.
I have chosen the way of truth; 14.15.
thy judgments have I laid before me. 16.115.
I will stick unto thy testimonies: 111.112.
and run the way of thy commandments. Thy word have I hid in my heart; that I
may not sin against thee. I will rejoice in the way of thy testimonies, as much
as in all riches. I will meditate in thy precepts: and have respect unto thy
ways. I will delight my self also in thy statutes: I will never forget thy
word. Depart from me, ye evil doers: for I will keep the commandments of my
God. Thy testimonies have I taken as my heritage for ever: for they are the
rejoicing of my heart. I have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes always;
even unto the end.

IX.
Accept, I beseech thee, the free-will-offerings of my mouth, O Lord, and teach
me thy judgments. Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law: yea I shall
observe it with my whole heart. Make me to go in the path of thy commandments;
for therein do I delight. With my whole heart have I sought thee: O let me not
wander from thy commandments. Psalm. 119.108,34,35,10,115,116,117.
I am sensible of the exceeding great weakness and inconstancy of our nature,
and that without thy gracious aids, I shall not be able to accomplish these
resolutions. And therefore I look up unto thee, with the more ardent desires,
for power from above, to confirm and strengthen them; and to assist me mightily
to fulfill thy whole good will and pleasure. I will steadfastly depend upon the
promise of my blessed Savior, who has told me that thou will give thy holy
spirit to them that ask it of thee. My hope, O God, is in this thy true and
faithful word. Uphold me according unto thy Word, that I may live; and let me
not be ashamed of my hope. Hold thou me up and I shall be safe: and I will have
respect unto thy statutes continually. Preserve in me such a lively sense of
thy good will and readiness to help me, that I may be so strong in our Lord and
in the power of his might, as to be able to do all things through Christ
strengthing of me. O thou Father of mercies, who have bestowed so many and so
great blessings on us without asking; who have visited us so lovingly, when we
could not desire any grace from thee, and when we could, but did not desire it,
and when we did, but very coldly, and with little devotion of spirit: deny not
the humble and importunate requests of thy poor supplicant, who most earnestly
beseeches thee, that thou will grant me, according to the riches of thy glory,
to be strengthened with might, by thy Spirit, in the inner man. Ephesians. 3.16.
Arm me therewith against the assaults of all temptations, either from the
good, or the evil things of this life; that they may never seduce, or deterr me
from my duty: but I may do virtuously, in all points, according to my Christian
profession, and those vows and promises, wherein I stand engaged to thee.

X.
Fill me, O God, with the whole knowledge of thy Will, in all wisdom and
spiritual understanding, that I may walk worthy of the Lord, unto all pleasing,
being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of thee, my
God. Increase that faith, likewise, more and more, which works by love, and
purifieth the heart, and overcomes the world. Stir up in me that lively hope,
which may make me purify my self, even as thou art pure: and that ardent love
to thee, which will make me cheerfully do thy will, and love my Brethren, with
a pure heart fervently. Excite in me a great hunger and thirst after
righteousness; till I feel the satisfaction of perfect reconciliation with thee
and conformity to thee. Continue me in the number of those, who are humble and
lowly in their own eyes, and moderate in all their appetites and desires: who
mourn daily that they have offended thee, and that others keep not thy laws:
who are meek and gentle toward all men, in heart and word, and all their
actions: who are merciful and kind, ready to give and to forgive: who are pure
in all their thoughts, intentions, passions and conversation: and who study the
things that make for peace; and who are void of all pride and vainglory, of all
strife and contention; endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond
of peace. O my God, possess me with such a strong sense of the blessedness
which thou have pronounced to all these; that I may be willing also to suffer
wrong rather than to do it, and to suffer any thing for righteousness sake with
a constant heart; giving thanks unto thee that thou will honor me and count me
worthy to suffer for the name of Christ. Help me to give a good example to all
my Neighbors by the sincere practice of all these virtues; shining as a light
in the world, and being the salt of the earth: That others seeing my good
works, may glorify thee our heavenly Father. Dispose my heart to cast all its
care on thee; to pray without ceasing; to bless thy holy name at all times; to
trust in thee, with a steadfast confidence in thy almighty goodness; to make
thee my strength, and my fortress, and the rock of my salvation; to have my
conversation without covetousness; and to set my affections on things above,
where Christ is at thy right hand. In the multitude of my thoughts within me,
let thy comforts, O Lord, delight my soul. When I am full, O that I may never
wax wanton, or forget thee; but still rejoice in our Lord always: that so when I
have nothing, I may be as possessing all things. Let the doing of my duty, ever
be my pleasure: and to serve thee, be a great reward. Let a contented mind, be
instead of all that I want: and a thankful heart, sweeten all my enjoyments.
Let patience always ease me under my burdens: and an entire submission to thy
will, breed in me a settled tranquillity of spirit. Let my delight be in the
excellent that are in the earth: and my thoughts be very much there while I
live, where I desire to be when I dye. That heaven being my aim, my hope, and
the longing expectation of my soul, I may conquer all difficulties in my way to
it; and go through honor and dishonor, good report and bad report, prosperity
and adversity, with the same cheerfulness and evenness of mind; till at last I
come to that place of rest and peace with the glorified Jesus, who is able to
give eternal life to them that obey him.

XI.
Blessed be thy name, who have inspired my heart with these holy desires; and
wrought these purposes and resolutions in me. It is an earnest, I hope, of thy
never failing love toward me; in assurance of which I repose my self with full
satisfaction of heart. Yea, this is my joy and my glory, that I know thee; and
that I live under the care of thy wise, merciful, and almighty providence at
present, and that I have the promise of remission of sins, and of a crown of
life; when the times of refreshment shall come from thy presence, and thou
shall send Jesus Act. 3.19.
to conduct all the faithful to that glorious place where he lives. This is my
salvation and and all my desire. 2 Samuel 23.5.
Now that I see thy abundant love, O heavenly Father, it suffices. Rejoice
with me likewise, all ye Angels of God, according to the word of our Lord, that
there is joy in heaven over one sinner that repents. Luke 15.7.
Bless the Lord, ye heavenly hosts, ye minsters of his that do his pleasure.
Psalm. 103.21.
And, O that this joy may increase continually by my daily increase in all
goodness, and the perfecting of my repentance! till I come to be admitted into
their company, and enter into the joy of my Lord.

XII.
And I wish the same happiness to all mankind, which I desire for my self. It
will multiply my joy to see all the people praise thee, O God, to see all the
people praise thee. O make a joyful noise unto the Lord all ye lands. Serve the
Lord with gladness, and come before his presence with thanksgiving. Psalm. 100.1.
Give unto the Lord, O ye kindreds of the people, give unto the Lord glory and
strength. Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name: bring an offering,
and come into his courts. O worship the Lord with holy worship: fear before him
all the earth. 96.8,9.


More especially, I desire the increase of grace, mercy and peace to thy chosen
people: Beseeching thee to bless thy universal Church, and to fill the hearts
of all its members with thy love; that they may rest neither day nor night,
saying, Blessed be God: Blessed be the glorious Majesty of heaven and earth,
whose power, wisdom and goodness excel all praise, and endure for ever. And
arise, O God, for the sighing of the poor and the needy: let not the men of the
earth always oppress them. Psalm. 10.18.
Let the salvation of thy people come out of thy holy place. 14.7.
Be thou exalted in thy own strength, and so will we sing and praise thy power.
21.13.
Lord continue thy loving kindness unto those that know thee, and thy
righteousness to men of upright heart. Let not the foot of pride come against
them: and let not the hand of the wicked remove them. 36.10,11,12.
O let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end: but establish thou the
just. 7.9.


Protect, O Lord, and defend that part of thy Church which thou have planted in
these Kingdoms. Great and innumerable have been thy mercies to us: but, alas!
we are a stubborn and rebellious people; a people that set not our heart
aright, and whose spirit has not been steadfast with thee. And therefore thou
have justly plagued us many ways: and we should have but our deserts, if thy
hand should still be stretched out, to punish us seven times more for our sins.
But what is man that thou should take displeasure at him? or what is a
corruptible generation, that thou should be extremely angry with them? For
in truth there is none among them but has dealt wickedly: and among the
faithful there is none that has not done amiss. But in this, O Lord, thy
righteousness and goodness shall be declared, if thou be merciful to them which
have not the confidence of good works. Psalm. 78.8. 2 Esdras 8.34,35,36. Psalm.
79 8,9. 118.25.
O be merciful unto us; be merciful unto us, and do not utterly forsake us. O
remember not against us former iniquities, and that we have so soon forgot thy
works, and the wonderful deliverances which thou have given us. Help us, O God
of our salvation, for the glory of thy name, and deliver us and purge away our
sins for thy names sake. Fill us with thy wisdom from above, that we may be
heartily in love with the Religion, which we profess: and preserve us in it for
ever. Defeat the counsels of all its enemies: and bring their wicked devices to
naught. Unite us to each other in brotherly love: and make us at peace among
our selves. O let peace be within this Church: Let them prosper that love her,
and seek her good. Save now, I beseech thee, O Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee,
send now prosperity. And for that end indue our Sovereign Lord, the King, with
all the gifts and graces of thy holy Spirit. Hear the daily prayers of thy
Church for him; that he may always incline to thy will, and walk in thy way:
and study to preserve thy people committed to his charge, in wealth, peace and
godliness. Enlighten all our Bishops, Priests and Deacons, with true knowledge
and understanding of thy Word; and enable them both by their life and doctrine
to set it forth, and show it accordingly. Teach all our Counselors and
Senators wisdom: and give all our Magistrates courage and zeal, to excute
Justice, and to maintain Truth. Vouchsafe to all thy people increase of grace,
to hear thy word with meekness, and to receive it with pure and sincere
affection, and to bring forth the fruits of the spirit. Give them honest and
good hearts, to honor and obey the King, and all that are put in authority
under him; to submit themselves to all their Governors, Teachers, spiritual
Pastors and Masters; to order themselves lowly and reverently to all their
betters; to be careful not to hurt one another by word or deed; to be just and
true in all their dealing; to bear no malice nor hatred in their hearts; to
preserve themselves to temperance, soberness and chastity; not to covet one
another goods; but to learn and labor truly to get their own living, and to
do their duty in that state of life, unto which it has pleased thee to call
them.

And, good Lord, bless the honest labors of all men among us, and crown them
with good success: Especially of those who have any work in hand, for the glory
of thy name, the increase of Christian piety, and the peace of thy Church.
Reward the bounty of all charitable persons, either for the honor of Religion,
or the relief of them that are in poverty. And make the bones which thou have
broken to rejoice. Comfort all that are in a sorrowful condition: and bring
them out of all their troubles. Send thy Angel to guide and preserve those who
are in journeys, upon their lawful occasions. Let them that go down into the
deep, and do business upon the great waters, observe thy providence; and praise
thee for thy goodness, and for thy wonderful works for the children of men.
Forgive all that have done me any evil: and requite the kindness of those who
have done me any good. Let their souls abide in good, and their seed inherit
the earth. Psalm. 25.13.
Rejoice the heart of all my Friends: and fulfill the petitions of all that have
desired my prayers. 106. ult.
Let none that wait on thee, O Lord, be ashamed: let all them that trust in
thee, say continually, the Lord be magnified. Save and deliver every one of us,
O Lord our God, from the hands of our enemies, to give thanks unto thy holy
name, and to triumph in thy praise. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, from everlasting to everlasting; and let all the people say,
Amen. Praise the Lord.

AFter this, if the spirits be tired, it will be fit to give them some
refreshment. And then it will be very profitable to read and weigh seriously
our Saviors Sermon on the Mount, contained in the V. VI. and VII. Chapters of
the Gospel according to St. Matthew. And such meditations may be interspersed
as are most suitable to the persons condition and occasions: With the addition
of some of the prayers foregoing, for RESOLVTION in well doing, or for the
DIVINE GRACE; or for good SVCCESS in any business, or for Friends that are
TROVBLED IN MIND, or are in a long JOVRNEY, etc. And then conclude with the
following Prayer and Thanksgiving.

I.
I Most humbly adore and worship thee, O Lord most high, the possessor of
heaven and earth: And admire thy infinite love to mankind, whom thou have
thought worth the expense of the blood of thy dear Son, and the conduct and
assistance of the holy Ghost, and the Ministry of Angels (by whom thou
exercisest a most watchful providence over us) and so many gracious messages
from heaven, wherein thou have plainly declared, that thou desire to see us
eternally happy, by being made partakers of a Divine Nature. When we seriously
consider thy glorious perfections, and thy astonishing kindness toward us, we
may justly wonder at our selves, that we should ever refuse to be conformed to
thy will; nay, that we should not be exceeding forward to join our selves unto
thee, in most hearty love and entire friendship with thee. I am amazed at the
dullness and stupidity of our Nature; that there should need so many entreaties
and beseechings of us, to be so happy. It is impossible to think of thee, and
to prefer any thing in our esteem, and desire and choice, and delight and joy,
before thy favor and good will toward us: who art so able and so desirous to
bestow the greatest bliss upon us. And therefore I most earnestly beseech thy
goodness, that to all other mercies which I have begged of thee thou will add
this grace, to bring thy self often to my remembrance, and to possess my heart
with a constant, serious and deep sense of thy mavelous kindness; in giving
me liberty to choose so great a good as thy self, and in propounding to my will
such everlasting happiness; and in drawing me from those ways, which are
contrary even to my peace and satisfaction here, by such powerful motives to
well doing.

II.
Awaken, O Lord, awaken this sense continually in my mind. Fasten my thoughts
upon those unseen, and eternal enjoyments. Make me feel what an happiness it is
to love thee with all my heart; to cleave unto thee against all temptations
which would allure or affright me from my duty; to bless and praise thee with
joyful lips; to be kept in perfect peace and tranquillity, while my mind is
stayed on thee; to be full and satisfied, and to desire nothing more, but to
live for ever in thy love. O make me more and more to conceive and remember,
what an infinite delight, thou the infinite good can pour forth into us; how
highly our Lord Jesus is dignified and exalted; and that thou have made him
most blessed for ever, and made him exceeding glad with thy countenance; Psalm.
21.6.
and that he will bring all thy children unto his glory. Settle in my soul such
strong apprehensions of these things; that they may purify my heart more
perfectly, and provoke me to an unwearied diligence in well doing, and make me
endure hardship also, if need be, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ, who was
made perfect through sufferings.

III.
And assist me especially in these holy addresses to thee; that continuing
instant in prayer, I may feel my heart lifted up more and more toward heaven,
by ardent breathings after thee. And indue me likewise with such a spirit of
wisdom, and such sincerity of heart, that I may never be discouraged though I
fall short of the height of my desires: but I may always thankfully acknowledge
thy grace, in what I have attained, and labor earnestly to grow better, with a
quiet, patient, even and steady mind. Preserve in me an humble confidence, that
thou will never forsake the work of thine own hands: And let that confidence
make me industrious, but not slothful. And let thy holy Spirit bless and
further my endeavors; and a fervent desire and hearty good will press me
forward; and the pleasures of Religion mightily indear it to me; and the joy
that thou have set before me, make me run the way of thy commandments with an
enlarged heart. And the nearer I come to the end of my race, may it please thy
goodness to present me with a clearer sight of that Crown of Life, which our
Lord has promised! Open to me more of the treasures of thy Kingdom; and fill
me with a greater joy in hope of thy glory: that so I may be willing to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is best of all.

IV.
And now, O Lord, what thanks shall I render unto thee for these holy thoughts,
desires and affections, which, by thy grace, I feel in my heart: together with
all the other benefits, which thou have bestowed on me, or intendest for me.
Great and mavelous things, O God, have thou wrought for the children of men:
and thou have promised far greater, if we will but be truly grateful unto thee,
for what we have already received. Thou sendest one blessing, as the earnest of
another: having given thy Son to us, that he might give us thy holy Spirit; and
given him to dye for us, that he might give us life. Thou grantest to us thy
grace, that we may repent: and thou give repentance, that thou may give us
pardon: and thou pardonest our sins, that we may be thy children; and being thy
children thou designest to make us thy heirs together with our blessed Savior.
Thou give us temporal blessings, that we may thirst after spiritual: and thou
fillest us with spiritual blessings in Christ, that we may long for the
accomplishment of them in immortal life. There is none can declare the goodness
of the Lord. We best declare our sense of it, when we thankfully receive it;
and become as good as thou would have us, and inablest us to be. And how
great, how free is that goodness, which is most of all pleased when we are
happy! and esteems our doing our selves good, with thy grace and favor, the
return that we should make to thy bounty! Thou do us good before we ask; and
thou give liberally unto us, that thou may move us to ask more. Thou
intreatest us when we are unwilling: thou beseechest us, that we would let thee
bless us, and not put impediments in the way of our own happiness: thou
pittiest us, when we have no compassion for our selves; and art still careful
of us, when we trifle away the richest mercies.

V.
O the exceeding riches of thy grace to the children of men! who can number all
thy mercies? and who can understand the greatness of those, of which we make
mention? It is easier to speak of them, than to be affected with the multitude
and surpassing value of them: and we can sooner be affected with them, than do
any thing worthy such excellent love. Our Praises and Thanksgivngs consist too
much in words, and transient admirations, and sudden passions. O that I had
such a serious, such a considerate heart, as to return unto thee, the constant,
uniform and cheerful obedience of a godly life! By which, I know, I shall not
only most praise and glorify thee, but do the greatest benefit to my self. And
when I have done all that I can, I will acknowledge my self an unprofitable
servant, that has done no more, than was his duty to do. I will esteem all my
goodness, to be the fruit of thy great goodness to me. And I will rejoice in
this, that thou art formed in me, and that I am made like unto the Son of thy
love; and that I have hopes through thy abundant and undeserved mercy to live
with him in his heavenly Kingdom. Which I beseech thee hasten, to the eternal
joy of all those that love his appearing. Amen, Amen. Let thy kingdom come;
that I may see the good of thy chosen, and glory with thine inheritance: and we
may all with united hearts and affections, render our thanks unto thee, and
sing thy everlasting praises.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communication
of the holy Ghost, be with me, and with all thy people every where, both now
and always. Amen.

A Prayer in Lent, or upon any public Fast.
I.
O Most glorious God; who art from everlasting to everlasting blessed in thy
self; and who alone can satisfy the hungry soul, and fillest the humble with
good things. In a serious sense of my own emptiness and thy fullness, of my
great needs, and thy bounty and readiness to bestow thy benefits, I cast down
my self before thee; worshipping and adoring thine incomprehensible perfections,
with a great fear of thy Almighty Majesty, and an humble hope in thine infinite
goodness, and an hearty love to thy purity and righteousness, and entire
submission to thy holy Will: believing thy gracious promises, desiring to be
guided by thy wisdom, depending on thy providence, blessing and praising thee
for thy unspeakable mercies to me, and earnestly beseeching the continuance of
them; with a continued sense in my heart of thy abundant goodness to me, and to
all thy creatures, and of those duties which I owe to thee, and to all men.

II.
I most sorrowfully bewail my carelessness, O Lord, that I have had so seldom,
or so short, or so cold and little affecting, thoughts of thee: and that I have
performed these acts of worship and adoration, of fear and reverence, of faith
and love, of submission and resignation, of supplication and thanksgiving, with
so little intention and earnestness of mind, with so little zeal and fervency
of affection, and with so little humility and prostration of spirit. Nothing, O
my God, is of so bitter remembrance to my thoughts, nothing is such a load to
my heart, as that I have loved the world, at any time, more than thee; and
pursued with greater eagerness the possessions, and pleasures, and honors of a
dying life, than the glory and treasures of thy Kingdom, the joy and happiness
of eternal endurance. It grieves me to think that I have, at any time, so
coldly entertained the glad tidings of salvation, so listlesly embraced the
loving invitations of my dear Savior; so negligently improved the helps and
assistances of the holy Spirit of Grace, and so faintly sought, I sorrowfully
again acknowledge, that glory, honor and immortality which Christ has brought
to light by his Gospel. How little have I been wounded with the dying and
bleeding of thine only begotten Son for my sake! How little concerned sometimes
in his passionate desires of the happiness of mankind! How little melted with
the ardent flames of his incomparable love! How little moved or persuaded with
his importunate entreaties! How incompliant with his inspirations, disobedient
to his commands, and insensible of his precious promises, and fearful
threatenings!

III.
I have praised thee, alas! but seldom or slightly, for so glorious an example,
as he has left us, of an holy life; for the effects and fruits of his passion,
and intercession; and for the power which he has obtained at thy right hand.
And lother have I, too often, been to imitate his life, and to employ that
power which he has sent me from heaven, to bring my heart to a conformity with
his pattern. How often have I received thy good creatures without such serious
and hearty thanksgivings for them, as they deserve! and tasted their sweetness,
with little sense of thee, or delight in thee, who art the fountain of all
bliss! How sollicitous have I been to please men, and obtain the good opinion
and praise of others; rather than to please thee, and to do thy commandments,
the praise of which endures for ever! O the little envyings that have been in
my heart at my Brethrens greater prosperity! and my aptness to be angry and
peevish, to entertain suspicions easily, to make wrong or unkind
interpretations, to aggravate offenses, and to keep too long a sense of
injuries! I hate my self even for these things. O how vile then and odious are
all those sins of injustice, or unmercifulness, of which I may have been guilty!

IV.
Be merciful unto me, O Lord, be merciful unto me; through the blood of that
spotless Lamb, which was shed for the sins of the world. Remember not against
me the vanity of my thoughts, the errors and mistakes of my judgment, the
pride of my spirit, the greediness of my sensual desires, the violence and
disorder of any of my passions, the unruliness of my tongue, the inconstancy of
my purposes, or the baseness and unworthiness of any of my ends and intentions.
O holy God, and merciful Father, enter not into judgment with me for the
mispense of my precious time, for letting slip any good opportunites, or for my
ill husbanding the many Talents, which thou have entrusted me withal. Let not
the abuse of any of thy creatures, the ill example that I have given to any of
my Neighbors, my unthankfulness for a world of mercies, my inobservance or
forgetfulness of thy fatherly providence, and my insensibleness of others
miseries, be charged upon me at the day of our Lord, or incense thy severe
displeasure against me in this present life. O remember not my immoderate
sorrow for worldly losses; my excessive pleasure in the abundance of any
worldly enjoyments; the deadness of my grief, and the scarcity of my tears, for
my own sins, and the sins of others; and the heartlesness of my joys in thee
and in thy Son Christ, and for all the good thou have done to me and to my
Brethren, or which they do for thy honor, and the comfort of thy people. Let
not any discontent with my condition, provoke thee to make it worse: nor my
want of love to thee, deprive me of the love of others: nor the breach of any
of my resolutions, be punished with an indifferency and carelessness of spirit:
nor the abuse of any of thy blessings, or unthankfulness for them, move thine
offended goodness to strip me naked of them.

V.
But, gracious Lord, so pardon me, as to give me the grace of thy holy Spirit
to change and renew me throughout, in spirit, soul and body, and to enable me
daily to amend my life according to thy holy word. That Is the hearty desire and
purpose of my soul: which longs for nothing more than a power from above, to
possess me with more steady and affectionate thoughts of thee; and to fill me
with a more inflamed love to thee, and to all my Brethren; and to dispose my
will to resign it self in all things to thee, and cheerfully to comply with thy
providence, and zealously to employ all holy opportunities of doing or
receiving, good. O God, deny me not this great grace, though unworthy of the
least; but strengthen me with might by thy Spirit in the inner man. Let it
teach and direct me in the right way; let it assist me to walk in it; let it
constantly encourage my progress; chearing and refreshing me when I am ready to
faint, upholding me when I am ready to fall, recovering me when I slip,
enabling me with fervent desires to implore thy mercy, and with resolved
watchfulness to strengthen my self against all temptations for the time to come.

VI.
Preserve in me such a serious and deep sense of the worth of my soul, of the
weight of all eternity, of the certainty and greatness of the glory which shall
be revealed, that they may prevail more with me than all the honors, and
riches, and pleasures of this life. Prepossess me with a clear understanding of
the Gospel of our Savior, with a strong says, a fervent charity, and a lively
hope, against all other things that press upon me, and solicit my affections:
that so nothing may find admittance into my heart, but what shall submit to thy
laws, and live under the government and discipline of our Lord Jesus. Instruct
me how to make all my pleasures discreet, moderate and useful to me; that they
may never take up the best of my time, nor devour the strength of my mind.
Teach me to use the riches of this world aright, and to do good to my self and
others with them. Dispose me to look upon greatness or honors, but as greater
opportunities to do thee more honor, and the world more service. Moderate all
my passions, and subdue them perfectly to the obedience of Reason and Religion.
O that all my conversation with others may be innocent and profitable: and my
private retirements more devout and heavenly: and all my employments without
inordinate cares and fears, or any distrust of thy good providence. Help me to
look upon long life as desirable, only that I may have more time to root out
perfectly all evil habits and dispositions, to implant and increase all Divine
Virtues, and to do the more good; that I may be better sitted for an happy
life, world without end. Amen.

The same prayer may be used in time of any public calamity: and some of these
following prayers added, as there shall be occasion.

A Prayer in time of Plague.
GReat and many, O Lord, are the sins whereby we have provoked thee in these
Kingdoms, to send all thy sore judgments upon us; the sword, the famine, and
the pestilence, to cut off from them man and beast. It is only of thine
infinite mercies, that we are not utterly consumed, and because thy compassions
fail not. Blessed be thy goodness, that we are not yet delivered into the hand
of those that hate us; but only corrected by thy own hand, who art the Father
of mercies. To them we flee now in our great distress: and beseech thee, that
thou will not shut up the bowels of thy tender mercy and compassion toward us,
in displeasure. But punish us, that thou may pardon us, and amend us, and
make us a more devout, sober, righteous, and charitable people, zealous of good
works. Say to thy destroying Angel, Hold thy hand, it is enough. Or if thou art
pleased to have it still stretched out against us, give grace to us who are yet
in health to spend our time in examining our hearts and lives; in bewailing our
offenses; in settling our purposes of repentance and new obedience; in inuring
our selves to delight in Prayer and holy Meditation; in giving thanks to thee
for thy merciful preservation of us; in preparing our selves for whatsoever
change thou art pleased to make in our condition; and in doing good with
compassionate hearts, to those poor people, that lie under thy heavy
visitation. And graciously vouchsafe to bestow upon them entire patience and
submission to thy Will: and enable them, with unfeigned repentance and humble
hope in thy mercy, to resign themselves and theirs into thy hands; that
howsoever thou shall dispose of any of us, living or dying we may be the Lords.

Lord have mercy upon us all, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

In time of War.
O God, who have justly punished our carnal security, and abuse of that peace
and quietness which we have enjoyed, by making us hear the sound of the
trumpet, and the alarm of war; be merciful unto us, I most humbly beseech thee:
and awaken ever one of our souls thereby, to search and try our ways, and to
turn unto thee, by a timely repentance and amendment of our lives. Though we
deserve to be cut off by the sword, which is unsheathed as a foolish people
that have not known thee; sottish children, that have no understanding; who are
wise to do evil, but to do good have no knowledge: Jer. 4.22.
yet spare us, good Lord, spare thy people, and give not thy heritage to
reproach. Joel 2.17.
O thou God of peace, who did send thy own Son among thine enemies, to make
reconciliation between lost men and thy self; inspire our hearts, and the
hearts of all those with whom we are at difference, with a love of peace: and
incline us to hearken and consent to reasonable terms of reconciliation. And
for that end root out of every one of our minds and hearts, all pride and
ambition; all inordinate desire of greatness and dominion; all covetousness,
and greediness of wealth; all false opinions, prejudices, and misapprehensions;
all anger, passion, and causeless jealousies; and especially all study of
revenge; all rancour, and bitterness; all hatred and malice; with whatsoever
else is contrary to the Doctrine and Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ. Possess
us with the Spirit of Truth, and love, and brotherly affection. Make us
tenderhearted, and to have compassion one toward another; to study to be
peacemakers; to pray for peace; to seek those things which will make for
peace; and not only to seek after it, but to pursue it, to the utmost of our
power. Direct to those expedients which will happily unite, and tie us fast
together. Or if these miserable differences continue, and cannot otherwise be
composed, go forth, O Lord, with our hosts: give wisdom and valor to our
leaders; resolution and undaunted courage to our soldiers, and good success to
all those enterprises which are undertaken for the common good and safety of
these Kingdoms. O God, let us fall into thy hands, for thy mercies are great:
but not into the hands of men, when they are wrathfully displeased at us. And
if thou art pleased to crown us with victory, give us grace to use it with
moderation, justice and charity. O that we may overcome likewise all
temptations to bold and presumptuous continuance in our sins against thee: and
be subdued by thy favor toward us, to a serious study and care, how to lead a
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty; for the sake of Christ Jesus, the
Prince of peace. Whose grace be with us all. Amen.

In time of Scarcity.
O God, who turnest a fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness of them
that dwell therein; pour down upon the sinful inhabitants of these Islands, a
serious sense of their own undeservings, and of thy righteous judgments, which
thou have sent upon them. That they may humble themselves before thee, and
repent of their wantonness and riot, of their feasting themselves without fear,
and hardening their hearts against the cries of the poor, of their discontent
and repining in the midst of plenty, and their loathing the divine food of
their souls; which thou have justly punished with scarcity of bread in all
places. Make us ashamed, O Lord, and heartily sorry for these and all other our
offenses against thy Divine Majesty. And as an earnest of better obedience for
the time to come, dispose the hearts of those who are afflicted, to submit with
meekness to thy punishment: and preserve them from all murmuring at thy wise
providence. Open the hearts likewise of those who are rich, to show mercy to
them, and comfort them in their miseries. The greater stores of provision any
have treasured up, against this time of want; incline them so much the more to
consider the poor and needy, and fear to oppress them. Enlarge their hearts in
more abundant charity, by the advantage they make of this present Scarcity. And
when thou shall have turned it into plenty again, Lord, make us all truly
thankful, and soberly to use thy blessings, and to bring forth plentifully the
fruit of good living, to the honor and praise of thy Name, and the eternal
happiness of our souls and bodies, in that world where there is no want, but
fullness of joy for evermore. Amen.

A Thanksgiving for any public or private mercies.
O God most high, and blessed for evermore: who have bestowed upon us the
happiness to know and understand thee, that thou art the Lord of all, and that
thou exercisest loving kindness, judgment and righteousness in the earth, and
that thou have said, in these things thou delightest. Jer. 9.24.
Thou art to be worshipped and adored with my continual praises and
thanksgivings, who am here prostrated before the Throne of thy Grace, oppressed
with the great load of thy mercies and benefits, which call upon all that is
within me to bless thy holy Name. I have often acknowledged that thou art the
Author of my being; and that it is thy favor which has made my life not to be
a burden to me, as it might have been by innumerable miseries. And now I
heartily renew those acknowledgements; and thank thy great goodness for my long
continued health, ease, peace and plenty; or that thou have mercifully relieved
and supported me, in any sickness, pain, trouble, or loss of worldly goods that
has befaln me. Particularly I thank thee for thy late blessings which thou
have conferred upon me, notwithstanding my undeservings, and high provocations,
which I have any way given thy divine Majesty, to deprive me of all good things.

[ Here mention the particulars in which you are privately concerned: and if it
be the public mercy of ceasing a great Contagion, proceed thus.]

Blessed be thy goodness, which has preserved so many of us alive in the midst
of a great mortality; and has restored health again into the habitations of
our Neighbors. Blessed be thy sparing mercy which has delivered us from the
noisome pestilence; and when a thousand fell at our side, and ten thousand at
our right hand, did not suffer it to come nigh our dwelling. Thou have been
our refuge, and our fortress, our God, in whom we ought to trust for ever.
Psalm. 91.2,7.


[After a War is ended, some such words as these may be added.]

Psalm. 124.1,2, etc. 65.7. 29. ult.
If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, may we all well say, if it
had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men rose up against us: Then
they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us.
Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us as a prey to their teeth. Blessed be
the Lord, who has caused wars to cease: and made our enemies to be at peace
with us. It is the Lord, that stilleth the noise of the Seas, the noise of
their waves, and the tumult of the people. The Lord gives strength to his
people: the Lord blesses his people with peace.

[When Plenty is restored, say]

Psalm. 65.9,12. 132.15. 147.14. Joel 2.23.
Thou have visited the earth and blessed it; thou have made it very plenteous.
Thou have crowned the year with thy goodness; and thy clouds have dropped
fatness. Thou have blessed our provision abundantly, and satisfied our poor
again with bread. Blessed be the Lord, who has caused the former and latter
rain to come down for us in their season; and filled us with the finest of the
wheat. We eat in plenty and are satisfied: Praised be the name of the Lord our
God, that has dealt wondrously with us.

But above all, thy great and glorious name is to be praised, for thine
incomprehensible mercy in thy Son Christ, whom thou have sent unto us with
better blessings; to be the Mediator of our peace with thee, to heal all the
diseases of our sinful natures, and to deliver us from the power of Satan, and
of Hell and Death, and to restore us to an immortal life. Thanks be to thine
infinite goodness, which has taught us by him the way of truth and
righteousness; and made him an offering for our sins; and raised him from the
dead, to the Throne of Glory in the heavens; and sent from thence the holy
Spirit, to enlighten our minds with the whole knowledge of thy will, and to
shed abroad thy great love in our hearts, and to be the earnest of an heavenly
inheritance, together with our blessed Lord; who is heir of all things, having
the hosts of Angels subject unto him, whom he has appointed (blessed be thy
Name) for the guard and defense, the succor and help of all his faithful
servants. I thank thee, O Lord, that thou have pardoned so many offenses; and
so graciously importuned me to return to my duty; and afforded so long time and
space of repentance; and waited so patiently for my amendment; and continued to
me constantly, as I must again confess, so many blessings which I have abused,
or restored them to me after a short correction of my faults. I cannot wish for
any further happiness, but only for an heart gratefully to resent thy love, and
to delight to meditate continually on thy tender mercies; that so I may love
thee more, and thank and serve thee better the rest of my days, and live in
good hope to pass from all this happiness here to eternal bliss. And this grace
thou have likewise promised to bestow upon me; yea, I feel the motions of thy
holy Spirit in my heart, exciting in me a sense of thy goodness, and provoking
me to love and to good works.

O my soul, never forget the loving kindness of the Lord. Let his name be daily
blessed and praised with a joyful heart; for his goodness endures continually.
Psalm. 52.1.
To him I ought to live, and not unto my self; for he is my Creator, and
Savior, and Comforter, who daily loadeth me with his benefits. Therefore I
ought to glorify him, both with my body and with my spirit, which are his.
Accept, good Lord, of the unfeigned desires and purposes, which thou see in
my heart, in all things to be conformed to thy Will. And accordingly assist me
always with the renewed influences of thy heavenly grace, that I may grow in
spiritual wisdom and knowledge of my duty; and that I may heartily love it, and
faithfully remember it, and give all diligence to perform it, notwithstanding
any difficulties that I meet withal to oppose it. In able me to maintain a
constant sense of thy divine presence, to reverence thy holy Name and Word, and
to walk before thee in all humility, thankfulness, patience, heavenly
mindedness, and contentedness of spirit. And help me likewise to exercise all
justice; charity, meekness, and forgiveness toward all men: and to live in a
sober, chaste and moderate use of all the good things of this world. Let thy
fear always curb the disorders of my passions; and thy love be a spur to my
endeavors; and the example of the Lord Jesus, and all the Saints provoke me to
zeal and fervency of spirit; and the hope of eternal bliss strengthen,
encourage and make me constant in all the troubles and hardships of this life:
that persevering in well doing, I may finish my course with joy, and win the
Crown of Righteousness, which he has promised to all the faithful. Amen, Amen.

Assist me mercifully, O Lord, in these my Supplications and Prayers, and
dispose the way of thy servant, toward the attainment of everlasting
salvation; that among all the changes and chances of this mortal life, I may
ever be defended by thy most gracious and ready help, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

A short Prayer for a Student.
I Look up unto thee O Lord, from whom comes every good and perfect gift,
beseeching thee to direct, assist and bless all the labors of my mind.
Illuminate my understanding, O Father of lights, and lead me unto right
apprehensions in all things. In due me with that humility and soberness of
mind, which thou delightest to reward, with more of thy gifts and graces.
Bestow upon me a discerning spirit; a sound judgment; and an honest and good
heart, sincerely disposed to employ all the Talents which thou have, or shall
entrust me withal, to thy honor and glory, and to the good of mankind.

For which end, I beseech thee to excite my thirst after useful, rather than
much knowledge. And especially enrich me with the treasures of that inspired
wisdom, contained in thy holy Scriptures; which are able to make me wise unto
salvation. That growing in understanding and goodness, as I grow in years; my
profiting may be apparent unto all men: and I may give a comfortable account of
my time to thee, my God, at the day of the Lord Jesus. Amen.

A Prayer that may be used, any time of the day, when a person has leisure to
retire.
O Lord, the great Creator and Governor of all things; I prostrate my self
before thee, in the humblest adoration of thy incomprehensible Majesty:
acknowledging that I depend entirely upon thee; praising and magnifying thy
most glorious Power, Wisdom and Goodness, which are conspicuous every where;
and rendering unto thee my most hearty thanks for all the benefits, which thou
have so freely and undeservedly conferred on me. Thou art bountiful to the
whole world: All thy Works praise thee; and we the children of men ought more
particularly to bless thee and speak good of thy Name, who have received
singular marks and tokens of thy favor and grace, above all the rest of our
fellow creatures. Thou have made us after thine own Image; and endued us with
reasonable and immortal spirits; and given us a capacity to reflect on thee the
author of our being, and to be like unto thee in wisdom, holiness, goodness and
truth. But above all I ought to remember continually that great demonstration
of thy love, in sending thy dear Son to live among us, to dye for us, and to
give us an assured hope of immortal life.

I love thee, O Lord. I renew the oblation, which I have often made of my soul
and body to thee. I wait upon thee still, for what thou see good for both. I
hope in thy everlasting mercies, that thou will pardon all my forgetfulness of
thee, and ingratitude unto thee. And I most earnestly implore the grace of thy
holy Spirit, to preserve in my mind, a powerful sense of thee; an ardent love
to thee; and an holy care to please and obey thee in all things. That the very
same mind and spirit may be in me, which was in Christ Jesus our Lord; the
Spirit of wisdom and understanding, and the fear of thee; the spirit of
meekness, humility, purity and charity: and that I may do thy will with such
cheerfulness, zeal, constancy, patience and perseverance, as he did.

I thank thee, O Lord, for all helps and assistances of that good Spirit, which
thou have already favored me withal. That thou have so frequently made good
motions to my soul; inspired me with holy thoughts, and devout affections; and
inclined and disposed my will, many ways, to the choice of that which is good.
I thank thee for the many seasonable admonitions which thou have given me, for
the happy opportunities which have been afforded me, for wisdom and virtue; for
a good education, pious examples, faithful friends, and all other furtherances
in the way of salvation.

I remember likewise, with my most grateful acknowledgements, what abundance of
good things thou have bestowed on me, from time to time, for my better
accommodation in this present life. Blessed be thy name for my continued
health, and food, and raiment. Blessed be thy name that my bones are not
broken; that I am not groaning under the sorest pains; that I dwell in safety
night and day; and that I still see my friends and acquaintance, and many other
comforts round about me.

I thank thee, O Lord, for these, and all blessings whatsoever, that thou have
conveyed to me by the Ministry of thy holy Angels; unto whom thou have given
the charge of me. O bless the Lord, together with me, ye his angels which excel
in strength, that do his commandments, hearkening to the voice of his word. And
enable me every day, I most humbly beseech thee, O Father of mercies, to bless
thee better; with a purer heart, and a more lively sense of all thy love, and a
greater delight in thy divine Service, and a forwardness to every good work.

And as thou have preserved me hitherto this day: so bless me the remaining
part of it. That endeavoring sincerely in all my designs, words, desires and
actions to approve my self to thee, as thy good and faithful servant, I may
with a good conscience present my self before thee in the conclusion of it: and
with the greater confidence of thy gracious acceptance renew my praises and
acknowledgements, and commend my self to thy blessing, and hope for the
continued protection of thy holy Angels; through Christ Jesus. To whom be glory
for ever. Amen.

A shorter to the same purpose.
I Prostrate my self before thee, O Lord of heaven and earth, in all humility
of soul and body. I acknowledge my dependence upon thee; and thy constant care
and providence over me, ever since I was born: particularly this day; in
keeping me hitherto from many dangers, and providing for me many good things;
as well for the comfort and pleasure, as for the necessary support of this
present life. Especially I thank thee for thy exceeding great love in the Lord
Jesus; through whom thou have given me good hope of better enjoyments in the
life to come, by following that blessed example which he has set us, of all
well doing, and contented suffering.

It is all reason, O Lord, that I should love thee, and entirely trust in thee,
and most willingly serve and obey thee. Accordingly I here again dedicate my
self both soul and body to thee. I vow my self ever to thy service. I hope
still in thy great mercies, which have been so tender and so abundant toward
me. I depend upon thee, for what thou see to be profitable for me. I refer my
self absolutely to thy wise Will; resolving to rest contented and satisfied in
that condition wherein thou placest me. I believe thou orderest all things in
heaven and in earth; and take the greatest care of those that wait upon thee,
and commit themselves unto thee, as I now do, in confidence of thy goodness,
and submission to thy pleasure. Especially I rely upon thee, for thy holy
Spirit, to preserve in me these holy purposes, and inspire me continually with
good thoughts, and stir up in me heavenly affections, and increase and
strengthen my faith and hope in thee, and assist my endeavors to do according
to my pious resolutions.

Blessed be thy great goodness for what I have felt already: I thank thee for
thy many illuminations from above; for thy grace so early preventing me; for
the assistance and furtherance thou have given me; and the happy opportunities
I have met withal of improving my self in true wisdom and goodness. It is the
earnest desire of my soul to grow more in both, and to be made perfectly like
to my blessed Lord and Savior. By whom all honor and glory be given to thee,
O Father Almighty, world without end. Amen.

A Grace before meat.
WE acknowledge thy goodness, O Lord, in making this [plentiful] provision for
us. Pardon our ingratitude for thy former mercies. And bless us with such a
discreet and thankful use of these thy good creatures, that they may not hinder
us in our duty, but better dispose us to do thee all faithful service in our
several places; through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Or this.
WE look up unto thee, O Lord, who give us life and breath, and all things;
beseeching thee to forgive us all our sins, and to make us such thankful
partakers of these thy good creatures, that by a moderate use of them our
bodies may be refreshed, and made more fit to accompany our souls in hearty
endeavors to do thee all faithful service, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Or this.
WE renew our thankful acknowledgements unto thee, O Lord, for making again
this merciful provision for us, who are unworthy of the least of thy favors.
Add thy gracious pardon likewise; and bless the sober use of these thy
creatures, to the strengthening of our frail bodies. And endue our souls with
the grace of thy holy Spirit, that we may return back unto thee the strength we
receive from them in well doing, and it may be as delightful as our meat and
drink to do the will of thee our heavenly Father, through Jesus Christ, etc.
Amen.

After Meat.
WE return unto thee, O Lord, our hearty thanks for these and all other the
like mercies bestowed upon us, ever since we had a being; especially for the
promises thou have given us of eternal life, by thy Son Christ. Enable us, we
beseech thee, to continue so patiently in all good works, that at last we may
attain it. And bless thine Universal Church, these Realms, the King, the Queen,
and all the Royal Family; and grant us thy grace, mercy, and peace, through
Christ Jesus. Amen.

Or this.
BLessed be thy name, O Lord, for our continued health, and food, and raiment,
and friends, and all other good things, whereby thou maintainest the comfort of
this present life. Above all we thank thee, for thy love in Christ Jesus, and
the hope thou have given us by him, of better things in another world: Unto
which we beseech thee to bring us by hearty obedience to thee all our days.
Save thine Universal Church, etc.

Or this.
WE thank thee, O Lord, that we are alive, and that we live in health, and
peace, and the enjoyments of all good things that are needful for the support
of this present life, and for the attainment of a better. Continue them, we
pray thee, unto us: and continue in us such a thankful sense of thy love, that
we may live unto thee, by whom we live. Save thy Universal Church, etc.

THE TABLE.
Prayers for Families.
ON the Lords day Morning Page. 1. At Night. 11. A shorter form for the Morning
21. Another at Night 27. A Prayer for Afternoon 34. Another 39. On a Communion
day Morning 44. At Night 49. On Monday Morning 57. At Night 62. Tuesday Morning
69. At Night 75. Wednesday Morning 81. At Night 87. Thursday Morning 95. At
Night. 101. Friday Morning 109. At Night 115. Saturday Morning. 123. At Night
130. A shorter form for any Morning 137. Another 140. A short Prayer for the
Evening 143. Another 145. Morning Prayer for a particular person 149. For the
Evening 156. A shorter for the Morning 163. For the Evening 166.
Prayers in the Church.
A Short Prayer before Divine Service begin 171. Another 172. A longer for that
purpose 174. Another more large 177. After Divine Service 182. Prayers at home
before Morning Service 183. After it is done 186. Before Evening Service 188.
After it is done 190.
On any Festival in remembrance of our Savior 192. On Good Friday Morning 199.
In the Evening. 206. On any Saints day 215. On ones Birthday 222. For
Resolution in well doing 229. After Relapse into sin 238. A Thanksgiving for
hope of Pardon 245. A Prayer for Divine Grace 250. Especially in dangerous
temptations 255. For serious consideration 258. Ejaculations on several
occasions unto 264, 272.
For Submission to God in case of any loss 273. In trouble of Mind 277. A
Prayer to be used by others for such Persons. 283. Another to the same use 289.
A Prayer in the beginning of a Sickness 298. A Prayer to be said by others
with the sick Person 305. Another at the point of Death 312. A Thanksgiving
after Recovery 315. Another to be said by the whole Family 321.
A Prayer for a sick Child 327. A Prayer before a Journey 331 In it, or at the
end of it 334. In case of any hurt received in it 336. For a friend in a
Journey 339. A Thanksgiving after a safe return 342.
A Prayer for one going to Sea 347. Thanksgiving when he is arrived or returned
safely 351.
For a woman with Child 356. When her Travel is near 358. Another to be said by
her Relations for her 361. A Thanksgiving by the Company present after safe
Deliverance 364. Another by her self alone 369.
A Prayer for good success in extraordinary business 373. For one that intends
a single life 377. For one that deliberates about Marriage 386. For one that is
entering into it 390.
Parents Prayer for their Children 395. A Child's Prayer 399. A shorter 401. An
Orphan's Prayer 402. A Widows 403. A Servant's 406. A Prisoner's for debt 410.
A Malefactor's 414. A Soldier's Prayer 419. An Aged persons Prayer 421.
A large form of Praise, Thanksgiving and Prayer, when any one would spend a
day or part of it in Devotion 425. In twelve Parts.
First part 431. Second part 434. Third 440. Fourth 443. Fifth 446. Sixth 449.
Seventh 453. Eighth 455. Ninth 457. Tenth 459. Eleventh 463. Twelfth 465.
The same Devotion continued after the same form 472. In five Parts.
First 473. Second 475. Third 476. Fourth 478. Fifth 480.

A Prayer in Lent, or upon any public Fast. In six Parts.
First 482. Second 483. Third 485. Fourth 486. Fifth 489. Sixth 490.
A Prayer in time of Plague 492. In time of War. 494. In time of Scarcity 498.
A Thanksgiving for any public or private Mercies 500. Particularly for Health
502. For Peace Ibid. For Plenty 503. A Students Prayer. 508. A Prayer, at any
time of the day 510. A shorter to the same purpose 514. Graces before Meat 517.
Graces after Meat 519.
Some new Books Printed for Richard Royston.
THe Christian Sacrifice, a Treatise showing the necessity, and manner of
Receiving the Holy Communion, together with suitable Prayers and Meditations
for every Month in the Year, and the Principal Festivals in memory of our
Blessed Savior: in 12. By the same Author. A Friendly Debate, between a
Conformist and a Nonconformist, in 8o the first and second Part. Toleration
disapproved and condemned 4o: By William Ashton of Brazen Nose College. War and
Peace reconciled: Or a Discourse of Constancy in unconstant times: in 8.
The End.

