THE CHRISTIAN SACRIFICE.

A TREATISE Showing the Necessity, End, and Manner of Receiving the Holy
COMMUNION: TOGETHER With suitable Prayers and Meditations for every Month in
the Year; and the Principal Festivals in Memory of our Blessed SAVIOR.

In Four PARTS.

Ecclus. 14.20, 21. Blessed is the Man that does Meditate good things in
wisdom, and that reasons of holy things by his understanding.

He that considers her ways in his heart, shall also have understanding in
her secrets.

LONDON, Printed by R. N. for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred
Majesty, in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1671.

MVNIFICENTIA REGIA. 1715.

GEORGIUS D.G. MAG. BR FR ET HIB. REX F.D.

J. Pine sculp


TO THE READER.
THE Reasons that moved me to write this Book, together with its design, I have
declared in the beginning of it: and given Directions also, in their proper
places, how to use it. I have little therefore here to advise the Reader of,
but that I am much indebted for what I have writ, in the Second Part, about the
Nature and End of this holy Sacrament, to a Treatise called MENSA MYSTICA: unto
which I refer those that desire a larger discourse on that subject. It is
possible that I may not only have followed the sense, but used also some of the
expressions, which you find there. But if I have, it is more than I know: for I
have not read it of many years; nor had either that or any other Book on this
Argument by me, when I composed these Meditations. And to say the truth, since
I comprehended, as I thought, what belonged to this matter; I was not willing
to look into any: merely lest they should hinder the free conceptions of my own
mind; and their very words should cleave too much to my Imagination.

I hope the Reader will think fit to bring the like free and unprejudiced mind
to the perusal of what I have writ; especially an heart seriously desirous to
have holy Devotion wrought in it to our Creator and Redeemer: and then neither
of our pains, I presume, will prove unprofitable. But I do not mean by
Devotion, only some transient thoughts and passions arising at certain seasons;
when we more solemnly address our selves to God our Savior: But a settled love
to him, disposing us to present him always with an heart humble, pure, just and
charitable; which is the oblation that all our other Sacrifices are to prepare
for him, and the greatest honor that we are capable to do him. For this
expresses the high esteem we have of him; that above all things we study to be
like him, and conform our selves, whatsoever it cost us, to his holy Nature and
will. This indeed glorifies him before men; and all the praises we can bestow
upon him without this, are but words: which we revoke and unsay again when we
cross his Commands.

And for this end Christ instituted this Commemoration of the Sacrifice, which
he made of himself to God; that we might be moved thereby to offer up our
selves freely and cheerfully, as he did, to do and suffer what our heavenly
Father pleases. For it is rank hypocrisy to commend and praise his obedience
to the death, whilst we will not imitate it: but follow our own humors, rather
than the will of God. And that is the scope of this Treatise, to excite those
that read it to worship the Lord with holy Worship, that is, says one of the
Ancients, by purged thoughts and reasonings, right and true opinions; composed
passions and quiet affections; and by likeness to God in virtue, to the utmost
of our power. They are the words of Eusebius L. 3. Praepar. Evang. cap. 13.
: to which you may add these of Lactantius, There are two things that ought to
be offered to God; a Gift and a Sacrifice: the Gift for ever, the Sacrifice for
a time; and both the one and the other is incorporeal. The Gift is integrity of
mind; the Sacrifice is praise and hymns. Therefore the most excellent manner of
worshipping God, is praise directed to him, out of the mouth of a just man L.
6. Instit. Div. cap. 25.
. The Eucharist consists of both, as you will find in this Book. The help of
which if the Reader will be pleased to use, till he has made himself such a
thankful oblation to God; he will not want a reason why I call it, The
Christian Sacrifice: nor fail to grow in wisdom and spiritual understanding.
For, as the Son of Syrach says, The love of the Lord passes all things for
illumination: Ecclus. 25.11.
he that holds it, whereto shall he be likened? The candor also of such men,
I know, is incomparable: which will make them charitably pass by the defects,
that they may espy in a work well intended. And if there be any that shall
dislike the design it self, or slight my performance; I shall not concern my
self in their censures: but rest in this, as well as other cases, in the
judgment of the same wise man; which they may do well to consider:

Blessed is the man whose conscience has not condemned him; Ecclus. 14.2.
and, who is not fallen from his hope in the Lord.

1.26.
For it is an easy thing unto the Lord in the day of death, to reward a man
according to his ways.

THE CONTENTS
THe First part treats briefly of the obligations we have to Communicate. Page.
1. The Second shows the Ends and purposes of this Holy Action; and contains
Meditations or Addresses to God suitable to each. p. 15. You may find the first
Meditation. p. 19. The Second. p. 24. The Third. p. 34. The Fourth. p. 49. The
Fifth. p. 56. The Sixth. p. 69. The Seventh. p. 81. The Last. p. 92.
Directions for the use of them. p. 95. A more compendious form of Devotion
after receiving the Bread. p. 96. After the Cup. p. 99.
The Third part shows how to dispose our selves to receive with profit and
pleasure. p. 105. Several Meditations after the Consecration of the bread and
wine, and whilst the rest of the company is receiving, from p. 113, to p. 134.
A compendium of them. p. 135. Directions how to use them. p. 136. An
Introduction to the last part of this Discourse. p. 141. Which contains
Meditations and Prayers before and after the Communion For January. p. 153. For
February. p. 175. For March. p. 199. For April. p. 219. For May. p. 239. For
June. p. 259. For July. p. 279. For August. p. 299. For September. p. 319. For
October. p. 341. For November. p. 361. For December. p. 381. For Christmas Day.
p. 399. For New years-day. p. 423. For Easter Day. p. 437. For Ascension-day.
p. 463. For Whitsunday. p. 485.

Imprimatur,

Sam. Parker Rmo. in Christo Patri ac Domino, Dno. Gilberto Archiep. Cantuar. a
sac. Dom.
Ex Aedib. Lambeth. Mart. 3. 1670/1
WHEN I consider whence it is, that they who otherwise frequent the Christian
assemblies, are generally so negligent in Communicating at the Table of the
Lord; the Reasons seem to me to arise from one or other of these four Heads, It
is either thought to be no necessary part of a Christians Duty; at least, not
so necessary as others are: or else the Meaning, Use, and Benefit of it is not
understood: or men are loath to be at the pains of disposing themselves to be
worthy Communicants: or, lastly, having sometimes Communicated they found no
good by it, and so left it of.

It is the design therefore of this small Treatise, which a desire to quicken
and promote Christian Piety has brought forth, to show as briefly and plainly
as I can devise,

First, that all those who are called by the name of our Lord, have a strong
tie upon them to address themselves to his Holy Table; and

Secondly, that the ends and purposes for which it is prepared are such, as
both invite and engage them to come thither:

Thirdly, to direct the Readers to an easy and familiar way of disposing
themselves to do this duty with Profit and Pleasure: and

Lastly, to furnish them with some Meditations and Devotions suitable to the
Action; for want of which, I conceive, many reap so little good from it.

These are the Four parts of the ensuing Discourse.

PART I. Of the Obligations we have to Communicate.
For the First of these, to make you sensible of the necessity and weight of
this Duty, there are these Six things to be considered.

THAT we have an express Command First, he requires his Apostles, Luke 22.19.
to do this in remembrance of him. Which words, it is plain refer to what our
Savior then did, who took Bread and gave thanks and brake it and gave it unto
them saying, this is my body which is given for you: thi^ do in remembrance of
me, And therefore it is as much as if he had said, Do you take bread, give
thanks, break it, and give it to all my family hereafter.

Now if they were bound to give it, then all Christians no doubt must be bound
(though there had been nothing more said) to receive, and eat it. But the more
to enforce the Duty, they are requir^d so to do, according as S. Paul has
declared the mind and intention of our Lord in this business (and he is the
only person beside S. Luke who makes mention of these words Do this in
remembrance of me; though two other Evangelists mention the Institution of this
Sacrament.) He tells us, 1 Cor. 11.24. that when our Lord had given thanks, he
brake the Bread and said, take, eat, this is my body which is broken for you,
Do this in remembrance of me. Here these words DO THIS immediately refer, to
take, eat; which are not in S. Luke. And therefore DO THIS in his Gospel,
immediately refers, as I said, to taking bread, giving thanks, breaking it, and
giving it to them. In that, the Apostles and their Successors were more
peculiarly concerned; and none can Do this, (i. e. take bread, give thanks,
break it, and give it) but they. But in the other, taking, eating, and
drinking; all Christians are concerned, and are bound to do this as long as the
world lasts. Which appears sufficiently from the whole discourse of S. Paul to
the Corinthians, who were, as he tells them v. 26. to show forth the Lords
death, as often as they did eat that bread, and drink of that Cup, which the
Ministers of our Lord gave to them. As they were not to neglect their duty, in
making ready this holy food, inviting the Lords people to partake of it,
offering it and giving it to them: so it behoved them who were called to be
careful not to neglect theirs; but to come, and eat and drink, at the Table of
the Lord: that by the whole action, performed by both, the Lords death might be
declared and solemnly commemorated, with Thanksgiving and Praise. And to make
this Command appear more weighty, let me cast in two or three considerations
more, before I proceed any further.

1. That our Lord not only gave it to the Twelve Apostles; but to S. Paul also,
after he was added to the number. From which we may clearly gather his
intention of having this duty every where performed; not only by the Jews, but
all others. For when he appeared to this person and revealed his whole mind to
him, that he might be an Apostle and preach to the Heathen world; he left not
out this precept, but gave him particular instructions about it. For I have
received of the Lord; that which also I delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus,
the night in which he was betrayed, took bread, etc. v. 23. 1 Cor. 11. He had
not this from the Apostles, nor was taught it by man, but Christ himself
delivered it to him, as he had done to the rest of his Apostles: that he might
teach men to do this; if they had any regard to the express Command of their
dearest Lord. And it is very hard, if they have not a great reverence to it,
considering

2. That it is the very last Commandment which he gave before his Death. When
he was parting with his Disciples, and taking his farewell of them (till he
should see them again after his resurrection) he left this charge with them,
that they should do, as they had seen him do, just before he went away. Read
the verses going before those now mentioned out of S. Luke (chapter 22. v. 16, 17,
18, etc.) and you will find the sense of our Saviors whole discourse to be
this.

This is the last Supper we shall eat together in this world: I shall keep no
more Feasts with you, till we meet in Heaven. But I would have you meet often
and Feast together, upon my broken Body, and my Blood shed for you: according
to the pattern which now I set before you. As you see me, take bread, give
thanks, break it and give it to you, so do ye. This is my Will and Testament:
if you have any respect to the words of a dying Master and Savior; if you love
me, and bear me in mind when I am gone from you; Do not forget to do this in
remembrance of me.

And what he said to them, we are to take as said to us, for

3. S. Paul says, this is to be done till his coming again, 1 Cor. 11.26. It
is not a Temporary Command like those given to Moses, but lays a perpetual
obligation upon us: till Christ, who appeared to put away sin by this Sacrifice
of himself (which we commemorate) shall appear the second time, without sin,
unto Salvation. From whence it necessarily follows, that not only the Apostles,
but all the Ministers of Christ to the end of the world have power to do this:
and that the people are bound to do their part, when the Minister has done
his. How they will excuse themselves from an open breach of our Saviors
Commandment, who do not do this in remembrance of him, I cannot imagine. There
is nothing that he enjoins with more solemnity, and particular care, than this
Action: and therefore the same necessity lies upon us for the performance of
it, that there does for obedience to other of his Commands. If there be any
difference, it is such as should rather make us exceeding careful about this
duty, than otherwise. For,

etc. we can derive from a Reason within our selves. But this duty, to which I
am exciting you, is one of the things for which there is no other ground, but
his Divine Commandment and appointment. We have no other reason why we should
do this, but because he would have us. And therefore the doing of it is a piece
of pure obedience, arising wholly out of our respect and affections to him and
his injunctions. It being indeed designed for the keeping him in Memory; his
appointment of it for that purpose, has added a good Reason to it: Which does
mightily enforce our duty, if we have any love to the Memory of so dear a
Savior: and desire to perpetuate the story of so rare a Love, and make it
known to all succeeding generations.

By this it is apparent, that the thing which makes most men negligent of this
duty, is that which if they were understanding Believers, should make them most
zealously affect it. Natural Conscience not reproving them for not doing this,
as it does for injustice, cheating, lying, and such like sins, they live
securely in their neglect of it. And this is the very reason why the people
known by the name of Quakers, have so little, or rather no regard to it. But if
Christian Faith were planted and deeply rooted in men's hearts, they would upon
this very account be the more forward to do it. Because it is a peculiar mark
of a Christian, a work proper to him alone: who is moved to this, not by Nature
and the common light of mankind, but purely by his Religion, and Devotion to
his Savior. For there is no piece of Divine Service in which he is interessed
so much as this. It is more properly Christian worship than any other. All the
world think their Religion binds them, to pray to God, to praise him, and give
him thanks: but to acknowledge him, and render thanks to him by doing this,
belongs only to Believers in Jesus. And that was one cause, I make no Question,
that the first Disciples of Christ made this so great a part of their Devotion:
which is the next consideration.

do this, as they did publicly meet together to pray, or hear; and as often as
they did eat and drink together in token of their love and friendship. Both
which they did very frequently. In the Church of Jerusalem every day; as we
read. Act. 2.46. They continued daily with one accord in the Temple, and
breaking bread at home, did eat their meat with gladness, and singleness of
heart. That is, after they had daily performed their common Devotions with the
Jews in the Temple Service, they went to their own houses to tender a more
particular Service to our Savior; by doing this in remembrance of him, and
keeping feasts of charity for the poor and indigent. At those Meals it is
manifest they forgot not this, 1 Cor. 11.20, 21, etc. Act. 20.7, 11. which they
took to be an exact imitation of Christ, who after the Paschal Supper
instituted this Holy Sacrament. And that it accompanied other parts of Divine
Service and Christian duties is as manifest from Act. 2.42. where you find they
continued steadfastly or unweariedly in hearing the Apostolical instructions, in
communicating to each others necessities, in breaking of bread, and in Prayers.
The word we render continued steadfastly (...).
denotes both the frequency of the action, and that they were not tired with
it. But the principal time for it, seems to have been on the Lords day:
according to what you read in the place just now mentioned, ( Act. 20.7.) that
the Disciples were assembled on the first day of the week to break bread: and
the Syriack translation of those words, 1 Cor. 11.20. which runs thus; when you
meet together, you do not eat and drink as becomes the day of our Lord As if
they had found in their Copy (...) not (...).
Which it is most likely was the set day on which, Pliny Stat^ die. ^. 10.
Epist. 97
says, they were wont to assemble before it was light, to sing a Song of
praise together to Christ, as God: and to bind thems^lv^^ by a Sacrament, not
to any wickedness ha^, (...) they would not commit theft, nor rob^e^^, nor
adulteries; nor break their words, nor deny any thing that was deposited with
them in trust, when it was demanded. This done; their custom, he adds, was to
depart, and to meet together again to partake of a common but innocent meal.
Which assembly, it is plain from the Scripture, was in the evening, as the
other was held before the morning light. So that it should seem, in some places
they remembered our Lord by doing this, 'twice in a day, both morning and
evening. In their assemblies before day (as Tertullians words are Cap. 3. de
Corona.
) as well as in the time of meat: which we know was Supper time; when they held
their Feasts of Charity. This is sufficient to show what a great affection they
had to this duty, and in what high account it was among them: in that, no
assembly of Christians, of whatsoever sort it was, could pass; wherein Christ's
death was not remembered with thanksgiving and praise.

And indeed it is part of the food which and joy in God our Savior: so long
will there be a necessity of Doing this; which serves for all these ends and
purposes.

by these outward signs we might express our hearty consent to the new Covenant
made by Christ in his Blood, and engage our selves to stand to the terms and
conditions of it; we should be extremely afraid to refuse to come to this holy
Communion: because that is the same with refusing to be of his Religion. For he
that made the New Covenant with us and is the Author of the Christian Religion,
has made these outward Rites and Solemnities to be Instruments of stipulation:
whereby they who are willing to enter into that Covenant, and be of that
Religion, should express their agreement and submission to it; and openly
declare that they own Jesus to be the Lord, and will perform due obedience to
every one of his Commands. Which when they have once done, they are to signify
their continuance and stedfastness in that Religion, to which by these means
they have addicted themselves, by the repeated use of the same things.
Otherways, they live as if they repented of the contract which they have made,
and renounced our Blessed Savior: who has made the doing this to be a special
testification of our Devotion to him and his Service. This is a thing to be
sadly pondered; and might prevail much, were it laid to heart as it ought.

To which if you add all the other purposes the will of Christ, his special
Command, the practice of all Christians, our own wants, our respect to the
Christian Religion, or the great Benefits we may receive by doing this in
remembrance of him; can make us judge any thing so. And that is the second part
of my Discourse; to which I now proceed.

PART II. Concerning the Ends and Purposes of this Holy Action.
IF the Reader be convinced by what has been writ, that he is as much bound to
do this, as he is to be a Christian, I hope it will have a double effect upon
him. First, that he will endeavor to quicken and stir up himself, to a serious
and constant performance of this duty, by often pressing these considerations
hard upon his heart. Secondly, that he will be very desirous to understand the
full meaning, end, and use of this holy Action; that so he may reap the profit
which is therein designed to him. He must stifle his Conscience, or else it
will move him to the Former: and the more resolved he is in that, the more
solicitous he will be about the other. Leaving him therefore to attend to the
voice of his own awakned mind; I shall give him no further encitements to this
duty, than will arise from what I am now going to say about the Nature of it:
From whence he may draw a great many Arguments, to persuade him to be ready
prepared to this, as well as every other good Work.

Paul about it, prove that it is to be considered as a Divine Feast which our
Lord has appointed in commemoration of himself. That it is to be looked upon as
a Feast or repast provided for us, the Bread and Wine, the eating and drinking
sufficiently declare. But it is more fully expressed in the names of Breaking
bread, and of the Supper of the Lord, which are given to this Action. And as it
is expressly ordained, to be in remembrance of our Blessed Lord, so (I think it
not amiss to add) it was no unusual thing in the world to institute Feasts and
entertainments to preserve the memory of famous Persons. It is recorded by
Athenaeus, L. 5. Deipnosoph. cap. 1. (...), etc.
that there were such set meetings of several sects of Philosophers in Athens
to commemorate their Founder. Some on a certain day celebrated the memory of
Diogenes, others of Antipater, others of Panaetius. And the great Philosopher
Theophrastus left a sum of money at his death for such a meeting: not that they
might there debauch themselves, as his words are, but manage their discourses
soberly and learnedly in that Compotation. So the Greeks called their Feasts,
which took their denomination from the Wine, as among the Hebrews they took
their name, from the Bread Genesis 43.25. They heard they should eat bread, i. e.
dine with Joseph: and v. 31. he said, set on Bread.
. And so Constantine, I remember, calls the Christian Feasts in Memory of the
Martyrs (...), Orat. ad Sanct. coetum. cap. 12.
, where the Poor were comforted, and those that had lost their estates
mercifully relieved. At these most sober Tables they discoursed of their
memorable sayings, their worthy actions, their patient sufferings: and
rehearsing the History of their life and death excited themselves to tread in
their steps. For this, as Germanicus said excellently on his deathbed, Quae
voluerit Meminisse, quae ma^dave^^t exequ^, Tac. l. 2. Annal,
is the principal part of Friendship; not to follow the dead with tears, but to
remember his Will, and to execute his Commands. Which is the general design, I
make no doubt, of this most holy Feast: where we meet to preserve an eternal
Memory of our glorious Redeemer, and to fix more deeply in our minds, all that
he did and suffered for us; that thereby we may be disposed with the greater
cheerfulness to perform his Will, and obey his Precepts. For this end I find
Ca^^^^. ex Mosara^. ^atur^ Exerc. 16. n. 38.
that the Gothic Churches (which long continued in Spain) having comprehended
the History of our Savior under these nine words [Incarnation, Nativity,
Circumcision, Appearance, Passion, Death, Resurrection, Glory, Kingdom,] were
wont to divide the holy Bread in the Sacrament into just so many parts: on
which they imposed those nine names. Whereby they have let us know what their
conceptions were of this Action; and that they thought the Breaking, giving and
receiving of that Bread, was to commemorate and more strongly imprint on their
minds, the whole History of our Lord Jesus. Which we are not to reflect upon in
an idle and ineffectual manner, but with such passions as we feel, when we
think of the sweet conversation, the good offices, and the solemn departure of
the dearest Friend that we ever had. Whom no good natured man can seriously
call to mind, without Love, Delight, Gratitude, and a great forwardness to
fulfill his Will and Testament, and to follow his admired example.

Now that we may be made able to do so, in respect to our Lord Christ, he is
pleased to set before us this Holy Food; which the Christian Church has always
looked upon, as a Spiritual nourishment, to strengthen and increase in us all
goodness. And for that purpose we are to address our selves to the Table of our
Lord, that by affectionate meditation on his condiscending kindness in becoming
a Man for our sakes, and by laying to heart the whole story of his wonderful
Love from his Birth to his Grave; and fixing our eyes on the glorious hopes he
has given us by rising again from the dead, and ascending to the Throne of
God; we may feel a greater strength derived to us from him, enabling us to our
several duties, and be enlivened to a greater freedom and cheerfulness in
denying all our own appetites and desires, and submitting them to the Will of
Christ. Say therefore to your selves before you come thither, some such words
as these;

We are invited to a Feast: our most Gracious Lord is the Master of it: yea, He
himself is the cheer that is provided for us. With what Humility, with what
thankfulness ought we to accept of his invitation! Let us fit up our selves and
make our souls ready, to appear before him in as holy and becoming a manner as
we are able. Let us go with such joy, as if we were called to the richest
entertainment in the world. Let our Meditation of him be sweet: and let us be
glad in the Lord Psalm. 104.4. Isa. 63.7. Psa. 45.17.
. Let us mention the loving kindness of the Lord, according to all that the
Lord has bestowed on us. And let us make his name to be remembered in all
generations. Let us resolve to feed on him in our hearts by Faith with
Thanksgiving, as his Minister exhorts us: to ruminate so long upon his love
till we feel our hearts burn with love to him. Let us meditate on his holy
life, his bitter passion, his bloody and shameful death, his glorious
Resurrection and Ascension, his Power and Authority at Gods right hand, the
great benefits we justly expect from thence, and the precious promises he has
by these means sealed to us: till we feel all the powers of our souls quickened
and stirred up with a mighty heat and zeal to do the will of our ever blessed
Redeemer: even a new life and spirit coming into us, and making us Strong in
the Lord, and in the power of his might.

Which virtue we shall certainly find flowing into us, and spreading it self
through our hearts; if we believe, and enter into a serious consideration of
the more particular intention and design of this holy Feast: whose general
meaning I have briefly described.

thoughts the whole Gospel of our Savior Christ, I shall proceed to show you,
on what you are more principally to fasten them. You must not consider this
holy Action only as a Feast in remembrance of him; but as a Feast upon a
Sacrifice, wherein you are more particularly, to commemorate his Death.

Our blessed Lord, the High Priest of our profession, was pleased himself to be
offered upon the cross; where he gave himself for us an offering and a
Sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling savor. Ephesians. 5.2. A kindness that, as
it ought never to be forgotten so it, ought to be mentioned with the highest
and devoutest praises. And therefore after the manner of those Feasts among the
Jews, and Gentiles too) in which the people had some portion of the Sacrifice
to entertain themselves and their friends withal; he makes us pertakers of the
Sacrifice which he made to God, by admitting us in these representations of his
body and blood, to feast upon it. Which Action is a grateful commemoration of
his death to his everlasting praise and glory. Therein we set forth that
Sacrifice of his for us; and signify the thankful sense we have of his love,
and our high esteem of those benefits which his bloody Death has purchased to
us. This we learn, first, from those words of our Lord and his Apostle S. Paul
which teach us to do this in remembrance of him. Which phrase does not signify
our calling him to mind, but our making mention of his dying love with due
praises and acknowledgments: which is best expressed by the word Commemorate.
We declare by doing this, that we indeed bear that remarkable testimony of his
kindness, in the remembrance of a thankful heart; and will endeavor to make it
be remembered in the succeeding generation. That this is the meaning appears
more fully from a second expression of S. Paul's 1 Cor. 11.26. where he says
as often as they did this, they showed forth the Lords death, till he came. We
declare and publish by this Action his bloody Death. We proclaim, and
abundantly utter the memory of his great goodness: which he would have made
known to all, by this solemn Feast, till his second appearing. This is the
import of that word show forth: only it carries this further notion in it (as
appears by the use of it in the Psalms Ps. 106. ^. Ps. 145.4, 5, 6, 7.
.) That we hereby publish his mighty Acts with praise; extol and magnify his
mavelous love; and celebrate the Memory of those divine benefits he has
obtained for us: with a desire that they may be acknowledged in the same manner
to the Worlds end.

And here now we may consider that this Commemoration and showing forth looks
two ways: toward men and toward God.

First, We show it forth and tell it to the world. We openly declare to all
those that see or know what we do, that the Son of God dyed for the Children of
men: that he freely gave his body to be broken and his blood to be shed for our
redemption. We proclaim Jesus to be the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins
of the World: and show how God has commended his love to us, in that, while we
were sinners, he gave his only begotten Son for us that we might live through
him. In this riches of his grace we make our boast; and glory a great deal
more, than if we possessed the Treasures of the whole Earth.

Secondly, And then we Commemorate also and show forth his Death unto God the
Father. We set before him this free will Offering of Jesus as a sufficient
Sacrifice for the sins of the whole world. We magnify his bounty in this
invaluable blessing: and make mention of this which his Son has suffered for
us, as a complete satisfaction for all our offenses against him.

We must approach therefore to the Table of the Lord with affectionate
acknowledgments of his infinite goodness: extolling and praising his merciful
kindness in bestowing on us so great a gift: professing we will never forget
the tender love of our Lord, who laid down his life for us: and beseeching the
Father of Mercies to receive us into his grace and favor; for the sake of his
dear Son, whose Death we show unto him. We should resolve to express the sense
of our hearts in some such words as these. Psalm. 92.1, 2, 3.
It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy
name, O thou most high. To show forth thy loving kindness in the morning, and
thy faithfulness every night. For thou, Lord, have made me glad through thy
work: I will triumph in the works of thy hand. 66.16.86.13.
Come and hear, all ye people, I will declare what the Lord has done for our
Souls. For great is his mercy toward us: and he has delivered our souls from
the lowest hell. Glorious things are spoken of thee, John 1.14, 29. Col^ss.
1.15. Joh. ^.12.
O Jesus, thou lover of Souls: The word made flesh; the Image of the invisible
God; the light of the world; the Lamb of God that takes away its sin; the first
begotten from the dead; the heir of all things; Rev. 1.5.
the Prince of the Kings of the Earth; Heb. 1.3. Heb. 8.1.9.24.7 25.
an high Priest who is set down on the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty
in the Heavens: who appears in the presence of God, and lives for ever to make
intercession for us. Psalm. 89.6.
Who in the Heaven can be compared to the Lord! who among the sons of the
mighty can be likened to the Lord? For thou Lord art highly exalted: thou art
exalted far above all Gods. 9^.9.


In this most powerful name, O Father Almighty, we humbly cast down our selves
before the Throne of thy Glory. Give us leave to mention before thee the Death
of him, who said, behold I come to do thy will, O God. Behold, O Lord, the
bleeding wounds of thy well-beloved; in whom, thou have testified by a voice
from Heaven that, thou art well pleased. Remember how his Body was broken for
us, and his Blood poured out. In him we believe thou art perfectly satisfied:
and therefore are bold to hope that thou art reconciled to us on that account.
O hear his dying groans: regard his Agony and Bloody sweat: by his Cross and
Passion let our sins be blotted out: and by his glorious Resurrection and
Ascension let us feel every evil affection and lust perfectly killed and
crucified. We have nothing to plead, if he have not done enough, and fulfilled
all thy will. But since he has laid down his life in obedience to thee; O let
us, by virtue of that voluntary Sacrifice which now we represent before thee,
obtain thy mercy and grace. We cannot be content to lose our share in so great
a Love. And since thou have bid us to Commemorate it; we hope we shall as
certainly partake of it, as we do of this Feast, to which thou have invited us.
Ps. 79.13.145.1, 2.
So we thy people and sheep of thy pasture will give thee thanks for ever. We
will show forth thy praise from generation to generation. We will extol thee,
our God, O King; we will bless thy name for ever and ever. Every day will we
bless thee, and will praise thy name for ever and ever.

In such Meditations as these when we show forth the inestimable value of
Christ's Sacrifice, we do, as it were, offer it unto God: or rather make before
him a commemoration of his Offering. And in this sense the Ancient Christians
did call this Sacrament, a Sacrifice: and every Christian they looked upon as a
Priest and a Sacrificer, when he came to the Table of the Lord. Because Christ
not only bad his Apostles do this in remembrance of him; but S. Paul requires
every one of us to do the same, and to show forth his Death till he come. There
is none mentions this Sacrifice more frequently than S. Chrysostom: but to
explain himself; after he had said, [we do not make another Sacrifice, as the
high Priests of old, but always the very same] he adds; or rather we make a
Commemoration of a Sacrifice (...), in Heb. 10. p. 523. edic. Savil.
. And in the very same manner Eusebius writes in his first Book of his
Evangelical Demonstration. Christians cannot think fit, says he, to return
back again to the first and weak Elements (he means the Mosaical Sacrifices)
which were but Symbols and Images; not the Truth it self: (...), etc. cap. 10.
p. 37.
since they celebrate every day the Commemoration of his Body and Blood; and
are made worthy of a better Sacrifice and ministry, than the Ancients were.
And a little after, speaking of Christ's wonderful oblation, and most precious
bloody Sacrifice to the Father, he adds, that he delivered also to us a
Remembrance, instead of a Sacrifice, to offer up continually unto God (...) p.
38.
. By which words it is manifest he took the Remembrance or Commemoration of
Christ's death, to be that Sacrifice which we make to God. And again he says in
the very next page: to celebrate the remembrance or commemoration of that
Sacrifice upon the Table, by the Symbols (or representations) both of his Body
and saving Blood, we have received, according to the ordinances of the New
Testament. Hither he applies those places out of the Psalms, offer to God
Thanksgiving. Let the lifting up of our hands be as an evening Sacrifice. The
Sacrifices of God are a contrite Spirit, etc. So that they thought of no other
Sacrifice, in those days, but that of praise and Thanksgiving; together with
the offering of our selves, our Souls and bodies to be a reasonable, holy and
lively Sacrifice unto him: as it is admirably expressed in our Communion
Service Prayer after all have Communicated.
. With which the Author now mentioned perfectly agrees, and delivers his mind
almost in the same words. We Sacrifice (...), etc. Ib. page 40.
, says he, a divine, venerable and most holy Sacrifice. We Sacrifice after a
new manner, according to the New Testament, a pure Sacrifice, etc. we both
Sacrifice, and offer Incense too. Celebrating the remembrance of that great
Sacrifice, according to the Mysteries delivered by him to us: and offering
Thanksgiving for our Salvation by godly Hymns and Prayers to God: consecrating
our selves also wholly to him, and to our high Priest, the word; devoting to
him both our Souls and Bodies. It would be easy to add much more to the same
purpose: but this is sufficient to show, what the Sacrifice is which we make
when we do this, and that our Church now does that, which the Ancient did. By
feasting upon this Sacrifice, we not only commemorate that oblation of himself,
with the Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving, but likewise offer up our selves
to him to be entirely his. As will appear more fully in the next consideration:
which is this

By this Action we make a solemn Profession and declare our selves to be the
Disciples and followers of Jesus, to whom we join our selves in fellowship. So
much is the rational consequence of what has been said. For by eating of the
Sacrifices offered at the Altar, both Jews and Gentiles professed themselves to
be the Worshippers and Servants of that God, to whom the oblation was made. And
secondly, it may be rationally drawn from that discourse of our Saviors with
the Jews, in the Sixth of S. John's Gospel. Where eating his flesh and drinking
his blood, v. 51, 53, 54, etc. signify nothing else but believing See v. 29
35.47.
the word and keeping the Precepts which Christ published in our flesh, and
sealed with his Blood. This is honestly acknowledged by a Learned Person in the
Church of Rome: who gives the sense of those verses in these two lines. They
are nourished with the flesh of Christ to eternal life, who keep the sayings of
Christ incarnate Carne Christi nutriuntur in vitam aeternam qui Sermones
Christi incarnati servant, Rigaltius in Cypr. Epist. 1.
. Which he expresses more largely in another place. The words of eternal life
which Peter acknowledged our Savior had, are the Commands, says he, which he
gave when he was in Flesh among men. For therefore he was made Flesh, that in
the Flesh or Body of man, he might procure their Salvation, and form them to
eternal life. Therefore the words which Christ spoke in flesh, the Gospel of
Christ, is the flesh of Christ. These words, this flesh, this meat Christ would
have us eat, ruminate and digest, that being nourished thereby, we may profit
to eternal life Idem in Epist. 55. Annot. a.
. Thus S. Peter understood our Lord, when he answered at the end of that
discourse to his Question [will ye go away?] To whom should we go? thou have
the words of eternal life, v. 68. And thus Christ explains himself, v. 63.
where he says his discourse was not to be understood so grossly as the Jews
apprehended it; but in a more spiritual and divine manner. His meaning was to
be conceived as if he had said, unless you really receive me, notwithstanding
my being crucified, as God speaking to you in flesh; and so conform your selves
to my Doctrine, you cannot be saved. And indeed this eating and drinking which
now he called them unto, could be nothing else, but receiving him and his
Doctrine; for the Sacrament of his Body and Blood was not yet instituted. But
when it was; then, I make account, they who did eat of this Bread and drink of
this Cup in Commemoration of Christ, were to look upon it as a devout
Profession of that Faith in him and Obedience to him, without which we cannot
inherit eternal life. We declare by this Action the entire assent of our minds
to the Truth of all that he preached, when he was in our flesh: and the
unfeigned consent of our Wills to be ordered and governed according to it.
Hence, perhaps, it was that this Action came to be called the Sacrament, which
was the ancient name for our whole Religion As may be seen in S. Cyprian
Lactan^ius etc. in innumerable places.
, because here we make the most solemn Profession of the Christian Religion, as
the Jews did of the Mosaical; when they did eat before God of the Sacrifices
offered on his Altar. Thus much I am sure of (in the third place) that the
whole discourse of S. Paul is to this sense; when he calls the Cup of blessing
which we bless, the Communion of the Blood of Christ; and the Bread which we
break, the Communion of the body of Christ. 1 Cor. 10.16. That is, an Holy
Action whereby we declare our Society and fellowship with Christ; and that we
are of his Religion, in opposition to all others. Which we shall easily discern
to be the Apostles meaning, if we take but the pains to consider what it is
that he goes about to prove in those eight verses [from v. 14. to 22.] It is
nothing but this: That if they did Communicate with Christ in the Cup of
Blessing and Breaking of Bread, then they must flee from all Idolatrous
Services and not partake in them. The consequence, says he, is manifest to any
understanding person, as I take you to be. For to Communicate with him in that
manner, is as much as to acknowledge Jesus only to be the Lord; to honor and
worship him; to profess that you belong to him; and to join your selves in
fellowship with him. Which he proves, first, from the intention of the Feasts
upon the Jewish Sacrifices; of which whosoever did eat, he thereby became of
that Religion, and professed to worship that God at whose Altar (which Malachi
calls his Table. Mal. 1.7.) that meat was offered in honor of him. And
secondly, from the Religious Feasts among the Gentiles; whose Sacrifices being
offered to Demons, whosoever did eat of them, thereby he made an
acknowledgment of their Deity; and that he was one of their Servants and
Worshippers. Which instances carry in them this general reason; that the eating
continually of any ones meat, signifies us to be of his Family; or his Friends
and familiar acquaintance: and so this Religious eating at their Tables and of
their meat, was a token and a declaration of Friendship and Society with God or
with Demons: and by consequence this must be the meaning of our pertaking of
the Table of the Lord. From which premises the Apostle concluds with the
greatest force of reason, that all those who made this profession of being
Members of Christ's Body, and belonging to the Christian Society or Corporation,
( v. 17.) by pertaking of Christ's Table, and eating of his Meat; must have
nothing to do with the Tables of Demons. For this would be to jumble the most
contrary and inconsistent things together: to worship God, and Baal too: to be
the servants of Christ, and the servants of the Devil. Whereas, in truth, by
honoring them in eating of their Sacrifices, they did, in effect, renounce
Christ. And by Communicating with Christ, at his Table, they did re-renounce
them. For he came to destroy the works of the devil, 1 John 3.8. and Idolatry
in the first place: wherein that worship and service was paid to the devil,
which was due to God alone.

You must address your selves then to the Table of the Lord, as the friends of
Jesus Christ; on purpose to profess that you believe on him, and are of his
Religion, and mean to cleave unto him and obey him; renouncing all other
Masters for ever. Say in your hearts; O Blessed Jesus, I acknowledge thee to be
the Lord; Thou art the only begotten of the Father full of grace and truth.
Joh. 1.14.
14.16.
Thou only art the Way, the Truth, and the Life. I humbly adore thee; and here
devote my self everlastingly to thee. I believe thy blessed Gospel: I own thy
supreme Authority: and submit my self to thy Sovereign Commands. Truly I am thy
servant, I am thy servant. I look for all blessings through thy hands alone:
who have all power in Heaven and in Earth. Let it be unto thy servant,
according to thy word. Yea deal with me, according as I unfeignedly acknowledge
thee, and heartily join my self in fellowship with thee, to be thy Disciple and
follower for ever. I give thee possession of my heart entirely. Do there what
thou please. Be the sole governor and disposer of all my thoughts, words,
desires and actions. Psalm 119.128.
I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right; and I hate every
false way.

And according to our Sincerity in this devoting of our selves to him, we shall
find the powerful communication of his good spirit to us, to unite us closer to
himself. When this outward action declares the inward devotion of our hearts,
to knit themselves to him, and to become one spirit with him; without all doubt
he will make us feel that he dwells in us by the power of his Spirit, to
enliven, help and strenghthen us in a Christian course of life. For this
Communion is mutual; and the word properly signifies a Participation of
something from him, by our joining our selves to him. We dwell in Christ, and
Christ in us: we are made one with Christ and Christ with us (as the words are
in our Communion Service) and so may expect all those graces and favors which
he has received from God, to impart to faithful souls: perticularly it is a
pledge of his Divine presence with us, and that he will send his heavenly
influences into our hearts. Being knit and joined to him as Members of his
Body, we may be assured he will take care of us, as our Head. He ingages
himself to guide, quicken, refresh, powerfully move and assist us in all well
doing. This we may humbly wait for by virtue of our Union with him. As the evil
spirit wrought in the children of disobedience, who were joined to devils, by
eating of their meat: so will the Spirit of grace work in those that obey our
Lord; being joined to him by pertaking of his holy Table. And for that end we
may come to it, that being knit still faster to him, we may have a more
abundant communication of his holy spirit to us. We may entreat him to be a
constant Friend to us, to make his abode with us; so that we may evermore dwell
in him and he in us. He will say, Amen, to it as well as we; if in the
uprightness of our hearts, we perform this holy Action: the meaning of which I
shall still further declare.

said, that by pertaking of this Feast; we make such a profession of
Christianity and subjection to the Lord Jesus, as to engage our selves hereby
in a mutual Covenant with him. So much I told you at the beginning; that
Sacraments are outward Rites and Solemnities, to express our consent to the new
Covenant: and whereby we signify our settled purpose, and engage our faith, to
perform the duties of Christians; as ever we expect that Christ Jesus should be
a Savior to us. But this Sacrament of the Lords Supper is more particularly
designed for that end: that by often doing this, we may, with repeated
protestations of our fidelity, renew our Baptismal Vow and Covenant wherein we
stand engaged: and in the most sacred manner addict and devote our selves again
and again, to that Service which we promised, when we entered into Christ's
Religion.

It is well known that eating and drinking together, was ever reputed a token
of friendship and brotherly accord, between those persons who consent to such a
meeting. But this was more notorious when there was a Feast made on purpose to
express this Friendship: For this amounted to a Covenant, and thereby they
entered into a league, to be at peace and Unity among themselves. Thus you read
that King Abimilech and his Courtiers came to Isaac and said ( Genesis 26.28, 29.)
Let us make a Covenant with thee; that thou will do us no hurt, as we have not
touched thee, and as we have done unto thee nothing but good, etc. And then it
follows immediately ( v. 30.) that he made them a Feast, and they did eat and
drink. That is, he entered with them, according to their desire, into a league
of love and friendship, by making this solemn entertainment for them. But then,
it is farther to be noted that, when this Feast was upon a Sacrifice, and they
eat and drank of what had been offered to God; it was still a more sacred way
of covenanting and making compacts one with another. So when Laban desired
Jacob, in these words ( Genesis 31.44.) come now, let us make a Covenant, I and
thou; and let it be for a witness between me and thee: we are told that this
was the manner of it, v. 54. Then Jacob offered Sacrifice upon the mount, and
called his Brethren to eat bread; and they did eat bread, and tarried all night
in the mount: that is, they remained together in one and the same place, as
those that had now no emnity nor suspicion of each other (though they had been
at difference before) after they had covenanted to be Friends, by eating all of
the same Sacrifice. By this it is apparent, that it was then a common custom
among the several Nations of the Earth, to make contracts and agreements
together, by eating and drinking, especially upon a Sacrifice. Which continued,
I might show you, in after Ages among the Gentiles, as well as Jews. But I
shall only mention one memorable instance, which we find in Quintius Curtius:
who tells us, that when Alexander was so surprised with the beauty of Roxane,
that he presently determined to make her his wife: he commanded Bread to be
brought, after his Country fashion. For setting Bread before them was the most
sacred pledge of Conjugal love among the Macedonians; which being divided with a
Sword, each party tasted of H^c erat apud Macedones sanctissimum co^untium
pignus; quem divisum gladio, uterque libabat, Lib. 8. cap. 4.
.

All that need be added to this is, that there was an Oath frequently
accompanied these holy Covenants; which could never be more solemnly made, than
when they were in the presence of God, at these Feasts upon his Sacrifices. You
have examples of it in the stories already mentioned. Abimelech not only
desired to make a Covenant with Isaac; but said let there now be an Oath
betwixt us. And accordingly you read after they had feasted, they confirmed the
Covenant thereby made, by swearing one to another, early the next morning, Genesis
26.31. This was a sign they intended to continue friends; and had not made that
league in a fit of kindness, when their hearts were warm with good cheer, but
seriously and deliberately before Almighty God. Just so you find it in the
History of Jacob and Laban: only the Oath there went before the Sacrifice and
the Feast. And the consequence of this discourse is this: that when the Jews
therefore, did eat of the Sacrifices of Thanksgiving, which was Gods meat;
being offered or set on his Altar or Table: they did express thereby that they
were in Covenant with God. Their feasting with him in that manner, was a
declaration of peace and friendship with him: and they bound themselves to keep
the whole Covenant made with their Fathers; which every time they came to his
Altar, was renewed and confirmed. And this we are to conceive is the meaning
likewise, of our eating and drinking of this Bread and of this Cup at the Table
of our Lord. Our pertaking of his Sacrifice, is an open declaration that we
continue steadfast in the New Covenant, that he has made with us, and we with
him: which hereby we renew and ratify. It is an engaging of our faith again to
him; that we will remain for ever in his love. A promise to keep friendship
with him, by never swerving from that Obedience, which we have vowed to him. We
pass our words to him; that whatsoever service we owe him, shall be punctually
performed. That all the Articles of the holy Covenant, which we made with him
when we were first received into his society, shall on our part be carefully
and duly observed. As hereby he ingages himself (you shall see anon) to make us
pertakers of all the blessings of that Covenant; so we engage to perform the
duties of it. And accordingly as we acquit our selves, and honestly stand to
the terms of our agreement with him, and make it good; so we must expect, and
no otherways, to enjoy the benefits which he has promised to the faithful. If
we prove not false in this Covenant of God, but in the uprightness of our heart
keep close to our duty; then, as sure as we take that Bread and that Cup into
our hands, as certain as we taste them with our mouths, and receive them into
our bodies, will he give us his pardon, grace, and eternal life. And this we do
not only Covenant with him to perform; but this Action looks like an Oath which
we take, that we will be Christ's faithful Soldiers and servants to our lives
end. This is an ancient notion of the word Sacrament, which we now use to
express this Action by. And thus in Pliny's time they understood the meaning of
it: for he tells us, as you heard, that Christians bound themselves at their
Assemblies, by a Sacrament (or oath) not to commit any wickedness. When we come
therefore to the Table of the Lord, we swear fidelity to him, and vow that we
will be steadfast in our Covenant. We take the Sacrament upon it, as we
ordinarily speak, that we will be true to him, and manfully fight under his
banners against the Devil the world and the flesh. And here I cannot but
remember what Josephus L. 2. de bello Jud. cap. 7. (...).
writes concerning the Essens (a sect among the Jews) who would not admit any
to their Communion nor eat with them, before they had taken certain Horrible
Oaths, that they would worship God, and observe all the rules of Justice
toward men. But can there be any more dreadful than this, whereby we keep our
Communion with Christ? Is it not a most terrible thing to swear fidelity to our
Lord, by laying our hands, as it were, upon his Body and Blood; nay eating and
drinking that which represents him to us? This lays the most powerful
engagement on us, and binds us in the strongest resolutions to be constant,
hearty and zealous in our Christian Profession of Faith and Obedience to him:
without which we draw upon our selves the greatest mischiefs imaginable. For I
must observe once more; that this made it such a perilous thing to eat and
drink unworthily, and brought such judgments on the Corinthians (1 Cor. 11.29,
30.) because in all Covenants made in the presence of God and with appeals to
him, there is necessarily understood, though it be not expressed, an
imprecation of divine vengeance, if we do not keep them. There is nothing more
easy to be observed in the Leagues among the Greeks, which were confirmed by
Oath, than such words as these. (...), etc. v. Seld. L. 2. de S^nedr. cap. 11.
n. 3.
I wish perdition to my self and my house, if I transgress any of those things
which I have agreed unto: as I hope for all good things if I keep them
inviolable. And if they did not use such formal words; yet it was the sense of
all Nations, that having Covenanted in Gods presence and made him a witness of
their action; his wrath was to be expected against the unfaithful: which they
had burdened themselves withal. And therefore seeing here we do in such a
sacred manner vow to God that we will be at peace with him and observe the Laws
of our blessed Savior; we must remember that we load our selves with Curses
and expose our selves to the Almighty's displeasure, if we do not faithfully
study to make good our word. A consideration that ought not to deter and
affright us from this holy Communion, but only make us more serious in it, and
diligently to frequent it: if we intend to be good Christians, and expect to
enter into the blessed society of our Savior in Heaven. It shows us the great
necessity of obeying this Command of our Lord; because of the security we
hereby give him, that all the rest of his Commands shall be better observed; if
we carefully observe this. For who can live always in the midst of meditations
of our Saviors Love, and not be sensibly moved to love him above all things?
who can be ever thinking of his Obedience to the death, and yet himself be
disobedient? who can endure to lose such blessings, as he says the blood of
Christ was the price of? How is it possible that we should continually remember
him, and yet quite forget our duty to him? with what face can a man plead his
Sacrifice, and not himself be wholly offered to him? what an intolerable
hypocrisy is it, to be continually professing our selves Christians and
acknowledging him to be our Lord; if we will not be governed by him, and live
in subjection to his Commands? Nay more than that, what desperate profaneness
is it, to promise, Covenant and Vow to be his servants; and to make no
Conscience how we behave our selves toward our Lord and Master? certainly, the
serious performance of this Action must needs produce other effects, and be of
mighty force to make us thoroughly good. And therefore can be neglected by none
that understand it; but those who are unwilling to be tied to their duty: and
are afraid to be engaged to use their best diligence, to keep the Commands of
Christ. And what such persons think of themselves I cannot tell. It is like
they put away all sober thoughts of other matters, as they thrust by the
thoughts of this. But it is certain they are in a most dangerous condition.
They have broken their Baptismal vow and Covenant: and they have no mind to
repent, amend their lives, and be bound to keep it better hereafter. They do
the works of their Father the Devil, and will not come and renounce them once
more; because, they are of opinion, that if they should, they shall return to
them. Were their hearts right toward God, they would be forward to come and
dedicate themselves anew to him. And they would not out of fear of breaking
these bonds too, refuse to renew their Covenant with him: but in hope to be
assisted by the Holy Ghost, make a sincere protestation of their purposes of
holy living. And suppose they should be guilty of any failing afterward; it
would only move them to make the more have to sue out their pardon; and to bind
themselves more strictly by renewed vows to their duty: that at last by the
help of Gods Almighty grace, in the use of this and all other means, they might
get the mastery over their sins, and perform an uniform obedience to Christ's
Commands.

There is a Fable goes among the Romanists concerning a Lord in Provence; how
that he being extremely sick and earnestly desiring the blessed Sacrament,
entreated the Priest, when he brought it to him, to lay it upon his Breast,
because he durst not eat it for fear of vomiting it up. Immediately, says the
Legend, his breast opened and receiving into it self the Heavenly food, closed
its mouth again. The moral of it, if we please, may be true in every one of us.
Did we but come to the Holy Table with fervent desire and great devotion of
Spirit; did we apply our thoughts strongly to meditate on our Saviors wondrous
love, and lay our hearts, as I may say, to his, to feel how full of affection
it was to us, in dying for us: we could not choose but set our hearts (our Wills
I mean) wide open to admit him for our Lord and Governor. Our hearts would leap
for joy to entertain such a gracious Master: and they would not easily open
again to any thing else, that would rob him of our love, and oppose it self to
his Commands. We should hate that which tempted us to break our faith with him.
The world would seem little in our eyes; and we should find all our inordinate
affections to it languishing and dying; that we might live to him, who dyed for
us.

So S. Basil, I remember, describes the meaning and intention of this Sacrament
L 1. de Baptismo cap. ult.
. What is the profit, says he, of those words, Do this in remembrance of me?
I Will tell you. That eating and drinking we may always remember him that dyed
for us and rose again, and so may be taught necessarily to keep before God and
his Christ that Ordinance delivered by his Apostle in these words; for the love
of Christ constrains us; judging this, that if one dyed for all, then were
all dead, and he dyed for all, that they who live should not henceforth live to
themselves, but to him that dyed for them and rose again. He that eats and
drinks to the indelible memory of Christ Jesus who dyed for us, and rose
again, but does not fulfill the reason of that memory of the Obedience of our
Lord even unto death, according to the aforesaid instruction of the Apostle
[the love of Christ constrains us, etc.] has no profit at all: according to
the declaration of our Lord, who says, that the flesh profits nothing. He
adds a great deal more to the same purpose; and repeats it over again in fewer
words in another place (if the Book (...) cap. 3. Reg. 21.
be his) The reason of eating the Body and drinking the Blood of Christ, is for
a Commemoration of his Obedience unto death, that they who live should not
henceforth live to themselves, but to him that dyed and rose again.

Let us always then have this in our mind, when we are making our selves ready
for this holy feast, that we are going to consecrate our selves again to the
obedience of Christ unto the death. To renew our protestations of friendship
with him, and confirm the Covenant that is between us. Utterly to disclaim all
emnities and opposition to his will: and to profess our selves heartily his
confederates that will never forsake him. In short, to promise and vow in the
most sacred manner, that we will henceforth live unto him and not to our
selves: and remain his servants in truth and fidelity for ever. Let us say to
him some such words as these. Thou O Lord have redeemed me by thy own most
precious blood. I see the wounds thou have received for my sake. I behold how
thy holy flesh was rent and torn for my sins. O the Agonies, O the pains and
sorrows which thou have endured for my salvation! I will never willingly grieve
thy heart any more. Far be it from me, to pierce thee again, by slighting thy
Commands. I had rather die, than wound thee by my unkind unfaithfulness to
thee. Rather had I be torn in pieces my self, than break thy Laws, and violate
thy Covenant wherein I am engaged. I forswear all confederacy with thy enemies,
and all opposition to thy will and pleasure. I vow most sincerely, that I will
endeavor to live in all good Conscience toward God and toward all men. So
help me God; as I mean to be true and faithful to thee, to my lives end. I have
sworn, Psalm. 119.106, 112, 113, etc.
and I will perform it; that I will keep thy righteous judgments. I have
inclined my heart to perform thy statutes always, even unto the end. I hate vain
thoughts: but thy law do I love. Depart from me, ye evil doers; for I will keep
the Commandments of my God. Hold me up, and I shall be safe: and I will have
respect unto thy statutes continually.

to the death, which we here remember, puts me in mind to add another
consideration (which we are to have in this Action) that belongs to this, which
I have now handled. It is such a Covenant wherein we stand engaged, that by
doing this, we covenant even to die for him, rather than deny him. We promise
to be obedient to him, as he was to his Heavenly Father; so that if he demand
our lives to be laid down to do honor to him, we cannot honestly refuse it.
For as we offer the Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving, in this Commemoration
of him: so we offer, I told you, and present our selves, our Souls and Bodies
to God, to be a lively, holy and acceptable Sacrifice unto him. Now the very
life of the Beast which was offered in Sacrifice, was given to God; its Blood
being shed at the Altar. And therefore the complete meaning of this phrase, and
of this action, of offering our selves to be Sacrifices to God, is this: that
we part with our selves so entirely and are so absolutely devoted to him; that
it shall not be in our power afterward to recall this gift: no, not though we
die for it. As the beast that was offered to God was no longer the owners; and
the Blood, which is the life (says he himself) became appropriated wholly to
his uses: so the grant we make of our selves to God at his Altar is
irrevocable: we are no longer our own but his, and cannot resume our selves any
more into our own disposal: but if he will have our very life, it must be at
his service. This was one reason, I make no doubt, of receiving the Sacrament
so often in the beginning of our Religion; that they might fortify their holy
resolution of following Christ to his Cross, and dying for the testimony of his
Truth: to which they expected continually to be called. I have the authority of
an holy Martyr (S. Cyprian) for it, who tells us (in his Book upon the Lords
Prayer) that in his Church they Communicated every day: which custom remained
till S. Hieromes time at Rome, and in Spain. One great end of it was, that they
might be well appointed against the assaults of their enemies; and have
courage, as good Soldiers of Christ Jesus, to march after him, even unto the
death. For the same person, giving an account in one of his letters Epist. 54.
Cornelio.
, why he would receive to the peace of the Church certain persons that had fallen
away in time of persecution (but now bewailed their fault, and resolved to be
more constant hereafter:) says, that he saw a new storm arising, and was
assured by divine admonitions and tokens, that a more furious conflict would be
renewed. And therefore it was necessary to receive them into Communion again
(whom he exhorts to fight valiantly and play the men) that so they might not be
left naked and unarmed: but be strengthened by the protection of Christ's Body
and Blood. For since the Eucharist is designed for that end, that it may be a
defense or safeguard to them that receive it, we arm those with the Ammunition
of the Lords fullness Munimento Dominicae Saturitatis.
, whom we would have to be safe from the adversary. For how can we teach and
provoke those to pour out their blood, in the confession of his name, to whom
we deny the blood of Christ, when they are about to fight? Or how can we make
them fit for the Cup of Martyrdom, if we do not first admit them, by a right of
Communication, to drink the Cup of the Lord in the Church? He cannot be fit for
Martyrdom, who is not armed by the Church for the war. That heart will fail,
which by receiving the Eucharist, is not lifted up and inflamed. By which last
words, it is clear that the minds of believers were raised up by the Eucharist,
and had a holy zeal inkindled in them, to follow Christ in sufferings. The
Priests who celebrated the Sacrifices of God every day (as he speaks in the
same Epistle) prepared Sacrifices and Victimes to be offered to God.

For remembering the blood of Jesus, and being touched with a sense of his love
to them; they went full of heat and courage: as those who had made a sworn
agreement to suffer death valiantly; which Christ underwent for their
Salvation. And in his next Epistle but one, which is an exhortation to
Martyrdom, he calls upon the people of Thibaris, to arm their right hand with
the spiritual sword, (speaking according to the manner in those days, when they
received the Eucharist into their hand, as we do now, and not into their mouth,
as the fashion is in the present Church of Rome) that they might never stretch
it forth to Idolatrous sacrifices: but being mindful of the Eucharist, that
hand which received the body of the Lord, might embrace him and hold him fast;
and receive hereafter the reward of celestial Crowns. The like we read in his
Book concerning those that fell away, in a time of suffering: when other men's
mouths sanctified with the celestial meat, after the body and blood of the
Lord, refused to taste the profane infections and relics of Idols. I shall
add no more but the words of another Writer de Cardinal. operibus Christ: Cap.
de Coena Dom.
; under his name, which are very significant. When we celebrate the Sacrament,
says he, we are admonished to ruminate and chew over and over again, the
example of our Lord; that his passion may be always in memory; and the
punishments of death may not terrify the Heirs of the Crucified: but they may
feed and refresh themselves, with the joyful solemnities of a timely
resurrection. O how excellent is this Cup! How religious is the excess of this
Drink! by which we are divinely out of our selves: and forgetting the things
that are behind, reach forward to those that are before. And losing the sense
of this world, and contemning the delights of the purpled rich man; we cleave
to the Cross, and suck the blood, and lay our tongues in the wounds of our
Redeemer. They were transported, he means, by the thoughts of Christ's death
beyond themselves, and thought of nothing but dying for him, if he called them
to it: preferring his Cross, which they carried always in their mind, before
the greatest riches and glory in the World.

And with the same affections should we be inspired when we make the same
Commemoration of him: professing we had rather die than dishonor him and his
religion, by denying them: Vowing our very life to be expended upon his
account, if there be occasion for it. This being a Feast as I told you, upon a
Sacrifice; we engage by doing this, that we will become a bloody Sacrifice to
him, if his will be that we should be offered up for his service. It being a
Communion, participation, or fellowship with him; if he will have us to partake
and have fellowship with him in his sufferings; we here express our selves to
be well contented. We Unite and join our selves to the Crucified Jesus; and so
profess that if he will have us bear his Cross, we will not deny him. Nay we
declare that we will glory in nothing so much as in the Cross of Christ: that
we will rejoice in tribulation: and think it is given to us as an honor to
suffer with him. For a feast is a joyful meeting; and therefore our eating and
drinking, at this feast, shows that we will not think he feeds us with gall and
wormwood, when we induce any thing for his names sake: but that he gives us the
Wine of joy and gladness; when the same Cup is put into our hand, which our
blessed Savior drank of. This is the very height of Christianity; to which
noble pitch we should earnestly strive, by all means, to arrive. Every drop of
our blood should be ready to be poured out, for that Religion, which Christ
sealed with his own. And indeed, what better use can we make of our life, than
to give it for him, from whom we received it, and who gave his life for us? And
how much better is it not to live at all, than to live with the mark and brand
of cowards and fugitives, from the Prince of life and the Lord of glory? Let us
say therefore when we come to the Table of the Lord; O how much do we owe thee,
most blessed Redeemer! How great is the price which thou have paid for the
ransom of us, miserable sinners! Tongue cannot express it, nor thought conceive
it. What shall I render unto thee for the incomprehensible benefits thou have
bestowed upon me? I can give thee no less than my self; which here I resign
entirely into thy hands. Do thou dispose of me according to thy pleasure. It is
but reasonable I should follow thee, whithersoever thou leadest me. Though it
be to thy Cross, I refuse not to obey thy orders. Though I should die with
thee, I hope I shall not in any wise deny thee. For there is no better use I
can make of my life, than to spend it for thee. I esteem all things but loss,
for the excellence of thy knowledge. I account not my life dear unto my self,
Act. 20.24
so that I may finish my course with joy. It is Christ that died; yea, rather
that is risen again: who is even at the right hand of God; who also makes
intercession for us. Romans 8.34, 35, etc.
Who shall separate me from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress,
or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? (as it is written,
for thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the
slaughter. Psalm. 44.17, 18.
) Though all this should come upon me, yet will I not forget thee; nor will I
deal falsely in thy Covenant. My heart shall not be turned back; neither shall
my steps decline from thy way. Nay in all these things, I shall be more than a
Conqueror, through him that loved me. For I am persuaded, that neither death,
nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor
things to come. Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to
separate me from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

And great reason there is, that we should cleave to him to the very death; if
we consider the inestimable benefits which he by his death has purchased for
us, and by this Commemoration of it confirms unto us. Especially that of
remission of sins through his blood: which he, for his part, covenants to grant
us, if we, for our part, be faithful to the death. For

a Feast upon a Sacrifice for Sin. Wherein we agreeing, as I said, to be his
constant Disciples, profess our belief that God has set him forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood: and he gives us a part in that
propitiation, and promises to be merciful to our unrighteousness, and to
remember our sins and iniquities no more. It was not permitted to the Jews you
know, (no not to the Priests themselves) to taste of the blood of any Beast,
that was slain in their Sacrifices to God: but it was to be poured out at the
foot of the Altar, after some part of it had been sprinkled thereon. And as for
the flesh of the Sacrifice, if it was an offering for sin, that was to be
wholly burnt also, and they were not allowed the least portion of it, at any of
their Feasts. This is a privilege belonging to Christians alone at the Table of
the Lord: where they not only eat of the Bread, which represents the body or
flesh of Christ; but drink of the Cup, which represents his Blood. We have an
Altar (i. e. a Sacrifice) whereof they had no right to eat that served the
Tabernacle: that is, Heb. 13.10.
which the Jewish Priests themselves, who ministered at the Altar, could not
partake of. We are admitted to the enjoyment of more singular privileges, than
they were invested withal. As we are pertakers of a better Sacrifice, which is
of greater efficacy and virtue, than any of theirs were: so God receives us
into a nearer familiarity with himself; and by setting before us not only the
body of that Sacrifice which was offered to him, but the blood also (which was
his own proper food) plainly tells us that he intends to make us pertakers of
the highest blessings; even of his own joy and happiness. Of which he gives us
strong assurance, in that he lets us partake not only of the blood of the
Sacrifice, in this figure and representation: but of the blood of that
Sacrifice, which was offered for the sins of the world. This bids us rest
assured of his abundant grace; and not doubt of our acceptance with him, to a
participation of his highest favor. There is nothing now to hinder it, nor to
make us call in question his merciful kindness toward us. For we have such a
token and pledge of forgiveness of our sins by this Sacrifice; as the ancient
people of God had not of the forgiveness of their offenses, by the blood that
was offered at Gods Altar. They were not admitted to taste of that blood, as we
are, of the blood of Jesus: and so could not have that boldness, and access
with confidence to God, which we have through the faith of him.

Luke 22.20. 1 Cor. 11.25. compared with Mat. 26.28.
This seems to be one great secret of this Sacrament: as appears from the words
of S. Luke and S. Paul, who tell us, that this Cup which we drink of, is the
New Covenant in Christ's blood, which was shed for the remission of sins. We are
received by doing this into that gracious Covenant; which assures us of
forgiveness through his blood. He gives us a right to those benefits (of which
that is the first) which he obtained by his obedience to the death. Which is
the import also of the word Communion, used by S. Paul to express the effect of
this Sacrament; 1 Cor. 10.16. The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
Communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the
Communion of the body of Christ? In its full signification, that phrase
denotes, not merely our being made of his Society, but our having a
Communication of his body and his blood unto us: So the word (...) is rendered
in other places, Gal. 6.6. Phil. 4.15.
of which we partake by eating this bread, and drinking this Cup, in
remembrance of his death for the remission of sin. And so we beseech our
merciful Father (in the Prayer of Consecration which our Church prescribes)
that we receiving these his Creatures of bread and wine, according to his Son
our Saviors holy institution, in remembrance of his death and Passion, may be
pertakers of his most blessed body and blood. For after the bread and wine are
deputed by holy prayer to God, to be used for a Commemoration of Christ's death;
though they do not cease to be, what they were before, yet they begin to be
something which they were not before this Consecration. That is, they become
now to us, visible signs of an inward and spiritual grace: and do not merely
figure to us the breaking of Christ's body and the shedding of his blood; but
are a pledge of that inward and spiritual grace, which they represent. What that
grace is, we are taught in our Catechism; when it tells us that it is, the body
and blood of Christ, which are verily and indeed received of the faithful in
the Lords Supper. That is, they have a real part and portion given them in the
death and sufferings of the Lord Jesus; whose body was broken and blood shed,
for remission of sins. They truly and indeed partake of the virtue of his
bloody Sacrifice; whereby he has obtained an eternal redemption for us. This
is the meaning sure, of pertaking of his body and blood, which are here
communicated. Because this bread and wine do not become his body and blood, by
ceasing to be bread and wine: but by tendering them to us, as a spiritual grace.
Their efficacy therefore and virtue by the divine favor is made ours. All the
effects and benefits of his passion are imparted to us. In short, there is
nothing which the body and blood of Christ can be to the spirits of men, but by
these tokens he exhibits it to us, and gives us an interest in it. This is
spiritually to eat his flesh and drink his blood; as both our Church and the
ancient speak. Our souls intertain and feast themselves upon his Sacrifice;
being really made pertakers of whatsoever his body and blood can do for them.
Which S. Gregory Nazianzen meant, I should think, when he says that these
oblations are the Communication of the Incarnation of God; and of the
sufferings of God in his (...). Tom. 2. Jamb. 15.
, How does he communicate to us his Incarnation, but by giving us the fruits
and benefits of it? and so he communicates to us his broken body and his blood
that was shed. We partake of both in the same manner. We are admitted to
participate of the secret of the sufferings of Christ (as he speaks in another
place (...), Orat. 40.
.) and by means of this Sacrament are vested in the merit of them. And thus
indeed the bread and wine are changed, not by abolishing their substance but,
by turning them to this divine use (to which they are deputed by prayer
according to Christ's institution) to tender to us the spiritual grace of the
body and blood of our Savior. The principal part of which grace is, remission
of sin. For sin being done away; death, the fruit of sin, is abolished: he
graciously restores us to the privilege of immortality which we had lost: and
in order to it assures us he will not fail to communicate the grace of his holy
spirit; to assist and further us in our way to everlasting bliss. We may be
satisfied that he will send a living virtue into our spirits, to quicken,
excite, and strengthen us, to do according to our Vows and engagements: that so
we may continue in his love, as he continued in his Fathers love, by keeping
his Commandments. For this is the nature and office of all Sacramental pledges,
to assure us of the good will of God, and of his truth in fulfilling his
gracious promises. He ingages to be faithful to us by giving them; as we engage
our selves to be faithful to him, by receiving them. God bids us believe that
we shall be accepted in his beloved; nay, he puts us in possession of all that
which the Gospel promises, and the Sacrifice of Christ on the Cross obtained to
us: mercy, grace, and peace: remission of sin; the power of the Holy Ghost, and
eternal life.

Thus the prayer of Consecration runs in the ancient Liturgies: into which
though many things are foisted, suitable to the conceits of later times, yet
they contain sundry expressions of Christian devotion, worthy of those who are
called the Authors of them. Bless this Bread and this wine (says that ascribed
to S. Chrysostom) make it to be the body and blood of thy Son, etc. that it may
be to all that partake of it, for the washing of the Soul, the forgiveness of
sin, the communication of the Holy Spirit, etc. And a little after. Make us
worthy to partake of thy heavenly and dreadful mysteries, of this holy and
spiritual Table, with a pure Conscience; for the remission of sin, the pardon
of our offenses, the communication of the Holy Spirit, the inheriting the
Kingdom of Heaven, and confidence before thee; not for judgment or
condemnation. In that also which goes under the name of S. James (to mention no
more) we find these words. Be merciful to us, O God, according to thy great
mercy, and send upon us and upon these gifts thy Holy Spirit, that it may
sanctify and make this bread the holy body of thy Christ, and this Cup the
precious blood of thy Christ; that they may be to all those who receive them,
for the remission of sin, and for eternal life, the sanctification of body and
soul, the bringing forth the fruit of good works, and the establishing of thy
holy Catholic and Apostolic Church which thou have founded upon the ROCK OF
FAITH; that the gates of hell may not prevail against it, etc. The meaning of
which words [ make this Bread the Body of thy Christ, etc.] are so well
expounded in the Service of the Roman Church, by the addition only of these two
words [TO VS] as if their forefathers had studied to prevent that gross
conceit, which now they have entertained Our Writers have shown often enough,
that the fancy of transubstantiation is not countenanced by the service of that
Church which teaches it.
. For the Prayer there concerning the Bread and wine is, that they may become
to us the body and blood of thy wel-beloved Son our Lord Jesus Christ. God does
not make them so in themselves, by changing their substance: but unto us, by
their change from the common to this Spiritual use. Nor does the prayer, now
mentioned, for the Holy Spirit to come and sanctify them, and make them his
body to us, etc. suggest any such thing, as a change of their substance. For
the ancient writers frequently say as much concerning the sanctifying of the
Water in Baptism, by the holy Spirit: and yet it remains Water still, though it
serve to the mystical washing away of sin. So do the bread and wine remain
bread and wine, after the sanctifying of them, and their becoming the body and
blood of Christ to us. They are both: bread and wine in their substance: and
the body and blood of Christ the Spiritual use to which they are appointed. To
that use when once they are consecrated, we have no regard at all to the
substance of bread and wine: but only to the body and blood of Christ; which by
doing this are communicated to our souls, in the remission of sin, the
sanctification of the Spirit, and eternal life. To conclude, what Gregory
Nyssen says concerning Baptism Tom. 2. in Bapt. Christi p. 802.
[Do not contemn the divine washing, nor undervalue it as a common thing,
because of the Use of the Water: for that which it works is great, and there
are wonderful effects of it] we may say concerning the Supper of the Lord;
Bread and Wine are but small things: but in this holy use of them they are
great, and produce admirable effects. Nay he himself immediately mentions this
very thing, among others, for an example of the great benefit that may be
received from common matters; when they are applied to a divine use. This
Altar, says he, at which we stand is in its Nature but ordinary stone; nothing
different from those you tread upon: but being dedicated to God ^ervice, it is
an holy Table, etc. And this bread also, is in the beginning but common bread:
but when the mystery has offered it, then it is called and it is the body of
Christ. So the mystical oil and so the Wine, which are little worth before the
blessing, after the sanctification of the Spirit, have another kind of
operation. And thus a Priest who the other day was a vulgar person, being
separated by blessing, becomes a guide, a Governor, a teacher of piety, etc.
And these things he does, without any change at all in his body or form. By
these examples any man may see that he thought, the bread and wine in the
Sacrament become the body and blood of Christ; with no more change in their
substance, than there is in the water with which we baptize, or in the Priest
who ministers there or at the Eucharist. But that they are called the body and
blood of Christ in regard of the Use to which they are sanctified; and are his
body and blood, in regard of the wonderful effects which are communicated to
the faithful in the use of them; viz. remission of sin, and all other benefits
of his passion.

Now what greater favor can we desire at Gods hands, than to be admitted to
such fellowship with him and with his son Jesus Christ? what is there of equal
power with this, to possess our hearts with the love of God? was there ever any
so treated by him as we are? did the friends of God in ancient time receive
such pledges of his grace and favor? were they ever made thus one with him and
joined to him, by pertaking of his Sons body and blood? who would not give up
himself soul and body eternally to him, that thinks of these things? who can
think he makes a dear purchase, if he give his life in exchange for such
invaluable blessings? we should go to the Table of the Lord and say; How
excellent is thy loving kindness O God! How precious are thy thoughts toward
us, how great is the sum of them! who would not fear thee? who would not love
thee, and glorify thy name? For thou have given us exceeding great and
precious promises, 2 Pet. 1.4.
that by them we might be pertakers of a divine Nature. Thou have sealed them
with the blood of thy Son: and have made a new Covenant with us in that blood,
Heb. 10.16, 17.
to put thy laws in our hearts and write them in our minds; and our sins and
iniquities to remember no more. Thou have made him an high Priest for ever to
make intercession for us: and given him power and glory at thy right hand; 1 Thessalonians. 5.24.
that he may be able to perform all his promises. Faithful is he that calls
us, who also will do it. For ever, O Lord, thy word is settled in Heaven. Psalm.
119.89, 90.
Thy faithfulness is unto all generations. But thou have given likewise farther
assurances of thy merry and thy Truth: by entertaining us at thy Table; and
making us partake of that body and blood, which was offered for our sins.
Enough, Enough, O most merciful Father! We see the love thou bear to us. We
cannot desire greater tokens and testimonies of it, than these thou have given
us. 2 Cor. 1.20
All thy promises in Christ, we believe, are Amen; certain, faithful and true.
We know and are sure, 1 John 2.1, 2.
that we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous; and he
is a propitiation for our sins. I will never doubt any more of thy good will
toward us: for I taste and feel that the Lord is gracious. Psalm. 111.4, 5, 9.
The Lord is gracious and full of compassion: he will ever be mindful of his
Covenant. He has sent redemption unto his people, he has commanded his
covenant for ever: Holy and reverend is his Name. Psalm. 103.17, 18.
The mercy of the Lord, is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear
him. To such as keep his Covenant, and to those that remember his Commandments
to do them. I wait therefore for thee O Lord, Ps. 130.5.
my soul does wait: and in thy word do I hope. Mine eyes shall be ever toward
the Lord; Jude 2.
that Mercy and peace and love may be multiplied unto me: that I may walk in
the light as thou, Lord, art in the light; for so shall we still have
fellowship one with another, 1 John 1.7.
and the blood of Jesus Christ thy son shall cleanse me from all sin, Amen.

The natural consequence of what has we might live through him, and he might
be the propitiation for our sins; is drawn to our hand by S. John 1 Epist.
4.11. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. This is
so certain a fruit of an hearty sense of Gods merciful kindness to us, that no
man ought to think he loves him, or has any fellowship with him or with his
son Jesus, who does not feel in himself an unfeigned affection and readiness to
do good, to all his Christian Brethren. By this we know that we dwell in him,
and he in us (which we pray for at the Lords Table) because he has given us of
his spirit, v. 13. That is, endued us with his own kind, and gracious Nature
and disposition. Of which that we may not fail to be pertakers, he has
ordained this Sacrament to be a bond of Union between all Christians, who
believe in one common Savior, and all partake of his Sacrifice. There is no
doubt but this is one of the ends for which he invites us to this Feast, that
we may profess charity to all our Brethren, and join our selves in a league of
Friendship with them, as well as with himself. This was the intention of
public feasts in all Cities of the world. Athenaeus mentions such among the
Athenians, Lacedaemonians, and Cretians L. 5. Deipnosoph. cap. 1.2. (...) and
(...).
. Whose Lawgivers had appointed common entertainments, at which the Citizens
met in one place; that they might be more firmly linked together, and not
espouse any private interest. Many other besides these he there remembers: at
which they thought it of great import that all should appear and present
themselves. For he immediately adds the saying of an ancient Poet who
admonished them, that Friends and companions should not long abstain from these
Feasts, because this was a most lovely Commemoration -- (...).
. (the very word used by our Savior at the institution of this Feast of his)
They commemorated, I suppose, the common benefits that had been bestowed on
them, the famous Acts of their ancestors, and the mavelous victorie^ and
deliverances which they had obtained: whereby they were engaged to love and
unity, without which they could never hope to remain so happy. Such meetings
(besides those ordained by the Law) there were among the Jews, that lived in
the same neighborhood: who maintained society and friendship by eating of the
same food in the evening of the Sabbath. Which was as much as to say (as
Maimonides his words are Mentioned by Dr. Lightfoot in 1 Cor. 10
.) we are mingled together, or associated: there is one food for us all: no man
intrenches on his neighbors property. But as there is one equal right to us
all in this common place, so there is a several right to every one in the place
which is peculiar and proper to himself. Thus our Companies and Fraternities
have their Common Halls and Feasts also: which were appointed for nothing else,
but that they might the better maintain love and kindness, among the Brethren
of the society. In like manner this Divine Feast of our Saviors institution,
was attended with that of charity: in which the poor were entertained as
Christian Brethren together with the rich; for the continuing and promoting of
friendship, Unity, and peace among them all. Nay, this Feast it self was
designed, without all question, for this purpose, as well as others: that all
those who met at the same Communion, might be joined together in the strictest
bond of holy friendship; by pertaking all of one bread, and drinking of one
Cup. So S. Paul teaches us, 1 Cor. 10.17. For we being many are one bread, and
one body: for we are all pertakers of that one bread. As the bread was broken
to commemorate the sufferings of Christ, whose body was broken for our sins: so
it was broken also to be distributed among all the Communicants; in token that
they were but one body: members of the same Christ, and members one of another.
As it was a Feast, their eating at the same Table declared their friendship and
charity: but their eating there of one and the same loaf (which represented the
body of Christ) more effectually declared it, and engaged the holy Brotherhood
to greater Unity and intireness of affection. It is well observed by S.
Chrysostom H^mil. 18. in 2. Cor. p. 647.
, that it was not lawful for the people among the Jews to partake of that part
of the Sacrifice which was given to the Priests. But they had their portion to
themselves, and the Sacrificer with his Friends another portion different from
the Priests. But now it is not so, says he: one and the same body and one and
the same cup is given to all. To teach us that we are one body: differing no
more one from another, than member does from member in the same body. And
therefore we are not to throw all upon the Priests: but every one is to take
care of another; and contrive as much as he is able the good of the whole
Church. I will only add the words of S. Cyprian Epist. ad Magnum. p. 151. Edit.
Regal.
: who says, the Lords Sacrifices declare the Christian Unanimity, knit
together in a firm and inseparable charity. For when our Lord called the bread,
which is kneaded together and made up by the union of many corns, his body; he
denoted Christian people. And when he calls the wine, which is pressed out of
many grapes and gathered together in one, his blood; he signifies also our
flock, coupled by the mingling together of an united multitude. From whence it
is manifest to all that will not shut their eyes; that he took the bread to be
Christ's body, not only as it represents Christ, but all the faithful together
with him. Which appears more fully from the long discourse he makes in another
place Epist. ad Coecilium 63. p. 103.
, concerning the mixing of water together with wine in the Cup of the Lord; as
the custom then was. Waters, says he, in the holy Scripture signify many
people and Nations: which we behold also contained in the Sacrament of the Cup.
For since Christ bare us all, who likewise bare our sins, we see the people to
be understood by water, as the wine shows us the blood of Christ. Now when the
water in the Cup is mingled with the wine, the people is made one with Christ:
and the multitude of believers is coupled and joined together with him in whom
they believe. Which conjunction of water and wine is so mingled in the Cup of
the Lord, that they cannot be separated one from the other, etc. So that in
Sacrificing the Cup of the Lord, the water alone cannot be offered He is
disputing against those who used only water in this Sacrament.
, no more than the wine alone. For if one offer wine alone, it begins to be the
blood of Christ without the people: if water alone, it begins to be the people
without Christ. But when both are mingled and joined together by such an union
that they cannot be known one from the other, then the spiritual and heavenly
Sacrament is perfected. It is just so likewise in the other part: the body of
the Lord cannot be meal alone or water alone, but both must be made one and
coupled together and make up one solid loaf. By which Sacrament also our people
is shown to be made one. That as many corns being gathered together in one, and
kneaded and mixed together make one loaf: so in Christ who is the bread from
Heaven, we may know there is one body, to which our number is joined and
united. From which words we may clearly discern (that I may touch on this by
the way) that he did not believe the Wine in this Sacrament was turned in
substance into the blood of Christ, but only in representation and use. For it
begun to be his blood, when it was offered to God, just as the water begun to
be the people and flock of Christ. He uses the same words of both. And
therefore if we say he thought the wine was changed from its own nature into
the very substance of Christ's blood: we may as well say, he believed the water
to be changed from being water, and to be made the very substance of his Church
or people. In the like manner we may discourse concerning the bread, which, in
his opinion, is so made Christ's body, that it is also the body of the Church.
For that is represented, he says, together with Christ, by the flour and water
made into one Bread.

But not to trouble our selves any further with disputes, let us therefore when
we partake of the Table of the Lord, think, that as thereby we are made one
with Christ, so we are joined in the closest Union one with another. And let us
remember when we are making our selves ready for this heavenly Feast, that as
we are going to commemorate the dearest love of our Lord, and to profess our
love to him: so to engage our selves to the heartiest love toward all the
members of the same body; to enter into a Covenant one with another (as well as
with him) by eating of the same bread and drinking of the same Cup; that we
will never fall out any more; much less hate, malign, or do despite and
injuries one to another: but live for ever in the peace of God; in unity and
godly love. O that this holy use of this Sacrament were more seriously regarded
and laid to heart! It would make a mavelous change in the face of Christ's
Church; if all that partake of his Table, did cordially embrace as loving
friends; and resolve to remain in an inseparable affection. For Love or
Brotherly charity is the fulfilling of the Law; and would certainly secure all
thoses duties, which we owe to our Neighbor: as S. Paul shows, Romans 13.8, 9,
10. If our hearts were filled with it, we should not only be preserved from
doing of him harm: but it would make us do him good. By giving and
communicating to his necessities Which is joined with breakin^ br^ (...) us
^ship.
; and by forgiving him, and passing by his injuries, trespasses and offenses:
under which two heads, are comprehended all the offices of brotherly charity.
We have our Saviors word for it, that if this heavenly virtue were but planted
in our breasts, all other Christian virtues would presently shine in us and
adorn our souls. For he compares this loving and kind disposition, free from
all base selfishness and covetous desires (which look only at their own
particular profit) to the eye in our head: which when it is clear and pure, the
whole body is full of light, Matthew. 6.22. And therefore the oftener we come to
the Lords Table, with this end, among other, in our aim; the better Christians
we shall grow. We shall preserve this light that is in us, from growing dim:
and renewing our friendship at this feast (to which the Lord invites both high
and low, rich and poor) we shall neither despise, nor envy, nor bear ill will,
nor be hard hearted one to another any more. Nay, our light will so shine
before men, that they seeing our good works, will glorify our Father which is
in Heaven.

It is a maxim (I observe) among Politicians, that a great person or Governor
should Feast or entertain but seldom; upon some special occasions: because it
is uncertain whether he shall procure by it favor or envy. Some may think
themselves neglected; and others think themselves disparaged, who are not able
to give the same entertainment. But our Lord upon the quite contrary reasons,
invites us frequently to his house and Table: because he invites all, and makes
no difference, upon account of men's outward estates; and expects nothing at all
again, but that all his Guests would love one another, with a sincere heart and
unfeigned affection. The great he would engage not to scorn the meaner sort;
and the meaner sort not to envy the great. He would oblige the rich to be
merciful and liberal; and the poor to be thankful and contented. The weak in
knowledge not to judge the strong; and the strong not to despise the weak: but
all to live together as loving Brethren and members of the same body. That so,
they may have the same care one for another. And whether one member suffer, all
the members may suffer with it: or one member rejoice, all the rest may rejoice
with it. And whatsoever differences may arise, he conjures them, by all that is
sacred and dear to them; that they fall not out, nor make any quarrels; much
less divide and separate themselves one from another; or do any thing that may
spoil the harmony and consent of their affections, together with the comfort of
their lives and the beauty of his Church. O how good, Psalm. 133.1, 4.
how pleasant it is (should every one say when he is at this feast) for
Brethren to dwell together in Unity! Heaven and Earth are pleased with this
happy agreement and sweet accord. Here the Lord commands a blessing, even
life for evermore. Never will I make any jars in this heavenly consort. Nothing
but love, nothing but Love, shall possess that heart, in which, thou O Lord of
love, art pleased to inhabit. I willingly enter into these holy bonds of
friendship and peace. I ty my self here inseparably to all my Brethren. I
embrace them all in every place, with an open and enlarged heart. I will ever
endeavor to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace: and will love
not in word nor tongue, but in deed and in truth. And O that we could see that
holy Spirit, which gathered so many Nations and tongues and people of sundry
sorts, into one body of the Church; descending once more to join together all
Christian hearts. Come holy Ghost, and draw us all to unity concord and peace.
That as there is one Lord and one spirit and one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.3.4, 5. Act.
4.32.
and one hope of our calling: so the multitude of believers may be of one
heart, and of one soul. O blessed Jesus, who when thou ascendedst up on high
gave gifts to men, yea, to the rebellious also; renew thy ancient bounty to
thine Universal Church. Visit our minds and inspire us with heavenly grace;
that we may be like minded, Phil. 2.2.
having the same love, being of one accord, and one mind. That so at last there
may be but one voice also: that we may all speak the same thing, 1 Cor. 1.20.
and that there be no divisions among us: but that we be perfectly joined
together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. Now the Lord of peace
himself give us peace always, by all means. 2 Thessalonians. 3.16.
Now the God of patience and consolation, grant us to be like minded one
toward another, after the example of Christ Jesus: Romans 15.5, 6.
that we may with one heart and one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ. And the Lord make us to increase and abound in love one
toward another, 1 Thessalonians. 3.12, 13.
and toward all men: to the end he may stablish our hearts unblameable in
holiness before God even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ
with all his Saints. Amen.

Now what is there that will more certainly Paul, I observe, after he had made
a passionate exhortation to the Colossians to put on bowels of mercies,
kindness, long-suffering, forbearing and forgiving one another, Coloss. 3.12,
13, 14, 15.
if any man had a quarrel against any, and above all to put on charity, and to
let the peace of God rule in their hearts, to which they were called in one
body: immediately adds in the close of all, AND BE YE THANKFVL. As if he
thought that this would secure all the other: as they do the rest of our duty.
And for this very purpose has our Savior instituted this holy Feast, that our
hearts may be raised to Praise and give thanks to the Father of mercies with
the devoutest affection; not only when we are there, but at all times and in
all places. This is a thing that cannot be omitted at this feast, without
spoiling the very nature of it. It is not what our Lord appointed it to be; if
this be wanting. With this we begin; with this we continue; and with this we
conclude this holy Action. Nay, it is Thanksgiving, with prayer to God, by
which the bread and wine are sanctified, that they may become to us the body
and blood of Jesus Christ. And (to say no more) it is so much of the essence,
as we speak, or being of this Action, that it has been the name of it for
many, if not for all, Ages. We find this Sacrament called the Eucharist, that
is, Thanksgiving in the most ancient writers: which would make one think this
was the name belonging to it in the Apostles times. And indeed S. Paul calls it
the Cup of blessing, which is the very same with Thanksgiving. For, if you
observe it, the Evangelists use these words indifferently when they speak of
the institution of this holy Feast. S. Matthew, and S. Mark say that he took
the bread, and blessed; and he took the Cup and gave thanks. S. Luke and S.
Paul only say, he took bread and gave thanks: and the Cup in like manner. And
thus they speak also in another matter, concerning common food: which will help
to explain this business. S. Luke says Christ looked up to Heaven, when he
took the five loaves and two fishes to feed the multitude, and blessed them,
Luke 9.16. S. Matthew and S. Mark say only, that looking up to Heaven he
blessed, viz. his Father, who is in Heaven, Matthew. 14.19. Mark 6.41. And S.
John's words are that he distributed them, when he had given thanks, Joh. 6.11.
From whence we may conclude these two things. First, that blessing and giving
thanks are the very same in their language, or include one the other: which may
be further confirmed from, 1 Cor. 14.16. Secondly, that though this blessing or
speaking good of his name, and thanksgiving, be directed immediately to God:
yet the Creatures for which we bless and thank him, partake of the blessing,
and become the better to us. For so the loaves and fishes were blessed, by our
Saviors blessing God. And so we say in common speech, that before we eat we
should bless the Table (or those good creatures that are before us;) because by
thanking God for them, he grants them to our use, with his good will and
blessing See 1 T^^. 4.^
. And in like manner at the last Supper of our Lord, he blessed the bread and
wine, by giving thanks, and blessing God, to be to his Disciples the divinest
blessings, and pledges of his singular love. And thus we are to conceive it is
at this day: by the blessing and thanksgiving of him that Ministers at this
holy feast, to which all the people say, Amen, and join their hearty consent,
those creatures of bread and wine are sanctified and blessed, to those
excellent uses, which I have already named Thence Justin Mart. calls them
(...), in English, Thanksgiving'd food or food hallowed by Thanksgivings Apol.
2.
. For thanksgiving and blessing suitable to this occasion (if nothing else were
added) include the most powerful prayer to God, that by receiving this bread
and wine in remembrance of his Son Jesus, he would make us pertakers of all the
benefits, which he procured by dying for us. And therefore you ought to be very
careful of this as a principal part of your duty here: to lift up your hearts,
when the Minister calls upon you, unto our Lord God: and to give thanks and
praise together with all the heavenly host to the Father Almighty, who of his
tender mercy gave his only Son Jesus Christ to suffer death upon the Cross for
our redemption, etc. And be sure to say Amen to that prayer which presently
follows in our Service (for the clearer understanding of the use to which the
bread and wine are deputed, and of the means whereby they come to be so: which
is the divine blessing) That we receiving these thy Creatures of bread and
wine, according to thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ's holy institution, in
remembrance of his death and passion, may be pertakers of his most blessed body
and blood. Nay, all the time of this holy solemnity, praise and thanksgiving
are to be intermixed with every part of the Action: to make it the more
effectual to us. We cannot commemorate him, as I told you, without extolling
and magnifying his name, and making our acknowledgments to him. And how can we
remember his making his Soul an offering for sin; without special thanks unto
him for so great a kindness? We ought to profess our selves Christians, with
the height of joy and gladness of heart. To bless him for the gracious Covenant
into which he receives us. To vow our selves unto him with the most solemn
thanks, that he will accept such poor things as we are to be his servants. And
to make a grateful mention of all the benefits, he has bestowed on us, and
intends unto us; and to all our Christian Brethren: whose concernments should
be very dear unto us, as well as our own. And truly the ancient Church were so
much in love with this duty, that they gave thanks to God, for all good things;
the benefits we enjoy by all his creatures: as well as for our redemption by
his Son Jesus. Because this feast accompanied that of Charity; in which, their
bodies were fed, as in this, their Souls: and because of the offerings they
then made of some of the fruits of the Earth (as we do now of money in lieu of
them) for an acknowledgment to God, that he was the Author of all the blessings
which they enjoyed. But this always made the principal part of their
acknowledgments that God had sent his Son into the world to save sinners. And
therefore (as our Church teaches us in the exhortation just before the
Communion) above all things we must give most humble and hearty thanks to God
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, for the redemption of the world by the
death and Passion of our Savior Christ, both God and man: who did humble
himself even to the death upon the Cross for us miserable sinners, who lay in
darkness and the shadow of death, that he might make us the children of God,
and exalt us to everlasting life, Without which thanksgiving, to speak the
truth, we do not do that which Christ commanded, and so cannot hope for the
blessing he has promised. Hear S. Chrysostom (in stead of all that treat of
this matter) who excellently declares the manner and reason of this
Thanksgiving, Homil. 25. in Matthew. p. 178. Edit. sav.
in a Sermon of his upon Eighth chapter of S. Matthew. A perpetual memory,
says he, and thanksgiving for a good turn, is the best way that can be found,
to secure and preserve it to us. And therefore the dreadful mysteries and full
of Salvation, which we celebrate in every assembly, are called the Eucharist:
because they are a commemoration of many benefits, and show forth the principal
piece of divine Providence, and dispose us always to give him thanks. For if to
be born of a virgin was a great wonder: what was it to be crucified, to shed
his blood for us, and to give himself to us for a Feast and a Spiritual
banquet? what shall we call this? where shall we place it? we can do no less
than give him thanks perpetually. Let this precede both our words and works:
and let us give him thanks not only for our own good things but for those of
others. For by this means we shall destroy envy, and bind charity faster; and
make it more genuine and of a kindly nature. For a man will not be able to envy
them any more, for whom he gives thanks unto his Master. And therefore the
Priest, when this Sacrifice is in hand, bids us thank God for the whole world:
for what is past, and what is present, and for those things that are to come.
This sets us free from the Earth and translates us to Heaven: and of men makes
us Angels. For they making a Quire gave thanks to God, for the good things he
bestowed on us, saying, Glory be to God in the highest, on earth peace, good
will toward men. Thou will say perhaps, what are they to us? they live not
upon the earth, nor are men like unto our selves. It is all one for that; this
signifies very much to us. For we are taught hereby to love our fellow
servants, so as to account their happiness to be our own. Let us do so then;
giving thanks perpetually for our own blessings, for others; for little, for
great: or rather there are none little that come from God. And that I may pass
by other things, which are more than the sand for multitude; what is there
comparable to this dispensation? For that only begotten son of his who was more
precious to him than all things besides, has he given for us enemies. And not
only given him; but after that gift, set him before us for our Table: doing all
things himself for us: both to give, and then to make us thankful for his
gifts. For mankind being generally ungrateful, he undertakes throughout, and
does all things for us himself. And what he did for the Jews putting them in
mind of his benefits from PLACES, and TIMES, and FEASTS; that he has done
here: from a kind of Sacrifice, casting us into a perpetual remembrance of the
good he has wrought for us. None labors so much that we should be approved,
and great and ingenuous, as God who made us. And therefore he does us good
oftimes even against our will: and gives us many good things which we know not
of.

It is but reason then that whatsoever we do in word or deed, we should do all
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ; giving thanks to God and the Father by
him, Coloss. 3.17, which Theodoret refers to this business. There being those,
says he, that required them to worship Angels, the Apostle enjoins the
contrary: that they should adorn their words and deeds with the memory of our
Master Christ; and send up thanksgivings to God the Father by him, and not by
Angels. To him we should address all our Services, in a grateful remembrance of
his love in Jesus: and, as our Communion Book excellently expresses it, we
should give him (as we are most bounden) continual thanks, submitting our
selves wholly to his holy will and pleasure, and studying to serve him in true
holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. But especially when we go
to this holy Communion, we should enter into his gates with thanksgiving and
into his courts with praise: we should be thankful unto him and bless his name.
Saying, Great is the Lord and greatly to be praised: Psalm. 145.3.
his greatness is unsearchable. Great and mavelous are thy works, Rev. 15.3.
O Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy ways, thou king of Saints. Psalm.
106.2.
Who can utter the mighty acts of the Lord? who can show forth all his praise?
100.3.
He made us and not we our selves: 116.8.
we are his people and the sheep of his pasture. He holds our souls in life,
and keeps our eyes from tears and our feet from falling. 66.9.
36.6.
Thou, Lord, preservest man and beast: 145.15, 16
Thou give food to all flesh. The eyes of all wait on thee and thou give
them their meat in due season. Thou openest thy hand and satisfiest the desire
of every living thing. 34.3.
O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together. O give thanks
unto the Lord for he is good, and his mercy endures for ever. Psa. 136.1, 2,
23, 24.
O give thanks unto the God of Gods: for his mercy endures for ever.
138.1.149.6.
Who remembered us in our low estate: for his mercy endures for ever. And has
redeemed us from our enemies: for his mercy endures for ever. I will praise
thee with my whole heart: the high praises of God shall be in my mouth. Who
has raised up a mighty Salvation for us: Rom 8.32
and has not spared his own Son but delivered him up for us all. Heb. 9.12.
Who has obtained for us an eternal redemption: 2 Pet. 1.3.
and given us all things that pertain unto life and godliness, through the
knowledge of him that has called us by a glorious power. Bless the Lord, O my
soul, Psalm. 103.1. etc.
and all that is within me bless his holy name. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and
forget not all his benefits. Who forgiveth all thy iniquities: and heals all
thy diseases. Who redeemeth thy life from destruction: and crowns thee with
loving kindness and tender mercies. Psa. 111.1.
I will praise the Lord with my whole heart, in the assembly of the upright and
in the Congregation. While I live will I praise the Lord: 146.2.
I will sing praises unto my God, while I have any being. 145.21,
My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord: and let all flesh bless his holy
name for ever and ever.

Thus I am come to a conclusion of the second part of my Discourse; concerning
the Nature, End and Use of this Holy Sacrament. The sum of what has been said
is this. It is an holy Feast in commemoration of our Lord Christ, especially of
his Death. In which we, for our part, make a solemn profession of his Religion;
and tie our selves in the strictest Covenant to follow him unto the death, and
to live in love and charity with all our Christian Brethren. And he, for his
part, makes a representation of his dying love to us; and confirms the
continuance of it; giving us pledges that he will make us heirs of all the
blessings, which were the purchase of his body broken and blood shed for us. So
that when the Minister gives the Bread and the Cup to us, we should think that
Christ by him gives us tokens and assurances of his continued and everlasting
love and kindness. And when we take, eat and drink that which he gives us, we
should look upon it, as expressing our consent to continue his faithful
Disciples, in hope of that eternal life, which God that cannot lie has
promised to us.

In short, the whole Action is the renewing of a Covenant between Christ and
us. He by giving, we by receiving, engage our selves to perform our mutual
promises. He his promises, of giving us pardon, power to do well, and immortal
bliss. And we our promises of loving God with all our heart and soul and
strength: and our neighbor as our selves. All which we are to reflect upon,
with the greatest love to God and our Savior; with thanksgiving, blessing, and
praise; and with an humble confidence that it shall be to us, according to his
word.

To promote which ends I have concluded every particular Head of this
discourse, with a brief Meditation, which may be used in this manner.

The First of them may serve to excite our devout affections before we go to
Church; or, when we have placed our selves conveniently, just before the
Communion begin; or while the company are making their oblations to God. The
Second will be proper immediately after the Consecration; while the Minister is
receiving himself, and giving the Communion to the other Ministers that may be
there present with him. The other Six, half of them may be used after we have
received the Bread; and the other half after we have received the Cup. Or if
any desire a more compendious form of Devotion, wherein to lift up their Souls
to God immediately after their receiving; they may reserve those till they
retire from the Holy Table to their seats again: and in this manner address
themselves to him just after the receiving of the Bread.

2 Cor. 1.3.
Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.3.
the Father of mercies and the God of all comfort: who, according to his
abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope by the Resurrection
of Jesus Christ from the dead. Col. 1.22.13, 14.
Who has reconciled us in the body of his flesh through death, to present us
holy and unblameable and unreproveable in his sight. Blessed be God who has
delivered us from the kingdom of darkness and translated us into the kingdom of
his dear Son. In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the
forgiveness of our sins. I love thee, O Lord, I love thee. I devote my self
most unfeignedly unto thee. I will ever cleave unto thee, and unto all my
Brethren, with settled purpose of heart. Search me O God and know my heart:
Psalm. 139.23, 24.
try me and know my thoughts. See if there be any wicked way in me: and lead me
in the way everlasting. Yea, Psalm. 23; 4, 6.
though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil:
for thou art with me. Thy power, and thy care of thy flock; they comfort me.
Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life; 34^
and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. I will sing unto the Lord
as long as I live: I will sing praise to my God, while I have my being. My
meditation of him shall be sweet: I will be glad in the Lord. 67.3.
And let all the people praise thee, O God, let all the people praise thee. O
that men would praise the Lord for his goodness; and for his wonderful works to
the children of men. 107.21, 22.
Let them Sacrifice the Sacrifices of thanksgiving, and declare his works with
rejoicing. 117.2.
For his merciful kindness is ever more and more toward us, and his truth
endures for ever. Praise ye the Lord.

Or thus.

Lord, Psalm. 8.3, 4.
what is man that thou art so mindful of him, or the son of man that thou thus
visitest him! Thou have made him a little lower than the Angels, and crowned
him with glory and with honor. Thou have given him dominion over the works of
thy hands, and have put all things under his feet. Many, O Lord my God, Psalm.
40.5.
are thy wonderful works which thou have done; and thy thoughts which are to us
ward, they cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee: if I would declare and
speak of them, they are more than can be numbered. Sacrifice and offering thou
would not: Heb. 10.5.
But a body have thou prepared for thy Son Jesus; Who has done thy will, O
God: and made himself an offering for sin; and made us one body with himself.
Blessing, and honor, and glory, and power, be unto thee O Lord God Almighty;
and unto thy Son for ever and ever. I offer up my self entirely, both Soul and
body, unto thee. I consecrate my self here most faithfully to thy Service.
Psalm. 40.8, 11.
I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea, thy Law is within my heart. Withhold
not thy tender mercies from me, O Lord: let thy loving kindness and thy truth
continually preserve me. Unite my heart, to fear thy name. Fill me with all thy
fullness O God: and above all things, with fervent charity. This I pray, that my
love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and in all judgment; that I may
approve things that are excellent; Phil. 1.9, 10, 11.
that I may be sincere, and without offense till the day of Christ; being
filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto thy
glory and praise. I am thine; save me. Multiply grace, mercy and peace upon me
unto eternal life. For it is thou O God, Psalm. 68. ult.
that give strength and power unto thy people. Blessed be God.

Immediately after the receiving of the Cup, they may lift up their hearts and
say,

Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.3, 7, 8.
who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ:
in whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins,
according to the riches of his grace; wherein he has abounded toward us in
all wisdom and prudence. O Lord, how manifold are thy works! Psalm. 104, 24, etc.
in wisdom have thou made them all. The earth is full of thy riches: and so is
the great and wide sea, wherein are creatures innumerable. These wait all upon
thee: that thou may give them their meat in due season. Thou openest thine
hand, and they are filled with Good. But eye had not seen, 1 Cor. 2, 9, 10.
Ephesians. 3.5.11.
nor ear heard, neither did enter into the heart of man, the things which thou
had prepared for them that love thee: and have now revealed to thy holy
Apostles and Prophets by the spirit; according to thy eternal purpose in Christ
Jesus our Lord. Who for us men and for our Salvation, came down from Heaven;
and was manifested in flesh to destroy the works of the devil; 1 John 3.8.
and dyed for our sins; Romans 4.25
rose again for our justification; ascended up on high to give gifts unto men;
Ephesians. 4.8.
and is at the right hand of God to make intercession for us; Heb. 7.25. 1 P i.
3. ult. Heb. 1. ult.
Angels, authorities, and powers being made subject unto him; and sent forth to
Minister for them who shall he heirs of Salvation. Ephesians. 3.8. Col. 2.3.
O the unsearchable riches of Christ! in whom are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge. I submit my self unto thee, O thou Prince of life, and
Lord of glory: unto thee I will live henceforth; and not unto my self: and if
for thee I must die; the will of my Lord be done. Ps. 16. ult.
Thy favor is better than life: in thy presence is fullness of joy, and at thy
right hand are pleasures for evermore. Luke 17.5.
Lord, increase my faith; strengthen my hope; raise my love to a greater
height; and make patience to have its perfect work: that I may not love my life
unto the death. But the trial of my faith, Rev. 12.11
though it be tried by fire, 1 Pet. 1.7. Col. 2.2.
may be found unto praise, and honor and glory at thy appearing. And O that
our hearts may be comforted, being knit together in love! Ephesians. 4. ult.
that we may be ever kind, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, as thou, O
God, for Christ's sake have forgiven us. That so, with united minds and
affections, we may be still praising thee and saying; Blessed be the Lord of
Heaven and Earth, who only does wondrous things. Psalm 72.18, 19.
And blessed be his glorious name for ever, and let the whole earth be filled
with his glory: Amen and Amen.

Or thus.

O the breadth, and length, Ephesians. 3.18, 19.
and depth and height! O the love of Christ Jesus our Lord, which passes
knowledge! Phil 2.7, 8.
who made himself of no reputation, but took upon him the form of a Servant:
and humbling himself, became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross,
for us miserable sinners. Rev. 5.12.
Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom,
and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing. Re. 1.5, 6. 1 Pet. 2.5.
For he has washed us from our sins in his blood, and has made us Kings and
Priests unto God; to offer up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God by Christ
Jesus. Behold, O Lord, an heart that offers up it self unto thee, in love
unfeigned. I absolutely resign my will to thy holy will and pleasure. Not my
will, but thy will be done. And praised be God, who has made a new covenant
with us in the blood of Jesus: Col. 1.20.
who has by him reconciled all things to himself, both in heaven and in earth:
and has now renewed unto us the assurance of his continued love. Psalm. 75.1.
Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks: unto thee do we give thanks: for that
thou art near unto us, thy wondrous works declare. Psalm. 20.3, 4.
The Lord remember all our offerings, and accept our Sacrifices. Grant us
according to our hearts desire and fulfill all our petitions. Col. 1.9, 10, 11.
That we may be filled with the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and
Spiritual understanding: and may walk worthy of him unto all pleasing, being
fruitful in every good work, and increasing in knowledge; strengthened with all
might according to his glorious power, unto all patience and long suffering
with joyfulness; giving thanks continually to the Father of mercies, who has
made us meet to be pertakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light. 1 Timothy
1.17. Psalm. 106. ult.
Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor
and glory, for ever and ever. And let all the people say, Amen.

But when you have eased your hearts a little in these expressions of faith,
love and grateful remembrance of our Saviors kindness: you will still find
room for more devout effusions of your soul in some holy passion or other;
while you are at this feast. Either before or after you have been at the Table
of the Lord (while the rest of the company is communicating) there will be time
to entertain your selves with sundry pious thoughts and meditations; which I
shall briefly suggest unto you in the next part of this Treatise; that now
follows. The intention of which, I told you in the beginning, should be to
instruct you in a plain and easy method; how to partake of this holy food with
the greater fruit and delight also.

PART III. Containing a familiar way of disposing our selves to Communicate
with Profit and Pleasure.
HAVING shown you what is the Nature and Use of this Feast; you will expect,
perhaps, that I should tell you, who are the persons whom our Lord invites and
calls unto it. Which is a question so easy to be resolved from what has been
said, that I have assigned no part of this discourse, for the discussing of it.
If you are baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus, and seriously believe his
Religion; if you take upon your selves to make good that promise, vow and
Covenant, which was made in your name, when you were baptized; if you
understand the ends of this holy Communion (which I have named) and are willing
and desirous to perform them; if you lie not under the censures of the Church
for any violation of those sacred vows, which you have made to our Savior: You
are the persons whose company he waits for, and would gladly see at his Table.
Nay, he will take it ill, and account it a neglect of him and of your duty, a
breach of your promise to obey all his holy commands; if you accept not of his
kindness in inviting you thither: because this is one of his Commands, as I
have proved, that you should do this in remembrance of him. Do not entangle
your selves therefore in endless doubts and scruples about the qualifications
that are required in those that come to this Supper of the Lord: but only
examine your hearts by this plain and certain rule. Do you believe the Gospel
of Jesus Christ to be the truth of God? Do you consent to be governed by his
Laws? Do you remember, and will you stand to the Vow that was made in your
name, when you were baptized? Are you desirous to renew that Covenant, in the
manner that I have described? Do you value his favor and grace declared in his
precious promises above all earthly things? Would you partake of this holy
Communion, that you may commemorate your Saviors dying love; that you may own
and acknowledge him to be your Lord; that you may devote and unite your heart
unto him in stricter friendship; that you may bind your self in the bond of
peace to all your brethren; and that you may receive more of his grace and
greater assurance of his love, as the most invaluable blessing? Then lay aside
all your fears, and humbly approach unto him; to render him the Sacrifice of
praise and thanksgiving; and to receive fresh tokens and pledges of his
unchangeable good will and affection to you. I shall make no more words of this
matter: but only add, that you may know sufficiently by the invitation which
the Minister makes to you at the Communion, in Christ's name (according to the
order of our Church) who are persons qualified for this feast. And it is
expressed in such plain and pregnant words, that better cannot be devised for
your direction and satisfaction. They are these.

Ye that do truly and earnestly repent you of your sins, and are in love and
charity with your neighbors; and intend to lead a new life, following the
Commandments of God, and walking from henceforth in his holy ways: draw near
with faith, and take this holy Sacrament to your comfort.

Which that you may be able to do, I shall now proceed (according to the method
I have propounded) in my endeavors to put you into such a temper of mind, when
you are at this holy Sacrament; that you may perform all that which has been
said, with more ease and edification also to your selves. And that I may the
better raise those affections in you, which are suitable to this action; it will
not be amiss to remember you a little of the excellency and dignity of the
feast to which you are invited.

To make a true Feast these four things (in the opinion of the most learned of
all the ancient Romans) must conspire and meet together. Varro. lectis viris;
lecto loco; lecto tempore; lecto apparatu.
Chosen and select persons, a choice and delicate place; a choice time and
season; and choice provision; proportionable to the quality both of him that
makes it, and of those that are invited to it. Now in all these regards, if we
reflect a while on them, this Supper of the Lord which he makes for us, will be
found to be incomparably beyond the noblest entertainment which the world ever
saw.

For as concerning the persons that here meet together, they are our blessed
Lord, the Master of the feast, and those that believe on his name: to whom he
has given the right, or privilege, to become the sons of God, Joh. 1.12. A
company of souls that are larger than the world; heirs of a Kingdom; rich in
faith; as full as they can hold of love and charity toward each other, and
toward all men. So that there cannot be either more honorable or more sweet
society found under heaven.

Then for the place you see it is prepared in the house of God: where we give
unto the Lord the glory due unto his name; and show forth his salvation from
day to day: where we pay our vows unto him in the presence of all his people;
and make a joyful noise unto him by singing of his praises: where the Angels
(as I may say) are waiters; and the heavenly host are glad to attend upon us:
according to those words of the Apostle (in that very chapter where he treats
of this Sacrament, 1 Cor. 11.10.) the woman ought to have a covering on her
head, because of the Angels.

As for the time, you see likewise it is commonly the Lord's Day: on the day
when he rose from the dead, when he trampled under his feet the great enemy of
mankind; when the Angels not so glistering as he, brought news that he had
accomplished our redemption; when the host of heaven was at a gaze to see
mortal man made immortal; and restored to the state of paradise again: when we
have nothing else to do but to rest and rejoice; to declare the works of the
Lord; to give thanks unto his holy name, and triumph in his praise.

And lastly, for the provision it self, I have told you already what it is: the
body and blood of the Lord of life: bread that excells the Angels food: a cup
of blessing, of which those sons of glory never tasted. To these our Lord calls
us; nay, beseeches and entreats us to come: that we may feast our selves on his
Sacrifice of himself; and be filled with his love; and satisfy our selves with
his joys, and everlasting consolation.

Now what soul is there that can be willing to lose his share in such divine
food? that would be shut out from such society, or absent from such a place; or
desire to spend his day better than in near communion with our Lord? Either men
do not believe these things, or they do not reflect on them and lay them to
their hearts: for otherwise there is none that reads this writing, but will be
moved to make one at this holy feast. But then as you cannot choose, if you
seriously consider, but judge it very desirable to be admitted to it: so you
cannot but think in what manner it becomes you to be adorned, and how you
should behave your selves in so great a presence. If a mean subject should
receive a message from his Prince, to come and bear him company at his own
Table; would he not wonder and be astonished at the favor? would it not busy
every thought in his heart to know the cause? and would he not lay aside all
other employment, that he might prepare himself to appear there after a decent
and seemly fashion? He could not be so stupid as not to study to form himself
to a comely behavior: and to learn to comport himself with all the reverence
and fear, the caution and circumspection, that his soul could possibly be
master of. No marvel then if we see good Christians so curious and exact, so
diligent and laborious; to understand the meaning of our Lord in this
invitation; to dress up their souls in the best manner they are able when they
go to his Table; and to suit their behavior to the height of the solemnity:
since to approach unto Majesty, on such an occasion, with negligent thoughts
and after a careless fashion; is to slight both the greatness and the grace of
him, who grants us the honor of his society. To gratify therefore the pious
desires and endeavors that are in any souls, to render themselves fit company
for our blessed Lord at this feast; I shall spend a few pages of this Book, in
directing them how to demean themselves before him, and dispose their hearts to
enjoy most sweet and fruitful communion with him.

And that I may make my discourse more easy and affectionate withal; I shall
take the rise of it from one of those things just now named. Much of the
contentment of a true feast, consists in apt and good discourse; according to
the old saying, a supper without discourse, is a Crib and not a Table (...).
. And therefore the old Roman, I mentioned, gives this description of the
chosen persons, of whom he would have his guests consist; that they should be
such as know how to speak in a decent manner: and are neither talkative, nor
altogether dumb Nec loquaces, nec omnino muti.
. Our Lord then making a feast here for us, and presenting himself unto us in
this broken bread, and wine poured forth: we are not to look on these as dumb
signs; but as things that speak most significantly and distinctly to us. Though
we hear never a word with our ears, yet our minds are to conceive, when Christ
crucified is set thus before our eyes, that we hear him discoursing to us of
his Love; of the ends of his death; of all the great blessings that he has
bought for us; and of all those things which he justly expects from them that
profess themselves his disciples. And accordingly it becoms us, to make such
replies unto him, and to answer in our hearts with such expressions of our
affection: as may show that we understand, and are very sensible what he says
unto us. Of both these I shall treat a little: leaving it to every man's own
devotion, to inlarg them, as he sees occasion, in his private Meditations.

First then, when you see these symbols of Christ's body and blood, think that
you behold the crucified Jesus represented to at the very mention of these few
words; My Brethren? And yet for such he esteems us, saying; I will declare thy
name among my Brethren, Heb. 2.12. And so he called his Disciples after he
arose from the dead, saying, Go tell my Brethren that I go into Galilee, and
there they shall see me, Matthew. 28.10. and again, go to my Brethren and say
unto them; I ascend to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God, Joh.
20.17. And we may well conceive that in such terms of grace he receives us at
this holy Feast: and make account we hear him say; My Brethren, I sent my
Ministers to call you to my house and bid you to my Table, which here you see
spread for you. It is well done that you are come; and I take it kindly to see
you here. The reason of my invitation is that I may remember you of my love,
and that you may show your selves my Friends by a joyful commemoration thereof.
I have no other end in sending for you, but to make you more sensible of your
happiness; and to lay obligations on you, by doing my will, to continue in it;
and likewise to impart unto you new tokens of my love: the very greatest
pledges that I can bestow on you, to assure you that I will be your eternal
friend. You may think perhaps, that this is but a little bread and wine which
here you see before you; and that it is but poor cheer which I have provided
for you. But open the eyes of your mind; remember and believe what I have
taught you; and you will see that this is my body which was broken for you, and
this is my blood which was shed for you: and on these I would now have you
feast together. Behold here, how the spear pierced my side. See the hole which
was made by the lance when it run to my very heart. Do you not discern how my
hands were wounded; how my feet were bored, when I was nailed to the Cross for
you? How despitefully was I used? how cruelly was I martyred and tormented?
besides all the mockeries and abuses, the shame and reproach, the agony and
bloody sweat which I endured to do you Service. Did I not love you, think you,
when I suffered thus for you? Can you choose but read the greatness of my
affection, which is writ in my most precious blood? Can you doubt that you are
dear unto me, whom I have purchased at so high a rate? Let these wounds speak
for me, and tell you what a passion I was in for your sake. Look into them; and
see what a vehement desire I had to accomplish your salvation. What sorrow was
there ever like unto my sorrow? or what love was there ever like unto my love?
This broken bread and this wine poured out, tells you that I have dyed once for
you already: and I am now come by giving them to you to let you know that I do
not repent me of it; but if it were needful, I would die for you the second
time. What greater assurance can your heart wish of my love, than this which I
now offer you? what more would you have me do, to testify that my heart is
still toward you, and that I will he ever mindful of you? As the Father has
loved me, so I have loved you: and all that I desire of you is that you would
continue in my love. If you keep my Commandments you shall abide in my love:
Joh. 15.9, 10, 14.
even as I have kept my Fathers Commandment and abide in his love. This is the
token I would have of your kindness to me. Ye are my friends, if you do
whatsoever I command you. Nothing else do I request of you, but that you would
not hurt your selves by sinning against my love: that you would henceforth live
unto me, who dyed for you. Come, I beseech you now, and assure me, that you
love me. Renew your covenant of friendship with me. By taking, eating and
drinking this that I give you, plight me your faith that you will be ever true
unto me. And then I will be your security against the curse and the
condemnation which you dread. I will undertake for you, that all your sins
shall be pardoned. Nay, I will present you fair and beautiful before my Father,
as if you had been always innocent. Take my word for it, that I will deliver
you from the wrath to come, and give you the blessing of eternal life. If you
doubt at all of it; come hither, take this bread and drink this cup: as sure as
you now receive these, your sins shall be blotted out and never remembered in
the great day of judgment. By these tokens I give you an interest in my death
and sufferings. I oblige my self by these sensible signs to perform all my
promises. I seal to you that gracious Covenant which was made in my blood. As
certainly as I dyed, I assure you that you shall live for ever. Only, as I
said, do not deny me your hearty love. Grant me this small request, to
correspond with me in sincere affection. And by eating and drinking here at my
Table, tie your selves to be my faithful servants. Then I allow you to begin
now the joys of Heaven. Nay, I require you to rejoice in my salvation: to
comfort your selves in my promises; to solace your souls in the hope of my
glory, and to sing the Song of Angels, which shall end and be completed in
eternal Hallelujahs. Praise ye the Lord.

It is no dream and mere imagination, I assure you Christian Readers, no vain
fancy that you entertain your selves withal; if you conceive our Lord thus
discoursing to you at his Table. For all this is, in effect, pronounced by the
Bread and wine which represent his precious body and blood. When they are
broken and poured out before your eyes, and offered to you to eat and drink in
commemoration of of his death: they report unto you his great love, and declare
the agonies and pains which he endured, and give you assurance, by authority
from him, that he will never cease to bless you and do you good. And therefore
you cannot better affect your hearts and raise your devotion to him, in my
opinion, than by expounding their meaning to your selves, and thinking you hear
him uttering by them such words unto you, as I have now mentioned.

should be altogether silent, and answer never a word unto him? Can you find
nothing to return to so kind and gracious a declaration of the bowels of his
mercy toward you? Or will it be hard to tell him your heart, who has so
freely opened his unto you? No man sure can be mute, unless he be astonished and
struck dumb at the power and mightiness of his incomprehensible charity. This
may indeed justly strike us all with the greatest admiration, and hold us a
while in wondering thoughts, that we should be thus beloved of God. It will well
become us to be amazed and lost in our thoughts; to be unable to do any thing
at the first hearing of all these things, but only marvel that he should be so
kind to such wretched sinners. We cannot begin this action better, than in a
soulfull of thoughts not to be expressed. In a silent admiration that the God
of Heaven should thus graciously visit us; manifesting himself in our flesh,
giving his Son to die for us, and inventing so many ways to make us rest
assured of his love toward us.

But when you have recovered your selves out of this passion; how many other
shall you feel struggling in your souls, which shall first present themselves
unto him. Do but stay and pause a while, upon every part of the foregoing
words; and you will find all sorts of resentments in your heart: which you may
cast into this order, and thus address your reply unto him.

And our infidelity, O how great is it! that after thou wast pleased to endure
all this for us, we should stand in need of such frequent remonstrances of it:
and be in danger to forget thee or distrust thee; unless thou did continually
thus present thy self unto us, and assure us of thy good will toward us. O my
Lord, how shall I present my self before thee! who am one of those that have
occasioned all this care and pain; this agony and passion; this sweat and this
blood. I sigh to remember the many groans, which we have made thy heart ache
withal. It wounds my ears to hear those words, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me. I am ready to ask thy pardon, even that thou art come, at such a
rate, to pardon us. It is too much, too much, but that thou art love it self,
to spend all this love and kindness upon such insensible and ungrateful sinners.

Thus having begun to make your addresses to him, you may proceed in the second
place

Humbly to acknowledge your unworthiness thirsty a desire to it, as the chafed
Heart to the streams of water; with as hungry an appetite as a poor man to a
full Table, or a covetous man to an heap of gold: yet still we must remember
that we are but beggars, and those desires must be tempered with much modesty,
lowliness and humility of Spirit. Though our Lord say to us as David to
Mephibosheth (2 Samuel 9.7.) thou shall eat bread at my Table continually; thou
shall always feast with me: yet it becomes us to bow down our selves, and say
as he there did; what is thy servant that thou should look upon such a dead
dog as I am? It is too high a favor to sup with thee: since I am not worthy to
pick up the crumbs that fall from thy Table. The least offal of thy common
mercies is too good for me; how shall I dare to approach to this fullness of
heavenly blessings to which thou invitest me? I have sinned, I have sinned; and
am not worthy to be called thy son, or to bear thee company. In my very best
attire I am so ragged, that I am ashamed to see my self; and therefore how
shall I appear before thee? O my Lord, I come merely in obedience to thy call.
I should not have presumed to appear in thy presence, but that thou have hidden
me. And been afraid to be seen in this condition, but that I was more afraid
not to be seen here at all. My comfort is, that you will not be angry with us
when we obey thee; nor be offended that we show our selves ready to execute thy
commands. And here

You may call to remembrance those sins and sweat. Our want of love to God,
that made thee hated and rejected of men. I see as in a glass, now that I look
upon thy blood, the abominable state of sinful men: which never seemed so foul
as now. How shall one of that wicked race be bold to look up unto thee:
especially since that I have known thy love, I have so little valued it; and
sinned even against thy precious blood Here you may remember your particular
offenses.
? Can thou endure to enter into familiarity with such a soul as this, that
here presents it self unto thee? may I hope to be admitted into thy holy
fellowship and to dwell with thee? I abhor, I loath, I am weary of my self;
desiring nothing more than to be made like to thee: in purity and holiness, in
truth and justice, in love and charity, in lowliness and humility, in meekness
and patience, in compassion and forgiveness, in entire resignation to the will
of God. From hence

the most innocent and harmless, nay, the most loving and kind, the most
obliging and charitable person that ever was. Continue your addresses to him,
and represent your extremest detestation of that covetousness and worldly
mindedness, that pride and vain glory, that ambition and love of the praise of
men, that envy and ill will, that wrath and bitterness of spirit, that
hippocrisy and partiality, which betrayed and killed him the Prince of life.
Show him how much you abhor these and all that is evil: resolving to cleave to
that which is good. Destroy O Lord, may you say, all these thine enemies, and
root them perfectly out of my heart. Pierce through all these evil affections,
by a stroke from thy cross and passion. I have brought them to be slain by
thine hand, for they are too strong for mine. If there be any life remaining in
them; O that they may be quite mortified, and never able to stir any more. They
are offensive to me, as well as unto thee. Would I might never see them more,
but crucified and dead. Would I might never behold them, unless it be drowned
in thy blood. And then

Excite in your heart the mightiest sense of his love; which as it is never to
be forgotten: so here it is more particularly to be pondered and affectionately
commemorated. You may say to him; O my Lord, was manner of love is this,
wherewith thou have loved us; that we should be called the sons of God! How
great was thy goodness which brought thee down from Heaven; and made thee one
of us! And was it not enough that thou should come to dwell among us in the
likeness of sinful flesh: but thou would also lay down thy life for us?
Would nothing serve to testify the height of thy affection to us; unless thou
sufferedst the death of the Cross to redeem us? O Love! O the infinite riches
of thy grace! For a Friend one might be content to die: but what should make
thee so in love with enemies? with the very worst of enemies; with Idolaters;
with us Gentiles who were without God in the world? Yea, with us, who now that
we know the greatness of thy love, have so little or no love to thee? What am
I, O Lord, that thou should command me to love thee? Nay, should take
such a course to deserve my love? What am I to thee; that thou should so
much desire me? And now thus graciously visit me, and come to entertain me?
What made thee being in Heaven, with them who know so well how to love and
serve thee; descend to us who know so ill how to do either? could thou not be
satisfied unless we enjoy thee? nor be contented to be without us; who have
such low thoughts of thee and of thy love? Is it possible that thou should
still continue it to such ill-natured and insensible wretches? Art thou still
desirous of our friendship? and come to give us new assurances of thy grace, by
making us pertakers of thy body and blood? O how precious are thy thoughts to
us! how great is the sum of them! I can do no less, most blessed Savior, than
set my soul wide open to thee; and accept thy kindness with the most enlarged
affection of my heart. How glad should I be, if it were a thousand times
larger, to correspond with such a love! How happy should I think my self, if I
could think of nothing, and delight in nothing but only thee! O that a perfect
image of thee, in all divine virtues, may be formed in me; and be ever dearer
to me than life it self! that I may live no longer, but thou O blessed Jesus,
may live in me. And the life which I now live in the flesh, Call. 2.^^
I may live by the faith of thee, the son of God: who lovedst me, and gave
thy self for me. And then

1 John 4.16.
I have known and believed the love that thou have to us. I see here the
excessive greatness of thy dying love. No heart is able to hide it self from
the heat thereof. One cannot come near it; and not be made like the whole
burnt-offerings to the Lord. Never was any thing bought so dearly as this
sinful soul. Never was so great a price paid for any creature, as thou have
laid down for my sake. If I was as big as the highest Angel, I should be an
oblation too little for thee. The flames of those heavenly fires, are not
strong enough wherewith to offer to thee. But that I may be just (for it is no
more) I humbly lay my self here at thy Altar; and present thee with all I have.
I Sacrifice soul and body, without any reserve, to thy holy will and pleasure:
though I must be beholden to thy great love, and not my own, to procure
acceptance for me. I know how vile and unworthy I am, that thou should have
any respect to my oblation. All that I can say is, that I offer my self for
this end, that I may be made better: and so have every day more and more to
return unto thee.

For that purpose, engage your selves I am not my own: but bought with a price.
1 Cor. 6.20.
Therefore will I glorify God in my body and in my Spirit, which are Gods. I
will love the Lord my God with all my mind, and with all my heart, and with all
my soul, and all my strength. And my Neighbor as my self. And then

my Lord, and my God. Suffer me to claim an interest in the Merits of thy
precious blood, which was shed to be a propitiation, for the sins of the whole
world. Look on me, O thou that sit at the right hand of God, with the
favor thou bear to thy people. Join thy powerful intercession with my
humble suits to the Father of mercies, that for thy sake I may be accepted with
him. I believe thou appearest in the presence of God for us: and as we show
forth thy Sacrifice of thy self here on earth, presentest it in the most high
and holy place, before the mercy seat. Bless me, O Lord, from that throne of
thy glory: and raise up such a holy hope in thee; as if I heard that voice
founding from thence, I am thy Salvation. And here

Beg of him his mighty grace to confirm it shall be given to those that ask it:
and that because thou live, we shall live also. O do not lose what thou have
done already, for want of doing something more. Psa. 138.8.
Perfect that which concerns me: and forsake not the work of thy own hands.
Hold me up and I shall be safe: 119.117, 133.58.
and I will have respect to thy statutes continually. Order my steps in thy
word: and let not any iniquity have dominion over me. I entreat thy favor
with my whole heart: be merciful unto me according to thy word.

Joh. 13.12.) so think you hear him speaking to you now. Know ye what I have
done to you? Are you sensible what grace it is that I have bestowed on you? Do
you know what I did for you upon the cross; and what I have done unto you at my
Table? O, dear Lord, that a man could but understand and conceive what thou
have done for us! It would melt and dissolve our hearts: and make them burst
out into the highest expressions of joy and gladness. All that is within us
would be roused up to bless thy holy Name. We should be filled with triumph and
exaltation of Spirit in thy love: and the very furthermost parts of our soul
would feel, that it is a most blessed thing to be thy servants. All the Music,
and Songs, and Melody that the feasts of sensual men are attended withal; are
not worthy to be named with the joys of those that sing continually and say,
Blessed be the Lord our God for ever: Neh. 9.4, 5, etc.
blessed be thy glorious Name, which is exalted above all blessing and praise.
Thou, even thou art Lord alone, thou have made Heaven, the Heaven of Heavens
with all their host, the earth and all things that are therein, the Seas and
all that is in them; and thou preservest all, and the host of Heaven
worshippeth thee. Ephesians. 1.4. 1 Pet. 1.21.
Thou art the Lord, the God and Father of Jesus Christ: who have chosen us in
him before the foundation of the world; and redeemed us by his blood; raised
him from the dead, and given him glory that our faith and hope might be in thee
our God. Thine, 2 Chronicles. 29.11.
O blessed Jesus, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the
victory, and the Majesty; for all that is in the Heaven and in the earth is
thine; thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as head above all. In
thy hand is power and might, and in thy hand it is to make great, and to give
strength unto all. Now therefore; our God, we thank thee, and praise thy
glorious Name. Psalm. 115. ult.
We will bless the Lord from this time forth, and for evermore. Yea, bless the
Lord ye his Angels that excel in strength, that do his Commandments harkening
to the voice of his word. Bless ye the Lord, all ye his hosts, ye Ministers of
his that do his pleasure. Bless the Lord, all his works in all places of his
dominion: bless the Lord, O my Soul.

Thus if we did converse with him; and such holy communication did heartily
pass between us: it would be so pleasant and delightful, that we should cry out
with the Jews in another case ( Joh. 6.34.) Lord evermore give us this bread.
We should long for such another repast, and be desirous every day to wait on
him at his Table. At least, we should greedily embrace the next invitation that
he gives us to come unto it. And because we cannot every day do this in
remembrance of him; we should secretly retire unto him in our own heart, as
into his holy Temple: and there call to mind what he has done unto us,
commemorate his love, maintain our acquaintance, preserve our friendship, and
renew to him our vows: that by all these ways we may prepare our selves for his
fellowship and society in the eternal world.

It may happen indeed that there may be but a few communicants at the Table of
the Lord: and so you may not have time there to do all this. In which case, you
may use only some part of it; or thus in brief open your heart to him, when you
see how he declares his love to you.

Adored be thy condescending love, O merciful Savior to thine unworthy
servant, who blushes to lift up his eyes toward thee, even when thou invitest
me unto thee. For, besides my other guiltiness, this most gracious
representation which now thou make of thy self to me, does but little move my
dull and heavy affections to love and rejoice in thee. I am heartily ashamed of
my self: only, I desire and resolve to become better. And here I prostrate my
self before thee, as a humble worshipper of thee; presenting thee with a poor
oblation of my soul and body, which I dedicate again with the most dutiful
affection, I am able to excite, unto thee. Do thou, O Lord, excite a greater:
that when I shall appear before thee again, I may present thee with a soul more
pure, humble, meek, merciful, and improved in all other fruits of thy holy
Spirit. In thy mercies alone are all my hopes. For as the Heaven is high above
the earth, so great is thy mercy toward them that fear thee. As far as the East
is from th West: Psalm. 103.11, 12.
so far have thou removed our transgressions from us. O be merciful unto me, be
merciful unto me; for my soul trusts in thee. 57.1.
Looks thou upon me, and be merciful to me, as thou usest to do to those that
love thy name. 119.132.
Thou art my portion, O Lord; I have said, 57.173.
that I would keep thy word. Let thine hand help me: Ephesians. 3.16.
for I have chosen thy precepts. Strengthen me with might by thy spirit in the
inner man; that denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, Tit. 2.12.
I may live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world: looking for
that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and thee our
Savior Jesus Christ. Now unto him that is able to keep me from falling, and to
present me faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, to
the only wise God our Savior, be glory and majesty, Jude 24, 25.
dominion and power, both now and ever. Amen.

But when there is time to do the whole, you will not spend it, I hope, in any
thing else, but such Meditations as these. Which, that they may be disposed in
such order as every one of them may come in its season, you may make use of in
this manner. Think you hear our Savior speaking to you by the Bread and the
Wine; when you see the one broken, and the other poured out. Then you may
immediately employ your thoughts in the four first (together with the second.
Meditation set down in the second part) while the Minister is Communicating
himself and others with him. The V. and the VI. will be seasonable after you
have received the Bread; and the VII. and VIII. after the Cup: together with
those mentioned before in the same place. And the two last in like manner,
after you have withdrawn your self from the holy Table; or before, according as
you can find room for them. And if your spirit be not able to hold out in so
many thoughts, and expressions of the inward sense and affection of your heart;
you may single out those, which you find to give you the most lively touch, and
lift up your heart highest toward the Lord. And at some opportunity, the rest
perhaps may be as acceptable, or more welcome meditations: nay, you may feel
your soul enlarged and run out in more pious thoughts and affections, than I
can suggest or excite by all that I am able to say on this subject. But I
desire you never to omit one meditation, when you behold the rest of the
company receiving, which is; that all those, and the whole Church, who partake
of this holy Communion, are your Brethren. To whom you must stir up (as I
directed you before) the most fervent charity, and the readiest disposition to
relieve, counsel, assist, comfort, or admonish them; as there shall be
occasion: And with whom you must resolve to live in the strictest Unity and
peace, as those who are Members of the very same body. When you think therefore
that our Lord tells you, there is nothing he desires of you, but that you would
continue in his love and friendship by keeping his Commandments, (as he said to
his Disciples, Joh. 15.9, 10. etc.) remember that he adds presently, This is my
Commandment that you love one another, as I have loved you, v. 12. which he
repeats again, v. 17. These things I command you, that ye love one another. And
so, take them all into your heart, with as much affection; as if the embracing
each other in our arms, and giving the holy kiss of charity, were still in use
among us. And let the Memory of Christ's death for his Enemies, and of this
divine feast, together with him and your Brethren; ever kill all your Enmities,
extinguish your anger, compose your differences, sweeten the harshness of your
Spirits, etc. and make you live together as loving Friends that hope to live in
endless love and immortal joys in the highest heavens. Of which you may also
look upon this Feast, as an earnest; and begin those joys in such thoughts as
these, at the holy Communion: that, one day you shall keep an eternal Feast
with our Savior, in the happy company of the Saints and Angels; who will all
join in the cheerful praises of the blessed and only Potentate, the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords; 1 Timothy 6.15, 16.
who only has immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach
unto, whom no man has seen, nor can see: to whom be honor and power
everlasting, Amen.

PART IV. Containing several other Meditations, together with Prayers suitable
to this Action.
BY this time, I hope, you see, that it is good for you to draw near to God, at
his holy Table: if you have any desire to be good Christians, or any savor of
spiritual pleasures. You must wholly cast away all remembrance of your duty,
and be lost to all sense of rational satisfaction, or else be strongly inclined
(considering what has been said) to take the pains to prepare your selves, or
rather to keep your selves in a constant preparation, for frequent Communion
there with our blessed Savior. An innocent, holy, and useful life cannot but
commend it self to you, if it be but on this score, that you may be entertained
with such a comfort, as to know the love of God in Christ to you; and be fit to
be feasted continually with such delightful pledges of it. How is it possible
for any considerate persons to despise or neglect such means of their
contentment? The Table of the Lord, methinks, should be more acceptable to them
than a stage; and they should run more greedily to this Divine feast than they
do to the Theaters. He should have more guests and a greater crowd to attend
upon him, than those so much frequented places. For what do they see
represented there, but some of the follies of mankind; the passions and
misfortunes of a miserable lover; the wiles and subtle contrivances of some
ingenious person; or such like things, some of which never were? But here is
represented the great wisdom of Almighty God; the manifold wisdom of our
Creator, into which the Angels desired to look, and of which they are gladsome
spectators: The incomparable kindness of our blessed Savior; that ardent love
which offered him up to God upon the Cross, and which he still continues now
that he is in the Heavens; as we see by these remembrances which he has left
us of it: The rare method of our Salvation: the wonderful way which Heaven has
contrived to bring lost souls again thither: the glorious conquest which the
Savior of the world, has made over sin, the grave and Hell: All which we here
behold his Captives, and our selves the prize which he desires to win by all
his labors. Do not men then extremely betray their infidelity; is it not plain
that Christian piety lies languishing and dying; when such numbers will spend a
great deal of time to prepare and dress themselves to be seen in the Theater,
and we cannot prevail, in some places, with any considerable company to meet us
at this glorious representation, which we make at the Table of the Lord? They
that will be at the pains to go to the former every day, content themselves,
nay think it a great trouble, to put their souls in a posture to come to this
holy place once in a whole year. And God knows how many there are, that will
not put themselves to that pains neither: who rarely appear before God at this
holy Solemnity, and whose faces are scarce ever seen in the presence of our
Savior. O shameful ingratitude! which you that read these things, if you are
believers, can never endure, I should think, to be guilty of. If you give any
credit to this history of the love of God in Christ Jesus, recorded in the
Gospel, you will spend some time sure to dispose your selves to make frequent
acknowledgments to him, by receiving these holy Mysteries. You will be ashamed
that so much time should be consumed in trimming up your selves to see and to
be seen in other places; and little or none that you may come before God, and
behold the great things that he has done for your souls. For the love of God
consider, at what charge he has furnished this Table for you: how often he
has invited you to it: how desirous he is that you would show him so much
love, as not to refuse him your company there. Think how ill he must needs take
it, if you will not accept of his singular kindness; nay, that you your selves
will not be pleased, when you reflect and consider, of how much joy you have
deprived your souls, by denying him so much of your duty. For there is no
compare between all the jollities in the world, and this one single pleasure:
of giving hearty thanks to God, for his unspeakable mercy to us in Christ
Jesus. Do but come, and see. Satisfy your selves by waiting on him at his
Table, with such thoughts as become his presence. If you have the least spark
of goodness; you will find it shine and glow, and spread it self, to your
infinite joy and contentment of heart. Among all the various degrees and
conditions of Christian people, there will none be found that come hither, with
sincere affection to do this in remembrance of their Savior, but may go away
rejoicing, loaded with many divine benefits.

For we may apply to this heavenly nourishment what the Jews say of their
Manna, sent down by God from Heaven to them; which contained in it (as their
tradition affirms) all the tastes that any man desired and longed for: it being
so suited to every palate and constitution, that none could fail to be both fed
and pleased; though they were of never so different tempers. This is not only a
common story in the Books of the later Hebrew Doctors, but we meet with it in
one of the Apocryphal writings, which is very ancient. Thou feddest thine own
people with Angels food (says the Author of the Book of Wisdom, chap. 16. 20,
21.) and did send them from Heaven bread prepared without their labor, able
to content every man's delight, and agreeing to every taste. For thy sustenance
declared thy sweetness to thy children, and serving to the appetite of the
eater, tempered it self to every man's liking. And in the great Comment upon
Exodus they endeavor to prove it thus. It is said, Exodus 16.4. behold, I rain
bread from Heaven for you, and v. 31. the taste of it was like wafers made with
honey, and Numb. 11.8. the taste of it was as the taste of fresh oil. How can
all these agree, that it should be like bread, and like honey, and like oil?
The answer is, the young men tasted in it bread, the old men honey, and the
infants oil. Accommodate this now to that divine food which our Savior has
ordered to be prepared for us, and you will find it true; that he has declared
therein his sweetness to his children, by making it suitable to every complexion
of mind and temper of Spirit: who may meet with what is agreeable to their
wants, and will give content to their desires. The infant Christians are hereby
marvellously cherished and encouraged: it pours on them the oil of joy and
gladness, and sets them forward in the ways of God by the sweetness of its
pleasures. It gives strength and power to the young men, and is the bread of
life unto them: that they may overcome the wicked one (as S. John writes to
them 1.2.14.) and never yield to the temptations of the world, the flesh and
the Devil. And to the Fathers or more aged Christians, to those who have had
long experience of the Service of God; it gives a singular relish also: and
makes them say, that his Commandments are sweeter than the honey and the honey
comb; and that in keeping of them there is great reward. Their hopes of
immortal bliss are hereby exceedingly advanced, and they receive the foretastes
of it; as the Israelites did of the land flowing with milk and honey. For
therefore, the Hebrews say well, the Manna had the taste of honey, that it
might be a representation and earnest of that pleasant country to which they
were going, and which was so described by Moses to them. Young and old, weak
and strong, if they do but in such a manner, as has been now directed, feed on
Christ in their hearts with Thanksgiving, (as the Minister of this Sacrament
exhorts them) will feel all the graces of Gods holy Spirit plentifully
nourished and increased in them, to their great satisfaction. Their Faith,
their Hope, their Charity, both their love to God and to their Brethren; will
all be raised to an higher pitch. From every one of which, it would be easy to
show, there must needs flow abundance of divine joy, and the last of them will
be an eternal spring of pleasure. If a man had only an assured confidence
wrought in him, that Almighty wisdom and goodness will take a fatherly care of
him, and provide for him as long as he lives; what a satisfaction would it give
to his heart? in what peace, freedom and contentment would he enjoy himself?
now no man can understand what he does at this holy Communion, and doubt of
this. If God has given us his Son, as here we profess to believe; we may well
conclude, how shall he not with him give us all things? If he give us this holy
bread, the bread of life; will he not give us the common bread of every day?
will he invite us to such a rich, such an heavenly feast, and not bestow on us
our ordinary food? will not he that at so vast a price has provided for us
this spiritual cheer, give us that which is so cheap, that every Raven, every
Crow and Cormorant has plenty of it? I can never question this, will every
pious soul say. I will never in the least distrust his tender care and
providence more. Our heavenly Father knows that we have need of all these
things: and will not deny them to us.

By this you may judge how much strength and life every other part of divine
Faith may derive from hence: and with what joys likewise the hearts of true
Believers offer up themselves in love to God; and wait for the consummation of
his love at his second coming, when they shall see him as he is.

But it is not the business of this treatise to demonstrate these things, which
you may find done in other Books. I only conclude from hence that this is a
great reason why many that have some good desires, some good purposes at
certain seasons; yea, begin to do well; remain so weak and feeble, so
languishing and dull in their devotion, nay, grow cold and indifferent again;
because they do not come to this holy feast, that they may cherish, encourage
and confirm what God has wrought in their hearts. They are easily overcome and
drawn away by the flatteries and violent temptations from abroad; and so bring
a reproach upon the ways of God, breed an ill opinion of them in themselves
and others, persuade themselves they cannot do better, but that there is a
necessity of sinning: because they will not use the means which God has
appointed for the strengthening their inward sense of spiritual things; or
because they will not frequently use them, when they are invited and have
opportunity to come to the Table of the Lord. This would mightily quicken and
enliven them; it would bind and tie them fast to their duty; it would make it a
pleasure to them to do the will of God; it would engage the power from above to
come to their assistance; and being full of faith and love, no temptation in
the world would be able to enter when it made its assaults. The Devil himself
would flee away from them: according to that of S. James and S. Peter, Resist
the Devil, and he will flee away from you. Whom resist steadfast in the Faith.
Jam. 4.7. 1 Pet. 5.9.


And here I might represent the sordidness of those souls that perfectly
imitate the stupid Israelites; who preferred the Onions, the Garlic and the
Cucumbers, before the heavenly Manna; even after they had tasted of it. That
had rather, I mean, enjoy the delights of sense, than these spiritual
pleasures; and after they have been at this feast, call it (as they did Manna,)
light bread; a thing which has no solid satisfaction in it. Which can be
imputed to nothing else, but a careless, negligent and superficial use of this
holy nourishment. They do not excite their appetite and stir up their desire;
they do not employ their Faith, and raise their hearts to a due esteem of the
divine benefits; or having tasted how gracious the Lord is, they do not often
reflect upon his goodness, and remind themselves of their promises and their
hopes. For otherwise they would increase in knowledge and judgment, and grow
strong in the grace of the Lord Jesus, and be furnished to every good word and
work. They do with this as S. James says many do with the Gospel: who like a
man that beholds his natural face in a glass, and taking but a short glance of
himself, goes away and straightway forgets what manner of man he was. Whereas
if he would not only look into the perfect Law of liberty, but continue to look
therein; being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work: he would be
blessed in his deed, Jam. 1.23. etc.

It is the design therefore of this last part of my discourse, to furnish you
with some apt matter for your Meditation, and with suitable Prayers: whereby you
may both quicken your selves, in your private closets, when you are preparing
to go to the Table of the Lord; and likewise preserve alive those godly
affections and resolutions which are excited there, after you are come home
again. That so by continuing to look upon what you have done, and what your
Savior has done unto you; and beholding as in a clear Mirror the great love
of God in Christ Jesus, and your great obligations to him; you may never forget
him, nor the duty you owe him, but be blessed in a faithful observance of both.

And that no man may have the excuse which the wanton Israelites pretended, who
were cloyed with the same thing, repeated over and over again; I have taken the
pains to compose variety of Meditations and Prayers (some longer, some
shorter;) for every Month in the year, and the principal Festivals in
remembrance of our Savior. Which you may either make use of, if your infirmity
require it; or else stick constantly to such as you like best, and find most
apt to move your hearts. No man's thoughts are always alike, neither his that
writes, nor his that reads; and therefore sometimes one may be most agreeable
to you, sometimes another: but there will be no time, I hope, wherein you may
not be able, among them all, to fit your self with a Meditation and a Prayer,
that may stir up and further your Devotion toward God. And he that will be at
so much pains with himself, as to follow some such method as this, will never
be able to say hereafter, as too many wretched souls have done; that they have
frequented this holy Sacrament, but were never the better for it.

January.
Meditation before the Sacrament.
COnsider with your self, some time before you intend to Communicate, that you
are invited to come, not only into the presence but, unto the Table of God: to
be one of the guests of the Lord of the whole world. What a grace; what an
honor is this? Shall any business, any pleasure on earth put by the thoughts
of it? It is impossible, if you remember what the great God is who calls you to
him; and that he sets the body of his Son before you upon your Table; and that
your Cup is filled with his Blood: That the Angels think it not below them to
wait on you and minister to you; and the divine Spirit will be ready to breath
upon you, and fill you with such holy love, that you shall send up your soul in
joyful hymns of Praise and Thanks to God our Savior. With what admiration
should you receive the news of this invitation? With what reverence ought you
to approach him? With what forwardness of love; with what gladness of heart
should you go to meet our blessed Lord? Was there ever any kindness (should you
think with your selves) like unto that of his? Did there ever such a furnace of
Love (if I may so represent it) burn in any heart? could he do more than die
the bloody and shameful death of the Cross for to save sinners? How is it
possible that the remembrance of this tender love and compassion should ever
die? or that any heart should freeze over such a fire? unless we be wilfully
careless, I see that he will have our love: he will not suffer any thing to rob
him of the purchase of his blood. For lest we should prove so ungrateful as to
let him slip out of our mind, he has left himself still among us in sensible
signs and representations. By these he shows us his bloody death and passion:
he makes himself present to our faith: and we may see that he is desirous to do
more than die for us; having contrived a way to live for ever in us, and be
firmly united to us.

What manner of love is this that Heaven has manifested unto us? who can
refrain from tears of grief and sorrow to think of his own ingratitude; and
from tears of joy to think of the wonderful kindness of the Lord? can you look
on him who was pierced for our sins, and not lament and mourn? can you see his
bleeding wounds and not be troubled? no pious heart can be so hard. And yet
when you consider that by those stripes you are healed; that he has washed us
from our sins in this blood; that faithful souls may take sanctuary in his
wounds, and be secure and safe: you cannot choose but rejoice in the Lord, and
be glad in his Salvation.

Call to your Soul then and bid it awaken in it self the liveliest thoughts of
him, and the devoutest affections to him. Call to it, to put it self in tune,
to string (as I may so speak) the instruments of joy and praise; and to stir up
all the graces of the holy Spirit. That so you may go with a deep humility; a
godly sorrow; a perfect hatred of all sin, both of the flesh and of the spirit;
a strong resolution against them: with a lowly faith; and in the heights of
love; with enlarged desires, and great longings to this holy Feast. Ask your
Soul, what do thou think of? what do thou love? what do thou long for?
with what intentions art thou going to the Lords Table? are the Treasures of
Christian wisdom and knowledge, more in thine account than thousands of gold and
silver? Do thou heartily believe the holy Gospel of Christ Jesus; and love
him and his Religion in sincerity? Is all sin already bleeding to death in
thee, and had thou rather die than willingly offend thy Savior that died for
thee? Art thou going to hang all remaining affection to them upon his Cross;
that there they may be perfectly crucified, and never taken down till by
continued Meditation on it, they be quite dead? Resolve then to go and tell him
as much: to declare and show to him that this is the sense of thine heart. Only
ask thy self again; what appetite do thou feel in thee? Art thou going as a
thirsty man to his drink; or a hungry man to his food; or a Bride to the
marriage of a chosen soul, dearer than all the world beside? or do thou feel
something like these things in thine heart? what is it that thou hungrest and
thirstest after? Is it the tastes of the love of God? Is it his Divine Grace and
holy Spirit? Do thou long to be more like him, and made pertaker of his
divine Nature? Art thou going to make a new resignation of thy self to him; to
be made one Spirit with him, never any more to depart from him? Then think how
the Bridegroom will welcome thee: how our Savior, I mean, will declare and
set forth his love to thee; and give thee assurances that his mercy indureth
for ever; and bid thee rejoice and be exceeding glad in what he has done
already, and in the hopes thou have of what he will do hereafter.

And here you may call to mind how the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us:
how he manifested forth his glory by his wonderful works: how he taught us the
way to eternal life; and at last was betrayed and delivered into the hands of
sinful men, and was crucified and dyed for us: with all the rest that concerns
the knowledge of Christ. That so you may have it more ready in your thoughts,
when you come to his Table; to do this in Commemoration of him.

In this manner also you may bewail the sins of your former life; sue for a
pardon of what is past; and beseech the grace of his holy Spirit, to assist
your resolutions of well doing for the time to come.

The Prayer.
O Eternal and most blessed God, the fountain of being and bliss; infinite in
perfection; and highly exalted above all our words or thoughts. I am astonished
at the thoughts of the brightness of thy glory: and justly afraid to present my
self before so great and holy a Majesty. Even that abundant grace which invites
me to thee, abashes me too; when I reflect upon my shameful ingratitude to such
undeserved love. It becomes me to ly down in dejection of Spirit and mournful
silence; rather than confidently to lift up mine eyes toward Heaven to speak
unto thee. But since thou art so rich in Mercy, as to require repenting sinners
to draw nigh to the Throne of Grace; I prostrate my self in the humblest
reverence before the searcher of all hearts. Not to excuse, thou know, but
to aggravate my faults: to acknowledge the justice and equity of thy Laws; to
condemn my self for opposing thy Sovereign authority; and to vow to thee the
most sincere and hearty obedience for the rest of my life.

I have done so much evil and so little good; been so eager in the pursuit of
the things of this world, and so cold and unconcerned many times about those of
eternity; so unmindful of my promises, unthankful for thy benefits, and
unfruitful in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus: that it is a wonder of thy
patience, that I am still alive, and not cut down like a barren tree that
cumbers the ground. For ever adored be thy sparing Mercy, which has born so
long with an unprofitable servant: who has so many ways offended, in thought
word and deed against thy divine Majesty -- Here reckon up those particular
sins, you are conscious of,
I have not given thee that honor, worship and service, which I owe to my
Almighty Creator. Nor laid to heart, as I ought, thine infinite love in Christ
my Redeemer. Nor duly followed the godly motions of thy holy Spirit; which thou
have sent to renew and sanctify my affections, and draw me to thine obedience.
I have not lived according to the faith which I continually confess: But
behaved my self too often as if I dreaded not the threatenings, and valued not the
promises of my Lord Christ: as if I feared not his vengeance, nor cared for his
glorious rewards; and as if he would not come to judge the world, and render to
all men according to their works.

The stupid insensibleness of mine heart, even now that I remember these
things, brings new accusations against me. It testifies that I know not, as I
ought, the terror of the Lord: but am apt rashly to mention thy Name, without
an awful and considerate regard to thy infinite greatness, power and holiness,
before which I approach. I am no more worthy to be called thy servant; much
less to present thee with any offering; or receive the least of thy blessings.
Nothing but shame and confusion of face belong to me: and it is only of thy
tender mercy that I am not lamenting those follies in weeping, wailing and
gnashing of teeth; which I speak of now with so little grief and bitterness of
Spirit. Mercy, Mercy; still more Mercy, good Lord, I most humbly beseech thee.
O that a greater fear and dread of thee may now fall down mightily upon me, and
overspread me! O that I may feel such a strong sense of thine incomprehensible
Majesty pressing upon my heart, that may bear down all other thoughts; and sink
me low, and make me abhor my self in thy sight! I know the Sacrifices of the
Lord are a broken Spirit; a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not
despise. And Jesus has also offered himself a sacrifice for us, in whom thou
have declared that thou art well pleased. For Jesus his sake dispose me now to
offer unto thee that acceptable Sacrifice. And give me grace ever to fear thee,
and to walk humbly with thee; to preserve a tender sense of my duty toward
thee, and conscientiously to obey thee: that so, by virtue of his Sacrifice of
himself, all my sins may be done away and remembered no more. Blessed be God,
that I have any hope of that great mercy. Blessed be God, who by him has given
us everlasting consolation and good hope through his grace. By him I will offer
up to thee continually the sacrifice of praise, giving thanks to thy Name. Yea,
the mercies of thee my God move me, to present my body a living sacrifice,
holy, acceptable unto thee, which is my reasonable service. I dedicate my self
absolutely to thy obedience. I vow that I will never willingly depart from thy
precepts. Assist and strengthen me mercifully with thy grace that I may perform
my vows: and never be so unreasonable as to return to those sins, which are the
burden of my heart, and grieve thy holy Spirit; which rent the flesh and shed
the blood of the Lord Jesus; and which I have so often and so solemnly
protested against.

And now that I am going to thine holy Table, to commemorate the Sacrifice of
my Savior; to give thee farther testimonies of my love to thee; and receive
new tokens of thy love to me: O Lord, vouchsafe to make thy self powerfully
present to my mind. Represent thy self and thy Son Jesus so lively to my
thoughts, in all thy wisdom, power, goodness, holiness and truth; that I may
never forget thee any more: but most seriously reverence thee, and love thee,
and rejoice in thee, and trust thee and obey thee, all the days of my life.
Imprint the very image of thy Son upon me: that I may carry him ever in mine
heart, and have his life and death continually before mine eyes; and in all
things conform my self to his will, and fashion my self after his holy example.
Come, Lord Jesus, and possess thy self of my whole man. Purify me from all
remaining filthiness either of the flesh or of the Spirit. Bring in all thy
heavenly graces along with thee into my soul. And be my perpetual defense, by
giving me a fuller communication of thy holy Spirit, and more mighty aids to do
my duty toward thee and toward all men.

And for that end, compose mine unsettled thoughts before I approach to receive
the holy Mysteries. That I may attend thee with a full and clear conception of
their meaning; with an actual belief of thy whole Gospel; with most sensible
love to thee, and desire to be more like thee; with thy high praises in my
mouth, and joy unspeakable in mine heart. May I presume, most gracious Father,
to ask such tastes and rellishes of thy wondrous love, that I may never be able
to delight in any thing so much as in the remembrance of it. But mine eyes may
be ever toward the Lord; and I may hunger and thirst perpetually after thy
righteousness: till I am perfectly made pertaker of thy divine nature, and
rendered meet to be translated to that high and holy place; where I shall see
thee not as now in mysterious representations, but openly and face to face.
Amen, Lord Jesus: who art able to save to the uttermost all them that come to
God by thee. In thy most blessed name and words I continue my humble prayers.
Our Father, etc.

A Meditation after the Sacrament.
WHen you come home or some time after, ask your soul, what wentest thou out to
see? where have thou been? and what have thou been doing? Bid it never forget,
that thou have been with the Lord of life; and that before God, Angels and Men
thou have acknowledged him, and devoted thy self to his obedience. That he has
vouchsafed to represent unto thee his mavelous love, the pains he has taken
for thy salvation, and the great desire he has to see thee with him in
immortal glory. Of which he has given thee such earnests and pledges, by
making thee pertaker of his body and blood; that thou may say of that place
where he was pleased to meet thee: This is no other than the gate of Heaven: I
have been in the porch of his dwelling place, and begun to enter into the joy
of my Lord [Here you may read over again, that which I said our Lord might be
conceived to speak unto you there: and then go on and say] How shall I escape
if I should neglect such great salvation! God forbid that I should receive this
grace in vain. As I have received Christ Jesus the Lord, Col. 2.6.
so will I walk in him. I will endeavor to keep my self holy and unblameable
before him in love; and to have my conversation as becomes the Gospel. There
are no joys like to the joys of God. No pleasures comparable to those of
Christian piety. All his Commandments are sweeter than the honey and the
honeycomb; and in keeping of them there is great reward. Shall I cease then to
delight my self in the Lord, and to do good? Shall I leave off to do the rest
of his will, now that I have done this in remembrance of my Savior? Shall I go
away from him, now that I am gone from the place where his honor dwells?
Alas, whither shall I go, thou, Joh. 6.68.
Lord, have the words of eternal life. Thou art the author of eternal Salvation
to all them that obey thee. Heb. 5.9.
I will go in the strength of the Lord God: Ps. 71.16.
I will make mention of thy goodness, even of thine only. 1 Thessalonians 4.1.
As I have received how I ought to walk and please God, so I will abound more
and more. Ephesians. 4.15, 24.
I will grow up into him in all things who is the head; till I perfectly
resemble him in righteousness and holiness of truth.

Here you may meditate upon all the parts of his holy life, and the complete
example he has set us of all divine virtues: more especially those which shone
at his death. And, as I have known some do, you may single out one or two, for
your daily meditation all this month: that you may bring your self to an
habitual imitation of him [suppose in his great HUMILITY] and tread in his
steps who did no sin, 1 Pet. 2.22.
neither was guile found in his mouth. And as you have begun the New year well,
so resolve you will continue it, and become a new man; by leading a more
exactly holy course of life, Mat. 26.41.
Watch therefore and pray, that you fall not into temptation. And often
represent to your self the great love of Christ, that it may constrain you,
because you thus judge; that if one died for all, then were all dead: 2 Cor.
5.14, 15.
And that he died for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live
unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again.

The Prayer.
O Most Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty; Heaven and Earth are full of the
glory of thy Majesty. I most heartily join with all the Saints on earth, with
the Angels in Heaven, and the holy ones that are above, in giving blessing,
honor and praise unto thee. Glory be unto thee, O God most high, thou great
Creator and possessor of Heaven and Earth; thou preserver of all things; thou
spring of an eternal Mercy: who have made Angels and men to know thee, and
acknowledge thee, and praise thee, and love thee, and be beloved of thee for
ever; who have so loved mankind, that thou have opened thy bosom, and sent thy
dear Son to convey thy charity to us. All laud and praise and thanksgiving be
to thee, O Father of Mercies, who have now made me taste how gracious and good
thou art.

And glory be to the Son of God, who took on him the form of a servant; who
died for us upon the Cross; who purged away our sins by his blood; who has
left us so many remembrances of his love; and given us his body and blood to
preserve our souls and bodies to eternal life: who lives for ever to make
intercession for us; and has promised to come again and take us up unto
himself.

And blessed be the holy Spirit, the mighty power of God; the Author of all
good thoughts; the inspirer of all heavenly desires; the light and comfort of
our minds; the purifier of our hearts; the guide and strength of our life; who
has given us the earnest of the eternal inheritance.

Thus will I praise thee whilst I live. Psalm. 63.4.
I will sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever. Psalm 86.12.89.1.71.23.86.5.
My lips shall greatly rejoice when I sing unto thee, and my soul which thou
have redeemed. For thou, Lord, art good and ready to forgive: and plenteous in
mercy unto all them that call upon thee. I have now tasted of the abundance of
thy grace and dearest love: the savor of which, O that it may remain fresh for
ever in my heart: that I may live for ever in thy love, and be ready to die for
thy love: that I may delight to do thy will, O God, and be content to suffer
it, as the blessed Jesus did. And, O that I may never forget to feed on him
daily by faith and love, till he indeed live in me and I in him; and all the
powers of my soul and body be employed by his counsels and not my own. O that
my life may be an exact imitation of him, and express his perfections, and show
forth his virtues, and declare to all how much I love him. Especially endue me
with great humility and modesty of Spirit; that I may live in a constant
remembrance of thee my Creator: and considering that thou art the author of
every good gift, may never be puffed up, nor do any thing through strife and
vainglory; Phil. 2.3, 4, 5.
but in lowliness of mind esteem others better than my self. O that the same
mind may be in me, which was also in Christ Jesus: who being in the form of
God, made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant;
and humbling himself became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross.
That so thou may exalt me in due time to glory and honor, as thou have
highly exalted him: and when thou shall call me from this delightful employment
of worshipping, praising and serving thee here on earth, I may pass into the
company of Angels and Saints: whose work it is with eternal joy to glorify
thee our Creator and Redeemer.

Let thy way be known upon earth, Psalm. 67.2, 3.
and thy saving health unto all nations. Let the people praise thee, O God: Let
all the people praise thee. Let the earth rejoice, and the multitude of Isles
be glad, because the Lord Jesus reigns, and governs the world in
righteousness and truth. O that all the kingdoms of the earth, may become the
kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ. That Turks, Jews and all Infidels may
be converted unto thee: and that all who name the name of Christ in every place
may depart from all iniquity. Communicate especially to all Christian Kings,
Princes and Governors a large measure of wisdom, justice and goodness. That
they may think it their greatest Crown and glory to be thy faithful Ministers:
and imitate the charity of our Lord Jesus, by employing their power in doing
good to all that are under their charge. O that thy Priests may be clothed with
righteousness, and thy Saints shout aloud for joy. That the poor may be
satisfied with bread; the fatherless find mercy with thee; the widows be
comforted and protected; the disconsolate refreshed; the sick eased and
restored; the prisoners delivered; the captives redeemed; the oppressed
supported and relieved; and all men, in every estate and condition of life,
contented, bettered and amended. Now unto him that is able to do exceeding
abundantly above all that we ask or think, Ephesians. 3.20, 21.
according to the power that works in us, unto him be glory in the Church by
Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world without end, Amen.

February.
The Meditation before the Sacrament.
THink with your self, it is now a month since our Lord did me the honor to
entertain me at his Table. Where have I been ever since that happy time? What
have I been doing? Have I never gone to return him thanks for that grace
bestowed on me? Have I been a perfect stranger to him, who loves me so much,
who spoke so kindly then unto me, and gave me such assurances of his
everlasting kindness? O shameless ingratitude! How shall I be able ever to look
him in the face any more? I shall sink and die under the load of such a fearful
guilt.

But I hope the case is not altogether so bad with me. Have I not sometimes
reflected on his incomparable love? Have I not endeavored to preserve some
memory of the benefits he has done unto me? Is there not still a little sense
of them remaining in my heart? I would fain encourage my self to wait again
upon my Lord. Pardon me, O God, if I presume again to enter into thy gates with
thanksgiving, and into thy Courts with praise: to eat of the bread which came
down from Heaven; to show forth the Lords death; to represent to my God the
Sacrifice he made for the atonement of our sins; and by virtue of it humbly to
expect the continuance of his pardon; to renew my Covenant with him, and to
receive new confirmations of the truth of his promises to me. Awake, Awake, O
my soul, all thy holy thoughts, thy Faith, thy Love, and every other grace,
till thou can say with David, My heart is fixed, Psalm. 57.7.
O God, my heart is prepared, I will sing and give praise. Go, and show him how
thy heart has been wounded with the thoughts of his love; how all thy sins
have been bleeding to death; how ready thou art to offer up thy self again in
Sacrifice to him. Show him how resolved thou art to walk on still more steadily
in his holy ways; to employ all the renewed strength thou shall receive in his
hearty service; and to go forth in the joy of the Lord to do his will with
greater freedom and cheerfulness of Spirit.

Then thou may think thou hear that voice of wisdom which says, Prove.
9.5.
Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have mingled. Or that of
the divine Lover; Eat, O Friends, drink, yea, Came. 5.1.
drink abundantly, O beloved. Let your soul be satisfied as with marrow and
fatness, Psalm. 63.5.
and your mouth praise him with joyful lips. For Christ himself says, Blessed
are the poor in Spirit: Matthew. 5.
for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are they that mourn: for they
shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.
Blessed are they which do hanger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall
be filled. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are
the pure in heart: for they shall see God. Blessed are the peace makers: for
they shall be called the children of God. Blessed are they which are persecuted
for righteousness sake: for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven. As he will one day
say to such, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you
from the beginning of the world: So now he authorizes his ministers to say,
come ye blessed souls, receive the tokens of his love, some earnests of future
bliss; and rejoice in hopes of his heavenly kingdom. He has not only prepared
for you a kingdom, but, as the Psalmist speaks in another case, he has
prepared a Table for you, and anoints your head wish oil (that gladness where
with our royal High Priest is crowned) and makes your Cup (his celestial
blessings poured on us) to run over. Let us go then and humbly receive that Cup
of blessing, to which he invites us. Let us bless the Lord and speak good of
his name: desiring that all mankind may be blessed in him: Psalm. 72.17
all nations may call him blessed.

Psalm. 50.16, 17.
To the wicked indeed God says, what have thou to do to declare my statutes,
or that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth? Seeing thou hate
instruction, and castest my words behind thee. Romans 8.8.
They that are in the flesh, cannot please God. And the works of the flesh are
manifest which are these, Gal. 5.19. etc.
Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, Idolatry, witchcraft,
hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings,
murders, drunkenness, revellings and such like. For them that do such things
there is a cup in the hand of the Lord, and the wine of it, says the Psalmist,
is red, but it is the cup of indignation, (...). 16.^^.
and the wine of the fierceness of his wrath.

True, my soul; but let us go therefore and renounce all ungodliness, and
worldly lusts. Let us crucify the flesh with all the affections and appetites
thereof. Let us engage our hearts in that Covenant, which we have often taken
into our mouths: and protest and vow that we think it our happiness to be his
most obedient servants. Then make no doubt, but that he will accept thee, and
send thee away with his blessing; 1 Thessalonians. 1.10.
and bid thee wait for his Son from Heaven, whom he raised from the dead, even
Jesus which delivered us from the wrath to come.

The Prayer before.
O Most holy and ever blessed God, who art brighter than the Sun in its
greatest strength; and dwell in that light, which no man can approach unto;
whom no man has seen, or can see. But in thine infinite goodness have
condiscended to show us thy glory by manifesting thy self in our flesh; so that
our weakness may look upon thee and live. I thy poor Creature, encompassed with
darkness, adore as I am able, that unspeakable love: though I have just reason
to tremble even at the presence of my humblest Savior, and to be afraid when I
have before mine eyes the tokens of his dearest love. For I have not duly
weighed his infinite kindness, nor rejoiced in the light of his blessed Gospel,
nor loved his Commandments, nor feared his threatenings, nor settled my hope and
satisfaction in his precious promises, as I ought to have done. A great part of
my life, I acknowledge, has held but little conformity with the faith which I
profess. I have not remembered so frequently as becomes me, my dependence upon
thee as my Creator, and my subjection to thee as my Sovereign Lord. I have
strangely forgot thy fatherly love in sending thy Son to dwell among us: and
his tender love to us in all his agonies and sweat and wounds, and bitter
passion for our sake. O the folly I have been guilty of in listening to the
inordinate desires of the flesh, rather than to the motions of thy holy Spirit.
How many neglects [ if not injuries Here you may mention, that earning, wrath,
conte^^t^on, ^^^^ari^a^^^ censu^^^^. etc. (...) ha^ (...) guilty of.
have my Brethren to accuse me of? How little have I been concerned for the
honor of Religion, and the good and inlargment of thy Church. I have not
glorified thee with body and spirit, as if I believed the Resurrection of the
dead, and expected from Christ Jesus forgiveness of sins and everlasting life.
How shall I stand in that great day of judgment, which I have so little thought
of? whither shall I go, when the remembrance of my Savior is now so
astonishing, and the remembrance of thy love so sad and afflicting? It is some
small comfort to me, that I am something confounded and ashamed in my own
thoughts. Thou have not taken, I hope, thy holy spirit from me. Psa. 138.8.
Thou will not forsake the work of thine own hands, but perfect that which
concerns me. Phil. 1.6.
As thou have begun a good work in me, so thou will finish it, I humbly hope,
to the day of Jesus Christ. Pierce my heart with a more mortifying sense of
what I utter with my mouth. Work in me a deeper sorrow for all my sins, a godly
sorrow that works repentance, never to be repented of. Turn my heart, Good
Lord, turn me quite away from them: that I may loath and abhor that which is
evil, Romans 12.9
and cleave to that which is good. I expose my soul here unto thee, as an
object of thy tenderest pity and compassion. I spread my wounds before thee,
that thou may cleanse and heal them. It is not thy pardon alone which I
desire; but that I may be thoroughly renewed and changed in my mind, will and
affections. I long for a strong and settled apprehension of thee, to overawe
and rule me in every thought, word, desire and action of my whole life. For a
steadfast love to thee, that may move me willingly and cheerfully to obey thee.
And for an active hope in thee, which may constantly excite me to purify my
self, even as thou art pure. Great, O Lord, is the levity of my mind, and the
fickleness of my thoughts; which makes me afraid lest all these holy desires
should presently vanish. Wretch that I am, how often have I started from my
purposes, and forsaken my own resolutions? I am going (...) more unto thy A^ta^
to ^^^er my soul and body to thee* to renew my Covenant with thee; and to put
my self into thy hands, that thou may preserve these thoughts and purposes in
my heart for ever. Accept, most loving Father, of these holy intentions. Meet
them there again; and visit me from above with a more plentiful effusion of thy
holy Spirit, to confirm and strengthen me in all goodness. I beseech thee by
the precious blood of Jesus Christ, the price of our Salvation; by thy wondrous
and ineffable love which gave him for us; to pour down upon me the abundance of
thy grace, that I may ever hereafter walk before thee with a perfect heart in
newness of life. As thou have invited me to that holy feast in remembrance of
him, so dispose my soul to approach unto it with such reverence and holy fear;
with such pure devotion and fervent love; with such spiritual gladness and joy;
that tasting the pleasures of thine house, I may never thirst for any thing so
much: but delight my self always in the Lord, and do good. Lord, what wait I
for? truly, my hope is in thee: that I shall increase in the faith, and be
rooted and grounded in love, and stick unto thy testimonies with my whole
heart, and run the ways of thy Commandments till I have finished my course
with joy.

Come, Lord Jesus, and seat thy faith in my mind and will, as in its throne.
Establish thy Laws and Government there: reign and rule in me for ever. That
armed with thy power, all thy enemies may flee before thee, and no evil thing
may dwell in thy sight: but I may overcome the world, the flesh, and the Devil,
and serve thee without fear in righteousness and holiness all the days of my
life. Hear my words, O Lord, consider my meditation. Psalm. 5.1.17.1.
Give ear unto my prayer that goes not out of feigned lips. And make me to
know and feel that Jesus who dyed for me, Rev. 1.18.
is alive from the dead and lives for evermore: and that he is an eternal
fountain of life and strength, of comfort and refreshment, to all those that by
him believe in God, 1 Pet. 1.21.
who raised him from the dead and gave him glory, that our faith and hope might
be in God. In his most powerful name I sue unto thee, for all that is
comprehended in his own holy words; saying, Our Father, etc.

Meditation afterward.
SOmetime that day, and as often as you can after, reflect upon your own
thoughts, resolutions and vows: and consider, that there may be but a few
days, perhaps hours, remaining; before you must appear at the Tribunal of him,
who has now entertained you at his Table. The next sight you have of him, may
be upon his throne, 1 Pet. 5.5.
as one that is ready to judge the quick and the dead. Put your soul in mind of
the great account you must then give, of all that you have done in the body;
and of your sacred actions, no question, as well as of the rest. And therefore
ask your self in the most serious manner, and bid your soul tell you, with what
affection has the death of the Lord been now remembered? Have thou as sincerely
renounced all thy evil ways and consecrated thy self to the life of Christ, as
thou hopest to be saved? As God shall judge the world in righteousness, art
thou resolved and determined to become a new Creature, and to pass the time of
thy sojourning here in fear? O how dreadful will he then appear, to those who
return with the dog to his vomit, after they have eaten of this holy bread, and
drunk of this holy Cup? who can stand before him that has known and remembered
his transcendent love, and yet loved his ease, his pleasure, his money or any
other thing, better than him and his eternal life? It concerns me nearly, O my
soul, to keep him ever in my thoughts, and to express him in my life. That when
he comes he may see himself in me, and behold his own image, in righteousness
and true holiness, fairly engraven on my heart. For many will say unto him at
that day, Lord, Luke 13.26, 27.
We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou have taught in our streets.
But he will say, I tell you I know you not whence you are; depart from me all
ye workers of iniquity. Most dismal change^ now he invites, now he says come;
but then he will say depart: if we come not to his Table with hearts to
entertain him, to suffer him to dwell in us, and to be the sole disposer of all
our actions. God forbid that ever that terrible voice should sound in mine
ears. This one word DEPART from me; how confounding will it be! It must needs
strike the stoutest soul into eternal sorrow.

The searcher of my heart knows that I went unfeignedly thither, to give him
possession of it: and here again I confirm the gift. Let him command what he
pleases, and I will obey it. Let him bring his Cross along with him; I will
submit unto it. Come poverty, come reproaches, come imprisonment, come pains
and torments, come death it self: rather than be so miserable as to depart from
the living God. Depart from me, Psalm. 119.115.
rather, ye evil doers; for I will keep the Commandments of my God. Psalm.
101.2, 3.
I will walk within my house with a perfect heart. No wicked thing will I set
before mine eyes: I hate the work of them that turn aside, it shall not cleave
to me. All my delight shall be upon the Saints, that are in the earth; Psalm.
16.3.
and upon such as excel in virtue.

And that you may preserve these good purposes, let your heart be often there,
where they were conceived and made; though your body cannot. Look often back
upon the Table of the Lord, and say with the same holy Psalmist, O when shall I
come and appear again before thee. 42.2.
Early will I seek thee, O my God: Psalm. 63.1, 2, etc.
my soul thirsts for thee; that I may see thy power and thy glory, so as I
have seen thee in the Sanctuary. Because thy loving kindness is better than
life: my lips shall praise thee. Thus will I bless thee, while I live: I will
lift up my hands in thy name. My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and
with fatness: and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips.

And to furnish your soul with greater plenty of good thoughts, you may often
reflect upon the example which Christ has set you in his death as well as in
his life. And perticularly resolve to spend this month in meditating every day
upon his great CHARITY, 2 Cor. 8.9.
who though he was rich, yet for our sakes he became poor, that by his poverty
we might be rich. In this God commended his love to us, Romans 5.8.
that while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us. Greater love has no man
than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends. Joh. 15.13
But we when we were enemies, were reconciled to God by the death of his Son:
Romans 5.10.
and therefore shall much more be saved by his life. Excite in your self
hereby, a great and compassionate love to all mankind: especially to your
Brethren, with whom you are knit in one body. That you may be strongly inclined
to do good, as occasion is offered; to refresh the bowels of the poor and
needy; to comfort and support the feeble minded; to live with all in unity and
peace: till your Christian friendship be perfected in endless love, in the
other world. Remember that God is the God of peace, and Christ is the Lord of
peace. Often meditate on the words of our Lord, that it is better to give than
to receive: and upon these words of a good man, that He is the best Merchant
who lays out his time upon God, and his money upon the poor.

The Thanksgiving and Prayer.
I Cast my self down before thee, O Lord, in the deepest humility of soul; to
worship and praise thee together with all the heavenly Host, saying: Holy,
Holy, Holy, Lord God, Almighty; Heaven and Earth are full of thy glorious
goodness. Thou art the joy of all those happy creatures above, who continually
behold the brightness of thy glory: and thy presence, and the light of thy
countenance makes Heaven upon earth to us thy servants, whom thou admittest
thus near unto thee. Glory be to God in the highest, who to all other blessings
has added the gift of his dear Son; and delivered him up for us all. Glory be
to the Son of God, the Prince of peace; who has loved us and given himself for
us, to redeem us from all iniquity: and left us such remembrances of himself,
and precious pledges of his never failing love. And thanks be to the holy
spirit of grace, the power of the divine love; which draws us unto God, and
inflames us with his love, and raises up our hearts toward Heaven. Blessed,
for ever blessed, be thine infinite wisdom, power, and goodness, which all the
world proclaims unto us, and which thou have more particularly manifested in
Christ Jesus. Psalm. 73.29
There is none in Heaven that we can desire, but thee; nor in earth besides
thee: that we may know thee, and entirely love thee, and be made like unto
thee, and be loved by thee, and made meet to live for ever with thee. O that
the sight I have now had of thee, may make all things here below seem mean and
contemptible in mine eyes, in compare with thy favor and good will toward me.
That no temptation in the whole world may be able to draw my heart from the
obedience I have vowed to thee: but I may ever think of thee, and ever seek
thee, and ever speak of thy goodness, and esteem my self happy in being beloved
of thee, the possessor of Heaven and earth. It is the serious purpose of my
heart to cleave to thee; and to spend my days in humility and
heavenly-mindedness, in prayer and praises, in temperance and chastity, in
works of justice and mercy, in doing of good and forgiving evil, in meekness
and peaceableness, contentedness and thankfulness, patience and forbearance,
and in all other fruits of thy holy Spirit. And therefore I humbly wait on
thee, O Father of mercies, for the continued help and assistance thereof, 1
Pet. 2.9.1.5.
that I may be able to show forth the virtues of thee, who have called me out
of darkness into thy mavelous light. Thou will preserve me, I hope, by thy
mighty power through faith unto Salvation: And so mightily assist me by thy
grace, that I may keep my self unspotted from the world; and never do any thing
to offend thee, and cause thee to depart away, or hide thy face from thy
servant who is devoted to thee. Coloss. 3.12, 13, etc,
O that I may never forget to put on, as the elect of God, bowels of mercies,
kindness, lowliness of mind, meekness, long suffering; and above all those
things charity, which is the bond of perfectness: without which whoever lives,
is as dead before thee. Pour into my heart more and more of this most excellent
grace; that according to my ability I may do good, and be rich in good works, 1 Timothy 6.18.
ready to distribute, willing to communicate; laying up in store for my self a
good foundation against the time to come, that I may lay hold on eternal life.

And, as this Charity binds me, I most heartily desire the good of all mankind:
especially of the Universal Church, which Christ has purchased by his blood.
That the devil may not devour his inheritance; and Christians may not bite and
devour one another, by hatred and strife and bitter envyings: but the peace of
thee our God may rule in their hearts, and all agree together in godly love. It
pitties thy servants to see her bleeding wounds; her miserable rents and
divisions. O that the sweet and loving spirit of the Lord Jesus may inspire
every part of thy Church. O that all who call upon the name of Christ may be
endued with uniting principles, and listen to healing counsels, and be filled
with brotherly affections and dispositions. Hear, O Lord, the daily prayers of
every member thereof. Relieve the poor; pity the groans of the sick; support
the infirmities of the weak; take compassion upon the sighings of captives, the
cries of the Fatherless and widows, the distresses of the strangers and
friendless; and the various needs of all those that have no helpers. For which
end, fill the hearts of all Christian Kings and Rulers with abundance of wisdom
and charity; that they may have such a tender and merciful care of all their
subjects, as Parents have of their Children: providing for their happiness and
comfort to the utmost of their power. Give thy grace also to all the Pastors of
thy flock, that they may stir up every one to do their duties; by their holy
exhortations and godly examples: and the light of all Christians may so shine
before men, that they seeing their good works may glorify thee our heavenly
Father. That the strangers to our Religion may come and submit themselves unto
thee: and at last there may be one fold, as there is one shepherd; and the
whole world with one voice and one consent may praise and magnify thy glorious
name. Now to him that is of power to establish me, Romans 16.25, 26.
according to the Gospel and preaching of Jesus Christ; to God only wise be
glory through Christ Jesus for ever. Amen.

March.
Meditation before the Sacrament.
YOU may consider that when God intended to make a new Covenant with Man of
more abundant grace and mercy than was ever known before; he was pleased to do
like a Man. The word was made flesh, and he came and dwelt among us. He
declared by the mouth of one taken from among our selves his great good will
toward us. He entered into all imaginable bonds, to perform his part of that
sacred Covenant. He gave us his word and his oath (two immutable things in
which it was impossible for God to lie) He gave us his Son for a pledge; and his
Son gave his blood for a seal, and his holy Spirit for an earnest of his
eternal love. Adored be the goodness of God (should you say within your selves)
who has done so much to assure the hearts of trembling and unbelieving
sinners. Adored be his goodness, who is so desirous we should be persuaded of
it. Is there no way for us also to engage our selves, and pass our word as
solemnly to him? Can we find no bonds that are sacred, wherein to ty our selves
strongly to his service? Blessed be the Mercies of our God, who has appointed
two Sacraments: wherein we for our parts promise and seal to stand to the
conditions of that Covenant of grace. But so excessive is his love, that he
does there again likewise engage his fidelity to us, and secures to us the
blessings which he has promised in his holy Gospel. O how excellent is his
loving kindness, which has given us such strong consolation! And how long is
it now since I was first devoted to him, and received the first assurances of
his love? These Reckon from the time of (...) Baptism, 20, 30, 40, etc.
-- years have I been called by his name; and made pertaker of his grace. In my
baptism he began to show his love to me; and there I entered into Covenant with
him, and vowed to keep his Commandments. What manner of person ought I to have
been in all holy conversation and godliness; who am so deeply indebted to him;
who have lived so long in his family; and been often likewise entertained at
his Table, and received there the renewed tokens of his dearest love? O how
unwearied is his goodness, which calls me once more to partake of that great
favor! Can thou find in thy heart, O my soul, to admire any thing, to love
any thing like unto him? Let us go with the forwardest affection to testify
how much we value his kindness: to profess the sincerity of our faith in him;
and most dutiful love unto him. Let us go and confirm the agreement that is
between us, and make a new choice of him for our only Master and Savior, and
take upon us to be eternally his Servants. Nay, render him our most hearty
thanks that he will admit us to that honor; and with the most passionate
admiration make him our acknowledgments, that he would do so much to deserve
our Service. Is not this thy mind and intention in approaching to his Table?
Does it not grieve thee that thou have at any time offended so great love?
Had thou not rather die and be crucified as he was, than willingly break the
least of his Commands? Do thou not in heart and resolution forsake every
thing, that would hinder thee from doing his will? Art thou not purposed to
follow Jesus in all the actions of an holy, humble and mortified life? Let us
go then and wait upon him; and show him the love that we bear unto him. Let us
give him thanks, even for this good mind which he has put into us; and for all
the hopes we have that he will continue it to eternal life. Be not discouraged;
for when the wicked forsakes his way, Isa. 55.7.
and the unrighteous man his thoughts, he himself has said that, he will have
mercy upon him, and multiply to pardon. He will pour more abundantly of his
holy spirit on us to strengthen our resolutions. He will make us grow in grace,
and bring forth all the fruits of righteousness. He will abundantly satisfy us
with the fatness of his house, Psalm. 36.8, 9, 10.
and make us to drink of the River of his pleasures. For with him is the
fountain of life; in his light shall we see light. He will continue his loving
kindness unto them that know him; and his righteousness to the upright in heart.

The Prayer.
O Most holy and ever blessed God; the fountain of good, the highest object of
our love, the rest and satisfaction of all rational desires; infinitely greater
than all we can see, and all we can conceive. I bow my self before thee, and
humbly worship thy incomprehensible Majesty. It was thy goodness which brought
me into being; and thy patience which has continued me in it unto this time;
and a greater mercy which has not suffered my being to be miserable to me; but
heaped on me innumerable good things. But I have no fit name for that
superabundant love, which thought of making mankind so very happy by thy Son
Jesus. It is a wonder, O Lord, that thou would be at such expense about
those, who had chosen to be any thing rather than such as thou made them.
None but infinite compassion could be so tender of those who despised thy
Image, and loved to live like the beasts that perish. None but thou, O merciful
God, could think of bestowing greater benefits on such brutish sinners. And
nothing but a stupid negligence and unaccountable inconsiderateness, could ever
refuse to be made pertakers of such endless happiness as thou designest to us.
I am one of those strange things that have forsaken thee, and know not why. Who
was long insensible of thy grace, and unmovable under thy greatest
importunities to return to thee. And since thou have prevailed with me, am too
much inclined to content my self with a small degree of likeness to thee: and
apt to find out little pretenses and excuses, for the doing of my own will,
rather than thine. And that though I am so solemnly consecrated to thee, and
have been instructed in thy blessed Gospel, and put in hopes of such glorious
rewards, and received such encouragements at thy Table; where I have frequently
promised cheerful obedience in all things.

Blessed be thy inconceivable love, O most gracious Lord, who have shed thy
blood for those who sin against that love; if with all their hearts and all
their souls they return unto thee. For ever magnified be thy mercy, who have
given us so many assurances of the truth of thy love to us; and so many
opportunities to testify the truth of ours toward thee. Thou art pleased not
only by thy word, thy promise and oath to give us ground of hope: but even by
outward and sensible signs to encourage our weak and justly fearful faith. For
who can but tremble to think, that he has at any time offended the majesty of
Heaven and earth? and yet who can but hope, that hears the voice of thy Son
inviting us to come unto thee, and promising a pardon to returning sinners? O
thou who call me now again to thy holy Table, and there have made such rich
provision for us: assist I most humbly beseech thee all the Meditations,
desires and resolutions of my soul in that holy action. That I may remember all
that the Lord Jesus has done and suffered for me, with such an humble
admiration, a lively faith, and a thankful love; that I may feel my heart tied
faster to him with the cords of his love; and sent up to Heaven, as the whole
burnt offerings, to the Lord. Draw me, O God of love, more powerfully to thee
and fill me more with wisdom and goodness; that my mind may more clearly
discern between things that differ; my will may become more easy to all that is
good, and more obstinate against all that is evil; and that every affection and
passion may be more gentle and submissive to the government of thy holy Laws.
Possess my heart against all the force of temptations by a never dying sense of
thy goodness, and a remembrance of those joys which thou have prepared for
those that love thee. O that all my graces may receive increase of nourishment:
that I may more perfectly imitate the humility, the meekness, the patience, the
charity, the resignation and absolute obedience of my Lord and Master Jesus
Christ. He has bidden us believe, that thou will give thy holy Spirit to those
that ask it; as readily as an earthly parent gives bread to his children. O let
the power of that attend upon me; to fix my wandering thoughts, to raise up my
heavy and dull affections, and to form all my holy purposes into a settled
disposition and temper of heart, to comply with thy blessed will in every
thing. I am not worthy, I confess, of the smallest crumb of thy mercy: but thou
have made me to hope for these great blessings, through thy grace declared unto
us in Christ Jesus. In whose words I further recommend my self unto thy
merciful kindness; saying, Our Father, etc.

The Meditation afterward.
WHen you have leisure to retire alone by your self, you may say to your self
as the people did, when they beheld the sick man at our Saviors word take up
his bed and walk ( Luke 5.26.) I have seen strange things to day. I have seen
the mavelous love of Heaven to us sinful dust and ashes. I have seen how the
Son of God dyed for the love of us: how the blessed Jesus was hanged and bled
upon a Cross for our Salvation. I have beheld him presenting himself unto me;
and offering to make me pertaker of all his benefits. With what affections did
I meet and receive his strange love? Did not my heart burn within me when he
opened the Counsels of his heart to me? Did it not melt and dissolve into love,
when he showed me how passionately he loved me? Did I not offer my self both
soul and body to him, and promise to be his faithful servant? Did I not
remember that I was his already, and renew my vows to cleave unto him in loyal
obedience? O what a transforming sight was it, to behold Jesus who was made a
little lower than Angels for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and
honor, and promising by patient continuance in well doing, to lift me up also
at last unto glory! Lord what is man that thou take knowledge of him! Psalm
144.^.
or the Son of man that thou make account of him? How is it possible to
forget this love, or my own engagements? For what pleasures shall I leave
these, of Communion with God and my gracious Master Christ Jesus? You offer too
little, all ye flattering temptations upon earth, that would draw my affections
from so great an happiness. There can be nothing comparable, to being beloved
of the undoubted Lord of Heaven and earth. One thing have I desired of the
Lord, Psalm. 27.4.
that will I seek after; that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the
days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in his
temple. This is sufficient to indear an holy life unto me; that I may be always
fit to be one of his guests, to feast with him at his Table, to be filled with
his comforts, and live in hope to live with him in endless joys. And could
(...) but see what things he has prepared for those that love him; the height
of his glory, the attendance of his Ministers, the pleasures that are at his
right hand; there would be more spirit in me. This little that I have seen
makes me say, 1 King 10.8.
Happy are those thy servants, that stand continually before thee. Psalm.
65.4.84.3.
Blessed are they whom thou have chosen, and caused to approach unto thee; that
they may dwell in thy heavenly courts; they will still be praising thee. I will
never foregoe the beginnings of this bliss. For a day in thy Courts is better
than a thousand. I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, than to
dwell in the tents of wickedness. For the Lord God is a Sun and shield: Psalm.
84.10, 11, 1^
the Lord will give grace and glory: no good thing will he withhold from them
that walk uprightly. O Lord of Hosts, blessed is the man that trusts in thee.

And here it will be fit to remember, how every deliberate sin after such fresh
experiences of Gods goodness, new obligations from him, and new resolutions and
vows to him; will be of a more crimson die, and a bloodier nature. And
therefore you must be sober and watch unto prayer. And remember withal, on the
other side, that every good action will be the more acceptable, when it
proceeds out of mere love to our Master Jesus, who has loved us so much. And
therefore always endeavor to quicken the one by reflecting upon the other. More
particularly you may resolve to meditate all the Month following upon the great
MEEKNESS of the Lord Jesus. Who was dumb as a sheep before the sheerers, Isa.
53.7.
and as a Lamb that is brought to the slaughter. He was oppressed and he was
afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth. When he was reviled, ^ Pet. 2.23
he reviled not again: when he suffered, he threatened not; but committed
himself to him that judges righteously. And so labor to tread in his steps
and to imitate him in this lovely grace. To speak evil of no man, to be no
brawlers, but gentle, showing all meekness unto all men. For we our selves also
were sometimes foolish, Tit. 3.3, 2.
and disobedient, and deceived, etc. This virtue the Apostles, there and in
other places 1 Pet. ^ 15.
, require us to exercise especially toward Rulers and Governors. And S. Peter
recommends this to Wives as the most handsome and becoming attire; even the
ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, 1 Pet. 3.4.
which is in the sight of God of great price.

The Thanksgiving and Praye^
PRaised be God. Let all ^^^^tures in Heaven and Earth praise the name of the
Lord. For his name alone is excellent; his glory is above earth and heaven.
Glory be to thee, O God most high, the Creator of all; the Father of mercies;
who openest thy hand and fillest every living thing with good. Blessed be thy
name, O Son of the Father, the ever blessed Jesus, to whom I humbly bow my
self, as the Image of God, the brightness of his glory, the redeemer of our
souls, the Mediator of our peace, and our intercessor at the right hand of the
Majesty on high. O thou holy Spirit of grace, the Almighty power of God,
inspire my heart, that I may know, that I may acknowledge, that I may love,
delight in, obey and praise the Lord our God from henceforth and for ever.

Thanks be to the eternal goodness for the everlasting Gospel; for the constant
services of thy Ministers; for the happy Communion of Saints; for all the
comforts of food, and health, and peace, and friends; above all for the death,
resurrection, ascension and exaltation of our Lord Jesus; for all the fruits of
them; and for the earnests and pledges I have received, of forgiveness of sins
and immortal life. One day is too short to recount thy Mercies. While I live I
shall never be able to find out, how much thou have already loved me; how many
blessings thou have loaded me withal since I came into this world. And yet in
the careful improvement of these, thou intendest to bring me to higher and
endless felicity. O that the remembrance of what I have seen and felt of thy
love, may always cleave unto my mind: and that I may every day see and be made
sensible of more. That the powerful operation of it in my heart, may defend me
against all the allurements of the world and the flesh: and nothing may be able
to entice me from my duty, nor be hard and difficult to do for thy mighty love.
Incline my heart, O Lord, continually toward thee; that I may know I love
thee, by thinking often of thee, and delighting to be with thee, and studying
in all things, to conform my self to thy blessed nature and will. That having
thee always before mine eyes; thy holiness and righteousness may move me to
purify my heart thoroughly from all worldly and fleshly lusts: thy greatness
may breed in me, much reverence, fear and humility; and thy tender mercies,
incline me to pitifulness, bowels of mercies, and readiness to do all good.
Give me such apprehensions of thy truth and faithfulness, that I may entirely
trust thee, and rely upon thy promises: of thine unerring wisdom, that I may
resign my understanding to thee, and be perfectly contented with whatsoever
thou appointest. Dispose my soul so, that a serious sense of thine omniscience,
may on all occasions overawe every thought of my mind, and motion of my will
into order and obedience: and thy patient goodness suppress all angry
affections in me; and make me gentle, long-suffering, and forbearing others in
love. Represent thine infinite fullness, O Lord, continually unto me; that it
may engage me in eternal thoughts of thee; and make me rejoice in the happiness
of being one of thy children, and an heir of thy glory. There is nothing more
my heart can desire; but only that I may still receive more pledges of thy
fatherly love: and have grace to keep my soul so pure and undefiled, that our
Lord may delight to manifest himself to me, and make his abode with me.

Reign in me, O blessed Lord, and in all the world. Subdue all the enemies of
thy Cross. Advance it above all the crowns of the Kings of the earth: that they
may become thy obedient subjects. O that those of them, who call upon thy name,
may be nursing Fathers to thy Church: and promote Christian piety by their high
authority and great examples. Illuminate all the Bishops and Pastors of thy
flock; that they may feed thy people with wisdom and understanding, and lead
them in the ways of righteousness. Bless all my Friends: pardon and change all
my Enemies. Comfort and relieve all sorts of miserable people. And grant us
seasonable weather, that the earth may bring forth her increase.

Accept of my hearty thanks which I tender thee again for all thy mercies both
to my soul and body; which are more than thought can number. Accept of the
oblation of my whole self, which I have devoutly consecrated unto thee:
desiring to render all praise, thanksgiving, love and hearty service to thee
eternally.

Now the God of all grace, who has called us unto his eternal glory by Christ
Jesus, 1 Pet. 5.10, 11.
make us all perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle us. To him be glory and
dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

April.
The Meditation before the Sacrament.
AMong the innumerable swarms of people that are upon the face of the earth,
how few are there that know the great love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord, And
among those few that know it, alas, how small a number are there, that remember
it, and celebrate it constantly with those praises and thankful
acknowledgments, which it eternally deserves. O what a grace is this, which I
am pertaker of, Ephesians. 2.19.
that I should be made a fellow-Citizen with the Saints and of the household of
God! Coloss. 1.27.
That I should know what is the riches of the glory of this Mystery; which is
Christ among us the hope of glory. I am infinitely indebted to the divine
goodness which inclines my heart also to go and commemorate this love in the
assembly of his Saints; who all like a spiritual building fitly framed
together, Ephesians. 2.21.
grow into an holy Temple in the Lord. There the Lords name is continually
praised. There he delights to dwell, and has chosen them for his habitation.
There is the voice of joy and gladness: and there he showrs down the blessings
of his goodness. Psalm. 95.6.
O come, my soul, let us worship and bow down: Let us go and kneel before the
Lord our Maker. 66.8.
Let us exalt the Lord our God, 96.8.
and make the voice of his praise to be heard. Let us give him the honor due
unto his name, 100.5.
and worship the Lord with holy worship. For the Lord is gracious and his mercy
is everlasting, and his truth indureth from generation to generation. Thy
reverence, thy faith, thy love, thy holy resolutions, thy hunger and thirst,
are all, I hope, still alive: wherewith we ought to approach into his presence.
Thou have not forgot sure the meaning of this holy Feast: the sweetness of
which may well preserve a memory of the ends for which our Lord invites thee to
it. Let us go then with an humble confidence, to admire and proclaim once more,
the infinite love of God our Savior. Let us openly declare that we are his
friends and followers: and bid defiance to all his enemies. Yea, let us bind
our heart to his Altar with the cords of his love; and make an oblation of all
we have unto him. It is but just and reasonable; since we have received so much
from him. It is but right, meet and our bounden duty to praise him continually;
to glorify and serve him with body and soul which he has redeemed. Let us go
and thank him therefore that he would come down from heaven to us: that he will
accept us for his servants; and set any esteem upon our poor obedience: and
that he will still from heaven visit us; and not leave us comfortless without
his holy presence with us. So may we rejoice in his salvation, and represent
with gladsome hearts his sacrifice to God for our exp^ation; and fix our eyes
upon that glory where he is inthroned: hoping we shall one day sit down with
him in the kingdom of the Father, and keep a perpetual feast with him in heaven.

What should hinder us, O my soul, from going to begin to be so happy? Search
and try, examine and prove thy self. Have thou not a mind to know and do the
whole will of God; with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
strength? Do thou not choose to be poor in spirit, meek, merciful, pure in
heart, a peacemaker, a patient sufferer for righteousness sake? and art thou
not desirous to make an increase of all these by going to his holy Table? Be
not discouraged then, Psalm. 4.3, 5, 6.
but know that the Lord has chosen him that is godly, for himself. The Lord
will hear when I call upon him. Go and offer the Sacrifices of righteousness;
and put thy trust in the Lord. There be many that say, who will show us any
good? But let thy voice be, Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance
upon me. Open thou mine eyes, Psalm. 119.18.
that I may behold wondrous things out of thy Gospel. Make me able to
comprehend with all Saints, Ephesians. 3.18, 19.
what is the breadth, and length, and depth and height; and to know the love of
Christ, which passes knowledge. This shall put gladness in my heart, more than
in the time when their corn and wine increased. For thine are riches, and
power, and honor and pleasure: and they whom thou love, can want nothing
that is good. Psalm. 5.12.
Thou Lord wilt bless the righteous; with favor will thou compass him as with
a shield. 22.26.
The meek shall eat and be satisfied: they shall praise the Lord that seek him;
your heart shall live for ever.

The Prayer.
O Lord; who fillest all things, and delightest to pour out thy blessings upon
all thy works; especially into humble spirits; who empty themselves of all
their own desires, that they may be filled with thy holy truth. Behold a poor
soul, that opens it self to thy bounteous goodness; though with much shame and
confusion of face, when I remember how much of thy grace I have refused, or in
vain received. Thou have sent me, I acknowledge, unasked innumerable benefits;
and I have found thee in my very heart, when I sought not after thee. Often
have I felt holy thoughts springing up in my mind; and pious affections
carrying my heart away from all these earthly vanities. Many godly purposes
have thou wrought in me; and made me to taste how happy a thing it is to love
thee, and be beloved of thee: O God, thou have taught me from my youth, Psa.
71.17.
and early instructed me in the knowledge of thy truth. Thou have prevented all
my desires; and secretly disposed my will, to choose the ways of virtue and
piety. Hitherto I have declared thy wondrous works; and every day brings along
with it, new testimonies of thy most fatherly care and providence. But all this
only reproaches me, for my shameful negligence, ingratitude, and unfruitfulness
in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus: and makes me despair of receiving any more
of thy grace; unless thou will magnify the riches of it, in thy patient and
long-suffering charity toward me. Thou have required us to put on bowels of
mercy, kindness, condescension; Coloss. 3.
forbearing and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any.
And have taught us such charity as is kind and suffers long, ^ Cor. 13.
and bears all things. And therefore I am encouraged to fly unto thee and to
hope in thee, who have made thy self, the pattern of tenderness and compassion
to us in Christ Jesus. There is something of thy self likewise still remaining
in me. I feel my heart inclining toward thee; desiring to have a more lively
knowledge of thee, and to be made thoroughly good and perfectly like thee. Which
emboldens me the more to wait upon thee, and to open my heart for new
communications of thy holy spirit to me. O thou who give food to all flesh,
who satisfyest the cravings of every living thing: deny not the desires of an
immortal soul which hungers and thirsts to be filled with the fruit of the
Spirit, Ephesians. 5.9.
in all goodness, and righteousness, and truth. It is not thy pardon only which
I crave, and humbly hope for, through thy mercy in Christ Jesus: But a power
from above continually to assist the holy resolutions, thou have wrought in me;
to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and
godly in this present world. Tit. 2.12.
I have chosen O Lord, the way of truth: thy judgments have I laid before me.
Psalm. 119.30.10.^^.38.
Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin against thee. I have
gone astray: but now I will meditate in thy precepts, and have respect unto thy
ways. I will delight my self in thy statutes: Psalm. 17.5.
I will not forget thy word. With my whole heart do I seek thee: O let me not
wander from thy Commandments. But stablish thy word unto thy servant, who is
devoted to thy fear. Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my foosteps slip not.

And give me leave, good Lord, to approach to thy Table, and there to dedicate
my self again unto thee; and receive fresh tokens of thy grace and favor
toward me. I am not worthy, I confess, to be seen in thy sacred presence. But
since thou have wrought in me a will to please thee in all things; I desire
that I may humbly appear and profess it before thee: and wait upon thee for a
power to do, according to the purposes of my heart. O thou who searchest the
hearts, and know what is in man; deal with me according to the sincerity of
my soul. And open mine eyes that I may see it, if there be any evil way in me:
any pride, any covetousness, any impurity; any hatred or uncharitableness. For
I renounce them all; and unseignedly resolve to do justly, and to love mercy,
Mic. 6.8.
and to walk humbly with my God. Ps. 19.14.
Let these words of my mouth, and meditations of my heart be acceptable in thy
sight, O Lord my strength, and my redeemer. And when I come to thy holy Table,
may I feel that thou have accepted them: by inspiring me with stronger purposes
to continue in thy obedience; and lifting me up to an higher degree of love to
thee and my blessed Savior. Raise me, O Lord, so high, that I may be out of
the reach of the temptations of the world and the Devil: or at least, they may
never be able to draw me down to follow any sinful lusts and desires. Dan 9.19.
O Lord hear; O Lord forgive: O Lord, hearken and do, according to thy infinite
mercies declared in Christ Jesus; and the most comprehensive meaning of his own
holy words, in which he has taught us to pray, saying, Our Father, etc.

A Meditation afterward.
THE next time thou visitest thy soul, ask it if it observed well that glorious
person who feasted thee at his Table: and marked the kind and gracious words
which he spoke unto thee, by the representation of his broken body, and blood
that was shed for thy sake. Alas! will thou say, I should not have been here,
if I had had a clear view of his glories. He would have carried me to heaven
with him, if my heart had been possessed with the fullness of his love. My eyes
are too weak to behold his perfections: my thoughts too narrow to comprehend
the unsearchable riches of his grace.

But have thou not seen something of him? Did not many of his beauteous graces
shine fairly in thine eyes? Did he not even force upon thee some sense of his
wondrous goodness and charity? And has he not put himself, by sensible tokens,
into thy very hands; nay, entered into thine heart, and told thee; that he has
desired it for his habitation. Where is he then? what have thou done with him?
are the thoughts of him vanished already out of thy mind? Does the love of him
languish and die thus soon in thy breast? Art thou content to let him go, and
see him no more; till the same solemnity come about again?

How will thou be able then to appear before him, at that time? with what face
will thou look upon him, whom thou slightest so much; as to love any company
better than his? Will it not confound thee to think that thou art but a
stranger to him, though thou have been so often with him? and that he can find
nothing of himself in thee; no, not after so many professions of the greatest
love and friendship to him? O let him see, that he has not bestowed himself on
one that knows not how to value so divine a guest. Preserve an everlasting
memory of his dying love. Never fail to thank him for it every day, with the
greatest passion thou art able to excite. Look on him seriously and study to be
like him. Never take off thine eyes from his beauties, till all his lovely
qualities be imprinted on thy heart. Imitate his humility and great
condescension to us of low estate. Learn of him to be meek and lowly in heart.
^atch. 11.20. (...) 5.2. ^
Walk in love, as Christ also has loved us, and given himself for us, an
offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor. Purify thy self,
1 John 3.3.
even as he is pure. Heb. 13.5.
Let thy conversation be without covetousness; Psalm. 37.3.
and be content with such things as thou have. Trust in the Lord, and do good:
make him thy hope, and thy portion. That as long as thou live; Christ Jesus
may be seen among men. O what a goodly sight would it be, to behold our Lord
still walking up and down in the world! To see the loving, the peaceable, the
meek, the merciful, the holy Jesus again upon the earth! Do thou resolve to be
that blessed man, in whom he shall appear. Let not his Image and likeness be
lost, whilst thou art in being: and labor to leave it upon others when thou
art dead and gone.

Particularly thou may resolve all this month to meditate often on the
PATIENCE of our Lord; under ah the rude affronts and cruel pains he endured
from his enemies: and the great dullness, untowardness, and slowness to believe,
which he found in his Disciples. That so Patience may have its perfect work in
thee; to the end thou may be perfect, and entire, Jam. 1.4.
wanting nothing. For we have need of Patience, Heb. 10.36
that after we have done the will of God, we may receive the promise. Rest in
the Lord therefore, and wait patiently for him: Psalm. 37.7.
fret not thy self because of him who prospers in his way, because of the man
who brings wicked devices to pass. Resolve not to be discouraged in thy
Christian course, whatsoever it be that thou art to do, or suffer. Warn them
that are unruly; ^ T^^ss. 5.14.
comfort the feeble minded; support the weak; be patient toward all men.
Remembering that this is the character of those, who received the heavenly seed
with honest and good hearts; Luke 8.15.
that they brought forth fruit with patience. And we know that the fruit of
patience is experience; Romans 5.3, 4.
and experience works hope; and hope makes not ashamed.

The Thanksgiving and Prayer.
ALL thy works praise thee, O Lord; they proclaim thy greatness, thy wisdom,
thy power and goodness, throughout the world. There is no place in heaven or
earth where their voice is not heard. But the mouths of rational creatures
ought most to be filled with thy praises: whom thou have made to understand the
wisdom and majesty of all thy works. We our selves, O Lord, are fearfully and
wonderfully made. Thou have adorned mankind with most noble perfections, and
given us dominion over the works of thy hands. And after we had despised this
honor which thou did us, choosing to become like the beasts that perish; thou
wast pleased to do us a greater: and to demonstrate an infinite wisdom, power
and charity in our recovery by Christ Jesus. I bless thee, O God, for that
abundant grace; and for that part and portion, which thou have given me in it.
That thou wast pleased to come so lovingly, and dwell among us; and appear in
the likeness of sinful flesh; to what can I ascribe it, but thine
incomprehensible love, and readiness to do us good. I most heartily thank thee,
that thou wouldt so mercifully comfort us by thy divine presence among us; and
encourage us to hope in thee, that would not destroy us. And that thou have
proclaimed as much by thine eternal Word, and bidden us to hope in thy mercy.
Above all, that thou have assured us by his Death and Passion, that thou will
pardon our sins; and by his Resurrection, that thou will bestow on us eternal
life. There is no end, O Lord, of thy loving kindness. For thou continuest to
give us new assurances and tokens of thy good will toward us: and have now
entertained me at thine own Table, with his most precious body and blood. It is
too little, O God of all grace, to give thee my self, if I had any more to
give. All that I can do, is again and again to give my self to thee. And as I
have at thine Altar offered my whole soul and body, to be employed according to
thy holy will and pleasure: so I continue here to renew my devotion to thee;
and to oblige my self by repeated vows to be thy servant. I hope I shall never
suffer thy love to slip out of my mind; nor forget the promises wherein I stand
engaged to thee. Yea, that thou in thine abundant goodness wilt always
accompany me by thy holy spirit, (which our Lord has bid me expect from thee,)
to preserve alive his memory in my heart: that I may ever be a follower of him
in poverty of Spirit; in meekness; in mercifulness; in purity of heart; in
peaceableness, and studying to be quiet. 2 Thessalonians. 3.5.
And the Lord direct my heart to the love of God, and the patient waiting for
Christ. That I may endure all the troubles of this life with a composed,
constant spirit; and never repine at any thing that befalls me. That I may
cheerfully suffer for righteousness sake; and taking up my Cross, Heb. 12.1, 2.
run with patience the race that is set before me, looking unto Jesus the
Author and finisher of our faith; who for the joy that was set before him,
endured the Cross, despising the shame and is set down at the right hand of thy
throne of glory.

Romans 15.5, 6, 7.
Now the God of patience and consolati^^ grant us all to be like minded one
toward another, according to Christ Jesus. That a^^ Christian people may with
one mind a^^ one mouth glorify thee our God: and receiv^^ one another, as
Christ also received us, un^^ thy glory. Unite our hearts in love and charity:
and give us grace to follow afte^ those things which make for peace, Romans 14.^^
and thing wherewith one may edify another. O that the power of all Christian
Kings and Rulers may be employed to be a terror to all evil doers; and to give
praise and encouragement to all that do well. That all the servants of the Lord
in holy offices, may be gentle unto all men, apt to teach, 2 Timothy 2.24.
patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves. And all those
that are under their care, 1 Thessalonians. 5.13.
may have the grace to esteem them very highly in love for their works sake:
and laying apart all filthiness, Jam. 1.21.
and superfluity of naughtiness, receive with meekness the engrafted word,
which is able to save their souls. I recommend to thy mercies all the poor, the
sick, the fatherless and widows; and whosoever are in any distress: that they
may remember the words of the Lord Jesus, Luke 21.19.
and in their patience possess their souls. And the Lord deliver us all from
every evil work, and preserve us unto his heavenly kingdom: 2 Timothy 4.18.
to whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen.

May.
Meditation before the Sacrament.
CAst your eyes now on the beautiful face of the earth, and see how all things
smile upon you. How God has crowned the year with his goodness, and clothed
the pastures with flocks, the gardens with flowers and fruits, and the valleys
with corn. How the little hills, as the Psalmist speaks, are girded with
gladness; Psalm. 6^.
and every creature shouts for joy and sings. And then think with thy self, how
uncomly it is that thou should be the only dull and silent thing: whom the
Lord has adorned with greater riches and honor; and set over all the works of
his hands. Think what nobler beauties he has made thee to behold, and set
before thy mind even himself in all his glory, which shines upon thee in the
face of Jesus Christ. Think how he calls thee to a Paradise of delight, now
that he has invited thee to his holy Table: where he represents unto thee the
Son of his love, the express image of his person; and all the happy fruits of
his manifestation in our flesh. Bid thy soul therefore awake, and meditate on
his humble descent from Heaven for our sake, with the acclamations of all the
heavenly host; on all his miraculous works of charity; his holy and useful
life; his bitter passion; his bloody and shameful death; his glorious
resurrection and ascension; his power at the right hand of God; and all the
benefits he has by these means obtained to us, and crowned our nature withal.
Bid it sing aloud, and give praise, and shout for joy. Stir up all that is
within thee, to bless his holy name. That while all things round about thee are
fresh and spiritous and full of life; thou may not remain the only dead and
heartless creature: but spring up together with the rest, in all the acts of
spiritual life. Say to thy self, what a new world do I see? God dwelling here
among men. God in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their
trespasses unto them. Friendship made between heaven and earth. Death swallowed
up in victory. The gate of heaven set open to all believers. Jesus our
fore-runnner, there already inthroned: waiting for all his faithful followers;
and filling them now with good hope, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.

O what a glorious sight is this: which the Angels themselves admired! what a
new heaven and new earth should this have made, wherein dwells righteousness?
what ailes us, that we do not all become new creatures? And beholding as in a
glass the glory of our Lord, are not changed into the same image, from glory to
glory; even as by the spirit of the Lord? I am ashamed of my barrenness in the
knowledge of Christ Jesus: into whom I was ingrafted long ago. It is high time
to be more fruitful in all good works. For he has said that, every branch in
me that bears not fruit, John 1^.2, 8.
my Father takes away: and every branch that bears fruit, he purges it,
that it may bring forth more fruit. And herein is my Father glorified, that ye
bear much fruit, so shall ye be my disciples. I will go therefore and open my
heart to him who is the root and fountain of life; that I may derive new
spirit, vigor, and strength from him. I will go and declare that I believe in
him: that I have placed my hope, my comfort and satisfaction in his love; and
value his favor and blessing more than all the world. I will show him how I
long to be changed more and more, into his divine image: and am resolved to
abide in him, v. 7.
and that his word shall abide in me. I will give him all the assurance of it,
I am able: by renewing my covenant with him; and making a cheerful oblation of
all that I am, and have, and can do, unto his service. Then sure he will
communicate more of himself unto me. I shall feel his divine power and virtue
quickening me: and because he lives, John 14.19.
I shall live also. The Sun when he returns to visit us with his warmth, does
not more revive all things, and renew the face of the earth, than I shall find
him inlivening and renewing me; that I may have my fruit unto holiness, Romans
6.22
and the end everlasting life. For he himself has said, Joh. 15.7.
If you abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and
it shall be done unto you. Be it unto me, O Lord, according to thy word. I ask
nothing, but that I may still have the grace to continue in thy love, by
keeping thy Commandments. That I may grow and increase in wisdom and Holiness;
and be filled with all the fruits of the Spirit. With love, joy, peace, Gal.
5.22.
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: and that
they may abound in me more and more, to thy praise and glory. Amen.

The Prayer before.
O Most blessed God, who art most lovely in thy self and in all thy works: and
full of love and kindness to us whom thou have made to understand thy glorious
perfections. Thou art beloved of all those that seriously fix their eyes on the
beauties of thy holiness, wisdom and goodness; and observe thy bounty to all
thy creatures. Thousands of Angels and Saints thou have, whose hearts burn
continually with love to thee: and thou have had many faithful servants that
have dyed for the love of thee. I am one of those fools and senseless wretches,
that have loved every thing better than thee, my Creator, and merciful Savior.
While others have burnt in the fires for thee, I have been unwilling sometimes
to take the pains of a few serious thoughts about thee. And my mind at best, is
apt to start away from that most heavenly employment: it is hard to think, even
of thy surpassing kindness to me, without interruption, but for a few moments.
I am too unlike the ancient Disciples of the Lord Jesus: being prone to content
my self with reading or hearing thy word, with speaking of thee, or praying to
thee: and all many times without any love, or but with little affection to
thee. Yea, while I make mention of thy love, I am not so much in love with
thee, as it deserves. I have beheld the Sun of righteousness shining upon me,
and received the dearest pledges of thy loving kindness; without that warmth
and heat of love which it might have excited. The liveliest Truths have not
penetrated so deep, as they should, into my heart. But though thou have been
pleased to entreat so earnestly, and promise so liberally, as if thou should
be indebted to me for my love; it has many times but little stirred this dull
soul toward thee. Thou have loved us so much as to purchase our love at any
rate: having redeemed us with thy Sons blood, which is the greatest price; and
called us to thy kingdom and glory, which is the greatest reward: but alas! how
unconcerned have I been, too often, in all these wonders of thy love?

I am ashamed of my self. I blush to think that after so long acquaintance with
thee, I should love thee and delight in thee to no higher a degree. Which is
the only thing, next to thy grace which pitties our weaknesses, that gives me
hope I shall at last love thee far better. Still make me more ashamed, that
after all thy care and pains thou should see so little of thy self in me. And
assist me by the power of a mighty grace, which I will endeavor to improve, to
fix mine eyes more steadfastly on thee, and to stay my thoughts with thee; till
I love thee so much as to be changed into thy likeness. Now that I am going to
commemorate thy love in Christ Jesus, let not my ingratitude provoke thee to
absent thy self from me: but according to the gracious Covenant thou have made
with us in his blood, be merciful to my sins, and remember not mine iniquities
against me. Make me know and feel that thou do pardon me, by exciting holy
resolutions in me to purify my heart more perfectly; and disposing me entirely
to love thy holy nature and will, and conform my self unto it in all things. O
that all carnal affections may die in me, and all things belonging to the
spirit may live and grow in me. That I may have power and strength to have
victory and to triumph against the Devil, the world and the flesh. That I may
utterly hate every thing that is evil; and cleave most affectionately to that
which is good. Yea, that I may hate even Father and mother, and the dearest
thing in this world, rather than sin against thee and forsake thee. That no
relation, no pleasure, no profitable enjoyment, may ever turn my heart from
thee, but rather draw me to thee, and make me more in love with thee. All thy
creatures may justly complain of me, if I should not love thee above them all.
But how shall I answer it to our Lord Jesus, if his love should not constrain
me? O that the spirit of thy ancient Saints may hereafter possess my heart.
That I may cry out after God, Psa. 131.6.
even the living God. That I may watch for thee, more than they that watch for
the morning: And my soul may follow hard after thee: 63.8.
and even break for the longing it has to thy judgments at all times. 119.20.
That I may be a diligent follower of their Doctrine, 2 Timothy 3.10.
manner of life, purpose, faith, long suffering, and patience. Psalm. 119.103.
O that the words of thy mouth may be sweeter to me than the honey and the
honey comb. Psalm. 119.47.
That I may delight my self in thy Commandments which I have loved. And the
light of thy countenance may be better to me than life it self. Amen.

Confirm and strengthen, good Lord, all the holy desires and dispositions which
thou have wrought in my heart; that they may ripen into all the fruits of
righteousness, which are by Christ Jesus to thy praise and glory. In his holy
words I further recommend my self to thine infinite mercies, saying, Our
Father, etc.

The Meditation afterward.
O Love, what have thou done? said an holy man, when he thought of the Mercies
of God in Christ Jesus. Thou broughtest the Son of God down from Heaven, and
made him appear in the likeness of man. Thou broughtest him to his Cross, and
made him an offering of a sweet smelling savor unto God. O Love, what would
thou not do (may thou say to thy self) if thou did but possess our hearts?
That which made him like to us, and brought him down hither, would make us like
to God and carry us up to Heaven. If I did but love God, what could he demand
of me which I should not immediately do? How naturally should I study to please
him? How easy and delightful would it be to comply with his will? And what a
favor should I count it, that I might know his will which I am o do? None of
his Commandments would be grievous to me; but all his ways pleasantness, and
all his paths peace. And will it not be very strange, if I should not love him,
who has loved me so much, and is still demonstrating his kindness to me? I
must forget my belief if I should not love him: and that he will not let me
forget; but calls me often to his holy Table, and feeds me with the sweet
remembrance of him. There he represents to me, that which I continually profess
to believe. That he is the Father Almighty, of whom the whole family of Heaven
and Earth is named. That Jesus is his only Son our Lord; that he was conceived
by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was
crucified and put to death, rose again, ascended to Gods right hand, and will
come at last to judge the quick and dead. This is my Faith. May I never make
confession of it, Gal. 5.6.2.20.
without feeling it excited to work by love. May it always call to mind the vows
I have made to live by this Faith of the Son of God. Acts 15.9.
May it purify my heart; that when he shall appear again and come to judge the
world, 1 Pet. 1.7.
my faith may be found to praise, and honor, and glory. Amen.

This was the reason, you may here consider, that good men anciently advised
all Christians to repeat the Creed every morning. Not as a Prayer, or a
Preservative from sin, merely by the force of the words: but to put them in
mind that they were the followers of Jesus, who had done and suffered so much
for them; and to quicken themselves to love and to good works, which are the
natural fruits of says in Christ. Resolve therefore to reflect on it, for this
end. Show that thou do willingly remember the Lord Jesus, and studiest to
stir up his love in thy heart: and have not only some sudden flashes of it
forced upon thee, by the mere greatness and power of his love. Think that thy
love to him will grow faint and cold without these endeavors: so that it will
be a doubt to thy self (O how uncomfortable is that!) whether thou love him
or no.

And the better to preserve it, thou may resolve particularly to Meditate
often, all this month, upon this piece of Christ's love, in instituting and
ordaining, just before he died, these HOLY MYSTERIES at this Divine feast, as
pledges of his love, and for a continual remembrance of his death, to our great
and endless comfort. O what a kindness was this, may thou think with thy
self! what wonder of love, which is here fairly represented to us and set
before our eyes! what a pleasure is it to see our selves thus beloved of the
Sovereign of the world! to behold our selves in the arms of the Almighty, the
only wise, and all-sufficient good! who will never fail to take care of us,
provide for us, direct, support, assist, comfort and protect us; yea, and
eternally bless us. This is love indeed, that we have such pledges given us of
his everlasting kindness; that we shall see him in the other world, where we
shall know him and love him as much as we can desire. Nay, what an happiness is
it, that we can love him at all? And that he will take such care to excite our
love to so great an height in this world? O what pleasures have I felt in
loving him; and offering my heart with sincere affection to him? How does my
will sweetly melt into his; when I think how good he is, and how much I am
obliged to him? We should never have praised him so much, if he had not thus
represented his love to us: And that, together with entire friendship and
concord (to which he also here ingages us) is the happiness of Angels and
glorified Spirits. I will never cease to think of these pleasures, that I may
never cease to enjoy them: but be still more and more praising thee, till I
come to praise thee in the company of the Blessed.

The Prayer and Thanksgiving afterward.
O Most holy and ever blessed God; Thy name alone is excellent; thy glory is
above the Earth and Heaven. All the heavenly powers continually proclaim thy
greatness; and raise themselves, not thee, by admiring, loving and praising thy
eternal Majesty. I most humbly adore and extol thy unsearchable Wisdom, thy
uncontrollable Power, thy boundless Goodness, and thy unspotted Holiness and
Truth. It is a shame, I acknowledge, that ever I should think of esteeming or
loving any thing like to thee, who art so infinitely above all the world; and
it being so impossible for me to be safe or happy, but in thy love. And it is
no less shame to make mention of thy Name, without the greatest joy and
satisfaction of heart in thy love and favor. For thy wisdom is the surest
guide and most certain director: thy Power is our strength and safeguard: thy
good Providence is our all-sufficient treasure: thy holiness and truth is our
security: thy goodness is our hope and comfort: thy unerring will is our
satisfaction, in all events that here befall us. I cannot wish, when I
seriously recollect my self, to live in a world without thee. It would be
better not to be at all, than to be forsaken of thee, and left to the conduct
of my own childish thoughts and desires; and to the protection and provision of
my own weakness. How much do I owe thee, even for this knowledge of thee? And I
have had daily, yea minutely experience of thy loving kindness, ever since I
had a being. A great number of thy creatures serve me, and minister unto my
content and comfort, by thy command. And thy own Son is become a Servant to me,
and submitted himself to the vilest state and condition for my happiness. I
deserve not to live, if I should not love thee entirely. For thou art every day
adding new fuel to my love, and taking care that it may never go out. What
tokens of thy love has this day brought along with it to my Soul? Thou have
given me leave to wait upon thee, and feast with thee at thy own Table: To see
the love that the Lord Jesus bare and still continues to me; that I may be
still more induced to love thee, and strongly engaged to be so happy, as to
continue in thy love by cordial obedience to thee. Who can look on thee, O
blessed Lord, and not love thee? Who can think of what thou have done unto us,
and not devote himself eternally to thy love and service? But alas! our eyes
are weak; our thoughts are short and transient; we are soon weary of beholding,
and thinking even on thy love. Direct my thoughts therefore by thy mighty
power, more strongly toward thee. Fasten in my mind a more lively remembrance
of thee: that I may, at least, be often looking back unto thee, and delight to
reflect upon thy wondrous love. Psalm. 119.37.
Turn mine eyes from beholding vanity, and quicken thou me in thy way. And, O
that all my love may be changed into obedience; that I may be ever very fearful
to displease thee; and careful to omit no part of the duty I owe thee: but I
may spend my days in acts of holy love toward thee and toward all men. 1 Thessalonians. 5.15, 16, 17, etc.
That I may rejoice evermore: pray without ceasing: in every thing give thanks:
prove all things; and hold fast that which is good: never rendering to any man
evil for evil: but ever following that which is good, both among our selves,
and to all men.

And I desire the happiness of all mankind: especially that the Faith of all
Christian people may grow exceedingly, 2 Thessalonians. 1.3.
and the Charity of every one toward each other may abound. That so they may
adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things: Tit. 2.10.
and recommend his Religion effectually, by their good and innocent lives, to
all the world. Give the King thy judgments, O God: Psalm. 72.1, 2, etc.
that he may judge thy people with righteousness, and thy poor with judgment.
That the greater powers may bring peace to thy people, and the lesser also, by
righteousness. That they may judge the poor of the people, and save the
children of the needy, and break in pieces the oppressor. That we may all fear
thee, as long as the Sun and Moon endure, throughout all generations.

Now unto him that has chosen us t^ Salvation, 2 Thessalonians. ^.13.1^.^
through Sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth: whereunto he
has called us by the Gospel, to the obtaining of the glory of the Lord Jesus
Christ, be thanks and praise, and love and obedience rendered, world without
end. Amen.

June.
The Meditation before the Sacrament.
IS it possible that the great God should be manifested in the flesh? 1 Timothy
3.16. Act. 20.28
And that he should purchase those who were his Creatures, sinful Creatures,
with his own blood? Surely we do not believe this. How joyful, how thankful
should we be; how holily, how purely should we live; if we thought our selves
so nearly related to him? What faith, what hope should we place in him? How
confidently should we trust our selves and all we have with him? How willingly
should we resign our selves to his pleasure, who has not thought this too much
to do for us? And how contentedly should we want what he pleases not to give,
who has done us such an honor, as to marry us to himself? If he had taken
hold of the Nature of Angels, and laid down that life, that precious life which
was spent for us, for their redemption; how much would those heavenly creatures
have loved him? And yet, now that he is desirous of our little love, he cannot
have it. O my soul, what is become of that love which thou lately professedst
to him? I thought the last time we were at his Table, that thou wast mightily
sensible of his love, and would never cease to love him. Did thou not
protest, that nothing was so dear unto thee as thy Savior, and his Commands
and precious promises? That thou had rather lose thy life, than lose his
favor? And did thou not resolve that thou would preserve it as thy life,
by all the acts of love to God and man? O how easily do we forget the greatest
benefits? How apt are we to pay him only with liberal promises? If he had not
made us this new invitation to his Table, it is possible we might have
forgotten, that we have any obligations to him. But this sweet voice of thy
Savior, which calls upon thee, saying, come, do this in remembrance of me, how
does it awaken and revive that love, which sometime I felt in my heart to him?
Thanks be to his goodness for this new opportunity to acknowledge his love, and
to profess my own. I hope in time I shall love him to the height of my desires:
and by these frequent remembrances of him, become perfectly like him.

Though very unworthy therefore of this new favor, who have been so unmindful
of the old, I will go into his house, and present my self at his Altar: if it
be but to declare that I belong to him; and am not willing to lose his
blessing. I will show him, at least, that I do not quite forget him; and have a
mind to become a better Christian. But how is it possible, that I should see
the representation of his mighty love, that I should behold his pains and
agonies for my sake; and do no more than tell him, that I keep him in mind, and
intend to obey him. I cannot choose but vow my self entirely to him. I must bind
my self, in the most sacred Covenant, to keep his Commands. I can do no less
than assure him again that I love righteousness, and hate iniquity: and will
choose death, rather than to displease him. Nay, I will resolve never to cease
to renew these vows; and multiply my engagements: and then at last, sure, I
shall become steadfast in his Covenant, Psa. 112.1.
and delight my self greatly in his Commandments. Psalm. 119.167, 48, 44, 162,
127, 72.
My soul shall keep thy testimonies, and love them exceedingly. My hands also
will I lift up unto thy Commandments which I have loved: and I will meditate in
thy statutes. So shall I keep thy Law continually, for ever and ever. I will
rejoice at thy word, as one that finds great spoil. And love thy Commandments
above gold, yea above fine gold. The law of thy mouth shall be dearer unto me,
than thousands of gold and silver. Let us go, my soul, and thank him heartily,
as for other benefits of his passion, so for these hopes I have of becoming so
perfectly in love with him, that I shall exactly resemble him. Ps. 42.11.
Hope in God, for thou shall yet praise him, who is the health of thy
countenance, and thy God. If I regard iniquity in my heart; the Lord will not
hear me. But verily God has heard me: Psalm, 66.18, 19, 20.
he has attended to the voice of my prayer. Blessed be God, which has not
turned away my prayer, nor his mercy from me.

The Prayer before.
O Most high and Holy one; who can not be comprehended by our shallow
thoughts, nor by any other thing, but only thy self. Though inconceivably
beneath thine infinite Majesty, and also a miserable sinner, I make bold, in
the name of the Lord Jesus who is my hope, with humble reverence to prostrate
my self before thee. Acknowledging that thou art my Maker, my Lord and
Sovereign; and that I being the work of thy hands, must needs be thy servant
and subject. Yea, thou have given me leave every day to call thee Father, and
ownest me for thy child. With what fear and astonishment, with what grief and
sorrow, does it become me to ly in thy presence? How heavily have I condemned
my self by these acknowledgments? For I have not always honored and served
thee as my Creator, nor loved and delighted in thee as my most gracious Father,
nor obeyed and submitted to thee in all things, as my Sovereign Lord and
Master. I have too often rebelled against thine Almighty power and authority, and
spurned against the bowels of thy love, and broken thy most holy Laws, and
violated that faith which I professed in my Baptism, and have many times since
plighted unto thee. Thine Almighty mercy accuses me. The passion and torment,
the death and resurrection, the threatenings and promises, all the love of my
dear Savior condemns me; and so do the mighty works and the gracious
inspirations of the Holy Ghost. And yet I have no whither to fly, nothing to
trust unto, but that Almighty mercy; the passion and love of our Lord; the
power and grace of the Holy Ghost. How shall I hope for pardon from that love
which I have offended? and look for mercy, from those tender mercies which I
have too much slighted? With what confidence can I expect a remedy from that
power which I have resisted? O the long-suffering and patience of my God! O the
infiniteness of thy mercy! and the pretiousness of that blood, that can wash
away so many transgressions against it self. I adore thee, I thank thee, O God,
who have set forth Christ Jesus to be a propitiation, Romans 3.25.
through faith in his blood. By his Cross and Passion, Good Lord, I hope to be
delivered: and wait on thy mercy for the power of his holy Spirit, to wash me
thoroughly from mine iniquity, Psalm. 51.
and cleanse me from my sin. Assist me thereby, I most humbly beseech thee, to
purify my self from all filthiness both of the flesh and of the Spirit: 2 Cor.
7.1.
to purge my mind, my affections, my passions, from whatsoever is offensive to
thy pure eyes, who can not approve of iniquity. For I would have no
uncleanness, no inordinate affection, Col. 3.5, 8.
no evil concupiscence and covetousness, no anger, wrath, malice or evil
speaking to be found any more within me. And now that I am about to remember
the death of Jesus, help me to mortify all these more perfectly, and to hate
them worse than death. Behold, O Lord, I abandon all worldly lusts. My soul is
open; and I have emptied my heart, to receive the fullness of thy grace. Take an
absolute possession of me; rule in me by thy laws; guide me by thy counsels;
fill me with thy love; satisfy me with the comfort of thy promises; and
refresh me with thy divine joys; that I may have a great delight to be thy
faithful and obedient servant. O that I may feel, at thy Table, the liveliest
apprehensions awakened in me of what thou have done for my soul. Hold my
thoughts close unto thee; inspire me with devout Meditations; strengthen and
increase in me all good resolutions; and enable me to bring them to good
effect. I know thou never failest those that heartily seek thee. Our Savior
has bid us ask and we shall receive, seek and we shall find, knock and it
shall be opened to us. Fulfill then, O Gracious Lord, all my petitions: so give
unto thy servant what he humbly asks, let him that seeks find, open the gate to
him that knocks; that I may be made partaker of Christ's most blessed body and
blood. And feeling the comforts of holy fellowship and friendship with him, and
studying to maintain it by a pure and blameless life; I may now and ever
triumph in thy Salvation, and sing thy praises in thy Church on earth, and
among thy Saints and Angels in heaven: giving honor, blessing, power and
dominion unto thee, O Father Almighty, and unto thy Son Christ Jesus to all
Eternity. Amen.

Our Father, which art, etc. A Meditation afterward.
Do thou mind, O my Soul, wha^ thou say, when every day thou call God,
Father: thy Father which is in Heaven? How happy art thou, if thou art beloved
of God Almighty? So beloved, that the Lord of Heaven and Earth is thy Father?
What is there that thou can desire, what can thou long for beyond this? How
well satisfied and contented should thou be in the poorest condition; how
well assured that all shall be well with thee, if thou art sure of this one
thing, that he is thy Father? And what should make thee doubt of it, though so
great an honor? Where have thou been now? what have thou been doing? Have thou
not been with Jesus? Have thou not professed thy self a Christian? ^ Joh. 1.3.
And truly their fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.
He has shown thee the love which God bears to thee. He has bidden thee, by
those tokens, rest assured that he will never cease to love thee. For he has
given himself to thee; and thou have given thy self to him. The Covenant of
friendship and eternal love has been renewed between us. Thou have made oath
again of fidelity to him, and he has sworn in his holiness, that he will not
take his loving kindness from thee, nor suffer his faithfulness to fail. O how
rich is he, that possesses God; and is heir of his immortal glory! How chary
should we be of this inestimable wealth? How void should we be of all other
cares, but only this; to preserve the love of our heavenly Father? What should
covetousness do in that heart, which enjoys such a Treasure? What should
ambition, what should vainglory do in him; that can boast of the honor, of
having God for his Father? Need he fear that he shall want, who is so well
provided? Should he murmur or repine, who has such fullness? Is there any cause
of anger, if our Father be not angry? Shall we be uncharitable to any, who
partake of such great charity? Watch, O my Soul, and walk circumspectly, that
thou lose not such exceeding abundant grace, as this which is bestowed on thee.
Go forth in this new strength and comfort which thou have received, and perfect
thy conquests over the world, the flesh, and the Devil: and resolve that
nothing shall separate thee from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Well may thou stand to this resolution, if thou remembrest that he is thy
Father. For what is it that has tempted thee, and drawn thy heart at any time
from him? Nothing but a little short pleasure. Nothing but a vain, and many
times foolish, breath of a mortal man; whose breath is in his nostrils, and
must shortly die, and all his thoughts perish. Nothing but that which the Moth
can corrupt, or the rust consume, or a Thief despoil us of. Nothing but a
fading beauty, which sickness or time will certainly bring to decay. What are
all these to the pleasure of pleasing God? to the commendation and praise which
comes from unerring and eternal wisdom? to the durable riches, honor and
beauty which our heavenly Father will give us for our portion? Our hopes in him
now are infinitely better, than any thing else. The love of such a Father is
more worth, than all that the whole World can do for us. Value thy self highly
then, upon this account: and never call him Father more, but with the greatest
joy and contentment of heart. Be careful for nothing: Phil. 4.6, 7
but in every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let thy
requests be made known unto him. Look often into thy heart, and ask if he be
there: and say, it is enough; God is my Father, in this will I rejoice. The
peace of God which passes all understanding, shall keep my heart and mind
through Christ Jesus.

And here you may resolve all this month, to meditate often, upon the great
FAITH and confidence which he reposed in his heavenly Father, and expressed
when he died, saying; Father, Luke 23.46.
into thy hands I commend my Spirit. He trusted himself with him, that he
should have a blessed resurrection. His flesh rested in hope, Acts 2.26.31.
that he would not leave his soul in hell, neither suffer his holy one to see
corruption. Though he was then scorned, abused, made the vilest of men, and
shamefully put to death upon a Gibbet; yet he took Gods word for it, that he
should rise, and reign, and be glorified eternally; triumphing over all his
enemies, Hell and Death it self. Do thou labor to imitate him in this holy
Faith, both for all the things of this life, and of that which is to come. Form
thy self to an habitual trust in Gods careful Providence, and precious
Promises; and commit thy self unto him in well doing. Take care of that only;
and leave all the rest, with an assured confidence, to him. Let thy
conversation be without covetousness; be content with such things as thou have:
Heb. 13.5, 6.
for he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. So that we may
boldly say, the Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what man can do unto me.
This is the promise that he has promised us, 1 John 2.25.
even eternal life. And these things says the AMEN, the faithful and true
witness, the beginning of the Creation of God; Rev. 3.14, 20, 21.
If any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will
sup with him, and he with me. To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with
me in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his
Throne.

The Thanksgiving and Prayer afterward.
I Return unto thee, O most great and glorious God, all praise and thanks, for
thine infinite, unspeakable Mercies to us the children of men. It is but just
and reasonable that I should acknowledge thee with the heartiest affection, and
the greatest cheerfulness or Spirit, who have made us, and redeemed us, and
sent thy holy Spirit to sanctify us, and designed us to immortal glory. All
the host of Heaven is continually praising thee. The Thrones, the Dominions,
the Principalities and Powers; the Apostles, the Prophets, the Martyrs and all
the blessed, rest not day nor night, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Rev. 4.8.
Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. Thou ever wast, and ever
wilt be the fullness of wisdom, power, bounty, holiness and truth: and therefore
it is not only my just duty, but my happiness to unite my heart with all that
glorious company: and to bless thee, O Father of Mercies, who have brought me
forth out of Nothing, and made me such an excellent Creature; and sent thy Son
to seek and to save me when I was lost; and purchased me to thy self by his
Blood; and washed me in the laver of regeneration; adopted me for thy child;
instructed me in thy holy Gospel; guided me hitherto by thy faithful Ministers;
admitted me to the Communion of Saints; and fed me with the Body and Blood of
my dearest Savior. Blessed be that Goodness, which has sent the Holy Spirit
so often to visit me, to comfort, assist and conduct me through the dangers of
this world: and which still continues its grace unto me; though I have not
always given that reverence, attention and obedience, to its heavenly motions,
which I ought. Every day gives me new occasions to speak good of thy Name. And
now, particularly, I am bound to render thee my thanks for the sweet
refreshments of that holy Feast, of which I have been partaker; for the new
resolutions thou have wrought in my heart; for the fresh pledges of thy love;
for the assurances thou have given me, that thou art my Father, who wilt ever
take care of me; Here pause a little, that your heart may be transported and
overjoyed in the thoughts that God is your Father.
-- for the joys I feel in thy Fatherly love; for the comforts of Brotherly
kindness; for all the pleasures of thy House; the fore-tastes of Heaven, and
the hope of Everlasting life. I will greatly praise the Lord with my mouth,
yea, Psalm. 109.30.
I will praise him among the multitude. 116.1.
I will love the Lord because he has inclined his ear unto me: I will call
upon him as long as I live. 119.164.
Seven times a day will I praise thee: because of thy righteous judgments. I
will trust thee; and commit my self entirely to thee. I will always hope in thy
mercy; and depend on thy power and faithfulness; and satisfy my self in thy
kindness, care and fatherly Providence; and glory in this, Jer. 9.24.
that I know and understand that thou art the Lord, which exercises loving
kindness, judgment and righteousness in the Earth: for in these things are thy
delight. And therefore I wait on thee, from whom comes my help and my
salvation, for the constant supply of thy Holy Spirit, which I believe thou will give to those that ask it, to strengthen and enable me to pay thee my vows
continually. Maintain, good Lord, such a sensible remembrance in me, of thee
and of thy love; that my heart may always be inclined to thy testimonies; ^sa.
119.36.
and not unto covetousness. That I may serve and please thee in all purity,
heavenly-mindedness, simplicity, charity, humility, contentedness of spirit,
faith, hope, and joy in the Holy Ghost. 56.10.
In the Lord will I praise his word. 119.114.38.
In thy word do I hope. Stablish thy word unto thy servant, who is devoted to
thy fear.

And I heartily desire the Salvation and welfare of all mankind: especially
that all Christian people may understand their happiness; and walk worthy of
the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 2.12.
who has called them to his Kingdom and Glory. And as thou have given Kings
and Princes a Supreme Authority over others: so their spirits may be raised to
a greater height of Christian wisdom; that they may think it their truest glory
to be like unto thee, in doing much good to all their subjects. Bless our
Sovereign with a happy and prosperous reign; that in his days the righteous may
flourish: and abundance of peace; Psalm. 72.7.12.
that the needy may be delivered when he cries; the poor also and him that
has no helper.

A Father of the fatherless, and a judge of the widows, is God in his holy
habitation. Psalm 68.5.
Thou, O God, have prepared of thy goodness for the poor. Thou give food to
the hungry and loosest the prisoners; and preservest (...) strangers; and
raisest them that are (...) down; I recommend them, and (...) ^serable people
unto thy (...) and protection, who reg^ (...) all for ever and ever. Let (...)
seek thee, rejoice, and be glad in the (...) such as love thy salvation say
continua^ (...) God be magnified. Blessed be the (...) the Lord, from this time
forth and for (...) more. Amen, and Amen.

July.
The Meditation before.
HOW can I think that I love my Savior so dearly, as I ought? And without love
who can be welcome guests at his holy Table? They are often in my thoughts,
whom I love with a sensible passion. My mind is perpetually looking toward
them. I delight in their company and conversation; and ever labor to recommend
my self to their affections, by conforming my self to their will and humor.
How do I study to please them? And if they will tell me what will please them,
O how glad am I of the opportunity to serve them? Nay I can cross my self and
my own inclinations, to follow theirs. I love they should be honored and
esteemed by all. I am much cast down, if I have given them any disgust: and not
a little troubled, that others have offended them, or done them any wrong. O
that I felt but this little sign of a tender love and regard to my sweet
Redeemer! that my heart were wounded (now that I am going to behold his wounds)
for the just offense I have at any time given him; and the great forgetfulness
and ingratitude of most of those that are called by his Name. He may well be
displeased, if it be but for the defects of my love, and the coldness of my
affection to him; who has deserved to be remembered with the greatest passion.
For I have long professed love to him. I have received many testimonies of his
special kindness to me; and given many assurances of mine to him. And yet how
pale and dim are those marks of a great love to him, which are plainly visible
in me to others? Am I ever casting mine eyes toward him? Does he often present
himself before my mind, and feelingly touch my heart? Am I never better
pleased, than when I am going to him? Is the question rather what will please
him, than whether I shall do it? He has declared his will in his holy Gospel;
Am I glad to hear of it, and read it, and very desirous to know it in all
things? Can I forsake my own will cheerfully, to follow his? And does it grieve
me much that his excellent laws are not observed; and that all Christians do
not love and honor him?

O Lord, thou know our weakness; and how hard it is to keep our minds and
hearts so steadfastly fixed upon invisible things. And in great pity therefore
have ordained holy mysteries, for a frequent remembrance of thee; and to
represent thy self and thy love more sensibly to us. By this means I hope to
grow in time to a perfect love: ever bearing thee in mind; and delighting to
give thee thanks and praise; and conforming my self to thy blessed will; and
desiring and studying that thy name may be hallowed and honored by me and by
all men else throughout the world. This hope incourages me to go to thy Table,
though very unworthy to be entertained by thee. There I hope also, my Lord will
meet me, and speak kindly to me; as one that loves him, at least, a little
better than any thing beside; and is resolved and determined to love him more
and more. He invites us thither to increase our faith, and to nourish our love,
and to strengthen our hope, and excite our gratitude; and exercise all our
graces: and therefore I will not refuse his kindness; even because I desire and
long to love him so much.

But first, my soul, let us examine our selves, whether we be sure that this,
indeed, is the very sense of our heart: that we really love to please him in
every thing; and heartily mean to proceed in this love, to the most ready and
willing obedience to all his Commands. And does it not become us humbly to
confess the foolish wanderings of our affections from him; to blush for shame
that we fall so short of our own resolutions; and to excite our selves to
greater watchfulness and diligence in well doing? Ought not the very
remembrance of our former coldness, to put a greater heat into us? And our
former backwardness, make us to be more forward and zealous? Should we not vow
our hearts again to him? And let him know, that we shall not think we live when
we do not love him; and that we shall be willing to die that we may more love
him? But how can we hope to grow still better, by these new expressions of his
love to which he invites us; without his gracious assistance, which ought to be
faithfully implored? Let us go then to him beforehand, and desire him to raise
up those thoughts and affections in us, which we cannot produce in our selves:
that we may bring an heart full of love to him and carry it away full of joy,
to find it more enlarged to love and serve him.

The Prayer before.
O Most holy and ever blessed Lord of heaven and earth; who art good and do
good to all thy Creatures, and to us above all the rest, who are most unworthy
of thy loving kindness. It is but a part of my duty to admire and praise thy
great and glorious perfections; to reverence thee, to worship thee, to love
thee, and with heart and tongue both here and eternally to acknowledge my
dependence on thee, to give thee thanks and speak good of thy Name. But it
becomes me no less to debase my self in the lowest manner before thee; because
all that I speak in thy praise, declares my foul ingratitude to thee my Creator
and constant benefactor. There is nothing that I can justly call my own,
without thy leave, and I have received exceeding much from thy bounty, and thou
have made me that I might enjoy satisfaction in thee, the most Sovereign good,
and taken care to bring me acquainted with thee; which ought now to be
remembered with the greatest humility, thankfulness, and joyful resignation of
my self and all that I have to thy obedience. But alas! how little do I feel
thee, though I live and move and have my being in thee? Though I have tasted of
thine abundant goodness every moment, how late was it before I seriously
thought of my obligations to thee? Now that I see thou have sent thy son, the
express image of thy person among us, how little is it that I know of thee, and
what a stranger am I still to thee? I have been too willing to receive but
small benefit by his appearing; and to content my self with a little measure of
that purity, wisdom and goodness, which he came to impart unto us. Thus foolish
and ignorant have I been: and it was but fit that we should sink into the
greatest stupidity, when we were such fools as to leave thee, and follow the
counsels and desires of our own hearts. For ever adored be thy infinite
charity, who art not willing to lose us, when we are so forward to lose thee
and our selves. Blessed be the exceeding abundance of thy grace in Christ
Jesus, which continues to invite even such senseless wretches to come unto
thee; who have so little esteemed it, or know how to value the unsearchable
riches of it. The mavelous greatness of thy forbearing and pardoning mercy,
if nothing else, will incline and excite my heart, I hope, to love thee much
above all things. That so at last I may love thy blessed nature, and perfectly
understand that it is my happiness, to have thy image renewed in me, in
righteousness and true holiness. Thou have often convinced me, praised be thy
goodness, that it is impossible for me otherwise to be happy. Thou have wrought
many strong resolutions in my soul, to be guided and governed by thine unerring
wisdom, and holy will. And I have felt the comforts of a pure, humble, meek,
merciful, peaceable, and loving disposition of heart. Perfect, good Lord, what
thou have wrought in me: that all the pious inclinations of my soul, may settle
in a firm and lasting habit of well-doing. Our righteousness, I know, cannot
profit thee; but thou delightest to communicate thy self to thy creatures;
especially to those who think it the greatest treasure to be enriched with thy
wisdom, and to be made partakers of a divine Nature. O thou who have given me
this knowledge, who have given me a will to choose thee for my portion, make me
completely happy in being made exactly like unto thee.

Meet me graciously when I approach to thy Table, and represent thy Son Jesus
so feelingly to me; that my mind may be more clearly illuminated to understand
the beauteous perfections of his holiness, and my will more strongly bent to
cleave unto him, and all the powers of my soul mightily inlivened to follow and
imitate him to the end. I go with a desire, O Lord, to learn of him; that I may
henceforth have low thoughts of my self, as having received all I have from thy
fullness; and low thoughts of all enjoyments on earth, as a small part of that
happiness to which thou have designed me; and hateful thoughts of every sin, as
that which is opposite both to thee and to my own happiness. O that the
thoughts of thy goodness, may ever hereafter make me partaker of more of thy
holiness: that thy mercy and indulgence may never tempt me in the least to
offend thee, but rather affright me into thy obedience: that I may love thee so
much as to feel it a satisfaction to cross my own desires, to fulfill thy will
and pleasure. O that it may be a comfort to me, to be able to deny them; and
that I may account it the greatest victory to overcome my self; my highest
triumph that thou, Lord, conquerest, and make me thy willing subject. I hope
to be subdued perfectly unto thee, and enabled to maintain a sovereign dominion
over all things here: so that I may use them all soberly, moderately and with
due acknowledgments to thee, and charity to men, but be brought in subjection
unto none. Amen, Lord Jesus; who live and reignest for ever, with the Father
and the holy Spirit, in power and glory: Heb. 10.13.
from henceforth expecting till all thine enemies be made thy footstool. In
his most holy name and words, I sue for mercy, desiring to be heard, according
to the largest sense and meaning of them.

Our Father which art, etc. The Meditation afterward.
WHat makes thee sigh, my Soul, now that thou have been with thy Savior? Is it
because thou art departed from that holy place, where thou saw his glory,
and beheld how he loved thee? Alas! we cannot endure always to dwell in his
house: we are too weak, while we are in this fleshly Tabernacle, to remain in
the heights of love. Saint Paul came down again, when he was caught up into
Paradise, and could not stay in the midst of those joys. But thou art afraid
thou shall forget Him, now that those sensible representations are removed from
thine eyes. And that thy love and thy joy will vanish, now that thou art gone
from his blessed presence. Be of good Comfort: for he is every where, and will
not absent himself if thou art so desirous of his company. His word is nigh
thee, even in thy mouth, Romans 10.
and in thy heart. Look into his holy Gospel, and read again and again the
story of his love. Look into thy self, and see what he has already done for
thee, and he will not fail to be ever doing more. He has given thee a well of
living water, Joh. 4.1^.
springing up into everlasting life, if thou believe the Gospel, the word of
his grace: And thou may feed continually on the remembrances, which he has
now given thee of himself. He desires thou would make him like thy daily
bread, and be ever drawing life, and power, and joy from him, the fountain of
life. Does not he love Holiness, better than thou can do thy self? Is it not
his own life, his image, his nature formed in thee? Did he not live, did he not
die, did he not rise again, and is he not at Gods right hand, and has he not
an unchangeable Priesthood, 1 Pet. 3.18 Heb. 7.19. Tit. 2.14.
that he may bring us to God, and purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous
of good works? Be confident of this very thing, Phil. 1.6.
that he which has begun a good work in thee, will finish it until the day of
Jesus Christ. Do but let him know every day that thou love righteousness and
hate iniquity, Heb. 1.9.
and he will crown thee with more of this grace. For it is the character he
has given of himself; and he will love to beautify his own image, and make it
fairer and clearer wheresoever he finds it. Do but work out thy salvation with
fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12.15.
lest thou should neglect such great salvation, Heb. 2.3.
now that he works in thee to will and do of his good pleasure: and thou
need not fear, but that he will continue to work in thee for ever. That
little light which is in thee shall increase to a perfect day. Thy love, though
but like a spark, shall burn and flame: and thou shall shine as a light in the
world, 1 Thessalonians. 5.24.
in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, holding forth the word of
life. Faithful is he that calls thee, who also will do it. Phil. 4.4.
And therefore, Rejoice in the Lord always: and again he says, Rejoice. Neh.
8.10.
For the joy of the Lord is our strength: and they that rejoice greatly in his
holy Comforts shall go from strength to strength; every one of them shall, in
the high and holy place, appear before God.

And here remember, that the more thou can forgo thy own will to satisfy
his; the more assured thou will grow that he delights in thee, and will rejoice
over thee to do thee good: and so thou can never fail to find thy joy in him
to be full. Therefore resolve particularly all this Month to meditate often
upon his absolute RESIGNATION to his Fathers will in all things: of which he
has given such a perfect example from the beginning to the end of his life.
Heb. 10.5.7.
When he came into the World, he said, Lo, I come to do thy will, O God. When
he preached among men he protested, Joh. 5.30.
saying, I can of mine own self do nothing: because I seek not mine own will,
but the will of the Father which has sent me. And when he was an hungered he
protested again; Joh. 4.34.
My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work. And
when he was in his bitterest Agony, from which nature was passionately averse,
he submitted himself nevertheless with the greatest meekness, Mark 14.36. Luke
22.42.
saying, Not what I will, but what thou will. Not my will, but thine be done.
Labor thou to form thy self to the same mind and disposition, both in doing
and in suffering: Remembering the word that he said unto his Apostles, The
Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord. Joh. 15.20
Matthew. 10.24. Joh. 13.17
It is enough for the Disciple that he be as his Master, and the Servant as his
Lord. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.

The Prayer and Thanksgiving afterward.
ALmighty and most Merciful Father; the Fountain of all life and happiness: who
bountifully communicatest thy blessings, and every where overflowest in thy
mercies to all thy creatures. More especially to the sons of men, who are
surrounded with an Ocean of them, the bounds of which we cannot see, and the
depth whereof we cannot fathom. And the more thirsty any Souls are, and humbly
desirous to receive them, the more it pleases thee to pour out thy mercies upon
them; the more thou delightest in the issues of thy bounteous goodness to them.
I thine unworthy servant, encompassed about with thy salvation, come to make my
humble acknowledgments, and such returns of love and dutiful affection, as I am
able, to thy Divine Majesty. If I had the Spirits of all Creatures united in
me, I could not conceive, or worthily express thy loving kindness. Who have
raised me out of Nothing, to an excellent degree of being; endued me with
reason and wisdom; instructed me in the Christian faith; and therein let me see
such things as eye never saw, 1 Cor. 2.9.
ear never heard, Psalm. 68.18.
nor did it enter into the heart of man to conceive: that the Lord God should
dwell among us, Ephesians. 1.20.21.
and our Nature be exalted at his right hand, far above all Angels,
Principalities and Powers, and every name that is named, not only in this
world, but also in that which is to come. Blessed be the infinite wisdom and
goodness of God, which sent his Son Jesus, born of a woman, to die for us, and
to be a propitiation for our sins: and by means of death, has crowned him with
glory and honor, that we might have a blessed hope of glory, honor and
immortality together with himself. I ought to be overwhelmed with the thoughts
of thy mercies, which I cannot comprehend. The great load of them, The
exceeding great load of them, ought to press my heart continually, to send them
all back again in eternal love and obedience. Accept, good Lord, I beseech
thee, of such poor expressions of them as I have now made unto thee, and of my
vows, at thy holy Table, to render unto thee better. There thou have been
pleased to give me a sweet remembrance of thy past loving kindness, and
assurance of the future. Bestow upon me likewise such a wise and considering
heart, that I may sink my thoughts deeper and deeper into the vast Sea of thy
mercies: and think my self happy when I am filled with such a great sense of
them, that all my thoughts, desires and actions, are under the power of
Heavenly love. O that the love of God my Savior may be ever admirable in mine
eyes! that I may delight to think of thy love, to speak of thy love, and to
imitate thy love: so that all inordinate affections may die in me, and I may
perform most ready and easy obedience to all thy commands. Thou have laid also
great engagements upon me, in that whilst thou make this extraordinary
provision for my Soul, thou have not neglected my Body: but taken care that a
world of good things should serve my needs and pleasure continually. O that my
heart were but duly sensible of all thy goodness! I know then, that I could not
deny thee any thing thou desire, who have opened thy hand so liberally to me,
even beyond my desires. I could not but trust thee; and resign my will wholly
to thee; and be contented with what thou orderest for me; and in every thing
give thanks, which is thy will in Christ Jesus concerning me.

All that I have and can do is too little to give thee. I can love thee but a
little; and therefore I desire that all the world would love thee, and worship
thee, and glorify thy name. For thou art great and do wondrous things. Psalm.
86.10.
thou art God alone. O that all the Kings of the Earth would praise thee, O
Lord. Yea, 138.4, 5.
that they would sing in the ways of the Lord: for great is the glory of the
Lord. That they may think it their greatest honor to be the Subjects of our
Savior, and their greatest security to obey him and observe his Laws: That
being entrusted with thy divine power, they may employ it to right those that
suffer wrong, to ease the oppressed of their burdens, supply the wants of the
poor, defend the fatherless and widow; and comfort all mankind in their
miseries. I recommend this Church and Kingdom, our Sovereign and all his
Subjects, to thy most powerful Protection: beseeching thee to endue us all with
thy Heavenly grace, to dispose us to love thy true Religion, and to be zealous
of good works: that our Lord and Master may be honored by us, and all men may
know we are his Disciples, by our loving one another. Now to the most High God,
Dan. 4.34, 35.
who lives for ever, whose dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his
kingdom from generation to generation: before whom all the inhabitants of the
Earth are reputed as Nothing: and he does according to his will in the Army of
Heaven, and among the inhabitants of the Earth; be blessing, and honor, and
praise rendered, by me and by all Creatures now and eternally. Amen.

August.
The Meditation before.
DOES it not seem long, my soul, since thou wast at the Table of the Lord? With
what thoughts, with what affections then, do thou receive this new invitation
to it? See what joy, what delight it raises in thy heart, that thou may know,
whether indeed thou love him or no. His love is so great, that one would
think it should never slip out of thy mind. Our Lord has done such great
things for us, that we may be tempted sooner not to believe them, than to
forget them. But this is one piece of the greatness of that love, that it has
taken care it should be always remembered. He has not thought it enough to die
for us, but he has left us a representation of it; and a command to show forth
his death until he come. What do thou think of that command? Is it a burden
to thee to yield obedience to it? Do thou unwillingly hear the motion to go
and do this in remembrance of him? What? Is it a sad thing to think of
declaring the goodness of the Lord? To magnify the love of God our Savior? To
celebrate his praises? To profess our selves his servants, and to engage to him
our fidelity? Does it make thee sigh to think of going to receive the tokens of
his love? To represent the death and satisfaction of Christ Jesus for thy sins?
To wait on God for the pardon of them? And to be put in assured hope of
immortal life? Thou art not such a stranger, sure, to thy own happiness; but
know better things; even things that accompany salvation. Give glory
therefore to the Lord that he calls thee again so graciously to show forth his
death: Let him know that thou meanest to obey him; (to attend him at his holy
Table,) and thank him too. But with what blushing should we look there upon
that love, which we have sometime slighted? With what hatred, upon those sins
which murdered the Lord of life? With what joy should we think of the hope
there is, that they may be pardoned? And how should we stand admiring at that
wise goodness, which made that blood, which sinners shed, to be the expiation
for their sins? Sure we do not believe these things: or else we shall begin
already to feel our heart burn with love to him; and ready to offer it self in
Sacrifice, before we come to his Altar. Excite thy Faith; that it may stir up
thy Love: and that may carry all the passions of thy heart along with it to
him. Show him that the desire of thy heart is to the remembrance of his Name;
that thy care is to please him; thy fear to offend him; thy joy to do his will;
and thy sorrow that thou can do no more for him. Let it be a great comfort to
thee, that he knows thy sincerity, and sees into the very secrets of thy heart:
how affectionately thou studiest to be like him; what a pleasure it is when
thou can steadfastly think of him; how it grieves thee when thy thoughts are
broken, thy affections heavy and dull, and thy power falls so short of thy will
and desires. And be assured that he pitties thee; that notwithstanding this he
will kindly entertain thee; and receive the poorest oblation thou art able to
make him at his Table. Eat and be satisfied, and bless the name of the Lord. He
has invited thee; he expects thee; he loves to see thee there; and will make
thee know that he loves thee, and delights to do thee good.

Let us go, my soul, and declare before Angels and men that we are Christians;
and mean to live and die in his holy Religion. And let us now take shame to our
selves that we have at any time contradicted our belief. Let us acknowledge the
breach of that Faith into which we were baptized: and declare before we go how
great a trouble it is to us, that we love him no more; and how desirous we are
and fully resolved to love him better and better.

The Prayer before.
O Eternal God, the Lord of life, of grace, peace and all our comforts. It is
of thy great mercies alone that I am not consumed; or that I lie not now
groaning on a bed of sickness: but am invited to feast at thy holy Table. I
might have distasted and loathed even the ordinary food of my body; and thou
continuest an opportunity, and some appetite to receive the precious food of my
soul. The grave might have been my dwelling, the worms my companions, and I
been turned into rottenness and corruption: but now I am going to thy house, to
be the companion of thy people, and to communicate with thee and my blessed
Savior; that I may be nourished to a blessed immortality. This is nothing else
but thy mavelous Mercy, and because thy compassions fail not: For I have too
many ways violated thy holy Laws, broken thy covenant, resisted thy grace, and
unvalued thy eternal life. Thou have adopted me early for thy child, sown the
immortal seed of thy word in my heart, sent thy holy Spirit to further its
growth and increase to that never dying happiness and bliss. But how little
have I recovered of thy image in wisdom, righteousness and holiness, which has
been miserably defaced? How coldly have I sometimes entertained the motions of
thy holy Spirit? And been barren and unfruitful in the knowledge of Jesus
Christ? How often have I heard of that great and dreadful day of reckoning; and
been prone to follow the little pleasures of this life, as if I looked neither
for joy nor misery in the other world? That Faith which should save me, might
justly condemn me: and Jesus my most compassionate Redeemer, without infinite
mercy, become only a severe Judge toward me.

Adored be thy patience and long-suffering to sinners. For ever magnified be
that Grace, which gives me the least hope in thee: and presents me with another
opportunity of humbling my self before thee; of entreating thy favor; of
deprecating thy displeasure; and vowing my self again to thy service which I
have covenanted to pay thee. O merciful God, have mercy upon me; have mercy
upon me: according to the multitude of thy mercies, in Christ Jesus, blot out
all my iniquities. I have not offended thee beyond the height, and depth, and
length and breadth of thine incomprehensible love in him declared to us. And
there is still remaining in my heart some esteem of that love, and an
inclination to love thee above all things; with an hearty desire to be purified
and sanctified throughout both in body and in soul and spirit. Though not by
works of righteousness which I have done, yet by thy mercy I hope to be saved,
through the washing of regeneration, and more perfect renewing of the
Holy Ghost. That renewing virtue from above I most humbly wait for, and
earnestly desire to be more abundantly poured on me. Deal with me according to
my unfeigned resolutions to study to purify my self, even as thou art pure: to
walk before thee hereafter in all sobriety, righteousness, humility, meekness,
peaceableness, charity; endeavoring to perfect holiness in thy fear. Vouchsafe
me some earnests of this grace, when I present my self before thee, to
commemorate the death of thy Son Jesus; who was wounded for our iniquities, and
bruised for our transgressions. That my heart may be deeply wounded with a
sense of sin; and hate the very thought of every evil way; and choose to endure
any misery, rather than offend thy dearest love again. O that I might then feel
my thoughts carried away from this world: that I could think then of nothing
but thee; and the dying love of my sweetest Savior; and the greatness of that
love which I owe to him, that died for me. Replenish my soul with holy
thoughts; lift me up in heavenly meditations; and fill me with a multitude of
devout affections: that I may be able hereafter to do and suffer all things for
his sake; and never forget how good he is, and how good I have resolved to be.
Without thee, I cannot ascend up unto thee: and therefore I look for thy holy
inspirations to accompany me in all my Meditations, and prayers and praises,
and thanksgivings, and resolutions. That attending upon this sacred service,
with love, and zeal, and delight and devotion of spirit; there may be an happy
meeting between me and my Savior: and such an inseparable Union contracted, as
may be at last consummated in eternal Love and Joy in his heavenly Kingdom. To
which I humbly hope to be brought by thy infinite Mercies in him, who has
taught me to call thee Father; and to say, when I pray; Our Father, which art
in, etc.

The Meditation afterward.
SEeing it has pleased my Lord to tie me to himself, by one bond more; and I
have added a new resolution to all the rest, and made choice of him again for
my only Master; how careful ought I to be that I prove not a false Disciple?
Have thou never read or heard of an holy man, who never used the name of Jesus,
but he immediately added, not without the appearance of singular pleasure, MY
MASTER? This was his glory; this he thought the highest honor on Earth, that
he served such a Master. Let this be one of thy thoughts every day: Let it work
in thy mind, till the sense of these words be engraven on thy heart, My Master
JESUS. Consider that when thou wast baptized, thou wast dedicated to his holy
service. That if thou have owned and confirmed that Sacred Covenant, thou have
renounced all other Masters, the Devil, the World, and the Flesh; and professed
thou would be a Servant of Jesus. And every time thou have been at his Table,
thou have done this over again; and protested thou will have no other Master,
but only him. Is there any cause do thou think, to repent of thy choice of
following his service? Is it not a great preferment to be one of his family,
who is Lord of Heaven and Earth, the Heir of all things, the Prince of all the
Kings of the Earth, the Lord of Life, and the King of Glory? Do thou not
profess in thy daily Prayers, that his service is perfect freedom? Can any
reward their servants, like to the blessed and only Potentate, who only has
immortality? Do any servants in the world serve in such hopes, or enjoy such
promises, or receive such earnests, as he is pleased to bestow on his? Is not
death the wages of sin; but the gift of God eternal life? What servants are
admitted to such familiarity with their Lord, as thou art at his Table? Who are
entertained with such a Feast, or live upon such delights, as they that receive
his Body and Blood? And yet how zealous, how diligent, how forward are they to
do their Masters will, who serve only for the wages of unrighteousness? How
proud is a man of the honor to follow the Court of an Earthly Prince? But if
he should be advanced to eat continually at his Table, the world would envy his
too great happiness. What a shame will it prove then, if thou art not fervent
in spirit serving the Lord? If thou do not think thy self honored enough,
and art not well contented in any condition, who followest such a glorious
Master? Thou will not pardon thy self, if thou art unfaithful to him; or
disgracest his service by murmuring, repining, dejection of spirit; or any
other unworthy behavior toward him. For what Master ever merited so much at
his Servants hands? We have heard of Servants, that have died for their
Masters; but where did we ever read or hear of a Master that freely died, even
for his rebellious Servants? The business was, Jesus would purchase us to
himself by his own Blood: and make us, if we have but any good nature in us, to
be most entirely devoted to his cheerful obedience. Ask thy self therefore
every morning, whose Servant am I? What did I promise my Master such a day? If
I call him Lord and Master, why do not I do the things that he says? And shall
I go about my Masters business with a drooping countenance, and an heavy heart?
Shall I sigh when I hear his voice, though he bid me deny my self, and take up
my Cross and follow him? Shall any of his Commandments seem grievous to me,
after so many, so solemn professions of love to him? God forbid that I should
cast such reproach upon him. I have not so learned Christ Jesus, whose I am,
and whom I serve: who has said, Joh. 12.26.
If any man serve me, him will my Father honor. Can there be words of greater
grace than these? God be thanked, Romans 6.17, 18.
that I was the servant of sin, but have obeyed from the heart that form of
doctrine which was delivered me. It is a favor to be the servant of
righteousness. I ought to account it an honor to receive his commands: and to
study to do his will on Earth, as it is done in Heaven. How comfortably then
shall I live? how comfortably shall I die? How will it make my heart leap for
joy, to hear that voice of his; Matthew. 25.21.
Well done thou good and faithful servant: enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

Here you may resolve to meditate all this Month, how our Lord and Master
himself took upon him the form of a SERVANT; and being found in fashion like
one of us, became obedient unto Death, Phil. 2.7, 8.
even the Death of the Cross. That absolute OBEDIENCE of his you should set
always before your eyes for a pattern: that you may not live as if you were
ashamed of his service, or thought any thing below you, or too mean to submit
unto, which he requires at your hands. Never suffer your reputation, your ease,
your wealth, no nor life it self to stand in competition with his commands: But
presently remember, that though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience, by the
things which he suffered: Heb. 5.8, 9.
And being made perfect, he became the Author of Eternal Salvation unto all
them that obey him. And remember again, that The Disciple is not above his
Master: Luke 6.40
but every one that is perfect shall be as his Master.

The Thanksgiving and Prayer afterward.
FOr ever hallowed be thy great Name, O Father of mercies, the God of love, the
fountain of all good and blessedness. All the heavenly host delight continually
to praise thee. They never cease to ascribe wisdom power, dominion, riches,
honor and glory unto thee who live for ever. O how great is thy goodness,
who invitest us, that dwell in houses of clay, to bear them company in their
praises and thanksgivings? They can add nothing at all unto thy fullness: but it
is our happiness to spend our days here, in loving thee, in speaking good of
thy Name, in doing thee honor and service; and to pass the life of the other
world, in the perfection of admiration, love, thanksgiving and obedience to
thee: Psalm. 126.3.
who have done such great things for us, of which we are glad. Blessed be the
Name of God our Father, who has raised us out of Nothing; and has not
appointed us unto wrath; 1 Thessalonians. 5.9
but to obtain Salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ. And of God our Savior, who
has redeemed us from the hands of all our enemies; and purchased us with a
great price unto himself. And of God our Sanctifier, strength and assister, the
God of our Salvation, who keeps us every moment from ruin and destruction. I
thank thee, O Lord of Heaven and Earth, for that liberal portion which thou
have given me, thine unworthy servant, in thy grace and favor. For the
knowledge of thy holy Gospel, which has brought life and immortality to light:
For all the good instructions I have received from thy Ministers [and the
tender care, You may mention these and others, if you have had this benefit.
religious education of my Parents, Tutors and Governors:] For all seasonable
reproofs, wholesome counsels, good admonitions, and every truth I have received
from my Friends or Enemies: For the pious examples and good conversation of any
of my Neighbors; for all holy opportunities, and the leisure I have to attend
upon this heavenly employment: For thy merciful chastisements, and thy
wonderful deliverances: For all the good Books thou have brought to my hands;
and the good advice which I have any way received: For all my Benefactors; all
those that love me and pray for me: And above all for thy gracious inspirations
from above, the holy thoughts thou have put into my mind, and the pious desires
and purposes thou have stirred up in my heart; with all the furtherances, helps
and assistances thou have vouchsafed me in my way to Heaven: particularly now
at this holy Feast, where thou have made me know and feel how good thou art,
beyond the compass of all our thoughts.

What shall I return unto thee for all thy love? What shall I give unto my
Lord, who has given himself for me? I have given thee my whole self, and now
devoted all the powers of my soul and body to thy service: that all my
thoughts, my words, my desires, my passions, and actions may be disposed
according to thy will and not my own. And I think my self happy, O blessed
Jesus, in the choice I have made of thee for my Lord and Master. I rejoice in
the disposal I have made of my self to thy service and obedience. For a world I
would not revoke my consent to be absolutely ruled and governed by thee, as
long as I live. Sin shall not reign in my mortal body, Romans 6.12
that I should obey it in the lusts thereof. But here I come again to yield my
self unto thee my God, and to profess thy service to be the most perfect
freedom, and the noblest employment. To beseech thy pardon for all mine
unfaithfulness; and the constant power of thy Holy Spirit to assist me in the
doing thy will here on Earth, as it is done in Heaven: that all my resolutions
may be persevering, my endeavors successful, and my obedience perfect and
complete in all things. Lord Jesus do what thou please in me, and what thou
please with me. Truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant: and I will make my
boast continually in this, that I serve the Lord Christ. May I but ever love
thee, and steadfastly cleave unto thee, and cheerfully obey thee, and faithfully
live to honor thee. I desire nothing else. Come prosperity, or adversity; come
sickness, or health, life or death; so that I may but glorify thee, and be
made conformable to thee, and bear thine image in holiness here, and in glory
hereafter.

And let all the Earth stand in awe of thee, thou Lord and Ruler of the whole
world. Let the hearts of all people submit themselves to thy Kingdom and
Authority. Psalm. 45.3, 4.
In thy Majesty ride on prosperously, O thou most mighty, because of truth, and
meekness, and righteousness: till all thine enemies fall under thee, and think
themselves happy in thy most just and merciful government. I commend thine own
family to thy gracious and powerful protection: and this part of it especially
in these Kingdoms. That we thy servants being hurt by no persecutions, may
evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy Church, and triumph in thy praise;
saying, Psalm. 48.14.
This God is our God for ever and ever; he will be our guide even unto Death.

Now unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own Blood, and
has made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father; Rev. 1.5, 6
to him be Glory and Dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

September.
The Meditation before the Sacrament.
SHall we not be too bold in going so often to the Table of the Lord? May we not
offend him by our forwardness to approach into his presence? No sure, not if
love carry us thither, and accompany us there. And who can want that, who knows
and considers how forward he was to do that, which we remember? When he came to
offer himself a Sacrifice for us, he says, Lo, I come: Psalm. 40.7, 8.
in the volume of the book it is written of me: I delight to do thy will, O
God. And when he eat the last meal with his Disciples, he said again, Luke
22.15.
with desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer.
Behold what a hearty vehemence there was in his love! what an ardor in his
desire; to be made an offering for us, and to be remembered by us! With what
love should we commemorate his dying love? with what desire should our souls
approach to his holy Table in remembrance of him; who took such content in
dying for us, and was so desirous to institute this holy feast, for a perpetual
remembrance of his death? With the same joy that children use to welcome a
Festival; with such an hunger and thirst, as a laboring man goes to his
supper; ought we to go to the Supper of the Lord: that we may cheer and refresh
our souls with the memory of our Master and only Savior; with praises and
joyful thanksgivings; with the love of God and of our Brethren; with the hopes
of his Mercy here and eternally. Awake, awake then thy Faith; call up thy love:
quicken thy desires: excite all that is within thee to bless the Lord and speak
good of his name. Say with a great joy, Lo, I come, according to thy command:
and delight to do thy will, O God. With desire I have desired to do this in
remembrance of my Lord: to declare thy mighty acts, and show forth the
greatness of thy love; to profess my self thy servant, and to glory in the holy
name of my Master Jesus; to offer up my self unto thee, an oblation of love; to
renew my covenant with thee, and with all my Brethren; to give thee thanks that
I am one of thy family, and for all the benefits I received, and thou have
still in store for thy faithful servants. But who is able to tell how much he
has done already for us? Or find out all that he designs unto us? Who can
praise him according to his excellent kindness, and his wonderful works for the
children of men? The thoughts of Angels are not wide enough to comprehend them.
And if we had their spirits, and could love him and acknowledge him, with their
enlarged affection, it would be too little a present to make unto him. O give
thanks therefore unto the Lord, for he is gracious, for his mercy endures for
ever. O give thanks unto him, who is so desirous of us, such narrow souls, such
little hearts, that can hold so little love unto him. Let us go to him, and
desire that he would enlarge them; or that he would fill them to the height
with his love. Since he is content, if he may but lodge and dwell in our
breasts, and have the government of us in his hands: let us go and vow, that he
shall possess us solely to himself; that no affection, no desire shall dwell in
us, without his leave; and all be ordered by him just as he pleases. And let us
show him now, that we have prepared no less gift than our whole selves to be
bestowed on him: that we are very desirous of the honor to be commanded by
him, and to do him service; and that if he will make us more desirous, more
resolved and steadfast in these holy purposes, we will never cease to thank him
in this manner as long as we live.

And approaching thus, with all humility to him, may we not hope that he will
accept us, and receive us as his friends, and embrace us with real love, and
enclose us, as we desire, unto himself? Nay, he will hold us fast tied in the
bonds and cords of his love: not to fetter and imprison us; but to unlock and
open our narrow hearts by the power of it, that they be enlarged into the true
liberty of love to him and to all the world. We may hope at last, that it will
become as unnatural to offend him, as it is to kill our selves, or kick against
the bowels of a most indulgent parent: that obedience shall be our delight:
that all good things on earth, which have been our hindrance, shall prove our
encouragement and provocation to an holy life: and that our watchfulness over
our selves shall be so strict and severe, that we shall not be easily
surprised; but continually worship him, by presenting him with a spirit like
his own, innocent, harmless, and delighting to do all good.

The Prayer before.
O Most mighty Lord, the high and holy one who possessest eternity: who
dwell in the purest light, and whose Majesty is enthroned in the midst of
all the heavenly host, who are continually celebrating the praises of thy name,
which is most excellent throughout the world. The light of thy countenance, I
believe, is better than life: and one day in thy courts better than a thousand.
If thou will graciously shine upon me, when I enter into thy gates to go unto
thy Table; if thou will fill me with the joys of Faith and love and holy hope;
I shall account that day the beginning of the eternal life, and remember as
long as I live how gracious thou art. But I have little reason to expect to be
so highly favored by thee, who have forgotten ofttimes that reverence and fear
that I owe to thee my Creator; and that love and dutiful affection which I owe
to my Redeemer; and been too disobedient to many good motions of the holy
Spirit of grace. I have thought so much how to please my self, and so little of
pleasing thee; spent so much time in the affairs of my body, and so little in
those of my immortal soul, that I may rather sink into dejection of spirit
toward the place of darkness, than hope to be lifted up toward heaven, to
behold the light of life. I am apt to think that if I knew thee as the Angels
do, I should be filled with their love, and readily disposed to thy obedience,
and spend my self in thy endless praises: whereas now that thou have revealed
those things to us which the thoughts of Angels entered not into, and have sent
thy dear Son in our nature and not i^ the nature of Angels, and given him to
die for us, and to open the kingdom of heaven to us, I have not loved thee with
the love of men. I have felt sometime so little love to thee, that I have been
apt to doubt whether I love thee. It has been but a little spark in my heart,
scarce to be discerned; and has not shone, as it ought to do, in my life
before men --

But thy gracious pardon, O Lord of love, I hope will make me admire thee; and
love thee exceedingly. Some small taste and savor of thine extraordinary
kindness, will inkindle in me the most ardent affection toward thee. And it is
already the hearty desire and study of my soul, thou know, that I may love
thee above all things; and that all my love may run into ingenuous, free and
cheerful obedience to every one of thy Commands. They are all holy, just and
good: they are most lovely and gracious in mine eyes. I esteem thy precepts
about all things to be most equal, beneficial, and highly conducing to the
perfection and happiness of our natures: and choose most joyfully to submit my
self to the Sovereign Authority of such tender love and good will toward us. O
pity and pardon an humble suitor to thee, that his heart may ever be under the
power of thy holy Commands; and being captivated from all things here below,
may become a subject of thy love. I wait on thee for the power of thy holy
Spirit now to come upon me, to fill me with thoughts, desires and affections
suitable to the duty which I am about to render to thee. That when I think of
those sins, which killed the Lord of life, I may vehemently abhor and utterly
renounce them. And when I think of thy love, it may wonderfully raise and exalt
my heart to love thee, delight in thee, and gratefully acknowledge thee. And
when I think of thy holy Commands, my heart may humbly bow, and gladly resign
it self to be governed by them. And the dying of the Lord Jesus set before my
eyes, may make me an offering holy and acceptable to thee for ever.

I am sensible how often I fall short of my own desires and resolutions: and
therefore again look up unto thee, with a humble Faith, for thy powerful
presence with me. To inlighten my mind more clearly; to settle my wandering and
unstable thoughts: to awaken the conscience of my duty toward thee, and toward
all men; to compose and quiet all my turbulent passions and affections; and to
confirm and strengthen all the holy purposes which thou workest in me.
Vouchsafe, most gracious Lord, to accept and assist the faintest, but honest,
endeavors of my soul to please thee; to encourage and further every good
inclination; to possess and fortify me against the most importunate
temptations; and to enable me to quell and bring under the strongest
oppositions to thy divine will. I deliver up my self absolutely with all my
heart unto it: desiring and purposing to live instedfast union and conformity
with it; to maintain an humble and reverend sense of thy greatness and
goodness; soberly to use all the good things thou indulgest to me; to exercise
righteousness, charity, meekness and gentleness to all men; to possess my soul
in patience; to be contented with my portion; to pray without ceasing; and in
every thing to give thanks, which is thy will in Christ Jesus concerning me.
Sanctify, I beseech thee, the greatest worldly blessings to me; support me
under the heaviest afflictions; fit me for the most sudden or lingering
departure out of this life, and for whatsoever thy wise providence shall order
for me while I stay in it; and by all these means prepare me for everlasting
glory. And, O, that the nearer I approach unto it, the brighter sense of it may
shine in my heart; chasing away the fears of death, and the cares of life. And
that I may now begin it, by praising thee in the company of thy Saints with
joyful lips: and every day praise thee better; and long more for that happy
state, where we shall have nothing else to do but love and praise thee for ever.

The Lord Jesus Christ be with my Spirit: 2 Timothy 4. ult.
in whose holy words I further recommend my self to thy wonted Mercies.

Our Father, etc. The Meditation afterward.
IS there any need after all that thou have heard, and thought, and said of thy
blessed Savior, that I should call upon thee, and bid thee love him? Need I
entreat and earnestly beseech thee, my Soul, to preserve the memory of his most
obliging kindness; and exhort thee to go again and again, to praise him in this
manner? Methinks, we may turn our thoughts and our speech to him; thanking and
admiring the excess of his love, that he will let us approach thus near unto
him. It is his love that he will at all regard us, and receive the love we
offer to him. But it is a great marvel of his love, that he has entreated us
so often, and used so many arguments to us, and laid so many obligations on us
to love him. What are we, that he should seek after us on this fashion, who had
a mind to lose him? It is strange that he will accommodate and address himself
to our very senses, that our dull flesh may not hinder us from loving him. Good
Lord! that thy delight should be with the Sons of men. Could thou not live
unless we lived also? Can thou be at all the better for us? Have we been kind
unto thee, since thou have done all this for us? Or do we use half so many
entreaties to thee, to do us good; as thou have done to us, to be good to our
selves? O be astonished at the greatness of his mercy. Do but thoroughly affect
thy heart with the height and depth of his love; and love will make more
pathetical and moving exhortations to thee, than any thought can invent. I will
leave thee under the power and constraint of thy love. Cease to love him if
thou can; if thou do but think of his love. But think withal, what an
hopeless condition that Soul is in, which the love of God in Christ Jesus
cannot move and prevail withal to love him. And what may all thy Brethren
expect from thee, who are partakers of the common Salvation together with thy
self? Can thou find in thy heart to offend him, for whom Christ died? Will thou not open thy bowels of compassion toward others, when thou stand in so
great need even of infinite mercies thy self? Shall some small differences
between you, four thy heart; or blunt the edge of that affection, which is
sharpened by the Divine love to us, when we were strangers and enemies to him by
evil works? How can thou choose but be ready to do good, and to forgive, even
those that have done evil to thee? To bless them that curse thee, Luke 6.28.35,
36.
and pray for them that despitefully use thee? Remembering that thy reward then
shall be great, and thou shall be the child of the Highest: for he is kind unto
the unthankful, and to the evil. Be thou therefore merciful, as thy Heavenly
Father also is merciful.

Here resolve to meditate all this Month, very often, upon that part of our
Lords example, which he left us when he died, in PRAYING FOR HIS ENEMIES; his
bitter enemies; his malicious and ungrateful enemies; his enemies, that with
implacable wrath most Devilishly contrived the destruction of the most
innocent, loving, obliging and bountiful person, that ever walked upon the face
of the Earth. Remember also how sweetly and mildly he treated, even that
villainous Traitor, his own Servant, who betrayed him with a base hypocrisy;
saying no worse words than these to him, Matt. 26.50. Luke 22.48.
Friend, wherefore art thou come? betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss?
And let not either the greatness of men's malice; or their barbarous requital of
the benefits they have received from thee; or their treacherous hypocrisy; or
their vile dissimulation; or any other aggravation of their crime, hinder thee
from following thy Savior, and stifle thy love to thy enemies. And
particularly express thy love by praying most earnestly for them, bewailing
their folly and madness; pitying the ungodly hellish state wherein they are;
and imitating the charity of Heaven to which thou recommendest them. Open thy
mouth with meekness of wisdom, Prove. 31.26.
and let the law of kindness be in thy tongue. Speak to them graciously, who
have disobliged thee: And if thine enemy hunger, feed him; Romans 12.20, 21.
if he thirst, give him drink: heap coals of fire on his head; that if it be
possible he may be melted into better nature, and his evil may be overcome with
good.

The Thanksgiving and Prayer afterward.
O Most holy and ever blessed Lord of Heaven and Earth, who only have
immortality, and dwell in light unapproachable by mortal eyes: shining in
the glory of thy own perfections, and not needing any reflections from thy
Creatures. Thou art full beyond our thoughts; and ever communicating out of thy
fullness, abundantly beyond all that we can conceive. We cannot comprehend the
vast number of Creatures which thou have made, who all praise thee and declare
thy magnificent goodness; nor are we able to fathom the least part of that
bounty which feeds them, and provides for them, and takes care of them every
where. Much less can we comprehend thee, in whom they all live, and move, and
have their being; and from whom they are continually supplied, without
diminishing thy full goodness. We the children of men have received a more
liberal share in thy blessings, than the rest of our Fellow Creatures, and had
most large experience of thy never ceasing love and kindness to us. For after
we had spent and wasted those great treasures wherewith thou did endow our
natures; thou have been pleased to grant us a new and better portion, and to
raise us up again with the addition of many Talents. Having sent thy Son to
redeem us, and to be the Author of a supernatural birth to us; to declare to us
all the will of thee our Heavenly Father, and to give us exceeding great and
precious promises, the expectation of which might encourage us to do all that
thou requirest of us. Thou have sent him, blessed be thy goodness, to bring us
Life and Spirit; to strengthen us against all the powers of Hell and Earth; to
break the force of all temptations; to sanctify even our afflictions to us,
and the infirmities of our crazy bodies; to take out the sting of death; and to
make it an entrance into an immortal life. Thou have advanced him to intercede
for us at thy right hand; to be our Advocate with thee, when by our weakness we
sin against thee, or are afraid to approach thee, to pardon us when we repent
and return to thee; and to bless us by giving us repentance, and turning us
from all our iniquities. And to all other benefits thou have added the comforts
and refreshments of thy holy Table, where I have now partaked of his most
blessed Body and Blood. Thou have shown me the greatness of my Saviors love;
and tied me in new resolutions to love and serve thee for ever; and given me
strong assurance of thine everlasting mercies in Christ Jesus.

These very acknowledgments will witness against me, if I should carelessly
throw away this new portion, which thou have given me in thy love. The
remembrance of them will be intolerable, if I should not improve this
extraordinary grace which I have now commemorated. I flee unto thee therefore
again. O most merciful Father, for the help of thy Holy Spirit, to continue in
me a perpetual memory of that love which thou have bestowed on me; and of the
professions I have made of an unmovable love to thee. O thou inspirer of all
holy thoughts and desires; O thou who delightest to encourage all those that
seek after thee with thankful hearts; stop not the current of thy bounteous
love: but as thou have drawn me to thee, and moved me to devote my self to thy
obedience; so preserve and keep these thoughts and purposes in my heart for
ever. I believe thou hear me, and wilt be with me. And filled with thy power
and might, and with constant hope in thee, I will walk and not be weary, and
run the ways of thy Commandments, and not faint. To that Almighty goodness I
commit my self, of which I have had such long experience. I will never doubt of
thy readiness to assist and further me: but always look up unto the Heavens
from whence comes my help. My help comes from the Lord, which made Heaven and
Earth. The Lord shall preserve me from all evil: Psalm. 122.2, 7, 8.
he shall preserve my Soul. The Lord shall preserve my going out, and my coming
in, from this time forth and even for evermore.

O that all the ends of the Earth may see thy Salvation, and worship thy Name;
for it is holy. And especially all those to whom is given a Kingdom, Dan. 5.18.
Majesty, Glory and Honor, may evermore praise, 4.37.
and extol, and honor the King of Heaven; all whose works are truth, and his
ways judgment, and those that walk in pride he is able to abase. Psalm. 68.3.
Let all the righteous be glad; let them rejoice before God, yea, let them
exceedingly rejoice. 35.27.
Let them say continually, The Lord be magnified, which has pleasure in the
prosperity of his Servants. O that all mankind would praise the Lord for his
goodness, Psalm. 107.8, 9, 13.
and for his wonderful works, to the Children of men. For he satisfies the
longing Soul, and fills the hungry Soul with goodness. They cry unto the Lord
in their trouble, and he saves them out of their distresses. Blessed be the
Lord God, Psalm. 41.13.68.19.
even the God of our Salvation, from everlasting to everlasting. Amen and Amen.

October.
The Meditation before.
HOw long is it since thou thoughtest of the best friend thou have in the whole
world? And what were thy last thoughts of him? Did thou not a very little
while ago long for his company; and wish the time would come wherein thou
might again enjoy him? Did thou not count the days till that happy time,
when he promised to return or to send unto thee? And suppose he be dead; with
what passion do thou follow his memory? How art thou moved with the mention
of his dear name? How glad to possess any relic of him, though it be but his
shadow? Or how often do thou look upon the lively picture of him, which is
drawn in thy own imagination? And do thou think it could fail to put thee in
mind, of what he left thee in charge when he departed this world? Could thou
forget the legacies he left thee, or the inheritance he bequeathed to thee, as
the heir of his love?

O how long then is it, my soul, since Jesus was in thy thoughts? Can thou
not tell? Was there ever such a Friend as he, that dyed to save thee? Can any
one pretend so much to thy love, or merit of thee so kind a remembrance? Who is
there that ever died for the sake of his enemies? O how precious, how dear,
should the Name of Jesus be unto thee! with what joy should thou receive the
news, that he is coming to visit thee? How welcome must this invitation be from
thy blessed Savior, whom if thou love thou can not but long to see? It is
the voice of thy well-beloved, that calls unto thee, and says; come and feast
with me. Come, and see by these sensible signs, which I have left to represent
me, how much my love has made me suffer for thee. Behold the lively figure of
my Body and Blood, which was broken and shed to redeem thee. I have caused it
to be made on purpose, that thou might not forget me.

What do thou answer to him? Can thou say, thou have looked for this day?
That thou thoughtest it long, till thou might go to his house? or at least
wast desirous to go, and see him set forth crucified before thine eyes? Why?
What good did the last sight of him do thee? What pangs of love did thou feel
in thy heart? what pleasure, what joy in the remembrance of his kindness? Did
it call all his Commands to mind, and recommend them effectually to thy love?
Did it stir thee up to do his will, and make thee more zealous ever since in
working that which is pleasing in his sight? What did thou think of the
inheritance he has given thee? An inheritance incorruptible, 1 Pet. 1.4.
and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for thee? Did
thou believe his word; Col. 3.24.
and verily expect to receive the reward of this inheritance? How did that
faith then work in thy heart? Did it give thee extreme content? Having hope to
see him, did it make thee purify thy self, 1 John 3.3.
even as he is pure? Go then now as a friend of his, and do the same again.
Renew thy remembrance of him. Show him the belief thou have in him: the love
thou bear to his name and word: how resolved thou art never to forget him:
and how happy thou think thy self, in the portion he has given thee in his
grace and love. Profess to him, that his Commandments are dearer to thee than
thy life: and that thou will sooner part with it, than not perform his holy
will in every thing. Vow to him again that thou will be true and faithful to
him. Embrace all thy Brethren there assembled with a kind affection, because
they are his friends and followers. Desire that all the world should know him
and be acquainted with him; and that a perpetual memory of him may be
preserved, by doing this, as long as the Sun and Moon endure. And can thou do
it without those passions, which the thoughts of a Friend are wont to raise up
in thy heart? None of them, sure, will be absent upon this occasion. They will
all attend thee in this holy action: and thou will feel the greatest gratitude
to thy Savior, who has done so much to deserve thy love, which is so little
worth to him.

Then thou will hear him, as good as, say unto thee, Son, be of good cheer, thy
sins are forgiven thee. All that I have is thine. I will be an everlasting
friend to thee, and make thee inherit all things. It is my Fathers good
pleasure, to give thee a kingdom: and here I give thee the earnest of that
purchased possession. What reason have thou to doubt of the enjoyment; if thou
art my friend, by doing whatsoever I command thee? Do not friends partake in
each others goods? My power which I have over all things in Heaven and earth
shall assist thee. My Angels shall be thy guardians. My spirit shall be thy
guide and director. My comforts shall encourage and support thee. Because I
live, Joh. 14.19.10.10.
thou shall live also. For I came that my sheep might have life, and that they
might have it more abundantly.

The Prayer before.
O Most holy and eternal God; who art good and do good: the whole earth is
full of thy goodness. Thy mercy reaches unto the Heavens, and thy faithfulness
unto the Clouds. Thou art great in power, wisdom, and all other perfections:
and therefore greatly to be feared, honored and loved by all understanding
creatures. When I consider how much thou have done for me, or how much I have
often promised to do for thee; I am on both hands confounded and ashamed in my
own thoughts. Thou art my Creator, my Father, my Savior, deliverer, and
constant Benefactor: the God of my life, of my health, of all my present
comforts and future hopes. I have promised often to be thy faithful servant,
and thy dutiful child: to honor and glorify thee both with body and soul, and
all the good things thou have bestowed on me. In my Baptism I was dedicated
unto thee; and have many times confirmed that gift, and renewed my engagements
to continue in thy obedience. In my promises, protestations and vows I have
been very liberal: but how sparing in performance, thou, who art acquainted
with all my ways, know. And I my self know so much of my negligence, that I
may justly wonder, thou still retainest me in thy family, and let me enjoy
the privilege of thy children. Adored be thy great long suffering and patience,
toward me and all mankind. Thanks be to the name of the Lord, who after our
abuse of so many blessings, has added the gift of his dear Son, and sent him
to pay a ransom for us. O the unconceivable greatness of that love, which has
so much befriended the most ungrateful enemies. I humbly mention the blood of
his Cross, as a sufficient sacrifice, oblation and satisfaction, not only for
my sins, but the sins of the whole world. I lift up my hands unto thee in his
name, to receive that gracious pardon, which he has purchased for me: hopeing
thorough him, that thou will still continue thy love unto me, who am steadfastly
resolved to love thee above all things. Far be it from me to think that the
love of our Lord should maintain me in any rebellion against thee, or
countenance my contempt of thy holy Laws. No, love me so much, good Lord, as to
change my will, and renew my nature into thy own likeness; that I may be truly
a friend of God. I wish for no greater happiness, than to feel my soul at peace
and friendship with thee, by an entire and unchangeable love to all
righteousness, goodness and truth. And I am going to remember his dying love;
that with the heartiest affection I may devote my self wholly to thy love and
service. I do as unfeignedly desire that all my sins may die; as I am glad that
Christ died to be a propitiation for them. And I as sincerely offer up my self,
my understanding, my will, my desires and passions, and all that I have, unto
thee; as I really believe that he offered up himself for me. O that the power
of the holy Ghost may accompany me: and unite my thoughts and affections to
make a most thankful commemoration of his loving kindness. Represent unto my
mind most feelingly all that Jesus has done and endured for our sake. Fix my
mind and heart upon the inestimable benefits, he has obtained to me. That I
may not only behold the outward figures of him: but receive those pledges of
his love, with the humblest reverence, with such a lively faith, and vehement
love, and ready submission of my will to him; that Christ Jesus may be inwardly
formed in me. I long for the happiness of knowing assuredly that I am a friend
of his, by my delighting greatly in his Commandments, and trusting my self and
all my concerns entirely in his hands, and contenting my self in his love and
good will toward me, and rejoicing in the Sovereign Dominion, power and glory
which thou have given him; with most earnest desires that all the world may
love and obey him. Amen.

Our Father which art, etc. The Meditation afterward.
WIth what unwillingness, are we wont to leave the company of a Friend in whom
we delight? How does the remembrance of him stick unto our mind? How often do
we think of the kind words we heard from his mouth, and view the tokens he has
left with us of his love? Do we not use to cast our eyes behind us when we go
from him, and look after him as long as he is in sight? Are we not glad to see
but his back, when we cannot behold his face? O sweet Jesus (then should thou
say to thy self) who can be content to part with the thoughts of thee, when he
sees the love thou bear to us; and all the blessings thou impartest to thy
friends and followers? What heart can endure to lose the sight of such
happiness; or suffer thy remembrance to die out of its mind? I should look as
far as heaven, rather than suffer thee to go out of my thoughts: and always be
casting mine eyes to thy dwelling place; that I may behold, at this distance,
though never so little of thy most excellent glory.

So one would think in reason: But this dull flesh begins to complain, that it
is tired and cannot thus follow thee any further. It makes me sigh to think,
that I must lose this clear and lively sight which I have of thee. And yet, as
heavy as it is, I will not cease to be often looking after my Savior. What
though I cannot always see him, so as I have now seen him in the sanctuary; yet
I will never forget him. And the darkest apprehensions of his love and favor,
shall ever be dearer to me, than any object in this world. Blessed be his
goodness, which has given me such pledges of it, as engage me to remember him.
I will he ever mindful to keep the Covenant, I have made with him, and remember
his Commandments to do them. Psalm. 103.18.
And as long as I do his will (though I cannot always lift up my thoughts and
affections as I would unto him) I hope I am his friend. O sweet words which I
have heard from the mouth of my Savior; whosoever shall do the will of God,
Mark ^.35.
the same is my Brother, and my Sister, and my Mother. I have no other will, O
Lord, but thine. And I will prove continually, what is that good and acceptable
and perfect will of thine; that we may be eternal friends, by the constant
union of our wills in one. Let my Lord command what he pleases, it shall be
obeyed. Let him do what he thinks good; my will shall be done, as well as his.

Psalm. 16.2, 3.
O my soul, thou have said unto the Lord, thou art my Lord: but my goodness
extends not unto him; but to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the
excellent in whom is all my delight. They are his friends, and what thou do
to them, he accounts it as done unto himself. Think thy self happy, that thou will never want him, whilst thou enjoyest them. Thou feedest him, when thou
feedest them. Thou go to see him, when thou visitest them in their need and
misery. Verily I say unto you (they are the words of thy Lord) in as much as ye
have done it unto one of the least of these my Brethren, Matthew. 25.40.
ye have done it unto me.

Resolve therefore all this Month to endeavor to excite BROTHERLY KINDNESS,
which is the fountain of Charity. And look on it as a great part of the riches
of the divine grace, that he is not only content to love us himself; but has
contrived ways and means that all men else may love us, and commands them so
to do, as they hope to be saved. Begin this Brotherly kindness then thy self,
that so thou may be able to say every day. O how great is thy mercy O Lord!
that thou love me thy self, and would have all the world to love me. O how
great is thy goodness, that thou not only chargest them so to do; but ingagest
them to love me, by thy love. Yea, to love me so, as thou have loved me and
them; and so, as they love themselves. How full, how incomprehensible is the
love of my God, who would have me hated by none: but every man to be my friend,
if I am in need, every man to do me good? How can I want who have such a
Father, who has made all men to be my Brethren? How happy would he make me,
who labors to set all hearts open to me; that as many men as I see, so many
lovers I may behold? Thou dwell, O God, in love: and would have me to do
so too, by loving and being beloved of all. What returns shall I make to the
Lord for his love? He tells me, that it is love. Love thy Brethren, love them
with a pure heart fervently. This is the thing, which I would have thee do. And
this will make thee blessed for ever: by loving me and all others, and by being
beloved of me, and of all men else that love me.

The Thanksgiving and Prayer afterward.
O Lord God Almighty, which is, which was, and is to come. Who art the
happiness of men and Angels: and have an innumerable company of beautiful
Creatures always beholding thy glories, satisfied with thy love, delighting
themselves in thy praises; and to eternity can desire no higher pleasure, than
to be thy Friends and Servants. I cast down my self before thee, to join, as
well as I am able, together with all that Heavenly Host, in lauding and
magnifying thy great and holy Name; and rejoicing in thee with thanksgiving.

Thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are, and were created.
Thou have redeemed mankind by the Blood of thy Son; and raised us out of the
dust, that we might sit with him in Heavenly places. Thou have sent the Holy
Ghost the Comforter, in signs and wonders, and diverse Miracles; in gifts of
knowledge, wisdom and prophecy; and in abundance of thy grace, to renew and
sanctify the hearts of thy faithful people. The Apostles and Ministers of
reconciliation were thy gift; by whom thou have brought the glad tidings of
Salvation into these parts of the world. The Sun of righteousness, praised be
thy goodness, has enlightened our eyes, who sat in darkness, and in the shadow
of death. I have been thy constant care from my first conception and entrance
into the world, until this moment. Innumerable blessings thou have bestowed on
me; and still I hear the voice of joy and gladness. I behold my guides and
instructors: and have the liberty to go into thy house: and I see my Savior
himself in the remembrances and pledges he has left me of his dying love. I
will never cease to adore and extol thy mercy: who have kept me from going down
into the pit, and saved my Soul from the nethermost Hell. Blessed be thy
goodness for the constant provision of thy House; the comforts of thy Holy
Spirit; the society of thy children; the hopes of Heaven; and the tastes thou
have given me of immortal joys, in this holy Feast with my Savior. As thou
have begun, good Lord, out of thine own undeserved love to make me happy, so
continue thy loving kindness to me, till it be finished in perfect friendship
with thee. Preserve in me, though never so weak, yet, a constant and prevailing
sense of thy goodness; that I may most willingly obey thee, and cheerfully do
thy will in all things. That the very same mind may be in me, which was also in
Christ Jesus: Whose meat it was to do thy will, Joh. 4.34.
and finish the work of thee that sent him. O that God would count me worthy of
this calling, 2 Thessalonians. 3.11, 12.
and fulfill in me all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of Faith
with power. Coloss 4.12
That I may stand perfect and complete in all the will of God: and the name of
the Lord Jesus may be glorified in me, and I in him; according to the grace of
our God, and the Lord Jesus Christ. I have given my self now again unto thee,
and professed the strictest friendship with thee: Lord, help me to keep it
without spot, and unrebukeable until the appearing of the Jesus. That both body
and Soul being preserved pure and undefiled, as the Temples of the Holy Ghost;
it may be my constant guide, strength and comfort: and lead me safely through
all the difficulties and dangers of this world, the enticements of the flesh,
and the crafts and subtilties of the Devil; to a place of peace and safety in
the regions above, where I may for ever dwell in thy love, and sing thy praise.
O that all the people did praise thee, O God; that all the people did praise
thee. That the whole Earth were filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as the
waters cover the Sea: and all those that know thee, did walk worthy of thee; as
children of the light and of the day, having no fellowship with the unfruitful
works of darkness. Bless thy Church planted in these Islands; that we may not
receive in vain that grace bringing Salvation, 2 Cor. 6.1.
Tit. 2.11, 12.
which has appeared to us, teaching us, that denying ungodliness, and worldly
lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world:
But from the highest to the lowest have grace, Heb. 12.28
whereby we may serve thee acceptably, with reverence and godly fear. Comfort
all my Friends; forgive all my Enemies; relieve those that are in any misery;
draw all sinners to repentance; and help all good men to perfect holiness in
thy fear: that at last with one consent, we may all unite our hearts and
tongues in thy everlasting praises.

Now the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, 2 Cor. 13. ult.
and the Communion of the Holy Ghost, be with us all. Amen.

November.
The Meditation before.
WIth what wonder and admiration do we entertain those things which are strange
and unusual? The very news of them carries great numbers to see them; and the
sight of them fixes their eyes on them, as if they could never have enough of
them. Behold here the wonder of wonders, which thou art called to see, and seed
thine eyes and heart withal. God is come to dwell in Flesh. This flesh is made
a sacrifice for the sins of the world. And he invites thee now to a Feast upon
that Sacrifice; that thou may dwell in him and he in thee. O mavelous
love! what eyes ever saw such a sight as the Son of God dying on a Cross? The
only begotten of the Father bleeding as a malefactor? The glorious King of
Heaven laying down his life freely for his own subjects: Rebels I should have
called them, and enemies to him? Where are all my thoughts? Where is my
admiration? What is become of my love? Whither are all my desires gone? It will
be a new wonder if they do not all assemble themselves together, at the
commemoration of such love: which does me the grace to make me partaker of that
Body and Blood, which was so offered up to God. Strange! that my thoughts
should be so heavy, and my affections so cold! that my hunger and thirst should
be no more excited, at the very motion to go to the house of God, to make a
thankful remembrance of his death! We think the Angels lead an happy life, in
their blessed employment of giving continual Praises to God: why do I not go
then with a more forward joy into the Courts of the Lord to do this in
remembrance of Christ, which those Heavenly creatures do not do? For he has
not taken hold of the nature of Angels, Heb. 2.16.
but of the seed of Abraham; for whom he has prepared also this Sacred food,
of which they never tasted. Unto which of the Angels said he at any time, thou
art my Son, Heb. 1.5, 13
this day have I begotten thee? or sit thou at my right hand, till I make thine
enemies thy footstool? Art thou not desirous of honor and greedy of gainful
preferment? Art thou not prone to seek great things for thy self? What greater
honor or dignity can there be, than to be so nearly related to the Lord of
all; to be members of him that is Head of all Principalities and Powers? Behold
the treasures of grace and glory which he offers thee: and by these signs of
his Body and Blood would make over to thee. Is not Love the very life and Soul
of the World? Is it not the ^oy and satisfaction of hearts? Behold here the
worthiest object of it that ever was. See how he would fill and possess thy
whole Soul with perfect contentment. And lest thou should be so unhappy, as
not to dwell in love: see how he would engage thee by these bonds in which thou
^rt going to tie thy self, to love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, soul
and strength; and thy neighbor as thy self. How does he comply with thy most
natural inclinations? How does he study to gratify thee in thy most noble
desires? Call up thy best and purest thoughts. Strain thy self to the height
of admiration. Endeavor to forget all other things, and only to look at
present upon Jesus. If any thing can make thee love God, it must be his love.
If any thing can make thee hate sin, it must be this Sacrifice for it. If any
thing can make thee willing and obedient, ^it must be his obedience to the
death. Think then when thou come into his presence, that thou see him
hanging on his Cross. Think thou see him spreading out his arms, and
resigning himself to the will of God. That thou beholdest hi^ gaping wounds,
and the Blood trick^ling down his Sacred body. That thou hear him cry unto
thee; Did I not love thee, when I bled to death for thee? Did I not love thee,
when I endured this pain^ and sorrow to redeem thee? Could I do more than give
my self, to deliver thee from death, and open the Kingdom of Heaven and Eternal
life? And then what heart i^ there, that need be taught what it should say, and
what it should do on this occasion? Who can refrain himself from giving
blessing, and praise, and glory in the highest to him? Who can want thanks to
render him, for such invaluable benefits? O^ find in his heart to deny him his
service^ Nay, who would not rejoice to think o^ serving one that has merited
thus of him* and intends to reward his duty with that very glory which the
Father has given him Our Lord cannot but expect to see thy mind fraught with
Heavenly thoughts, and a most high esteem of him: thy hear^ mighty full of
love, and vows, and resolutions, ready to be presented to him: thy will bowing
and submitting it self wholly to his disposal. And to all such he says by his
Ministers, Come to my Supper, for all things are ready. Come, and take this
holy Sacrament to your comfort. Rejoice with me and be exceeding glad; for I
love you, and will love you to the end.

The Prayer before.
O Most holy Lord of Heaven and earth; the greatest and most desirable good;
the only rest and satisfaction of our souls. Whom to know is the beginning of
life: whom to love purely is our perfection upon earth: whom to possess in an
unchangeable wisdom, charity and purity is heaven it self. It was thy great
goodness, to make us to know thee and love thee and be like unto thee. And a
greater, to sue unto us and entreat for our affections. But it is the greatest
of all, a miracle of thy love, that thou have sent such a person as thy Son
Jesus to beseech us, and to add mighty importunities to his entreaties; that we
would do that, which we ought to be desirous to be admitted to do, as the
greatest happiness we are capable of. Lord, what is man that thou art thus kind
unto him? we are very little things; hugely below so much of thy notice. We are
naturally infirm and crazed in our bodies. And our understandings are short
sighted, our reasonings weak and childish, our passions easily disordered, our
resolutions inconstant; and by sin we have made our selves worse, and turned
these into greater mischiefs. So that if thou had been pleased, to show but a
little pity and compassion to us, and not suffered us to become extremely
miserable, what could we have expected more from thy goodness? But that thou
should design to advanc^ such piteous and wretched things a we are, who know
not how to valu^ and esteem thy benefits, to the stat^ and dignity of thy
children; to mak^ us like thy self in righteousness, goodness, and truth; and
at last to give us a blessed immortality in soul and body; O how astonishing is
this love! which thou have shown to us in the Son of thy love the Lord Jesus. I
am ashamed to think that this grace has waited so long upon me, and been no
better entertained and improved. That my apprehensions of it are still so dull;
my reasonings of so little force, to constrain my whole soul unmoveably to love
thee, and delight in thee, and to live to thee for ever. I most humbly flee to
that grace which has abounded thus toward me, for the pardon which it has
promised to those, who yield themselves to be governed by it. O let not thy
unwearied goodness be provoked yet to cast off the care of me: But continue to
hold before mine eyes thy love in Christ Jesus, and the great glory which he
has purchased for us; till my heart be overcome and subdued perfectly to his
obedience. That I may abandon every evil way, which is inconsistent with the
enjoyment of his favor and happiness; and it may be the very business of my
life to purify my self as thou art pure: from all inordinate cares and fears;
from sensual lusts and brutish passions; from anger and hatred; envy and
malice; pride and vanity; falseness and dissimulation; murmuring and
discontent; and whatsoever is opposite to thy blessed Nature and Will declared
by Christ Jesus. O that the Faith of Christ, which thou have already planted in
my heart, may take a deeper root; that as I believe him to be the Lord of all,
who died for me and bought me with a price, and is risen again to be the author
of eternal Salvation to those that obey him, and will come to judge the quick
and the dead: so I may constantly reverence him, and religiously keep his holy
Commands, and steadfastly trust him, and make him my hope, and love his
appearing; that I may be found of him then in peace. And now that I am going to
make him my renewed acknowledgments, and devote my self to his holy obedience;
Lord, fill me with such worthy thoughts, affections and resolutions, that I may
know that I love him, and may rejoice in hope of his eternal love unto me. O
that nothing may interpose when I am at thy Table, to hinder the effect of
these holy desires; that no cloud may arise in my mind to obscure my sight of
his love; no vain thought to draw me aside from meditating on his death and
passion for my sake: but I may be carried then and always with a strong and
irresistible inclination to do his will.

Let my prayer come before thee, Ps. 141.2.
as the incense; and the lifting up of my hands, as the evening Sacrifice. Hear
me, O Lord, Psalm. 143.1, ^.
and give ear to the voice of my supplications: in thy faithfulness answer me,
and in thy righteousness. And enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in
thy sight shall no man living be justified.

Our Father, etc. The Meditation afterward.
WHAT our Savior said to the people concerning John the Baptist, may be
imitated by thee with a small alteration. Luke 7.24. etc.
What went you out for to see? a reed shaken with the wind? (a thing of no
moment?) But what went you out for to see? a man clothed in soft raiment? [Some
worldly pomp and bravery] behold, these are in kings Courts. But what went you
out for to see? a Prophet? Yea, I say unto you, and much more than a Prophet?
For among those that are born of women, there is not a greater Prophet than
John the Baptist.

Where have thou been? may thou say to thy self. At an ordinary meal, or a
common entertainment? What wentest (...) out to receive? a piece of bread and
(...) cup of wine? that we have in our (...) houses. Or what wentest thou from
(...) to see? a dumb show, a silent gray (...) company of serious faces? Those
w^ (...) see in them that mourn for any dead friend. Or what wentest thou out
for to see? Bread broken and wine poured out, in a solemn and holy manner by
the appointment of Christ Jesus? Yea, and much more than so. Christ himself,
the Son of the blessed, under those signs and figures of his death. This is he
of whom it is written, behold, the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
world. Verily, there is none born of women like unto him, the only begotten Son
of God, the heir of all things. And thou have been at his Table; thou have
beheld the astonishing love of God in delivering him up to suffer for thee;
thou have received the pledges of his dearest love: and the earnests of all
those goods that he possesses. Could thou see no beauty in him, that thou
should desire him? Nor taste no pleasure in having friendship with him? Is it
nothing to partake of the merits of his sufferings? To be made the Son of the
King of Heaven and the heir of his love, by being made partaker of his divine
nature and disposition? Where were thine eyes then? What were thy thoughts
doing? None ever believed and considered this love that God bears to us; who
was not moved and inflamed by it to love him above all things. For the Creator
and Possessor of Heaven and earth to love thee: what a word is that? Who can
hear it, and not be at once both amazed and transported? Especially when he
loves thee so much as to send his own Son unto thee, yea his only Son, the Son
of his love: who has so loved thee, as to spend his dearest blood in thy
service; and all this freely, without any motive but his own love; and to
procure us the greatest blessings, no less in conclusion than immortal life.
What heart can think of this and not be overpowered by it? And need he entreat
thee, not to forget the love he has shown unto thee? to spend a few thoughts
every day on such a Friend, that has deserved so much of thee? A mean request;
which should be granted, one would think, without the asking. And will thou be
at no pains to preserve his memory? Shall he slip out of thy mind, unless he
force himself into thy company? It is easy to be warm by a fire side. It is
almost impossible not to be moved, when the person we love is before our eyes.
But when we are gone from the fire, we must exercise our selves, not to grow
cold again. And when a friend is at a distance from us, we must look upon the
tokens we have received of his kindness, or some other way bring him to our
remembrance. Or rather our great love to him, will often present him before our
imagination. Do but love (...) Savior then in an hearty manner, and (...)
can thou fail to love him more? (...) little thing is all that he desires of
(...) thou would love him best; and (...) do even what thou will.

For you may consider, that it is the nature of all love, not to let our heart
be joined to any other object, which shall in any degree prejudice that which
is principally loved. What never is esteemed honored and admi^^ed by us above
all others; will not permit any thing to be entertained, that shall any ways
^njure it in our thoughts and affections. We are naturally averse to any such
objects, and reject them with disdain; as those which are inconsistent with our
better desires. If thy Redeemer therefore be advanced and seated in thy heart,
by an unfeigned love to him above all things on earth: it will render every
thing despicable, which woe ld draw thy heart from him, or in the least abate
thy devotion to him. Thou will look upon it as a base temptation and an
unworthy offer; which is not only to be slighted and rejected, but hated and
loathed. Thou will say, I am dead to sin, I cannot live any longer therein. I
have done with all your adulterate pleasures. Jesus is my joy, my life and my
crown: what pleases him; pleases me. His love is a Law within my heart: and
therefore I delight to do thy will, O God.

And the more to fortify thy self, thou may often meditate all this month,
upon the COURAGE and CONSTANCY, the Fortitude and Magnanimity of Jesus in
asserting the truth of God. For this is particularly remembered by S. Paul as a
part of his character, that he witnessed before Pontius Pilate a good
confession. 1 Timothy 6.13.
By which we should excite our selves out of love to him, Ib. v. 11.12
to follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, charity, patience and
meekness, whatsoever it cost us. Let the dangers be what they will, we should
still fight the good fight of Faith, to lay hold on eternal life. For, herein
is our love made perfect, that we have boldness in the day of judgment: 1 John
4.17, 18.
because as he is, so are we in this world. There is no fear in love; but
perfect love casts out fear: because fear has torment: he that fears, is
not made perfect in love.

The Thanksgiving and Prayer afterward.
I Humbly offer unto thee, O Lord, together with the whole company of Heaven,
the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving; which is eternally due to thy most
bounteous goodness. The whole world was made by thee out of nothing. The
Heavens, the Earth, the Seas, and all that are therein, confess themselves the
work of thy infinite wisdom and power. Out of the dust thou have framed our
comely Bodies: and inspired into them immortal Spirits; on which thou have
engraven thy own image. Thou did put thine own Majesty upon us, that all thy
creatures here should be obedient to us, and we be obedient only to thee, the
great Lord and Governor of all. O how great was the honor which thou
conferredst upon us! And how much more wonderful the grace thou have given us
in Christ Jesus, after our disloyalty and shameful disobedience to thee? Thou
have sent him to redeem us from Hell and Death by his precious Blood. And given
thy Holy Spirit to sanctify our hearts, and a^^ (...) our duty: thy Gospel to
be ou^ (...) thy self to be our Example: thy ^^^^sters to be our remembrancers:
^^y Sacraments to be the Signs and Seal of thy blessing. I have now tasted o^
thy great and abundant love. Thou have feasted me at thy Table: and satisfied
me with thy good will toward me: and filled me with joy and gladness in thy
favor, more than if all the riches on Earth had been increased What shall I
render unto thee, and d^ for thee; who have done all this for me who am less
than the least of all the mercies? My heart burns within m^ ^ll I have offered
up my self again unto thee: and resolved to spend my ^ays in praising, loving
and serving ^hee, to the best of my power. O that this holy sense of thee, may
never quite ^anish out of my mind: But I may be ^lways inclined to think of
thee, to declare thy loving kindness, to approve my self to thee, by studying
and doing thy will with cheerfulness of heart. I have now knit my self to thee,
by new ^onds and engagements, which I desire may be never loosed. O that my
^ows and promises may stand as fast as ^hine everlasting Covenant. That nothing
may make me break my Faith, which I have now and in my Baptism given to thee:
but I may always, as I stand bound, most heartily continue to believe in thee,
to fear thee, The words of the Church Catechism, which excellently expresses
the duty we owe to God and our Neighbor.
to love thee with all my heart, with all my Soul, and with all my strength; to
worship thee, and give thee thanks; to put my whole trust in thee, to call upon
thee, and to honor thy holy Name and Word, and to serve thee truly all the
days (...) my life. And assist me by thy Heavenly grace to do my duty also
faithfull^g toward my Neighbor: to love him (...) my self, and to do to all
men as I would the^ should do unto me: To love, honor, and succor my Father
and Mother: to honor an^ obey the King and all that are put in Authori^ under
him. To submit my self to all my G^vernours, Teachers, Spiritual Pastors an^
Masters. To order my self lowly and rev^rently to all my betters. To hurt no
body (...) word or deed. To be true and just in all (...) dealing. To bear no
malice nor hatred in (...) heart. To keep my hands from picking an^ stealing,
and my tongue from evil speaking, lying and slandering. To keep my body
in^e^perance, soberness and chastity. Not to co^^ nor desire other men's goods;
but to learn a^^ labor truly to get mine own living, and to (...) my duty in
that state of life, unto which it sh^^ please God to call me.

I desire also the good of all mankind that they may partake of the knowledge
of the Lord, and enjoy the fruits of his Death and Resurrection: especially
that all Christian people may walk worthy of the Lord, who has called them to
his Heavenly Kingdom. And particularly all Kings, Princes and Governors may be
as careful to observe his Laws, as they are desirous others should observe
theirs. That they may remember the honor thou cast done them in exalting them
so ^igh; to the end they may imitate thee, (...) doing good to all below them.
Purge out of thy Church every thing that dishonours the Religion of our Lord,
and endangers Souls. Unite ^ll the members of it in the profession of the true
Faith, and in sincere Charity: that the poor may be relieved, the sick
comforted, the fatherless and widows visited in their affliction, sinners
^eclaimed, the obstinate softened, and all that are in unbelief brought into the
^^ock of Jesus Christ.

And grant unto us all that have Communicated together this day, tha^ peace
which passes all understanding humility, meekness, obedience, fort^tude,
contentedness, patience, longin^ desires after Heaven, and willingne^^ to die;
that we may rest in an ho^^ Hope, and have a blessed Resurrection with the
just. Amen.

December.
The Meditation before the Sacrament.
NEed I be told after a whole years service, at least, of my blessed Master
Jesus, what that duty is I am now going to perform unto him? Am I not preparing
my self, according to his command, to make a solemn commemoration before God,
Angels and Men, of his unheard of love in dying for us? To make a profession of
my sincere love and affection to him? To engage to him my fidelity? To renew
the Covenant that is between us? To open my heart to him, and to confirm to him
the most absolute possession of my Soul and Body? To wait on him for his
continued grace; and that I may feel the ^ower of his Death and Resurrection?
To ^^ow him my willingness even to take up ^is Cross; and to be his Disciple
and follower to the very death? To testify the love I bear unto, and the
Communion I desire to hold with all the Christians that ^re throughout the
world? To exalt the ^ame of the Lord, and to speak his praises: who would give
his Son for us, and who has condescended to a treaty of peace with us, and
upon such easy terms to become friends with us, yea, reward us, and do great
things for us? O how sweet is the remembrance of these blessings! How happy am
I that he will not let me forget them! But with a continued kindness invites me
again to this delightful employment. I will go and give him thanks for all his
benefits, and for this among the rest; that he has made me so often partaker
of his blessed Body and Blood, and now gives me a new opportunity to celebrate
in this manner the memory of his love. And O that my heart were lifted higher
than ever, after so long acquaintance with him, in admiration of his grace, in
faith, in love, in joy, in praise and thanksgiving, in strong and vehement
desires, and in cordial resolutions to be his devout and faithful Disciple. O
that the hearts of all men else, who shall approach his Table, may be disposed
to the like zeal and fervent affection to his service: and so many Souls as
there are then present, so many living Sacrifices there may be to God; so many
wills resigned into his hands with ardent love. That so those holy Spirits,
which the Apostle tells us, were present in their Christian assemblies, may be
invited to come into ours. And beholding nothing but what is reverend, serious,
pure, and full of true devotion, they may be excited to rejoice and praise God
together with us, for our sincere affection to his Religion. And they may make
report among their Heavenly company above, that Christian piety is still
remaining in the world; and that we have made a great increase in growth in it
this year, by our frequent remembrance of the Lord Jesus: which may stir them
up all to bless the great and glorious name of our God, which is exalted above
all blessing and praise.

The Lord has prepared his Throne in the Heavens, and his Kingdom rules over
all. Psalm. 103.
Bless the Lord ye Angels of his: Bless him all his hosts. Bless him all ye
works of his in all places of his dominion: Bless the Lord, O my Soul. Stir up
thy self to bless the name of God our Savior; who has not cast us out of his
sight, when we threw off our obedience to him: but sent his Son to gather us
again to him, to invite us by precious promises, to endear himself to us by
shedding his heart blood for us, to open the gate of Paradise again, and
restore us to immortality; to make us equal with the Angels, and rank us among
the eldest sons of glory. Let us go, and, if it be possible, excite a greater
love in our heart toward him, than ever we felt before. Let us offer up our
selves to him with a stronger flame of devotion: which may always burn and rise
up higher and higher, till it touch heaven; and lift us up thither where our
Savior is in the high and holy place, God blessed for ever, Amen.

The Prayer before.
ETernal God: whose omnipotent word brought me and this whole world of
creatures into being. Out of the fullness of whose goodness, we are all fed and
maintained; and by whose rich and abundant grace it is, that our souls are not
in a desperate and forsaken condition: but may approach with some confidence to
thee our Maker, who in thy Son have revealed thy self unto us, a most merciful
Father. I fall down before thee in an humble reverence, to perform that
Religious duty which I owe thee as thy creature, and much more as thy redeemed
one, through the purchase thou have made of us by the blood of Jesus. I admire,
adore and love all that I know of thee. I extol and praise thy wisdom, thy
bounty, thy holiness and truth, which endures for ever. I acknowledge my self
beholden to thee beyond all my words, or conceptions either. I reproach my self
for my base ingratitude, and all the wrongs I have done thee. I confess the
justice of thy proceedings, should thou strip me of all those good things,
thou have bestowed on me. I give thee the glory of thy ineffable and never
enough to be valued love in thy Son Christ. I disclaim all opposition to thy
will, as base, unjust and unaccountable. I vow to thee my entire service and
obedience: and approve all thy Commandments as righteous, wise and good. I lay
new bonds upon my self, to keep and observe them with my whole heart; and
rejoice in thy precious promises accounting them better than thousands of gold
and silver. My hope, my satisfaction, my comfort is in thy word: which
incourages me to wait on thee for the grace of thy holy Spirit; blessing thee
for that portion of it, which I have already received. I thank thee for all thy
other goodness to me, and trust thee for the continuance of it, as far as thou
see profitable in thy wise providence; to which I heartily refer my self. I
hope thou will accept of these poor but sincere acknowledgments, and not
condemn me out of my own confessions: but pardon my errors and miscarriages,
confirm my holy purposes, pity my infirmities, and strengthen my pious
endeavors. That I may perfectly mortify all sinful lusts and desires,
faithfully discharge my duty in my several relations, thankfully and soberly
use all thy mercies, patiently bear the heaviest afflictions, and improve my
soul in wisdom and goodness, by all the helps thou affordest me: by thy holy
Gospel, by the good counsels of others, the inspirations of the holy Ghost, thy
many remarkable providence about me, and whatsoever courses thou take with
me, to bring me safe through this world, into an happy eternity. And now that I
am about to address my self to the Table of the Lord, O that I might have such
a sweet remembrance of his love, as may revive my spirit, encourage my hope,
excite me to all my duty, and put an humble confidence in me, to look up unto
thee again for thy pardon; and for the grace of thy holy Spirit, to enable me
to please thee better ever hereafter. Thou who know all things, see that
my soul waits for thee, O God, and longs to be more like thee; and is ready to
offer up its understanding, will, and all its affections unto thee: That I may
remain steadfast and unmovable in justice and charity; meekness and humility;
temperance and purity; contentedness and patience, devotion and piety; with all
other fruits of thy good Spirit. Suffer nothing to appear in my soul before
thee, but reverend thoughts of thee, most zealous love to thee, passionate
desires that Christ Jesus may live in me, and appear in all the actions of an
innocent, harmless and useful life. That so the day when I approach unto thee,
may be a day of good tidings of great joy; a day of peace and reconciliation,
of feasting and refreshment, of comfort and encouragement, to walk before thee
with a perfect heart as long as I live. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, Phil. 4.8, 9, 19.
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if
there be any praise, help me always to think on these things. And the God of
peace be with me; and supply all my need according to his riches in glory by
Christ Jesus. In whose name and words, I still recommend my self to thy grace,
saying, Our Father which art, etc.

The Meditation afterward.
THou art my portion, O Lord; Psalm. 119.57.
I have said that I would keep thy word. Why should I repent me of my choice;
or start from my resolution? Thy Counsels and commands are the surest guide:
thy power the strongest defense: thy good providence the fullest storehouse:
thy eternal justice and holiness the best security: thy promises the richest
treasure: and good hopes in thee our highest happiness. It is enough, enough, O
Lord, to be beloved of thee, the all-sufficient good; who comprehendest all
things in thy mind, and can do all things by thy power, and delightest in
raising such monuments of thy wisdom and greatness, as thy almighty love may
dispense endless blessings unto. I am well satisfied now that I can say, Psa.
142.5.
thou art my refuge, and my portion in the land of the living. The Lord is my
portion; whom shall I envy? The Lord is my portion; for what shall I be
discontented? The Lord is my portion; of whom shall I be afraid? Why art thou
cast down, Ps. 42.11.
O my soul, why art thou disquieted within me? How can his friends fail to
partake of his bounty, who treats even his enemies with so much kindness? 62.5.
My soul, wait thou only upon God; for my expectation is from him. Trust in the
Lord and do good; 37.3, 4, 34.
and verily thou shall be fed. Delight thy self also in the Lord; and ^ he
shall give thee the desires of thy heart. Cast thy burden on the Lord, and he
shall sustain thee: 55.22.
he shall never suffer the righteous to be moved. Wait on the Lord and keep his
way. For the eyes of the Lord are upon them that love him: Eccl^^. 34.16, 17.
He is their mighty protection and strong stay, A defense from the heat, and a
cover from the Sun at noon; a preservation from stumbling and a help from
falling. He raises up the soul, and lightneth the eyes: He gives life, and
health and blessing. Judeth ult. 16.
All sacrifice is too little for a sweet savor to him; and all the fat is not
sufficient for his burnt-offering: but he that fears the Lord is great at all
times. Ecclus. 34.13.
The spirit of those that fear the Lord shall live; for their hope is in him
that saves them. My heart shall rejoice in him; because I have trusted in his
holy name. Let thy mercy, O Lord, Psalm. 33.21, 22.
be upon me; according as I hope in thee.

And I hope that I shall never forget thy word, which I have said that I would
keep: the revelation of thy wisdom, the declaration of thy will, and the
description of thy most holy and happy life. My God, I have taken thy precepts
as my heritage for ever: for they are the rejoicing of my heart. Psalm. 119.111,
112.
I have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes always, even unto the end.
This day I have added one vow more of consecration to thee. I have made over my
self entirely to thee, to be thy portion. Whom shall I love, whom shall I
serve; to whom shall I resign my will and ways? but only to thee, the Father
of lights, and the Father of mercies: who have not thought thy Son too much to
give to me. Never will I forget this happy day, which has brought me a taste
of the joy and peace and serenity, which spring from the very beginning of a
God-like nature. I will always be devoted to him. Let his will be done on earth,
as it is in heaven: for it is the will of my heavenly Father. Let these words
remain upon record against me, if I endeavor not to make him my pattern: and
not only in that place where I have now been, but in all my behavior in this
world (that great Temple of his) demean my self holily and purely; with that
humility, reverence, meekness and submission, which becomes his presence. What
have I here to do, but to show forth the glorious perfections of righteousness,
mercy and truth, which I behold in him? and to declare the esteem I have of
him, and my satisfaction in my portion; by modesty, contentedness,
thankfulness, faith, patience, hope, joyful resignation of all my concernments,
with an equal mind, to his wise disposal? This is my will: this is my
resolution. And I will declare from year to year, that this I take to be my
happiness.

And here it may be very fit to resolve often all this Month, to reflect upon
our Saviors CONTEMPT OF THE WORLD, when he had chosen to come and do the will
of God. Riches, honor, glory and pleasure, were nothing in his account; in
compare with the satisfaction of doing the pleasure of God, though it were by
sufferings. He did not regard the esteem of men, nor what they said of him.
Though he dyed an ignominious and disgraceful death, as well as lived a poor
and despicable life; he was not ashamed nor dejected: but rather gloried in
both. Because his business was not to please himself: but as it is written,
Romans 15.3.
the reproaches of them that reproached thee, fell on me. Let the same mind be
in us, that was in him. Ib. v. 2.
Let every one of us please his neighbor for his good, to his edification. But
overlook the censures and vain opinion of this world, with all the honors and
preferments of it: so we may but approve our selves to God, and his will be
fulfilled by us. For it is a faithful saying; 2 Timothy 2.11, 12.
if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him: if we suffer, we shall
also reign with him.

The Thanksgiving and Prayer afterward.
O Most high and holy Lord of Heaven and Earth; the Author of every good and
perfect gift. Who art for ever to be humbly acknowledged, worshipped, loved and
obeyed, by me, and by all that know thee. I have often made thee my
acknowledgments, for my being, and all the comforts of it; for the hopes I have
both in this life and hereafter: And now I come to renew them, that I may be
more firmly united to thee in hearty love and entire affection. I cast down my
self before thee, being even oppressed with the great load of thy mercies and
benefits; which will not suffer me to dispose of my heart other-ways, than to
thy obedience. As I owe my very being to thee; so all those good things which
have made it not to be a burden and uneasy to me. I have enjoyed a long
measure of health, and cannot tell that ever I wanted my daily bread, [yea,
plentiful provision both for my necessity and my pleasure.] The days of pain
and sorrow, which I have endured, have been but few, in compare with the many
years of ease and joy which thou have vouchsafed me. I find now all my senses
entire and perfect, and I have a great many Friends and kind Neighbors: and
also a great deal of time to think of all this, and to prepare my self for thy
eternal favor. How much am I indebted to thee, for the continued use of my
understanding, reason and memory? that I can take notice of all thy goodness;
whereby my heart may be excited to love thee; which is the greatest happiness
and pleasure of all You may acknowledge what you may owe him also for good
education, civil breeding, and that he has perhaps inclined your heart early
to be Religious, whereby your Conscience has been kept from many wounds, and
both Soul and Body from much dishonor, etc.
. This, this, O Lord, is the greatest of thy mercies, that thou have given me
the knowledge of thy love in Jesus Christ; which cannot but constrain me to the
greatest love of thee. And that thy holy Spirit has shone so often into my
mind, and breathed so often on my will and affections: that thou have pardoned
so many faults; and waited so long for my amendment; and so earnestly
importuned my return; and afforded me so many helps, and such a long time to
perfect my repentance. Thou have added also now new pledges of thy love, and
earnest of that immortal life; wherein I may complete my praises and
thanksgivings to thee, in the company of the blessed. O how precious are thy
thoughts toward me, how great is the sum of them! If I would go about to
number them, they are more than the sand. I cannot count the least part of them;
nor ever see any end of thy goodness: for even whilst I am thinking of it, I
receive new favors from thee. Every moment is big with abundance of thy
mercies, both to my Soul and my Body; for this life and that which is to come.
But I know enough to make me admire and love thy goodness; and to make me
ashamed of my forgetfulness and ingratitude: enough to oblige me eternally to
thee: enough to make me fully contented, and to rejoice in thee, as my portion.
Behold. O Lord, I here again sincerely devote my self to observe thy commands:
and keep thy holy word. I have chosen it as the rule and the comfort of my
life: and I will ever cleave unto thy testimonies with my whole heart. I would
not abuse thy mercies; nor grow careless, wanton and secure under the abundance
of thy goodness: but look upon them as engagements, and mighty arguments to
love, acknowledge and obey thee for ever. Blessed be thy goodness, that I have
such thoughts, and am so inclined. Accept of my good desires, purposes and
vows, which I have made: and accompany me always by thy gracious assistance,
that I may accomplish what I have begun, and perfect holiness in thy fear. To
thee I recommend all mankind; especially thy Church and chosen People: all the
Rulers and Governors of them; that they may remember thou art higher than the
highest, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: who wilt judge all men without
respect of persons. Give pure zeal and knowledge to thy Ministers; the grace of
contentedness to the poor of the flock; and of an open heart to the rich;
wisdom and discretion to those that are in their younger years; and an holy
hope to comfort the aged. And endue them all with an humble meekness, that
laying aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and all
evil-speakings, 1 Pet. 2.1, 2, 5.
as new born Babes they may desire the sincere milk of the Word, that they may
grow thereby: and offer up continually spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to thee
by Christ Jesus. Amen.

On the Feast of the Nativity, OR Christmas Day.
The Meditation before.
WHat amazing News is this! What an astonishing piece of love! That the King of
Kings who needed nothing, and is able by his Omnipotent word to command more
Creatures into being (if he wanted any subjects) than we can think of while we
live, should send a kind Embassage of peace, to us vile worms, sinful dust and
ashes. To us who were unworthy of a gracious look from him, should we have
besought his favor; to us that had highly affronted his Sovereign Authority
and Sacred Laws, he has dispatched a glorious Message, as if we were the
greatest persons, and so many little Gods. And had it not been too great an
honor for us to think of, if he had sent one of his meanest servants in the
Heavenly Court to visit us? Or if he had bidden an illustrious Seraphim, to
come and comfort, and cheer us by his bright appearance, or one of the
Cherubims to fly all over the Earth, and make proclamation in their ears, that
the King of Heaven would be reconciled to his rebellious subjects; Would it not
have filled the whole world with wonder, and made all mankind stand at a gaze,
to see themselves so highly favored? O what a grace then was it, that God
should send his Son, his only begotten Son, the Prince and Sovereign Lord of
all that Heavenly host, upon this business of reconciliation? See, my Soul,
that which astonishes not men only, but Angels themselves, who proclaimed the
birth of this Prince of life, with the loudest shouts of joy, saying, Glory be
to God on high, Luke 2.14
and on Earth peace, good will toward men. Toward men do they say? Lord, what
are they, that thou should put this honor on them? What are the greatest
and noblest men on Earth? What is their excellency and worth, that such
addresses should be made unto them? O join thy self, my Soul, as well as thou
art able, with those bright morning-Stars that sang for joy, when the
foundation of the new world was laid, and say; Glory be to the eternal majesty
of Heaven and Earth, who possesses all things, and can suffer nothing; that he
would deign to send to us his poor subjects. Glory be to his Almighty love, who
so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes
in him, should not perish, Joh. 3.17.
but have everlasting life. For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn
the world; but that the world through him might be saved. O blessed Jesus, how
ardent, how powerful was that love, which brought thee down, from the Heavenly
company above, to us here on Earth; yea, Ephesians. 4.9; Psalm. 139; 15.
to the lower-most parts of the Earth? To be clothed with our rags, to dwell
in our mortal flesh, in the likeness of sinful flesh? Might thou not at
least have been apparelled like the best of men, and been found in the habit
and fashion of the noblest of us: but thou would also condescend to the form
of a servant? that the most despicable of all mankind might never suspect they
should be despised by the King of glory? O what an humble love was this, to us
most wretched sinners? What heart can conceive the infinite force of it? How
infinitely is it above all words? We do but declare, that we know little of it,
if we are able to talk much about it. It is fit for our wonder and silent
admiration: for adoring thoughts, and devout exstasies of love. Only I will go,
and declare, in the assemblies of his people, these wonderful works of the
Lord: and publish his goodness, with the voice of thanksgiving and praise.

Lord, what new wonder is that, which there I behold! This glorious person,
murdered by his subjects. The new born Prince of the world, the Heir of all
things, caught, Matthew. 21.39.
and cast out, and slain by those to whom he was sent to demand their
obedience. O the miraculous wisdom of this love! That he should be born and
come among us to die for us! and take our flesh that he might offer it on the
Cross, and make peace and reconciliation by being slain, and shedding his
blood! Go, my Soul, and show forth his death to Angels and Men. For this is the
up-shot of his love, that while we were yet sinners, Christ would die for us.
By this he has made an atonement for us; by this he has obtained an Eternal
Redemption; with this offering God is well satisfied; and by this he has
exalted our Nature to the right hand of God, that he may always appear in his
presence for us. With what love, and joy, and zeal should we commemorate this
never to be forgotten love! With what hearty affection should we offer our
selves to him! How glad should we be of this new opportunity to vow to him our
obedience! With what tender love should we embrace all our Brethren, who are
flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone, as he is! And how comfortably may we
hope that God will be gracious to us, who has not only sent his Son to make
his abode among us, but also to lay down his life for us! Let us go and bless
his name, that to us a Son is born, to us a Child is given, even Christ the
Lord: that he has ^aised up a mighty Salvation for us; and has redeemed us
out of the hands of all our enemies, that we might serve him without fear all
the days of our life. And let us receive these earnests and pledges of his good
will, as hopeful assurances; that he will never end his love till he has
conveyed us thither, where Jesus is. But how shall we come there, unless it be
in those steps whereby he ascended from Earth to Heaven? Go therefore and offer
to him an heart of flesh, to be molded and framed into what figure he pleases.
Desire him to form his own image in thee; to subdue thee perfectly to his will,
that it may be thy meat and drink to do it, and to finish the work he has for
thee in the world. Think thou hear him say, as Abimelech to the men of
Schechem, to move them to elect him for their King; Remember that I am your
bone and your flesh. Judge. 9.2.
Behold, my body which I took for your sake. See here how dear you were to me:
and how nearly related I stand, to every Soul of you. Will you not suffer me to
rule over you? Such a Lord as is so much concerned for you? Will you not be
governed by me, that am your Brother, as well as your Lord? And then,
methinks, we should all answer with one accord; other Lords have reigned over
us: but now, none but thou, O Christ; none but thou, O Christ. Rule and reign
over us for ever; for we are thy Servants.

The Prayer before.
O Eternal God; the Sovereign Lord of all creatures, both in heaven and earth:
who art before all things, and on whom they all depend. To whom we owe all
honor and homage, all love and dutiful affection, all praise and thanks,
service and obedience, throughout our whole life. I acknowledge, O Lord, that I
am never more unjust, than when I do not render all this most freely and
cheerfully unto thee. I cannot deny the debt wherein I stand engaged; though I
have too often denied to pay it. For thou have raised me out of the dust; and
preserved me from returning thither again. Thou have richly laden me with thy
benefits; endued me with principles of wisdom, righteousness and goodness; made
a world of good things to wait upon me and minister to me; and expectest only
reasonable service, and an easy obedience from me: which thou have sent thy Son
to demand, and to entreat, and to give me an example of. This is the surpassing
height of thy love, that thou wast pleased not to despise and reject us, when
we had despised all thy former favors: but even to assume our Nature into an
inconceivable nearness to thy own; and send thy Son Jesus to seek and save us,
when we were lost. I adore thine infinite condiscention, O blessed Jesus, Heb.
2.11, 14.
who art not ashamed to call us Brethren. And for as much as we are partakers
of flesh and blood, have also thy self likewise taken part of the same: that
through death thou might destroy him that had the power of death; that is,
the devil. Blessed be thy goodness, that in all things thou wast made like unto
us; that thou might be a merciful and faithful High Priest, v. 17.
to make reconciliation for our sins. Let all the Angels in heaven still praise
him; for as high as the heaven is above the earth, so great is his mercy above
our thoughts. We were not worthy, that thou should so much as look upon us,
or speak unto us: and then in thine unbounded love, thou wast pleased to dwell
in our nature, and to send thy Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, Romans 8.3.
that by a Sacrifice for sin he might condemn sin in the flesh. I see, O Lord,
in that Sacrifice, how hateful sin was to thee, when thou wast so full of love
to us: and am going to thy Table, to renounce utterly every evil way, and
devote my self to an holy and god-like life: to acknowledge thy wise goodness,
who would dwell in our flesh to sanctify and cleanse it; and give thy Son
Jesus to die for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to
himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. Accompany me, O God, by that
mighty spirit, through which he was conceived, and offered himself without spot
unto thee: that I may have a lively conception of him and his holy Gospel in my
mind, and be made conformable to him in every thing, and offered up entirely
soul and body, to be ordered and disposed of as pleases him. It is but just
and reasonable that his will, not mine, should be done. And it is no less my
happiness than my duty, to be governed by him, who is the wisdom of thee our
God. I deliver up therefore my understanding, my will, my affections and
passions, to be guided, directed and ruled by his supreme and immutable
counsels. Work in me a steadfast admiration and love of his purity, lowliness,
meekness, patience, contentedness and charity: that nothing may be so desirable
to me, as to have Christ Jesus, in all his divine virtues, formed in me. Hold,
O Lord, this image of him always before mine eyes: that my life may be nothing
else but a constant imitation of him, and both body and soul become the Temple
of the holy Ghost; wherein thou may be truly honored, heartily loved, highly
praised and exalted, and purely worshipped and served. O that my mind may be
ever employed in pious or honest thoughts; that my will may choose the better
part, which can never be taken away from me; that I may set my affections on
heavenly things, and not on things upon the earth; that I may use the world, as
one that seeks a better country; being cheerful and yet composed; diligent in
my calling, and yet working out my salvation; doing good to my self with all
the comforts of this life, and likewise unto others. Give me the grace, good
Lord, never to be weary of well-doing; to be just in all my dealings; faithful
in my promises; mindful of my vows; upright in the discharge of my trust;
inoffensive in word and deed, and an useful and peaceable Member of Church and
state. Dispose me to be good in all my relations; obedient to those who are
over me; kind to all my equals; compassionate and pitiful to those that are in
misery; meek and lowly toward all men. O that riches may never make me forget
my self, nor poverty tempt me to forget thee; that health may not make me
confident and secure, nor sickness make me dejected and discontented. But I may
be patient and constant in all adversities; Religious and thankful in
prosperity; and go through fullness and emptiness, honor and disgrace, good
report and bad, with the same evenness of mind; till I come to receive praise
and commendation as a good servant of Jesus Christ, at the great day of his
appearing. In whose most powerful Name I continue to make my suits unto thee;
saying as he has taught me.

Our Father, etc. The Meditation afterward.
IS not our heavenly Father very desirous, that we should love him? Would he
else have appeared among us? Would he have manifested himself to us? Yea,
manifested himself in our flesh? And more than that, purchased us to himself by
his own blood? O how dear has he paid for our love? Love him, love him
exceedingly, that he may not lose the great price, wherewith we are bought. But
what love do we bear him, if we be not like him? What are we the better that a
Savior is born to us, if he be not formed in us, and dwell not in our heart by
faith? Was not this the end of his taking our Nature, that he might purify it;
and make us reverence our selves more, than to defile that which is so near of
kin to the Son of God? O most wise goodness, which by becoming like to us,
designed to make us like thy self. I see the humility of the blessed Jesus, who
was born of a poor Virgin. I see his sweetness, in accommodating himself to the
vilest of us, and taking on him the form of a servant. I see how little he
valued the riches and the dignities and the pleasures of this world. How
contented he was in a mean condition; how obedient to his parents; how
courteous to the meanest clients, who came to receive, not to give. I see how
liberal he was of his favors, how unwearied in doing good, how patient in
suffering any evil; how he loved righteousness and hated iniquity; how dear the
honest heart was to him, and how odious hypocrisy. I see how meek he was when
he was affronted; how loath his enemies should perish; how little concerned
either in the calumnies, or applauses of the world; How absolutely resigned to
the will of God; and how desirous to do him honor. O how often did he thank
his heavenly Father? How many hours did he spend in prayer and private converse
with him? How joyfully did he suffer great pains to do great good? And at last
laid down his life, full of hope in God to see a glorious resurrection? These
are the beauties of Jesus, which I admire. This is the Image of him, which I
have vowed to carry always in my heart. This is the glory of humane nature: the
honor and dignity to which I would be preferred. I desire to be great in
nothing but his humility: to be rich only in contentedness, patience, and good
works: to be glorified in meekness, and sweet condiscention: to have the
pleasure only of pleasing God, and my Brethren to their edification: to rejoice
that Gods will is done, though mine be crossed.

And it is no small joy to see the beginnings of this beauteous image drawn
upon my heart. He that did not despise the Virgins womb, will not despise the
humble oblation I have made of my self to him; nor that little likeness he sees
in me of himself. Do thou not see, my soul, what great things come from mean
beginnings? How a poor Babe that lay in a manger, came to be the King of glory?
Hope in God then, that thou shall grow to a greater stature; and more exactly
resemble thy dearest Savior. He has given thee assurance that he will not
overlook thee, now that he sits on the Throne of his glory. It is a Throne of
grace too, unto which thou may address thy self, and find grace to help in
time of need. Do but let him see how much thou honor him; how precious his
memory is unto thee, how thou art in love with his purity; and he that was
manifested in our flesh will manifest himself in thee. He will adorn thee with
all his graces; and make thee shine as a light in the world; in humble charity,
in meekness of wisdom, in cheerful patience, and devout obedience. Blessed be
God for this hope. I have no cause to envy the greatest persons: No, not her
that carried him in her womb, and then in her arms; if there had been nothing
more. For though we are apt to say as the woman among the multitude did,
Blessed is the womb that bare thee, Luke 11.27, 28.
and the paps that thou have sucked; yet Jesus says, yea, rather blessed are
they that hear the word of God and keep it. They that hear or believe his word
conceive him in their heart: and they that do it, bring him forth in their
life. Blessed be Jesus for the least share I have in this blessedness. I will
spend this holy day, in praising him for the hope I have to partake of more of
it. What can there be more delightful to those, who know what it is to believe
in him and obey him? And in what shall we spend the rest of this time wherein
we commemorate his coming into the world? Shall we be so uncivil to our Lord,
as to go more willingly to feast with our neighbors, than to feast again with
him? Shall we go to their houses with more cheer, than unto his? I will never
so dishonor him. God forbid that I should feast my body more than my Soul. I
will rather imitate the ancient Christians, who could find in their heart to
meet every day before the morning light, to sing Hymns to our Savior. I will,
at least, be able to say with David; O that all others may bear me company in
it, I have gone with the multitude, Psalm. 42.4.
I went with them to the house of God; with the voice of joy and praise, with a
multitude that kept Holy Day.

The Thanksgiving and Prayer afterward.
O Eternal Majesty of Heaven and Earth, the Father of mercies; by whom all
things were made out of nothing, whose Almighty hand supports them, from
falling back into nothing again, and whose good providence keeps them from
being miserable. Thy Wisdom is past finding out; thy Power is irresistible; thy
Love and Goodness is unmeasurable, and thy tender mercies over all thy Works. O
how great are thy tender mercies to us, O Lord! How large a portion have thou
given us in thy love! Thou have not dealt so with any Creature, as thou have
done with Man: on whom thou did instamp thine own image, and clothed him
with immortality, and made him Lord over the works of thy hands. And, so great
is thy goodness, that, when he had lost himself by departing from his obedience
to thee, thou would not so lose thy sinful Creature: but chose rather to do
wonders, that he might not perish. Thou have sent thy Son to seek after him and
restore him to thy self. Thou have not abhorred our Nature; but loved us so
much as to manifest thy self in our flesh, and honor us with the glorious
title of thy Sons, the Brethren of the Son of thy love Christ Jesus. I have
remembered with all thankfulness this day, his humble and loving descent from
Heaven, that he might be born and dwell among us: to comfort us in this sinful
and troublesome world with his Divine presence; to assure us of thy good will
to us, and invite us friendly to return to thee; to instruct and encourage us
in our duty; to put us in hope of endless felicity; and at last to die and give
himself a ransom for us; that he might be touched with a sense of our
infirmities, being in all points tempted like as we are, without sin. I again
adore, O Lord, thy most glorious Majesty. I reverence thy Power and greatness.
I wonder at thy wisdom; and am astonished at thy goodness. I have neither words
nor thoughts befitting the inestimable benefits thou have bestowed on us. O
that the Holy Spirit which was in our Savior, would inspire my heart with
devout affections toward thee, O God of all grace: that I may love thee more
than I can express, more than now my heart can think; and I may join cheerfully
with all the Heavenly Host above, that are still giving honor, blessing,
glory, power and dominion to thee, for ever and ever. For unto us a Child is
born; Isa. 9.6, 7.
unto us a Son is given: the mighty God, the Prince of peace: of the increase
of his government and peace there shall be no end. In him dwells all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily: And we are members of his body, Coloss. 2.9, 10.
of his flesh and of his bones. Ephesians. 5.30
In him we are complete, which is the head of all Principality and Power; and
has redeemed us by his blood, Rev. 5.9.
and made us Kings and Priests unto God, to offer unto him Spiritual
Sacrifices; 1 Pet. 2.5.
and we shall reign with him for ever. Amen. I confess, O Lord, that I am less
than the least of all thy mercies: And though I have been ungrateful even for
the greatest, yet thou continuest the course of thy goodness; and have now
newly admitted me to the Communion of Christ's precious Body and Blood. Thou
pitiest also my weak and childish thoughts, my heavy and dull affections, and
all the wanderings of my foolish imagination; and do not estrange thy self
from me, though I am so little moved by thy miraculous love. O thou who have
done such great things for me, bear still mercifully with me: exercise more of
thy patience, and show thy self exceeding great in forbearance and long
suffering toward me. Thou who have given thy Son unto me, vouchsafe to send
thy Holy Spirit to over-shadow my Soul, and form Christ Jesus within me. That
conceiving him in my heart by a lively faith and belief of his Gospel, I may be
made partaker of a Divine nature: and express him in his holiness, meekness,
humility, patience, charity, contentedness, and simplicity; in perfect
innocence, in doing good, and entire satisfaction in thy fatherly love. O that
the new life to which I am born by the incorruptible seed of thy Word, which
lives and abides for ever, 1 P t. 1.23
and for the nourishment of which thou have provided this holy Feast, of which
I have now partaked; may increase unto a perfect age, to the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ: that so at last I may be begotten again from
the dead, and be a child of the resurrection, to live for ever with the Lord.
And for that end dispose my heart, as a new born babe, to desire the sincere
milk of thy Word that I may grow thereby. That since thou have caused thy Holy
Scriptures to be written for our learning, I may in such wise hear them, read,
mark, learn, and inwardly digest them, that I may obey from the heart that form
of Doctrine, Romans 6.17
whereunto I have been delivered: and by patience and comfort of thy Word,
embrace and ever hold fast the blessed hope of everlasting life, which thou
have given us in our Savior Jesus Christ. Vouchsafe, good Lord, so to direct
and govern me, that I may never profane this Body, which thou have so
sanctified, honored and exalted, by intemperance or any impurity: nor this
Soul which is so dear to thee, by pride or envy, hatred or malice, wrath or
revenge, covetousness or discontent. But I may repose a perfect trust and
confidence in thee for what I want, seeing thou have not withheld thy Son,
thine only Son, from us; and be thankful for what I enjoy; and live in the love
of thee, my God, and of all my Brethren; and possess my body in sanctification
and in honor; that I may humbly wait for thy mercy in Christ Jesus to eternal
life. Help me this very day, to begin to use all bodily good things with holy
fear; with thanksgiving; with pity to the poor and needy; with a sense of
spiritual delights and hungerings after righteousness; and with most earnest
longings after that feast of joy and gladness which we hope to keep with thee
in the Heavens.

O that all the world may hear the glad tidings of a Savior; that there may be
great joy among all people. Let all the people praise thee, O God, let all the
people praise thee. Let them lift up their hands unto thee in his name, and bow
their knees unto him: and let every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord,
to the glory of God the Father. And O that all they who do confess him, may
have their conversation as becomes the Gospel, and be continually offering up
the Sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving, and be communicating and doing good.
Kings of the Earth and all People; Psalm. 148.11, 12, 13.
Princes, and all Judges of the Earth. Both young men and maidens, old men and
children. Let them praise the Name of the Lord: that God in all things may be
glorified through Christ Jesus; to whom be praise and dominion, 1 P^t. 4.11.
for ever and ever. Amen.

On Newyears-day, if there be a Communion, may be added this short Meditation.
LEt us consider, my Soul, before we go to the Holy Table; for what ends we go
thither; and with what hearts we ought to go. Is it not to admire the greatness
of Gods love in giving his Son to us; and the greatness of Christ's love in
giving himself for us? Is it not to render our highest thanks and praise to the
Father and the Son, for this inestimable love, in giving his blood a ransom for
us; and then to offer up our selves wholly to his love? Is it not to renew our
Baptismal Covenant, wherein we promised to forsake all his enemies, and to lead
a mortified life in all obedience to his will? To represent to God what his Son
has done for us, and humbly to hope in him, for all the benefits of his
passion? To receive increase of power to overcome the world, and further
testimonies of his love, and stronger desires after the consummation of it in
Heavenly bliss? To unite our heart in Brotherly affection to all the faithful
servants of Jesus; and to rejoice in the holy Communion of Christ and his
Saints? O blessed Jesus, who can have hearts disposed to do all this without
thee? I come to thee therefore, that thou will represent thy self most lively
to me. If I could have seen thee hanging on the Cross; or if thou would
appear to me as thou did to Saul; if the Heavens were opened, and I could
behold thee, as did St. Steven; what strange passions, what holy affections
would it raise up in my heart! Open thine eyes, my Soul, heartily and strongly
believe; and thy joy shall be full. He will be in the midst of us, when we are
assembled together in his Name; according as he promised. He presents himself
before us in these Signs of his Body and Blood. Behold, how the Word was made
flesh: how he was Circumcised, and fulfilled the Law under which he was born;
that he might be a pure and unspotted offering to God. See how he was whipped and
scourged for thy sake. See how he suffered upon the Cross; how his Body was
broken, and his heart-Bloud poured out to reconcile us unto God. And then thou
can not but come with a thankful heart; and with an humble, reverent, and
devout affection present thy self unto him: bitterly bewailing thy offenses,
cheerfully resigning thy self to his will, and joyfully hoping for his mercy.
When he says by his Minister, Take, eat, drink this; what is the meaning, but
as if he should say, I am thy Salvation? And when thou stretchest out thy hand
and do this; what is it, but to say, My Lord, and my God? Joh. 20.28.
And happy are they, who not only call him Lord, but do the things that he
says. Blessed are they, that do his Commandments; that they may have right to
the Tree of Life; Rev. 22.14.12.20.
and enter into the City of God. Behold, he comes, and his reward is with him:
and he will give to every man according as his work shall be. Rev. 21 7.
And he that overcomes (says he) shall inherit all things: I will be his God,
and he shall be my Son. Amen. Even so, come Lord Jesus.

And this short Prayer.
O Lord of heaven and earth; who know my down-sitting, and my up-rising,
Psalm. 139.2, 3. etc.
and understandest my thoughts a far off. Who compassest my path and my lying
down, and art acquainted with all my ways, ever since I was born. There is not
a word in my tongue, Psa. 19.12.
but lo, O Lord, thou know it altogether. Such knowledge is too wonderful for
me: it is high, I cannot attain unto it. Who can understand the errors of his
whole life? And with what trembling ought I to approach thee, though I knew
nothing by my self? But alas my own heart condemns me; and thou art greater
than my heart, and know all things. I am ashamed to think, that I lived so
many years, before I seriously thought of all my duty to thee. And that since I
have known thy will and devoted my self to thy service, I have made such small
improvement in wisdom and virtue. Many years are passed, and innumerable
blessings in them have been received; but alas! the God in whose hand my breath
is, Dan. 5.23.
and whose are all my ways, how little have I glorified? I have reason to
blush that now I have brought an heart before thee, with so little sense of
that love, which I have so often remembered, and praised and acknowledged, with
the largest expressions of devotion to thee. But it is some comfort, O Lord,
that thy all-searching eye, which pierces to the bottom of my soul, sees a
sincere desire there to become better; and a steadfast resolution to endeavor
to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. It is in my
heart to renew my covenant with thee; to engage my fidelity once more to thee:
trusting that I have a good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly.
Heb. 13.18.
I hope thou will graciously accept, and encourage whatsoever thou beholdest of
thy self in me; and when I go to offer my self again most solemnly to thee at
thy Altar, make me feel thy divine presence with me: enlightening my mind with a
clear sense of thee; raising in me worthy thoughts and affections toward my
dear Savior; engaging my will more firmly to thine; confirming all my pious
resolutions, exciting my Faith, love, hope and joy; that this holy Communion
may be to the continuance of a holy life in greater care, diligence, zeal and
fervency in all well doing. Assist me, I beseech thee, in every part of this
duty; that I may remember the sufferings of the Lord Jesus, so as to be
crucified with him, and his great love, so as to love him with all my soul, and
my neighbor as my self; and the new covenant he has made in his blood, so as
to have his laws written on my heart; and all the the precious promises he has
thereby sealed to us, so as to place my entire contentment and satisfaction in
them; till I come to possess that perfect happiness which I wait for, through
thy mercies in Christ Jesus, Amen.

Our Father, etc. A short Meditation after.
WHat have thou now received from our Lord? Are they not the most sacred
pledges of his love? And what does the Lord require of thee? but only love. But
how great a thing is love? Love brought him down hither to us: and love will
carry us up to God. Love made him like to man: and love is able to make thee
like to God. O the power of heavenly love! How shall we get it planted in our
heart? How? But by love? The frequent meditation of this admirable love of God
in his Son Jesus, will not suffer us not to love him with all our heart and
soul and strength. Let us resolve then that the remembrance of his love shall
lie perpetually in our heart. As we have begun the year with the thoughts of
his love: so let us continue it. What more welcome thought can there be to thee
every morning when thou awakest than this, I am the beloved of the King of
Glory? With what can thou open thy soul more cheerfully? What will brighten
it, and chase away the darkness of melancholy, sorrow, sadness, cares and
fears, like to this? If thou have not lost an hour, and wasted this precious
time which thou have spent at the Table of the Lord, thou can not but feel
the mighty force of his infinite love. Let us try, my soul, what it will be
able to do in a whole years thoughts upon it. Let the morning light bring Jesus
ever along with it to thy mind: and enkindle in thee a new devotion to him. And
let us take all occasions to celebrate his memory; that so our holy resolutions
may be more quickened and strengthened; and when the flame begins to burn dimm,
we may blow it up again, and add more fuel to it. If a friend had left thee a
token of his love, whereby to keep him in mind, would thou throw it into some
blind corner, and never look upon it? But suppose he was a dying friend, nay a
friend that dyed for thee, to save thee from death; could he ever go out of thy
mind, or would thou let the thing he left to remember him by, be long out of
thine eye? Let us not deal more unkindly with our Savior. Did he think when he
went to heaven, that those whom he has so obliged, would remember his love so
seldom and so coldly? That they need be so much entreated to come and have
communion with him? Is it not a grief to him now (if he be capable of any) to
see that he has so few lovers? And that they who profess love to him, testify
it so rarely and in so poor a manner? Let us vow, my soul, again that we will
henceforth show our selves his hearty friends, by keeping his holy Commands:
and never forget that this is one, Do this in remembrance of me. I will
remember thee, O Lord, and in this manner lift up my hands in thy name; till I
have finished my days and come to see thee as thou art, in all thy Majesty and
Glory.

And this Thanksgiving and Prayer may be added afterward.
O Lord, I thine unworthy servant, whom thou art pleased to call thy child,
most devoutly humble my self before thee, in new adorations of that love which
I can never fully understand. The highest of our praises, is most heartily to
acknowledge, that thou art exalted above all blessing and praise: And our most
grateful acknowledgments, to be very sensible of the weakness of our love, when
it is advanced to its greatest and strongest pitch. Thy love is like to thy
self, and we cannot search it out to perfection. It is higher than the Heavens,
Job 11.
what can we do? It is broader than the Sea, what can we know? I have enjoyed
many years of mercies; and thou have been loading me with a multitude of
inestimable benefits both for Soul and Body, ever since I came into this world.
Every day brings me fresh tokens of thy goodness; and this day, the dearest of
all, the tokens of thine everlasting love. Psalm. 139.
O how precious are thy thoughts toward us, how great is the sum of them! I
hope to give thee eternal praises, O Father of mercies, and God of all comfort;
who have made us after thy own image; and in the fullness of time sent thy Son
born of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem us from the curse; and have
adopted us to be thy children; promised to make us heirs with thy only
begotten; and for that end to give us a new birth from the Grave, into an
immortal Life. Have patience with me, O Lord, till that time, when I shall more
fully comprehend, and better acknowledge the greatness of thy love: for which I
will endeavor to prepare my self, by an innocent, harmless and unblamable
life, as becomes the Gospel of Christ. To him I have now dedicated my self
again in all holy obedience. I have professed my self his servant, that admires
him and loves him, and glories in being his faithful Disciple. O that the good
thoughts and pious inclinations, which I have now felt in my heart, may remain
and abide there for ever: that as I grow in years, so I may grow (as my Savior
did) in grace and favor with thee my God, and with all good men. Endue me with
a more solid knowledge of thy will, with a stronger love and affection to it,
and with power to do my duty toward thee and toward all men. That I may
behave my self in an humble and godly fear before thee; in all justice, mercy
and charity to my Neighbors; and possess my Body and Soul in sobriety,
chastity and patience. Make me loving to my inferiors, respectful to my
betters, friendly to my equals, kind to all mine enemies; thankful for thy
mercies, contented with my own state and condition of life; fearful of my self
in prosperity, and confident in thee in adversity; that all temptations may
only present me with something to overcome, and give me new occasions of
victory over the world, and produce for me at last a greater crown of glory.

For thou art my hope, O Lord God: thou art my trust from my youth. Psalm. 7^ 5,
6, 8, 9.
By thee have I been holden up from the womb: thou art he that took me out of
my mothers bowels; my praise shall be continually of thee. Cast me not off in
the time of old age, 73.24*
forsake me not when my strength fails. But let my mouth be filled with thy
praise, and with thy h^nour all the day. Guide me with thy counsel, and
afterward receive me to glory, through Christ Jesus; to whom with thy self, in
the unity of the Holy Ghost, be all honor, thanksgiving, love and obedience
rendered, by me and all Angels and Men, both now and eternally. Amen.

Easter Day.
The Meditation before.
O Blessed day! which brought glad tidings of great joy. Our Saviors second
birthday, to a more glorious life! The day of the first fruits of those that
slept! The day that brought life and immortality to light! and gave us assured
hope in God, that it shall be to us according to Jesus his Word. Why do we
dream thus, my Soul, about these things? Awake, awake; and stir up in thy self
the most piercing belief and sense of them. Thy Savior is risen, and calls
unto thee with a mighty voice, saying, Rev. 1.1^.
I am he that lives, and was dead; and behold, I am alive for evermore, Amen;
and have the keys of Hell and of Death. Need there any more words to persuade
thee to go and rejoice in his love, which made him give himself to die for
thee? And in the love of God which accepted of his oblation, and rewarded his
sufferings with a glorious Resurrection to an endless Life? And in that power,
might and majesty wherewith he is crowned? So that at the Name of Jesus all
things in Heaven and Earth, and under the Earth do bow and obey? It is too
little to say, that I will go and thank him, at this holy Feast, for what he
has done for me, and for what I hope he will still do: I will go and offer my
self absolutely to him: I will make a vow of love to him, and charity to all
the world: I will triumph in his praise, and glory in the service of the Prince
of life: I will dedicate my self to be an everlasting monument both of his
Death and of his Resurrection from the dead. I will so remember his death, as
to die my self to sin: And so remember his Resurrection, as to rise again to
walk before him in newness of life: And his dying no more; so that sin shall
have no more dominion over me, Romans 6.12, 14.
nor reign in my mortal body, that I should obey it in the lusts thereof. His
Humility shall be remembered so as to kill my Pride; and his Charity so as to
kill my Covetousness. I will remember his pains so, as to mortify all
inordinate desires of pleasure; and his patience so, as to subdue my anger,
passion and peevishness. His love to his Enemies, shall make me forgive others,
and do good to those who do evil to me. And his absolute obedience, make me
take up my Cross, and be obedient to the very death. Do thou not begin
already to feel the remembrance of his free giving himself for thee, animate
thee to a cheerfulness, and forwardness in well doing? Does not his full trust
in God, when he laid down his life, that he should receive it again, raise in
thee a strong confidence in his Almighty word? Is not the power he has over
Hell and Death, of mighty force to encourage thy hopes, and make thee
victorious over all thy enemies? How does thy heart beat within thy breast?
What thoughts and passions does it travel withal? Does it not begin to send up
admiring thoughts toward Heaven where Jesus is? Does it not burn with strong
desires? Is it not ready to burst forth into the highest expressions of love
and joy? Art thou not enraged against all those sins which murdered the Lord of
life? Are they not all condemned to be crucified and slain? Do thou not
resolve to live like one, that believes in Jesus, and professes himself to be
his faithful follower?

Then think when thou go to celebrate the memory of his Death, that Jesus
stands in the midst of you, as he did among his Disciples when he was newly
risen from the Grave, saying, Peace be unto you. Joh. 20.19.
Eat, O my Friends; rejoice and be exceeding glad: As my Father has loved me,
so I have loved you: Joh. 15.9.
continue ye in my love. Behold here, the sensible Signs and Seals of my love.
By these I give my self to you, as once I gave my self for you. By these tokens
I convey to you, all that I have. I make over to you that inheritance which I
have purchased by my Blood; and that is eternal life in the Heavenly places.
For I am alive again; and behold I live for evermore. Amen, Lord Jesus; 14.19.
live, live for ever. Because th^^ live, I shall live also. Thou know how
to pity us, because thou art he who was dead. And thou will never cease to pity
and help us, because thou art he that lives, ^^m. 6.9.
and being raised from the dead dies no more; death has no more dominion over
thee. Because thou wast dead and tempted in all things like unto us, thou art
sensible of our infirmities, and able to succor us in all the trials of life
and death. And because thou live, thou can make thy death become powerful
and effectual to us: thou can make good all thy own promises, and put us in
possession of the purchased inheritance. 1 Pet. 1.3.
Blessed be God, which according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again
unto such a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.
Death is swallowed up in victory. O death where is thy sting? O grave, 1 Cor.
15.54, 55.
where is thy victory? Thanks be to God who has not appointed us to wrath, 1 Thessalonians. 5.9, 10.
but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ; who dyed for us, that
whether we wake or sleep, we should live with him. Knowing that he which raised
up the Lord Jesus, shall raise up us also by Jesus; 2 Cor. 4.14 Jude 24.
and shall present us faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding
joy.

The Prayer before.
O Most mighty Lord of heaven and earth, the Father of Spirits, the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: whose name is ever hallowed by an innumerable
company of Holy ones, that are always burning with love to thee, and praising
thy most beauteous perfections; thy incomprehensible wisdom, goodness,
righteousness and truth. The Sun shines not before the brightness of thy
Majesty. The Angels are unclean, in compare with the purity of thy holiness.
What are we, O Lord, that thou will look down from the habitation of thy
holiness upon us! what manner of love is this, wherewith thou have loved us! in
sending thy Son down among us, and designing to take us up unto thy self, that
we may join with that holy fellowship of Angels and Saints, to love and praise
thee for ever. We are the offspring of rebellious parents, that have been
transgressors from the beginning. Who have dishonored our nature, despised or
undervalued thy grace in the Lord Jesus, resisted or coldly entertained thy
holy Spirit; and loved these little things here below, more than that eternal
happiness, which Jesus has revealed by his resurrection from the dead. We are
not worthy of the crumbs that fall from thy Table, which thou have spread for
all creatures, or of the least drop of thy mercies. We are not worthy to lick
the dust before thee; because we deserve not to live and breath any longer in
this world. And yet thou let us live in hope, that we shall live with thee:
and thou give us leave to breath forth our souls toward thee: and have thy
self spread a new Table for us, and furnished it with the richest of thy
blessings: and invitest me most graciously, among the rest, to come now and
feast with thee, and eat of the bread of life which came down from heaven, and
is able to nourish me to eternal life. I would fain, O Lord, approach into thy
holy presence there, and behold the wonders of thy love. But I am covered with
shame and blushing because of my ingratitude unto thee. I cannot with any
confidence open my eyes toward thee, till I have some sense in my heart that
thou art willing to cover my sins, and hide thy face from mine iniquities.
Which I cannot reasonably hope for, till I find them loathsome, grievous and
hateful to me, more than death it self. I ought to hang down my head in
heaviness of spirit, till a sense that my heart is thoroughly changed and
renewed, give me liberty to look up unto thee, saying, Thy will O Lord be done.
Possess thy self of my soul; for I absolutely submit my thoughts, desires and
passions to be ruled and governed by thee in all things. And what is it else, O
my God, that I long for? What does my soul thirst after? But that I may know
thee more, Ephesians. 1.19, 20.
and the greatness of thy power to us ward, which wrought in Christ, when it
raised him from the dead; and set him at thy right hand in heavenly places, and
that I may be overcome and perfectly subdued by this mighty love; and that I
may be transformed into thy image, and live according to the sense I have of
thy most adorable perfections* O that I may wholly follow the guidance of thy
wisdom; and submit to thy sovereign Authority; and be obedient to all thy
righteous and good laws: reverencing and fearing thy majesty, approving my
inward thoughts and desires to thine all-seeing eye, depending on thy
al-sufficiency, hoping in thy omnipotent goodness, trusting to thy true and
faithful word, delighting and rejoicing continually in thy Fatherly love and
care of me, who have brought me into being, and preserved me from ruin, Ephesians.
3.6.
and made me partaker of thy promise in Christ; the beginning and first born
from the dead; in whom it pleased thee, that all fullness should dwell. Col.
1.18, 19.
I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord: that I may be found in him, and have the righteousness which is
by Faith: Ph l. 3.8, 9, 10.
that I may know the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his
sufferings, being made conformable unto his death; if by any means I may attain
unto the resurrection of the dead. Begin now, good Lord, to raise up my heart
above all these perishing things, to those joys where thou art exalted. Make
me feel that thou art an high Priest after the power of an endless life; still
ready and able to assist and succor all those that come to God by thee. O that
my eyes might be so fixed on the high and holy place into which thou art
entered, that some little glimps of thy glory may breakforth upon me; and I may
see the treasures and riches of thy kingdom, and what is the hope of my
calling; that so I may be confirmed in my resolutions, grow strong in the
Faith, and be more fervent in my desires, more vehement and earnest in my
endeavors, unwearied in my pains, impregnable against all temptations,
cheerful under all difficulties and discouragements; Phil. 3.13, 14.
and that forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto
those things which are before, I may press toward the mark, for the prize of
the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Into thy hands, both now and ever,
Psalm. ^^.5.
I commit my Spirit: for thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of truth. I confide
entirely in his Almighty and eternal love, to whom thou have given all power in
heaven and in earth. Matthew. 28.18.
I wait on thee, who have not thought thy immortality too much to bestow on us,
for whatsoever thou see good and wholesome for me in this world; referring my
self wholly to thy wisdom, and looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious
appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ: Tit. 2.13.
in whose prevailing name I am emboldned to make these addresses to thee, and
still to offer up my desires in his holy words, saying.

Our Father which art, etc. The Meditation afterward.
Psalm. 118.24, 22.
THis is the day which the Lord has made, I will rejoice and be glad in it.
The stone which the builders refused, is become the head of the corner. God
has raised up Jesus, whom they slew and hanged on a tree. Him has God exalted
with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, Act. 5.30, 31.
for to give repentance and remission of sins. It is the Lords doing, and it is
mavelous in our eyes. God is the Lord, that has showed us light: offer unto
him the Sacrifice of righteousness, Psalm. 118.23, 27, 28, 29. Psalm. 4.5.
and say, thou art my God and I will praise thee: thou art my God, I will exalt
thee. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy endures for
ever.

Could I ever cease to rejoice if I heard for certain that a dead friend, the
dearest in the world, was alive again: and not only alive, but preferred to the
highest dignity and honor? O my dullness! that I rejoice no more in God my
Savior! For that Jesus whom I have now seen crucified before mine eyes, is
alive from the dead. That Jesus who was such a friend that he died and hung on
a gibbet for me; is revived again and sits on the throne of glory. Without all
doubt he lives and reigns for me also: and being reconciled by his death, Romans
5.10
I shall much more be saved by his life. For God having raised up his Son
Jesus, sent him to bless us, in turning every one of us from his iniquities.
Act. 3.20.
And we wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead, 1 Thessalonians.
1.10.
even Jesus which delivered us from the wrath to come. He is the first begotten
from the dead: and has the keys of the grave. Rev. 1.5.
He will change this vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious
body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things
unto himself. Phil. 3.21.
For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which
sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. 1 Thessalonians. 4.14.
Lord what a blessed hope is this! seeing we look for these things, what manner
of persons ought we to be in holy conversation and godliness? 2 Pet. 3.11, 4.
How diligent should we be, that we may be found of him in peace, without spot
and blameless? What can be more disagreeing than a crucified Christ, and a
carnal Christian? What more contrary than a Savior despising the world, and
one that professes friendship to him, loving it above God himself? A libe^al
Savior, and a covetous disciple? A Savior that endured pain and anguish and
^orrow, and a servant that will live in nothing but ease and pleasure? A
Savior weeping and bleeding, and a man acquainted with grief; and a world that
nothing but laughs and sports and makes merry? A Savior that suffered all
things, and a world that will suffer nothing; no not the mortifying of
unreasonable lusts and desires? A humble and lowly Savior, and a proud,
vainglorious, self-conceited people that profess him? A meek and patient
Savior, and a passionate, angry and revengeful generation, that pretend to be
his followers? A Savior that was ever thinking of our good, and men that call
themselves his lovers, who never to any purpose remember hi^ love? A gracious
Lord that did us the mos^ real courtesies and benefits; and servant^ that only
complement with him, and call him Lord, Lord, but do not that which he says* A
master that never quarrelled with any o^ Gods Commands, no, though it were to
die and such scholars that count all his Commandments grievous, murmur at all
his lessons, and say that it is impossible to obe^ them? O how unlike is a
diffident distrustful Christian, to a Savior that laid dow^ his very life in
hope? How il-favoured do these two sound together, a conquering Christ, and a
Christian that is a slave? Jes^ that has conquered death, and a Christian that
cannot conquer himself? An head that is in heaven, and a member of his, that
only looks at things on earth? God forbid that having professed my self so
often to be dead to sin, I should live any longer therein. I was buried with
him by baptism into death; Romans 6.4, 5, 6.
that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father,
even so I also should walk in newness of life. And now I am again planted in
the likeness of his death, by partaking of his broken body and his blood that
was shed: and therefore shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection:
knowing this that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might
be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. God be thanked, that
though I was the servant sin, Ib. v. 17, 18.
yet now being made free from it, I am become the servant of righteousness.
Henceforth, I will serve no other master. 1 Cor. 5.7, 8.
For even Christ our passover (by whose blood we are redeemed from everlasting
destruction) is sacrificed for us. And therefore I will keep the Feast, not
with malice and wickedness, but with sincerity and truth. Building up my self
in our most holy Faith, praying in the holy Ghost, I will keep my self in the
love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.

The Thanksgiving and Prayer of afterward.
O Most mighty Lord, the Creator and possessor of Heaven and Earth: who art
every where and can not be excluded from any place, no not from the closest
thoughts of any of our hearts. Who art always the same, and can no more
change, than thou can cease to be what thou art: unmoveably fixed in thy own
eternal blessedness. Thou need not go out of thy self for any thing; and I
am sensible that I cannot possibly make thee greater, or more happy than thou
art: But it is my bounden duty to admire and extol, to laud and praise, to
worship, love and honor thee: and it is a good thing to give thanks unto the
Lord, and praise is comely. All the Host of Heaven delight to sing perpetual
Hymns, to the glory of thy infinite Majesty: with whom I beseech thee to give
me leave to join my poor and imperfect praises. The whole world was made out of
Nothing by thy Power: and proclaims thy greatness, wisdom and goodness in the
multitude, variety, beauty, comeliness and order of all thy works of wonder.
The Heavens are the work of thy hands; the Earth stands fast by thy
appointment, and every thing keeps the course wherein thou have set it with
admirable constancy. Thou governest all things without any trouble: because at
once thou know and can do what thou please; and thou do all things
with the greatest reason, justice, mercy and pleasure to thy self. Man was
raised by thee out of the dust of Earth; and thou did inspire him with a wise
and understanding Spirit; and placedst him in a Paradise surrounded with thy
blessings, and Lord over the work of thy hands. And when he had degraded
himself, and forfeited, by his disobedience, his garden of pleasure; thou did
not leave him without a remedy, but openedst the way for him into the Paradise
above. Thou did send thy holy Prophets, and messengers in all ages to thy
people; and in the fullness of time, thine own dear Son, the brightness of thy
glory: whom thou have made Heir of all things, and to whom thou have graciously
committed the care of us. Blessed be thy unspeakable goodness, who have made
him in all things like unto us, sin only excepted, so that we know and are
sure, that he will take care of us, and pity us, and relieve us. I adore thy
unparalleled love in giving him to die, that he might make expiation for our
sins; and that he has overcome death by his rising again; and is set down at
thy right hand, because he was obedient to the death. From thence we have
received the gift of the Holy Ghost (thanks be to thy Grace) to confirm us in
the belief of his Resurrection, and of all his promises, by signs and wonders,
and mighty deeds; and to give us power to perform our duty toward thee and
toward all men. Thou have spread this Gospel of Salvation into the furthermost
parts of the Earth; and the light of it has long shone upon this Kingdom where
I live. I was born into this light, as well as into the light of the Sun, and
had early assurances given me of thy love. In my very infancy I was devoted to
thee; and all the engagements I was capable of, laid upon me to be happy, by
being a faithful Disciple of Christ Jesus. Thou have not failed since to breath
on me by thy Holy Spirit, and to move me to my duty; that I might be able to
make the answer of a good Conscience toward thee, 1 Pet. 3 21.
and so be saved by his his Resurrection from the dead. Many happy
opportunities have thou put into my hands, to improve my self in Christian
wisdom and virtue: and engaged me to thee in many solemn vows, only to seek the
glory, honor, and immortality, which Christ has brought to light, by patient
continuance in well-doing. I have now received the pledges of it, and
commemorated his love in dying for us, and thy love in raising him to life
again: that he might perfect our Salvation; and assure us he has obtained an
eternal redemption; and comfort us against the fears of death; and take care of
us for ever; and receive the power and glory thou promisedst him, that he may
be able to bless us and do us all good. O how has thy love abounded in Christ
Jesus! Besides a world of outward blessings, which thy bounteous hand has
poured on me, and still continues merely out of thy goodness and liberality.
How can I praise thee for all thy mercies to all mankind, who cannot comprehend
all those which thou have bestowed on my self alone? None can understand how
much we are beholden to thee; but those that know what thy Son Jesus was, and
what the blessing of the Holy Ghost, and what the Resurrection of the dead, and
the unsearchable riches of thy Kingdom and Glory are. Accept, blessed Lord, of
such acknowledgments as I am able to make thee. Accept of my whole self, which
I yield up unto thee with love unfeigned. Thou whose infinite understanding
pierces into the greatest depths and secrets, know that I love thee. Do
even what thou please with me; for it is but just and reasonable, that I
should not live unto my self henceforth, but unto him that died for me and rose
again. I am twice thy Creature: Thou have given me life a second time by Christ
Jesus, through whom thou have created me to good works, in hope of a blessed
Resurrection from the dead. Inspire me good Lord, with such a strong and
lasting sense of thy love, that I may always live in sincere obedience to him,
and never forfeit the new title, thou have given me, to life immortal: But
believing the Resurrection of Jesus from the dead, I may most heartily
acknowledge him to be the Lord; and steadfastly believe his Doctrine; obeying his
commands, hoping in his promises, and fearing his threatenings; and endeavoring
thereby to prepare my self, in all purity and holiness of life, for the joys of
the World to come.

And The words of the Church Catechism explaining the Lords Prayer.
I desire my Lord God our Heavenly Father, who is the giver of all goodness, to
send his grace unto me and to all people, that we may worship him, serve him,
and obey him as we ought to do. And that he will send us all things that be
needful both for our Souls and Bodies; and be merciful to us, and forgive us
our sins; and that it will please him to save and defend us in all dangers
ghostly and bodily, and that he will keep us from all sin and wickedness, and
from our ghostly enemy, and from everlasting death. Which I trust he will do of
his mercy and goodness, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Now the God of peace, Heb 13.20, 21.
that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the
Sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant. Make us perfect in every
good work to do his will; working in us that which is well-pleasing in his
sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

This short acknowledgment may be used sometime that Week.
Acts 4.24, 25.
LOrd, thou art God which have made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea, and all that
in them is: who by the mouth of thy servant David have said, Psalm. 2.7, 8.
Thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee. And I will give thee the
Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy
possession. Thy word is true from the beginning. Psalm. 119.160.89.90.
For ever, O Lord, thy word is settled in Heaven. Thy faithfulness is unto all
generations. For thou have sent thy holy Child Jesus, Romans 1.4.
and declared him to be the Son of God with power, by the Resurrection from the
dead. Though he was Crucified through weakness, 2 Cor. 13.4.
yet he lives by the power of God. Thou would not let thy holy one see
corruption: Acts 2.27, 28.
But have made known to him the ways of life, and made him full of joy with thy
countenance. Thou have given him power over all flesh, Joh. 17.2.
that he should give eternal life to as many as thou have given him. Adored be
thine Eternal love, which appeared in the sufferings of Christ, and the glory
that followed after. Adored be thy love, 1 Pet. 1.3.11. 2 Timothy 1.10 1 Cor.
15.20. Joh. 11.25.
which has given us a lively hope through the Resurrection of Christ Jesus,
who has brought life and immortality to light: being the First Fruits of them
that slept, and the Resurrection and the Life. I rejoice in the consolation
which thou has sent unto us; and that we in this furthermost part of the Earth
are become his inheritance. I praise thee; I bless thee; I most heartily devote
my self to the obedience of Jesus, as is but just and meet. For to this end
Christ has died, Romans 14.8, 9.
and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living. I
reverence his Sovereign authority: I submit my self to his Laws: and depend
upon his care and good providence. I refer my self to his wise will and
pleasure in all things: desiring nothing more, but that whether I live or die,
I may be the Lords. O that thy Spirit which raised up Jesus may dwell in me,
guide and govern me: Romans 8.11.
that thou who raisedst up Christ from the dead, may also quicken my mortal
body, by thy Spirit dwelling in me. O that the rest of the World may become his
possession too; and all with one mind and one mouth glorify thee, the God and
Father of Jesus Christ: Who is the faithful witness, and the first-begotten of
the dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the Earth: Rev. 1.5, 6
to whom be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

Ascension-day or Sunday.
The Meditation before.
AH! how duskish are my thoughts in house of Clay! How dull my affections under
this load of flesh! My Savior is in Heaven, crowned at Gods right hand with
glory and honor: Heb. 2.9. Ephesians. 4.10 1 Pet. 3.22
He is ascended up far above all Heavens, Angels, Authorities and Powers being
made subject to him. And I can scarce cast a look thither; but am instantly
pulled down to this Earth again. Blessed be his goodness who has left us a
lively Image of himself to help our infirmities. To represent his dying and
departure from this World; and to be a pledge likewise unto us, that we shall
one day ascend up to Heaven, and be for ever with the Lord. O blessed news! 1 Thessalonians. 4. ult.
the hope of it fills me with joy already, and raises me up a little toward
that high and holy place where Jesus dwells. I will go and bless the Father of
mercies for his great charity toward us; that he would accept of an offering
for sin; and that he would be satisfied without demanding of us the debt: That
he would grant new and easy conditions of Salvation for us through the Blood
of his Son; and seal a gracious Covenant in that same precious Blood. I will go
and testify my love to him, even by my joy that he is gone unto the Father;
Joh. 14.28
and has triumphed over his enemies, Coloss. 2.15.
after he had overcome them, and spoiled Principalities and Powers. Ephesians. 4.8.
He has led captivity captive, Acts 2.33.
and received the promise of the Holy Ghost; and is set down at the right hand
of the throne of God; Heb. 12.2.
and made the Lord of all. All the Angels of God worship him; Acts 10.36
and in the Heavenly Sanctuary attend upon him; where he is an High Priest for
ever, Heb. 1.6.8.2.
holy, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the Heavens.
(...) 6.10.13.
There he makes intercession for us; from henceforth expecting, till his
enemies be made his footstool. And we have boldness also by the Blood of
Jesus, 10.19.
6.20. Joh. 14.2, 3.
to enter into the holiest: whither he the forerunner is for us entered; and
gone to prepare a place for us: and will come again to receive us unto himself,
that where he is, there we may be also.

Psalm. 24.3, ^, 5.
But who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? And who shall stand in his
holy place? He that has clean hands, and a pure heart; who has not lift up
his Soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. He shall receive blessing from the
Lord, and righteousness from the God of his Salvation. I will go then and offer
him my heart, that it may be formed to his likeness; Who did no sin, neither
was guile found in his mouth. I will go and submit my self to him as the Lord
of all; and renew my Covenant of love and friendship with him. I will vow again
that I will fight valiantly under his banner, who is the Captain of our
Salvation, Heb. 2.10.
made perfect through sufferings, against sin, the world, and the Devil. I will
be faithful to him unto the death, and no suffering shall deter me from
following the Prince of life. For I doubt not but the Sacrifice he made was
most acceptable to God; and that he by himself having purged our sins, Heb.
1.3. H b. 2.13.
sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high; and will help and succor
all his faithful followers; 1.14.2.10.
and send forth his Angels to minister unto them; and bring them to glory, Rev.
2.10.
and reward them with a crown of life. O lift up thy self, my Soul, when thou
come to the Table of the Lord. Now, if ever, listen to the Priest of God,
when he calls, saying, Lift up your hearts. Now is the season above all others
to answer, with the whole Quire of pious Souls, in that joyful voice; We lift
them up unto the Lord. Rear thy self aloft, my Soul, and look beyond these
shadows. Fix thine eyes on the splendour of that Majesty, wherewith thy Savior
shines: and think thou hear him calling unto the whole company of believers,
saying, Come, come, my beloved, for whom I died: Come, and dwell with me. It is
still my will and desire, that you may be where I am, and that you may behold
the glory, Joh. 17.24
which my Father has given me. Come on therefore: Whither I am gone you know,
14.4.
and the way you know. Tread upon all the glittering temptations of the
Country where you are, as dirt and dung, in compare with the Kingdom which I
will give you. Make haste unto me, and let nothing hinder you: for I expect
you, and long, when you are meet for it, to see you. The travel of my Soul will
not be satisfied, till you be with me.

O my Soul, why do we linger? Why do we look after any thing so much, as his
Eternal life? Why should we be discouraged or faint in our minds? This Lord of
glory came to his Throne, out of as low a condition as we can possibly be in.
He was once a servant, the meanest of servants: He humbled himself to be
subject to the basest usage, and to suffer the greatest despite and public
reproach. Let us be assured then, that he will not despise the poorest wretch,
now that he is in his glorious state. And let us not think it strange if we be
despised and reproached for righteousness sake. But rejoice, in as much as we
are partakers of the sufferings of Christ; 1 Pet. 4.13
that when his glory shall be revealed, we may be glad also with exceeding joy.

The Prayer before.
O Most blessed God, who dwell in the highest heavens, and art adored by the
highest creatures, who blush before the brightness of thy majesty: but do not
despise us poor worms that dwell upon the earth. Who art happy in thy self, and
yet make suit to us that we would love thee: who command us to do good to
our selves, and entreatest that duty from us which thou may command: who
take it kindly when we give thee thine own, and rewardest us for that which
by thy grace only we can perform; and pardonest us also when we fall short in
our performance; and give us repentance that thou may pardon us and
receive us into favor; and have sent no less person than thine own Son to
obtain a pardon for us; and exalted him at thy own right hand, that he might be
a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance and forgiveness of sins. Before
thee, O Lord most High, I humbly prostrate my self; desiring to be admitted to
thy holy Table, that I may adore the riches of thy grace, and beg forgiveness
for my unworthy returns to such great love. Give me leave, O Lord, to come and
make, at least my acknowledgments to thee, of the duty I owe thee. Yea, I would
take thy yoke upon me, with the greatest thankfulness; and tie those bonds
faster, wherein I stand already engaged to thee; and bless thee for such easy
and gracious terms of reconciliation, as thou have propounded to us; and
express my hearty consent unto them; and declare my belief of thy precious
promises; and acknowledge thy goodness in making me so certain of their truth,
by the resurrection of Christ from the dead, and his ascension to heaven; that
he might sit down at thy right hand to make good all that he has said. Blessed
be the Lord, who has rewarded his obedience, with such honor, power,
dominion, and authority; that we might be encouraged to follow him, and depend
upon him, and have a settled hope of immortality by him. I rejoice in the glory
which thou have with the Father of all, O Lord Jesus, whose throne is for ever
and ever. A Scepter of righteousness is the Scepter of thy kingdom: thou have
loved righteousness, and hated iniquity; H^b. 1.8, 9.
therefore God, even thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above
thy fellows. O God, that I could forget all other things, when I present my
self before thee, and ascend up, in my thoughts and desires and resolutions, to
heaven where Jesus is: that when I come down again to converse with these
things here below, I may look upon them as objects of my contempt, or as proofs
of my virtue, or as incitements to praise thee, the Creator of all; and as
occasions to manifest how much I love thee, by quitting the dearest thing in
this world, if thou requirest it, for thy sake, who have raised man to such an
height or glory and honor above all. O that I may hate every thing, that would
not let me love thee, better than it. That I may fear to offend thee, and be
very sollicitous to please thee, and studious in all things to approve my self
to him, whom thou have raised from the dead and promoted unto glory: so that he
is able to prefer all his faithful servants to that glorious place where he is.
Show me, O Lord, that he is not held by death, but reigns with thy self for
ever, by the power of thy holy Spirit in my heart; raising me above my self,
and enabling me to comply with those high and heavenly thoughts, desires and
designs which thou have wrought in my heart. O blessed Jesus, who sit at
the right hand of the Father, and have said, thou have life in thy self, and
all power in heaven and in earth; John. 5.26 Matthew. 28.18.
that I and all others, who prostrate themselves before the throne of thy
grace, might find thy power still to remain as great as ever: chasing away the
darkness of our minds, warming and thawing our frozen affections, melting and
dissolving our wills into the will of God, inspiring us with might and strength
to do that which we cannot but desire; lifting up our hearts to have our
conversation in heaven, and to live, above the love of riches, pleasures and
honor; a contented, humble, sober, and thankful life. O that we may ever
demonstrate our belief of thy ascension up on high, by our living and walking
in the Spirit, and no longer fulfilling the lusts of the flesh: and by
improving all the grace thou sendest down to us, till we be fit to be
translated from hence and come to see what we now believe, and behold thee in
the glory of the Father. Amen, Lord Jesus; where thou art, let us be also,
rejoicing with thee for ever: and while we stay here, I will always say most
heartily,

Our Father, which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name; thy kingdom come, thy
will be done on earth as it is in heaven, etc.

The Meditation afterward.
O The height of that glory wherein my Savior is inthroned! 1 Pet. 3.22 Heb.
7.26. Ephesians. 4.8. Ephesians. 1.21.
Who is gone into the heavens: and made higher than the heavens: nay, is
ascended up far above all heavens: far above all principality, and power, and
might and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but
also in that which is to come. What a comfort is it to dust and ashes, to see
their nature shining brighter than the highest stars of glory? To behold their
flesh the greatest beauty of the Paradise of God? Where should my conversation
be, but in heaven? Where should the members and the heart be, but where their
head, and their treasure is? What should I seek, but those things above,
Coloss. 3.
where Christ is at Gods right hand? O ye little vanities! How contemptible are
all your pleasures? How ^ow are all your dignities and honors? How base and
vile the rest of your temptations, when I look up to heaven, where my Savior
sits in unmatchable glory and majesty? Never speak to me any more; never
persuade me to follow worldly lusts: thy thoughts are not now so mean; I am
dead to all those things, and my life is hid with Christ in God. When Christ
who is my life shall appear, then shall I appear with him in glory.

But, is that eternal life with Jesus the thing thou seek? Is thy heart
indeed set on things above, where he is at Gods right hand? Search and try;
do thou in good earnest travel with high and heavenly designs? Art thou
ambitious of nothing so much, as to be like to Jesus; and by the most self
denying ways to obtain his glory? Do thou spare no pains to flatten thy too
eager desires toward the things on earth; to let out thy vain and aerie
conceits; to sharpen thy appetite after real righteousness; to inflame thy
love, to heighten thy desire and hope, to strengthen thy faith, to excite thy
watchfulness, and engage thy serious endeavors, that thou may possess the
things above? Art thou sure taht the wisdom from above is the crown of thy
glory? Jam. 2.17.
Humility thy honor? To do good thy riches and treasure? to be Religious thy
business; and to rejoice in God thy highest pleasure? Does the peace of God
which passes all understanding keep thy mind and heart? P^. 4.7.
Art thou above the threats, the contempt, the hatred, the oppression, the
enmities and affronts of this evil world? Above thine own and other men's
passions and peevish affections? So that thou returnest good for evil, kindness
for injuries, and prayers for curses? Is that sweet thing, that heavenly love
to all thy Brethren, the darling of thy bosom; which is the very joy of
Heaven? Then the Angels give thee joy of an happy resurrection and ascension
with Christ Jesus. He has made thee already to fit with him in heavenly
places. Ephesians. 2.6.
The day star is risen in thy heart, foretelling thy approaching glory. Thou
beholdest the morning of eternal joy, the dawning of the day of recompenses.
And thou may rest assured, that God will not leave thee in the grave, nor
suffer thee for ever to see corruption: but it shall deliver thee into the arms
of thy Lord; 1 Cor. 15.53. 2 Cor. 5.4.
and corruption shall put on incorruption, and this mortality be swallowed up
of life. Nay, thou may now triumph and say, I am an heir; an heir of God,
Romans 8.17.
and joynt-heir with Christ: who has also given me the earnest of the
inheritance. Ephesians. ^.14.
For he has formed already a model of the heavenly Sanctuary within thy
breast: where Christ Jesus himself is enthroned; and the name of God is
continually honored and glorified. And therefore thou may humbly conclude in
the words of Jesus, Joh. 12.32.
If God be glorified in me, God shall also glorify me in himself. And O that
the Father of glory would be pleased more and more to enlighten the eyes of our
understanding, Ephesians. 1.17, 18, 19, 20.
that we may know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the
glory of his inheritance in the Saints, and what is the exceeding greatness of
his power to usward who believe, according to the working of his mighty power;
which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his
own right hand in Heavenly places, etc. Amen.

The Thanksgiving and Prayer afterward.
O Most Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty; who art to be most humbly adored,
worshipped and admired: but thy perfections no tongue can express, and thou art
above the thoughts of the highest and purest of all Creatures. They all give
glory to thee in their several kinds, and declare thy power, thy greatness, thy
wisdom and goodness, which spreads it self throughout the world. Psalm. 113.3, 4.
From the rising of the Sun unto the going down of the same, the Lords name is
to be praised. For the Lord is high above all Nations, and his glory above the
Heavens. They sound continually with the praises, which the holy Angels give
thee; who know thee better than we, that are shut up in houses of clay, and can
see but little of thy glory. And yet thou art pleased not only to admit, but to
invite us to lift up our hearts unto thee, and unite them with that Heavenly
company; in rendering thee our poor praises and thanks, which are infinitely
below thee. Accept, Good Lord, of such as I have to give; and inspire me
graciously from above with such a sense of thy goodness, that I may offer thee
an heart full of love; which may be ever making grateful acknowledgments unto
thee. I bless thee, that thou have made man such a noble Creature; capable to
look back to thee, the Author of his being, and to be happy in loving thee, and
bearing a likeness to thee. O how great was thy goodness, that when he forgot
thee that formed him, and lightly esteemed thy love and favor, thou would
not call him out of thy care: but mercifully and speedily made a promise of a
Redeemer to him? I thank thee, O God, that in the fullness of time thou have
sent him, thy only begotten Son into the world; not only to converse lovingly
with us as our Friend and Brother: but also to die for us; and to die the
accursed death of the Cross. Who can understand the greatness of thy love, O
blessed Jesus, that would hang in such shame and pain; and bleed to death; and
lie in the Grave for us wretched sinners? And the greatness of thy love, O
Father of mercies, who have raised him again from the dead; and exalted him
with thy right hand to the Throne of Glory in the Heavens; and given him a name
above every name: Phil. 2.9, 10, 11.
that at the name of Jesus every knee might bow, both of things in Heaven, and
things on Earth, and things under the Earth; and that every tongue might
confess, that Jesus is the Lord, to thy glory? I confess his Sovereign power
and authority, whom the Angels worshipped and adored; and I give glory to thee,
O Father of all, who have made him head of the Church, Ephesians. 1.22, 23.
which is his Body, the fullness of him that fills all in all. Glory be to
thee, O Lord most high, who have put all things under his feet: and made Angels
themselves to be ministering Spirits, Heb. 1.14.
sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of Salvation. Glory be to
thee, Acts 3.26.
who have sent him to bless us in turning every one of from our iniquities:
5.32.
and have made him a Prince and a Savior to give repentance and remission of
sins: and made him able to save them to the uttermost, that come unto thee by
him, Heb 7.25, 27.
seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. To thy eternal praise and
glory be it remembered, that we have such an High Priest, Heb. 8.1.
who is set on the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty in the Heavens: who
needs not daily to offer up Sacrifice; but has done it once, when he offered
up himself. I bless thee, that thou have now admitted me to partake of that
Sacrifice; which is able to perfect for ever them that are sanctified. Heb.
10.14
And that to the blessings of thy house, thou have added also those of my own.
Thou feedest not my Soul only, but most bountifully providest for my Body too:
not only thy Son, but a great number of thy Creatures losing their lives
continually to preserve mine. There is all reason that I should serve thee with
unwearied diligence, who have made so many things constantly to serve me. And
here I present my self again before thee; to tender thee my hearty service, to
beseech thy acceptance of the vows and promises I have already made to thee,
and to express my hope in thy mercy, for power from on high to assist and
further my pious desires and resolutions. I believe in thee, O God, through
Christ Jesus, who have raised him up from the dead, 1 Pet. 1.21
and given him glory, that our faith and hope might be in thee our God. I live
in a full persuasion, that thou designest to make me everlastingly happy: and
therefore humbly look to receive from thy Divine bounty, the communication of
thy Holy Spirit; to help me to fit and prepare my self for such a glorious
state with Christ in the Heavens. That there my thoughts and my heart may be,
where my hopes are treasured up; and all things may seem little and mean in
compare with the glory to be revealed; and I may think my self exceeding high
and great, in the humility, meekness, goodness, patience and contentedness of
the Lord Jesus, and in the holy hope he has given me of Eternal life. Preserve
in my mind a constant sense of that blessed hope, as incomparably beyond all
possessions on Earth: that so I may walk worthy of my High and Heavenly
calling; cheerfully doing and suffering thy will; and believing that thou who
have done so much for us, as to advance our nature to such glory in the
Heavens, will take care of us while we are here on Earth; and conduct us by
humble submission to thee, and patient continuance in welldoing, to that place
whither Jesus the forerunner is entered for us.

Psalm. 98.4.
And let all the Earth make a joyful noise unto the Lord: make a loud noise, and
rejoice, 97.1.
and sing praise. For the Lord Jesus reigns: 29.10.
He sits King for ever. Let them praise his great and holy name: For the
Kinds strength loves judgment, 99.3, 4.
he does establish equity: He executes judgment and righteousness in the
Earth. Psalm. 5.11.
And let all those that love him, be joyful in him. Rejoice in the Lord, 97.11,
12.
ye righteous: and give thanks to the memorial of his holiness. For light is
sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart.

Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, 2 Th ss. 2.16, 17.
and God even our Father, which has loved us, and has given us everlasting
consolation, and good hope through grace. Comfort our hearts, and establish us
in every good word and work. Amen.

Whitsunday.
The Meditation before.
O Holy Spirit of grace! what news is this that thou blessest our ears withal?
What glad tidings are these, that thou art come to tell us? What means the
sound of so many various tongues? the gifts of prophecy, of wisdom, of
knowledge, of faith and miracles: with all the rest which thou dividedst
severally to every man, as thou would? Does Jesus yet live? has he indeed
conquered the grave; and is he exalted at the right hand of God; and invested
with all power in Heaven and Earth? It is enough: I will go then, and see him
when I die. That word is no longer dreadful to me. I am not afraid of the King
of terrors: since Jesus lives, and is the Lord and King of all. Witness the
Holy Ghost the Comforter, which he has sent down from the Throne of his glory:
to assure us that he not only lives, but reigns in Majesty and Power; and is
mindful of us, and of his promises. Those fiery tongues that came with the
noise as of a might rushing wind, tell me that he is able to transport us, when
he pleases, in fiery Chariots unto Heaven. I hear them call my thoughts up
thither, Heb. 2.9.
and bid me see Jesus who was made a little lower than the Angels, for the
suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor: and scattering his royal
gifts among his servants. I am thy servant, O blessed Jesus; Psalm. 119.125, 135.
make thy face to shine upon me. Let thy mercies come also unto me, O Lord,
even thy salvation according to thy word. Ver. 41, 49
Remember the word unto thy servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope.
That, WHERE I AM, Joh. 12.26
THERE SHALL ALSO MY SERVANT BE. What words of grace and life are these? It is
enough, O thou that dwell in the Heavens, that I be there where thou art.
Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, Psa 73.24
and afterward receive me to glory.

And till I go to see that glory which the Father has given thee, I will go
and see the representations thou have left us of thy self; and receive the
pawns and pledges of thy Eternal love. I will go and remember thy obedience to
the death; for which cause thou art highly exalted and made most blessed for
ever. 21.6.
And O that the Holy Spirit of grace, which fell on the Apostles on the day of
Pentecost, would fill my heart with a sense of that love; and swell my Soul
with a full apprehension of all the blessings that it contains: that so I may
burst forth into thy praises as they did, and speak the wondrous works of God.
Acts 2.11.
Mavelous are thy works, O Lord, Ps. 139.14
and that my Soul knows right well. I see by the light of the Holy Ghost sent
down on them, that Jesus indeed was the Son of God; holy and without fault:
that all the fullness of the Godhead dwells in him bodily: Coloss. 2.9.
that he has made peace by the blood of his Cross, and reconciled Heaven and
Earth: Coloss. 1.20
that he is ascended up far above all Heavens, Ephesians. 4.10. Ephesians. 2.6.
that he might fill all things: and that thou, O Lord, have raised us up
together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. I see
what a powerful Advocate we have in the Court of Heaven: Joh. 17.2.
and that thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give Eternal
Life to as many as thou have given him. I see that all thy promises in him are
yea, and in him Amen: 2 Cor. 1.20, 22.
by whom thou have also sealed us, and given us the earnest of the Spirit. One
tongue is too little to speak the praises of the Lord. I will go therefore into
the Assemblies of thy people, that they may magnify the Lord with me, Psalm.
34.3.
and we may exalt his name together. I will declare the exceeding greatness of
his love; and the superlative bounty of Heaven, in sending him to die for us.
Yea, My Soul shall make her boast in the Lord, Psalm. 34.2.
and glory in his holy Name. Let the wise man, if he please, glory in his
wisdom, and the rich man glory in his riches, and the mighty man in his great
strength: But I will glory in this, that I understand and know thee, that thou
art the Lord, the God and Father of Jesus Christ, Jer. 9.23, 24.
which exercises loving kindness, judgment and righteousness in the Earth: for
in these things are thy delight. I will glory in this, that I am the Disciple
and Heir of the crucified Jesus: that I know the power of his Resurrection,
Phil. 3.10.
and the fellowship of his Sufferings: that he has made a new Covenant with us
of grace, mercy and peace: that we have received the Spirit of Adoption, Romans
8.15.
whereby we call him Father: and that I am taken into the fellowship of the
Saints, and have hope to be numbered with them in glory everlasting. I will
send up my heart to Heaven, where he is, in holy love: and engage my self to be
ever mindful of his Covenant; especially of that new Commandment, to love one
another, even as he has loved us. By this shall all men know that I am his
Disciple, because I love the Brethren. Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, etc.
For there is one Body, and one Spirit, even as we are called in one hope of
our calling; one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, who
is above all, and through all, and in us all. Who gave to every one grace
according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Wherefore he says, when he
ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. And he
gave some, Apostles: (blessed be his bounteous goodness) and some, Prophets:
and some, Evangelists: and some, Pastors and Teachers; for the perfecting of
the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of
Christ: till we all come in the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the
Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the fullness of Christ. From
whom the whole body fitly joined together, and co^^acted by that which every
joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every
part, makes increase of the body, unto the edifying of it self in love.

The Prayer before.
O Lord, who live for ever and changest not. Whose power made me and all the
world: before whom the whole world is as a little grain of a balance, Wis.
11.22.
or a drop of the morning dew that falls on the Earth. Whose wisdom governs
and orders all things both in heaven and earth; whose goodness and bounty
provides constantly for their comfortable support; under whose Sovereign and
everlasting dominion we live; and unto whom we owe all homage, service and
fidelity, which ought most readily and heartily to be paid by every one of us.
I adore thee in the humblest reverence of my Soul and body. I acknowledge my
dependence on thee, and subjection to thee. I desire above all things to live
in thy fear, and in thy love and obedience as long, as I have any being.
Blessed be thy goodness that I may love thee, and that I am alive to worship
and acknowledge thee. Blessed be thy goodness; that thou have not been provoked
to cut me off in my forgetfulness of thee; nor now to open the gates of death
for me, and command me to dwell in silence: but the doors of thy house, that I
may enter in and praise thy holy Name. To thee belongs all blessing, honor,
worship and service: to me nothing but shame and confusion of face; which ought
to cover me when I approach thy presence.

I thank thee most humbly for the good news thou have sent us, that thou art in
thy Son Christ, 2 Cor. 5.19
reconciling the world to thy self. I rejoice in thy love, who have delivered
him up for our offenses, Romans 4.25
and raised him from the dead for our justification; that we may know thou have
accepted of his death as a sufficient satisfaction for us, and believe that all
his words are faithful and true, and that we shall be accepted in thy beloved.
I thank thee O God, that thou have exalted him to sit in thy throne of glory;
that he may be able to perform his own promises, and enable us to obey his
Commands. That thou have given us such good hope in thee, by patient
continuance in well doing, to come to the resurrection of the dead, and to be
made partakers of life immortal. Blessed be the Lord for the assurance we have
of this: that we see Jesus crowned with glory and honor, by the descent of the
Holy Ghost; which is the earnest of that eternal bliss: that thou have sent
thine Apostles to preach the Gospel to every creature; and that when they went
forth thou wroughtest with them, Mark 16. ult.
confirming their word with signs following: and that I my self have felt the
effects of his royal power in the heavens, by the breathings of thy holy Spirit
in my heart, persuading me to love thee and thy Son Jesus; who has shown all
long-suffering toward me, and waited with great patience upon me, that I might
return to thee and live. I thank thee, O Lord, and desire to be admitted to thy
holy Table, that I may thank thee better; and renew my acknowledgments to thee
in the most solemn manner: laying my self at thy feet to tender thee my hearty
service; resigning my self to thy will; recommending Soul and body to thy
wisdom; submitting to thy government; approving all thy laws, and devoting my
self to the constant observance of them. I hope thou will mercifully accept and
own me in all these acts; and stand by me to guide, assist, and encourage me;
and to work in me whatsoever is well pleasing in thy sight. That I may be such
an one as thou can love, and delight in, and reward: and I desire nothing
else in heaven, or in earth. I do most freely give my self up to the conduct of
the Holy Ghost; and steadfastly depend on thee for its continual presence with
me: to possess my mind with such a strong sense of these things which it has
revealed unto us; that they may operate powerfully on my will and affections,
and make them conformable unto Christ. O that by walking in love and showing
all meekness to all men; by patience and peaceableness; gentleness and
goodness; uprightness and fidelity; temperance and moderation; contentedness
and joy in every state and condition; and by all other fruits of the spirit I
may so resemble my blessed Lord and Master Jesus; that I may nothing doubt to
bear the image of his glory in heaven, as I bear the image of his holiness here
on earth.

O that the eyes of my understanding may be opened more and more, to see the
wondrous things which thou have written to us in thy Gospel: that apprehending
and believing and following the wisdom given to us by thine Apostles through
the inspiration of the holy Ghost; I may have the comfort of knowing that I am
still led and moved by it: and living and walking in the Spirit, may go on
joyfully to the possession of that immortal inheritance, which it has sealed
to us.

Now the God of hope fill us all with joy and peace in believing, Romans 15.13,
14. Col. 1.28.
that we may abound in hope through the power of the Holy Ghost: being full of
all goodness and knowledge, and able also to admonish one another; till we come
to be presented perfect in Christ Jesus. By whom I am encouraged to make these
addresses unto the throne of grace, and to recommend my suits unto thee in his
holy words; saying, as he has bidden us.

Our Father which art, etc. The Meditation afterward.
THou have now seen the completion of all the mystery of our redemption; how
that Jesus who learned obedience by the things which he suffered, H b. 5.8, 9.
being made perfect; became the author of eternal Salvation unto all them that
obey him. Can thou doubt of it when thou remembrest the princely gifts, which
he has already bestowed on his Church? Did not the spirit poured out, as on
this day, bear witness that all those who obediently believed on Jesus, were
the children of God? Romans 8.16, 17, 18.
And if children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ. How
could thou refrain, my soul, from rejoicing in these thoughts, should thou
be in the midst of their tribulations? For I reckon, that the sufferings of
this present time, are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be
revealed in us. Be not so dull then now, that he gives thee also a number of
other good things so richly to enjoy. But stir up thy self, and be exceeding
glad in the comfort of that light which shines from heaven upon us; showing us
those things which in other ages were not made known to the sons of men, (...).
2.5.
as they are now revealed unto his holy Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit.
And is it possible to know Jesus, and not to learn obedience of him? What was
it that he designed from first to last but to form to himself an obedient, holy
people zealous of good works?

Do thou not see how early he went himself about his Fathers business? Luke
2.49.51.
How dutiful and obedient he was to his earthly parents? How humbly he
condiscended to be baptized by a meaner person than himself, because he would
fulfill all righteousness? Mat. 3.15.
And what did he do immediately after he was baptized, Mark 1.12.
but enter into a combat with the Devil, and vanquish those very temptations
which foiled our first parents? O how gloriously did he then triumph over
pride, ambition, Matthew. 4.1, 2, etc.
eager appetite of meat and drink, and all persuasions to presumption, or
distrust of God! Consider, my soul, what was the first thing he preached after
this, but that men should repent and believe the Gospel? Mat. 4.17. Mar. 1 15.
And his Sermon that presently followed on the Mountain, what lessons does it
teach, but poverty of spirit, mourning, meekness, mercifulness, purity,
peaceableness, Matthew. 5.3, 4, etc.
and such like heavenly virtues; without which, he tells us in the conclusion
of his discourse, 7 26, 27.
we may as discreetly build an house upon the sand as hope to go to heaven? And
was not his whole life, a continual comment upon this text? Whither tended all
his promises, his exceeding great and precious promises; 2 Pet. 1.4.
but that by these we might be made partakers of a divine nature, having
escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust? O God! that we should
be no more moved by such promises to purify our selves! what miracle will work
upon those hearts, whom these will not prevail withal to be obedient? And yet
his miracles I see also had the same design, to win men to a better life. I
hear him admonishing the impotent man whom he had cured, Joh. 5.14.
Behold, (mark what I say) thou art made whole: Sin no more, lest a worse thing
come unto thee. So had his death also; for he gave himself for our sins, Gal.
1.4.
that he might deliver us from this present evil world, according to the will
of God and our Father: and that he might sanctify and cleanse his Church with
the washing of water by the word; that he might present it to himself glorious,
Ephesians. 5.26, 27.
not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and
without blemish. For this cause likewise he rose again, as well as died, that
we should not henceforth live unto our selves but unto him; 2 Cor. 5.15. Act.
3.26.
and that he might bless us in turning us from our iniquities. For which end he
ascended into heaven, and was exalted with Gods right hand, to be a Prince and
a Savior, Acts 5.31.
for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. This is the intent
of his eternal Priesthood, that we should be encouraged to draw near to God
with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, Heb. 10.21, 22.
having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed
with pure water. And for this purpose he sent the Holy Ghost, to make the
Gentiles obedient, Romans 15 18, 19.
by word and deed, through mighty signs and wonders, by the power of the Spirit
of God. With this commission he sent his Apostles, that they should go to open
their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan unto God, Acts 26.18
that they might receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them which
are sanctified by faith that is in Christ. And this they preached with the
greatest fervency and testified in the Lord, that they who believed in him,
should not henceforth walk as other Gentiles did in the vanity of their minds,
Ephesians. 4.17.5.6.
etc. for they pronounced the wrath of God would come upon the children of
disobedience: but to them, Romans 2.7
who by patient continuance in well-doing, sought for glory, and honor, and
immortality; eternal life. Of this the Holy Ghost was the Earnest; the Advocate
of Christ Jesus here, as He is ours with the Father; the Witness of his
resurrection and glory, the Proof and Demonstration of his Religion; the
Comforter of all those that live according to it. It bids them hope that he who
has so advanced humane nature (as was most apparent on this day) in wisdom,
power and charity; can and will change us into his glorious image, and make us
meet for the inheritance of the Saints in Light. It bids us ask what we will in
his name, Joh. 16.23 Romans 8.32
and it shall be given us: for he that has given us his Son, and sent his holy
Spirit; how shall he not then give us all things?

What shall we ask, O my soul? I only bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3.14, 15, etc.
of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named, that he would grant me
according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might, by his
spirit in the inner man; that Christ may dwell in my heart by faith; that I
being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints,
what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and to know the love of
Christ which passes knowledge, that I may be filled with all the fullness of
God. Amen.

The Thanksgiving and Prayer afterward.
O Lord, the fullest and most bountiful good: who art rich in mercy to all that
call upon thee; never weary of our importunities; nor weary of importuning us
to dispose our selves to receive thy blessings. Ecclu^. 2. ult.
Thy power is the beginning of righteousness; and is guided by the greatest
wisdom, and the greatest love. As is thy Majesty, Wisd. 12.16.
so is thy mercy: and because thou art the Lord of all, it makes thee to be
gracious unto all. Thou love all things that are, 11.24, 25, 26.
and abhorrest nothing which thou have made; for never would thou have made
any thing, if thou had hated it. And how could any thing have endured, if it
had not been thy will? or been preserved, if not called by thee? But thou
sparest all: for they are thine, O Lord, thou lover of Souls. It is of thy mere
goodness that I am not consumed, Lam. 3.22.
and because thy compassions fail not. That I have so much liberty as to
recount thy mercies, which keep me in life, and let it not be as wretched and
miserable, base and vile, sickly and uneasy, troublesome and tedious, as it
might have been according to my deservings; is for ever to be remembered with
most humble thankfulness. I cannot forget, unless I cast away all care and
consideration of my self, from how many dangers thou have delivered me, in what
extremities thou have succored and relieved me, and what friends, lovers and
kind acquaintances thou have bestowed on me. But the greatest of thy mercies
are those, which thou have expressed to us in the Lord Jesus; without which all
the rest might have made our life in the next world, to have proved more
miserable and intolerable to us. Thou have sent him in the tenderest and most
endearing manner in our own flesh: with the most moving and compassionate
entreaties; and the strongest and most obliging arguments, to surrender our
selves to thy obedience, to whom of right we belong. And he has laid down his
life (so great was his love) the just for the unjust, 1 Pet. 3.18.
that he might bring us to thee our God. And thou have rewarded his obedience
to the death, with a glorious Resurrection; and set him at thine own right
hand; and given him the promise of the Holy Ghost, Acts 2.33.
which he has shed abundantly on his Apostles to guide them into all truth:
Joh. 16.13
that they might go and Teach all Nations, and Baptize them into his Religion:
Matthew. 28.19, 20.
and teach them to observe all things that he has commanded. I remember, with
most grateful acknowledgments, the manifold gifts which thou bestowedst on thy
Church to confirm the faith of Christ, and propagate it in the world; till it
came to these Regions where I live. Blessed be thy goodness, that I was born of
Christian Parents; and without my knowledge, very early, by their care,
dedicated unto thee. Blessed be thy goodness, that ever since I have been thy
care; and that thou have brought me up to the knowledge of thy holy Gospel:
wherein I read this story of thy mavelous love; and am instructed in my duty
toward thee and toward men; and encouraged by exceeding great and precious
promises; being put in hope of immortal life, the pledges of which thou have
ordered and appointed thy Ministers to provide for me, and give unto me. I have
now by thy goodness received them; and tasted that the Lord is gracious, full
of compassion, and of great pity: not desiring the death of a sinner, but that
he should return and live. This raises thy mercy to the greatest height that
thou have done all this, for those who are so dull and insensible; cold and
careless; inconstant and uncertain; apt too soon to forget these benefits and
great obligations, which thou layest on them. But thou have done all this, and
continuest thy kindness to make us better. Which is the thing, O Lord, that I
most heartily desire and labor after: and shall ever account it the greatest
blessing when I am overcome by thy merciful kindness; and am willing to part
with my self and all my own desires, to gain thee and thy love; by being led
and ruled in all things according to thy will. To that I unfeignedly again
submit my self; and humbly vow all the powers of Soul and Body to thy
obedience. I own thy blessed Gospel, for the rule and direction of my life; and
thy Son Christ Jesus, for my pattern and example; and thy good Spirit for my
guide and governor: in whose holy comforts I rejoice, more than in any thing
in this world. For ever magnified be thy love, that thou have exalted one
mighty to save: and have sent him not only with a pardon, but with the power of
the Holy Ghost, to renew, sanctify and advance our Nature, by changing it into
the likeness of thine own. I hope in thee, O Lord, for the continued influences
thereof, to quicken my Faith, and render it more and more effectual in all the
actions of an holy life. That I may have high and adoring thoughts of thee, and
humble thoughts of my self: overlook the little things here below, and labor
for those above: do good with what I have, and lay up treasures in Heaven: be
contented with my portion, and sober and discreet in the use of it: live
peaceably with all men, but not be partaker in their sins: and that it may
always be part of my employment in this World thus to worship thee, and reflect
upon thy goodness; and the rest may be to live according to my prayers and
acknowledgments. Amen, and Amen.

O that all Nations whom thou have made would come and worship before thee,
Psalm. 86.9, 10.
in Spirit and in Truth. Joh. 4.23.
O that they would glorify thy Name; for thou art great and do wondrous
things; thou art God alone. But let all Christians especially, 1 Cor. 12.13.
who by one Spirit are all baptized into one Body, and have been all made to
drink into one Spirit, glorify the Name of their Lord; Ephesians. 4.3.
by keeping the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, and agreeing together
in Godly love. And do thou, O Lord, the God of Peace, direct their hearts into
the more excellent way: that though tongues, and prophecies, and miracles are
ceased, yet that humble, kind, meek and long-suffering Charity may remain and
abound more and more, which will bring us all to live in endless love and
peace, and joy together in the Heavens.

The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 13. ult.
and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost, be with me, and with
all my Friends, and all thy Servants every where. Amen.

THus, by the help of God, I have brought this Treatise to a Conclusion: which
I hope will not be unwelcome to those that love our Lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity. Ephesians. 6. ult.
And I most humbly beseech the Divine Majesty graciously to accept my weak
endeavors therein to serve this Church, and stir up every Member of it with
hearty love, to offer up themselves to him in its Public Service. Which so
gravely and pathetically expresses the sense of pious hearts at the Holy
Communion; that these Private Prayers which I have composed to wait upon it,
can only serve to excite those who will make use of them, to join with more
fervor in the Common Devotions: and to continue those holy dispositions which
they declare to be in their hearts if they sincerely unite them with these
words, In the Prayer after the Communion.
And here we offer and present unto thee, O Lord, our Selves, our Souls and
Bodies, to be a reasonable, holy, and lively Sacrifice unto thee.

Which that we may ever be; we cannot, in a few words, better implore the
Divine assistance, than in those of that incomparable Prayer at the end of our
Communion-Service.

PRevent us, O Lord, in all our doings, with thy most gracious favor; and
further us with thy continual help, that in all our works begun, continued, and
ended in thee, we may glorify thy holy Name, and finally by thy mercy obtain
Everlasting Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THE END.
ERRATA.
PAge 53. line 19. read, went away: p. 179. l. 1. r. heart: l. 2. r. mouth: p.
320. l. 27. 1. have received: p. 357 l. 12. r. Lord Jesus: p. 362. l. ult. r. a
member: p. 383. l. 10. r. and growth: p. 396. l. 13. r. earnests.


