A CHARACTER OF COFFEE AND Coffee-Houses.

By M. P.



LONDON, Printed for John Starkey, near the Devil-Tavern, by Temple-Barr. 1661.

A CHARACTER OF COFFEE AND COFFEE-HOUSES.
A Coffee-house is free to all Comers, so they have Humane shape, where a
Liquor made of an Arabian Berry called Coffee is drunk. Six or seven years ago
was it first brought into England, when the Palats of the English were as
Fanatical, as their Brains. Like Apes, the English imitate all other people in
their ridiculous Fashions. As Slaves they submit to the Customs even of Turkey
and India. Does the Frenchman wear Feathers in his Hat, and Pantaloons to hide
his stradling? Believe it, the Englishman will be a la mode de France. With
the Barbarous Indian he smoaks Tobacco. With the Turk he drinks Coffee.

The Englishman, might he himself misplace, Herb. with some little altering.

Sure to be cross, would shift both feet and face.
2. These capricious Islanders, of the Hop, Malt, Cock, China, Rash-berry, and
other ingredients, make and swallow as many and as various sorts of Drink, as
they amongst them have Sects and Opinions. They drink as much Canary, as its
native Country produces. It Is said, they devour down a greater quantity of
Wine, (called Canary.) than the Canaries afford. All Countries send in hither
their several sorts of Wine and other Liquors. This variety of drink satisfies
not the voraginous Palate of the English. Even the Deserts of Arabia are
ransackt for a Berry, which made into a drink, is as thick as puddle-water, and
so ugly in color and taste, that Poets hereafter will undoubtedly choose it, as
the best resemblance to describe the Stygian Lake by. Oh Heavens, how do the
English Palats differ from those of more sober Nations? These preserve Snow to
temper their Liquor with, those gulch down Coffee even boiling in the Dish,
more eagerly, than an almost ^^arved Dog does lick up Pottage, just then taken
from the fierce fire. In time (sure) the Englishman will swallow down burning
Coals.

3. Coffee is a Dryer, and therefore with success is drunk by those Gentlemen,
who are infected with the French Pox, which is now become the Characteristal
difference between the plumed Nobless and the highshoon. Alas, Virtue is a
pedantical and vulgar quality.

4. It Is extolled for drying up the Crudities of the Stomach, and for expelling
Fumes out of the Head. Excellent Berry! which can cleanse the English-man's
Stomak of Phlegm, and expel Giddiness out of his Head. Yet it is certain, that
for the small space of an hour or thereabouts it has expelled out of an
English head and Stomach these infirmities. But after such a little interval,
they return again. And the house being thus swept and cleansed, seven Devils
enter it. For Physicians say, that Coffee causes the Meagrim and other
Giddinesses in the Head, etc. Of this daily experiment may be made: For if you
set Short-hand-writers to take down the Discourse of the Company, who prattle
over Coffee, it will be evident on reading the Notes, that the talk is
extravagant and exactly like that of the Academians of Bedlam, and such, as any
others, would be ashamed of, but themselves.

5. Coffee makes no man drunk. But for this, it is no more to be commended,
than a Neates-tongue, a dish of Anchovaes, or a salt Bit, which never yet
intoxicated any man. For Coffee being mixed with the more drying smoke of
Tobacco makes too many run to the Tavern or Alehouse to quench their thirst,
which they cannot satisfy, till out of their gorged stomachs, they send up rich
Sacrifices to Liber Pater.

6. This foreign Liquor in truth qualifies the Vapors of Wine, which makes your
Good Fellows resort thither to heat their Stomachs made cold and infirm by
their having powered thereinto too too much Wine, and thus they enable their
weak Stomachs to receive a new Load. But hereby in part may be made a Judgment
of the good Company of this place. O Heavens! how well will the Barrels of
Herings (imposed on these houses) agree with Coffee.

7. Coffee being dry, in proportion, dryes up the Radical moisture. By constant
use thereof, a man becomes,

-- ad unum Mollis opus -- The other Sex has just cause to curse the day, in
which it was brought into England; Had Women any sense or spirit, they would
remonstrate to his Majesty, that Men in former times were more able, than now,
They had stronger Backs, and were more Benevolent, so that Hercules in one
night got fifty Women with Child, and a Prince of Spain was forced to make an
Edict, that the Men should not repeat the act of Coition above nine times in a
night, for before that Edict, belike Men did exceed that proportion; That in
this Age, Men drink so many Spirits and Essences, so much Strong-water, so many
several sorts of Wine, such abundance of Tobacco, and (now at last) pernicious
Coffee, that they are grown as impotent as Age, as dry and as unfruitful, as
the Deserts of Africa. Having remonstrated this, they then would (were they
wise) petition his Majesty to forbid Men the drinking of effeminating Coffee,
and to command them instead thereof to drink delicious Chocolate.

8. It Is the Interest also of Women to have this drink damned, lest the Men
bereave them of one of their most excellent and appropriated Qualities, that is
Garrulity and Talkativeness. In this Age Men tattle more than Women, and
particularly at the Coffee-house, when the number has been but six, five of
them have talked at one time. The Company here have out-talk'd an equal number
of Gossipping Women, and made a greater noise than a Bake-house. Men are here
born down by clamor, which resembles at times the noise of the Cataracts of
Nilus, but always resembles a School, filled with Children, every one conning
his Lesson aloud.

9. Here Men carried by instinct sipp muddy water, and like Frogs confusedly
murmur Insignificant Notes, which tickle their own ears, and to their
inharmonious sense, make Music of jarring strings. Hic fluvius Verborum, vix
gutta Mentis.

10. In this confused way of gabbling the Coffee-drinkers fondly imagine, that
they make a better Consort, than four and twenty Violins. They run from point
to point, from one subject to another, as insensibly and as swifty, as
Polewheel runs division on the Base Viol.

11. The day suffices not some Persons to drink 3. or 4 dishes of Coffee in.
They borrow of the night, though they are sure, that this drink taken so late,
will not let them close their Eyes all night. These men are either afraid to be
alone with themselves, or they to excess love Company, so that they never set
apart any time to converse with themselves. This ill-tasted Liquor (by what
charms I know not) makes Men to neglect and forsake themselves; for

Who cannot rest, till he good Fellows find, Herb.

He breaks up house, turns out of doors his mind.
12. At this place a man is cheated of what is, by far more valuable than Money,
that is, Time. A constant Companion of this House going in all haste for a
Midwife, or to save the life of a Friend then dying, must call in, and drink at
least his two dishes of Coffee and his two Pipes of Tobacco. And which is yet
more wonderful, many persons prefer Coffee, (and the Company, which love it)
before the gain of money, for many men neglect their Callings and Vocation, to
tattle away their time over two or three dishes of Coffee.

13. Here is no respect of persons. Boldy therefore let any person, who comes
to drink Coffee sit down in the very Chair, for here a Seat is to be given to
no man. That great privilege of equality is only peculiar to the Golden Age,
and to a Coffee-house. However even here, a small portion of Wit, gilded over
with an Estate, has an influence. Money! Thou art the Man, and Man but Dross to
thee. Or with Iuvenal I may say,

-- O nummi vobis hunc praestat honorem Vos estis fratres -- So also is it here
in respect of Titles; Children do not more for a time value their Babies, than
Titles are for a while here gazed on. Even a -- as such, gains as good an
opinion as the place is capable of. Light-things weigh much in those Scales,
which are here used, Heavy, little or nothing. Wisdom and Virtue are every
where used, as fanatical --

14. Such is the humor of the Coffee-meetings, that that person shall gain
more love and respect, who gives to the Company a Suger-plum, than he who
bestows gifts more befitting men to receive, and he who has attained the Art
of making an agreeable by words.
address to the Company, and knows, how by empty Complements to flatter them
into a good opinion of themselves, or to tattle to them little pleasing things,
shall assuredly thereby insinuate himself into their good opinion more than if
he discoursed to them of the most Profitable Subjects with the deepest Judgment.

15. Very critical and very discerning is the Assembly here. The Company within
a very short while will look through and through the Prudentest and most cryed-up
Person. A Weak part will quickly be found in him, and not only Real but
Imaginary Faults will be laid to his charge. A Man of Reputation is so tender a
Creature, that he should in a manner always keep within doors, and never come
into the Air, unless chosen, and clear. But by all means let him beware of the
Coffee-house, for here there is always a thick smoke, which will sully a fair
color. In plain terms, an assiduous frequenting the Coffee-house, and exposing
reason, parts and estimation, by conversation, to the open view of the Society,
renders them hereby first familiar, then contemptible. Here a man too late will
be taught, that the most excellent Jewels, to wit, the Noblest Speculations,
the D^vinest Truths, the most Exquisite Fancies, the most Meritorious Actions,
and the most Complacential Humors prodigally thrown away amongst a mixed number
of persons, become as common, as Gold was once in Jerusalem, that is, as
common, as Stones.

16. Such is the mixture of Persons here, that me thinks I cannot better
express it, than by saying, That at these Waters meet all sorts of Creatures.
Hence follows the Production of diverse monstrous Opinions and Absurdities.
Here is a congress of old Rome and of new, of Turkey, Geneva, and Amsterdam. A
Coffee-house, like Logic, the Lawyer, and the Switzer, will maintain any Cause.

17. Infinite are the Contests, irreconcilable the Differences here. The
Society has been divided about the manner of the creeping of a Louse. Were
there not here, a constant contention amongst the Elements of this Body, it
could not subsist. For should all agree, and be of one Judgment, they would as
it were become but one Person, the House would be solitary, and at last one or
two Persons would be the whole Company.

18. However, though it resemble Amsterdam, being divided into innumerable
different Opinions, yet is it free from effects of Sedit on or War. For there
are no bloody Challenges here made, much less Duels fought, or Blows given.
Will you know the reason? The Company in this are more Courageous than wise,
that they contend about triffles only, but they are more Wise than courageous,
in that they fight not for the Victory: so that in a true sense the Lion and
the Lamb ly down together here.

19. Such being the differences of Opinion, and such the Tameness of the
Company, how can any one in reason, think, that a Coffee-house is dangerous to
the Government, that seeds of Sedition are here sown, and Principles of Liberty
insinuated? A Coffee-house has always been as great a Friend to Monarchy, as
an Enemy to Liberty. The Principles of a Popular Government at the Rota were
weakne'd, and rendered contemptible. Men of such Contrary Judgments as here
meet, cannot justly be feared to Agree in a Conspiracy. And in truth they talk
too much, to be looked on as dangerous, and active Persons.

20. Rather say the Fanatics, that this is not a place in which a great and
generous Truth can be maintained, that a Person full of such a Truth, not being
able to contein it, is forced to whisper it in the ear of some Ingenuosus, if
he can find such a one. This is certain, that who ever intends here to
discourse of Worthy Subjects judiciously, ought carefully not only to choose his
Time, but to pack the Company, that so he may be heard but with patience.

21. On the other side, who ever is troubled with impertinent Fancies and
ridiculous Notions, is here quietly heard and sometimes heraunged. The Relater
hereof has heard a young Gentleman affirm, that he used to go to the
Coffeehouse purposely to vent his strange and wild Conceits, and to rid himself
of such bad Guests. An opinion, how foolish or fond soever, here receives
entertainment. To this Coast, as to the West Indies, you carry not rich
Merchandises to Trade with, but only Beads, Looking-glasses, Knives, and such
like, nor shall the Merchant make returns of any other Commodities, than such
as are fit for the Pedlars box.

22. Though the Coffee-house may be condemned for ill choice of subjects, on
which they discourse, yet are the Company by many persons commended for this,
that every one of them abounds in his own sense, and submits to the reason of
no other Mortal, following herein that great Example of the Men who inhabit the
Lunary World, who put the Monsieur in a Cage, for discoursing like a Parrat in
the words of Aristotle. Every one over Coffee discourses those things, which
his own reason or fancy inspire him with, and he, who cants in the terms of
Aristotle, or argues by Book, is looked on to want terms and reason of his own,
and jurare in verba Magistri.

23. Yet here being neither Moderators, nor Rules, (were there no other reason)
a Man shall as soon fill a Quart Pot with Discourse, as Profit by it. He may as
rationally expect to carry a Ship from the River of Thames to the East Indies
without a Pilot or Rules of Navigation, as to manage a discourse successefully,
or in this School to bring it to a good Issue.

24. A School it is without a Master. Education is here taught without
Discipline. Learning (if it be possible) is here insinuated without Method.
Good Manners and commendable Humors are here infused into Men by the
contemplation of the Deformity of their contrarie's, as the Spartars infused
into their Children hatred of Drunkenness by setting before them their drunken
Helots.

25. The Company, (that their intertainment man appear in its native colors)
at times divert themselves with the controverting such points as these.

Utrum corpus est immateriale.
Utrum chimaera bombinans in vacuo possit commedere secundas intentiones.
Utrum antiqua Roma a Christianis fundata fuit.
Utrum bestia honoranda sit.
26. A facetious or merry Story is preferred by the Gentlemen here before a
Banquet of Philosophy. The Auditors lissen to him, who tells a Tale gracefully,
with as great an attention, as Orpheus his Beasts did to his Charming Music.
And good reason such a person should be attentively heard.

-- nam quae comoedia? Mimus Quis melior? One relates he took thirty and three
thousand Pipes of Tobacco in one night. He tickles the Auditors. They laugh
heartily. Another informs the Company, that the night before having swallowed a
vast quantity of Ale, he slinkt home, and crept into Bed, and that in the midst
of the night he was waked by an Alarm made in his Guts by reason of an
Insurrection therein. Hereupon he rises to expel the Rebel, but his weighty A
-- being too ponderous for an earthen Chamber Pot to bear, the Pot broke, and
his A -- unluckily fell on the bedighted ground. At this Story the Company
laugh majore cachinno.

Here I at present stop, having run (methinks) a long race in dirty way,
concluding with Iuvenal,

Aspice quid faciunt commercia -- An Apology to those Ingenuous Persons, who
frequent the Coffee-house, for this description.
THe Describer knows, there are several Virtuosi and Ingenuosi, resort to the
Coffee-house, whom, he has the honor to be acquainted with, others are his
Friends. Yet all the Elements here being confusedly mixed, this House appears to
him as a mere Chaos, so that (in contemplating it) he cannot prefer even Light
before Darkness, not being here separated or distinguishable one from another,
amidst confusion it self.

Verbum sat.
FINIS.

