Divine Arithmetic, OR THE RIGHT ART Of numbering our DAYS.

Being a SERMON preached June 17. 1659. at the Funerals of Mr Samuel Jacomb, B.
D. Minister of the Gospel at S. Mary Woolnoth in Lumbardstreet, London, and
lately Fellow of Queens College in Cambridge.

By Simon Patrick, B. D. Minister of the Gospel at Batersea in Surrey.

1 COR. 7.29, 30, 31. The time is short: It remains that both they that have
wives, be as they that have none: and they that weep, as though they wept not:
and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not, etc. for the fashion of
this world passes away.

(...)

Plato in Critone. LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Francis Tyton, at the Sign of
the three Daggers in Fleet Street, 1659.

Reader, be pleased before thou read, to Correct these Mistakes of the
Press.

EPist. line ult read your shops. p. 7. l. 25. r. the days. p. 9. l. 27. r.
unto. Eut he -- p. 10. l. 4. r. less. p. 13. l. 12. r. evil, etc. l. 17.
deserve. p. 20. l. 26. r. 3dly. p. 22. l. 20. r. any mind. p. 36. l. 24. r. his
Port. p. 38. l. 17. r. good thoughts. p. 43. l. 10. r. they spend. p. 63. l.
25. r. (...) and (...). p. 65. l. 11. r. his manners. p. 68. mar g. r. (...).
p. 78. l. 15. r. bonds. p. 79. l. 27. r. as he says. l. 31. r. Shall I say. p.
80. l. 7. Did I think. l. 10. after Funeral, add --

To my Worthy Friend Mr Thomas Jacomb, Minister of the Gospel at Martins
Ludgate.
Sir,
I Know that I shall but revive your grief by sending this Sermon to your
hands; but it is a trouble which you have drawn upon your self, by desiring to
see that which you heard. It was not meet that I should resist your request,
because he whom I had reason to love as my self, used to deny you nothing; yet
if I had obtained leisure to have considered these things over again more
deeply, you might have seen them (it is possible) pressed with more weight of
argument, and put into a more exact order: But since you were desirous that I
would dispatch them to the Press speedily, these Papers come to you to entreat
you, that you will be content to bear a share in the faults that by reason of
haste may (it is likely) be discerned in them. And if I could requite you in a
greater matter, by alleviating your griefs, and helping you to bear your
sorrows, I should readily lend you my hands, yea and my shoulders. But thanks
be to God you need not my assistance, but have learnt to bear patiently this
sad providence. It is an easy matter to be pleased with Gods providence when
he does what we would have him, but to rejoice in adverse things, and to suck
some sweetness out of gall and wormwood, is very hard. Every body can thresh
corn out of full sheaves, and fetch water out of the Thames; but to bring an
harvest out of the dry stubble, and to draw water out of a rock, is the work
only of a divine power which can bring good out of evil. I need not doubt but
you are endued with it, and that God will comfort you with the same comforts
wherewith you comfort others, and that you will say Even this is good too. Let
me have a share in your prayers that it may be sanctified to me also, who ought
to think my self concerned in it, and I shall ever remain

Your true Friend to serve you, Simon Patrick.
June 28. 1659.
To the Right Worshipful THOMAS VINER Alderman of the City of London, and the
rest of the inhabitants of the Parish of Mary Woolnoth Lumbardstreet.
WHEN the soul is set in sad circumstances, and clothed with black and
mournful thoughts, it is very apt to hearken to sober Counsels, and to
entertain pious purposes and resolutions. I imagine it possible that the sight
of the Corpse of your beloved Pastor, might open a wider gate then ordinary for
the truths which were then propounded to enter into your hearts, and that in
that sad silence of your souls they might have more of your attention, and
better audience. If they found any good acceptance with you then; they come now
again to ask you whether you still stand so affected, and continue in the same
mind, and can find in your heart upon a second motion to renew your good
resolutions.

For when the soul that has been shut up in it self, shall but open again to
let in some light of mirth and gladness, all our sad and serious purposes are
ready to run out at the same door, unless we take good heed and give an express
command for their stay by laying fast hold upon them. When the souls grows gay
and pleasant again, it is apt to look upon its former resolves but as
Melancholy fancies, or to retain only such a weak remembrance of them as we do
of the shadow of a dream, or they seem as things do that we are run a great way
from, and have left far behind us, which when we were present looked as big as a
Church Steeple, but now at a distance seem no bigger then the stump of a Tree.
And therefore it is necessary that you ask your selves how the truths that were
then plainly represented, appear unto you at ten or eleven days distance from
them. Ask your selves I say, whether now they appear so great and weighty as
its possible they might when you were very near unto them, and whether now that
you are counting your money and about your trades, you have as good a mind to
reckon your days aright, as perhaps you had when God and you were reckoning
together. If you would know your souls aright, and be acquainted with your own
temper, you must take your selves in all moods, both when you are merry and
when you are sad, when you are in health as well as when you are sick; and if
you like the same truths alike at all times, it is an argument of a healthful
constitution. So some of the Persian wise men advised that a man should
consider of a business both when he had drunk liberally and when he was
fasting, in the night and in the day, when he was angry and when he was well
pleased, and he might be sure it was a reasonable thing if it appeared so from
whatsoever station he looked upon it. In like manner I advise and entreat you
to consider whether you like these things not only when you were swallowed up
with sorrow, but now that you have dried your eyes. Do they appear the same now
to your sight, that they did when you looked upon them through tears? can you
like these things in shops, as you did in the Church? Now that they are
presented to your eyes, as when they struck your ears? Ask your souls whether
they are at so much leisure as to consider once more of them. Tell your selves
whether any such sense of the truth remain upon them, that you will try how you
like them upon second thoughts. And I pray our good God that whosoever of you
takes a review of these things, may learn so much of this Divine Art as to
take an account of the days he has passed, to keep a fair account of the rest
of his life, and to give up his accounts with joy at the day of our Lord. I use
this boldness and freedom of speech to you, because you have been used unto it
by my dear friend, and because I think thereby I shall best serve both the
truth and you. Let me be so importunate therefore with you as to conjure you by
all the names of love and dearness, by all that is precious and valuable to
you, by the remembrance of our Lord; by the remembrance of all the servants of
the Lord that have labored among you, by the love you bear to your own souls,
and as you desire after heaven, that you will consider seriously how precious a
thing a day is, and that you will not spend it all in the business of this
world, much less in sports and recreations, but let God have a considerable
portion of it. Some of the Heathens have carefully prohibited the wastefull
mispense of men's hours; (...), etc. L. 2. Var. hist. cap. 5.
and therefore I may well be suffered if I be urgent with you to redeem them.
It is a notable Testimony that Aelian gives of the Lacedaemonians, that they
were hugely parsimon ous and even covetous of their time; spending it all about
necessary things, and suffering no Citizen either to be idle or to play: In so
much that when it was told that some used to walk in the afternoons for their
recreation, the Ephori forbade it as savouring of pleasure, and would have them
to recreate their bodies by some manly exercises which had some profit in them,
and would breed them to be servicable to the Common good. How much will they
shame us in the day of judgment when it shall appear that all this thriftiness
of theirs was not so much for their souls, as for the profit of their City, and
we would not use half so much care for immortal beings and the securing of a
better Country which is an heavenly. Ib. cap. 28.
Themistocles seeing two Cocks fight when he was going to a battle, pointed his
Soldiers to them, and said, Do you see yonder Combatants how valiantly they
deal their blows? and yet they fight not for their Country, nor for their
Gods, nor for the honor of their Ancestors, no nor for glory, nor liberty, nor
children, but merely to overcome and crow over the vanquished. What courage
then my brave Countrymen, should this put into your hearts, on whose
resolution all these depend, and by whose valor they subsist? The same I say
to you; Do you see how sparing and saving of their time the Old Lacedaemonians
were? And yet it was not for the worshipping of their Gods, nor for the
attending to their souls, V. Wheatly of redemption of time
etc. but merely that they might be hardy Soldiers and might overcome all
their enemies. How good Husbands then ought we all to be? how valiantly should
we resist all Thieves and Robbers that would steal away our time from us? when
it is for God, for heaven, for the safety of our souls, yea and for our
happiness, peace and quiet in this world also. If this discourse may any thing
quicken you, let not me be forgot in those good hours that you spend with God,
and I shall not forget to pray for you, that he would provide a Pastor for you
after his own heart, that will feed you with knowledge and understanding, and
guide you in the good old paths that lead to everlasting life.

Your Servant in the Lord Jesus, Simon Patrick.
June 28. 1659.
Divine Arithmetic, OR The Right Art of numbering our DAYS.
PSALM 90.12. So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts
unto Wisom.


IF I were come hither to vent my own passions, they would have been better
pleased in the choice of some other Text then this that I have read unto you.
When I first heard of the departure of mine and your dear friend, those words
of David did strike my mind, and me thought did very well fit my mouth, with
the alteration of a name only. I am distressed for thee my Brother Jacomb, 2 Samuel 1.26.
very pleasant have thou been to me, thy love to me was wonderful, passing the
love of Women. Upon this Text it is possible that affection would have taught
me eloquence. Grief it self it would have been pleased that. I should have
related his pleasantness. Sorrow would have been contented that I should have
remembered the joys of his-society; for they would have been huge gainers by it
in the conclusion, when the heat and ardency of the affection would have but
ended in greater drops of tears for the loss of such a friend. Oh how willingly
could I fill your ears with such pathetick groans as those of David saying, O
my Friend, my Friend, would God I had died for thee my friend, my friend! And
then I imagine that I should hear the reboation of an universal groan from all
your hearts, more sad then his doleful knell. I imagine that at least you
would say in your thoughts as the Disciples did, when they saw our Savior
weep, Behold how he loved him! It were easy with a very little art to make
this place a Bochim, a place of weepers, so that it should be said by those
that see you, as they said at good Jacob's Funeral, This is a grievous mourning
to this people. But then my beloved, when the flood was a little fallen, and the
tempest blown over, when reason and religion had leave to return and take their
places, you and I would begin to ask our selves, What have we done? what a
folly is it to suffer such a deluge that should drown the thoughts of God? what
forgetfulness to let grief stifle the motions of our soul to him that ought to
have the precedence of all our other relations? then should we begin again to
lament our too forward lamentations, then should we call for a new tide to wash
away the former mud. Yea and the soul of our pious Brother if it could be
sensible of what we say and do here, would be much grieved too, that he should
leave such an unworthy friend behind him to discourse at his Funeral, as knew
not how to prefer Gods honor, before all the respect that is owing unto him.

I will remember therefore that it was his desire, and ought to be mine also,
that I should serve the good of your souls, and accordingly I shall speak as
much as I can for God, before I speak any thing of him. And what I say of him,
I shall endeavor likewise may reflect honor and glory upon God, and redound
to your profit and edification.

For this purpose I have chosen these words of the Psalmist, which are no less
suitable to the occasion, then they will seem perhaps to some of you to be to
the times wherein we live.

The Title of the Psalm tells us that they are part of a prayer of Moses the
man of God, and as the Chaldee Paraphrase says, of a prayer which he made when
the children of Israel sinned in the wilderness, and many of them were suddenly
cut off, and the rest wasted away in that barren place. He begins his address
to God with an acknowledgement of his eternity, and everliving goodness, and of
man's dependence on him, even as a word does upon the mouth of him that speaks
it; so that if he do but say to man Return, he presently goes unto his dust,
ver. 1, 2, 3, 4. And more especially he acknowledges how obnoxious men have
made themselves to God by contumacy and rebellion against him; and how they
shorten too often their own lives by kindling the anger of God against them,
from ver. 5. to ver. 10. where he shows how he sweeps them away as a torrent
that bears all before it; This was the very case of the Israelites in the
wilderness, when the wrath of God came upon them and slew the fattest of them,
and smote down the chosen men among them, as it is Psalm. 87.31.

But how inconsiderate foolish man is, in thus sinning against God, the
Psalmist seems to confess when he says, ver. 10. The days of our years are
threescore years and ten, and if by reason of strength they be fourscore years,
yet is their strength labor and sorrow, etc. i.e. There is no need to stir up
thy wrath: for our days are short enough of themselves: we have much ado to
crawle to eighty years: and if we do, the very weakness and infirmities of our
age will breed us sufficient trouble and sorrow without any additional griefs
from the just displeasure of the Almighty.

And yet for all this, he sadly complains that very few minded or considered
the power of Gods anger, which is as great as men can possibly fear or imagine
it to be, and greatest of all toward those that profess to fear him, but yet
rebel against him, ver. 11. Who knows the power of thy anger, etc. Alas! very
few that consider how often they provoke God, how jealous he is of his name,
and consequently how short their days are like to be who do dishonor unto it.
In the words of my Text therefore he heartily beseeches the Lord that he would
teach them to number their days as they ought, and promises that (after all
these corrections) they will bring a heart of wisdom. For so the words run in
the Hebrew, as obviously as may be to any ones observation; show us so ( i. e.
so as we should) to number our days (...) And we will bring a heart of wisdom,
or a wise heart.

According to this rendering of them, they contain A Frayer to God, and A
Promise of man's. He first prays for some thing that he would have God to do,
Teach us so to number our days; and Secondly he promises something that they
will do; We will bring a wise heart. Or according to the ordinary translation,
the words are an entire petition, First for grace to teach us to number our
days aright; Secondly for effectual grace that may so teach us that good may
come of it; so that there may be some good effect of the account, and it may
amount to some valuable consideration.

I shall neglect neither of these translations, nor any else that shall appear
to be genuine and unforced, but shall speak to them in these following
Observations, or in the use and application of them.

First, That we are very apt to misreckon, and in nothing more then in the
business of life.

Secondly, That our life is very short if we take it at the best.

Thirdly, That the right numbering of our days is earnestly and diligently to
be inquired out.

Fourthly, That the best disposition to attain this true Art of numbering is a
praying heart and a pious mind.

For the first, it is most plainly supposed in that we need a Master to teach
us to reckon right. It would be worth my pains to show you how much we are out
in our accounts about the things of this world. What a sum do we make these
Ciphers, these empty nothings amount unto? What a rate do we set upon riches?
at what huge sums do we purchase honors? etc. How vainly do we think that
such an enjoyment will make an addition to our contentment? how do we multiply
our hopes without any certainty, etc. And in the mean time heaven and all the
great realities of another world stand for nothing in our account. So in
reference to our selves I might show you, how few sins or miscarriages we take
any notice of, if ever we happen (which is but seldom) to call our selves to an
account, and how many good deeds we very falsely reckon up. But I shall confine
my self to the bad Arithmetic of men in numbering of their days, which the Text
most naturally leads me unto; and in a few words I shall show you how men
misreckon in the business of life.

First, They are very much out in their reckoning, if we look upon the account
it self; And secondly, if we examine the rule by which they number.

For the account, that is very false which men make.

First, many years then many days, Luke 12.19.
saying, Soul, thou have goods laid up for many years, Eat, drink, and be
merry. He that could not tell truly to one, (for that night his soul was
required) tells till he came to a million. What an huge mistake! what an
irrrecoverable error was this, that could never be amended! But thus do all men
generally miscount in the days of their health; and which is most strange, even
dying men oft-times think of nothing but recovering and living still in the
world. They number by years and not by days, or reckon all days to be long, and
none short.

Secondly, be Summer and Sunshine days. He dreams not of the evil days (as
the Scripture calls them) i. e. the days of adversity and misery; he thinks not
of a storm or a tempest, of a cloud that may cover his Sky, and bring a sad
darkness upon all his mirth and pleasure; and so he never provides against it,
but is miserably surprised when he sees all his expectations perish. Men are
like Babylon, that said, I shall sit as a Lady for ever: Isa 47.
I shall never know widdowhood, nor the loss of children. I shall be happy when
I am for my self; when I am married, when my Father dies and leaves me a fair
estate; when I have builded me an house, and purchased so much land, etc. And
so they reckon many years in the same manner, which must be all days and no
nights, all fair days and none foul. This makes them heavy and oppressed when
the days of darkness come, and every one says, non putaram (the fools Motto) I
never thought of this. One sad accident blots their whole account, and tells
them to their grief how the whole work is wrong wherein their thoughts have
labored.

Thirdly, About the use of these days, they are no less dangerously mistaken.
Men reckon that there are none but Play-days in their life, and they can find
never a working day among them. All their days in their Calendar are Festivals:
And they are so far from minding the business of life, viz. dressing up their
souls for God in a blessed eternity by Religion and Holiness, that a Saint
should have no respect from many that pretend to honor him, were it not that
he gets them leave to play more freely. The whole course of their lives is but
a sporting business, and when they lay aside their worldly affairs, it is but
to obtain leisure to be more frolic. There are those in the world that do
nothing else but make their bodies spruce and trim, that learn to speak finely,
and court Ladies, that in the morning are employed between the comb and the
glass, Inter pectinem and speculum occupati, etc. Sen.
and in the afternoon would have others look on them as much as they did in the
glass. These account a hair or two out of their place of as great moment as the
sacking of a town; and you may say they are employed in the same sense that
Children are, when they are dressing up a Baby.

A second sort we can not but see in the world, whose study is to flatter those
that are great; who learn to crouch and comply most basely with all their
humors, who gape for a place of preferment as a dog does for a bone; and they
know no other use of a day, but to provide for to morrow if they can. How many
others do we see sit all the day at wine, and know no other business but to
eat, and drink, and walk from one jolly place unto another? who turn days into
nights, and nights into days; who are mere Paradoxes in nature, desiring to
live for ever in this world, and yet gorging themselves as if they meant to die
to day, and never to taste more of Gods creatures. And I wish I could not say
there are another sort that have nothing at all to do, but are eat up with
laziness: Men that have no other thoughts but how they may spend their time
which lies upon their hands, with least trouble to themselves: The vermin of
the world, that do no good themselves, and devour the labors, yea and the time
of others. And for those who you think are busy and full of employment, that
have not a day of play inal ltheir lives, (unless they sleep on the Lords day)
I pray what can you say of them, but what Seneca does, operose nihil agunt,
they take a great deal of pains to do nothing! But do they do nothing, will you
say, that labor hard all day long and sweat at their work with the strength of
an ox? I answer yes, if they were oxen and horses, I should commend their
pains, and think they deserved a reward; but since they have a diviner shape, I
can call this toil by no better name then a laborious loitering. The man is
miserably ridden by the Beast, and seeing he takes no time to tame it, all the
rest of his toil is but a more painful sort of playing, a more serious kind of
Idleness. Ask such a man what he would do if he could live an hundred years
longer then yet he has done, and he would tell you that he would add house to
house, and increase his acre of land into an hundred, and eat and drink of the
best; the very voice of a cow or such a creature if it could speak. In such
poor fancies do these men's souls sport themselves and they do no more of the
work of a man (which is to mortify these carnal affections, and store their
mind with divine knowledge) then he does that rolls himself in a softer and
more delicate laziness. Alas poor souls! that play away their time in a most
tyrannous slavery, that are at leisure from themselves, that they may drudge in
the service of baser things. And will you say a man that coasts about to every
shore of the world to get riches, and lade himself with goods, is really
employed? His Ship takes as long journies as himself, and is laden with as much
riches as he pretends unto: but he knows how to make use of that riches, and he
buys land, or provides for his children, etc. What then? He dies, and as to the
other world he is worse then Nothing. Is this all you can say of the life of a
man, that he has fair possessions, and provides well for those that stay
behind him? Then sure there is no other state to come; or if there be, the man
has played away his day, having done nothing that will last to all eternity.
Nay, if this be the work of a man, it had been better for us to have been Apes
or such like creatures, for they take least pains to live, and they need no
such inheritance to leave their young ones. And so you may say of him that
studies impertinent things, or takes up all his time with other affairs of this
present world, he has stood all the day idle, as our Savior says to those
that he sends into the Vineyard; (...). Plut.
and his account at the last will appear so false, that it will be corrected as
Ph. loxenus did the book that was sent to him to amend, with one great blot
from the beginning to the end. The very Heathens have reproved the folly of
these men, and given such a dash to their accounts, that it is a wonder they
should not begin to think how they may live. There is a saying in many men's
mouths, but I wish they would think from whom it came that they may be ashamed
not to practice it, (...). Plut. de and. poctis.
and it is that which Socrates used, Wicked men live that they may eat and
drink, and good men eat and drink that they may live. This one saying strikes I
know not how many out of the number of the living; and if this Heathen were
alive, he would take most to be dead men, playing in the shape of the living.



1. Some reckon by their age. They account that the old must needs die before
those that are young; and they reckon that the fewer days any one has spent,
the more he has to come, and so few think of dying till they think it cannot
be avoided. Hence it is that one who is old says, I shall never live to see an
end of these troubles, but you that are young will behold the conclusion, and
perhaps that party drops into the grave in his youthful days. And he that is
young says, These will be fine things to talk of when we are old; our Nephews
will wonder when we tell them of such strange revolutions, when perhaps the
next week he is sent into the place of silence. These are they that reckon by
ages, and who think when childhood is past, that Youth, Manhood, and gray
hairs are all to come: But they forget the vulgar proverb, which some of the
Jews elegantly express, The old Ass very often carries the skin of the young
one to the market. Young men must not let their fancy be so brisk as not to
make account that they are but men: And what is that? Man is like to vanity,
Psalm. 144.4.
(says the Psalmist) his days are as a shadow that passes away.

2. Others reckon by their strength and lustiness of body, and imagine that
their constitution is so healthful that they are able to wrestle a fall with
the greatest sickness. Their rule is that the best built house shall stand
longest: a very false and deceitful rule! For on a sudden we see the fire of a
fever will burn up and consume the best timbred body in the world. The flames
of a Calenture will make him melt away as grease, whose strength is as the
strength of stones, and whose flesh is like unto brass. And who can hinder his
spirits from catching fire? who knows what vipers he nourishes within him by
his meat and drink, and especially his intemperance, which will eat through his
own bowels, even while his breasts are full of milk, and his bones moistened
with marrow? Job 21.23, 24. who knows what rottenness there is at the core of
the fairest fruit? and who does not know that the goodliest Oaks prove ofttimes
hollow and without heart within? And therefore let us not stay till the Axe be
laid at the root and the stroke of some terrible disease teach us to reckon
better.

3. Another sort reckon by the care they have of themselves. They measure their
days by temperance, chastity and good use of their bodies, by freedom from
excess and riot, and whatsoever might be the matter and occasion of diseases.
To say the truth, these men have a great many good rules, ex. gr. Too much oil
puts out the Lamp. Spare diet is the greatest cordial of nature. Discreet
fasting is the best Physic. But they have one rule which spoils all:
Temperance must needs prolong our time. The moderate man shall have many days.
It is pity such men should never think of the chances, the sudden accidents,
and unexpected surprizals which yet we have many instances of in the world.
Plagues and infections they say soonest seize on the finest tempers, pestilent
breaths do soonest choke the purest spirits. And there are secret malignant
causes which are unknown to the best of natures Secretaries. Yea the most
certain cures of known diseases have sometimes proved fatal to men's bodies. So
Gesner reports that one year he observed, Omnes pleuriticos a secta vena
expirasse, that all those who were let blood in Plurisies gave up the Ghost.
The opening of a vein which uses to give the soul breath, proved through the
corruption of the air (as he thinks) to be but the gate of death.

4. Others perhaps do reckon their days by their usefulness and the good which
they do in the world. There are a great many promises made to dutiful and
obedient persons, to such who are charitable and merciful to others, which may
make them apt to promise to themselves a certainty of long life. R. Nechonia a
Jew when his Scholars asked him on his deathbed how he came to live so long,
He answered, I never sought mine own honor by any man's disgrace. I never
reproached nor cursed my neighbor, and I was a liberal dispenser of my riches
to others, etc. alluding it is like to that in Psalm. 34.12, 13, 14. Who is he
that would live long and see many days? let him keep his tongue from evil. But
though there be some truth in this, yet there are many exceptions, and such men
do count wrong if they have no other rule but this. For sometimes by reason of
one great sin (as in the case of Moses) sometimes for the sins of others who
discern not such Jewels, and sometimes that they may not live to see miserable
and evil times which are the punishments of sin, the good man is taken away.
You see the days of our dear Brother are summed up, and we are taught to number
aright by the brevity of his life. If the King of terrors could have been
affrighted by piety and usefulness to have let his dart fallen out of his hand, I
had not been now here, unless it had been to have offered Sacrifices of praise
for his recovery to health again.

5. A fifth sort there are that measure their own lives by the lives of others;
and that not of all others neither, but of the longest livers. They hope to
attain to the days of the oldest man in the Parish, and think not that they may
go away in the company of the youngest. And especially if they see drunkards
and such sinners with gray beards upon red or rotten faces, they think surely
that they are many miles off from a grave. I do not know what kind of dotage it
is that possesses men's hearts; but so it is that though they see many flowers
cropped in their fullest beauty, yet they mind not them so much, though they be
in their own hands, as they do the rest that still flourish in the garden.
Though a wife be snatched out of men's bosoms, yet they think to live and
embrace another. Though a child be ravished out of their arms, yet they think
to live and get more, as if death must be so kind as to let them grow old,
seeing he has devoured their relations in their youth. You see now the corpse
of one before you that is gathered in the flowr of his age; and yet which of
you is there that does not think that he shall be at the choice of another
Minister, and that he shall hear him preach a great many Sermons, because some
in the Parish are grown so old as to have seen the Funerals of three Ministers
besides this? I wish heartily men would but a little ponder upon this common
mistake, and when they think of the large extent of some men's lives, they would
likewise cast their eyes upon the shortness of others, and see whether they
will not overballance the former account.

Sixthly, Some men's rule is, that all men's days are numbered by a fatal decree,
and therefore they need not number them. They measure their days by the stars,
and fetch their rule from Astrology and some secret fate: or rather they do not
measure them at all, nor make any reckoning how they live, whether piously or
wickedly, temperately or lewdly, thinking that the one cannot naturally
prolong, nor the other naturally shorten men days. This is the Turkish way of
account, who think that every man's fortune as they call it, and the length of
his days is written in his forehead by the Angel that stands by when he is
born. And so one of them not many years ago when he was hanged in the
Low Countries pointed to his forehead, as though it was his destiny and not his
fault. A barbarous brutish opinion, fit to nourish bloody Soldiers and make
men desperate, and was no Question cunningly devised by the Impostor to make
them fear no danger. But whatsoever is determined above concerning our lives,
it is plainby Scripture and reason that our wisdom, care, and good behavior
is required, and that by wickedness we may cut short those days which nature
has assigned unto them. Though there be an appointed time beyond which we
shall not go, yet we may never come up to that time, but be taken away in the
midst of our days.

Many such false rules there are; but it is no wonder if you do but consider,
First what a great love men have to this world. The pleasure and fine things
that tickle their senses, possess them with a fond desire of long life, that
they may enjoy all the kindnesses which the world offers them; and this most
ardent desire will let them think of nothing else but many days to entertain
her courtships, and answer her love when she seems to smile and look with a
pleasing countenance upon them. Or if she begin afterward to frown, they are
loath to think of death, because they hope to mend their fortune, or are wholly
unprovided for any better company in another world. Facile credimus quod
volumus; we would fain live long, and therefore we will not be of any other
belief but that we shall. And the thoughts of death are unwelcome because we
love the dalliances of the flesh so well, which will certainly by it be broken
off. This false numbering proceeds not so much from the weakness of men's
understanding, as from the wickedness of their wills and distempered
affections. They have no mind that it should be true that our days may be
short, and therefore they will think so as seldom as they can. And Secondly,
the love of our selves that is in us, is of no less power to blind us and make
us very fools. This will not let us think that we may die presently, though
many others do. As when two Ships meet at Sea, they that are in the one, think
that the other sails exceeding fast, and that they themselves go fairly and
easily, or rather stand still; even so it is in this case. Though men see the
days of another to run away like a Post, and fly after the manner of a swift
Ship that saileth by (as Job speaks) yet they think that they themselves scarce
stir at all, Job 9.25, 26.
and that their time runs on more slowly, and they seem to be now no older nor
nearer unto their graves then they were a year or two ago. They feel their
blood does dance as pleasantly through their veins, and the light sparkles as
clearly in their eyes, and their flesh is as warm and moist as formerly they
used, and so they think their life is no shorter then it was, because they feel
no sensible decays in their nature. A third reason of which mistake is, that
the shortness of their thoughts will not let them number aright. Most men look
but at a few things, and those few they consider of by halfs, and that half
they search not to the bottom, and so they mistake lamentably, and call those
years which are but days, and think they live when they lie rotting in their
graves. I conceit such men who seldom seriously think, to be like to a child
that knows not how much twenty is, who imagines it is a number that can scarce
be told. If they think of living twenty or thirty years, their short thoughts
makes them seem to be time that will never have an end, wherein they may
accomplish all their desires. And though they know that they may fall far short
of such an age, yet they only know it, and think no longer of it then a little
child with whose thoughts the next object runs away. It is one of the great
mischiefs of the world that so few love to consider, and of all other things
they least love to consider themselves, and of all parts of self-knowledge they
least know what to do with themselves. Many can tell what life is, who know not
how to live; many that confess how short it is, who throw it away as if they
had too much.

This mistake is of so evil and dangerous consequence, that we had all need
make great speed to correct it. Else we shall begin to think of living when it
is too late, and some will never think of it at all, and the best will cry out,
O mihi praeteritos, etc. -- O that God would give me again that time which is
flown away. O that I could call back a day that I might spend it better!

And that I may quicken you to reform this erroneous account, Let me give a
brief touch upon the second Observation, and the Lord make it to touch your
hearts.

Our life is but very short if we take it at the best, this Doctrine of the
brevity of man's life but a dry and trite theme; and therefore believe it, and
be affected with these two things in the text which do point to this
observation, which are all that I shall mention.

1. Our life is but days. He does not say Teach us to number our years; for it
is not safe for us to account upon too much, least we should we be deceived in
our computation. Yea Job says that man who is born of a woman, is but of few
days and full of trouble; he comes up like a flower, and is cut down; he
flees also as a shadow and continues not, Job 14.1, 2. Seneca makes the same
observation from his Poet, that I do here from the divine Psalmist, Optima
quaeqne dies miseris mortalibus aevi Prima fugit. De brev. vit^ cap. 9.
--

He says not aetas, says he, but dies; he speaks not of an age but a day,
that thy thoughts might not be infinite. Why then do thou promise to thy self
(as he goes on) months and years, and whatsoever thy inordinate desire of life
lists? De die tecum loquitur, and hoc ipso fugiente. He speaks to thee of a
day, and that is upon the wing too hasting very fast away. So may I say, the
Psalmist speaks to thee of days, it will not be long ere one Sun be set, and
then thou lie in the arms of the Brother of death. If another day shine upon
thy head, Job 9.26.
yet it flies likewise as an Eagle that hastes to his prey, and it will be a
greater wonder if thou outlive all the accidents and dangers of one day, then
that rhou die and descendest to thy grave. Yet some of the Heathens will not
allow us such a large measure for our lives as a day, nor suffer us to account
above an hour, or a minute, or if there be any thing less then the least
minute; such a diminutive expression has Plutarch somewhere concerning it.
(...). Punctum est quod vivimus, and adbuc punct^ minus.
All our life is but a point of time, which Seneca well interprets when he
says, It is but a point, yea less then a point that we live. If we believed
this, we should not draw so long a line of life as we do in our Fancy, nor
describe such a large circle wherein we make a thousand figures, and have
infinite contrivances as though it were without any end.

2. Our days may be numbered, and therefore they are but few. If he had said
years, yet seeing every body can count them, we could not justly look upon them
as long. That which every man can reckon is but little; and that is infinite
which no man can number. As who can tell the days of eternity? What thought
can conceive the duration of God who ever was and is and will be? But every
fool can tell what the days of man is if he will but set his mind to the
account. You can say of man no more but that he has been so many years, and
that he is, and no body can tell whether he shall be. Here you are at a stop,
unless you will at random speak of a few days that perhaps shall never come;
or if they do, Moses dare let his pen run no further then eighty year, and
these pass away as a tale that is told. Or if you will venture to tell by the
Son of Sirachs account, they are but a hundred, according as you read in
Eccles. 18.9.10. The number of man's days at the most are but an bundred years;
as a drop of water to the Sea, and a gravel stone in comparison of the sand, so
are a thousand years to the days of eternity.

Which if we did seriously believe, then first we should not desire, love, or
design any thing in this world, as though we should live to the years of
Methusaleh, or be like Melchizedeck, without end of days. How soon might we
tell what would content us, if we could but tell our days aright? what a just
measure should we set to all our affections, if we had but once measured our
time and drawn it into a narrow compass? innumerable designs would vanish out
of our minds, even as a shadow does when the Sun shrinks in his head, if we did
but look upon our selves as a shadow, and our lives as a vapor that goes out
of our mouths. And secondly, if we did seriously think what a few figures will
serve to number our years when we have their total sum, and how many of them
are spent before we can do any more then a Beast, and how many we cast away
without considering after we are men, and how many necessary refreshments by
meat and drink, and sleep, will still devour, we would not be so prodigal and
lavish of the small number that remains, but save them for good uses and the
service of our souls. We would never endure to be such spend thrists of that of
which only we can be honestly covetous, but rate our time at such a price, that
one minute of it would seem more valuable then all the world.

The belief of these things that men account so common, that they scarce think
of them, would not suffer men to be so late before they begin to live. They
would instantly step beyond resolution, and labor to do their work lest they
should have no time to do it in. It is a wise and good saying of Seneca, Male
vivunt qui semper vivere incipiunt. They never live well who are always
beginning to live. Yet this is the state of most men in the world who are at
all awakened, they resolve to live too morrow or the next week, when their
business is over, and then they resolve again, and set another day, or perhaps
they pray, and read, and begin a better life for a few days, at the end of
which some occasion breaks off all: And then they are to begin again, and new
resolutions come into their minds, and if God be content to stay their leisure
a few days hence, he shall hear more of them: As if they had their times in
their own hands, and could make death wait upon them till they thought good to
come to their graves. How strangely do men forget themselves? how dead do many
good notions lie in their minds? one would think they were in a dream; for like
men in a sleep, they say yea and no to all the questions we ask, and yet
remember nothing that is said. Ask them if their life be short, and their days
uncertain; they will fetch a sigh and say that all flesh is grass, or as the
flower of grass that soon fades away: Ask them if they have no work to do but
may take their pleasure, and they say that all eternity depends on this moment,
that their work is great, and their time is little, and their account is
dreadful. Ask them if God will take the dregs of their time, and be content
with the bottom of their days, and they will judge it unreasonable. Yea ask
them if it be fit that he should let such live that do nothing for him, and
they cannot but say that we kill vermin, caterpillars, and such like things
that destroy Gods Creatures, but bring no good to the world. Would you not
expect now that they who make such acknowledgements, should be busy about
their salvation? would you not imagine that they esteemed time more then
thousands of gold and silver? Alas,! their senses are all locked up, they are
fast asleep, though they thus speak; not one syllable of this comes from their
hearts, but they talk of dying and the grave as if they had seen nor thought of
either. If they had a thousand years still to live in the world, they could not
be more drousie about their souls, nor more expensive and wastefull of their
precious hours, then they are in this short moment of which they talk. Awake,
Awake for the sake of your poor souls. Let it feel it self I beseech you, and
shake off these heavy and sleepy thoughts that hang upon its mind. O let it not
talk like the soul of a bird that prattles according as it is taught, but let
it look into a grave, let it reason with it self about the true number of our
days, let it speak its sense to the full, and state things so that thou may
not only resolve to live, but make account that thou must either live now or
never, for any thing thy soul can tell. If I could see any soul looking forth
out of its Tomb, and mind lifting up its head, and demanding leave of the body
that it may live, how blessed an hour should I count this! I would reckon it
among the best times of my life, and it would turn all my present sorrow into
joy, that God has got a friend when I lost one. O let us not wound the air
with noises of death and judgment, and your hearts remain insensible and
unmoved. Let us not seem as fools that fill the world with sounds and clamours,
which no body heeds or gives ear unto. Who do we preach unto but men? what do
we preach for, if you will not believe? to what purpose do we call for belief
if you will not consider? and how should it come to pass that a thing of daily
occurrence as death is, should work no more if men did consider? We could find
no worse entertainment from a herd of beasts then we do from many men, if we
should preach unto them: And we shall be as unsuccessfull upon inconsiderate
men, as upon the Birds that fly over our heads; for men that will not consider,
will not be men. Therefore I beseech you resolve to take things into your more
retired thoughts; and whosoever he be that lays. his eyes upon these Papers,
let him well consider what I have to say upon the third Observation which is
chiefly intended, and it is this.

The right numbering of our days is earnestly and diligently to be enquired
out. So, signifies that he desires to be taught as is before expressed in the
Psalm; or else So signifies right or well without any mistake. For we find the
Hebrew word (...) which is here rendered So, taken for right and well, as Numb.
27.7. (...) etc. right have the daughters of Zelophedad spoken, etc. and 2
Kings 7. 9. the lepers say, (...) We do not well, this day is a day of good
tidings. And therefore thus we may render the Psalmists words, Teach us aright
and well to number our days, or Teach, so as we should, etc. But the sense
will be the same every way, because we shall reckon aright if we number So as
he spoke before in the Psalm. How is that will you say? what is the right and
good account?

I shall spare the labor of giving you reasons why you should so diligently
inquire, (in hope that you are a little awakened by what has been said, and in
fear that I should extend this discourse beyond the length of a Sermon) And
answer to the Question as distinctly as I can with some reference unto what you
find in this Psalm.

The word numbering is a word of consideration, and signifies a meditating or
casting in our mind, a serious thinking with our selves what our days are, and
for what end and purpose our life is given unto us. And if we would not mistake
in our accounts of which there is such danger, Then

Let us number by ones. nor venture to add one moment to another till God add
it. I mean, we must reckon only upon what is present, and account that all our
time that is to come, is in gods hands, which we must not number to our selves
because it is none of our own. And so ver. 3. the Psalmist says, Thou turnest
man to destruction, etc. i.e. Man is wholly in thy power, and he has no more
then thou give him, and the next moment if thou say return, he gives up the
Ghost. This now therefore is only ours, and so we must set that down, and there
stay till God bestow another moment upon us. He may be poor enough that will
value his estate by what he has only in hopes; and yet such an one is he that
reckons his stock of time by what is future. He was a distracted man who stood
at the Key at Athens and took a note of all the goods in the Ships that came
into the port and made account that they were his; yet just such is the vanity
of a man that puts more time into his accounts then this present instant; for
he reckons another goods, not his own, he takes that which is in the hands of
God only (who was, is, and is to come) to be his own proper possession. He that
numbers thus, must reckon over again before he reckon right; and if he will
account what is his, he must take great heed that he set not down in the sum
that which is Gods, and none of his yet. Let him say Now I am, and I shall be
as long as God pleases, in whose hand is the breath of my nostnls. He that is
hasty and quick in casting of accounts you know, is frequently mistaken; and
the surest way is to proceed leisurely and slowly that we may mind the figures
and comprehend the numbers clearly in our thoughts. There is no less danger in
letting our thoughts run too fast when we are about these sacred accounts; let
us stay and pause, let our minds go along with the moments that number our
time, but not outrun them; for then all our accounts will be but a fancy
because we have put into them more then is our own. If we could reckon thus,
and tell no faster then God adds unto our days, and increases our stock of
time, then God would be more in our thoughts, we could not but be more sensible
of our dependence upon him, and acknowledge him more feriously in all our
ways; we should be apt at every breath to look upon him as the Sun that
continues the shadow of our lives; and likewise we should look upon our graves
more then upon our houses or any thing else; For as Lipsius well says, our
houses are but Inns, Cent. 4. Epist. 30.
and our graves are our houses.

2. Yet let us count those things that may put an end to our days, by greater
numbers. Or thus, Let us reckon that there are more enemies to life then one.
Though we can tell but by ones when we number our days or moments rather; yet
we may tell by twenties or hundreds when we number those things that may
conclude and put a period to our time. Look over a Bill of mortality and there
you may tell thirty or forty diseases. Then add forty more to them, and two or
three hundred more to that forty, and so proceed until you come near to a
thousand. For according to the account of some of the Jews, there are nine
hundred and three diseases in the world This they gather from the word (...)
Psalm. 68.20. the numeral letters of which are 103.
. And let us be sure in this account to put down more ways to the grave then
from a sick bed. And above all take heed of that dotage to think that we must
die of old age; for there are fewer die of that disease then any other in the
world.

We must think that our lives may suddenly be snatched away, and not carried off
leisurely by the steps of many days ilness. Some diseases do no sooner appear,
then we vanish and disappear. An enemy sometimes gives no warning, but strikes
us dead at one stroke. And our sickness does not always lay seige to our
strength wherein we trust, but we are blown up in a moment as the Israelites
were, ver. 5.6. Thou carriest them away as with a flood, etc. They were swept
away with plagues, they fell before their foes, they went qu^ck into the pit,
and were gone out of the world as soon as a dream out of our mind. And so still
we see some are drowned in the water, others are strangled suddenly in their
own blood, and a world of contingencies and casualties there are besides: so
that ten thousand things besides these nine hundred diseases, may put an end to
our days. Anacreon the Poet was choked with the kernel of a grape; Aeschylus
by the shell of a Tortoise which fell from an Eagles Talons, who mistook as was
thought his bald Head for a white Rock. An Emperor died by the scratch of a
comb, Essays l. 1. cap. 19.
and a Duke of Britany (as Lord Mountaigne tells us) was stifled to death in
such a throng of people as is now in this place; one of the Kings of France
died miserably by the chock of an Hogg; and a Brother of that Lords playing at
Tennis, received a blow with a Ball a little above the right ear which struck
him into his grave. What serious considerations would these things breed in us,
if we thought of them? we should often say in our mind, What if now the house
should fall? What if my foot should slip? what if I should be trodden under
foot in this press, or drowned in this sweat? what if the Boat should overturn,
or the Horse should throw me? What would become of me if my meat should choke
me, or my drink should quench my life? What? then if I be not well provided, I
go down in a moment to Hell. And therefore I must always live well, that so I
may never die suddenly. V. Locman.
The Cock in the Arabic fable, because he had overcome in a battle against
another of his neighboring Cocks, thought he had now no enemy, and therefore
he got upon a top of the house, and began to crow and clap his wings in token
of his triumph, when behold on a sudden a Vultur comes and snatches this great
Conqueror away. Just such is the state of silly man, he overthrows some
disease, and gets the better of it, he escapes in a battle, and rejoices as if
now he were out of danger, when some accident or other lies in ambush for him
and strikes him dead upon the place. We must not therefore be secure at any
time; the strong man must not glory in his strength, nor the great man in the
honor of his family and numerous progeny, for all may be cut off in a moment.
I can not but here remember how three hundred of the Fab^i in Rome were slain
in one day, and but one man of the Family left that was not extinct. And about
five hundred years agone, the whole family of the Justiniani in Venice perished
in defense of their Country against Emanuel the Greek Emperor, except one only
who was a Priest. B^b^ Comes Abusinu^.
And Aventinus relates of a Count in the time of Henry the second Emperor,
that had thirty Sons (besides eight Daughters) who attended on him to the
Emperors court, and were all preferred to offices by him, and all died in a
very short space of time. And so in Scripture we find all Gideons children
slain at once, except one; and the like of Ahabs, a wicked family, whom God
intended to root out. And yet which of us thinks that if we have nine or ten
children, they may all die before us? Or who thinks that they may all die in a
day? nay we are apt to imagine not only that we may stay in the world till we
have done all we design, but that we shall go out of the world the ordinary
way, and not be let out at any new gate. Let us reform this error and be verily
persuaded that there is a vast uncertainty of life and all worldly things, and
that death is dressed in a thou, sand shapes, and may be in every thing we see in
the world.

3. Make account that there is no greater enemy to life then sin. Sin is not to
stand for one thing in our account but for a thousand, for all the miseries and
evils that can be reckoned up. The Stone, the Gout, the Plague, etc. all the
pains, and stinches and noisome evils that were ever heard of, are in the Womb
of sin, and therefore reckon a sinful life to be of all other the most
uncertain, and that which provokes the holy God to shorten our days. So you
read, ver. 7, 8, 9. of this Psalm, that they were consumed in Gods anger, and
their days passed away in his wrath, when he took notice of their rebellions,
and saw how heinous their crimes were. If you will believe the wise man, the
years of the wicked shall be shortened, Prove. 10.27. Or if you will believe his
Father, God shall shoot at them; with an arrow suddenly shall they be wounded,
Psalm. 64.7. Or the Prophet Malachi, by whom God says, I will be a swift
witness against the Sorcerers and Adulterers, and against false swearers, and
against those that oppress the hireling in his wages, etc. Hear what
Observations one of Jobs friends made, Job 20.4, 5.6. Ever since man was placed
upon the earth it was a known rule, that the triumphing of the wicked is short,
and the joy of the hypocrite but for a moment; though his excellency mount up
to the heavens, and his head reach unto the clouds, yet he shall perish for
ever like his own dung; they which have seen him, shall say where is he? He
shall flee away like a dream and shall not be found, he shall be chased away
like a vision of the night. And Job himself does assent to the truth of the
Observation, when he says, cap. 21.17, 18. How often is the Candle of the wicked
put out? And how often comes their destruction upon them? God distributeth
sorrows in his anger. They are as stubble before the wind, and as chaff that
the storm carries away. This Consideration might a little stop men in their
violent pursuit of sinful and unlawful desires. If they would but think that
every sin may strik off a figure or two from their lives, that every act of it
may cut their days some moments shorter, what heart could they have to sin?
With what pleasure could they drink if they thought that it were poison? how
could they endure passion and revenge, if they thought it would send a fire
into their bones? and yet there is all reason that we should expect it should
be so (unless God think fit to alter the course of things for what ends he sees
best in his Government of the world) seeing none are such a trouble and burden
to mankind as wicked men. He that is so prodigal of his time, has little
reason to think that God should give him more in whose hands it only is. He
knows not what to do with that he has already, and therefore how can he with
any face come to beg for a day longer to dishonor God! Wonder in thy self
that Gods lets thee live who know not how to live. Admire that he should give
thee any time who know not how to use it. And let this one thing lead thee
to repentance, and not make thee presume to continue in the same unreasonable
mispence. Me thinks every sinner when he is sick should think of nothing but
dying, and yet they think the least of it. Me thinks they should be in a
horrible fright, and never imagine to escape (seeing they do no good) unless
they have less reason then the Hogg in the Arabic fable.

That tells us that a Butcher carrying three creatures upon his Horse, Locman.
a Sheep, a Goat and a Hogg; the two former lay very quiet and still, but the
Hogg kicked and cried and never rested. Thereupon the man said, Why art thou so
impatient when the other two are so quiet? The Hogg answered, Every one knows
himself; and the Sheep knows that he is brought into the City for his Wools
sake, and the Goat for the sake of his Milk, and so they need take no care; but
I alas know very well that I have neither Wool nor Milk, but that as soon as I
come into the City I must be killed, for that is all that I am good for. A
wicked man must be worse then such a Swine that does not think every plague
will sweep him away, and that when there is a great mortality he shall be one
of the dead; for he is good for nothing else but to be killed, and to make some
room for a better person to stand up in that place which he takes up in the
world. But if God be pleased for the punishment of others, and to punish them
worse hereafter, to let them stay still here, Let them know that a sinful life
is a mere death (as the Apostle says of the lascivious Woman, 1 Timothy 5.6.) and
they can expect nothing hereafter but such a state as will make them wish they
had died sooner here.

4. Reckon that no man's life seems shorter then his that thinks not often how
short it is. Time never seems to pass away so swiftly as when we are thinking
of something else then our time. I told you life is very short of it self, and
we must reckon it by minutes rather then years, or by fractions rather then
whole numbers, and yet it is still shorter in our thoughts, because we mind not
how these minutes run away. They are as a steep, says the Psalmist, ver. 5.
and in sleep you know there is no observation of time at all, but a night seems
as one moment. How soon is an hour gone when we are in any pleasure? Yea in
business or any employment which takes up our mind, how quickly is a day flown
away? A day seems but as an hour to him that thinks not at all of his day. Just
as a man that is in a journey, who talks or reads or thinks, is come to the end
of it before he thought that he was near the place; so it is with every one of
us; our life is gone and we know not how, while we think of all things but only
of our life. He seems to himself not to have lived at all that minds not how
his time passes away, because it slips through his fingers and he feels it not.
His thoughts being busied always about other things, a year to him is but as a
day, and he complains miserably when he comes to die that God has given him no
longer time. If we did consider this, we should often think how our time
spends, and that would make us labor to spend it well. We should think what
our life is and how it goes, and that would make us prolong it by doing of
Good. For life seems long to no man so much as to him that minds how it passes
on, and how many hours he has for to employ, and who does some thing in those
hours. His very work will tell him that he has lived, or else he could not
have done so many things.

5. We must account that in our life there will be some nights as well as days.
We must not expect all kind usage from the world, but look to meet with much
trouble and sorrow. So ver. 10. the Psalmist tells us, That if we live till
Eighty years, our strength will be but labor and sorrow, and besides you see
from what has been said, that we must endure much grief before that, from the
loss of our friends and relations that God takes away, besides all the vexation
that will be apt to arise from other accidents. It is a foolish flattery of our
selves, to think that all ours must be Halcyon days, and that no disgust shall
wrinkle our foreheads, nor no black vail be cast over our faces. We had better
reckon truly, and put down more black days than white in our Calendar; and
then if they be fairer than we expect, our contentment will be the greater; and
howsoever the thoughts of trouble will make us desire more after our Fathers
house, and long more in our hearts for the heavenly Country. The travel and
toil here would make us have a care top rovide for our rest with the people of
God; and these black nights of affliction, for the eternal day that knows no
night at all. We should not be so much in love with life, if we did reckon upon
the evils of it; nor so much in fear of death, if we considered how many ways
we die daily. What pleasure is there in living when we are eighty year old,
when we are a burden to our selves, and too often to others what contentment can
we have? What cheer can there be when those that look out of the window are
darkened? when the sound of the grinding is low, and we rise up at the voice of
every bird, and all the daughters of music are brought down? i. e. when we have
lost our eyes, and teeth, and voice, and sleep, and are but a little distance
from a clod of earth, what joy can we feel in our hearts? And yet this is the
time that we would fain live to, though we creep to it upon our hands and feet
through a world of mire and dirt, Si vita humana esset 500 aut 600. annorum
omnes desperatione vitam finirent. Card. de vita prepria.
and swim through the waters of many afflictions to be more miserable. I am of
Cardans mind, that if the life of man should last five hundred or six hundred
years, many a one would make away themselves out of madness and desperation
(there are so many miseries that befall them,) and yet we are now madly
desirous to live till we be weary of life. Let us think that life if it be long
may be but a kind of death, and nothing will comfort us then, but the hopes of
another life. It was a sharp saying of Caesar's to one of his Guard, that by
reason of his craziness, asked his leave that he might cause himself to be put
to death; Do thou think then that thou art alive? Alas! such a decrepit thing
as man is, when he comes to Old age, is but a walking Carcass that is ready at
every step to stumble upon its Graves. Yea death is preying upon us every day,
he gets a mouth full of our flesh every moment, and sometimes by a sickness,
even eats us to the very bone; and then though we recruit again and repair our
bodies, yet we do but make food for new diseases. It is said to Adam, In the
day thou eatest thereof thou shall dye, which teaches us that we are next door
to death every day, and that we do not so much live as borrow something from
death, and if we live long, it will make us pay intolerable usury for not
paying our lives sooner.

As these things will correct our mistakes about the length and quality of our
days, so I shall now add some things that will teach us better the use of
them.

6. We must reckon our days by our work and not by our time, by what we do,
and not by what we are. Let us account that the longest day which is best
spent, and that the oldest life which is most holy. Plutarch Consol. ad Apollon.
(...). A long life is not the best but a good life. As we do not commend
(says he) him that has played a great while on an Instrument, (...).
or made a long Oration, but him that has played and spoken well, and as we
account those Creatures best that give us most profit in a short time, and
every where we see maturity preferred before length of age, so it ought to be
among our selves. They are the worthiest persons, and have lived longest in the
world, who have brought the greatest benefit unto it, and made the greatest
advantage of their time to the service of God and of Men. Let our Conscience
therefore be the Ephemeris or Diary of our life. Let us not reckon by the
Almanac, but by the Book of God, how much we live. And let us account that he
who lives godlily lives long, and that other men live not at all.

We must not say that a man has lived seaventy years if he has done nothing
worthy of a man, but that he has been so long. Diu fuit, sed parum vixit, he
had a great many days, but lived few or none.

In one sense most men may count their lives by nights rather then days, for
they are as men asleep, and do nothing at all that is the business and intent
of life.

They are as Childish in their desires, as weak in their fears, as unreasonable
in their hopes, as impertinently and vainly employed, as if they were but newly
come into the world, and had not attained to the use of their Reason. Shall we
think a man has lived because he is a yard higher then he was? is this enough
to denominate us men, that we have hair growing upon our Chin? No, there are
more Children then those that are in Coats, and while we look no further then
the present life, we are but great Infants, and are at play with Babies. And
alas! if we account the right way by our work and improvement of our selves in
true understanding, Conscience and godliness, the best of us must reckon fewer
years then eighty; for how little of this time do we truly live. When we do no
good we may say as the Emperor did Diem perdidi, I have clearly lost a day; I
had as good not have been to day: you can scarce say that I was, if you look at
the purpose of being. For to acknowledge God, and get acquaintance with him, to
govern our selves in conformity to him, to do good to others, etc. are the
great businesses of life; and of him that minds not these chiefly, you may say,
that there is such a thing called by such a name, and that has an existence,
but you cannot say that the man lives. Shall we say that he sailed much, who
was taken in a storm, as soon as he put out to Sea, who was tossed by contrary
winds in a Circle to and fro, and in conclusion is brought just where he was,
De Brev. vitcae. cas. 8.
when he first launcheth forth? Non ille multum navigavit, sed multum jactatus
est, as Seneca well says. He did not Sail much, but was tossed very much.
Shall we then say, that a man has lived much, whose soul was filled with Air
and vanity, as soon as he was born; who had tumbled to and fro in variety of
business in the Sea of this world, and is never quiet in the pursuit of earthly
affairs? Alas! when he comes to the end of his days he is as far from his
part, as when he first began them; Heaven is as far out of his reach (and
further too) as when he lay in his mothers Womb. He was much busied, but he did
nothing. He was much employed, but he lived idly. For as I told you, days and
living are truly to be measured by the work of a man. And therefore much less
can you say, that he has lived, who has eaten and drank, and got one of the
same kind, etc. For so does a Beast, and therefore all you can say, is that the
Beast in him lived, but not the man. And if we did reckon thus, and consider
how much time this toy, and that trifle, this business and that service, this
man and that woman have devoured, besides what every day will have for
necessary uses: Se^. ib. cap. 3.
Videbimus nos pauciores habere annos quam numeramus, we shall see that we have
fewer years than we number. We say perhaps sixty years is our age, but we may
set down ten, yea though we have seriously minded our great work. Let us
therefore hereafter when we ask our selves how old we are, reckon from that
time that we are born again. And let us distinguish between time and what is
done in time, for all creatures have time as well as we, and unless our work
differ us from them our age will not. O be ashamed to be a child with a great
beard! Blush to reckon forty or fifty years, when thou know not for what
thou came into the world. Let not the Sun see thee again so void of the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, as if thy soul were but newly dropped into thy body. Be
not twenty or forty years in learning to be sober; and for very shame let it
not be said, that in so many years thou know not how to pray and represent
thy needs to God. How many years do thou expect to live, if in so many thou
can not learn to mortify one lust? If in the space of fifty years thou can
not get the victory over a cup of drink, how many must God give thee to
overcome all the rest of thy sins? If so long experience will not teach thee
humility or contentedness, who can hope that thou should live long enough to
put on Jesus Christ, and be conformed to all his Image? O live, live I beseech
you as fast as you can, for it is certain that is little or nothing that we
have lived.

Seventhly, We must not account all days alike, or we must not measure our
time by the length, but by the weight; not by its greatness, but by its worth.
Let us not measure our days (as we do) by the motion of the Sun which we
see, but by the shining of the Son of Righteousness upon our souls: not by
the celestial bodies, but by the celestial inspirations. Think that a long
time wherein there are many days of grace, and mind that time and improve it
above all the rest. Always think that time is of a different value as to the
chief use of time; and in some days we have more of opportunity though but the
same time. This makes a great difference in our days if we well understand it,
and should make us very watchful to lay hold upon this flower of time when it
presents it self unto us. A day of grace, a Lords day when God shall move upon
our souls, such an opportunity as this, if God affect our hearts, is worth all
our days beside when we are left unto our selves. As to the purposes of
holiness and getting nearer to Heaven, one moment, when the Spirit of God is
upon us, and strongly possesses our mind with good things, and breathes into us
holy affections, is worth many hours, yea days and years when that is not with
us, or does not so powerfully incite us. Let us therefore employ such time
well, and set our selves to our business, earnestly entreating more of such
time, and that Gods Spirit will visit us more frequently with its company. Then
our work will go on fast, and if it be possible at all to recall the time past,
it must be by doing that in a few moments, which naturally could not have been
done in a whole Life. We must value time hereafter as Mariners do at Sea, by
the wind that blows upon us, and then we must hoise up our Sails. We must look
at some as Harvest days, and then we must gather and lay up in store by hard
labor; or as Market days, and then we must buy what we want, and lay in
provision for the following days. Yea the blackest day of affliction, if we
were well skilled, might be numbered among the best times of our life; For God
chastneth us for our profit, that we may be made parkers of his holiness.

Eighthly, Reckon time to stand in order to eternity. Consider it not in the
absolute notion, but in the relative. Look on it as a River running into the
Ocean, and account that time it self must be accounted for. So number thy days
as to think that they must be numbered again by God. Think that time passes,
and yet that it remain upon thine account. Think that as thou art now, so to
eternity thou shall be. Do not look upon thy life as a few days to be passed,
and there is an end, but reckon so many days I have lived, and the next moment
is eternity for any thing I can tell. Everlastingness hangs upon this moment,
and the state of the one depends on the state of the other; as time is used by
us, so shall we find our selves used in the other life. I doubt we seldom look
on these two, as having a reference to each other; but men live, as if when
time was trifled away, they might begin upon a new score in Eternity. Men live
as if all should be forgotten that is done here, and they should have something
else to think of when they go from hence. Remember therefore that both God and
thy self will call thee to another reckoning; all the days which thou have
never told, but went away without any observation, shall be recalled back unto
thy mind. Then the mind shall tell deliberately, and run thee through at every
thought, how many hours thou satest with the cup at thy mouth; how many days
thou did spend in sport; how long the time seemed when the Preacher overrun
his hour; and how many motions of Gods Spirit thou did send back, and bid
come at some more convenient time. Yea all thy false accounts shall then be
accounted for, and thou shall never have done numbering thy errors, but shall
tell them all over again with a new torment that thou should be so wilfully
mistaken. O that you would let your souls which are apt to number so many days
in this world, and are loath to make an end, let them lanch into the depths of
eternity, and there spread their thoughts. Seeing they have such a mind to be
telling out so many years for us, let them run into that vast Ocean. Bring
forth all your numbers wherewith your minds are pregnant, heap million upon
million, lay one hundred thousand of millions upon another, and they are all
but as an unite to eternity. In this vast eternity you must certainly live; and
therefore why do you not let your thoughts be more upon eternity than upon a
few uncertain days in time? Why do not your minds, which love to count so
unboundedly the days of this narrow life, extend themselves into eternity,
which is without any limits at all? Tell the torments of an everlasting fire,
tell the aching thoughts, if you can of a burning soul, number the sighs and
groans of a heart, that fries in the wrath of God to eternal ages. Then reckon
the joys of Heaven, number all the sweet notes of Heavenly quire, tell all the
Songs and Hymns of Praise which they sing. And if thou had an head as big as
Archimedes and could tell how many atoms of dust were in the Globe of the
Earth; yet think that such a vast number is but as one little atome in compare
with those endless sorrows and those endless joys. Seeing thou can look so
far as to the very end of thy days, seeing thou art prone to run in thy
thoughts as far as it is possible, take one step further then eighty years, and
then thy thoughts are in eternity; go a little further then the end of thy
life, and there let thy thoughts lose themselves. Let this be thy Impress, or
Motto, let this be writ upon thy mind, that a Learned man writes upon all his
Books, Aeternitatem cogita, Think of eternity. Johan. Meu. sius.
This will make thine account more exact, when thou let thy thoughts run
thither, whither thy time is running, into all Eternity.

9. Though our time be little, yet let us account that it is great enough for
what we have to do in time. I said that our life was short of it self, yet let
us reckon that it is long enough to serve all the ends of living. We have day
enough to do our real business. We have time enough to prepare for eternity.
We must always account that we have days enough to number our days, and make
up our accounts, and what can we desire more? If we will charge our selves
indeed with unnecessary things to bring about some great design, and accomplish
some covetous desire, and raise our estate to such an height, we may not have
time enough to execute out purpose. But must we therefore whine and complain
and say, nature has dealt hardly with us? No. Vita, si scias uti, longa est;
life is long enough, if thou know the use of it. If thou considerest what
thou have to do, thou have time enough to do it. There is time enough to
moderate those worldly desires; to break off those impertinent employments* to
throw away those designs; to subdue thy passions; to cultivate thy mind, to
submit thy will to God, to know the intention of the Son of God, his appearing
in the world; to work out thy salvation, and to make ready for his coming
again. Though we have not time to resolve all Questions that are started in the
world, yet we have sufficient time to resolve this great one, What shall we do
to be saved? Heaven may be got in that time, that the world cannot. Why then do
we murmur at the shortness of life? why do we sigh that we can number no more
days? what would men do with them, and to what use would they employ them? is
it their souls they would save? they need no more days then God has assigned
them for that purpose. Is it an estate they would get, or pleasures they would
enjoy? they have too much time for such ends, seeing they are not the goods of
a man. Would they know all the secrets and subtilties in Learning? two or three
Ages will not suffice for that; and seeing that knowledge will dye, it is not
worth living so long for it. Would they be able to determine all Controversies
in Religion. How absurd a thing is this for a wicked man to take up his time in
disputes, when he lets the Devil without any quarrel run away with his soul?
It is as preposterous a thing, as for a man that is in a deep Consumption to
consult with his Physician for the curing of a cut finger. But this is the
misery of it, that the fashion of the world is not to mind Religion. Most men
and especially great persons are led by the opinion of the world; now vulgar
people do not expect that we should be godly, and so they mind every thing but
only that, and then complain that they are straightened in their time. People
expect that we should keep open house, and let them eat and drink their fill,
etc. And so they tempt their. Landlords to think that it is below them to live.
Let us correct our selves in this mistake, and when we account the days are
short, we must mean no more but this.

We have one thing necessary to be done, To do the will of our Father, to get
ready for Heaven; this must be constantly and seriously minded, and we have no
spare time to throw away without any reference to this business. Our life runs
away so fast, that unless we take good heed, we shall not be able to do the
work for which we live. It would be accounted a piece of madness, if when the
enemy is at the Walls, when the storm is ready to be made, when the Bullets fly
about the Streets, A man should sit considering whether a Bow will carry
further then a Gun, and whether more were killed by the Ancient weapons, then
by the modern Arms. And yet just such is the folly of mankind. When death is
at their back, and life flies before their faces, when they are beset with
evils in the world, and have little strength to resist them, when they are in
the straits of time, and yet have a huge deal of work to do; they are thinking
with themselves whether it is best to hunt to day, or to Hawke; whether they
should visit a friend at this town or the next, etc. and then spend their time
as though they had too much, and yet at last cry out upon the brevity of life.
Come, come, let us be honest and reckon right, De brev. vitae. cap. 1.
Non exignum temporis habemus, sed multum perdimus, as Seneca well said. It is
not a little time that we have, but it is not a little that we lose. God has
not given a little, but we throw away much. Our portion is not small, for what
we are to trade, but our mispense is exceeding great. Non accepimus vitam
brevem sed fecimus. We did not receive a short life, but have made it so. Not
God but we our selves have made our time little. He is not niggardly and
sparing, but we are prodigal and make a lamentable wast of our hours. Just as
when a great estate and fair possessions come to an unthrifty Heir, they are
presently consumed and spent; whenas a little Portion well husbanded,
increases to large demeans; so it is with our life. They that have abundance
of time given unto them, through their grofs improvidence and mispense are
utterly undone, and whine like beggars, as if they had had none, whereas
careful and diligent persons so improve a little, that thanks be to God they
are rich in good works, and say it is enough, let God call for them when he
pleases.

Tenthly, Let us reckon death to be the best accountant, and so number our
days now, as we shall do when we come to dye. Then a day will appear a
precious thing; then will a covetous man offer all that he has got in his
whole life, for one day; then will a voluptuous man be ready to purchase a day
with any pains, though it were all rainy, and he were forced to spend it in
tears. But it is a sad reckoning when a man must reckon twice, and one of them
must be when he has no time to mend his errors and mistakes. It will go very
ill with us, if we make one account in our life, and another at our death. If
we should see then that there are as many faults as there are days; and that
so many lines as there are in our life, so many blots we must make: how
fearfully shall we be amazed, in what perplexity of spirit shall we see our
selves so foul and black, in the midst of such gross and damnable errors. Let
us therefore see and consider, now what account dying men make of their time,
and take their reckoning as most certainly true. Though men now be lavish of
their time, and play away their hours, though they give all or most to the
world, and little or nothing to God; yet come to a dying man and he will tell
you that days were good for something else, then for a man to eat and drink
and trade in; he will tell you of feeding and nourishing the Diviner part, or
providing for a soul, of dressing it for the Bridegroom by constant acts of
godliness; besides all those of temperance and sobriety, of justice and mercy.
He will tell you of a Book more worth your reading and studying, then all that
ever you turned over. And as for a day of grace at what rate would he purchase
such a precious season? He will tell you he is ashamed that he ever sat at his
door talking vainly among his neighbors on the Lords day. He will tell you
that he cannot sleep now for the aching of his heart, that he should sleep at a
Sermon. He prays that he might but live and Pray with his Family Evening and
Morn. Yea let him be a good man, that has made a good use of his time, yet he
will tell you that such an hour he might have spent better; in such a company
he might have done more good, at such a time he might have been more solicitous
and industrious about Heavenly things: and he will Pray as a good Bishop did,
Lord pardon my sins of omission. ^p Usher.
And therefore let us now judge as sensible and good men do when they are taught
by death that cannot flatter. That is a stern Master, but very just and
faithful, he speaks with a dreadful voice, but things that are infinitely
true and serious. He cuts their very heart whose accounts they leave him to
write, but he will truly state them. Let us then learn of those that he
teaches, and not stay till we be taught, when perhaps we shall be past
Learning. Let us imagine that the room is darkened, that the Physician stands
by our bed side, that we hear our friends sigh and groan, that we feel the
approaches of death, and then conceive that our Books of account are brought to
us, and we have our pen in our hand. What now shall we write? Let us eat and
drink and be merry? Let us take our ease for we have goods laid up for many
years? will you reckon thus, our time is long enough, let us take care for
nothing but to please our selves? why not thus now I pray you? when perhaps two
or three days agon this was your language. Oh! but now eternity, eternity
appears; and therefore set down so many hours for prayer to God, if we live;
write down so much pains to understand the Word of God; and we make account
that so much time must be spent in meditating of the will of God. Make a golden
letter at the Lords Day, for that must be more precious time, etc. Whosoever
thou art that read this, do the same now, that thou may do perhaps three
days hence. Do that which now thou can, which ere long thou will wish to do
and can not. This may be more then an imagination before the morning, and be
sure one day it will be a reality unless thou shall be struck dead without any
warning, and have no leave for one deliberate thought; and therefore now reckon
after the same sort, set down the same things in thy resolution, yea ingrave
them and cut them upon thy heart, that so thy death beds account, may agree
with that in thy life. Be sick now in thy thoughts, that thou may find thy
self well then. And seeing then we shall think that we have lived so much as we
have done good, and as we have designed the glory of God, let us now think that
we do not live unless these be in our hearts and lives.

Eleventhly, If we would number aright, let us every day cast up our accounts.
Let us so number our days, as at the foot of every day to write the total
Sum. Let us say, thus long have we lived, perhaps we may live no longer, nor
turn over another leaf; let us see therefore how our accounts stand. Say as
Pythagoras taught his Scholars, (...), etc. What sin have I committed? What
good have I done? What good have I neglected? What stand all these actions for?
Are they figures or ciphers? Have I lived or only been? Does my work go on, or
am I running in arrears? Do I live as if I were going to die? Is eternity in my
thoughts, and the great account that I must give? If we could call our selves
to such a reckoning, then we might correct any fault we find betime, before it
be grown to such a number, that it will be beyond our thoughts, and give up our
account more fair, and in order when God calls for them, and might hope they
would be accepted by him. And for the doing of this it is necessary, that we
account every day as if it were our last. Which is a maxim in this divine art
of numbering, that flows from the first Proposition. Seeing our time that is to
come is in Gods hand, therefore we must live this day as though we had no more
days to live. And a Heathen could say, That it is impossible for a man to live
the present day well, Musonius apud Stob. Sermon 1. Epist. 52.
(...), That does not propose to himself to live it as his last. And so Seneca
professes, Id ago, ut mihi instar totius vitae sit dies, that he labored one
day might be like a whole life to him. We must spend our days as though our
life were but a day. And if we did, then sure God would have a portion of every
day, if we intend him any in our life, and we could not but be diligent to set
all right, and to make up our accounts at night, as if it were the end of our
lives and our days were summed up. The Mariner which guides and steers the
Ship aright sits always in the Stern or hindermost part of it, and so must we,
if we will guide and direct our life aright through the troublesome sea of the
world, according to the course God has prescribed; be often in the
contemplation of our death; dwell much in our last end, and then shall we
manage all the better, possess our vessel in holiness, and bring her at the
last to a safe Haven. It is a good saying of one of the Jews, wherewith I shall
conclude this, Mind thy business as if thou wast to live always, but think of
thy end as if thou wast to die to morrow.

Twelfthly, Let us number as much backward as we are apt to number forward. Let
us cast up our accounts both ways, and tell the time that is past as we are
forward to account that which is to come. It is a great fault sure that we skip
over such a great part of our time, and never think what we have done, what
mercies we have enjoyed, which of them we have abused, and how little profit
God has received from us for all the benefits he has bestowed. And therefore
we must not only now begin to take an account of the passages of every day, but
take some time also to study our lives that are past. We shall find such a huge
advantage by this, that it will recompense all our pains. For

1. Hereby we shall at least know how long we have lived, and therefore what a
little time in all likelihood remains. And

2. How foolishly we have spent that time that is past, and therefore how chary
we ought to be of what God will give us more. And

3. We shall consider how soon those years (perhaps thirty or forty) are gone,
which will be a good measure whereby to judge of the time to come, which will
run away as swiftly if it should be as long. And

4. We shall wonder that we have lived so long, rather than that we die so
soon, seeing our Lord attained not to so many years as we perhaps number. All
these and many other advantages we shall get by our serious review of our lives
which I must leave to your own meditations. And I beseech you think of them
thoroughly; for it is for want of some such reflections that we live as we were
but beginning to live. Though men have lived forty or fifty years, yet velut
ex pleno and abundanti perdunt, they wast as if they had their whole and full
stock of time to spend upon, and had a great deal to spare; whereas if they did
well consider what it gone, and that the less remains, they would double their
diligence to gather up what is lost, to provide for that state, for which they
have but a little time left wherein to provide. And suppose we have forty or
fifty years to come, or let our imagination run as far as it pleases, yet we
must consider how much of this time must be spent in rectifying our accounts
and bringing our souls to good order; and how much will be devoured by the
needs of our bodies; and likewise how speedily they will be all gone if we
measure by what is past. How few do the days which we have spent seem? How soon
are they gone and seem as if they had not been? Just so fleetly will all that
run away, which is to come, let it be never so much, and though it seem a great
deal to us while we look forward, Senec. Epist. 4.
yet it will seem as a few days, if we look but behind us. Infinita est
velocit as temporis, quae magis apparet respicientibus. Time is infinitely
swift, but it most of all appears to those that cast their eyes back. They that
are in the bottom of the Ship think they do not stir, but they that look to
the place from whence they are come, will wonder how fast they have run before
the wind. If we did but cast up the sum of our days, when we have numbered
as many years as we think good, alas they amount but to a trifle. What are
eighty or a hundred years, when we have put them altogether in one number? How
few figures will tell the longest term of life? But we are so foolish that we
tell days, and months, and years one after another, which severally spoken of,
seem to make a great show, and never put them together, and consider what all
these will amount unto, if we should live them all. Then one figure and a
cipher will number them all. But if we likewise did consider how fast a great
part of this little number is fled away, it would make our life seem so short
and transitory that we should never fancy more that there is no haste to make
ready for another world. And if we added this consideration likewise that he
who best deserved to live, came not to these years which we perhaps have
attained: What should we think? What should we look for but death the next
moment? Jesus Christ the Son of the living God lived in our flesh but a
little more than three and thirty years. Why I beseech you should not this be
accounted old age among us Christians, since the Head of us all was no elder
when he died? Though they reckoned to seventy or eighty years when Moses lived,
yet why should we count to more than thirty three, as the ordinary term of life
since the great Prophet is come into the world? If God lengthen not our days
beyond this, we should rather look upon it as a wonder that we live so long,
then that we live no longer.

To conclude, the safest way is to reckon no more days then we have, as I told
you at first. For Moses you see reckons but to eighty years, which was the very
age that he was of when he entered into the wilderness. Forty years he was in
Pharaohs Court, and forty year more he was in banishment, as St. Stephen
informs us, ( Acts 7.23, 30.) and then he went to Pharaoh and brought the
people out of Egypt, who presently in the first year of their enlargement
began to provoke God, and the second year were threatened to be all destroyed in
the wilderness: Act. 7.36. Deuteronomy. 34.7.
now Moses reckons as if his days were at an end also, when as God lengthened
them forty years longer, even to an hundred and twenty years. So let us do
also and reckon that our days are past and gone, though God may lengthen them
to many more years; but if he do, we must remember that they will fly away as
swiftly as the rest have done, and therefore we must lay hold upon them, and fly
away with them, that they may not go away without us. Let us not be left behind
by our time, but let us be going on as fast we can along with it, til we and it
end comfortably both together. That we may not still call for life, when that
calls for death, but we may be fit to die, when our time of life is done.

But how shall we learn all these good lessons will you say? Who shall teach us
to number aright? Death you say is a good accountant, but who will lead us unto
these deep thoughts?

The fourth Observation (which I shall briefly open and commend to your
Meditations) will give you some Answer to this Enquiry. Observe. 4.


We may best learn this right numbering of our days, by a praying heart and a
pious mind.

The prayer herein the Text is directed to God, that he would teach them, and
for their part they promise to bring an heart of wisdom, Prove. 28.9.
that is a godly and religious mind. The prayer of the wicked is an abomination
to the Lord (says the Wiseman.) If a man will not hear Gods Law, it is no
wonder that God will not hear his prayer. When we come in a complement and for
fashion sake, having no great mind that God should do that for us that we ask,
it cannot be expected that God should regard us. If we have no heart to number
our days according to the account that I have laid before you, though we say,
Lord teach us to number our days, yet he cannot but turn away his ear from us.
Prove. 15.8, 29.
But on the contrary, That God who is far from the wicked hears the prayer
of the righteous, and delights in it. If our heart apply it self to wisdom,
if we come with a serious resolution and a sincere deliberate desire to be what
we say, God will answer our requests, and fulfill our petitions. If we bring
but a heart of wisdom, we should presently by the help of God reckon right, and
make the best use of our life.

By an heart of wisdom here in the Text is meant a wise heart, as an heart of
stone or flesh, signifies an hard or soft heart. And it is made up of these
things:

First, We must bring a serious heart, for a spirit that is vain and trifling
that acts like one in jest, cannot be wise. We must all labor to take off that
lightness and giddiness that agitates our spirits, and to bring our souls to
some composure and settlement by a reverence unto God; yea and unto our selves.
We must resolve to be in good earnest about our salvation, and to prefer this
art of numbering our days aright, before all the fancies of riches and
pleasures, and such like things that are apt to toss and whirl our minds, we
know not whither.

Secondly, We must bring considering hearts. For he will never number and cast
accounts well, whose mind is not fixed, and whose thoughts cannot put things
together. We many times think, but we do not consider. Let us therefore raise
observations unto our selves, and let us weigh them, and give them their due
value. Let us consider which is more, and which is less in all things; let us
balance things in our thoughts, and well mind what equality and what
disproportion there is between them. Say, is not a soul like to live longer
than a body? Had I not more need tell its days, and take care of it, then
labor thus about a dying thing? What compare is there between Time and
Eternity? How soon have I done telling the days of my life? And how am Host
and even drowned in that vast Ocean? But I need not teach a serious man to
consider. And I need not tell you that an heart that minds nothing, that lays
nothing (as we say) to heart must needs be ignorant and brutish in its
knowledge. And therefore this is a piece of wisdom acceptable to God to labor
in good sadness to take things into our thoughts till our hearts be touched by
them. We are gone a great way to learn any thing of God, and particularly this
great business how to live, when we are once made inquisitive and thoughtfull
in a serious sober manner.

Thirdly, A wise heart is such an one as designs something to it self, and
intends to improve the knowledge it gets to some purpose. The heart of a fool
looks no further than the beginning of a thing, and thinks not of what shall
follow, and therefore we must bring such a serious disposition as is determined
to deduce some good out of every thing that is propounded to our consideration.
Many truths lie by men, but they cannot be said properly to know and skill
them, because they are contented with the bare notion of them. They know the
number of their days, the shortness of their lives, and the rest that I have
said, but they make no use of it at all; it is as mere a speculation, as that
twenty and forty make sixty, or the like. And therefore we must not only
number and tell how short they are, and whither they are running, and what use
they are for; but we must conclude in some resolution, and set down something
that results from the whole account for the good of our souls. All these things
are but means to something else; reading, praying, considering and examination
are but the beginnings of Religion, not the end; they are the way only, and
therefore we must not rest in them, but let our souls go further, till we are
carried to something else by them. As when we account but one day to our life,
when we tell so many evil days if we live long, etc. We must ask our souls,
What then will you do? Cast in your minds and speak, what course do you mean to
take? And by such like Questions bring your work to some good issue. And

Fourthly, A truly wise heart is that which designs holiness, to be like to
God, and eternally to enjoy him. For the fear of the Lord that is wisdom, and
to depart from evil is that understanding, Job 28. ult. And this therefore is
it we must intend, to this issue we must bring our souls, and if we do consider
and contrive this heartily, then we may be encouraged to pray to God, that we
may know how to take the right measure of our days. We may say to him, Lord
teach me what my life is, for else I am afraid I shall not live. Lord affect me
with the shortness of my time, for else I am in danger to want thy self. And
thee it is that I seek, thou know it is the desire of my soul to be godly; I
am resolved it shall be my work and imploiment in the world, that I may be
friends with thee; and therefore teach me so to use my days, that I may not
lose both them and thee. God cannot resist such importunate and unfeigned
desires. He seeks such Scholars as have a mind to learn, and he will teach them
to make a right use of what I have said.

What Use should that be may some say? What will a pious mind, and praying
heart learn from hence? I will tell you, how it will shape its life according
to this reckoning which I have made, and thereby briefly suggest many good
Rules of life unto you.

A wise man will learn to be diligent, because the time is short. To be
watchful and always prepared, because the end may be sudden in every moment. To
be fearful of sin, because the anger of God cut sinners off in the midst. To
think much of time, because it passes most swiftly when we think of something
else. To remember our Creator betimes, because evil days will come wherein
nothing else will please us. To do good, because that is the work of life. To
work together with God, and zealously improve opportunities, because all times
are not alike. To be very exict in our actions, because they must stand upon
record to Eternity. To ^nnounce unto all unnecessary things, because we may
have no time nor leisure for them. To seek first the Kingdom of God, because
that is the only thing we are sure to attain. To die daily, because death makes
the best and truest reckoning. To be constant in self-examination, because this
day may be our last. To look back to our beginning, because the more we have
lived, the less we have to live. In a word, A wise heart will learn to be a
very good Husband of its time, and make it serve the most noble design. And he
is a wise man indeed that of a few days can make an eternal advantage, by the
improvement of a short life gain endless felicities. He would be accounted a
wise man, who had an art by a penny in a little space of time to raise an estate
of many thousand pounds. But he is far wiser, and has a greater reach, who by
the good use of this moment, obtains the inheritance of Angels, yea of the Son
of God, gets possession of the ever-living Good, and settles himself in the
joys of a never-dying life.

Let me conclude with a brief Exhortation to you in the words of the Text, as
they lie in our Translation. Pray unto God earnestly that he would so teach you
to number your days, that you may apply your hearts unto wisdom. Do you
seriously endeavor, and then entreat of him to give you such an effectual
grace, that there may some good arise to you out of your labor. Pray till you
feel your heart inclining unto wisdom, till it apply it self to understanding,
Till you seek for it as for silver, and dig for it as for hid treasure. Never
leave importuning the Father of mercies through Christ the wisdom of the
Father, till you be made wise unto salvation.

Let us never cease numbering, and taking every consideration several by it
self, and beseeching God to impress them on our hearts, till we find this
effect and fruit of it, that our hearts are brought to the wisdom of the just;
till we judge of things as does God, and choose that which he loves, and follow
the thing that good is, and altogether become of the same mind with him. Let us
number and pray till we find these considerations taking down the heights of
Pride, and the heats of lust, the huge desires of a covetuous mind, and the
humorous desires of a fond fancy; till we find them quieting our passions,
moderating our affections, and bringing our wills to the measures of God. Till
we have found a place in another Country, a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, a
house not made with hands eternal in the Heavens. Till we can live as well in
poverty as in riches; in hardship as in soft enjoyments, without distrust or
envy, without fear or cares, without perplexed or careless thoughts; in short,
till we have learned to live the life of Men, and the life of Christians, till
we make God our only joy, and love our Neighbors as our selves, and look death
in the face as a friend.

Let us every day call our selves to an account, and think that we have one day
less to live, and one day more to reckon for. We every day make our account
greater, and have less time to make it in, and therefore let us make it always
as we go along. And suppose (my Brethren) that God should come this night and
say to any one of us, as he did to Belshazzar, by a hand writing on the Wall in
the Chaldee tongue, Mean, mean, it is numbered, it is numbered, (which Daniel
applies to his Kingdom,) thy days are told, God has counted them up and
finished them, thou shall not live to see a morrow. Are thy accounts and Gods
even? do they not differ very much? do not thou reckon for a great many years
longer, and shall he not cut them short in the midst of those days, which thou
have told out for thy self? do not thou tell twenty, when he tells but one or
not so much? Are not thy thoughts a huge way off from eternity? have thou not
most of thy great work to do? art thou not in the midst of a design; as
building an house, or the like, while thy soul lies in its ruins and rubbish?
If they be not the same, if thy reckoning do not agree with his, then it will
make thee shake and tremble as it did him, to see thy self so much mistaken in
thy numbering, to behold so much of thine account stricken of by the hand of
God; so many of the days which thou reckoned wiped quite out of the Book of
the Living.

If thou do account as he does, and thinks that thou may dye to night; then
how can thou live otherwise then as a dying man? how can thou quietly lay
thy self on thy Pillow for to sleep, with the Conscience of any guilt upon thy
soul? why do thou not say every night as the Philosopher could direct? Vixi,
and quem dederit cursum fortuna, peregi: I have lived and finished my course
which providence has assigned me to run. Then if God give thee a morrow, thou will look upon it as a new life, and be more thankful for it.

He that tells his time by ones and by moments will think that if he donot live
now, he may live never; he will betake himself to the most serious and
strictest course of Piety, knowing that that life is long enough which is good
and that is too long, or rather none at all which is bad. Truly there is
nothing so much to be lamented, as the folly of men; whereby they think they
live but do not, and whereby they desire always to live but cannot. Weep for the
dead (says the Son of Syrach, 22. Eccl. 11.) for he has lost the light; and
weep for a fool for he wants understanding, i. e. is without light, even whilst
he lives. And therefore it follows presently in him, Make little weeping for
the dead; for he is at rest, but the life a fool is worse then death;
Seavendaies do men mourn for him that is dead, but for a fool and an ungodly
man all the days of his life.

We make it an argument you know of a fool, that he cannot count a right, nor
tell to ten or twenty: and there is no greater argument of stupidity, no
doltishness should more move our tears and compassion, then when men reckon,
after that foolish sort that I spoke of in the beginning, whereby they live in
a dream, and dye in an amazement. And therefore the holy man puts these
together in my Text, right numbering and a wise heart, which if we bring not,
we are dead while we live, and our friends have reason to take up lamentations
over us and say, Ah my Brother, ah my Sister.

Let me once more beseech you therefore to be wise. Go home and tell how many
days remain, and if you can find never an one for any thing you can tell, rise
not up from your knees, before you have taken up some good resolutions against
the morrow if you have it, and then work out your salvation with fear and
trembling; every day watch and pray, because you know not in what hour the
Lord will come. And to this end, remember that Counsel, and study it
thoroughly, which I have already mentioned. Look back the first thing thou do,
and think how few days thou have lived, Exigua vitae pars est, quam nos
vivimus, it is a very little part of our life, that we truly live, all the rest
of the space, tempus est, non vita; is time and not life. And therefore let
that which remains be Life.

PErhaps I may awaken you and my self the more if I leave this Text and take
another, which is our Dear Brother, that not long ago stood in this place from
whence I speak unto you. Whose Life was a continual Sermon, and upon whom I
might make another Sermon to you, now that one is done. His Life was but short
in the Vulgar account, and yet it was long if you use the Arithmetic, which I
have been now teaching you. He minded the true end of living, and he lived so
long as to do his work, and he did a great deal of work in a little time, and
therefore he died old and full of days, and was laded with more of life, then
many a man with a gray Beard. Old Age is not to be known by a withered face,
but by a mortified spirit, not by the decaies of the natural body, but by the
weakness of the body of sin; not by the good we that have enjoyed, but by the
good that we have done; and if we be prepared for death, we have lived long
enough; if our Life be a death, then no death can be untimely to us.

But then while I tell you the price of such a Jewel, I shall but make you
mourn the more for such a loss. How desirable would it have been to us all, if
such an Aged soul might have dwelt a little longer in a young body? How much
more good might he have done by his prudent counsel, by his wise discourses,
by grave and serious Sermons, by a mature judgment, by a Religious and well
governed life? Thus you are apt to speak within your selves, and I think I
shall do well to asist these thoughts now they are begun, and help your soul to
be delivered of their sighs, and to number their losses, that so they may by
serious weighing of them, redound to some good.

Consider therefore that the Church of God has lost a burning and a shining
Light, the Commonwealth an excellent and peaceable Subject, the Ministers a
Dear Brother, this Parish a tender Father, the City a most worthy Member, and
when you have wept to think of these, you will have no tears left to condole
with me who have lost so sweet a friend.

If we should consider only what a large stock he had of useful Learning,
there would be reason that all intelligent persons should bewail his loss; for
there is not such plenty of profitable Learning in the world that we can well
spare any, and we know not how long there will be any at all. But then
considering the Piety to which it was wedded, our loss is the far more
deplorable, because these two are but seldom found conjoined in so large a
measure. Orat. 20.
Nazianzen accounts that they who want either of these (...), do differ nothing
at all from men that want one eye, who have not only a great defect, but cannot
so confidently appear in the world, to look on others, and let others look on
them. Now many one eyed men there may be in the world, some that want Learning,
and more that want grace, but in very few heads shall you see these two
luminaries of knowledge and goodness in any great Splendour. The more therefore
ought such to be valued, and their extinction to be lamented.

Sigismund the Emperor (as Dubravius tell us) having knighted a Doctor of the
Law that was very learned, Hist. Bohx^m.
and one of his Counsel, and observing that when the Counsel went aside to
deliberate about any-business, he joined himself to the Knights as more
honorable, and left the Doctors. He called him to him and said. Fiscellin, (for
so was his name) I did not take thee to be such a fool, as to prefer honor
before Learning. For thou know very well, that I can dub six hundred Knights
in a day, but cannot make one Doctor in all my life. What would this brave King
have said, if he had spoken of the value of true godliness which is to be
preferred before all things else. I will imagine that he would have spoken such
words as these, I can make Knights as many as I will, and only such as thou
can make Scholars; But it is God alone that can give grace; and therefore
judge which thou art to prize at the highest rate.

Give me leave to make use of this to our present purpose. Men may make others
rich, or they may confer upon them honors, yea and they may appoint Preachers,
but alas they cannot make them Learned, much less can they breath into them the
Heavenly spirit, and therefore such men living are to be the more esteemed, and
dead to be the more honored. Especially where these two are accompanied with
moral prudence and decent behavior, which came nothing behind the other, in
our deceased Friend and Brother. Oh what an unaffected gravity was there in
that countenance! What innocent smiles in that face! what manlike humility in
his deportment! chearfullness in him did contend with seriousness, affability
with awfullness, love with discretion, wisdom with simplicity, etc. and the
result of all these recouciled graces, was the very Picture of virtue and
goodness. Donot think that I flatter him with my Pencil, alas! it gives so rude
a stroke, that I am afraid I shall rather disfigure him; and I am ready to
draw back my hand, now that I am going to draw the Lines of his Life and
present you with a brief Narrative how he spent his days.

Yet since it will be expected from me who have known him now near fifteen
years, I shall give you a draught of what is most material, and leave the
fillings up and finishings to your own thoughts, which may have been observant
of more particulars.

God was pleased early to sow the seeds of grace in his heart, and to sanctify
him to himself, partly by the Religious education of his godly Parents, and
partly by the Preaching (as I have heard him say) of one Mr. Ludlam now with
God, whose sweet and Christian eloquence I have heard him speak often of with
great affection. We little think perhaps how much we are indebted to God for
Praying Parents, and for a painful Ministry. By whose means he was kept from
blotting his soul with any of those foul things, wherewith the Consciences of
many are grievously deboshed.

Coming unto Cambridge he was placed in Queens College under a very worthy
Person, M.r Whitaker.
who did hugely love him, both for his choice Parts, and early Piety. There he
followed his Study very hard to the prejudice I fear of his body. Nulla dies
sine linea, might well have been writ over his Study door in those youthful
days, which use to be spent in doing worse then nothing. And the work of
godliness I am sure he no less labored in, as some few persons alive can
witness, who used to meet together once in a week to confer about things that
concerned their souls, the benefit of which some can to this day remember. For
Christian Communion discreetly managed, is that which keeps our Religion in
Breath. As soon as there was any occasion for him to appear in public, he was
noted for his good Parts, and after he had been between four and five years at
the University he was chosen Fellow of the College, with the unanimous consent
of the whole Society. After that time though he neglected not other useful
Learning, yet he applied himself chiefly to the Study of Divine things. And he
did not vent his conceptions while they were but half digested notions, but
gave his soul leisure to concoct them, and turn them into its habit and
constitution. Thus he labored to do while he wrastled with the ill habit of a
splenetick body, which created him (to my knowledge,) no small disturbance in
his Studies. And indeed it does a great deal of mischief in the world, that men
teach others who had need to be taught themselves. Imperfect apprehensions of
things, and raw indigested notions have made as great stirs and convulsions
amongst us, as the Wind makes in the Body, which arises from the ill concoction
of a sour and cold stomach. It was a wise saying, (whosoever was the Father of
it) That an indifferent Shoemaker might make a good Cobbler; and an indifferent
Tailor might make a good Botcher, but an indifferent Scholar was good for
nothing. And therefore he labored to have the mastery of such Learning as was
necessary for his end, and also avoided another dangerous error which many
fall into, and that is meddling with the higher things, before they had gained
some good knowledge of the lower. By this means they may be both discouraged
with the difficulty, and also lose their labor, if they fall not into a worse
disease, to have their mind blown up and swollen with things they do not
understand. He followed the Rule of Simplicius, In Epict.
which is to begin (...), with small things first, least it happen (says he)
unto us according to the Proverb, (...), to begin the trade of a Potter by
making a huge vessel first, before we know whether we can make a less, and so
we lose both our labor and cost, and credit altogether. But which is worst of
all, Orat. 1. (...).
such men do (...), as Nazianzen speaks, exercise Religion upon other men's
souls, before their own, which is the part says he of a fool, and of a bold
man. We had better begin any trade Ignorantly, and venture before our time at
great things in any calling, then in this Divine profession undertake to teach
souls, and practice godliness upon our Hearers hearts, when we have not the
first rudiments of Piety in our own. And therefore it was his endeavor to
understand well the grounds of godliness, and to settle those Foundations on
which a soul might ^ely, and having overcome the crudities of other knowledge,
and arrived to some strength, his next care was to study that learned Ignorance
(that a great Master commended) To be willing not to know those things which
our supreme Master is not pleased to teach us.

Then as soon as he was fit, he should appear in the Pulpit, he was presently
famed for an excellent Preacher. And he drew not only the common people after
him, but the most learned ears were chained to his tongue. I shall never forget
with what a becoming boldness, and modest gravity above his years, he
preached at St. Upon the 2 Romans 23, 24.
Mary's before the University, when he was appointed among others, to be of a
Combination before the ordinary time, by a new order from the higher Powers: A
Sermon, I accounted it, of self-denial, though his speech was not of that
subject, because it was so hearty, plain, and searching, and stripped of all
those Ornaments which young men love to dress and trim their discourses
withal.

Not long after, he undertook to preach constantly in the afternoons at a
Church belonging to the College, St Buttolphs.
which I may say he did freely; for the stipend amounts not to much above the
wages of an ordinary servant in one of your Houses. There might you have seen a
great throng of pious Scholars and people hanging upon his lips, many of which
desired nearer acquaintance with him, and used to frequent his Chamber for
advice and counsel. There, me thought, he was in his Kingdom, he did so reign
and domineer (as it were) over the minds and hearts of his Auditors, who could
not but attend unto him. And yet notwithstanding, he did not neglect the charge
which he had likewise undertook of many Pupils; but they thrived so well under
the wings of his care, and great love (a thing for which he was noted) that
several of them are now fellows of the House. And really, in the managing of
all these affairs, he so out-stripped his years, that it might have been an
argument (had not our eyes been blinded with love) that he was old already,
(...). Greg. Nyss. de Bas.
his manner being so gray headed in his youth. He did not grow up by degrees as
we do, but all on a sudden me-thought he was a man. He acted and preached,
when his hottest blood boiled in his veins, as men do in their cool age, with
great seriousness, gravity, and a certain majestic humility which commanded
reverence to his youth. It is no wonder therefore that God has gathered him so
soon, seeing he brought forth fruit so early, and was ripe when others begin to
bloom, or but to put forth a tender bud. He had run half of his course, and
seemed to be in his Meridian, when it was but daybreak with us his
Contemporaries, and we did but begin to peep above the Horizon with a timorous
light. And besides, this is not to be forgotten, that though he was of
excellent good learning, and had all this work to do, yet he lived not always
among his Books, which is to die among the living, and to live among the dead;
a dying to all, and perhaps not a living to a man's self. But he was exceeding
free to all good good converse, and let his Ftiends enjoy so much of him, that
sometimes he could scarce enjoy himself, but only in them. Yea, I doubt that he
was better to them then to himself, and disregarded his own health to satisfy
their desires. The Arabic Proverb is, Si amicus tuus sit mel, ne comedas
totum: If thy Friend be Honey, do not eat him all up. I wish that it had been
known more familiarly in England, for I fear the sweetness of his society, did
tempt his friends to devour him among them.

After he had been in Cambridge between a eleven and twelve years, and had
preached much both there and in the Country, the Providence of God so ordered
it, that coming to London about threee year and a half ago, upon another
occasion, he was desired to preach in this place, and instantly was chosen to
be Pastor of this Congregation. I remember that he was not received with less
joy, then now he is carried forth with sorrow. Nor was he less esteemed, as
far as I can hear, in other places of the City, then in this Parish, who I know
had a very great affection to him. His Brethren in the Minstry did highly value
(as I have heard from some of them) his excellent endowments, and looked upon
him as one like to be very instrumental in the work of the Lord. And so I hope
he has been; for you have fully known his Doctrine, his manner of life, his
purpose, Faith and Charity, as the Apostle says concerning himself to Timothy,
2 Epist. 3.10. I will but remember you a little of the first, (...). Solen. in
Laert.
viz. his Doctrine and speech, for by that you may judge of the rest, it being
according to the ancient saying, The Character of a man, and the Image of his
life.

His Sermons were stings, (...). Plato.
rather then words: They were (...), winged words in a diviner sense; for they
were the Arrows of the Almighty, shot with a strong arm into men's hearts. His
Discourses were so rational and demonstrative, that they were able to convert
an Atheist to the Faith: So clear and full of light, that they might turn the
most ignorant soul unto wisdom. So awakening and lively they were, that it
will be a wonder if he have left one soul asleep among you. So persuasive and
moving, that they might charm the cup out of the hand of the Drunkard, and
entice a sinner out of the most delicate embraces. So cordial likewise and
reviving, that if any persons droop who heard him, they never drank them down,
but only lickt the glass. So considerate and digested, that as he beat down
confidence in man's proper strength, so he rouzed them from their laziness, and
an idle indifferency about their souls. So discreet and fervent, that as he
affrighted cold formality, so he tempered zeal, that it might not be frighted
out of its wits. And as the Apostle has married Truth to Charity, so he
endeavored to keep this bond inviolable, For his degree of Batch. in Divinity.
that they might never be divorced either in his heart or word. But the Text
upon which he preached the last Commencement before the University was his
constant practice, Ephesians. 4.15.
Speaking the truth in love. He was a Preacher indeed, that sought to find out
acceptable words, and written upright; even words of truth, as the great
Preacher speaks, Eccles. 12.10. And whereas there are too many Sermons that are
full of words without matter, and not a few that have excellent matter without
words, to set it of, and convey it into men's minds; God had given him an
excellent faculty to dive into the bottom of the truth, and then to adorn it
with such good and rich expressions, that it should loose nothing for want of
one to commend it. There was a sweet vein of Eloquence that ran through his
reason. His Arguments were interlaced with handsome illustrations. And after he
had drawn the Picture of the truth he intended to represent, he had the art to
hang it in a convenient light, so that it should look upon every body in the
House. Nazianzen compares a man's mind, (...) Orat. Vices.
that cannot utter its mind, to the motion of a man whose joints are struck
with a benumming disease. And I may compare a mind which speaks without any
understanding, to the motion of a Puppet that frisks and skips most nimbly, but
has no soul within. But he of whom I speak was not frozen and benumbed, so
that his mind could not flow forth, neither had he a flood of words, and a drop
of sense, but he rapt away his Auditors with a double torrent of Rhetoric and
reason sweetly mixed together. And truly, if a Divine could stir up all kind
of affections and passions by his Sermons, as well as a Comedian can do by a
play, yet unless there be a sound and substantial truth at the bottom, they
will be but like the scorching flames in straw, which will quickly expire for
want of something to foment and feed them. It is possible that a man may by
earnestness and violence exprimere affectus (as Erasmus I think speaks)
express and squeeze out affections from his Auditors, but he will never
impresse them with any, unless there be the strength of reason and weight of
Argument to press and persuade men's understanding into obedience. I am sure
his Sermons were of this sort that were apt to imprint something, both upon
mind and heart; and I hope he has left some such seal upon you that will never
be blotted out.

But it pleased God that he had many ill fits since he came hither, which were
but spurs I believe unto him, to make him run the faster. And especially
the last September he was encountered with a most dangerous disease, which
assaulted him with such a violence, that it made all the pillars and supporters
of his body tremble. Your hopes were even at the last gasp, when God gave his
life to your Prayers and tears, and let him breath a little longer among you.
Now which of you can think upon his excellent Sermons since his recovery,
without thankfulness to God that he lent him to you a while longer. Who can be
impatient (even for his death) who remembers those words of our Savior with
his Comment in many Sermons; Joh. 18.11.
The Cup which my Father has given unto me, shall I not drink it? And who can
be prodigal of his time, and loose in his life, that felt any of those Arrows
which he took out of the Apostles quiver; See that you walk circumspectly, Ephesians.
5.15, 16.
not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time, etc. It would be a good work
for every one of you to examine if you have not been careless in following
those Directions which might provoke God to stop the breath of this sweet Organ
of his, and cut off the thread of his life by another sharp sickness which
arrested him on the first day of this month. Then God put a bitter cup into
his hand, and he drank it off to the bottom with such an admirable patience, as
he himself had preached. Then he felt the comfort of a holy walking and good
use of his time, so that as he was not heard to murmur or repine that God
should thus soon take hold of his rod again; neither did he call for time to
come back again, as if he were loath to die by this rod.

I cannot but remember a few things that I observed in this sickness, which
will be partly for our imitation, and partly for our comfort.

First, His resignation in the beginning of his disease: God is wise (said he
to me) and his will is guided by wisdom; and therefore let him do as seems him
good, for I am indifferent.

Secondly, The Expression of his Faith. When his disease began to make some
offers at his head, and a little to obscure his mind, he said to me, Truly this
is the only thing that troubles me, that I fear I shall loose my understanding,
But my Savior intercedes in Heaven; He does, he does.

Thirdly, His patience and quietness under the violence of his Disease. For
when he was desired either not to speak or not to stir, his Answer still was,
Well, I will not. So that I might say of his Feavour as Diogenes did when he
was sick of the same disease; Nazian. Epist. 64. (...). Ib.
It was nothing else but (...), the wrestling of the soul with the body, as two
Combatants use to do in the Olympic Games, and his soul got the better by
patience and lying still. When Epictetus broke his leg, they say he talked and
discoursed as if he had been in another man's body; and when the bones of our
deceased Brother were sore vexed, me thought he lay as if his soul were
somewhere else, and was gone out to God. For

Fourthly, God was pleased to bless him with a quietness and peace in his
conscience. Though he had no raptures and excesses of mind (which he never
affected) yet he thanked God he had a solid peace, and a sweet calm, and he
passed out of the world just as he lived, in an even temper. And

Fifthly, According to his Faith in the Mediation of Jesus Christ, so it was
unto him. God was very good to him in giving him his understanding unto the
last, even when the cunning Adversary of mankind made an attempt upon him
toward his latter end, when his strength declined, and he was least able to
resist an assault. He would have slily conveyed such thoughts into his mind,
that he had been a stranger to practical godliness, but he had so much
understanding as to consider that he was not himself, nor fit to be a judge
when he could look but at a few things. And truly, I told him that it was the
best way for one that had settled a wellgrounded hope in his life, to give the
Devil no other Answer at such a time, but Satan thou lie; and enter into no
further dispute with him. Whereupon he said, Thou cowardly Devil, take me now?
Why did thou not come sooner, if thou had any thing to say? This expression
he had more then once, and was troubled no further, but to give testimony
afterward to some that stood by, that thanks be to God we have the victory
through Christ Jesus. And

Lastly, He had such an (...) as the greatest man once in the world wished for,
and he placidly and quietly, without being torn by force out of his body, slept
in the Lord, on the Lords day the twelfth day of this month.

And considering the time of his end, I think it is not a mere fancy to remark
upon these three things, which made his death just proportionable to his life.
First, That as he died in the noon of his age, so he died in the noon of the
day: That may seem but an inconsiderable circumstance, unless we join it with
the rest. For secondly, He went to receive his Reward upon that day wherein he
most labored. From the communion of Saints on earth, he went to the consort of
Saints and Angels in Heaven. And it was one of the last words that he spoke,
There remains a Rest for the people of God. Thirdly, He died on one of the
longest days in the year, as if God would tell us, that he had lived long
enough; as long as was fit, and that being now come to his full height, he was
at his Tropic, and must return to him that sent him forth.

Men, Brethren and Fathers, you will pardon it to the affection I bear to his
memory, that I have given you this long, though I hope not tedious, Narration:
And if any think it is too short (which I may rather suspect) let them be
pleased to consider, that his life consisted but of a few days; and that it is
no small part of virtue, to conceal ones virtues. And therefore they may
believe without danger that the greatest part of what I have told you, is but
the least part of that worth which lay latent in him.

And now as you have had the patience to bear with me thus long out of your
love to him, so let your love to your selves bestow so much patience upon you
as to suffer a little longer, till I speak a few words to every one in this
Assembly.

And first of all to you my Brethren of the Ministry, I shall not take upon me
to speak any words of my own, but acquaint you with two words of his to the
dearest relation he had in his former sickness.

First, Let us be much in private prayer. Our time is short as well as other
men's, and many times shorter, though our account be greater; therefore let us
spend much time with God, as we endeavor to spend it all for him. Let not a
crowd of thoughts in our studies, nor a crowd of company here in the City,
thrust God away from our souls, but let them frequently retire unto him, as the
fountain of all light and good. Prayer before our studies is the key to unlock
the secrets of God, and prayer afterward is the turning of the key to lock them
safe into our hearts. Dexterius loquentur cum hominibus, qui prius tota mente
cum Deo fuerint collocuti. l. 3. derat. Concion.
Prayer sharpens our appetite after truth, and when we have found it, it sets
an edg upon the truth, and makes it more cutting and penetrating into the
heart. And as Erasmus well said, We shall speak more dexterously to men, when
with our whole hearts we have first spoken with God.

Secondly, Let us look to our ends in our work. This was another of his
counsels, without which indeed our labor will be in vain. Let us believe our
selves what we speak, and then we should mind the glory of God, and not our
selves. Alas! what is the applause of men when we are gone, but like a sound in
a dead man's ear? And what is it when we are alive, but an empty breath that is
lost sooner than got, and is got ofttimes by idleness sooner than taking pains?
And what is there else that can tempt an ingenuous mind? Our very breeding does
teach us to despise money and gain, but the example of our Lord and his
Apostles will make it seem a sordid thing to be trampled under our feet. Let
the good of men therefore, and the glory of God be the mark at which we aim. And
the Lord in Heaven hear our prayers, and bless our preaching.

Secondly, Then to you of this Parish, let me say a few things. And first, Pray
earnestly among other Petitions for these two things, That God would pardon
your unprofitableness, which perhaps you may have been guilty of under such
means; and that he would bless you with another Minister of such a temper as he
was, and that will design so seriously the good of your souls. He desired you
should know that he loved you, and he prayed God to bless you. I hope God will
so hear his desires, and you will so remember his instructions, and those you
have received from former Lights, that I may spare that prayer which Mr Udal
used at the Funeral of Mr Shute, viz. That God will neither let you fall into
the hand of a dark Lanthorn, nor be led by an Ignis fatuus. The Jews have a
saying (God grant it be true) That never does there die any illustrious man,
but there is another borne as bright on the same day. God loves the world so
well, that when one Sun sets, another arises. To which they accomodate that
place in Eccles. 1.5. The Sun arises, and the Sun goes down. Nay they observe
further, That he makes some star or other arise before a Sun be set. As
Joshua began to shine before Moses his light was darkened, and before Joshua
went to bed, Othniel the son of Kenaz was risen up to judge. Eli was not
gathered to his fathers before Samuel appeared to be a most hopeful youth. And
among the other Sex they also note, That Sarah was not taken away, till Rebekah
was ready to come in her stead. The Lord grant that you may find this true, and
that as now the nights are at the shortest, so you may have but a very short
night before another Sun arise in this place. But if we be so unworthy, that
God will not bless us with such a favor, May it please him but to let
posterity twenty year hence fit under such a burning and shining Light: May it
please his goodness and mercy, that the day of his Death may be but the
Birthday of some eminent person to illuminate this City.

Secondly, Let me beseech you to write down any memorable thing that you have
heard from him, and has much affected you, that it may be engraven upon your
heart, and do you good for ever. By this means you will cause the lips of the
dead to speak, and you will not lose all converse with him now that he is gone
from you. For a man's discourses are the picture of his soul, which is himself.
O my Beloved, how sad an account will you have to make, if you be not truly
Religious who have had so many Lights in your Candlestick that have spent
themselves to illuminate you? How will you appear before the Judgment seat of
God, when not only one, but four or five Ministers shall witness against
you? How will you look not only him, but those that delivered the Lamp to him
in the face? Or rather, how will you look God in the face when you shall think
what means of obtaining salvation you have enjoyed, and yet are not saved?
Remember therefore now all those wholesome counsels you have received from their
mouths, and if there be any beginnings of godliness in your hearts, any tastes
of Religion, let me remember you of two Directions which were some of the last
he gave you, and write them upon your hearts. He told me not long before his
sickness, that he had begun at his own house to give some short Exhortations to
you his Communicants, in which he intended (I think once in a fortnight) to
insist upon the chief things that belong to the establishing a soul in grace.
He begun this course April 14. and lived to give but two Directions, which I
shall again commend to your thoughts.

First, He desired you to beware lest you should be found in the number of the
giddy, or of the lazy Prefessours of this age; and one Argument whereby he
pressed to diligence, was this, Death is near you, like to a Mole it is digging
your graves under you (so was his expression,) therefore whatsoever your hand
finds to do, do it with all your might, Eccles. 9.10. My Beloved, Death may be
as near to you now, as it was then to him, and therefore take heed that you be
not found idle and useless servants.

Secondly, He advised you to give diligence not only to be sincere Christians,
but also growing Christians, and at length excellent and very exemplary. Here
he directed you to lay the foundation well, and then intended to show how to
raise the building and superstructure upon it; but God took him away before he
could do that. I beseech you labor to be true and real Christians, though
perhaps you may not live to grow to any great height, no more than helived to
direct you to it. Look to your hearts lest there be any root of bitterness that
may make you to backslide, and remember, as his very expression was, That there
is no such Antidote against Apostasy, as real integrity and sincerity. Yea
remember all other good Discourses of his, and your other Ministers, that you
may frame your lives according to them, and grow taller (if you live still) by
so many showrs. Let me a little quicken you by this Story. Zeno Cittiaeus
consulted with the Oracle, how he might live well, and he received this Answer,
(...), If he was of the same color with the dead. This he interpreted to mean,
that he should get and read all the ancient Books that he could hear of, and
then steep and die his mind in their sacred notions. My Brethren, what St. Paul
said of Epimenides his sentence, Tit. 1.13. that I may say of this, This
testimony is true. Look as like to the dead in the Lord, as ever you can, and
labor to turn your souls into their shape. Not as though there were not living
examples and teachers which you are to mind (thanks be to God there are a great
number here before you) but I would wish you not to forget men when they are
dead and gone, For you cannot tell how soon you must live according to the
manner of the dead, and not of the living. The world may prove so bad, that if
you will be of their color, you may be all, but only white. Let me beseech you
therefore to remember his Doctrine, and his manner of life too, to tread in his
steps, and be followers of him, as he was of Christ. And though I have already
made your patience sweat, yet let me exercise it a little longer, and borrow so
much time of you, as but to remind you of a few things I would have you
imitate. 1. Remember how great a reverence he did bear to the Name of God. You
should not hear him speak ofit (I think) without alteration of his countenance,
and the manner of his pronunciation. Learn from him not to take it up on every
trifling occasion, and when you have any discourse of him, let your mind be
serious, and lay aside laughter and jesting with whatsoever at another time may
be lawful, but not grave enough to keep company with God. 2. Remember how
serious he was in Prayer and addresses unto God. His soul seemed to be gathered
into it self, and then gathered up to God. And I believe you can remember that
his expressions were such that all might join with him, and that he was not
acted by any private, but a public and divine spirit. 3. How he taught you to
observe the Lords day. Not long ago he entered with me into a discourse of that
thing, and I perceived by it he had earnestly desired of you in some Sermons to
spend that time more religiously, in recounting the mercies of God, in telling
to your Children and Servants the great things that the Lord has done since
the beginning of the world, that they may be had in everlasting remembrance.
But especially in magnifying the goodness and wisdom of God in the glorious
work of Redemption by Christ Jesus. 4. Remember his Charity to the Poor, to
which he excited you not only in public but in private, and if you could have
seen it, by his example also. From some of you sure it was that he obtained
yearly a good sum for poor Scholars in the University, not being content with
doing good himself, unless you did reap some fruit too. Do not forget I say
this Charity, now that he is gone, but let it be still as a living water,
though it does not run through the same hands.

Fifthly, Get a faithful Friend if you can; for a Friend was a thing, that he
much loved and valued as the rarest Jewel in the world next to Piety, without
which no man can be our true Friend. A true Friend will tell you of your
faults, he will advise you of your concernments, he will be to you as the Wife
in your Bosom. He may indeed sometimes be more dear then the nearest relation
which we have, and there is a Friend that sticks closer then a Brother, or
whatsoever name of love there is in the world. And therefore it is observable
that in the 13. Deuteronomy. 6. he is put in the last place as the chiefest of all
relations. If thy Brother, or thy Son, or thy Daughter, or the Wife of thy
bosom, or thy Friend which is as thy own soul, entice thee secretly, saying,
etc. It is very clear that Moses rises up by steps from the lowest to the
highest, from a Brother of the same venture, to a Child, and then to a Wife, and
at last to a Friend, as the highest of all: And it is likewise clear, that a
Man and Wife are but one flesh, but a Man and his Friend are one soul, and
therefore unless they be friends as well as Man and Wife, there is a greater
love then theirs; but when both these conspire together, the relation of a
friend and of Consorts too, then it is the highest of all love, and the Image
of the love that is between Christ and his Church.

Friendship is such a sacred thing, that though we are sometimes mistaken in
our choice, yet it is not fit to snap the bones asunder, but gently to dissolve
them, that there may be some love afterward. Amicitiam etiam subdolam non
lacerabo, sed dissuam. De vita propria
So Cardan professes that he would never rend and tear a false friendship in
pieces, but would fairly unloose it, and pick the threads by which they were
sown together. I have said more of this then of the rest because it is so rare,
and we are most apt to talk of the thing we love.

To conclude this my address to you, Let me prevail with you to remember but
this in General, how he commended Religion to you both in his words, and in
his practice, as the life of the soul, as the soul of friendship, as the best
friend of men, and the best natured thing and fullest of humanity in the world.
It did not appear in him with its face all clouded, with looks sable and sad,
with eyes heavy or distorted; but he represented it as the very joy of ones
heart, the marrow of our bones, and that which gives health to all our flesh.
Methinkes it should make you all in love with Religion, when you remember how
cheerful, how pleasant, and I had almost said, how sportfull a thing it
seemed. When we have once attained to the true gust and relish of it; a man
that shall persuade us to forsake it, shall be like to him that is in love with
his own Dreams, and would persuade us into the Paradise of fools. And if at any
time you be sad, O wha^ sweet things are those tears? how full of joy are those
sorrows? they are but like a Cypress cast over a beautiful face, or at the
worst but like the clouds which cover the face of the Sun for a while, that it
may be more acceptable when it shines, and beside they water the Earth with
their showers, which make it flourish and spring the better.

But there are some other here present, who will expect a few words from me,
and therefore I must pass these things over without any further enlargements.

Thirdly, To you then who were his Auditors and Friends, let me say that I hope
you have learned by his instruction to choose another Guide if you want one in
your own Parishes; and that you cannot honor his acquaintance more, then by a
devout and strict life, and walking orderly and peaceably according to the
Gospel. I am sure he loved his Friends with an ardent love, and he was as void
of complement, as he was of gall. And therefore love his memory, and labor to
do that which you think would have pleased him best, if he had still lived. And
what is that? as St. John says concerning his Children, so would he have said
of his Friends, I have no greater joy then to hear that you walk in the truth,
3. Epist. v. 4. and therefore he says v. 11. Beloved follow not that which is
evil, but that which is good; He that does good is of God, but he that does
evil has not seen God.

Fourthly, To his Relations I need only say that I need say nothing. For should
I say remember him? alas! he was so dear, that they cannot forget him. Shall I
say be of good comfort? their piety is so great, that it will let them want no
Cordials. Shall I bid them prepare them selves against all other changes? that
is counsel common to us all. And therefore I will not address my speech unto
them, not knowing how to Administer any ^ounsell where there are so many
Physicians.

Fifthly; But lastly to my self, what shall I say (...) If he that has lost a
friend^ half dead, and like a worm cut in two, (...). Orat. 20.
(as Na^ianzen speaks) then it is a wonder that I have said already so much to
you. Little do I think when he so passionately bewailed the death of our Friend
Mr. Bright, that I should so soon have come to pay my tears at his Funeral.

I have said enough, having called my self fool by saying so much. But love
made me blind, and love makes me speak it. And O that we could all show that we
loved him by our tears! O that we could all water his ashes with such
affectionate showers, that nothing but Roses and Violets might grow upon his
Grave, that his name may be like a sweet perfume, that none may violate that
precious thing by any envious and pestilent breath. May thy dust sleeep in
peace my dear friend! may thy ashes take an indisturbed rest. May thy memory be
always green and fresh in my mind. May I live and do as much good. And may I
be as happy in my latter end! Oh my soul, let us begin then to take our leave
more seriously of this world; let us cease to weep for him, and weep for our
own folly. Nazian. Epist. 63.
Arise, arise, (...), etc. Let us go away from hence. Let us throw away these
dreams. Let us not live among these shadows. Let us not be mocked any more by
these false pleasures. Let honor, glory, and applause find some body else to
make their fools. Farewell all the Puppets that dance on the scene of this
world. Farewell all these painted clouds, these gilded vanities, these
hyperbolized nothings. Let this henceforth be writ upon my heart, yea let it be
engraven on us all. Vanity of vanities says the Preacher, all is vanity.
Surely man at his best estate is altogether vanity.

FINIS.

