MENSA MYSTICA; OR A DISCOURSE Concerning the SACRAMENT OF THE Lords Supper.

In which the ends of its Institution are so manifested; our Addresses to it so
directed; our Behavior there, and afterward, so composed, that we may not lose
the benefits which are to be received by it.

By Simon Patrick D. D. Minister of Gods Word at Batersea in Surrey.

1 Cor. 11.24. Do this in remembrance of me.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for F. Tylon; at the three Daggers in Fleetstreet,
1667.

To the Honorable Sir Walter St. John Baronet, AND THE Lady Johanna St. John
his Wife.
THese Meditations being conceived and born in your House, I take it to be a
piece of Justice that they should lay themselves at your feet, and come abroad
into the world under your Name. (And long before this, had they come to tender
their service to you, had the Press been favorable to them, and not let them
stick longer there than they did in my mind, before they could be brought forth
into the world.) Love has as great a power to make servants as any thing else,
and no bondsman is faster chained than he that is tied by the bands of his own
affection. A Captive of that quality I must needs profess my self, having such
a feeling of the obligations you have laid upon me, that I am not free to love
you, or not to love you; but am held under such a sweet tyranny, that I cannot
so much as desire to recover my former liberty. These thoughts therefore being
the births of one so bound to serve you, both by your favors and his own
affections; Exodus 21.4.
according to the Law of the Hebrews you may challenge a right in them, seeing
I am yours as much as my own. I know that I am writing to you, and not of you;
and that you do not expect my commendation, but my Counsel; for if you did, you
would not deserve Commendation. There is so much flattery many times in these
addresses, that men will not believe us when we say true, and so we displease
while we study to please. The world likewise is so envious, that they never
think more of our faults, than when we are praised. But yet to tell you of your
kindness to me, though you do not expect it, methinks I might be allowed, were
it not that then I should commend my self for a grateful Person, after I have
declined to commend you. But seeing that is no such great virtue that a man
should be tempted to be proud of it, I shall say thus much: That of all the
causes that are usually assigned of these Dedications, I can find the impulse
of none so strong as that of love and gratitude. Which bids me bind my
executors by these presents (if these Papers can live longer than I) to
acknowledge your love, and ever be mindful of it to you and yours. And
although I may justly suspect that they have not strength enough to live to any
great Age; yet if they can increase your Piety but in the least degree, that is
a thing that never dies, and will be an immortal witness of my endeavors to
serve you. To the study of that it is, that I do most affectionately exhort
you. Do well, and you shall hear well, though mine and all other Pens lie
asleep. Piety is the truest and most Ancient Nobility, as wickedness is the
greatest and basest degeneracy. There is no such way to exalt your Family, as
to make a strict alliance with God, and to draw him into your kindred. Nothing
can so enrich your Blood, as to contract an affinity with the Blood of Jesus.
But if earthly honor be of any value (as it may conduce to the better serving
of God) you have the favor granted unto you to be noble both in your soul and
body, to be allied both to the Blood of God, and of great Men. The Saint in
your name, may put you in mind to be Saints in your selves. The two Mullets or
Stars in your Coat of Arms, bids you shine like two Lights in the World. The
occasion of your bearing them (which if I mistake not, was because your
Progenitors warred in the Holy Land) may put you in remembrance to strive and
fight to be made free of the Heavenly Jerusalem, that City of God that is
above. As these Stars were born in their Ensigns in that expedition in
opposition to the Turkish Crescent; so let them put you in mind to keep the
world still under your feet, and to scorn these mutable and moon-like things,
See Cambden in Glamorganshire. Nympha. fluit propius. Fons refluit. Illa
recedit. Iste redit. Sic livor in st and pugaa parennis.
as much as you do Mahomet and the Turk. There is a Spring in that Country
where your name first took root in British soil, which is very low and empty
of water, when the Sea flows and swells the neighboring River Ogmar; and again
ascends and fills it self when the Sea retires out of the Channel. It will be a
most lovely sight both to God and Man, to see you humble and lowly in the
highest tides of a swelling fortune; and if your fullness should abate and draw
back into the Ocean from whence it came, to behold the elevation of your
spirit, and the greatness of your mind rising above all the reach of these
worldly changes. Then would you most truly imitate those Stars in your
Escutchion, which are not seen in the day; and shine most brightly in the night.

But your name bids you above all things to be full of love both to each other,
and toward all men. (...)
For beside that John in the Hebrew Language carries in its signification
graciousness and kindness; the beloved Disciple was the first of your name.
Degenerate not, I beseech you, from so worthy a precedent, but embrace with as
dear an affection as two St. John's would have done each other. That great Saint
had this always in his mouth, Little Children love one another; the same have
you always in your heart, seeing you are not only Christians, but of the same
Family, and of the same name which carries a remembrance of that divine Person.
The Athenians promised themselves nothing but Triumphs in the Sicilian War,
because their General Nicias derived his name from Victory, which in the
opinion of men had a good presage in it. And some of the Ancient Philosophers
did seriously Dispute whether there was not some secret fate or providence in
it, Plato in Cratilo.
that men should have names given them that did so exactly-agree with their
after good or bad fortune. I hope you will not think me impertinent therefore
that I have urged you so much with your name, and that you will not let it be
given you for nothing. And though that Nicias by his great overthrow did
disappoint the hopes which his fellow Citizens conceived from his name, yet you
will have a care that you deceive not the expectation both of God and Man from
you, which is grounded upon a better foundation. (...) Eusebius. Severus imperator
gravis, and vir nominis s^i dicitur. Lamprid.
I verily believe that you will endeavor to be (...), (as the Greeks call
them) persons of your own name. And as the Apostle prays for his Thessalonians,
1 These. 3.12, 13. you will increase and abound in love one toward another and
toward all men, to the end that you may establish your hearts unblameable in
holiness before God even our Father, at the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ
with all his Saints. Let me speak to you and all others once more in the words
of another Apostle: 1 Pet. 3.8.
Finally, be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another; love as
Brethren, be pitiful, be courteous. But what need I insist so long on this,
who find you so full of love toward me? It is a delightful Subject, and
therefore you will pardon my vehemence in it. But though it be delightful, yet
I will refrain my self from enumerating my particular obligations, because I
know (Sir) that you do not do your kindnesses that they should be talked of. And
for you (Madam) who carries kindness in both your names, I know also that you
love to be concealed, and that your love should have none to speak of it but it
self; and therefore I shall forbear to say how much (at least to me) you answer
the double remembrance you have in them. It will be more acceptable I know to
you both, if I turn this address to you into a Prayer to God, that he would do
all this and much more for you. And to that God of Peace from whom all good
comes, I humbly bow my knees, that he would make you perfect in every good
work, to do his will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight,
through Jesus Christ, Hebr. 13.21.
to whom be glory for ever and ever. The more particular petitions that concern
you, I shall put up alone, and ever remain what I am much engaged to be

Your affectionate Friend and Servant Si. Patrick.
From your house at Batersea January 27. 1659 60
THE INTRODUCTION.
Showing, 1. That God manifests himself to our sense. 2. That Bread and Wine
are fit things for the representing our Lord to us. 3. The first reason of the
celebration of this Supper, and the fittest time for us to do this that Christ
commands us. 4. Which is but a reiteration of what is done in Baptism. 5. As
may be seen by what I have briefly writ on that subject. 6. And if we will
extend this thing further, we may lose all. The Papists in danger of this who
speak not the language of the ancient Church. 7. The design of this present
discourse. 8. The alleging of some Heathen Customs and Principles, need be no
offense to any, but may be an help if they please.
GOd who is simple and removed far from all sense, considering the weakness of
man's soul, and how unable he is to conceive of things spiritual purely and
nakedly in themselves, and yet having a mind to be better known unto us, and to
make himself more manifest then ever; was pleased in his infinite goodness to
dwell in flesh, and appear here in the person of his Son, who was made like to
Man, to show what God is in our nature. This Son of his, being to die, and part
with his life for great ends and purposes, which he would not have us to
forget; was pleased to take the same course to convey to our minds spiritual
notions by outward and sensible signs; and to impress on our hearts what he
has done and suffered, by a visible representation of it in bodily things, and
not only by a plain description of it in the Gospel. He knew very well that a
Picture and Image of a thing does more affect us than an Historical Narration;
and that the more lively and express that Image is, the more lively motions it
makes within us. A dead Corpse is but the shadow of a man, and yet we find that
our souls are more assaulted, and all our passions stirred by the sight of the
face of a dead friend, then by all the reports that are brought us of his
death. And long after his Corpse is mouldred in the Grave, if we see a Child of
his that has his exact features, manners, and carriage, it renews a fresh
remembrance in us of that person, and stirs up the Images that are in our mind
more powerfully, then we can do our selves by reflections upon them.

But though God was willing to teach us by outward and sensible
representations, Sect. 2.
yet he thought it both unsafe, and likewise unfit, and no ways conducing to
the spiritual ends he intended in the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, that
we should have a picture of Christ, or an Image of him set before our eyes.
There is too much of sense in the Tragical and Theatrical representations which
are made by some Papists of Christ's sufferings. The outward actions are in
danger not only to take place of all spiritual affections, but quite to thrust
them out. The eye and the ear are so fully possessed, that their objects work
by their own natural strength, and not by the souls considering and meditating
powers. Our Savior therefore, that he might both help the soul, and leave it
something for to do in making of its own thoughts, and forming its own
apprehensions and resentments, has given us only Bread and Wine as
remembrances of him: in which we see so much as to awaken our souls, but not so
much as to keep them awake without themselves. They show Christ to our senses,
but more to our minds; that so both may be employed, but the mind may do most
by the help of the senses.

And indeed these are very fit things (upon other reasons) to serve our
Saviors design,

First of all, They are similiar bodies, and not consisting of Heterogenious
parts, i. e. their parts are not of different kinds, as the parts of our flesh
are. The flesh of a man is composed of veins, and arteries, and nerves, and
blood, and muscles, and diverse skins; but every part of Bread and Wine is like
the other, and has nothing in it different from its neighbor. Every piece of
the one, and every drop of the other, does as much represent what is intended,
as any other part does; and all the parts together make one body of the very
same sort.

And yet secondly,

And thirdly,

To which you may add fourthly, Melchizedeck unto Abraham, as a part (perhaps)
of the blessing of that High Priest, and as a signification of that Sacrament
which God would have Abraham's seed to feed upon, when the true High Priest
after that great man's order should come.

And fifthly, the Vine, and every branch that is in him, must bring forth
fruit, as he does, which may hereby be represented. And he is called the Bread
of life, which came down from Heaven, as the Manna in the Wilderness, who is to
support our souls, as the staff of bread does our bodies.

Sixthly, Cyril of Alexandria speaks) was typically eaten in Egypt. (...).
For first, It is acknowledged by all, that the Bread was blessed, and the Cup
also, and so went round to all the guests: And the forms of Benediction are
still extant in some of the Hebrew Authors. And secondly, The whole Feast after
the Passeover-night, was called the Feast of unleavened Bread. And thirdly, It
is the opinion (I observe) of some, that our Savior at the time of instituting
this Sacrament, Grot.
did eat only the Bread, and the bitter Herbs, but not the Lamb of the
Passover. For it is not said in the Evangelists, that his Disciples killed the
Passover for him, but only that they made ready the Passover, which might be
nothing else but that bread of affliction, and the herbs which were attended
with the cup of kindness that used to pass among them. For our Savior died at
the time the Passeover-Lamb was offered, being indeed the Lamb of God himself.
And therefore S. John says, Chap. 13.1. That the Supper was before the Feast
of the Passover, and he calls it eating of the Passover, because this was a
great part of it, a principal portion of this Feast. And this part was all that
they could partake of, who at any time could not come to Jerusalem, where only
the Lamb was to be eaten, being first offered at the Temple. But supposing this
to be doubtful, yet there is no question but that this Lamb was a Type of
Christ; and that Bread and Wine was a part of their Supper. And upon search, I
believe we shall find, that the Lamb of the Passover was the only Sacrifice
which the people did wholly eat (its blood being poured out at the Altar) and
it does the better set forth Christ who gives himself wholly to us. To which,
fourthly, may be added, that as the Paschal-Lamb did represent him, so the
manner of its killing was very conformable to Christ's death upon the Cross;
which may make it more reasonable to borrow from the Supper resemblances of
him. For they hung the Lamb upon nails (much what as Butchers now do a Sheep
which they have killed) and then fley'd off its skin that it might be dressed.
While it hung in this posture, it was just like the situation of Christ's body
upon the Cross, (as Buxtorf has observed out of the Talmud) whose hands were
so spread, and legs so stretched out, as the Lamb was. 5. Unto which I may
add, That the Law of Moses was not to be wholly destroyed, but to be changed
and altered by Christ: So the Apostle teaches us to speak, in Heb. 7.12. And
the malice of St. Stephen's accusers could prompt them to say no worse of him,
then that he preached Jesus should change the customs which Moses delivered,
Act. 6.14. Circumcision is commanded under the title of an everlasting
Covenant, and it is not so much abolished, as improved into a better Sacrament,
and seal of greater blessings to Mankind. The Sabbath Day likewise was to be a
commemoration of Gods rest from all his works on the seventh day, and of his
deliverance of them out of Egypt; and it is not cancelled, but changed into
another day which contains the former, and something else, even a remembrance
of the Resurrection of our Lord from the dead, that he might enter into his
rest. So we may conceive, that this great Feast of the Passover was not quite
done away, but gave place to a better Feast, which is in memory of a greater
deliverance than that from the thraldom of Egypt, and the iron Furnace. In this
the Jewish Christians might still commemorate their ancient mercies, as well as
if they had eaten of the flesh of their Lamb. Yea, because there was in it such
a clear representation of Christ's sufferings (especially in its first
Institution, when the blood was sprinkled on the doorposts) part of it was
thought fit still to remain, viz. the Bread and Wine, which they used to eat
and drink in memory of that mercy, with solemn forms of thanksgiving unto God.
And lastly, The Bread and Wine was more fit then the flesh to be retained,
because now that Christ is come, all Sacrifices are to cease, and no more blood
is to be shed for fin. This, I say, may be a good reason why Bread and Wine
only are used, because they are unbloody things; and after the killing of the
Lamb of God, there is to be no more life offered for our offenses.

This Feast our Savior did first of all celebrate with his twelve Disciples..
3.
And it was but fit that he should do so, that he might the better answer to
the Type, in Exodus 29. where we read that Aaron the High Priest, with his sons,
was to eat the breast and shoulder of the Ram of consecration, whereby he was
sanctified to officiate in the Priesthood. Even so our Lord being to be offered
up in Sacrifice, and thereby to be consecrated an high Priest, did institute
this Supper, that together with his Disciples he might (as much as is possible)
feast with them upon that Sacrifice. And seeing our Saviors Sacrifice answered
both to the Paschal Lamb, and the propitiatory Sacrifice on the day of
Expiation, it will be no wonder if it were so complete as to have reference to
this also.

The time when it was first instituted was in the night when he was betrayed,
(for at the Even they celebrated the Passover) which makes some (I suppose) to
keep the memory of Christ's death in the close of the day. But if they think
that they must exactly follow that precedent, they should do it after Supper.
And I rather think that the manner of receiving about noon is most agreeable to
the true pattern. For we do not remember the Supper of the Lord, but his
Sacrifice on the Cross. And therefore as the Jews feasted at Even, because they
came out of Egypt at that time; so should we feast about Noon, because our
Lords death began between nine and twelve, and ended about three of the Clock,
as you will clearly see by comparing the relation of S. Mark and S. John
together. It is said, John 19.14. that it was about the sixth hour, when Christ
was condemned to be crucified. But S. Mark speaks of his sentence, and of the
execution of it, as things done before the sixth hour, and says ( Chap. 15.
33.) That just when the sixth hour was come, then darkness spread over all the
Land, till the ninth hour. They do very well agree, if we do but understand
thus much; that the day being divided into four equal parts, consisting of
three hours apiece; every part had the name of that hour when it did begin; and
so the sixth hour was from twelve to three, and then began the ninth hour. Now
S. John does not say, that it was the sixth hour when Pilate gave him up to be
crucified, but that it was about the sixth hour, i. e. it was between nine a
clock (which was their third hour) and twelve, but nearer to twelve than to
nine; or it drew near to Noon; yet not so near, but that we must allow time for
the leading him away to the Cross, for the hanging him thereon, and the rest.
In so much that S. Mark says expressly, verse. 25. That it was but the third
hour, i. e. nine of the clock, when those things were done. Both of them say
true, if we do but conceive that it was between nine and twelve, i. e. about
half an hour after ten, when our Lord was hanged on the Cross. All the time
between nine and twelve, being called (as I said) the third hour, S. Mark
says, that that was the time: But it drawing toward twelve, S. John says, it
was about the sixth hour. And when the sixth hour was fully come, i. e. when it
was just twelve a clock, and the Sun was in its Meridian, then (says S. Mark)
was it eclipsed, and the darkness continued till three, which was the time of
the offering of the Evening Sacrifice, and just then our Lord expired, and gave
up the Ghost. From whence we may clearly gather, That our Savior was in the
very midst of his sufferings a little, after twelve. Which renders it
unreasonable, me thinks, to innovate and forsake the common form by receiving
toward night, seeing our Savior was in the middle and bitterness of his
passion about Noon (which is the common time of our Communions) and his passion
was quite finished a good while before that time, wherein some do celebrate it.

But I do not intend that this Discourse should beget any quarrels, and
therefore I forbear the prosecution of any such observations, which you must
not expect to meet withal in these Papers: The first design of which is to show
you for what end our Blessed Lord did appoint this Sacrament.

And here I might be tempted to make use of that method which I observed in a
little Discourse concerning Baptism,. 4.
for that which is done here, is but a further confirmation of what was then
agreed on between God and us. As our knowledge and obedience increases, so does
likewise the Favor of God, and his testimonies of that Favor: and the more
his mercies are assured unto us, the more are we engaged and confirmed in our
resolution of persisting in obedience. So that it is but one and the same thing
that is thus frequently ratified, first in Baptism, and afterward in
Confirmation, and lastly in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. For there in the
most solemn manner that can be devised, we profess our selves foederates of
God, and he again owns us for his friends, and treats us kindly by entertaining
us at his own Table. And this is no strange matter, that one thing should be so
often repeated; for at the beginning of Friendship between God and Abraham, he
only made him a promise, ( Genesis 12.1, 2, 3.) That he would make him a great
Nation, and bless him, and all those that blessed him, and that all families of
the earth should be blessed in him. But in process of time, when love was
increased between them, this Promise became a Covenant, when he and his
received the token of Circumcision, as you may read, Genesis 17.2, 4, 5. I will
make my Covenant between me and thee, and will multiply thee exceedingly, etc.
But when he had walked longer with God, (as he there bids him, verse. 1.) and
had perfected his obedience by offering up his Son, his only Son Isaac, then
God confirmed the Covenant by an Oath, and swear by himself, that he would do
what he had promised and sealed; as you may see Genesis 22.16, 17, 18. By my self
have I sworn, that in blessing I will bless thee, etc. This may be conceived as
a good representation of Gods dealing with us now. At our first entrance into
his family he gives us many promises which depend upon conditions; and
afterward he renews the Covenant with us, and does further ascertain us of his
favor, yet on terms of perseverance; and at last he swears unalterably, when
we have given proof of our obedience to him, that he will not take away his
mercies, nor his loving kindness from us. And it is observable, that in every
one of these, God returned something to Abraham for what he gave to God. When
he left his own Country, he promised him the Land of Canaan: When he was
circumcised, he promised to bless his seed, yea, he promised to him the
Messiah: And when he offered Isaac, God again assured by oath, that his own Son
should be really offered, as Isaac was designed to be, for a Blessing to all
the Earth. Even so, in like manner, does God confer new graces and blessings on
us when we are baptized, and when we confirm our Vows, and when we partake of
the Supper of the Lord; so that it is not in vain reiterate our acts of
surrender unto God. And thus it is among our selves, when children are
contracted in their younger years, and made sure to each other; they consummate
the Marriage, by their own consent, when they are of age, with festival joys:
And many of these married persons likewise renew the nuptial solemnity every
year, and observe that day that they entered into such holy bonds with more than
ordinary cheer. Whereby they strengthen their faith unto each other by an open
profession of their faith in the sight of their friends, and they indear their
hearts unto each other by a remembrance of their promises, and they run more
passionately into closer embraces by these new expressions of kindness. Thus do
we at this Sacrament but tie the old bond with a faster knot; and press harder
upon the former zeal to make a deeper mark, and a fairer Image of God in our
hearts; we do but renew our Covenant which we have already made, swear most
solemnly, by taking it upon the Sacrament (as we say) that we will be the
servants of the Lord Jesus. And it is very easy to lead you through all the
parts of the former method, showing you both how on our part, and Gods, it does
confirm a Covenant between us.

And perhaps it will not be unprofitable to give some brief touches upon those
things,. 5.
which you can without trouble enlarge in your own thoughts. Which is one
reason why I shall spare my self any long pains about them, and hold another
course in this following Treatise.

For our part, we do here profess our selves of the Religion that Christ has
instituted and taught us, as you will see more largely in the ensuing Book. We
do at once in this Feast both show our gladness, and assure him of our
affections.

Sin is here represented so unto us, that it cannot but make our wounds bleed
afresh. The remembrance of Christ's death does pierce our hearts again with
godly sorrow, and revives the smart and pain which the sense of sin has
created in our souls.

Faith likewise here is as greedy of its food, as an hungry mouth is of its
meat. And Obedience is hereby confirmed, because we receive lively nourishment
into our souls, which will make us strong to execute the will of our Lord. Our
suffering also with Christ, we profess more lively than by Water, even by Blood
it self. When our Savior says in the sixth of S. John, That we must eat of
his flesh, he means, we must receive himself, and digest his Doctrine; but
seeing the word flesh in Scripture Phrase signifies very frequently weakness
and meanness, he intends that we must receive him so as to partake with him in
his poor, low and suffering condition. And this we do most notably protest that
we will, when we receive the signs of his broken body. For the Bread broken
does not only argue it to be fit for food, but that first we must be slain and
mortified, and likewise receive such strength, that if he call us unto death,
we must undergo it. We own hereby the Covenant of sufferings, and feed upon a
dead Savior. Which makes Theophylact give this as a reason why Christ gave
thanks when he brake the bread, (...). That so we might receive Martyrdom
thankfully. It is a feast which we partake of, and yet signifies sufferings.
But let it not seem strange, for we must count it all joy when we fall into
diverse temptations.

Neither does it less signify and seal on Gods part, being a manifest token of
his great and inexpressible love, in giving of his own Son to death, even to
the cursed death of the Cross for us. Here he takes us not only under his wings
(as, I said, he does in Baptism) but he takes us into his arms. He takes us to
himself, and he gives himself wholly unto us.

And then for Remission of sins, it is manifest to be the purchase of his
blood, and so must needs further here be assured to all good souls. And it is
the very thing that is expressed in the Institution of this Sacrament: This is
my blood of the New Testament that is shed for many, for the remission of sins.

And there are not so many spirits contained in the Wine, as there are lively
influences of Gods good Spirit hereby conveyed to pious hearts. We have
assurance likewise given by these things, That he will not take his holy Spirit
from us, but that he will let it always diffuse it self through all our powers.

And as for the Resurrection from the dead; We being made, as it were, of his
flesh, and of his bone, and incorporated into him, he can lose none of his
members; but all that eat of his flesh, and drink of his blood, as they ought,
shall be raised again at the last day. We eat of the tree of life, which will
make us live for ever; and we receive (...), Epist. ad Ephesians.
(as Ignatius speaks) an Antidote against death, a Medicine to preserve us from
corruption. This the ancient Christians thought to be so fully assured to us in
the Eucharist, that this is one of the Arguments whereby Irenaeus confutes the
Valentinians, who denied the rising again of the Body after it is dead. How can
that flesh be corrupted, L. 4. adv. haeres. cap. 34.
and not live again, which is nourished by the Body and Blood of the Lord?
Either let them change their mind, or else abstain from this Offering. For as
the Bread which is of the Earth, perceiving the invocation of God, is no longer
common bread, but the Eucharist, consisting of something earthly, and something
heavenly: Even so our bodies perceiving this Eucharist, are not now
corruptible, but have the hopes of a Resurrection. L. 5. cap. 2.
Thus he, who has more to the same purpose in another Book.

Herein likewise God gives us a foretaste of Heaven, and the joys to come, as
will be made more manifest in the following Discourse. And thus far we may
grant the Bread and Wine of Melchizedeck to have been Sacramental, that they
were given to Abraham, as earnests, for to secure him of the Land flowing with
milk and honey. By this Banquet or Entertainment which the Royal Priest made
him, he took Livery of Seisin (as our Lawyers speak) of the promised Land. And
in that very place (it is most likely) where God intended the Mother-City of
the Kingdom should be, was this conveyance made to Abraham's seed. This Bread
and Wine were most certain evidences that his Posterity should eat of the fruit
of that Land wherein now he was a stranger. And just in the same manner does
God give unto faithful souls this blessed Bread and Wine, as an Antepast of his
eternal love; and hereby they do begin to taste of the heavenly Feast that they
shall celebrate above. They have herein a right made them unto Heaven, and a
kind of delivery of possession which shall shortly be completed by an actual
enjoyment.

They that would more than such things as these in this Sacrament, Sect. 6.
are in danger to have nothing at all, as they should have. While they think
that Christ is received coporally by them, they may neglect the spiritual
eating; and while they chew him (as it were) between their teeth, their Souls
may feel but little of him. (...) E^nap. in vita Jambl.
For just as it is with those that would paint a beautiful person; while they
think to add something of their own to the face, thereby to make him look
better than he is; they spoil the comeliness of the Picture, and miss both of
his face, and likewise of his true beauty: So it is with the modern Church of
Rome, which would make Religion seem as fair and beautiful, yea, as gaudy and
trim, as their fancies can devise; but by adding their own inventions, and
novel fashions, they quite spoil both true Religion, and the beauty of it,
which they study to adorn. Whilst they think to offer a proper Sacrifice, they
many times offer none at all. And whilst they think it is a Sacrifice both for
quick and dead, they rely so much upon it, that it proves to be for neither. By
making it flesh, and blood, and bones, they make Christ the food of the foulest
and prophanest mouths; And by using a multitude of Ceremonies, they are in
danger to take the mind off from all substantial exercises.

The Ancients, I am sure, understood not the new language of the
Transubstantiation of the Bread and Wine into the Flesh and Blood of Christ.
And though they would suborn those worthies to speak against their mind and
conscience on their side, yet we find that they call the bread and wine figures
or symboles of Christ's body and blood. Dionysius the Areopagite (or that
ancient Writer who passes under his name) calls them most frequently, (...). *
In Cap. 3. Eccles. Hierach.
Symboles, Images, Antitypes, sensible things received instead of things
intelligible. And Maximus in his Scholion upon him, interpreting what a Symbol
is in his Language, says it is, (...), i. e. A sensible thing which we partake
of instead of a spiritual; as for example, Bread and Wine in stead of the
immaterial divine nourishment and gladness. And so Macarius calls it, Homil. 27.
(...). The figure and representation of his Flesh and Blood; and says, That
he who partakes of the visible Bread, does spiritually eat the Flesh of our
Lord. And he that will, may repair to Theodoret, who lived in later times, and
he shall tell him, That they are (...) mystical representations, and that their
nature is not changed, no more than the flesh of Christ ceases to be flesh now
that it is in the Heavens. And in his Comment upon the 1 Corinthians. 11.26. he
says, Dialog. 2. (...).
the Apostle uses these words, Till he come, because there will be no need of
Symboles of his Body, when his Body it self shall appear.

The name of Antiquity makes a great sound in their mouths, (...).
and therefore let the Reader remember, that there are many ancient Errors as
well as Truths. If they have followed the Ancients in their Novel Doctrines,
they are rather the Old Heretics, (...), etc. Vide Irenaeum l. 1. c. 9.
than the Fathers of the Church. For it has been well observed by some of our
Divines, that Marcus a Magician is noted by Irenaeus for counterfeiting to
consecrate in an Eucharistial manner, Cups of Water mixed with Wine to a
strange purpose. He extended (says he) the Words of invocation to a very great
length, and then he made the liquor in the Cup seem of a purple or bloody
color. His followers believed that the divine Grace did drop down some of its
own blood into the Cup at his request. And all that were present, were very
greedy to taste of this Cup, that the same Grace which he called down, might
shower it self upon them likewise. I can little doubt, but that this Cup, over
which he gave thanks, was a counterfeit of that which the sound Christians
drunk of, from whom these men were apostatized. And that he might gain greater
applause by his followers, he would make them believe that he was more devout
than any, and could give them more than the Christians pretended to do, even
the very blood of Christ it self, which the Romanists now boast they have, and
therein excel us. But we are content with what holy men then enjoyed. and let
them take heed that they follow not worse examples. I am sure Theodoret in his
second Dialogue brings in a wild conceited man speaking the same things that
they do. Cap. 24.
The affirmation of that Fantastic is this, That Christ's humane Nature is
swallowed up in the Divine. His Argument for it is this, As the Elements or
Symbols, or the Lords Body and Blood are one thing before the Invocation of the
Priest, but after Invocation are changed and made another; so the Lords Body
after his ascension is changed into a divine substance, though before it was
not. Hereupon the Father says, You are caught in your onw net, for the Symbols
do not go out of their proper nature, but remain (...), in the former substance
wherein they were. Let the Reader then judge with whom they speak; and who are
the Masters of our language and assertions. And let him take heed how he leaves
our Communion where he has the holy Bread and the Cup both; whereas they
something like the Manichees of old, will not let the people drink of the Cup.

But let them believe as much as they will, so they will but quietly suffer us
to believe as we see cause. Let them practice as they please, if it will do
them any good; we doubt not but we believe and practice enough to the receiving
of as great benefits as they can enjoy. I confess I cannot be angry with them
for believing more than I can do; but I desire they would not be angry at us
(but rather pity us) that we cannot extend our faith so far. If a man will say
that Snow is nothing but frozen milk, which drops from the skies, much good may
it do him with his conceit; only let him not impose the same belief on others
who intend not to trouble him for his fancy. And if they will believe that wine
is the very Blood of Christ, I desire not that they should suffer the least
harm for this opinion; but let them not damn us, because we will not put out
our eyes, and deny our taste, and abandon our reason, and the holy Scripture,
to the novel fancies and interpretations, that they obtrude upon us. I know
that if a man's soul be not made of solid reason, but consists of weak and
credulous principles, they will fearfully astonish it with the dismal names of
Heresy and Schism, and such like bugbear words, which every one applies as he
pleases. But considerate souls are grown wiser than to be affrighted out of
their wits by the noise of words (the great engine of this Age) and they know
that damnation does not depend upon men's mouths; for if it did, I know not who
should go to Heaven. We cannot be so blind as not to see, that every party
arrogates to it self the glorious names of Christ, and the Holy Ghost; and if
we would be led by sounds, we must believe, no body knows, how many Christ's.
The name of Heretic, Schismatic, yea, and of Antichrist and Babylon, signify
but little to us, who hear them every day, so carelessly applied, that we are
assured men know not what they say. Neither will we be amazed with sad
relations of the miserable ends of those who have contemned their Sacraments;
for we do not allow that any man should irreverently behave himself toward any
of Christ's institutions, though there be something of man's invention mixed with
it. And we can repay their stories of the contempt of this Sacrament as among
them administered, with as sad and true relations concerning those, who have
despised that, which in scorn and pride they are pleased to call Calvin's Supper
and Communion. V. Annot. of Rhemists in 1 Cor. 11.34.
The memorable story which B. Morton relates, may quit scores with them for all
of this kind. L. 2. cap. 2. of his Protestants Appeal.
There was in S. John's College in Cambridge (Dr. Whittaker being then Master)
one Booth a Batchellor or Arts, and an excellent Scholar, who in the time of
his seducement by the Papists, had taken the Sacramental Bread (which he
received because he would not be discovered, but yet reserved without eating of
it) and in contempt had thrown it over a Wall. By the remembrance of this sin
afterward, when his eyes were opened, he was driven into so great remorse and
anguish of soul, that not long after he threw himself down headlong over the
Battlements of the Chapel, and within four and twenty hours died, whereof
there were many witnesses. Instit. of the Sacrament l. 2. cap. 2. seci. 6
Yea, this right Reverend Person says in another Book, that he saw this thing,
which now from him I have related. And it may put some in mind of what befell
the Donatists, who casting of it to Dogs, they grew mad, and tare their own
Masters in pieces as unknown Persons.

But if they will persist to damn all those that are not of their way, we will
say to them as Diogenes did to an Heathenish Priest, that would persuade him to
be of his order, that so he might be happy in the other world. Would thou
have me believe that Epaminondas; and other brave men were miserable, and thou,
who art but an Ass, and do nothing worthy, shall be happy, because thou art a
Priest? Is it credible that they who exercise all piety toward the Father, Son
and holy Ghost, and are ready to sacrifice their lives rather than consent to
the least sin against them, shall be miserable, and that God will accept men
merely for being of their Communion? We know upon what easy terms men may go
to Heaven as they believe; and they shall never persuade us that they whose
hearts are full of God, and have his Image shining fairly in their souls, shall
be the companions of the Devils and accursed spirits; when (as they imagine)
men of soul lives may get possession of Paradise, and live with Saints.

And yet let all Protestants take heed how they do irreverently behave
themselves in participation of these holy mysteries, lest we give them occasion
to say, that we have nothing but common bread and wine, empty of all Sacrament.
Let us as humbly and meekly address our selves to the Table of the Lord, as
they can do, who believe the very substance of Christ's body and blood is there.
And indeed it is but natural to approach with a great deal of reverence and
devotion, unless we be of a make different from other men, who use to be
affected with every thing, that does but relate unto that which is dear unto
them. L. 5. (...).
The Man in Achilles Tatius who found a Treasure in the ground, (...), etc. He
did honor to the place where it was found; he built an Altar, he offered
Sacrifice, he crowned that piece of earth. Such a passion of love it was (I
believe) that made the Ancient Christians do honor to the very day of our
Saviors Sufferings, to use the sign of the Cross on which he suffered, to look
toward the place where he was crucified and buried; and much more should it
make us highly to value the signs of his body and blood, and in a serious
reverent manner receive them as the sweetest tokens of his love.

I have said the more of this here, Sect. 7.
because I shall not fill the ensuing Treatise with any Disputes. And because I
intended it should be a Practical Discourse, I have waved the Controversy
concerning the Persons who are fit for to receive. Let it be sufficient here to
say with Justin Martyr, Apolog. 2.
(...). i. e. We suffer none to partake of it, but him who believes the things
that we teach to be true, and that is washed in Baptism for the Remission of
sins and regeneration, and that lives so as Christ has delivered unto us. He
therefore that is baptized, and instructed in the faith of Christ, and
professes to live accordingly, and does nothing that is destructive to this
profession, ought not to be rejected from our Communion. But as of the
Passover a stranger, or an uncircumcised Person, though an Israelite, might
not eat; so neither may an unbaptized Person, or one that does not profess our
Religion, partake of this Supper. And as they were to cast out then all
unleavened Bread, so are we to keep the Feast perpetually, and to purge our
selves of the old leaven, that we may become a new Lump.

And that we may be well instructed in our duty, I have shown in the following
Treatise, First, What is the end of this holy action. Secondly, With what
Preparations we must approach to the performance of it. And Thirdly, What
affections will best become us when we are performing it. Fourthly, How we
should behave our selves afterward. And Lastly, What Benefits we shall reap
thereby.


And because I know the great quarrels are about the lives of men (which is the
last thing in Justins words) I have said something in the end of the Discourse,
which may tend to the satisfying of us, who are those wicked persons that are
to be excluded.

If in the first part of this Treatise I have interspersed a little of the
Heathen learning, Sect. 3.
and endeavored sometimes to illustrate things out of their customs, it need
not seem a wonder to any considering person: And let me make a brief Apology
for it, and so put an end to this Preface. I can very easily demonstrate that
no small part of the Heathenish Mythology and Divinity was fetched from the
Hebrew stories and practices. As the Greek Poet says of the Cretians, that
they were always liars; V. Eusebius. l 10 prepar. Evang and Clem. Alex. l. 1.
strom.
so I may say of the Greeks themselves, that they were always thieves. Though
they bragged that all Learning came from them, yet in truth they were but like
the Crow, (as Tatianus his expression of them is) (...), not adorned with their
own Feathers, but with those they had stolen from their neighbors. That worthy
Author has well observed (toward the later end of his Oration against the
Greeks) that they drew their Dogmata or assertions (though unskilfully) from
the Fountain of holy Writings; and having busy and inquisitive minds,
whatsoever they found in Moses or other Divine Philosophers, they endeavored
(...), to set another stamp upon it, and make it pass for their own. And this
they did for two reasons (as he says) first that they might seem to others to
have brought forth some new thing, that was not known before; And secondly,
That what they did not understand of the truth, they might cause by their
artifice of words to pass for Fables in the world. Marinus in vita Procli.
And it is very considerable (me thinks) that Marinus reports of Proclas,
though a Philosopher of younger times; how that he observed the Roman, the
Phrygian, and the Egyptian Feasts, with all new Moons, (...).
and that (...) in a most splendid and ceremonious manner. And, in brief, he
says that he kept religiously the most famous Feasts of every Nation, after
their own manner and custom; and composed an Hymn, which he sung, containing
the praises of the God of several Nations. For he had this saying frequently in
his mouth, That a Philosopher ought not to address his service to the fashion
of one City, or some Countries rites, but to be (...) skilled in the sacra or
holy offices of the whole world. And it is very likely that this was the
principle of several Philosophers before him, it being a Character that
Pausanias gives of the Greeks in general, that they were (...), In Baot.
strangely prone to have the things of another Country in greater admiration
then those of their own. Which agrees very well with what the Scripture says
of them, that the Athenians were always hearing or telling some new thing Acts
17.21. and that even in matters of their Religion they were (...), very apt to
reverence every Deity that they heard of. Hence it was that they worshipped the
unknown God, which S. Paul tells them, was the true and living God which made
all things. This God was worshipped among the Jews, and as Nazianzen says,
that when they speak of the Elysian fields, they were (...), Orct. 20.
in a conceit of our Paradise, which they took out of Moses his Books, with the
change of the name only. So I may say, that when they invented the rest of
their Poetical Divinity, their Dreams were the offspring of some real things,
which they had seen or heard out of the Book of God. I will instance but in
four, which are not commonly observed, so far as I have read. Hercules is
called by the Dark Poet, Lycophron.
(...), etc. the three nights Lion, whom the sharp-tooth't Dog of Neptune
swallowed up within his jaws. This Dog of Neptune, the Sea-God, (says Isaac
Tzetzes) is the VVhale, and Hercules has the Epithete of Three-nights, because
being swallowed, he lay three days (...), in the VVhale, which he calls nights,
because the belly of the Fish was (...), without all light, and black as the
night. This seems to me to be but a corruption of the Story of Jonah, which
might well be known to the Heathens, and easily applied to Hercules. For it is
observed by D. Kimchi, that there is not so much as the name of Israel in all
the Prophecy of Jonah, because he was sent only to Heathens. And he was
embarked in a vessel going to Tarshish, or Tartessus in Spain (as Bochartus
has proved) in which part of the world it is well known the Tyrian Hercules
was most worshipped. Now it has been the manner of the world to attribute all
strange things, that were done by others, to some one person famous among them;
as all witty stories and jests are at this day fathered upon him, that is most
noted by us to abound with them; and so they might easily tell this story of
their Hercules, when it was once noised among them, because they ascribed all
wonders and miracles to him.

A second instance I may give in the Fables of Iphigenia and Julia Luperca. The
former of which being to be sacrificed to Diana, an Hare, or as some say, an
Heifer came running in the middle (and thickets; as it were) of the Greek Army,
which by the counsel of their Prophet, they offered instead of her. The latter
having the knife just at her throat (as it was at Isaac's) an Eagle came, and
(...), snatcheth away the knife out of the Priests hands, and threw a young
Panther near to the Altar, which they offered for her. These two stories are
but a depravation of two in the Scripture concerning Isaac and Jeptha's
Daughter, which they have jumbled together. And therefore the same Isaac
Tzetzes in his Scholia upon Lycophron adds these words to these Stories; You
cannot but remember (...), the Ram which instead of saac was caught in the bush
Sabek, (so the LXX do read those words 22. and 13.) as I think I should have
done, if he had not noted it to my hand.

But those Verses of Homer on which Porphyry writes his Book (...), (...).
are as like to David's words in Psalm. 139.15 as any thing can be, if we receive
Porphyry's Comment upon them. And according to Tatianus his computation, Homer
lived not long after his time, and so might have some knowledge of his Songs.
David's words are, I am fearfully and wonderfully made, etc. and curiously
wrought in the lowest parts of the Earth. Where the word (...) (which we render
curiously wrought) is by Val. Schindler interpreted Contextus sum, I am weaved:
and the Verb does signify acu pingere, etc. to work curiously with a needle or
otherwise. The words of Homer, which I say do answer to these, and describe the
body of man as wrought in a loom, and rarely weaved, are in his Story of
Ulisses, Odyss. N.
where he speaks of a Cave, and says, (...)
(...).
There do the Nymphs, a wonder it is to see,
Their Purple Garments weave most curiously;
From off long Stones their threads are drawn --


And David says, That he was wrought in the lowest parts of the Earth, i. e.
the womb; so here he speaks of an Antrum or Cave, in which the Nymphs or souls
making bodies, did reside. The Instruments or Tools from whence they drew their
yarn, which he calls great long stones, Porphyry interprets to signify the
bones of the body, which are hard like unto stones, which uphold the flesh, and
unto which it is fastened; and these Purple colored garments are (says he)
(...), the flesh which is weaved and wrought out of blood, which is (as it
were) the Coat wherewith the soul clothes it self. To this answers that in
David, that he was curiously wrought or weaved in the womb. And then (...), is
expressly the same with those words of David, I am fearfully and wonderfully
made, and mavelous are thy works. And it is a wonder (says the same
Porphyry) whether we look (...), at the rare fabric and composition of the
body, or (...), or at the no less strange conjunction of it with the soul.

Neither is this the single conceit of Porphyry, In his (...).
but he that will read Joh. Protospatharius upon that Verse of Hesiods, (...).
will soon see, that he also thought Homer to have described in those words the
contexture and formation of our bodies in the womb. For he says, by the web he
advises the woman to weave on the twelfth day of the Moon, is meant a Physical
Mystery concerning the generation of our bodies, which he there explains; and
for a proof of what he says, he directs us plainly to this place of Homer,
which I have recited. But I have no list to prosecute this any further.

There is another instance that suggests it self to my thoughts, and I should
have taken it for a corruption of the Story of Elias calling for fire from
Heaven to consume his sacrifice, had not Pausanias assured us that he saw it
with his own eyes. But it will clearly show how studious those false Gods were
to imitate the God of Israel, (...). Pausan. Esiac. (...) L. 5.
and render what I have said very probable, which makes me think it fitting to
be here related. Some Priests he says in Lydia (who worshipped after the
Persian manner) used to call upon he knew not what God, in a barbarous form of
words not to be understood by the Greeks, and presently the wood that was upon
the Altar was kindled without any fire, and appeared all in a bright flame. I
could easily show, that these barbarous words were Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
Sebaoth and such like, and in all probability the God they invoked was the
unknown God, and the example they Apishly followed, was that great Prophet.

And indeed the Prophet Elijah did therefore call for fire from Heaven, because
all Sacrifices at Jerusalem were consumed and eaten only by the Holy fire
which God sent from above to them. The Devil therefore in this thing may have
seemed to endeavor that his Offerings might sometimes correspond with those at
the Temple of God. And so Pindar gives us another instance how that the
Rhodians being about to offer Sacrifice to Jupiter, had forgotten to bring fire
along with them to his Altars, but he being loath it seems to lose this fat
oblation,

(...)
(...).
did bring a yellow cloud over them, and rained much Gold upon the Altar. This
Golden shower (as an excellent Person of our own does interpret it) was nothing
else but a shower of fire which devoured the Sacrifice, Dr. Cudworth.
in imitation of the Sacred Story. No wonder then if in other things as well as
these, they were forward to transcribe the holy Writ; and let it not be imputed
to a vain and affected ostentation of learning, if I sometimes use their
customs for an illustration of Sacred matters.

But the following Discourse is interlaced with so few of their Authors, that
perhaps it does not merit this Apology, and therefore I will cease it with this
double desire: The one is to my Reader, that if he understand not every Line in
the first part, yet he would not throw away the rest, which are fitted to his
practice: The other is to God, that he would bless it to those Ends for which
it is designed. Amen.

THE CONTENTS OF THE TREATISE.
SECT. I.
CAP. I. THe first end of this Supper is for a remembrance of Christ. What it
is to remember. The Passover appointed for that end. Two things it remembers
us of. And two ways we are to remember it. In two senses it may be called a
Sacrifice. p. 3. CAP. II. It is a remembrance with thanksgiving. This is
explained in six particulars. And two other senses are given wherein it may be
called a Sacrifice. p. 22. CAP. III. Here the third end is discoursed of, and
it is considered as an holy Rite whereby we enter into Covenant with God. This
is explained in five things. p. 46. CAP. IV. It is considered here as a sign
and seal of remission of sin, and this is cleared in three considerations, but
especially from this, that we eat of the sin-offering, and of that which was
not made for one, but for many, i. e. the whole Congregation. p. 73. CAP. V. It
is a means of our nearer Union with the Lord Jesus. The Nature of this Union,
and the effect of it is explained in five considerations. p. 93. CAP. VI. Here
is shown how the Supper is a means of our Union one with another. And five
General Observations are made to this purpose. The last of which treats of the
holy kiss, the feast of love, etc. To which two things are added by way of
conclusion of the first part. p. 115.
SECT. II. Concerning Preparation.
CAP. VII. An Introduction to the Discourse about Preparation, wherein those
words of the Psalmist are opened, Psalm. 93.5. p. 159. CAP. VIII. This word
Preparation is to be cautiously understood. Not a little time required for it.
Three things are discoursed of, that tend to the fuller explication of it. p.
164. CAP. IX. Four things more are treated of, which further open the Nature of
this Preparation. And so from a general Discourse concerning it, way is made to
descend to a more particular. p. 174. CAP. X. Here is discoursed at large
concerning those actions, wherein it is fit for us to be employed, before we
come. Of the setting apart some portion of our time, and of our goods. Of
Examination, of Reconciliation, etc. The whole is digested into ten
considerations. p. 195. CAP. XI. Mistakes are removed. The Primitive Christians
not too zealous. No reason for the neglects of the present worldly Christians.
Good people may be superstitious while they take themselves to be great enemies
to it. p. 235. CAP. XII. Advice and Directions to those, who never yet received
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Six things are said to them to prepare them
and encourage them. The Conclusion of this Discourse. p. 251.
SECT. III. Concerning the Deportment of a Soul at the Lords Table, etc.
CAP. XIII. Love is instead of all other Directions. Yet seeing it has many
ways to express it self; there is a necesssity to guide its motions so, that
they may not hinder each other. p. 269. CAP. XIV. Here therefore they are
ranged and set in their right places. And, 1. The soul is directed what to do
when it sees the Minister stand at the Table of the Lord. 2. What affections to
express when the Bread is broken, etc. 3. When the Minister comes to give it to
us. 4. When we take it into our hands. 5. When we eat. 6. When we see him give
it to others. 7. When we receive the Cap. Every one of which is discoursed of
in several Meditations. And then, 8. Meditations about the joys of Heaven. And
9. Psalms of Praise are shown to be very fit conclusions of the solemnity. p.
275. CAP. XV. An entrance is made upon the Discourse about our behavior
afterward. 4. Sorts of Christians are observed. We must strive to be of the
highest, by keeping our affections alive that are begotten in us. p. 330. CAP.
XVI. Eight directions for the maintaining in our hearts those resolutions that
are wrought in them, and keeping our hearts in a constant good temper. p. 335.
SECT. IV. Of the Benefits of holy Communion.
CAP. XVII. Holy men can best tell themselves how sweet this Feast is, yet for
the inviting of others to this cheer, a Discourse is begun of the pleasures of
it. p. 374. CAP. XVIII. Three benefits we may receive by it. 1. Great pleasure
which is brought to us sundry ways. 2. Great nourishment and strength, as is
proved by the three graces of Faith, Hope, Charity. 3. Great cures of our
sicknesses and diseases. p. 382. CAP. XIX. The danger of coming hither with a
love to our sins, opened in several particulars. Yet it is a great sin not to
come out of love to Christ. Men's excuses shown to be frivolus. p. 410. CAP. XX.
The great excuse of many unmasked, which is, that wicked men are permitted to
come thither. p. 431.
Mensa Mystica.
THe Sacraments being not unfitly called by an ancient Writer, (...). Dionys.
cop. 3. Eccles hierarch.
The Garments that are cast about our Savior; and it being the profession of
Divines, to labor to see the naked face of truth; it is most worthy our pains,
to open and reveal those secrets that lie hid and veiled under symbols and
sensible things.

And to say the truth, these Vestments are so thin and transparent, that the
truth does shine through them, and show it self to well-prepared minds. They
are but like to those thin clouds wherein the Sun is sometimes wrapped, which
render its body the more visible to our weak and trembling eyes.

I cannot pretend to have conversed much with barefaced truth, yet having been
drawn to publish a few thoughts concerning Baptism, I shall now further
endeavor to unfold those mysteries that lie hid under the coverings of bread
broken, and wine poured out, in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, that men may
not ( Ixion-like) embrace a mere cloud instead of God himself.

My sight is not so sharp as to discern the very flesh and blood of Christ in
those forms and shapes of bread and wine; no more could that Eagleeyed Author I
mentioned, though he thought he could see as far as the celestial Hierarchy,
which will appear to any one that shall be at the pains to read him. Yet I am
so far from thinking that they are mere signs of what Christ did for us, or
only representations of the benefits we receive by him, but am persuaded that
they exhibit our Lord himself unto believing minds, and put them into a surer
possession of him.

The truth commonly lies between two extremes, and being a peaceable thing,
cannot join it self with either of the directly opposite parties. And therefore
I shall seek for her in a middle path, not bidding such a defiance to the
corporeal presence, as to deny the real; nor so subverting the fancy of a
miraculous changed into a celestial substance, as to level these things into
mere shadows.

CHAP. I.
FIrst then this holy rite of eating bread broken, and drinking wine poured
out, is a solemn commemoration of Christ, according as he himself says to all
his Apostles, Luke 22.19. and particularly to St. Paul, who twice makes mention
of this command, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25.
Do this in remembrance (or for a remembrance) of me. His meaning is not, that
we should hereby call him to mind (for we are never to forget him) but rather
that we should keep him in mind, and endeavor to perpetuate his Name in the
world, and propagate the memory of him and his benefits to the latest
posterity. Now this is done by making a solemn rehearsal of his famous Acts,
and declaring the inestimable mable greatness of his royal love. For (...) does
not signify barely recordatio, recording or registring of his favors in our
mind; but commemoratio, a solemn declaration that we do well bear them in our
hearts, and will continue the memory, and spread the fame of him as far, and as
long as ever we are able.

I hope that none will conceive so little to be meant by this word, remember or
commemorate, as a naked mention of his Name with our mouths, or a dead image
of him in our minds. For all these words, to know, believe, meditate, remember,
and the like, are hearty words, and full of life. Though they seem to speak
only actions of the mind, yet in holy language they include in their
comprehension the affections of the heart. Cold, pale thoughts which have no
feeling of themselves, nor leave any footsteps or memorials behind them, are as
good as none at all. And therefore I understand hereby a very warm sense in the
soul, which begets and stirs up such motions in the heart as the conceived
object is apt for to raise.

Suppose you have been in deep love with any person, and have lost the half of
your selves, when you remember the death of that friend, the image of him is
ready to rob you of your lives, and make all the blood retire to your heart, as
if death were about to surprise the main Fort of life. But on the contrary, if
you think of that person as alive, the remembrance of him makes your spirits
for to dance, and the blood to run into your cheeks, and smiles to sit on your
forehead, and breeds a pleasance in your whole man. Just so would our Savior
be remembered by you, that the thoughts of him may even kill you with grief, and
transport you with love, and captivate your wills, and engage all your
affections, that they may be at his command, and issued forth at his pleasure.
As you think of a friend, of a father, of a wife or a husband, or any one that
has got the possession of your heart, so think of him.

By which examples you may see, that I intend not a natural passion, and a
sensual commotion in the soul, but a well-grounded affection.

When we read a true History, or a Romance, we are apt to side with some
persons in the story; and when we meet with a Duel, we favor one of the
Combatants, and are sensible of his wounds, and sorry for his fall, as on the
contrary we are glad he comes off a conqueror and wins the field. So may a man
when he thinks of Christ and his Tragedy, conceive a natural hatred and
indignation at the treachery of Judas, and the vile malice of the Pharisees,
and be much moved to see him used in such an unworthy manner; it may be fetch
sighs from his heart, and tears from his eyes, and put him into such a huge
passion as if he suffered with him. But if all this have non effect in his
life, and produce no answerable fruits afterward, it is no more than a natural
motion, and is void of the divine and heavenly spirit.

We must remember Christ therefore, as Nehemiah desires God to remember him, by
doing good: or as we remember our Creator, by a true subjection of all our
faculties to his sovereign will.

Then we remember him as we ought, when we get him formed in our hearts, and
have a more living image of him left in our minds; when it stirs and is busy
in our souls, and awakens all other images, and calls up all divine truths that
are within us, to send them forth upon their several employments into our lives.

Now for the fuller understanding of this matter, you must know that the
Paschal Supper (which is called by Greg. Naz. very elegantly, (...), a more
obscure type of this type) was instituted for a remembrance, and was a Feast of
commemoration, as will soon appear if you look but a while into the particulars
of it. And first you must observe that the very day of the Passover was (...)
for a memorial of their miraculous deliverance out of Egypt, as you may read
Exodus 12.14. and therefore they are bid, Exodus 13.3. to remember this day in
which they came out of Egypt, out of the house of bondage, etc. Thence it was
that they were commanded to eat the Lamb with bitter herbs ( Exodus 12.8.) for a
remembrance of their hard bondage in Egypt, which made their lives bitter unto
them, Exodus 1.14. So was the unleavened bread, the bread of affliction, in
remembrance that they brought their bread out of Egypt unleavened ( Exodus
12.34.) and were there in great servitude ( Exodus 13.3.) so that their soul was
even dried and parched in them. The later Jews have added the charoseth, which
is a thick sauce, in memory of the clay and mortar which they wrought in; and
they use red wine for a remembrance that Pharaoh shed the blood of their
children. To which may be added, that God required there should be a rehearsal
to their children of what the Lord had done for them, that so this feast might
be for a sign upon their hand, and for a memorial between their eyes to all
posterity, as you may see, Exodus 13.8, 9. And thence it is that the Jews call
that section of the Law, or the Lesson which they read that night, the
Haggadah, annunciation or showing forth, because they commemorated and
predicated both their hard services, and Gods wonderful salvation, and the
praises that were due to him for so great a mercy.

It is easy now to apply all this to our present purpose, if we do but
consider that this likewise is a holy feast. Whence it is called the Lords
Supper (not only because he appointed it, 1 Cor. 11.20.
but because he was the end of its celebration) and an entertainment at the
table of the Lord. 1 Cor. 10.21.


This Feast our Savior first keeping with his Apostles who were Jews, he makes
part of the Passeover-chear to be the provision of it. For he takes the bread
and wine, which used to go about in that Supper through the whole family, to
signify his broken body, and his blood which was to be shed. Now this was to
be in commemoration of a deliverance wrought by him, from a greater tyranny
then the Israelites were under, which made all the world to groan, and was
ready to thrust us all below into the Devils fiery furnace. And therefore, as
it is said, Exodus 13.8. thou shall show thy son in that day, saying, This is
done, etc. So the Apostle (in a manifest allusion to that phrase) says, 1 Cer.
11.26.
that when we eat this bread, and drink this cup, we do show forth the Lords
death until he come. So that we may conclude, that in this feast in honor of
Christ, we are to make a rehearsal of his famous acts, to proclaim his mighty
deeds, to speak of the glorious honor of his Majesty, and of his wondrous
works, and to endeavor that one generation may praise his works to another,
Psl. 146.3, 4, etc.
and declare his mighty acts, that they may speak of the glory of his Kingdom,
and talk of his power.

And indeed it should seem, that the memory of a thing is by nothing so
sensibly preserved, and so deeply engraven in men's minds, as by feasts and
festival joys. For it has been the way of all the world, to send to posterity
the memory of their benefactors or famous persons, by instituting of such
solemn times, wherein men did assemble together, and by the joys and pleasures
of them, more imprint the kindnesses and noble achievements of such Worthies
in their minds. So we find among the Greeks their (...) in honor of Aeacus,
their (...) in honor of Ajax, and in latter times their (...), and such like,
in remembrance of the merits of such persons. and how highly they deserved of
the places where their feasts were celebrated. In like sort the Jews had their
feasts in memory of some great and rare passage of divine providence, though
not of any particular persons, lest they should be tempted to worship them as
their Saviors, according as the custom of the heathen was. But all worship
being due to our Lord and Savior, he thought fit in like manner to appoint
this feast to be as a Passover unto us, a holy solemnity that should call us
together and assemble us in one body, that we might be more sensibly impressed
with him, and that all generations might call him blessed, and he might never
be forgotten to the worlds end.

Now of two things it is a remembrance, and two ways we do commemorate or
remember them;

I. It is instituted (...), Justin Martyr Dialog. cum Tryph.
etc. for a remembrance that he was imbodied for those that believe on him, and
became passible for their sakes. The bread and the wine are in token that he
had a true body, and that the word was made flesh. For thence Tertullian and
Irenaeus do confute Marcion, who denied the truth of Christ's flesh, and made
his body to be a fantastical thing; because then real bread and wine could not
be a figure of it: and so Theodoret says out of Ignatius, Dialog. 3.
that some ( Simon and Menander I think) did not admit (...), thanksgivings and
offerings, ( viz. of bread and wine in this Sacrament) because they did not
confess that it was the flesh of our Savior.

Now with what affection we should call to mind this love, that God would
appear to us not by an Angel in a bright cloud, not in a body of pure air, but
by his Son in our own flesh, I leave your own hearts to tell you. Methink, we
should wish that all the world could hear us proclaim this love; and that even
the fields and forests, i. e. the most desolate and heathenish places might
resound our joyful acclamations to him. We should wish to feel something of
ecstasy, and to go out of our selves, when we think of him. For

II. Just. Mart. Ib.
It was instituted (...), in commemoration of his passion and sufferings for
us. As the bread and wine do commemorate the truth of his body; so do bread
broken and wine poured out, commemorate the truth of his sufferings for us,
which those fantastical people in the first times did no less deny. And the
bread and wine being given to us severally, not both together, do clearly tell
us that he was really dead, his vital blood being separated from his body, and
his veins and heart being emptied of it. This is that miracle of love which the
Apostle says we should show forth till he come: this is that famous act which
never ennobled the story of any person, that the Lord would purchase enemies by
his own blood; yea by the blood of the Cross reconcile them to himself. The
thoughts of this is able to wound a heart of marble with love, and to turn a
rock into a fountain of tears, and to unloose the tongue of the dumb, that they
may speak the honor of his Name, and show forth his praise. And therefore
because this was such a singular instance of love, and because it contains in
it so many secrets (which we should have before our eyes) it is the chief thing
that we are to make a remembrance of.

But, as I said before, there are two parts of this Commemoration, and it
cannot be contained within the bounds of this world, but we must make it reach
as far as Heaven. For,

1. We do show it forth and declare it unto men, which is sufficiently clear by
all that has been said. We do publish and annunciate unto all that he is the
Savior of the world, and that he has died for us, and purchased blessings
thereby beyond the estimate and account of humane thought. And further the word
(...) may import, that we do extol, praedicate, magnify, and highly lift up in
our praises this great benefit, so that all may come to the knowledge of it, as
far as is in our powers to procure. This commemoration the Minister chiefly
makes unto the people, and all the people together with him to all that are
present, so that all may wonder at his love.

When our Savior therefore says, Do this in remembrance of me, the meaning
is, do this in remembrance that I dwelt in flesh, in memory of what I suffered,
in memory of the infinite price of my blood which I shed for you, in memory of
the victory that I have obtained by it over the enemies and tyrants of your
souls; in memory of the immortal glory that I have purchased for you: celebrate
this feast in memory of all these things, and when I am dead, let me always live
in your heart. Tell them one to another in a solemn manner, and declare them in
the face of my Church. Let all ages know these things as long as the world
shall last; that as the benefit is of infinite merit, so may the
acknowledgement be an eternal memorial. Be so careful in doing this, that when
I come again I may find you so doing.

2. We do show forth the Lords death unto God, and commemorate before him the
great things he has done for us. We keep it (as it were) in his memory, and
plead before him the Sacrifice of his Son, which we show unto him, humbly
requiring that grace and pardon, with all other benefits of it, may be bestowed
on us. And as the Minister does most powerfully pray in the virtue of Christ's
sacrifice when he represents it unto God; so do the people also, when they show
unto him what his Son has suffered. Every man may say, Behold, O Lord, the
bleeding wounds of thy own Son; remember how his body was broken for us, think
upon his precious blood which was shed in our behalf. Let us die, if he have
not made a full satisfaction. We desire not to be pardoned if he have not paid
our debt. But can thou behold him and not be well pleased with us? Can thou
look on his body and blood which we represent to thee, and turn thy face from
us? Have thou not set him forth to be a propitiation through faith in his
blood? O Lord then suffer us sinful creatures to plead with thee. Let us
prevail in the virtue of his sacrifice for the graces and blessings that we
need; and hide not thy self from us, unless thou can hide thy self from thy
Son too, whom we bring with us unto thee. In this sort may we take the boldness
to speak to God, and together with a representation of Christ, we may represent
our own wants, and we may be confident, that when God sees his Son, when we
hold up him (as it were) between his anger and our souls, he will take some
pity, and have mercy upon us. Just as a poor man, pleading with a King,
commemorates to him the worthy deeds of some of his Ancestors, or makes mention
of the name of some high Favorite, for whose sake he desires his Petition may
be granted. So it is with us when we come before God to request mercy of him;
we can hope to prevail for nothing, but through the Name of our Lord, whom we
can never mention with so much advantage, as when we solemnly commemorate his
sufferings and deservings. For then we pray and do something else also which
God has commanded; so that there is the united force of many acceptable things
to make us prevalent. And hence I suppose it is, that Isid. Pelus. calls the
Sacramental bread (...), L. 1. Epist. 123.
the shewbread (as we render it) which we set before God, as that stood always
before his face in the time of the Law, that God looking upon it, might
remember his people Israel for good.

It will not be unprofitable to add, That this was one reason why the Ancients
called this action a Sacrifice (which the Romanists now so much urge) because
it does represent the Sacrifice which Christ once offered. It is a figure of
his death which we commemorate, unto which the Apostle Paul (as a Learned man
conceives) has a reference, L'Emptreur.
when he says to the Galatians, Gal. 3.1.
That Jesus Christ was set forth evidently before their eyes, crucified among
them. They saw (as it were) his Sacrifice on the Cross, it was so lively
figured in this Sacrament. And it is very plain, that Chrysostom understood no
more, Hom. 27. (...), etc
when as he thus speaks, upon the Epistle to the Hebrews; What then? do not we
offer every day? yet, we offer by making a commemoration ((...)) of his death.
And we do not make another sacrifice every day, but always the same, or rather a
remembrance of a sacrifice. Such an unbloody Sacrifice, which is only
rememorative, and in representation, we all acknowledge. And if that would
content them, we make no scruple to use Eusebius his words, who says it is a
remembrance instead of a sacrifice L. 1. Demons. Evang. (...).
: and in another place, We sacrifice a remembrance of the great sacrifice (...).
. And so every Christian is a Priest or a Sacrifice when he comes to the table
of the Lord. For as our Lord says to his Apostles, Luke 22.19. Do this in
remembrance of me; so he says to every private Christian the same words, 1
Cor. 11.24. only there is this difference, that Do this, etc. in St. Luke,
does manifestly refer to those words before, To take bread, give thanks, and
give to others (which is only the Ministers work;) but in St. Paul, Do this,
etc. referres to, Take eat, which immediately precedes, and this is to be done
by all. So that both the one and the other, in their several kinds, do
commemorate Christ, and represent him to the Father.

And that it is only a memorial of a Sacrifice, and not a Propitiatory
Sacrifice, the Arguments of a Divine in the Council of Trent will prove, Hist.
Cone. Trent.
in spite of all opposers: Our Savior, says he, did not offer sacrifice when
he instituted this Sacrament, for then the oblation of the Cross would have
been superfluous, because mankind would have been redeemed by that of the
Supper which went before. Besides (says he) the Sacrament of the Altar (as he
calls it) was instituted by Christ for a memorial of that which he offered on
the Cross; now there cannot be a memorial but of a thing past; therefore the
Eucharist could not be a sacrifice before the oblation of Christ on the Cross,
but showed what we were afterward to do. From hence we argue, That if it was
not so then, neither is it so now. We do nothing but what Christ then did; and
therefore if he offered no sacrifice, neither do we, but only commemorate that
sacrifice which he was then about to offer. Therefore a Portugal Divine in that
Assembly made a speech to prove that it could not be demonstrated out of the
Scripture, Georg. de Ataide.
that this Sacrament is a sacrifice, but only out of the ancient Fathers; and
he answered all the arguments to the contrary so strongly, and the Protestants
arguments afterward so weakly, that the most intelligent were of opinion, that
he did not satisfy himself. But of this perhaps too much, unless the state of
things among us plead my excuse.

I will add but this one thing more, and so put an end to this Chapter. That it
may be called a Sacrifice, because with the Action we do offer Prayers to God
for all good things. Epist. 59. ad Paulinum.
And so St. Augustine expounds that place in 1 Timothy 2.1. concerning the
Petitions put up at the Lords Supper. By Supplications he understands the
Petitions put up before the bread and wine be blessed. By Prayers he
understands those whereby they are blessed and sanctified, and made ready to be
given to the people. By Intercessions he understands the prayers made for the
people when they do partake, (for then the Minister, as if he were a kind of
Advocate, does offer them to God, and commit them to his hand) after which
follow the (...) giveings of thanks, which are made by all, for that and all
other mercies that the good God bestows on us. Whatsoever becomes of this
interpretation, we need not fear to call the whole action by the name of a
Sacrifice, seeing part of it is an Oblation to God of hearty prayers; and it is
not unusual for that to be said of a whole that is exactly true but of one
part. But methinks it much unbecomes Christians to quarrel about Names,
especially about the name of that which should end all quarrels; and therefore
I only intended to show how this word may be used (if we please) without
danger, and how the ancient Church did understand it.

CHAP. II.
THis holy action is to be next of all considered, as a remembrance or
commemoration with thanksgiving, (...). And thence it is called by the name of
Eucharist, i. e. Thanksgiving, according to the phrase of Ancient times. Justin
Martyr, Apolog. 2.
For as the bread and wine, the breaking and pouring out, are representations;
so our taking, eating and drinking, express our hearty resentments. This good
cheer cannot but breed a certain cheerfulness. This Divine Food cannot but fill
us with gladness. After we have swallowed the sweetness of Heaven and Earth,
after we have tasted of that which Angels desire to feed but their eyes
withal, how can it choose but breed a spiritual joy in our souls, and make our
mouths break forth into singing? If there be any wine that makes glad the
heart of man, this sure is it, which is pressed (as it were) out of the
Celestial Vine, and tastes not of the blood of the Grape, but of the Blood of
God. This should send up our souls in songs of praise to Heaven; this should
make us wish that we could evaporate our spirits in flames of love, and that
our souls were nothing but a harmony and consent, that we might always be
tuned to his praises. And though the Angels have many strains of Praise that we
are unacquainted withal; yet this is a note that they cannot sing, Rev. 1.5, 6.
Unto him that has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood,
and has made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father: to him be glory and
dominion for ever.

Now for the fuller understanding of this, I take these six things to be
considerable:

I. That as it is a Feast, it betokens joy, and all joy at such times is
expressed by songs. If we will believe the wiser sort of Heathens, they looked
upon their public Feasts, not only as times of ease and outward mirth, but as
instruments to raise their thoughts to spiritual things, and fill them with an
inward joy. So Proclus does apply their customs in the (...), to intellectual
things, which, he says, lay hid under such Ceremonies. Lib. 1. in Timaeum.
(...).
And among other matters, he says, That their Feasts on the first day of those
Solemnities, were an emblem of the perpetual quiet and tranquillity we should
labor for in the World, knowing, that if we be filled with God, he brings in
with him a never ceasing feast. Do I hear a Heathen speak? Dropped these words
from the pen of a Pagan? O my soul that read this, blush to think that thou
should celebrate a Divine Feast without a Feast, and come to the Table of
God empty and void of God. For if they labored to see something Divine under I
know not what strange rites; how can we choose but be filled with God, and
Festival joys, when we sit with him at a Heavenly Banquet? And if we be, then
there will be all the usual attendants and companions of such seasons; Luke
15.25.
the soul will begin to leap and dance for joy, it will awake Psaltery and
Harp, and all the Instruments of Praise. And so the Apostle (speaking I suppose
of the Christian Feasts and Entertainments) bids them not be drunk with wine,
Ephesians. 5.18, 19.
wherein is excess, but be filled with the Spirit, speaking to themselves in
Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs, singing, and making melody in their
hearts to the Lord. These two things did commonly finish the Heathen Meetings;
After they were well liquored with Wine, they used to sing and roar the Hymns
of Bacchus. The Apostle therefore opposes two sorts of heavenly pleasure unto
that madness, bidding them not to gorge themselves with Wine, but to crave
larger Draughts of the Spirit, not to fill the air with (...) to Bacchus, (as
the manner was) but with Hallelujahs unto God. Drunk they might be, so it were
with the Holy Ghost: And chaunt they might, so it were Psalms and Thanksgivings
to the Lord. Psalm. 36.8. Inebriabuntur ubertate, etc. Vulg.
They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thine house (says the
Psalmist) and thou shall make them to drink of the River of thy pleasure. Even
a heathen could say, Pramium virtutis esse perpetuam ebrtetatem.
That the reward of virtue is a perpetual drunkenness. But then we must
distinguish of drunkenness as Ficinius does, who has well noted, That there is
one Earthly and Mundane, v. Argumentum dialogi 2. de Justo.
when the soul drinks of Lethe's Cup, and is beside her self, and unmindfull of
all divine things. This is it the Apostle speaks against, in the beginning of
those verses, as a heathenish crime. But there is another celestial
drunkenness, when the soul tastes of Heavenly Nectar, and is indeed out of it
self, because above it self: When it forgets these mortal things, and is
elevated to those which are divine, feeling it self by a supernatural heat to
be changed from its former habit and state. This is it which the Apostle
exhorts unto; this is it which we must long for when we are at the Supper of
the Lord. This is that which the Spouse means (according to some ancient
Expositors) when she says, He has brought me into his banqueting house (or
Wine-Cellars) and his banner (or covering For they feasted upon beds. Cant. 2.4.
) over me was Love. The Septuagint make it a prayer, and render it thus: Bring
me into his wine-cellar, place love in order over me. Which may be conceived
(says one) as the voice of the Church to the Apostles or Ministers,
Polychronius.
Prepare for me the Supper of the Lord, (...).
set me down orderly at the (...), the feast of love. There is nothing that
holy souls can more desire, then to be so satisfied with him, that their
mouths may praise him with joyful lips. This is the fruit of the spiritual
inebriation, that the soul meditate spiritual songs and hymns to God. And
indeed the better sort of Heathens did in their feasts sing the praises of
famous men; which good Critics make the true original of the word Encomium.
(...).
And so the Apostle exhorts the Christians, that they would break forth into
their praises of God and Christ, who were most worthy of all their hymns.

Before I end this, let me observe, That every one may sing such Hymns as the
Apostle calls for, and indite them in his own heart unto God, because a Hymn is
not (as we ordinarily think) only praise in verse and meter, but any words of
Thanksgiving that set forth the merits of him that we extol. So a Heathen will
teach us, if we be still to learn it. When a man (says Libanius) has any gift
given him by God, (...) 32. (...).
he should by way of thankfulness return something unto God: and some give one
thing, some another: The Shepherd offers a Pipe, the Huntsman a Stags head, the
Poet a Hymn in meter, the Orator a Hymn without meter; and in my judgment
(says he) a Hymn is more valuable with God then Gold, and far to be preferred
before it.

Now Love will make any one eloquent; if our hearts be full of God, they will
run over. Thanksgiving and Praise is the natural language of a pious heart; and
there is no such copious subject whereon to spend them as the Lord Christ; and
in the knowledge of Christ, nothing so admirable as his death; and therefore
when we commemorate that, the high praises of God must be in our mouths.

II. The Jewish Feasts upon their Sactifices do more plainly instruct us in
this matter. They that offered peace offerings unto God were admitted to eat
some part of them after they were presented to God, and some pieces of them
burnt upon the Altar. And this is called partaking of the Altar (which was
God's Table, 1 Cor. 10.18.
Ezekiel. 41.22. Mal. 1.7.) where they did rejoice before him as those that were
suffered to eat and drink with him. So I observe, That where there is mention
made of their eating before the Lord, (which can signify nothing else but
their partaking of the Altar, and feasting at his table) they are said likewise
to rejoice before him, Deuteronomy. 12.7, 18. Deuteronomy. 16.11. in the later of which
places, after he had given command concerning the three great Feasts, he adds
ver. 14. Thou shall rejoice in thy feasts. And in the later end of King David's
Reign, when Solomon was crowned, there was sacrifices offered in abundance for
all Israel, (as you may read 1 Chronicles. 29.21, 22.) and the people are said to
eat and drink before the Lord on that day with great gladness. But the
Psalmists words are most to be observed to this purpose, Psalm. 116.12, 13.
where to the question, What shall I return to the Lord for all his benefits
toward me? he returns this answer, I will take the cup of salvation, etc. i.
e. when I offer (...), sacrifices for salvation or deliverance that God has
granted me out of trouble, I will remember the mercy of God with all
thankfulness, as I feast upon the remains of that sacrifice. For it was the
manner, that the Master of the sacrifice should begin a cup of Thanksgiving to
all the guests that he invited, that they might all praise God together for
that salvation, in consideration of which he paid these vows unto him. And in
those words the Ancients thought they tasted the cup of salvation which we now
drink in the Supper of the Lord; expounding them in the anagogical sense to
signify (...), Chrysostom. in Psalm. 116.
the participation of the Christian mysteries. For in them we are to lift up
songs of praise to Heaven, as we feast upon the Sacrifice of Christ, and we are
to laud his Name who has done such great things for us, and raised up a horn
of salvation to his people. But

III. In the Paschal supper, when they eat the Lamb in memory of the salvation
out of Egypt, these festival joys and thanksgivings are more easy to be
observed. At which time that 116 Psalm was one of those that used to be sung.
For the Masters of the Jewish learning tell us, that besides their forms of
blessing and thanksgiving, when they took the bread and wine (which I need not
recite) they likewise sung a Hymn, beginning at the 113, and reaching to the
end of the 118 Psalm. The former part of it (to the end of the 114,) was
recited when they sat down to eat; and when the fourth and last cup went about,
then they sung the later part, which concluded the solemnity. This Hymn was
called (...) the Egyptian Hymn, V. Buxtorf. in voc. (...)
as Abarbanel relates, in memory of the great deliverance that God vouchsafed
them, when he flew the firstborn of Egypt, and brought them out of the house
of bondage, that they might for ever serve him, and offer sacrifices unto him.
And it may be noted, that the beginning of that Hymn, does so clearly refer
to that deliverance, and the later end of it so manifestly refer to Christ (who
was in the Passover represented) that there could not be one more fitly chosen
for that commemoration. Which likewise may teach us (if we had no other light
to guide us in the business) that our Lord is to be remembered with such Hymns
and Praises.

It is likely the Heathens took their custom of drinking Cups of Praises to
their gods after their Feasts, See the Schol. upon Aristoph. in Plut. and
Fquit. but especially in Iren. p. 642. (...).
from this Jewish Original. The first of which they drunk as soon as they had
supped, and called it the Cup (...), of their Good Genius. The last which they
drunk for a parting-cup, they called (...), the Cup of Jupiter the Savior: And
in them they gave praise to their Tutelar Angel, and the greatest of their
Gods, their prime Conservator. For that this drinking was a kind of Sacrifice
of Praise, and joined with Hymns, Xenophon will teach us, who thus speaks; When
the Tables were taken away, In Sympos. (...).
they offered a drink offering, and sung a song of praise, and so departed. The
Cup of Devils or Demons which the Apostle forbids the Corinthians (1 Cor.
10.21.) are by some taken to be these, Delrio in Isa. 65.11.
which I have mentioned, wherewith they concluded their feasts, after they had
sacrificed unto them. It may well be so, and thus much we learn from them (who
did but corrupt many good notions of Religion) that it was an ancient practice
in the world, to offer praises to God as the last and best of their sacrifices.
And that this cup which our Savior filled to his Disciples, was truly such a
cup of salvation, you may see by his own practice. For,

IV. Our Savior, in imitation of the Jewish solemnities, did institute this
Supper of his with such joys as I am speaking of. For first he did (...), Matt.
26 1 Cor. ^^
give thanks, or (...), bless and praise God. Which was not, because they were
then going to supper, for St. Matthew says distinctly, ver. 16. that as they
were eating he took bread and blessed; and the cup he took after supper) but
with a particular respect to this business, that he might reach us what the
Minister should do, and all the people joining together with him And Paulus
Fagius thinks it not unlikely that our Savior used some part of the form of
benediction that is still in the Hebrew books, In Targ. Deuteronomy. 8. Verisimile
es^Christum qui busdam, quae in his precibus continentur, maxim quod
principium and fiaem attin^t, usum susse, non autem aliis, quae a posierioribus
Judaeis adaita sunt.
blessing God after that manner that then was in use among the people of God,
to which the latter Jews have made some additions.

Secondly, They sung a Hymn before they departed, which Paulus Burgensis
imagines to have been no other than that Egyptian Hymn which I mentioned before
(called by some the great Hallet.) because his Disciples were best acquainted
with it. And thus much seems to me confiderable, that there is not only much of
Christ in that Hymn (as was noted before) but likewise that the whole multitude
of Disciples not many days before, when they brought the Lamb of God which was
to be offered at the Passover into Jerusalem, did rejoice and sing Praises to
God, with a part or it; as may be discerned, if you compare Psalm. 118.25, 26.
with Mat. 21.9. and Luke 19.37, 38.

The Paschal Lamb was to be taken up from the flock four days before the time
of its offering, Exodus 12.3, 6.
in conformity to which (it is like) our Savior was solemnly now taken and
brought to Jerusalem, just so many days before he was to be offered (compare
Mat. 21, 17, 18. and Mat. 26.1.) and as the Hosanna which they sung at his
preparation to his sacrifice, was taken (as you have seen) out of that Hymn, so
it is probable they used no other when he was represented to them as slain and
eaten by them. It will not be out of our way for to observe further, that this
Psalm was so remarkable, that the next day after these Hosanna's (when he saw
they wrought nothing upon the Pharisees) he reads them their doom out of it,
and declares to them his exaltation though they might kill him, Mat. 21.42. The
stone which the builders refused, the same is become the head of the corner.
This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes. But whatsoever
become of this conjecture, and supposing the Hymn to be unknown; our Lord, no
question, taught us by this practice, what we should do when we celebrate his
memory. And accordingly you shall find in the Scripture.

V. That the Disciples did eat this bread (...), with a gladness and leaping of
their heart for joy; (...), Act. 2.46, 47.
praising and lauding God, extolling of his Name with Hymns for all his
benefits. 1 Cor. 10.16. (...) (...) loc.
Therefore the Apostle Paul calls it the cup of blessing, because (says
Chrysostom.) when it is in our hands, we laud the Name of God with songs of
praise, wondering and being astonished at this unspeakable gift: or as Justin
Martyr does express it, because the Minister taking the cup, gave thanks, and
blessed God, as our Savior did, and all the people said Amen, making a solemn
(...), or acclamation, and testifying thereby their hearts to be in that
thanksgiving. But I need not have recourse to him; the Apostle himself in the
same Epistle acquaints us with it when he says, 1 Cor. 14. v. 16, 17.
When thou shall bl-ss (...), etc.
with the spirit (i. e. in an unknown tongue) how shall he that is unlearned
say Amen at thy giving of thanks, (...).
seeing he knows not what thou say? From these words (...), shall bless, and
giving thanks: Beza thinks that he touches upon the Lords Supper, So the L. Mr.
Thorndike also.
for they are the very same words which are used concerning that action of our
Savior when he first celebrated this feast; as you may see Mat. 26.26, 27. And
besides the Apostle seems in that Chapter to direct the Corinthians how to
handle the whole divine service so, that it might be to edification. Now having
spoken concerning Prayer and singing of Psalms, ver. 14.15. and instructing
them afterward concerning teaching and interpreting of Scripture, ver. 19, 26.
in all likelihood he here tells them how to behave themselves to the same
profiting of others in the Supper of the Lord, at which there were many
rudenesses committed by the people. And that which he teaches them, So Juct^n.
(...).
is to give thanks in a known tongue, that so all the people when the Minister
comes to (...), for ever and ever (as Chrysostom speaks) might assent with
their wishes and say Amen From whence we may collect, that giving of thanks is
so considerable a part of this service, that in the Apostles style it involves
the whole of it.

VI. It may further be observed, that all Churches in the world have always
used divine praises in this commemoration; and, (if we may believe ancient
Records) such as are very conformable to the Jewish benedictions at the
Passover, (...), etc. Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God, the King of the
world, who have produced bread out of the earth: and blessed art thou, etc. who
have created the fruit- of the vine. And afterward, Let us bless him w^o has
fed us with his own, and by whose goodness we live, etc. For so we read in
Justin Martyr and others, Apolog 2. and Constit. Apost.
that in their times the Church used to praise God for all things, and
particularly for those gifts of bread and wine, and so for Jesus Christ, his
Death, Passion, Resurrection and Ascension; beseeching the Father of the whole
world to accept of the offering they made to him. And in after ages, Cyril of
Jerusalem says (...), etc. We make mention of the Heaven, the Earth, the Sea,
and all the Creatures, reasonable and unreasonable; of the Angels, Archangels,
and powers of Heaven, praising God, and saying, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of
Sabbath, etc. These do very much correspond with those Hebrew forms, which
perhaps they were willing in part to imitate, for the greater satisfaction of
the Jewish Christians, who constituted part of their assemblies: One thing more
seems to be very clear, that from the Hallel of the Jews it was, that some
ancient Christians used in the 50 days after Easter, to sing and ingemminate
Hallelujahs in their assemblies, ut autem Hal^iujah per illos solos quinqua^
ginta dies in Ecclesia cantetur, non usqucquaque observatur, etc. Epist. 120.
as a remembrance of that great Hymn which the Prince of the Church and his
Apostles sung after this supper. This St. Aug. takes notice of, but says, that
in his days those Hallelujahs used to be sung at other times also.

From all which we may discern a farther reason why they called this Sacrament
by the name of a Sacrifice; Ia isto aut^m sacrificio, gratiarum ^ctio and
commemo^atio est carnis Christi quam pro (...) obtulit. Fu^g. de side. 1 Pet.
2.5.
because they did offer unto God thanksgiving as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm.
50.^4.) which is one of the spiritual sacrifices which every Christian is
consecrated to bring unto him. It is confessedly true, that there never was any
festival instituted by any people of the world, but one part of it was a
reverend acknowledgment of God, and a thanksgiving to him for his benefits. And
there never was any solemn feast either among Jews, Persians, Greeks,
Egyptians or Romans, without some sacrifice to their Gods. Christians
therefore are not without their sacrifice also, when they keep this feast, and
such an one as is very befitting God; and which no rational man can deny to
deserve the name. L. 2. (...).
For Porphyry disputing against the eating or sacrificing of beasts unto God,
denies that thereupon any ill consequence could be grounded, as if he denied
all sacrifices to him. No says he, (...), we likewise sacrifice as well as
others, (...), only we will sacrifice according as is most meet. And there he
assigns to every Deity its proper homage and acknowledgment belonging to it;
saying, that to the great God who is (...), He above all, we sacrifice nothing
but pure thoughts, and speak not so much as a word of him. But to those that
are the offspring of God, the celestial inhabitants, (...), we give Hymns and
praises, which are the conceptions and expresses of our mind; and so he
proceeds to the more petty tributes paid to lesser Gods. According then to this
Heathen Divine, the praises of God may well pass for the most proper sacrifice;
and he makes account that there is none better but only silent adorations. A
soul breathing forth it self out of an ardent affection in holy Hymns, is more
acceptable to God then the richest gumms, or the sweetest wood that can fume
upon his Altars. But a whole soul full of pure thoughts, too great to come out
of the mouth, and more clear then to be embodied in words, is transcendent to
all oblations.

But yet I would not be so mistaken, as if I thought the Christian thanksgiving
consisted only in inward thoughts, and outward words; For there are
Eucharistical actions also whereby we perform a most delightsome sacrifice unto
God.

We must not when we come to God, appear before him empty; but we are to
consecrate and offer unto him some of our temporal goods for the relief of
those that are in want, which may cause many thanksgivings to be sent up by
them to God. 2 Cor. 9.11, 12.
It has been said before, that our whole selves ought to be offered as an
holocaust to God, and our love should be so great, as to spend our souls and
bodies in his service; now in token that we mean so to do, we must give
something that is ours unto him for to be employed to his uses. We are to give
God an earnest of our sincere and entire devotion to him, by parting with
something that we call ours, and transferring it to him. Of this the Apostle
speaks, Heb. 13.15, 16. where the serious Reader (that can stay so long as to
peruse those Scriptures which I cite) will find both praise, and likewise
communication of our goods to others, to be called sacrifices. So that the
spiritual sacrifice of our selves, and the corporal sacrifice of our goods to
him, may teach the Papists that we are sacrificers as well as they, and are
made Kings and Priests unto God. Yea they may know, that the bread and wine of
the Eucharist, is an offering (out of the stock of the whole Congregation) to
this service, according as it was in the Primitive times, Apolog. 2.
when (as Justin says) they offered bread and wine to the (...) chief Minister
of the brethren, who took it, and gave praise and glory to the Lord of the
whole world, and then made (...)) a large and prolix thanksgiving to him that
had made them worthy of such gifts. We have (...), (as Origin his phrase is) a
rational and unsmoaky sacrifice, we offer our selves, and our prayers, and our
praises, and our goods; so that if you please, we may call the table of the
Lord (...) (in Theodoret's style) a rational table, where as God provides, for
us, so we provide for him in those that are his members, and offer upon it
those sacrifices which are most befitting either him or rational creatures. And
that you may see we are engaged to this kind of offering; it is to be observed,
that the eating of the Lamb was not all the solemnity of the Passover, but
they sacrificed likewise offerings of thanksgivings in abundance, that there
might be provision for the poor. You may understand this and a difficult place
of Scripture both together. It is said (according to our translation) in Dent.
16.2. Thou shall sacrifice the Passover unto the Lord thy God, of the flock
and the herd (or sheep and Oxen) in the place which he shall choose, etc. It is
well known, that the sacrifice of the Passover was to be a Lamb ( Exodus 12.5.)
taken from the sheep or goats, and might not be of any other kind. Therefore by
(...) Oxen, or of the herd, in this place, Aben Ezra, and others, understand
the Eucharisticall sacrifices, which we find 2 Chronicles. 35.7, 9. were offered in
great abundance. Or as Abarbanel will have it, Moses speaks briefly of the
Passover (as having sufficiently told them the manner of it before) so that we
are to understand ^ to be wanting before (...) (i. e. and to be wanting before
of the flock) and thus we read them: Thou shall sacrifice the Passover to the
Lord, and sheep and oxen: whichsoever way we take them, they tell us thus much,
that they were other sacrifices to accompany the Lamb. For the Jews were bound
at the three solemn feasts, to be very liberal and bountiful, and offer
according to their abilities, that so the Levites and strangers, the Fatherless
and Widow might feast and rejoice together with them, as you may see, ver. 10,
11, 16, 17.

Now Christ at this feast having nothing else to offer besides the Lamb; he did
offer himself, which was more then if the cattle upon a thousand hills had been
burnt unto God, or all the world had been laid on its funeral pile. In this he
dealt the greatest charity to the world, and by his poverty made us rich. So
that we are the more engaged, not only by their example, but by his, to offer
up something unto God beside praises, that may supply the wants of those who
may justly look to be refreshed by us.

To conclude then this Chapter; We must remember always when we approach to the
Table of the Lord, that we are to bring hearts full of thankfulness, and mouths
full of praises, and hands full of Alms; and that we may bring all these, we
must bring our selves to be offered to him. Our hearts must flame with love,
our minds must reek with holy thoughts, our mouths must breathe forth praises
like clouds of incense, and our hands must not be lifted up with nothing in
them; but we must pay such acknowledgements unto God, that may really testify
that we and all ours are his. We are to think that we come solemnly to bless
the Lord for all his mercies, and especially this great and rich one, that he
has given his Son to die for us, and that he has purchased forgiveness,
repentance, grace and salvation by his death on such desirable terms; and we
must think likewise, that blessing of him includes in it self such good works
as will provoke others for to bless him.

If you would briefly understand therefore what the meaning of this holy Rite
is, remember, that it is a Commemoration of Christ and his death, with hearty
thanksgivings for all the benefits we receive thereby.

CHAP. III.
THere will be no such cause of joy as the former discourse has spoken of, if
we be not faithful unto God and his Son Christ. And therefore we must further
consider this action, as a Rite whereby we enter iuto Covenant with him. This
is included in our taking the bread and wine, as well as in our eating and
drinking of them; and was expressed before, when I said, we must offer our
selves to God as, the greatest act of our thanksgiving. That offering of our
selves is such a thing; that it puts us out of our own power; and besides, we
enter here into strict engagements never to resume or draw back our selves
again, never to challenge any right to have our selves in our own disposal. We
make a solemn agreement with the Lord Jesus, that he shall dwell in us, and
possess himself of all our faculties, as the sole Lord and governor of our
souls. Though this have been done once already when we were baptized, so that
we cannot reverse the deed, nor cancel the bond that is between us, yet seeing
the matter of the Covenant is always to be performed, and more than one world
depends upon it; God thinks fit to take new security of us, and strengthen our
obligations, left we think of letting the debt run on unpaid one day after
another, till we be quite bankrupts, and have nothing left whereby to discharge
it.

We are also apt to think, that we stand indebted unto God in no great sum; and
that though we should spend prodigally till the latter part of our life, yet we
should have enough to pay him, and give him very good content. Therefore it is
but necessary that we should often be remembered of our huge engagements,
presently to perform our word to him: and when we begin again to fail, and not
to keep our credit with him, it is no less necessary that he should call again
upon us, and have us enter into more solemn bonds of a stricter performance.

And truly these that know what it is to enjoy God, long for no better
entertainment from him when they come to his house and table, then that they
may be tied faster to him with new cords of his love, and that it may be made
more impossible for them to unloose themselves from his service. What is there
more in the desire of a holy soul, then to cease to be its own? what greater
pleasure does it feel, then in parting with it self? To what would it be more
engaged, then to the pleasing of him whom it heartily loves? Let me be bound
hand and foot (says such a soul) that I may never stir from him. Let me seal
to him a thousand Deeds to convey my self unto him. If he would have me sign
the Covenant with my Blood, every vein in my body shall leap to do him that
honor. But rather let him come and seat himself in my heart, and let him take
my dearest lifeblood, if it will do him any service. I accept of a
suffering-Saviour: I take him as he is, all broken and bloody. If he will have
me follow him with a Cross upon my shoulder, I refuse no conditions; behold O
Lord thy servant, do with me as seems good in thy sight.

Thus we are to address our selves to this Feast, as will be better understood
if we consider these five things:

I. If we look upon this action only under the general notion of a holy rite
which God has appointed as an act of his Worship; yet the very using of it is
an acknowledgment of him and his Religion, and an engagement of our selves unto
him as our God. He that was circumcised, was bound to observe the whole Law;
and so was he that offered sacrifice to the God of Israel at his Altar, engaged
to own him that had appointed that Worship. Just so the performing but of one
thing which God has appointed as a ceremony in the Religion of Christ, does
tie us to observe the whole Religion which he requires, who did appoint that
Rite. And you may likewise observe, That there being a mutual action in this
Sacrament, of Gods giving something, and our taking, it does express, that we
are fast bound in that Covenant, of which this action is a part. So the giving
and taking but of so small a thing as a straw, does bind persons firmly to that
thing whereof they are agreed, and which they conclude in that manner.
Stipulation (one of the strongest words which we have to signify the
confirmation of a Bargain by) was anciently made by no stronger thing, as the
very word does import, which carries a straw in its name. And so any other
thing in the World may be used to the same purpose. The giving and taking of
sixpence to strike up a contract, does lay as fast hold of a man, as ten
thousand pound in hand. Much more then, this solemn giving and taking of Bread
and Wine, being a piece of Christ's Religion, and he so represented by them,
does bind us as fast to him, as if we should repeat every word that he has
said, and profess our consent unto it. We are supposed to know the terms of
that Writing that Christ has left us, containing our duty and his promises;
and it is presumed we are willing to enjoy those promises, and so to perform
those duties; this Action then does but more solemnly conclude the agreement,
and we hereby stand engaged as strongly as if Covenants had been drawn between
us, and our hand and seal were affixed to them.

II. But then if we consider this Action as a coming to Gods Table, and
partaking of his meat, we shall presently discern that thereby we prosess our
selves of his Family, and declare to all that we are his Followers and
Retainers, and that we own the Religion of the crucified Jesus. I confess that
coming to Christian Assemblies in the first times, was an owning of Christ,
because it was very dangerous; but this Action which was in those Assemblies
performed, was a more express profession of their belief in him, and friendship
with him. For the great stumbling block of the Jews was the Cross of Christ;
and it was foolishness to the Gentiles. To declare therefore this death and
Cross of his, to eat of his dead body, and drink of his blood, was as much as
to say, I believe in this suffering-Saviour, I am a Christian, and will live
and dye in this Religion. A stranger may come unto a man's house, but the
friends only are they that sit with him at his board; and he that is not true
to him of whose bread he eats, is the worst and basest of all Enemies. The
Psalmist could put no worse character upon an enemy then this, Psalm. 41.9.
That he who put forth his hand to eat of his bread, had lifted up his heel
against him. By coming then to Gods Table, we profess our selves his familiar
friends, in whom he reposes a trust; and we can put no greater scorn upon him,
then by being false to him that does admit us to such a nearness. You may
observe therefore in Scripture these two things: First, That eating of bread
together, is spoken of as a token of friendship and agreement, as these two
places among others will satisfy you; Job 42.11, Jer. 41.1. Bread is never
wanting at any Feast; and so they expressed by it a friendly entertainment.
Whence Pythagoras gave this Lesson to his Scholars, (...). Do not break bread,
i. e. ne dirimas amici iam, never break friendship, but let it remain
inviolable. And so likewise Salt being never absent from any Meal, and placed
upon the Table, it has been used as a symbol of friendship; and to have eaten
Salt with a man, at this day, is proverbially as much as to be well acquainted
with him: which was a word as usual in ancient times among other people; (...).
Aristot. l. 8. Ethic. cap. 3.
according to that speech of Aristotle; We cannot know one another, till,
according to the Proverb, we have eaten a quantity of Salt together. The Turks
Knolles in the life of Mah^met 1.
at this day join both together; and to say, I have eaten Bread and Salt with
sueh an one, is an expression of having good acquaintance with him. All which I
but briefly touch upon, to make it more sensible to us, that this participation
of Gods bread, is a token that we are of his acquaintance, and we do tell the
World hereby, That we profess all love and friendship to him.

The second thing I would have noted, is, That Covenants (in Scripture story)
are made by eating and drinking together: For which I need produce no other
places but those in Genesis 26.30. Genesis 31.44, 46. where Isaac and Abimelech,
Jacob and Laban conclude their Compacts with a Feast. But you may add (if you
please) that in Josh. 9.14. where it is said, the people took of the victuals
of the Gibeonites, and asked not counsel at the mouth of the Lord; i. e. They
made a Covenant with them before they consulted with the holy Oracle, whether
they were what they pretended to be; for so some good Interpreters both Jewish
and Christian, expound the words, because else we cannot understand why it
should be a crime to taste whether their bread was so dry as they said (as
others think the meaning is) without going to enquire of God the lawfulness of
such a fact. It is very likely also, that from this original that phrase is
derived, of a Covenant of Salt, Numb. 18.19. 2 Chronicles. 13.5.
which in Scripture-stile signifies an everlasting and unalterable Settlement;
because such Leagues which are made with the profession of the greatest
friendship (as if men were cohabitants and familiars) ought to be held most
sacred, and religiously observed. Now this Bread and Wine in the Sacrament is
Gods, both as it is offered by us unto him, and as it is consecrated to
represent his Son Christ unto us; and therefore we by partaking of it, do
solemnly engage our selves unto, and promise our fidelity in his service, as
those that are his domestics, and desire always to remain in his familiarity.
But suppose any person should give us his very blood to drink, that we might
the more firmly be obliged to him; what could there be devised more strong to
tie our hearts together? So the conspirators with Cataline did combine and join
themselves together by drinking of their own blood, that they might be bound in
a Covenant exceeding the strength of all others which are made by eating of
common food. And so does Christ take us into his society, and bind us to him,
by giving us the representations of his own flesh and blood to eat and drink,
that so we might never think of departing from him who has admitted us to that
Food, which is as much beyond all others in its obligatory virtue, as it is in
its own proper worth and excellency.

And that you may see it more fully verified, that this eating and drinking is
a foederal rite between God and us, let it be considered.

III. As a Feast upon a Sacrifice (in which notion it is most rarely explained
by an excellent Doctor of our own) from which it will evidently appear to be
intended as a solemn profession of Christ's Religion, D. Cudworth.
and a renewal of our Covenant with God.

For the understanding of this, you must know, That Jerusalem being the Holy
City in Gods Land, Matt. 4.5. Psalm. 85 1. 1 King. 6.1. Psalm, 135.1, 2.
and the Temple being the house of God, where he dwelt; and the Priests Gods
Servants, and the Altar his Table (as was said before) there was a constant
provision brought in for the keeping of Gods house, and maintaining of his
servants. And beside those of the morning and evening, there were a great
number of occasional Sacrifices (which were his flesh) together with their meat
and drink offerings (which were his Bread and Wine) that came in to be his
Food, as the expression is, Levit. 3.11. These common Sacrifices were of three
sorts: The first were Holocausts or Burnt-offerings, so called because they
were consumed wholly upon Gods Altar by his fire, Lev. 1.9, 13
(which at first came from Heaven, and was never to go out) none eating of
them but himself. The second we may call expiatory, because they were to make
atonement, and reconcile; which were of two sorts, Sinne-offerings, and
Trespass-offerings: These the Priests did eat of (if they were not such whose
blood was carried within the holy place) as you may read in Levit. 7.7, 9.
Numb. 18.9, 10. For they being Gods servants, were to be maintained and kept in
his Family, and beside hereby did take the man's guilt (as it were) and carry it
away: Lev. 6.25, 26.
But none else were permitted to eat of it, being supposed to be in a state of
guilt, and not fit to have familiarity with God. The third sort were
Peace Offerings, which were made to God for some benefits received (which go
among the Hebrews under the name of Peace) to testify their gratitude unto
him. The fat of these offerings being burnt upon the Altar to God, ( Lev. 3.3,
4.) and one breast with a shoulder being given to the Priest, for his portion,
( Lev. 7.34.) the remainds were the owners share, that he might eat of Gods
meat, and so feast with him (if he was not in any Legal uncleanness) as you may
see Lev. 7.20.

The Examples of such sacrifices are numerous in the Scripture, not here to be
amassed together, and wrapped up in these sheets. It may suffice to note two
places which lie close together: They were sacrifices of this sort that Elkanah
offered when he went yearly unto Shiloh, 1 Samuel 1.4, 5.
giving portions ( viz. of the sacrifice) to his whole Family that went with
him, but to Hannah a double portion.

Those offerings likewise which the sons of Eli made men to abhor, were of the
same kind, 1 Samuel 2.17. and their sin consisted in these two enormities: First,
That they were not content with that portion which was assigned them by Law (
viz. the breast and shoulder) but they took what, and as much as they list (
ver. 13.) And secondly, That they took their portion before God had his, i. e.
before the fat was burnt upon the Altar ( ver. 15, 16.) a rudeness which the
Gentiles would not have been guilty of, except some belly-gods and Atheistical
gluttons. For when they would set forth the intemperance of such a man, they
could say no worse then this, Haut immolata, sacra devorat; he devours the
sacrifices before they be offered to God. This I mention, because they were not
strangers to this kind of sacrifice (no more than to the rest) but did offer
them frequently to their gods. You may take one example out of a multitude,
which expresses both this custom of eating part of the sacrifices, and likewise
their forbearance to take any part till God had his. The Egyptians (says
Herodotus) while the Sacrifices were burning, In Euterpe, (...).
did beat and knock themselves; and after they had done so, then they made a
feast of the Relics of the sacrifice. We may learn thus much by the way of
these Heathens, That God is to be served before our selves, and there is no
true joy but that which arises out of true sorrow.

Now that this eating and drinking was intended as a rite of covenanting with
that Deity to whom the Sacrifices were offered, or else as a profession that
they were in the Covenant, and did remain Gods Friends (if they were already of
the Religion) you may discern from these two places, which will lead me to that
for which all this is said. When Moses had rehearsed to the people Gods Laws (
Exodus cap. 20, 21, 22, 23.) which he gave on Mount Sinai, and then came to
strike the Covenant between God and Israel, it is said, Exodus 24.5. that Moses
sent young men ( i. e. some of the firstborn who were the Priests hitherto) to
offer Burnt-offerings and Peace Offerings of Oxen, and half of the Blood he
sprinkled on the Altar, which represented God, and the other half he sprinkled
on the people, ( ver. 6, 7, 8.) as a token of the Covenant between them: But
for completing of the Compact, the chief of the people went up nearer to God,
and saw that bright appearance, and did eat and drink, ver. 11. which sure must
be understood of their feasting upon the Peace Offerings which had been
sacrificed unto God, whereby they professed to own that Covenant he had given
to them.

Not long after, this people made to themselves other gods, and offered not
only burnt-offerings, but also peace offerings to them, Exodus 32.6. and then
sat down to eat and driuk, and rose up to play, i. e. to be wanton, and commit
uncleanness with each other. Now that this was an associating of themselves
with the Egyptian gods, we may learn from the Apostle, who reciting of this
passage, and speaking of their Idolatry, makes no mention at all of their
sacrificing to these new gods, but only of this eating, etc. which did
conclude the Ceremony, as if the Idolatry did formally consist in this, and
that hereby they did devote themselves to that strange Worship. Neither be you
Idolators, (says he, 1 Cor. 10.8.) as were some of them, as it is written, the
people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play. By which words you
may see the Apostle makes account, that this eating and drinking of the
sacrifices, was a renouncing of the Covenant of their God, and joining of
themselves to idols. Now because it was the manner (as it seems) of some of the
Corinthians, still to feast in the Idols Temples, and perhaps in the Temple of
Venus, famous in that City, which makes the Apostle add those words, ver. 8.
Neither commit fornication, as some, etc. He tells them that this was a plain
forsaking of Christ, and utterly incompatible with his Profession. For the
vouching of which assertion, he reminds them what the Sacrament of the Supper
of the Lord does import, viz. a (...), participation or communion of the Body
and Blood of Christ, ver. 16, 17. which is as much as to say, it is a
profession that we as one body, partaking of one bread, do hold communion with
Christ, and adhere unto him as our Lord and Head, and that to his Worship and
Service we do consecrate our selves. For just as Israel by eating of the
sacrifices partake of (or have communion with) the Altar, ver. 18. i. e.
profess to be of that Religion, and adhere to that way of Worship. So it is
with Christians, when they eat of the Body and Blood of the crucified Savior
which was offered for us. And therefore by a likeness of Reason he concludes,
That to partake of the Table of Devils, and eat of things sacrificed to them,
was to profess to have communion with those impure spirits, and thereby to
desecrate themselves; it being impossible for them at once to be devoted to
things so quite contrary as Christ and the Devil, ver. 20, 21.

From all which discourse we may thus reason, That this holy Sacrament is a
Feast upon the Sacrifice which Christ offered, as the Jewish Feasts were made
with the flesh of those sacrifices which they offered to God. For the Apostle
makes the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, ver. 16. parrallel to
eating of the sacrifices, ver. 18. And therefore it is a rite whereby we
solemnly addict our selves to the service and Worship of Christ, and take upon
our selves strict engagements to be faithful in that Covenant that is between
us; which is the thing that was to be proved. As Israel joined themselves to
God by feasting in his house of the Sacrifices; so we join our selves to
Christ, by feasting in the place of his Worship, and at his Table, upon the
remembrances of his body and blood. And our obligations to cleave unto him do
as much excel all other ties in their sacredness, strength and virtue, as the
Sacrifice of Christ excels the Sacrifice of a Beast, or the eating and drinking
of his Body and Blood, is beyond all participation of the meat of the ancient
Altars. Yea it is supposed that we are the friends of God before we come
hither, and that we are not in any willing uncleanness (else we should be shut
out from partaking of this offering.) And therefore our approach to his Table
is but more strongly to tie the knot, and to bind us in deeper promises, to
continue friendship with him.

If more can be said then this, I may add, that the eating of this sacrifice is
a solemn Oath, that we will be true and loyal to him. For even Heathens
themselves did use by sacrifice to bind themselves in Oaths. From whence it is
that (...) signifies that sacrifice which was slain when they made a covenant,
(...) Hom.
and (in regard of its relation to (...)) may be rendered, the Oath-sacrifice.
And (...), to cut this sacrifice (in Homers phrase) is to make a Covenant,
which it is likely may be taken from the Hebrew custom, mentioned Jer. 34.18.
And to swear (...), upon the warm intrails of the beast, was the greatest Oath
that could be made. When we lay our hands therefore upon the body of Christ
that was sacrificed for us, (and much more when we eat of it) we do solemnly
take our Oaths, that we will be his faithful foederates, and rather die then
shrink from those duties to which we bind our selves.

IV. If there be any that look upon eating and drinking of this bread and wine,
only as symbols of believing in Jesus Christ, the matter draws to the same
point; for faith is the condition of the Covenant of Grace, and comprehends in
its signification all that God requires. So some of the Ancients expound those
words, Joh. 6. ver. 54.
He that eats my flesh and, drinks my blood, has eternal life, to signify
thus much; He that is made partaker of my wisdom, through my incarnation and
sensible life among men, shall be saved. For flesh and blood (says Basil) he
calls (...), Epist. 141. ad Caesar.
all the mystery of his incarnation and conversation here in the flesh amongst
us, together with his doctrine which he has taught us, (...) etc. by which the
soul is nourished and fitted for the sight of celestial things; and therefore
eating and drinking of these must denote embracing of all Christ, so as to be
conform to him and to his doctrine. If then we take the body and blood of
Christ in this Supper represented to us, to signify the same, and eating and
drinking to be only believing, yet you may easily see to how much we are
engaged if we do really believe.

But it is manifest to me, that eating and drinking here, must comprehend more
then it does in St. John: for else we shall do nothing at the Lords Supper, but
what we might do at any other time as well. If it be only believing, and mere
spiritual eating that here is exercised, then we may feed so without this food.
And when Christ commands so frequently, Do this in remembrance of me, it would
be no more sense then if he had said, Do this, which yet you may do, without
doing this.

This eating and drinking therefore must be a profession of our faith; a
covenanting solemnly with God, and a receiving and giving of those pledges of
love, which we cannot have any where else.

V. And indeed the old Christians did so sacredly bind themselves hereby to
their Savior, that Heathens were ready to suspect them of dangerous
combinations, and such conspiracies as might prove mischievous to the
Commonwealth. From which imputation whilst Pliny does acquit them, L. 10.
Epist. 97.
he likewise instructs us for what end they met together at this feast. They
assemble themselves (says he in a Letter to Trajan the Emperor) before day
break, and sing a Hymn to Christ as if he were God, and then they do sacramento
se obstringere; bind themselves with a Sacrament or Oath, not that they will do
mischief to any, but that they will not rob or steal, nor commit adultery, nor
falsify their words, nor deny their trust, etc. And then after they have eat
together, they depart to their own homes. Of more then this they protested to
him he should never find them guilty; and this was the crime of Christians in
those first ages, to engage themselves to commit no crime; which they bound
themselves unto by this Sacrament of Christ's body and blood.

The Greek Christians at this day, Christop. Angelus, rit. Eccles. Graec.
when they take the bread or cup into their hands, make this profession; Lord I
will not give thee a kiss like Judas; but I do confess unto thee like the poor
thief, and beseech thee to remember me when thy Kingdom comes. If we do touch
the body of Christ with traitorous lips, and embrace him with a false heart, we
stain our souls with the guilt of that blood which can only wash them from all
their other sins. And therefore we must come unfeignedly to bewail our
neglects; and to settle our former resolutions of strict obedience. It is grown
even to a Proverb (as Joseph. Accosta relates) among the poor Indians that have
entertained the faith, De procur. Ind. Sal. L. 6.
that Qui eucharistiam semel susceperit, nullum amplius crimen debet
committere: He must never be guilty more of any crime who has once received
the Eucharist. And if they chance to commit any, they bewail it with such a
sorrow and compunction, that (he says) he has not found such faith no not in
Israel. But it would be very sad if we should be sent to school as far as
India. There are, I make no doubt, many pious souls among our selves, that look
upon it as a blessed opportunity to knit their hearts in greater love to God,
and that are more afflicted for an evil thought after such engagements, then
other are for a base and unworthy action.

Whenever therefore we come to celebrate the memory of Christ's death in this
manner, we must remember with our selves, that we are assembled for to renew
our baptismal vow and league; and in the devoutest manner to addict our selves
to a more constant love and service of the Lord Jesus, We must look upon this
feast to which we are admitted, as a disclaiming of all enmity to him, and a
profession of our continuing a hearty friendship, so as never to do any hostile
act against him. And thence indeed it is called a Sacrament (according to
Tertullian and others with him) because we here take an Oath to continue
Christ's faithful Soldiers, and never to do any thing against his Crown and
dignity as long as there remains any breath in our bodies. We do repeat our
Oath of Allegiance, and swear fealty again to him, or (as we ordinarily speak)
we take the Sacrament upon it, that we will be Christ's faithful servants and
Soldiers, against the Devil, World and Flesh, and never fly from his service.

Every act of sin then after such promises, is not only treason, but perjury;
not only the breaking of our faith, but of our Oath; yea not only the
violation of a simple Oath, but of Oath upon Oath; which we ought more to
dread, then we do to break our bones.

We esteem it an impiety of a high nature, for a Minister to give a cup of
poison into a man's hand instead of the blood of Christ; and we do deservedly
abhor that Priest that poisoned Pope Victor the 3d. Venenum sub specie
sacramenti dedit, vertens calicem vitae in calicem mortis.
with the Sacrament, and him that poisoned Henry the 7th. Emp. turning (as
Nauclerus his phrase is) the cup of life into the cup of death. But whilst our
hearts swell in indignation at such a crime, let us consider with our selves,
what a treasonable act it is, to poison our souls with our own hands, and by a
base treachery to God, to swallow down curses and woes into our selves. Better
were it for us to be choked with the bread of life, or to feel the venom of
Asps boiling in our veins after the holy cup, then to take an Oath which we
take small care to keep; then to go on in a course of sin, after such sacred
professions of our duty and service unto Christ. We are amazed to hear that men
can touch the Gospels before a Magistrate, and kiss the book, or lift up their
hand to Heaven, and yet make good never a word that they swear. We are apt to
think, that either these men have no souls, or that they do not value them at
the price of a rotten nut. O let our very flesh then tremble to think, that we
should lay our hand upon the body of Christ, and take it into our very mouths,
and solemnly swear unto him, and yet not be faithful in his Covenant, nor
heartily endeavor to perform our promises unto him. For there is no forsworn
person has such a black soul, as he whose soul is fouled even by the blood of
Christ himself, which washes the souls of others. The world cannot but shrink
at the thoughts of that fearful act of one of the Popes, who making a League
with Caesar and the French King, divided the bread of the Sacrament into three
parts, with this saying (scarce tolerable) As the holy Trinity is but one God,
so let the union endure between us three confederates; and yet he was the first
that broke it and started from the agreement. Far be it from us then after this
action wherein we join our selves to God, and unite our hearts to fear his
Name, and become as it were one with him, to rescind our Covenants, or stand
again at terms of defiance. But let us have a care to observe this Vow far
more religiously then we do an Oath to any mortal man, which yet no person of
credit and conscience would break for all the world.

CHAP. IV.
TO all those that are thus faithfully in Covenant with him, this Sacrament is
a further sign and seal of remission of sin.

For the Law of Covenants does require, that where one party does profess
friendship, and engage to fidelity; the other person in the agreement should
make assurance of his love, and confirm his promises. And therefore when we
come with hearts full of love to renew our friendship with God, we may believe
that he does embrace us also with the dearest affection, and gives us greater
testimonies that he has cancelled all the bonds wherein we stood indebted to
him: Bonds able to break the whole world, if payment were exacted; Debts which
all men and Angels cannot possibly discharge; which yet he is so willing to
acquit us of, that he has appointed this holy action for that end, that we may
have more pledges of his love, and more assurance that we are not bound over to
eternal punishment. Well may we run into the arms of Christ where we expect to
receive such favors. It is no wonder if we be forward to tie our selves fast
to God (as I said in the last Chapter) when he binds himself as fast to us. We
need not stand so much upon it to promise even to die for him, when it is but
the way to life. We may be glad to lie in the wounds of Christ, when we find a
cure there for our sins. A crucified Savior should be most dear unto us, and
we should most joyfully kiss his cross, seeing we hope thereby to have our
iniquities crossed out, and stand no longer upon our account.

Methinks all that hear of such a Covenant of Grace should be desirous to enter
into it (and so they would if they had not as trifling conceits of the evil of
sin, as they have of the worth of their souls:) And all that are in that
Covenant should be glad of an opportunity to reiterate it, that they may have
stronger grounds whereon to hope for pardon. And it is to be acknowledged to
the singular mercy of God, that we can never come to profess any love to him,
but he will return back a great deal more to us; and that when we give thanks
to him, he will give us more cause to thank him.

Now for the full clearing of this thing, I shall propound but these three
considerations:

I. That our Savior in the institution of this Sacrament, does tell us, what
was a great end of it, when he says, M^th. 26.28. Luk 22.20.
This cup is the new Testament in my blood; or this is my blood of the new
Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins. In which speech
you must note, that the word This, does stand for the action of giving and
receiving, not for that which is given and received in and by it: For the Cup
or the Blood cannot be a Testament or Covenant, but the giving and receiving of
the cup or blood is; and therefore by This is the new Testament, etc. must be
meant, this action is a Covenant between you and me, made in the blood of the
Lamb for the forgiveness of your sins.

The Doing of this does necessarily presuppose a Covenant of Grace which God
has made, and which we own in Christ's blood; but besides, it does import a
profession (both on Gods part, and on ours who do receive) of performing and
making good that which we are respectively bound unto: so that God does there
tender all that which he promises in the Gospel comwe by receiving do bind our
selves (as you have seen) to all the Gospel, and mands. Now this is the great
thing that God promises in his Covenant, I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness; and their sins, and their iniquities will I remember no more.

This Action therefore is appointed by him, not only to be a symbol of his
sufferings which did ratify the Covenant of forgiveness, but to be an
exhibition of himself, for to put us in possession of the great thing purchased
by his blood, which was pardon to all penitent sinners.

The blood of the Paschal Lamb (as Chrysostom observes) was shed (...), In
Matthew. 26.
for the saving of the firstborn of Israel, but Christ's blood (who is our
Passover) was shed for the remission of the sin (...), of the whole world. Now
though the shedding of the blood, and sprinkling of it on the door posts, were
the cause of the deliverance; yet their eating of the Lamb was that which did
entitle them to it, and gave them a right to that salvation. So though the
blood of Jesus shed upon the tree be that which procures the pardon, and be the
price of our redemption; yet that remission is solemnly exhibited and given
unto us, or (as we speak) applied to our persons, by the eating of this bread,
and drinking of this cup, which are as effectual as Deed or Instrument for the
conveying of this mercy unto us. We may see this well explained to our hands by
an ancient Author. The Sacrament (says Bernard) is a sacred sign or secret,
Sermon. de Coena.
as may be illustrated by a common example. If I give a Ring to a friend, it
has no other significancy, but that I love him: but if I give him a Ring, ad
investiendum de haereditate aliqua, thereby to invest him in the right of some
inheritance, then it is both a Ring and a sign also. In like manner, though
Bread and Wine set before us, do denote nothing more then the kindness of a
friend that would refresh us; yet given and taken as a religious rite, and in
token of a Covenant, they are turned into another thing, and are both Bread and
Wine, and likewise the instrument of a conveyance. And this is the change which
the Ancients mention of the Bread and Wine into the body and blood of Christ: a
change, not in the substance, but in the accidents; not in their nature, but in
their use; not in any natural quality, but in their significancy, application
and divine efficacy. As when the wax is imprinted and made a seal, or silver
stamped and made a coin, they remain the same in substance, and yet are changed
in regard of their use and value also. So it is with the bread and wine when
they are offered unto God, and delivered by him again to us, and received as a
representation of the Lord Jesus: they continue what they were, if we look
only at their matter; but are changed by Gods appointment into divine things,
if we respect the end to which they are applied, which is to make over to us
the blessing of the Covenant, viz. remission of sins.

This is all that Theodoret means by his (...) or transmutation, and Cyril by
his (...), change of one thing into another; and Nyssen by his (...),
translation; or Theophylact by his great word (...), transelementation. For
that this last word does not amount to a change of one substance into another,
we may be clearly satisfied from himself; who as he says, (...).
the bread is transelementated into Christ's body; so likewise affirms, that we
are transelementated into Christ. Now as by this later expression, he can
intend no more but our mystical incorporation with him, so by the former
nothing else is to be understood, but the conversion of the bread to no other
use, so that in effect it is made the body of Christ.

In short; he that has the picture of a King in his Chamber, has but a bare
sign which may make him think of him, and no more: but he that has the Kings
great Seal, which confirms him in the possession of all the land he injoyes,
has his picture and something else that comes along with it, which instates
him in a real good. And though the wax affixed to the writing be the same for
substance with that which is in a man's shop, yet for virtue (as it is made use
of) it is much different, and far better then all the wax that a whole County
can afford. Even so it is in this case before us; Bread broken and Wine poured
out, are but bare signs of Christ's sufferings, if we consider them nakedly in
themselves: but if we look on them as a foederal rite, and as they are given to
us, and eaten and drunken by us in remembrance of the death of Christ, so they
are seals and further confirmations of Gods great love toward us. And though
they are still the same for substance, with the most common Bread and Wine
which we use at our Meals; yet in regard of the use to which now they are
converted, they become Sacred and of great virtue to convey unto us the things
expressed in the Covenant, which are of more worth then all the World.

II. It is further manifest that we are hereby confirmed in the state of pardon
and forgiveness, because we do here put forth the most solemn act of Charity
and Forgiveness to all our enemies. For it is a Feast of Love (as you shall see
afterward) and this is the very condition upon which our forgiveness depends,
that we forgive others; Matt. 6.14, 15.
and therefore when we here pray for all men, and put away all enmity out of
our hearts, never to return any more, God is engaged to express himself to us
as a friend, and to let fall all differences that have been between him and us.
I know that we are never to harbor any hatred in our hearts, and that we
cannot pray successfully at any time, unless we lift up pure hands without
wrath; and I likewise wish the Doctrines of Love were most frequently and
severely pressed and practiced; but yet there is no time when we do more
narrowly search our selves to find out the relics of that sour leaven, and
when we are more powerfully moved to extinguish even the least spark or seeds
of fire that are in our souls, then when we consider Christ's death, and
remember how he prayed for his Enemies upon the Cross. And therefore I
conceive, that upon this account, the Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood, may
be a means of assuring our pardon, and strengthening of our title to
Forgiveness. But notwithstanding I consider with my self, that this duty of
pardoning others, is not so peculiar to this Sacrament, but that it may, and
must be done (as I said) at all other times; and for that cause I shall pass it
by, and proceed to that which I would have most of all observed, for the
understanding of this part of my Discourse, and that is this:

III. This eating and drinking is a feast upon a sin-offering, and therefore is
a greater pledge of remission of sin. That you may conceive of this aright, it
must be remembered, That though the people of Israel used to feast upon their
peace offerings which were made at the Altar (as has been said already) yet
they were not admitted to eat of any else. The whole Burnt-offerings indeed had
Peace Offerings attending always upon them; and so they did partake of the
Altar, when they were offered, by eating of the latter; but of the former none
tasted but God himself. The Offerings for sin (as you have seen) were the
portion of the Priests, and the people were excluded from them, unless you will
say that they eat by them as their substitutes and mediators: But now you must
further note, That though the Priests were to eat of the sin-offering for
particular persons; yet of the sacrifice made for the sin of the whole
Congregation, whose blood was carried into the holy place; the Priests
themselves might not eat (and so consequently nor the people by them) but they
were to burn its flesh without the Camp. And whether it were upon the day of
general atonement, ( Lev. 16.27.) or at any other time when the whole
Congregation had committed a sin through ignorance ( Lev. 4.13.21. Lev. 6.30.)
that an offering was to be made for them; they were not permitted to have the
least share of it. Now Christ made his soul an offering for sin, Isa. 53.10.
and such an offering, that with his blood he entered into the holy place, and
suffered without the Camp, and therefore was most illustriously set forth by
that sacrifice, which was for the whole Congregation. According then to the
Law, none was to feed upon the Sacrifice; and yet our Lord has indulged unto
us the privilege of feasting upon this great Sacrifice of Propitiation;
according as the very words of the Institution of this Sacrament do intimate,
when our Savior says, Mark 14.24.
This is the blood of the New Testament which is shed for many, i. e. which is
like to the Sacrifice on the great Day of Atonement, which was not made for one
person, but for the whole Congregation; and of this I give you leave to drink.
This was a favor never granted to the World before; and besides what the Law
of Moses speaks, it is remarkable what is delivered by Porphyry, as the sense
of all the Heathen Divines in the World, L. 2. (...).
(...). All Divines consent in this, That it is not lawful to touch so much as
a bit of those Sacrifices which are for the averting of wrath. Though it was
never lawful (you know) to eat the blood of any Sacrifice, whether
Peace Offering, or other (but it was to be poured out at the Altar) and though
the flesh of those that were offered for sin, by the Laws of all people, were
not to be tasted; yet we may drink the blood of the Sacrifice, yea of this
great Sacrifice for all the people, and we may eat the flesh of it by the
command of our Savior. This things sure must contain in it some great mystery:
for the Apostle seems to take notice of it, when he says, Heb. 13.10. We have
an Altar whereof they have no right to eat which serve the Tabernacle, etc.
Altar in this place is by a Metonymie put for a Sacrifice, and the sense of the
Apostles discourse in that and the following verses is this: Go out of the
Synagogue, and never meddle with the Jewish Religion; though you may endure
persecution by them, as Christ did; for you enjoy this special privilege, of
eating of the sacrifice of Christ which was made for sin without the Gate,
and whose Blood was carried into the holy place, a thing which no Jew could
ever have any right unto, in those sinne-offerings that were made among them.
The true intent of this grant which Christ has made us, contrary to the manner
of all the World, may be to show our union with his Sacrifice, and that the
righteousness of it is as truly imputed to us, as if we could have made
satisfaction our selves. And (as the Apostle says, Act. 13.39.) it shows that
we are justified by him from all those things which we could not be justified
from by the Law of Moses. This difference therefore is remarkable between the
legal Sacrifices and this representation of Christ's sacrifice: In them was made
(...) ( Heb. 10.3.) a commemoration of sin every year, they were a plain
confession of sin, that it remained still in force, and that they could not
take it away, else they needed not to have been repeated; and so St.
Chrysostom says very elegantly, (...). Hom. 17. in Hebr.
The Legal Saerifices were rather Accusations then expiations; a confession of
their weakness, rather then a profession of their strength, because, as the
Apostle says, they were a remembrance that sin still was in power. But this
sacrifice of which we partake, is an (...), a commemoration of the remission of
sins; a remembrance that it is quite taken away, and has quite lost all its
strength; and so seeing Christ has made a perfect satisfaction, though they
might not eat, yet we may, of the sacrifice of Expiation. They might not,
because sin was acknowledged thereby to remain; we may, because by Christ's
offering to make expiation, it is abolished, and utterly destroyed, so as to
have no force to oblige us unto punishment. And if that be true which is
delivered in Pirke Eliezer and other books, Cap. 29.
that Abraham was circumcised on the day of expiation, ( Genesis 17.26.) and that
this day was a remembrance of the Covenant of Circumcision, then it is still
more clear, that only by the new Covenant forgiveness could be obtained, for
the greatest of their Sacrifices (according to the Apostle) made a remembrance
of sins, and not of the forgiveness of them.

To shut up this then, you may thus take a very brief sum of it. Before the
flood they only offered Holocausts or whole burnt offerings, (for then they
eat no flesh:) After the flood they sacrificed Peace Offerings also for mercies
which they received; and these they all eat of. But we read of no sin-offering
till the Law was given; and those the Priests only eat of, but not of all.
Till the Gospel came, never did any eat of a sin-offering that was carried
within the vail to reconcile withal; but now both Priest and People partake of
it. Rev. 1.6.
We are all made Priests unto God in this regard, that as the Priests of old
had the favor to eat of the body and so have all the people of God now, by
communicating of Sin Offerings, blood of Christ, who offered up himself unto
God for us. And it must be added, 1 Pet. 2.9.
that we are more then Priests, even Kings and Priests, or a Royal Priesthood,
for there is nothing denied unto us, and we have power to eat of that which the
High Priest himself might not taste of, which is the Sacrifice of general
Atonement, whose flesh was burnt without the Camp. And if we well consider, we
shall see that they had no reason to feast upon it, seeing the guilt did still
remain which their sacrifice could not remove; but that we have, because our
offering for sin has made a complete expiation, and given us the greatest
ground of joy and peace. Now by our eating of it, we must needs be concluded to
partake even of that Altar, and so to have remission of sin.

To draw then the Chapter to a Conclusion; If we take a review of what has
been said in this and the foregoing Discourse, we may be sufficiently informed
what Divines mean when they say, That the Sacrament is a Seal of the Covenant
of Grace. We set our Seal to it, as we give up our selves to God; and God sets
his Seal again to it, by delivering the body and blood of his Son to us. The
death of Christ there represented, and communicated to us, does seal to us
pardon of our sin, and all blessings; if we do heartily set our seal to the
counterpart, and by taking and receiving Christ under these signs, promise and
engage most firmly to lead a life according to his Will revealed to us. God
seals when he gives; and we seal when we receive. If we mean as really as he
does, then we have a right to all things specified in the Covenant. By which
you may discern, that it is not a seal that we are pardoned, and our sins are
forgiven; but that God remains firm in his purposes of Grace, and if we do so
too in our purposes of obedience, we may thence conclude that we are pardoned.
Our assurance then of our particular pardon, is a thing that results from
another act of ours, which is a serious comparing of our seal and Gods
together, or a reflecting upon what we and God have done. When we know our own
sincerity and heartiness in our profession, as we are assured of Gods reality
and truth in what he promises, then we may conclude well of our selves, and
rest assured of a pardon.

Yet our pardon is not sealed so certainly as God seals the Covenant, because
the certainty that we have in our selves of our being pardoned, relies upon a
thing far more dubious then the certainty we have that God will pardon. Our
judgment concerning our selves, is only an humane act grounded upon the true
knowledge of our selves, whereas our belief of the promise, is a divine faith,
grounded upon the word of God to which he sets his seal; and therefore the
conclusion we make (which still follows the weaker part) or the assurance we
attain of our being pardoned, can be only an act of humane faith: It can never
be so sure as one of the premises is, unless we could be as sure that we say
true of our selves, as that God says true of himself. If it were as certain
that I believe, as it is that God will pardon all that believe, then the
Conclusion would be as certain as either, that therefore I am pardoned. But
seeing the first Proposition is grounded on a fallible judgment (and it is
possible I may deceive my self) therefore I cannot make a conclusion of equal
certainty with the second proposition, but, That I am pardoned, will be no
stronger then this, That I believe. Yet notwithstanding, if a man find no cause
to suspect his own reality, he may have a belief of his pardon free from
doubting, and may rest well satisfied that he is in a good estate, because
nothing appears to the contrary, but that he sincerely does the Will of Christ.
Though he attains unto this persuasion not by a direct, but a reflex act of
faith, i. e. not merely by a belief of Gods Word, (which no where says that I
am pardoned) but by a serious examination of himself according to the tenor of
the Word; yet seeing he discerns a conformity between himself and it, he may
have a very good and strong (though not infallible) assurance that his sins
are blotted out, and shall not be imputed to him.

Whenever then we approach to the Lords Table, we should come with a belief,
that God makes over unto us the greatest blessings, if we receive them as he
requires. Now all that he requires is, That we would love and obey him (as we
said in the former Chapter;) when we heartily engage to this, we have hereby a
conveyance made to us of all that Heaven contains, which is included in this
phrase, forgiveness of sin. For you may observe that in Scripture-stile, the
taking away of Gods Wrath is the doing of some favor. His kindnesses are not
mere negatives or removals of evil; but when he forgives sin, and inflicts
not the punishment, he conferres the contrary blessing, and restores us to the
inheritance.

CHAP. V.
THE distance being taken away between God and us, this Sacrament must be
considered as a means of our nearer union with our Lord Christ. He does not
only embrace us when we come to his Table, but he likewise knits and joins us
to himself. He not only ties us with Cords of Love, and binds us to his
service by favors and blessings conferred on us; but in some sort he makes us
one with him, and takes us into a nearer conjunction then before we enjoyed.
And who would not desire to be infolded in his arms? Who would not repose
himself in his bosom? but who durst have presumed to entertain a thought of
being married unto him, and becoming one with him? And yet who would refuse
such a favor now that it is offered to us, but they that neither know him, nor
themselves?

This Covenant into which we enter, is a Marriage-Covenant, and our Lord
promises to be as a Husband to us, and we choose him as the best beloved of our
souls. It is none of the common friendships which we contract with him by
eating and drinking at his Table, but the rarest and highest that can be
imagined; and we are to look upon this as a Marriage Feast. What this union
then with Christ is, it need not be disputed; we may be sure that it is such an
one as is between a man and his wise, the Vine and the Branches, the Head and
the Members, the Building and the Foundation, as hereafter will more fully
appear) yea far beyond all sorts of union, whether moral, natural or
artificial, which the world affords example of. That which I am to show, is,
That by these Sacramental Pledges of his Love, and this communion with Christ
our Lord, we are faster tied unto him, and the Ligaments are made more strong
and indissoluble between us. This will be manifest upon these considerations:

I. Seeing we do after a sort eat Christ's flesh, and drink his Blood, we must
needs thereby be incorporated further with him. I dispute not now in what sense
we eat and drink his body and blood; but so far as we grant that we do that, so
far the other is likewise done. Our union is of the same kind and degree with
our communion and participation. And therefore when the Apostle speaks of a
communion with them, 1 Cor. 10.16. that adhaesion and cleaving to Christ,
signifies, That in some sort we are made one with him. So Chrysostom observes,
That the Apostle uses not the word (...), which is participation, but (...),
Communion, because he would show the near conjunction that is between us, and
that we are knit and united to him by this partaking of him. So likewise
Oecumenius upon the place observes, That Christ's blood uniteth us to him as our
Head, (...), by our receiving of it. And indeed as it is contrary to all
analogy of speech, to call the Bread and Wine by the Name of Christ's Body and
Blood, if they be not at all so; in like manner it is incongruous to use the
phrase of eating and drinking, if there be no union between us and that which
we eat and drink.

II. Faith and Love bearing a great part in this holy action, and Christ being
by them embraced, it must needs be a means of our nearer union. For union (you
know) begins in our consent unto him; and therefore the stronger that grows,
and with the greater dearness of affection that is expressed; the stronger and
closer our union to him becomes. Now Faith and Love (which are our consent)
receive here a great increase of strength, by the most intense operation of
them, which is apt to perfect and complete them. No man comes aright hither,
that does not from the bottom of his heart (as you have seen) put himself into
the will of Christ to be moved and governed at his pleasure. He must run into
Christ's heart, to have no motion but according as that beats, so that his whole
life should be put to a pulse answering to the heart of Christ. And so Cyril
brings in Christ calling upon men, and saying, I am the bread of life; (...),
Hom. in mist. Caen.
take me in as a leaven to diffuse it self through your whole mass. Be you even
leavened with me, that every bit of you may taste of me. This can be effected
by nothing else but a hearty conjunction of our wills with Christ's. We must put
our selves wholly out of our own power, as the wife does, when she gives her
self to her husband; and the more we can get out of our selves, so as to have
no proper will of our own, the more we become one with him. When we feel not
our selves to be any thing at all, nor to have any interest different from that
of his, then we and he are made perfectly one, or rather we are not, but he is
All. Now this abolition of propriety, and self, is much promoted by the
remembrance of Christ's death and his unvaluable love, whereby we become dead,
and are even snatched and ravished from our selves. Whatsoever other unions
there may be, they all wait and attend upon this which lays the foundation of
them. Yea by this faith and love our hearts are more enlarged, the vessels of
our souls are rendered more capable, and the Temple of Christ is much more
amplified to receive more of Gods presence. And that is the next thing.

III. The holy Spirit is here conferred on us in larger measures, which is the
very bond and ligament that ties us to him. For this union is not only such a
moral union as is between husband and wife (which is made by love) or between
King and Subjects (which is made by Laws) but such a natural union as is
between head and members, the vine and branches, which is made by one spirit or
life dwelling in the whole.

For the understanding of this (which I shall insist on longer then therest)
you must consider these things;

1. That our union with Christ is set forth by many things in Scripture, or in
St. Chrysostom's phrase, (...), He unites us to himself after many patterns. I
think there is not a better collection of them, then we meet with in him. He is
the head (faith he) we are the body; Hom. 8. in 1. ad Cor.
He is the foundation, we are the building; He is the vine, we are the
branches; He is the bridegroom, we are the bride; He is the sheepherd, we are
the sheep; He is the way, we are the travelers; We are the Temple, and he is
the inhabitant; He is the firstborn, we his brethren; He is the Heir, we the
coheirs: He is the life, we are the living, etc. all these thing (...), do show
an union, and such an one that will not admit the least thing to come between
them.

2. Observe, that the highest and closest union is that which is made by one
spirit and life moving in the whole. And therefore I take notice that the
Scripture delights most frequently to use the two first examples of a body, and
a building, and those that are nearest to these. Now because a building has no
life, but yet by its firmness and strength does notably set forth the firmness
of the union that is between Christ and his people; therefore the Apostle puts
both these together, and calls Christ a living stone, and those that come to
him, lively or living stones, which are built up a spiritual house or temple,
where they offer spiritual sacrifices unto God, 1 Pet. 2.4, 5. That union
therefore is most perfect which is made by life, though others may be of great
est strength, and therefore the Apostle applies it even to things without life,
that he might the better show, that the union between Christ and his members by
one life, is in strength more like the solidness of a Temple then any other
thing, whose parts are so cemented as that they would last as long as the world.

3. We must observe, That things at the greatest distance may be united by one
spirit of life actuating them both, and so may Christ and we, though we enjoy
not his bodily presence. It is truly noted by a most Rev. A. usher.
Person, that the formal reason of the union that is made between the parts of
our body, consists not in their continuity and touching of each other, but in
the animation of them by one and the same spirit which ties them all together.
If the spirit withdraw it self from any part so that it be mortified, it
presently remains as if it were not of the body, though its parts still touch
the next member to it. And so we see in trees, if any branch be deprived of the
vegetative spirit, it drops from the tree as now no more belonging to it. On
the other side, you see the toes have an union with the head (though at a
distance) not only by the intervening of many parts that reach from them unto
it, but by the soul that is present in the farthest member, and gives the head
as speedy notice of what is done in the remotest part, as if it were the next
door to the brain. And this it does without the assistance of the neighboring
parts that should whisper the grief of the toes from one to the other till the
head hear, but without the least trouble to any of them, which do not feel
their pain. If you should suppose therefore our body to be as high as the
Heavens, and the head of it to touch the throne of God, and the feet to stand
upon his footstool the earth, no sooner could the head think of moving a toe,
but presently it would stir; and no sooner could any pain befall the most
distant part, then the head would be advised of it. Which must be by virtue of
that spirit which is conceived alike present to every part, and therefore that
must be taken likewise to be the reason of that union which is among them all.
Just so may you apprehend the union to be between Christ our head, and us his
members; Although in regard of his corporal presence he be in the Heavens,
which must receive him until the time of the restitution of all things, Act.
3.21. yet he is here with us always, even to the end of the world ( Mat.
28.20.) in regard of his holy Spirit working in us. By this he is sensible of
all our needs, and by the vital influences of it in every part, he joins the
whole body fitly together, so that he and it make one Christ, according as the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 12.12. As the body is one, and has many members, and all
the members of tha^ one body, being many, are one body, so also is Christ. And
that this union is wrought by the Spirit (which every true Christian has
dwelling in him, Cor. 6. 7. Romans 8.9.) the next verse ( ver. 13.) will tell
you, we are all baptized into one body by one spirit, etc. Which will lead me
to the fourth thing for which all this was said.

4. We receive of this Spirit when we worthily communicate at the Supper of the
Lord, according as the Apostle in that 13th. verse is thought to say, We have
been all made to drink into one spirit, i. e. we have all reason to agree well
together, for there is but one spirit that animates the whole body of us, which
we receive at the Table of the Lord when we drink the cup of blessing. One
Christian does not drink out of the same cup a spirit of peace, and another
Christian a spirit of contention; but as Chrysostom expounds it, (...), etc.
We all come to be initiated in the same secrets, we all enjoy the same Table,
and though he does not say, (as it follows in him) that we eat the same body
and drink the same blood, yet since he makes mention of the spirit, he says
both. For in both we are watered with one and the same spirit, even as trees
(says he) are watered out of one and the same fountain. V. Ch ysost. and
Theoph^l.
Or if we understand the Apostles words of the spirit received ((...)) after
Baptism, but ((...)) before the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, whereby he
further waters (so the word (...) is used, 1 Cor. 3.6, 7, 8.) that which he
has planted; yet still it will be true, that at this time good Christians do
receive larger irrigations from that fountain of life, that they may shoot up
to a greater height, and bring forth more fruit. For this spirit is always
needful, being that which maintains our life, and it is given in the use of
those means that God has instiruted for increase in grace, of which means this
holy feast being one of the chief, that lifegiving spirit must be conceived to
lay faster hold of us, and knit us more unto our head. It is the vis vicaria of
the Lord Jesus, that power which supplies his place here in the world, by which
he is present to our souls. Now when shall we conceive it more present, then
when we remember him whose spirit it is, and when he does exhibit himself unto
us under these shadows of bread and wine? These are tokens of his presence, and
represent him to us; the spirit is that whereby he is present, and therefore
here it must be again conferred on us. Here it does take a stronger seizure of
us; here it possesses it self more fully of all our faculties; here it gives us
more sensible touches from our head, and makes us feel more vital influences
descending thence unto us; and so (it being the bond of union) must needs
strengthen and confirm us in an inseparable conjunction with him. Christ does
not descend locally unto us that we may feed on him; but as the Sun touches us
by his beams without removing out of its sphaere, so Christ comes down upon us
by the power of the holy Ghost, moving by its heavenly virtue in our hearts,
though he remain above. And this virtue coming from our Head the man Christ
Jesus, it does both quicken us to his service, and tie us to him, and likewise
we are said to partake of his body and blood, because we sensibly feel the
virtue and efficacy of them in our selves.

And do not wonder that I say we are more strongly united to Christ hereby; for
unson is not to be conceved without all latitude, but to be looked on as
capable of increase or diminution, and as that which may grow loose and slack,
or be made more perfect and compact. As it is with the foul and body, so it is
between Christ and his members. Though the soul be not quite unloosed from the
body, yet by sickness the bonds may become rotten, or by fasting they may grow
weak and feeble, so that it may have but a slender hold of its companion, and a
little violence may snap them asunder. Even so though our souls be tied to
Christ, yet by our daily infirmities, or the frequent incursions of our
enemies, or by long abstaining from this holy food, and other negligences, we
shall find a kind of looseness in our souls, and that we are going off from
Christ, and tending to a dissolution, unless we gird up the loins of our mind,
and be vigilant and sober, watching unto all holy duties. And therefore as in
the former case we must betake our selves to our physic, and food, and good
exercise for the making the bonds sound and strong; so in this we must have
recourse to the holy feast we are speaking of (which is both meat and medicine)
and we must stir up the grace that is in us, and beg more of the Spirit of God
that may strengthen the things that remain and are ready to die.

To receive the Spirit not by measure, is the privilege of none but our head.
We that receive from his fullness, have not our portion all at once, Phil. 1.19.
but must daily look for a supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ. And so the
Apostle says, Romans 1.17.
The righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith; and we must grow up
into him in all things which is the head, even Christ. Which shows that we may
be made one with him in a more excellent manner then when we were first born,
because the Spirit of Christ grows unto a greater strength within us, as we
receive more of heavenly nutriment into our souls.

And this is all that is meant by the real presence of Christ in this
Sacrament, which the Church speaks of and believes; as it is one reason
likewise of the change which is so much noised, because by his power these
things become effectual to so great purposes, when they are holily received.
Our Lord does call these signs by the name of the things they signify, because
in a spiritual manner his body and blood are present to us, viz. by the
communication of that to us which they did purchase for us. From the sacred
humanity of Christ, life and spirit is derived unto us, as motion is from the
head unto the members. And the power of the Godhead does diffuse the virtue or
operation of the humane nature, to the enlivening the hearts of men that
rightly receive the Sacramental pledges. Manna is called spiritual bread, and
water that came out of the rock is named spiritual dirnk, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4.
and the rock is said to be Christ, because they did signify him, and were
tokens of his presence; and therefore much more may this bread and wine be
called his body and blood, and spoken of as if they were himself, because they
do more lively represent him, and he had annexed his presence more powerfully
to them. Or as one of the Ancients says, they are called his body and blood,
not because they are properly so, sed quod in se mysterium corporis ejus and
sanguinis contineant, but because they contain in them the mystery of his body
and blood.

And this (as I said) is all the change that we are to understand in them,
according as Theodoret does excellently express it: (...). Dialog. 1.
Christ (says he) calls them by the name of the things they represent, not
changing the nature, but adding grace unto the nature. And what that grace is I
have already told you in this Chapter. So that the real presence is not to be
sought in the bread and wine, but in those that receive them, according as
Learned Hooker speaks. For Christ says first, Take and eat; and then after
that, This is my body. Before we take and eat, it is not the body of Christ
unto us; but when we take and eat as we ought, then he gives us his whole self,
and puts us into possession of all such faving graces as his facrificed body
can yield, and our fouls do then need. The change is in our souls, and not in
the Sacrament; we are though not Transubstantiated into another body, yet
Metamorphosed and transformed into another likeness, by the offering up of our
bodies to God, which is a piece of this service, Romans 12.1, 2. And so some
observe that all other meat is received as it is in it self, and no otherwise;
but this meat is diverse, as it is received. Other meat affects and alters
the taste, but here the taste alters the meat. For if it be worthily
received, it is the body and blood of Christ; if unworthily, it is but bare
bread and wine.

But yet this must be cautiously understood when we thus speak; for his
presence is with the bread, though not in it. Though it be only in us, yet it
comes with it unto us if we will receive him; because else we shall not know
how unworthy persons are said to be guilty of his body and blood, 1 Cor. 11.27.
if he be not present with his body and blood to work in men's souls.

This likewise is to be further observed for the better under standing of it;
that the Devil who loves to imitate God, (that he may the better cozen and
cheat) does seldom manifest his power to any great purpose, but when he is
called by some of his own ceremonies and sacraments that he has appointed.
This does but tell us that Christ is then most powerfully present, when we use
his rites which he has instituted and hallowed as special remembrances of his
love, and testimonies of our love unto him. So that we may come hither, and
expect that we shall feel more at such a time, and in the use of such means,
then at or in others, because he has made them his body and blood in such sort
as I have declared.

Other union then this (by Christ's spirit) I know no use of, though we should
believe that which we do not understand. I can conceive great things concerning
the power of Christ's humane nature; and it is not for us to tell how far it may
extend its influences through the inhabitation of the Deity. That it is
brighter then the Sun, Saint Paul saw when the Lord appeared to him, Acts
26.13. And as the Sun we see, communicates his beams a vast way, and twists it
self about us by silver threads of light, though seated in the Heavens; so may
we conceive that the sacred humanity of Christ does tie us to it self by cords
of love, and now embrace us in its outstretched arms after a more affectionate
manner, when we come to remember him. But to what purposes this should serve, I
do not well understand, and without the Spirit of Christ dwelling in us, the
flesh can profit nothing at all though never so glorious; and therefore I lay
aside such thoughts, and content my self to know, that they that are joined (or
cleave) to the Lord, 1 Cor. 6.17.
are one spirit.

5. Now from this secret union that is here made between Christ and our
persons, it comes to pass that this Sacrament has been accounted an earnest
and pledge of the resurrection. For nothing that is made one with Christ can die
and be lost, but he will raise it up again at the last day. His spirit can find
out all their dust after a thousand changes; it can gather all their
dispersons, and renuite their scattered crumbs, and knead them again into a
goodly body. And this it will do; 1 Cor. 6.19.
for their very bodies are the Temples of the holy Ghost; therefore he will
quicken their mortal bodies, Romans 8.11.
by his Spirit that dwells in them.

Hence it was that Cyril so earnestly invited guests to this feast, (...), etc.
Hom. (...) L. (...):
saying, Come eat the bread that renews your natures; drink the wine that is
the smile and cheer of immortality. Eat the bread that purges away the ancient
bitterness; drink the wine that asswages the pain of our old sore. (...), This
is the very restorative of nature, an healing plaster for the bitings of the
Serpent, a powerful antidote (...), ainst all his poison he has infused into
us. And so several of the elder times speak not without reason; for seeing our
Lord gives to these things the name of his body and blood, we need not fear to
attribute to them the virtues and efficacy of his death, which we know was the
restorer of life.

We should think therefore when we go to the Table of the Lord, that we go to
join our selves more closely to our head, and to unite our hearts more firmly
to the fountain of our life. That we go to receive of his holy Spirit, which
like wine running through our veins, should diffuse it self into all the vital
powers of our souls, and make us more able and strong, active and quick, ready
and forward in the service of our Savior. We should think that hereby we may
get greater victories over our enemies, if we do not betray our succors, that
we may more complete our conquests, if we use the power that is sent unto us.
We should look upon this bread, as the bread of life, and conceive that we take
the cup of immortality into our hands, and that the next draught may be in the
Kingdom of God, when our bodies shall be raised to feast at the eternal supper
of the Lamb. For this is but a just consequence of forgiveness of sins (which
the former Chapter treated of) that our bodies should live again which became
mortal through sin. And therefore as Christ here seals unto us the one, so he
likewise wise assures us of the other, and gives unto us the earnest of the
Spirit. What joy then must these thoughts needs create in our souls? What
better cheer can we desire? What greater dainties would we taste then this holy
feast affords? or what cause would we have of thanksgiving more then has been
named? If we desire a consort in our thanksgivings, and to have an harmony of
souls while we sing his praises; if we would hear some voice besides our own
that might fill up our joys, and lift them to a greater height; That is not
wanting neither, as the next Chapter shall declare. For here is an union of
minds begot; and a sweet consent of hearts is the result of this entertainment.

CHAP. VI.
AS this Sacrament is a means of uniting us to our Lord by faith, so likewise
of uniting us to our brethren by love. It knits us not only to our head, but
all the members also thereby are more indeared unto each other. We enter here
into a strict league of friendship with them, as well as into a Covenant with
God.

For all true Christians are not only of the Family of God, but his children
and nearest relations; so that we cannot profess any love unto the father of
them all, but we must at the same time embrace his whole progeny, as bearing
his character, and having in them those very things which we love in him. When
we take the bridegroom, we contract a kindred also with all the friends of the
bridegroom. And love indeed is of that nature, that it is not only diffusive
of it self, but it runs forth with a certain pleasure, and tickles our heart as
it passes from us. So that no man would be excused from loving of his
brethren, nor willingly want that part of this Christian feast. We all grant
that this food would not be so full of juice and sweetness, but that it tastes
of the Love of our Lord; nor would this cup be so pleasant, but that it is the
cup of Charity. Now when the heart is once filled with love, it wants nothing
but objects whereon to empty it self, and it is like new wine that is ready to
burst the vessel, unless it find some vent. And therefore one good man is glad
at such a time to ease himself into the bosom of others, and to express
himself to them in such charitable actions as cannot be done to God who is all
sufficient of himself. This adds to the grace of this entertainment, that there
is nothing but love to be seen in it. The food is love; the Master of the Feast
glories in no greater name, then that he is Love; all the guests are Brethren;
they are all in their Fathers house; they all receive the tokens and pledges of
the Love of their Elder Brother; and his love is so great that he is content to
share his inheritance among them. It must be therefore against nature, and the
course of things, not to love, and to let our Brethren share in our affections,
who have a portion in the same Savior.

But to make it plainly appear, that one end of the institution of this
Sacrament was to advance love and kindness in our hearts to each other, let
these things be considered:

I. As it is a common feast, it carries in it the notion of love and good will
that is between all the guests. It is well known that eating and drinking
together was anciently such a sign of unity, conjunction of minds and friendly
society, that the word Companis, and Companio, in old Latin, is the same with
Socius. Our English retains them all, and expresses a more then ordinarily
familiarity between persons, by the names of companions, company and society,
which are first made and afterward maintained by a friendly converse at the
same table, and eating of the same Bread. And hence it is that all our
Companies and Fraternities in Cities have their Guild-halls where they meet,
and their feasts likewise at certain times for the maintaining of love and
amicable correspondence. From which kind of meeting it is that the holy
Sacrament was called Synaxis, a convention or coming together in one, which the
Apostle expresses when he says, 1 Cor. 11.20. (...), etc. When you come
together into one place. It is a phrase for their assembling and convening at
an appointed time to feast together, and maintain mutual charity which Christ
had commended so much unto them. And this Aristotle in his Politics makes the
(...), L. 1. Polit.
the first of all communions, which is between those that live under the same
roof, and eat and drink at the same table, as Parents and Children, Brethren
and Sisters, from whence all other societies and communions are derived.
Christians are called in Scripture by the name of those near relations, and
therefore their love is fitly expressed and upheld by this kind of intercourse
and sweet converse. And the frequenter it is, the more would it approach to a
likeness to the most ancient and prime communion in nature. For this is a
maxim in that great man, (...). lb.
An every day communion does naturally make a house. We are the house of God,
and the first converts to the faith do seem to have maintained such a daily
communion; that they better deserved that name then any people that ever were;
and testified that they looked upon one another as Children of the same parent,
and were spiritual brethren and sisters in the Lord. It is so natural to give
tokens of friendship by this thing, In Muscovy the Bridegroom presents a loaf
of bread to the Priest, and he to the friends, who break it, and eat of it, in
token of fidelity and love. V. Hist. of Russia by G. Fletcher, cap. 24.
that in some places people have made their sponsalia, or contracts of
marriage, by each persons drinking of the same cup. And perhaps for the same
reason it is, that in many places of England they use after marriage to break a
cake over the head of the bride, as she enters into the doors, either showing
that they must live together in the most intimate society, or that they and all
their friends eating of it, may signify the great love that is between them.
Now the more sacred our food is whereof we partake, and the body of Christ
being broken before our eyes and administered unto us, the more strongly are we
engaged to brotherly love, and the rarer friendship do we contract beyond all
that the word companion can express.

II. The Paschal supper among the Jews was a feast of love, as well as of
remembrance. For it was not only celebrated between the members of the same
family, but by the whole Nation who came together from all parts at the same
time, and in one place; which did intimate to them that they were but one body.
For this cause it is likely God ordained that they should have one whole Lamb
for every family, Exodus 12.46.
and not divide it into portions among several companies; as also he forbids
that a bone of it should be broken by them. It did well represent the unity
that was among them, seeing they all did the same thing without any division,
and made not the least fraction in those parts that were most compacted. The
bread likewise without leaven might have some such signification in it, that
they should not swell by the fervency of any passion, nor be sowred by any
malice or ill will to each other who eat of the same unleavened bread. And so
the Apostle bids us to keep the feast (now that Christ our Passover is
sacrificed for us) not with the leaven of malice and wickedness, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8.
but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. And it may be observed,
that though the stranger that was uncircumcised might not by the Law eat of the
Lamb ( Exodus 12.43, 45.) yet their Masters tell us that they permitted them to
eat of the unleavened bread, and bitter herbs, etc. which was a token of some
love unto them, though not of such a dear affection as they had for their own
Nation.

III. But the Lords Supper is much more a feast of love, because it is a
remembrance of the greatest love that ever was, which our Lord showed in dying
for us. This love of his must in all reason be compensated with a great love
from us, and he has made our Brethren to be his proxies and receivers; he has
transferred the debt that is owing him unto them, that we may do them those
kindnesses for his sake which we cannot do immediately unto him. It is worthy
our notice, that the first person that ever received this holy Sacrament, was
(in all likelihood) St. John the beloved Disciple, he that lay in Jesus his
breast (and is therefore called by some Greek Writers (...), he in the bosom)
whose heart was so full of love to the Brethren, that he breathes little else
in one whole discourse which he left to his little children. And you may
observe also that immediately after this Supper (spoken of Joh. 13.) our
Savior entertains his Disciples the rest of that night till he went into the
garden, with those heavenly discourses which you read in the 14, 15, 16, 17,
Chapters of the same Gospel. A great part of which contain the Commandment of
brotherly love, of living in peace, and being one with each other even as He
and his Father are one; which may well suggest to our meditations, that one
intent of this heavenly repast is to breed in us a kind of celestial charity,
and make us all like that Disciple who first had the favor to taste of it.

IV. This Supper is the more significant of Christian charity and peace that is
to be between all the guests, because they all eat of one loaf, as the Apostle
speaks, 1 Cor. 10.17. where (...) which we render one bread, more properly may
be translated one loaf, of which all the company do partake, and thereby are
made one body, members of the same Christ, and members one of another. As the
flour though consisting of many little parts, is mingled and knealed into one
loaf; so are all Christians united and compacted into one body, by partaking of
that one and the same individual loaf. And therefore we may by the way take
notice, that the bread provided for our Communions (though never so great)
ought to be but one loaf; and likewise that all should communicate (if it may
be) at the same time, and not one part of a Congregation to day, and the other
at the next meeting; for this does not so well signify the union that is among
all Christians who live together in the same society. And to render this
contesseration the more manifest, Joseph de Vicecom. L. 2. de M^ssae rit. cap.
10.
in some ages of the Church (though but in some particular places) every family
that did receive offered a quantity of flower, with which the Communion-bread
was made. This mixture of one man's meal with another, and the combination of
all the particles in one paste, did well denote that they were but one body of
men mingled together by such a common affection that they were made one lump,
and did lose themselves in one another, not knowing any difference between each
other. And indeed there never was any society of men so strongly united and
kneaded together, as the first body of Christians were. Though their union may
well be represented by the little Atoms of flower all glewed together in a
loaf; yet the strength of their union may be better compared to the stones of a
Temple so cemented, that the hand of man is of no force so much as to move
them. And to such stones the Apostle St. Peter compares them, when he says (1
Ep. Cap. 2.5.) that as lively stones they are built up a spiritual house, etc.
Living stones they were, because they were so many souls or hearts joined
together into a spiritual temple, making one great heart beating with the same
love: and because likewise they had all drunk into the same spirit of life,
Act. 2.32.
which was the common vinculum, tie, or bond that thus united them together,
and made this one bread to be like the strength of stones rather then bread. As
the little particles of meal were by the help of water wrought into one paste;
(...), 1 Cor. 12.13.
so were all particular Christians by this spirit wherewithal they were
watered, formed into one spiritual body to be no more many, but one.

V. The ancient Christians likewise had many significant customs and practices
whereby they did notably express at this feast the love which was among them.
The most remarkable of which are these:

1. There was the Holy Kiss wherewith they saluted each other, as a token of
the dear affection wherewith they embraced, and of their desire that their
souls might pass (as it were) into each others bodies. There are many places of
Scripture which mention this kiss (as Romans 16.16. 1 Cor. 16.20, etc.) and the
best Writers near the times of our Savior, tell us, it was used to be given at
the holy Communion, as the fittest season to express such an innocent and
sincere love. When we have done prayers (says Justin Martyr) (...), Apolog. 2.
etc. we salute each other with a kiss; and then immediately the [(...)] chief
Minister takes the bread and wine from the hand of those that offer them, etc.
At this feast then they did salute one another; and when they fasted, De Orat.
cap. 14.
it began to be a custom (says Tertullian) that after prayers they should
forbear the kiss of peace, quod est signaculum perfectionis, which is the sign
or seal of perfection, i.e. of love and charity (I suppose he means) which is
called by the Apostle the bond of perfectness. That it was a custom among the
Jews to salute with a kiss at their prayers, is the affirmation of Drusius; In
Generosia.
but a greater man then he was, says, that he finds no such thing in all their
writings, and shows that in all likelihood he was deceived, by mistaking the
word Tiphluth for Tepilloth, the former of which signifies foolishness, and the
latter prayers. Buxtorf. Lex Tal. in voc. (...)
And so he observes that it is said in the great Bereschit (upon those wvrds
Genesis 29.11.) every kiss is (...) to folly, i. e. a wanton kiss, except those
three to which one adds a fourth. First, The kiss of homage, such as Samuel
gave to Saul, 1 Samuel 10.1. (and such I may add, as we are bid to give to the
Son of God, Psalm. 2.12.) Secondly, The kiss of meeting, such as Aaron gave to
Moses, Exodus 4.27. Thirdly, The kiss of departure, such as Orphah gave to her
mother, Ruth. 1.14. And fourthly, The kiss of kindred, such as Jacob here gave
to Rachel, because she was his Cousin. We must seek therefore for no other
reason of this kiss, but that it was a sign of kindness and love by the custom
of all the world, and therefore it is called the kiss of charity, 1 Pet. 5.13.

And for this cause says Chrysostom, the Apostle bids the Corinthians (in the
place forecited) to salute each other with an holy kiss, 1 Cor. 16.20.
because there was such vehement contentions and great differences among them.
For one said I am of Paul, another said I am of Apollo, another called himself
after Peter, and another after Christ. One was drunken at their sacred feast,
and another hungry; they went to Law with one another; and there was a great
deal of pride and envy and confusion about their spiritual gifts: And therefore
having exhorted them, ver. 14. to let all things be done in love; he now
commands them to be joined together also by the holy kiss, (...), for this
unites and begets one body. And so likewise he observes, that the kiss does not
only unite those that are divided, but it likewise makes an equality between
those that are unequal, which is a necessary thing to all friendship. By this
peace says he (in Romans 16.16.) the Apostle takes away all that disquieted
them, and makes that the great will not despise the less, (...).
nor the less will not envy the great, but both pride and envy will be cast
out; this kiss being of that nature, that it sweetens, smoothes, and equals all
things.

And I may observe also, that the very next words of the Apostle, ver. 17. are
an entreaty to mark all them who cause division among them. As if he should
have said, Salute one another, and so embrace; that he may be looked upon as no
Christian, that causes divisions and offenses among you.

And so in another Sermon he most admirably discourses of this Christian
Charity, which is signified by the kiss. Do not say (says he) that such an one
has done me harm, Homil. 21. in Epist. ad Romans
and no man can put up the wrong; but think with thy self what Christ says to
him that betrayed him with a kiss to the death of the Cross, and mind how
notably he reproves him. Luke 22.48.
Judas betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss? Who would not be softened with
these words? What heart would not such a Voice bow and incline unto it? What
wild Beast, what Adamant is there that would not be moved? Do not say unto me
hereafter, Such an one is a Murderer, or the like, and I cannot abide him. I
tell thee, if he be ready to thrust his Dagger into thee, and to baptize his
right hand in thy throat, kiss that right hand of his, for Christ kissed the
very mouth of his Murderer. Thou art the servant of him, I say, that kissed the
Traitor (for I will not cease to repeat it again and again) of him that spoke
words to him softer than a kiss. For mark it, he does not say, O thou villain,
thou traitor, do thou make me this requital for all my kindness; but he only
says, Judas, (calling him by his proper name) can thou find in thy heart to
betray me on this fashion. Yea I may observe, that he calls him Eriend, Matthew.
26.50. which are words of great sweetness to such an unworthy person. And after
this he does not say, Why do thou betray thy Teacher, thy Master, thy
Benefactor; but why betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss? If he was not
thy Master, yet will thou betray an ordinary man, who deals so courteously with
thee, and vouchsafes to kiss thee, even when thou betrayest him with that kiss?
O blessed Lord! what an example have thou given us of humility and forgiveness?
And how kindly and graciously he treats likewise those that came to take him,
you may see if you read what follows, which will make any man ashamed to be
cruel to his Brethren. What though they be guilty of a thousand faults? They
cannot be greater then this of Judas to our Savior. Will thou not kiss him,
when our Savior kissed and embraced the Traitor? How can thou receive the
holy offering, if thy tongue be red with the blood of men? How can thou give
the Peace (he means the kiss, which was accompanied with good wishes) if thy
mouth be full of War? Thus that excellent man, from whose mouth I desire my
Reader to learn, if not from mine. And therefore he expounds this word (...)
Holy to signify, O Cum. and Theophylact.
that the kiss should be sincere, and without all hypocrisy, or falseness of
heart, in which he is followed by other ancient Expositors. But it may likewise
signify the purity of it, and that it should be only out of Christian love,
and not with any other baser passion. And it was a thing so constantly used,
that it is likely indeed the Heathens did hence reproach the Christian
meetings, as if they did burn with some filthy fires. But the true Christians
could not be impeached of any such Crime: Their flames were so pure and bright,
that they left no foot nor blackness at all in the soul behind them. There were
indeed some base pretenders, the impure followers of Simon Magus, 2 Pet. 2.14.
whose eyes were full of Adultery, and whose lips gave strange kisses; but they
were abominable in their Doctrines too, and separated themselves from the Flock
of Christ, Jude 19.
being sensual, and having not the spirit. These men bragging that they were
the only spiritual men, and calling all others mere animals, might give
occasion to the Heathens and the Enemies of our Religion to say, that
Christians assembled for such actions as they practiced, but are not to be
named. But the sound professors did wipe off all these calumnies that were cast
upon the whole Religion for the fault of some Apostates, not only by their
most excellent Writings, but likewise by their pure lives and cautious
converses. Achill. Tatius. L. 4. (...).
The kiss of those that are in love (says one that well knew) is (...),
unlimited, unsatiable, and always renewed. To show therefore that their kiss was
a token only of celestial Charity, (...).
Athenagoras tells us that it was unlawful for them to kiss any one (...) the
second time to please themselves. And the Constitutions ascribed to Clemens,
tell us also, That the men saluted men, and the women those of their own sex,
that so they might avoid all danger, and take off all offense. These kisses
were as pure and innocent as the snow; they were no other then had been long
used in the World among familiar friends, but only that they were a token of a
diviner love, and denoted a more sacred affection being used in their solemn
congresses with the Divine Majesty. Cyril. Hierosol. Mystag. 5.
So Cyril says excellently, This kiss is not barely such an one as is given
among familiar acquaintance, (...) as they meet in the streets, but (...), etc.
they mingle souls together, and promise an utter oblivion of all offenses.
Christian souls did sit upon their lips, and there embracing together, did pass
(as it were) into each others bodies. As it was said of Jonathan, 1 Samuel 18.1.
so it might be affirmed of them, their soul was knit to the souls of their
brethren, and they loved them as their own soul. And therefore Alexander the
false Prophet, Lucian in Pseudomant.
in imitation (I make no question) of these holy brethren, did entertain all
his followers with a kiss; and those that were admitted to a near communication
with him, were called (...), they within the Kiss. There are several places I
observe in holy Writ, where this kind of salutation is joined with weeping,
Genesis 29.11. Genesis 33.4 Genesis 45.15. whereby the Scripture expresses such a joy
at each others sight, that it stopped all passages for the present, but the eyes,
and tears told that which the mouth could not yet speak but by a kiss. And in
one place this salutation goes under the Name of falling on the neck (Genesis
46.29.) which denotes the Ardency of their embraces, and that they hanged on
each others lips, as if they were loath to be two any more. But beside all
this, it must be marked, that the kiss was usually accompanied with some form
of Benediction or Prayer for their welfare; which plainly appears in the
salutations of two treacherous persons, Joab and Judas, 2 Samuel 20.9. Matthew.
26.49. the one of which says, Art thou in health my brother? (i. e.) I pray
thou may be, as I hope thou art, etc.) and the other, (...), All hail
Master, From all which we may be well assured, That these Christian embraces
did only melt them into tears, and not inflame them into any distempered
heats; that they did only show their dear affection, and heartily pray to God
that all Peace might be with them, i. e. that all prosperity and happiness
might be their portion.

2. The first Christians having the Blood of Christ as yet warm upon their
hearts, burnt with such Charity to each other that they instituted frequent
Feasts which they kept at the same time after they had received the Sacrament
of Christ's Body and Blood. At this sacred Meal the poor were feasted together
with the rich, upon those offerings which the rich had made. And they sat down
as it happened, without any distinction, either in higher or lower forms, to show
that they looked on themselves as equals in Christ, and fellow-heirs of the
same promise. These Feasts were called (...), Feasts of Love or Charity, and
are mentioned in St. Jude ver. 14. and by St. Peter, 2 Pet. 2.13. So
denominated they were, as Anastasius Sinaita will have it, from their end and
purpose; which was (...), to draw all together to an unity and agreement.
Tertullian gives a better reason, but tending to the same sense: Our Supper
(says he) carries its reason in its Name, Coena nostra de nomine rationem sui
ostendit. Vocatur (...) id quod dilectio penes Graecos est Tert. in Apol.
for Agapae signifies love in the Greek Language. We find no Divine Institution
for these Entertainments, yet they have (as a Learned man speaks Montag.
against Sdden.
) Divine Toleration. And they had a good beginning, though in process of time
they nourishod disorders. In the first simplicity they fed the soul as well as
the body, and Charity was no less nourished then their Carcasses; though in
aftertimes it must be confessed they made greater expenses then formerly, but
did far worse employ them. And therefore in Justin Martyr's days (about the
year 160) as far as one can guess by his Apology, they left them off, and
disposed the offerings more advantagiously into a common Bank for the poor and
distressed persons. For they were not like men now that take away abuses, and
save their money; but they reformed the mispence of that Charity which they
still continued. And therefore those Agapae which after-Authors mention, were
but rarely celebrated on their Birth or Marriage-dayes: or at their Funeral
Obsequies, whence a dole is at this day used to be given to poor people. But
they were so approved of in the Apostles days, that the phrase of breaking
bread in the New Testament seems to have reference to this whole Feast, and not
only to receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. For so the phrase is used
among the Hebrews for a Feast, and so in the Acts of the Apostles, cap. 27.35.
St. Paul is said to take bread, and give thanks, and break it, which was not a
celebration of the Eucharist, but a common meal together with the passengers in
the same ship. And in like sense the (...) the Lords Supper is to be
understood, 1 Cor. 11.20.
for the whole Feast including both the Agape, and the Eucharist also, being so
immediately joined together. Whence it is that Ignatius speaking of this under
the name of (...), to make an entertainment, he says they should never do it
(...), Epist. ad Smyrn.
without the Bishop or Overseer of the Congregation. And the reason sure was,
because this Sacrament was always joined with that Feast, and both understood
by one name; which Sacrament none might celebrate without the presence of him
that was appointed by God to bless and sanctify the offerings that were
brought.

So Mr. Thorndike testifies, Review of Rights of the Church.
That he finds in a MS. (expounding diverse Greek words of the Bible) this
glofs, (...), The Lords Supper, is to dine in the Church. This common
Entertainment being made for poor and rich, out of the stock of the Church from
the offerings that were brought, the seven Deacons were first appointed to
attend upon the making of this provision, and relieving the poor otherwise,
which the Apostles had not leisure for to mind; as you may read, Acts 6.2.
Where by (...), serving Tables, we cannot well understand any other thing then
providing for the poor this Table at the Feasts of Charity, which maintained a
singular love and kindness among them all. So great a kindness it was that
hereby was nourished, that the Heathens could not but take notice of it, as
inviting many to be Christians. You shall find, In Frag.
says Julian, among the Galileans, (by which name they called Christians)
(...), their Feast of Love, which they call Agapae, their entertainment, and
their serving of Tables, which draws many to their Religion. And this is the
great thing which the Apostle reproves the Corinthians for, that though the
Sacrament and this feast were appointed to preserve love, yet they rudely
abused them to the very contrary end.

The Gloss of Oecumenius (if it be perused) will make this very clear. When you
come together (says the Apostle, (...), etc.
1 Cor. 11.20.) into one place, This is not to eat the Lords Supper, etc. i. e.
Your very coming together signifies love, but it does not work it; for whereas
you should have a common Table (as our Lords was) you make it your own
pleasure, and exclude the poor from it. But I will tell you what the Lord
delivered to me, that he in the night he was betrayed entertained not only his
holy Disciples, but even the Traitor Judas, that wicked enemy of his, at his
Table; and how dare you therefore refuse the poor, and exclude them from your
Feasts. Or thus: If the Lord gave both to poor and rich his Body and Blood,
dare thou separate any from thy table, and cast a scorn upon them? If he gave
thanks who delivered and divided his own Body, shall not thou thankfully, and
with the greatest joy, make the poor thy companions and guests at the things
that are given from him to thee, etc. I tell you once more, ( ver. 27.) that
whosoever eats and drinks in this unworthy and base fashion, contemning the
poor for whose sakes you meet together, he is guilty of Christ's Body and Blood,
and does the greatest dishonor unto them by handling them with such impure
hauds. And at last ( ver. 33.34.) he advises them, that they would stay one
for another; and if through hunger they could not well expect long, he bids
them eat at home, and not come together for condemnation. Upon which words the
same Author thus glosseth: You come together to the Supper for love; and if
that be in your hearts, you had better take a refection at home, then by
casting a contempt upon your brethren, show that you have no love at all.

It is very likely also, That first from these Feasts they sent portions to
those that were absent, to testify their love unto them; and so afterward (as
is most certain) the custom grew to send from the Eucharist some of the blessed
bread to those that could not come unto their assemblies. So Justin says, That
(...), they carry away some part to those that are not present. Which I suppose
arose in imitation of the Jewwish manners, who in their Feasts sent portions
one to another, that they might more express their friendship which they
desired to continue. The Heathens likewise were not strangers to this custom,
as one example out of many will bear sufficient witness: When Agesilaus offered
his (...), Plut. in vita Agesilaus.
sacrifices for glad tidings of a victory, he sent pieces of the flesh to his
friends, that he might make them partakers in his joys. All which I mention
only for this end, that we may see how desirous they were, in the beginning of
our Religion, to keep up a mutual charity as the greatest honor of it, which
made them omit no custom that had been obliging among the Jews, if it might
help to promote the love and unity of the Church.

3. Then they had their collections for the poor, which ensued their
participation of Christ's Body and Blood. This the Apostle mentions, (...),
Oecum. in loc.
1 Cor. 16.1, 2. when he bids them on the first day of the week (when the
mysteries were celebrated) to lay by something for the use of distressed
Christians, which was the practice of other Churches. And Justin Martyr's words
may be a good Comment upon that Text, when he says, After these things (i. e.
receiving the Sacrament) we always remember one another of them, and (...), etc.
They that have, Apolog. 2.
do help those that want, every man giveing (...), according as he himself
thinks fit to do. And that which is gathered is laid in the hands of the
President (i. e. the chief Minister) wherewith he helps the Orphans and Widows,
relieves those that are sick, or in prison, and those that travel, and all
strangers; and to be short, he is the Curator of all that are in need. You may
perceive likewise by the Apostles words, that their charity was no less large
then the world; and that it was not impaled in a particular Church, but did
stretch its hands to the farthest parts, by sending relief to Jerusalem, from
whence the Gospel came unto them. But besides these, there were other offerings
(as we call them at this day) which the people brought both for the celebrating
of the Eucharist, and the maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel. These
gifts (as an Adversary confesses) were called Sacrifices, Dionys. Petav.
diatrib. in Syness. cap. 3.
though coming from the hands of the people. Whence it is that Cyprian chides
the rich people, that they threw nothing into the Corban: and came into Gods
house sine sacrificio, L. de Opere and Eleemos.
without a sacrifice; yea did eat part of that sacrifice which the poor had
offered. With these sacrifices the Apostle says that God is well pleased, and
they that did offer them did it to testify their love to God who had given
them such good things, and their love to their Brethren, who they desired
should share with them in Gods blessings. They were both a piece off Gods
worship, and gave glory to him, ( Psalm. 96.8. It was accounted a favor to be
admitted to the offertory, i. e. to have their money accepted which they gave
to the poor. And it was a punishment to communicate (...) without offering; as
a perfect communion was called (...), a communion with offering. Petavius Ib.
Epist. ad Diog.
) and likewise a piece of great charity that made others glorify his Name. By
these and all other ways they expressed such an affection, that it was the
talk of the Heathens, and that whereby they were known by all men to be his
Disciples. And therefore when Diogenetus sent to Justin Martyr, to know
something more particularly concerning the Christian way, he enquires not
only, what God they trust in, and how they worship him, and what makes them
contemn the world, and despise death, etc. but also (...), what was that their
dear affection which they did bear unto each other? This was more famed in the
world then the noble band of lovers that died at each others side, and were
ready to receive those wounds into their own bodies, which were dealt to their
companions. For they did not only impart their goods, but their own selves,
and were prepared to lay down their lives for the Brethren. And if the relief
they bestowed on each other were like incense and sacrifices to God ( Phil.
4.18.) then the giving of themselves, was something like the love of Christ,
and too great a charity to be resembled to any thing but his sacrifice.

4. And there was another thing that was sometime in use, which testified their
love to all Christians throughout the World. One Church sent a loaf of bread to
another, as a token of their consent in faith, and their consort in affection;
which they that did receive, might consecrate (if they thought good) and use at
the ministration of the Sacrament, and thereby testify their union with the
rest of the body of Christ that were distant from them. Aug. Epist. 31.
So Paulinus wrote to St. Aug. Panem unum quem unanimitatis indicio misimus
charitati tuae, rogamus ut accipiendo benedicas; i. e. That loaf of bread which
I sent to your kindness as a token of our unanimity, I beseech you to receive
and bless. Such ways did those holy men study and devise to engage themselves
to each other, and represent the brotherly kindness that was between them.

Beside all this, the present Greek Church (and I know not how ancient such a
custom is) do in express words (when they are at the Communion) profess charity
to all men, even to their enemies, and make a solemn declaration of the love
that is in their hearts, before the whole Assembly of Gods people. De rit.
Eccles. Gr. cap. 24.
For so Christoph. Angelus relates, That when they go up to the holy man for to
receive, they turn themselves first to the West, and then to the South, and
next to the North, and say to the brethren that stand on all sides, (...):
Christians, we pray you pardon us all our offenses either in word or deed. And
they all answer again when they are thus spoken unto, (...), Brother, God grant
thee his pardon. This Petition they make unto the Company upon their knees, and
seldom were any so wicked, as to dismiss them unpardon-d; if they did, then
were they themselves excluded from communion.

We must think then when we approach to this heavenly banquet, that we are
about to remember the dearest love that ever was, and to engage our selves in
the greatest affection and strictest friendship that can be in any hearts unto
each other. We must think that we enter into a mutual covenant with our
brethren, by eating of the same bread, and drinking of the same cup. And we
must resolve never to fall out any more, much less to hate, malign, or do
despite and injuries to one another; but to live more then ever in the peace
of God, by a brotherly unity and affection. Let us think it as unnatural after
such an union to fall out, as for the hands to scratch the face, or any one
member to beat and tear the other inpieces.

And if there be any thing hitherto treated of in this discourse, which men
cannot or will not understand to be meant by this Sacrament, yet let us all
apprehend that it is a bond of charity, and does engage us not to quarrel about
such things. For it is a great policy of the Devil, to make that a bone of
contention, which should be the Bread of Love and Peace. It was intended to be
a contesseration and union of Christian Societies to God, and with one another;
but men's evil taking of it; (as One well says) divides us from God, and the
evil understanding of it divides us one from another. Thus much notwithstanding
the weakest mind may conceive, that it is a feast of love; and it is not
weakness, but wilfulness, nor shortness of understanding, but perverseness of
heart that makes men senseless in this particular. And therefore let us use one
another as friends, and think our hands and tongues, and our very hearts are
bound with cords of Love, which we cannot break without apparent violence to
our selves. Remember always that a Rupture in this Sacred Bond of Brotherly
Love, does disunite us likewise from our Lord himself. For there are not two
cups whereof we drink at his Supper, the one containing the Love of Christ, the
other the Love of our Brethren; but we drink both at one draught, and engage to
both at one breath. So that he who unties the one knot, at the same time
dissolves the other, according as the beloved Disciple speaks, He that loves
not, 1 John. 4.8.
knows not God, for God is love.

Conclusion.
WHen I consider all these admirable uses of this holy food, I do not wonder if
some devout persons in the elder times, out of an excess of love, did by their
daily bread (which we petition for in the Lords Prayer) understand this divine
bread; and so out of a spiritual hunger, and a forwardness of affection, did
eat of it every day. For you see that herein we commemorate both to God and man
the death of Christ; we publish it to the world, and plead it with God in our
own behalf and others. Then this we have nothing more prevalent, so that our
hearts begin (while we are commemorating of it, to burn with heavenly fires;
and our tongues here taste such things, that make them sing the praises of
Angels. We seal Indentures between God and us. We give entertainment to our
Lord Christ, and let him into our hearts; yea, we profess to all the world,
that we are of his Religion and Communion. We are confirmed likewise in his
favor: he opens unto us his very heart; he lets us into his secrets, and knits
us unto himself with a more inseparable affection. We likewise associate our
selves with the Disciples of our Lord, and make a firmer League of a holy
friendship with them. All which may well make us say with the Disciples, Lord,
evermore give us this bread, But though it be so desirable to feed always on
such sweetness, yet you cannot but discern, that this is a business that
requires the greatest intention of our mind, and the strongest affections of
our heart, and lays the most weighty engagements upon us for our eternal good;
and therefore must be well understood, and solemnly performed in our approaches
to it.

For which cause, before I direct your Addresses to this Table (which is the
next thing to be done, having opened to you the secrets of it) I will observe
to you these two things for a conclusion of this part of my discourse. The one,
to quicken your appetite that you may feed heartily: The other, to guide your
minds, that you may not feed upon shadows.

1. This must needs be the most nourishing and strengthening food of all others
that a Christian has, because there are so many ends and purposes to which it
serves. It feeds all our Graces at once (as you shall hereafter see) and it
sends a nourishment (and that most plentiful and copious) to every part. It
increases our love to God, and our love to man, which is the sum of all our
duty: It engages us in the most sacred bands, by the dying of Christ, by his
dearest love, by all the blessings which he has bestowed, to do that duty, and
faithfully perform it. It is a little Epitome of the whole Gospel, for it shows
what God will do for us, and what we most do for him, and it affords strength
unto us for to do it. And therefore it is called the New Testament or Covenant
in his blood, because here the whole New Covenant is represented, God giveing
his Son and all Blessings unto us, and we giving of our selves and our best
service unto him, as has been already discoursed. By this God sets to his
Seal, that all things contained in the Covenant shall be done for us; and we do
set to our seal, and openly profess our selves to belong to the Covenant, and
that we esteem and highly value all those blessings, and will do any thing for
to obtain them.

Now who would not long for such a food that will satisfy our whole desire?
Who would refuse an invitation to that Table where all things are in one dish
(if I may so speak) and God and Man meet together in one Bread and one Cup? But
I doubt I may add, Who is there that would not have all these things, so that
this Bread and Wine without any labor will convey them unto him? And therefore
I must give you another short information, which was the second thing that I
promised, and that is this:

2. This copious Food does not nourish us, without some actions of our own,
even such as I have already mentioned in this Discourse. It does not feed us in
a natural, but in a moral and spiritual manner. It reiresheth us by our
consideration, by our faith, our love, our prayers, our covenanting and
thanksgiving. But all the cunning in the world will not draw a drop of blood
out of it without these; no, it draws out the blood of our souls, and wastes our
strengths by a careless and profane eating of it. The Papists talk of great
things that their Priests give in this Sacrament by their power, and they would
make the world believe, that they communicate more then we can do: But we must
solemnly averr, That our Ministry conveighs as great things as they speak of,
only men must do something more of the work themselves. We pretend not indeed
to send wicked men to Heaven with a word; but we can help the thoughts and
affections of all pious souls, as much as they with all their skill and power.
Nay, if the people do nothing, we give them more then they; for they feed them
with hungry accidents, they give them a bit of quantity, and a cup of colors;
yea the Laity have not so much as a sip of these figures; whereas the worst man
among us has at least Bread and Wine; so that the best among us enjoy as much
in effect and virtue as they can pretend unto, and the worst (by their own
confession) enjoy much more. But the truth of it is, that men have heightened
these things to such incomprehensible mysteries, because they would do nothing,
and these should do all. They have advanced these sacred Rites of Christ's
appoinment, into a degree of virtue beyond all his other commands, that so by
these easy and facile rites of Baptism and the Lords Supper, men might go to
Heaven by a compendious manner of doing little or nothing toward their
salvation. And they have not left these Rites as naked as Christ brought them
into the world, but they have changed the manner of their observance, and
clothed them in a great many strange dresses, lest the genuine simplicity of
them should reprove their false hopes which they conceive from them. They could
never put men so soon into Heaven, nor get so much money, as they do by the
bargain, if they did not make men believe greater things of this Sacrament,
then of all the eternal Laws of Christ; and they could not make men believe so
much more of it, if they did not transform it from its native simplicity, into
an uncouth mystery. These two things, the love of men's lusts, and the love of
the world, have made men stretch these things so far, as to defy all reason,
to damn all those that will not speak nonsense, and to send those to hell
(though of never so holy lives) that will not discredit their eyes and ears.
What strange things will men believe and do, so that they can but believe
contrary to the Gospel? They hope to go to Heaven they know not how, by the
Magic of words, and by the secret efficacy of a Religion that they do not
understand, and this makes them willing to entertain such Doctrines. And then
others have a respect to their own interest (and having little else to support
their greatness) would be reverenced and esteemed for their extraordinary power
in making the body of Christ, and that makes them willing to maintain them. So
the Author of the History of the Council of Trent, says very truly, L. 6.
When men began to place Heaven below Earth, good institutions were said to be
corruptions only tolerated by Antiquity; and abuses brought in afterward,
were canonized for perfect corrections. But we willingly acknowledge that we
have no power to save men without themselves. We celebrate no such Mysteries
that shall convey the wicked to Heaven. We cannot deliver those that are dead
from their pain and torment, who whilst they lived made little reckoning either
of this or any other Divine Command. No, we proclaim to All men, that this food
must nourish us by our own stomachs, that it affords strength by the vital
operations of our own souls. And if we our selves will do what God requires of
us, then we shall find it as full of virtue as we can desire, and it will be a
means to put us in Heaven while we remain here upon the earth. Sometimes they
will needs blame us as doing too little, and denying the use of good works; but
this is such a falsity, that we call for more of men's labor then they seem to
make necessary, and profess that we hope not by any power of ours to do them
good, without the exercise of their own powers. And therefore let us put forth
a lively faith, let us heartily covenant with our Lord, let us make a sincere
profession of our Religion, and exercise such other acts as I have been
treating of, and so will this Feast be of great force, and full of efficacy to
our souls health.

And that you may feed with an appetite, and hereby get an increase in
strength, it is necessary that I next of all direct your Addresses to Gods
Table, and show how you should prepare your selves to be his worthy Guests; and
that shall be the Subject of the following Discourse.

Mensa Mystica.
SECT. II. Concerning Preparation to the Table of the Lord; being a Discourse
upon Psalm. 93.5.
CHAP. VII.
IT is a known saying of the Psalmist, Holiness becomes thy House, O Lord, for
ever. The cornerstone upon which that Affirmation is built, is no other but
this, That God is essentially holy. And that is a truth which has such a
foundation in our natural understanding, a notion that springs so clearly from
every man's mind, that all the deductions and consequents that flow from it,
must needs be evident, and find no resistance but only from the wills and
perverse affections of men.

If we consider therefore with our selves a while, and look upon him that
dwells in pure light, we shall soon be persuaded that they ought to be holy
that approach near to him, that no profane foot ought to tread in his
Sanctuary, and that an unhallowed mind cannot be the Temple where he should
dwell. A short explanation of the Psalmists words will make it manifest, that
our minds do rightly persuade us, when we so conclude. The house of God (which
he speaks of) was the Temple at Jerusalem, where God was worshipped; into one
part of which none but the High Priest might enter, and that but once a year,
being void of Legal uncleanness. Into a second the Priests only might approach
for to Minister, but not without the like state of purity. And the people who
were admitted into the courts of Gods house, could not be accepted to feast
with God (as you have heard) unless their offering was without blemish, and
they themselves at that time free from any pollutions which their Law
prohibited. Which to any wise man must signify thus much; that God is greatly
to be feared in the Assembly of his Saints; Psalm. 89.7.
and to be had in reverence of all that are about him: and that nothing becomes
his presence but what is separated from the world, and cleansed from carnal
affections.

And so Plutarch (a grave Heathen,) In Polit. praecept.
tell us that into some ancient Temples none might come with any money or
weapons about them, but were at their first entrance to lay them down at the
doors, and so approach unto the Altars. This was to signify not only their
poverty and weakness, and that they look upon themselves as destitute of all
succor except divine; but their contempt of the world also, and their
forsaking of all earthly things, that they might be fit for divine converses.
Cunaeus I think has most happily conjectured, that the Temple which he speaks
of, was no other then the House of God at Jerusalem. L. 2. de repub. Heb. cap.
12.
For no man (says Maimon) might come (...) into the mountain of the House with
a staff, or with his shoes, with his purse or wallet, or such like things.
Which surely was significant of their divesting themselves of all earthly
things, and laying aside all employments and worldly thoughts, that they might
present themselves naked and simple, pure and holy before the God of holiness,
who always said to his people (both under the Law and Gospel) be ye holy, Lev.
11.14. 1 Pet. 1.16.
for I am holy. This is a truth at tested so much unto by Heathens, that I may
be confident I said true, when I affirmed it to be the issue of a first notion,
Dion. (...) Hesiod. L. 1. (...) etc. (...) i. e. (...), etc. v. Moscho pull. and
Proclum.
that they should be holy persons who converse with a holy God. Whosoever
thinks otherwise, (...), says a grave Author, is by this very thought (if
there were nothing else) an unholy person. And it is still ingrafted so much in
every man's mind, that none will venture to make any of the more solemn
addresses to God, but they think of some repentance, and purgation, of some
more devout disposition of mind, how unholy soever the rest of their lives have
been.

Now though the Psalmist intend more then a fit of Religion, and cannot be
thought to mean so little as a holiness that has only its set and appointed
times, its new Moons and solemn assemblies, or in our phrase, the monthly
Communions and the weekly Sabbaths; yet it may justly be asked, whether besides
those two things I have already mentioned ( viz. The holiness of God, and the
constant holiness of those who converse with him) there be not also a third
included in them, which is, that at some times we are engaged to a higher
degree of holiness, and ought more solemnly and religiously to purify and
cleanse our selves?

Are we not to raise up our hearts to a greater fervor in devotion, to search
our selves more curiously, and cast out all the leaven when we come near to God
in the highest duties of our Religion? Or, in short, it may be asked, Whether
we are not to use a greater preparation, and bring a greater holiness to Gods
Table, then at other times, when we approach to him in other duties? I shall
not certainly determine how far the Psalmists words do favor such an
assertion, that there ought to be a greater regard to our selves when we go to
the house of God then at other times; But I shall endeavor to illustrate all
the truth that is in it, and in the former also in these following Propositions.

CHAP. VIII.
Only let it be premised, that it is my design so to state this matter of
Preparation, that we may come to Gods Table in a very reverend manner, and yet
not use him unreverently at other times. A great deal of care is to be used
when we go to feast with the King of Heaven, but that is not the greatest, much
less all the care of a Christian. If God prepare a Supper, we should prepare
our selves to be fit guests (so much is resolved upon by all) the only danger
is, lest we do not think this preparation looks so far back as really it does.
In Sept. Sap. Conviv.
I like Thales his resolution very well which we meet withal in Plutarch,
(...). As he that entertains us at a feast makes great preparation for us
beforehand, so should they prepare themselves who are invited to the feast. And
the Sybarites (he says) were wont to invite their women a year before the
feast was, (...).
that they might at leisure prepare themselves with good apparel and brave
ornaments, etc. to come unto it. But truly, says he, in my judgment, there is
need of a great deal more time, to fit one for to feast in such a manner as he
ought, then this comes to. The manners and carriage are to be righly formed;
his mind is to be apparelled, and his soul trimmed with brave notions, that his
behavior may be handsomely composed. Now it is far more hard to adorn the
mind, then to adorn the body; to get a deportment befitting our selves, then to
appear richly and gaylie clad. And therefore longer time then a year will be
required to dress up a man's self for to feast like a wise man or a Philosopher,
even so much, till we can (...), get a becoming conversation, and find out
those Ornaments that suit best with a virtuous life. What he says in that
matter is but my very sense in the thing we are treating of. God makes an
invitation, and calls us to his board; we must therefore trim up our selves to
meet the bridegroom of our fouls. But this preparation is not such a business
that can have any set quantity of time allotted wherein to make it (as of a
month, a year, or the like space) but so much is necessary as will compose our
souls to the image of Christ, and make us fit company for so holy a God. It is
not the washing our clothes a little before, the sprucing up of our souls (as
I may say) and the putting on of a fine and demure behavior when we come
thither, though we be never so filthy and ragged at other times: But a holy
life is the true time for preparing our souls to be Gods guests. Whatsoever
care and exactness we use, and whatsoever extraordinary ornaments we put on
immediately before our approaches to him; yet that a constant good behavior
toward God and man is the main thing we are to look after, is the sum of what
I have to say in the following particulars.

I. The first of which I have already begun, and it is nothing but this, That
holiness is to be a Christians constant employment, and the great business of
his life. It is not a quality of which we have use only at certain times nor
is it a strictness at some seasons that gets us a liberty in the rest of our
lives to be loose and careless; nor a solitary retiredness now and then, that
shall make an amends for all our wanderings: But it is a walking with God, a
patient running of the race which he has set us, and a daily dying unto the
world, insomuch that the Apostle says, we must be holy in all manner of
conversation. 1 Pet. 1.15
We are not to put on the Lord Jesus as we do a cloak which we throw off at our
pleasure, and again cast about us when there is occasion; but as we do our
inner garment which we never go without, nor lay aside, no not when we have
none in company but our selves. Our Religion is not the feast of unleavened
bread which the Jews observed but for seven days, except you take the number
seven to denote perfection, and to be a token that they should rejoice always
in a constant course of holiness before God. And in this sense I confess the
Apostle is pleased to call our life a feast of unleavened bread, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8.
which he bids us observe now that Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us,
but without any limitation of time, because it is to last always. And the
reason of it is, because Christians themselves are become (...) unleavened
(ver. 7.) i. e. they are separated by their profession from the wickedness
wherein formerly they lived, and therefore were to be made (...) a new mass or
lump, that should never admit of any of the old profane mixtures that formerly
had defiled their hearts and lives. We are not only to make a solemn stir
against a Sacrament, and then light candles to search for the old leaven that
it may be thrown out; but being by Christ become unleavened, we are constantly
to maintain such a light shining in our hearts, that not we may live, but
Christ may live in us, and the life that we lead may be by faith of the Son of
God. Before a great festival the worst of Heathens had their Votivae noctes,
their severe and pure nights (as their Authors call them) ten of which together
used to precede the feast of Isis, in which time (as if they had imitated the
command to Israel when the Law was given, ( Exodus 19.15.) they abstained from
the most lawful enjoyments and chaste embraces. But what an heathenish life
notwithstanding was, you all know, or else the Apostle will tell you, 1 Pet.
4.3. They walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings,
banquetings, abominable Idolatries. And therefore their own sober Authors
reproved this great folly, of thinking holiness and purity to be the actions of
a few days, and not the course of a man's life. Orat. in Timoer.
An illustrious place there is in Demosthenes to this purpose, which I cannot
but mention because it will testify so much against the Christian world.
Before men come (says he) to their holy offices, they abstain for a certain
number of days from all filthiness and vile actions; whereas they who go about
holy things, should not only for some space of time, (...), but for their
whole life have purified themselves of such kind of practices. Hear O Christian
what an Heathen says, and please not thy self in thy separate and strict
devotion before thou come to the Table of the Lord, or against an holy time.
But think that every day is to be holy to the Lord, though every action in the
day be not equally holy. Learn not only (...), (as his phrase is) to purify
thy self for a set number of days, as if thou had appointed or ordered so
much time to be spent in holiness, and so much in sin; but to behave thy self
as if thou did account thy whole life an opportunity of serving God, and a
season of cleansing thy self from all that filthiness which will not let thee
see the face of God. When I think of the Persians (who they say) every year had
a feast wherein they destroyed all the Serpents that could be found, and then
let them multiply as fast as they would till the same solemnity returned again;
It puts me in mind of the Religion that is most in fashion among them that are
named after Christ. They are very angry at the Devil and all his cursed brood,
they are in some mood at a solemn feast, mightily incensed against the old
Serpent; but afterward they patiently suffer him to take his rest and his
lusts increase like the spawn of fishes without any considerable distaste or
opposition. These men are as much mistaken in the Christian life, as they that
mistake a Serpent for an Eele, or a stone for bread. God expects (and so he
justly may) that we should abound in all the fruits of righteousness that are
by Christ Jesus to his praise and glory, Phil. 1.11.
and that we should pass the time of our sojourning here in fear, 1 Pet. 1.17.
abstaining as pilgrims and strangers from fleshly lusts that war against the
soul. 1 Pet. 2.11.


II. The second thing that I would have observed is, that this holiness
consists of actions of diverse sorts, and is expressed in different manners. It
is diversified not only by the objects about which it is employed, but the
state of the subject wherein it is will not permit that all the acts of it
should be of one kind and value. And therefore it was that I said, the Actions
of a holy life are not equal in their holiness. Some of them respect God,
others our neighbors, and the rest our selves; and all these we can do at some
times with a better understanding and greater devotion, then at other times it
is possible for us to do. For we begin this life of holiness when we are
baptized into the Christian faith, and take upon us those sacred engagements to
be his servants.

We are ever after this under a religious tie and vow; and the next step which
we take to the discharge of it, is to be catechized and instruct in Christ's
Religion, which is all that a child is capable of. And then when we come to
years of discretion, we are to advance still forward to a serious profession
that we stand to our first Covenant, and will be true and faithful to our
Lord. Now all our life after is but an asserting of our truth and sincerity in
this holy Covenant, and a making good our promise and oath wherein we have
bound our selves. Which when we labor conscientiously to perform, then do all
the actions of our lives become holy. And so a man may be holy in his shop, by
diligence and justice; and at his board by temperance, thankfulness, and
sending portions to the poor. A friendly, innocent and useful conversation will
make him holy abroad; and meditation and prayer mixed with the former, will
make him so at home. Yea, prudence, and the ends of health and cheerfulness
will make his sports and recreations, his sleep and all such actions to be
holy, and not be reckoned among pastimes, but the necessary seasons of doing
little or nothing, that afterward we may do something and be worthily employed.
As to the disposition then of his heart, a Christian is always alike holy
(because he seriously desires, intends and endeavors to be undefiled in all
things) only the matter about which he is necessarily employed will not bear
it, that all his actions should always be alike excellent.

III. There is another thing likewise that must be confessed, That though all
actions of holiness have a regard to God as they are parts of our obedience to
his commands; yet some of them have a more particular respect to him, and are
more industriously intended to his honor. Though all holy actions look toward
him; yet some of them are a looking him directly in the face. Though we may
always fit under his shadow with great delight, yet sometimes we are under the
light of his countenance it self; his glory is to be always our end, but
sometimes we are said more particularly to glorify his Name. As when we
advance him highly in our own thoughts, or when we proclaim his excellencies to
the world. When we pay our acknowledgments to him for blessings received, or
wait on his bounty for things that we need. In brier, prayer and praises,
meditation of him, and desires after him, reading and hearing of his holy Word,
with such like actions, me of that sort wherein we behold his face, and do more
sensibly taste of his goodness, and are both more satisfied with him as the
greatest sweetness, and transformed into him as the purest beanty.

CHAP. IX.
IV. NOw to draw nearer to the main scope of this discourse; It must in the
next place be considered, that those actions which respect men or our selves,
and those which immediately respect God, are mutual preparations each to other.
As an holy behavior in the works of our calling, in our converses with men,
and the use of Gods blessings, dispose us unto prayer, meditation, and such
like duties: so prayer, etc. again requires them, and returns the kindness upon
their own heads, by disposing and preparing us to such like holy deportment for
the future in these matters. These two are (...) in an inseparable brotherhood,
like Hippocrates his twins, that grow or decay both together. Prayer makes a
Christian live holily, and a holy life makes us fit to pray servently. And both
the one and the other are not only parts of our duty which God commands, but
instruments and helps to doing our duty. Such a combination there is between
all the things that God requires, to make them easy and familiar, desirable
and pleasant, and to make us entire and complete, impartial and universal in
our obedience to him. We cannot do one duty that he bids us, but the rest
become more easy to be done; nor love sincerely one command, but the rest will
draw us unto their love. The holiness of our conversation is it self an
invitation of God to our souls, much more when we second it with the
attractives of holy prayers and affectionate desires: And both the sweetness of
such converses with God, and the power of his grace that is consequent upon our
hearty desires, will engage and enable us to continue an holy conversation. As
impurity brings us into familiarity with the Devil, so holiness brings us into
fellowship with God; and the happiness of that is so great, that we shall not
be tempted easily to leave it, but be excited to do all we can for to maintain
it. Psellus I remember tells us, that the mad fellows of Manes, and others,
frantickly and diabolically acted, used to eat the excrements of a man; and
being asked the reason of it, they made no answer but this, that to those that
eat such things (...), the spirits were made friendly and benevolent. I am sure
the Devil delights in those who feed upon the filth of the world; and the very
prayers of such persons are but a strange charm or spell that have a force to
hold them faster in the Devils arms. While men pray with any affection to
sin, or with no disaffection to it, they will but the more certainly continue
in it, and never think of forsaking that which they hope their prayers have
despoiled of all power to do them any harm. They think they have conjured out
all the bitterness, all the sting and the fire that is in sin by that holy
breath, and so they take the confidence to embrace and kiss it as an harmless
thing. But a holy man (as I said) is Gods delight, and he takes pleasure in
those that fear him. And therefore all the Religious acts of a pious soul, make
his ordinary Employments to be religious and pleasing unto God, and they again
have an influence upon his acts of Worship to make them more full of devotion
and true fervor. As wicked actions do nourish in some most passionate prayers
for forgiveness, and those prayers they hope obtain leave for them to do
wickedly upon no greater charge than to ask forgiveness: So good actions do
beget in men a greater longing after the divine grace, and these desires make
them still do well out of a hope to have more grace. When a good man lifts up
his hands to God, he draws down God into his soul that he may work with his
hands that which is good in his employment, and he is not so busy in that
employment, that his hands should grow so heavy or dirty by it, as to be
unwilling or unfit to lift them up again to Heaven.

We are to look then after such a demeanor, that we may be fit at all times
when God shall give us an occasion to wait upon him: our life must be so
framed, that one piece of them may well fit and fall in with another. And as it
is with a Table or some such thing that is taken in pieces and disjointed upon
occasion, but may presently be set together, and all the parts will come into
their proper places without much noise and trouble; So it should be with our
lives, though one piece of them be distant from another by reason of our
various businesses; yet when our necessities do require, we should be able
without much labor to join the most different parts together with the rest,
and not be forced to spend our time, to plain and smooth, and knock (as I may
speak) our hearts together, when we should be in a holy frame, and be spending
our time in the enjoyment of our greatest good. I mean by all this, that our
worldly employments must not hinder our Religion, but rather be a means to
further and promote it; so that where they end, it may take its place, and fall
in as if that room were prepared for it.

V. It is to be acknowledged, that even of those holy actions which respect
God, some are necessary, and some voluntary, i. e. some are of that nature,
that unless we do them, we cannot be Christians; but others of them will make
us excellent. Some are so necessary that we cannot be saved unless we do them;
others are aspirations after a greater glory. Those that are under an express
command, are indispensibly necessary to our happiness, and those actions of
piety that are free and uncommanded, I look upon as securing our happiness, and
without which we may be much in danger to neglect the most necessary. By these
Acts which are voluntary, (that I may avoid all quarrel) I understand only the
higher degrees of those acts which are necessary, unto which I imagine that no
man will take himself to be at all times absolutely engaged. And yet if at some
seasons they be not performed, it may hazard our estate, though not certainly
expose it to ruin. Such Free-will-offerings there were among the Jews, which
were only larger expressions of their gratitude in the same things wherein at
other times they did use to manifest it. And that they were a piece of Gods
Worship and Service, though not particularly commanded by him, is apparent from
the direction that God gives about them when they should be brought unto him.
But these Laws that God makes for their right and acceptable performance, do
again show, that he expected them from his friends, though he did not
absolutely enjoin them. To pray then, or to meditate and give praise to God,
are things of an unavoidable concernment: But by longer study and pains to
raise our hearts to a greater intention of mind, to greater expressions of
love, to higher and more sublime admirations, etc. is that which I call free,
but yet fit at some seasons. As it is in Almes-giving, so it is in these other
holy duties. There seems to be a certain portion which we are bound to give to
poor people, or else we defraud them of their due; but it is fit also that we
should enlarge our Charity beyond the bounds of mere necessity, lest by being
Niggards, at last we become Thieves, and by doing no more than is due, we be
tempted sometimes to do less. And so the Jews distinguished Charity into two
sorts, one of which they called Righteousness, which was exactly according to
the Law of Moses, and the other they called Mercy or Bounty, being above the
proportion the Law required. According to which notion, he that performed the
first sort was named a Just Man; and he that performed the later was named
Good. The Priests lived upon Gods Alms, and he assigned unto them a great part
of that Maintenance which the Jews brought to him; and though I might give
other instances of Charity, yet I shall choose to instance in one that concerned
them, because less observed. The Law required that they should give the
first fruits of their Land unto the Priest as his receiver, Numb. 18.12. Deuteronomy.
38.4. Though the quantity of them be not there determined, yet because Ezekiel
says ( Ezekiel. 45.13.) that they should offer the sixth part of an Ephah of an
Homer, their wise men have resolved that they were bound to bring at least a
sixtieth part to God for his Ministers; for an Ephah is the tenth part of an
Homer. V. Seld. Hist. of Tithes. cap. 2. Ainsw. in Numb. 18.12.
But notwithstanding this, they account him but a covetous man that brought no
more; and they called this a Terumah (or Heave Offering) of an evil eye. For
thus Maimon writes; A good eye, ( i. e. a liberal person) brings one part of
forty, a mean eye ( i. e. a man that has some goodness) one of fifty; and an
evil eye ( i. e. a niggard) one of sixty; less than which it was not lawful
for him to give. Therefore the Son of Syrach thus exhorts, Give the Lord his
honor with a good eye, Eccles. 35.8.
and diminish not the first fruits of thy hand, i. e. do not stint thy self to
a mere Legal righteousness in giving God his first fruits; however grudge not
to give him so much as the Law requires. This Doctrine of theirs is a good rule
for us to square such actions by. We must do what Justice reduires, and give so
much as we in conscience think God absolutely exacts of us, but we should
sometimes extend our hand beyond that which the Scripture calls righteousness,
and by liberality come up to the degree of good men. V. D. Ham. Sermon of Poor
man's Tything.
Now we cannot well think that God requires a less portion of us then he did of
the Jews, who once in three years gave a tithe to the poor; and therefore if
any one will bind himself to a thirtieth part of his yearly increase (which is
the same with a triennial tithe) yet it will be fit that he make some free will
offerings, and not confine himself to such a scantling, which he has tied his
hands unto, lest he should fall short of them through his carelessness. And the
one of these he looks upon as necessary, because else he may be worse than a
Jew, yea than a Jew of an evil eye; and the other as a voluntary oblation to
the honor of God, who does for us not only more than we deserve, but more
than we desire.

Now Prayer and such like duties, may be drawn within the compass of the same
reason. Acts 10.2. So (...) is rendered by continual. Romans 9.2.
And fince the Scripture tells us that we should pray always, Luke 18.1. and
that we should pray continually, or without ceasing, 1 These. 5.17. it is most
necessary that there should be some considerable portions of our time allotted
to it. And though it be not said in the Bible, how often in the day we should
be upon our knees; yet all good men (that I know or ever heard of) do think,
that nothing less than a morning and evening-Worship can denominate prayer
continual or without ceasing. As the Lambs that were offered every morning and
every evening throughout the year, were called in Moses his Law the continual
burnt-offering, Exodus 29.42. Numb. 28.3. So the offering unto God our Morning
and Evening Sacrifices, even the calves of our lips, for what we want, and what
we have received, may be called our continual prayer, which must be always
joined (according to the Apostle) with thanksgiving. From their practice we
fetch the best explication of these expressions concerning prayer, that I know
of, and so we may of such things as I before mentioned, and many others also.
These solemn Addresses then we may by no means omit, but look upon our selves
as necessarily bound unto them. And as among them there were two Lambs more
offered upon the Sabbath day, over and above the continual Burnt-offering, (
Numb. 28.8, 9.) So we cannot but think our selves most strictly enjoined to
enlarge our prayers and praises upon the Lords day, to a greater length than at
other times, and to offer as many more sacrifices as other days require.
Several other times there were wherein God required more than the ordinary
offerings of them (as may be seen in the same Chapter) but yet he left room for
some voluntary Oblations, which (as I said) he thought they would be so kind as
to bestow upon him, or else he would never have made mention of them, nor given
any Laws about them. Even so has God left it to our love and good will we bear
to him, to make choice of some seasons (beside those he has appointed) wherein
to pay him larger acknowledgments, and testify a more abundant affection to
his service, both by the fervency of our souls in what we do, and by the
greater proportion of time which we allow for the doing of it. Pral. 119.164.
and in the 108 verse, he prays God to accept the Free-will-offerings of his
mouth.
And therefore it will be highly accepted of God, if sometimes we pray with
David seven times in a day, and make some addition to the daily sacrifice.
Charles the fifth, though a person of a high employment (as David was) used to
continue so long at his private devotions, and was so sparing in his ordinary
speech, that his Courtiers were wont to say, Chytreus Orat. de eo.
he did saepius cum Deo, quam hominibus loqui, speak oftener with God, than he
did with men. The more pious sort likewise among the Jews, seem to have prayed
at least four times in a day, twice at the Temple, if they were at Jerusalem,
and twice in their own private houses. At the third hour when the Disciples
were together (at the Temple it is very probable, because all Nations that were
at Jerusalem took notice of it) the holy Ghost came down upon them, Acts 2.15.
which was the time of the morning sacrifice, about nine of the clock, according
to our reckoning. On the same day (in all likelihood) two of the Apostles went
into the Temple at another hour of Prayer, which was the ninth, ( viz. three of
the clock in the afternoon, (...).
the time of the evening-sacrifice) as you read Acts 3.1. where the words are
so placed, that they intimate another hour of prayer to be usual besides that.
From the constant observance of these appointed times, they are said in Luke
24. ult. to be (...), continually in the Temple blessing and praising God. But
beside you may find that Peter prayed at twelve of the Clock in his own private
house, which was the sixth hour of the day in their language, Acts 10.9. and
therefore it is probable that the twelfth hour, or six at night, was another
hour for private prayer among them. And if it should be said, That he being not
at Jerusalem, but Joppa, might omit the hours of prayer at the Temple, that
will be confuted by the practice of Cornelius (in the same Chapter, ver. 3, and
30.) who being at Caesarea, prayed at the ninth hour, and the holy Apostle
cannot be thought to be less devout than him. There is nothing lost by going
unto God; and the oftener we perswace our selves to it, the better success we
shall have in all other things, according to a good Proverb (of the Dutch I
think) which says, Thefts never enrich, Alms never impoverish, Prayer hinders
no work. Our Savior has given us an example of extraordinary devotion in his
own practice, Luke 6.12. where you read that he continued all night in prayer
to God, or (as (...), is by some rendered) in one of Gods places of Prayer:
Thither he retired from company, and passed the night in holy meditations and
converses with God. He did not sin when he slept other nights, but this was a
more illustrious act of holiness, and a more fervent expression of love to his
Father, above that which the precept requires. And concerning such devotions
the Mahometans say, Preces nocturnae sunt splendour dici; Night-prayers are the
light of the day. So in Luke 22.41. we find that our Lord fell upon his knees
and prayed; and not long after, ver. 44. (...), he prayed more earnestly and
fervently than before. He did not fail of his duty in the former prayer,
because it was not in such a vehement degree; but in this later prayer he
expressed a more excellent zeal and ardor of spirit then he was absolutely tied
unto. All these things are written for our instruction, that we may learn to
lay hold on the occasions that are presented to us, of intending our spirits,
and raising our hearts beyond their common pitch and temper. I remember Strabo
says concerning the ancient Venetians, that they used to sacrifice to Diomedes
(...), a white Horse, which might both signify the purity, and also the
strength and speed of the service that they owed to God. We must always be holy
and pure in our Addresses to the Divine Majesty; but we have examples in
Scripture (and it will be highly pleasing unto him) to put to greater strength
sometimes, and press forward with a greater speed; to collect all the forces of
our souls, and strain them to the noblest degree of desire and love that we are
able.

VI. You may likewise consider further, That one act of Religion is preparative
to another. The daily sacrifice makes the weekly more acceptable. Continual
prayer makes us more fit for prayer on the Lords day. The morning and evening
spent well, make us ready to spend a whole day better. And these constant
sacrifices keep the Altar warm, and maintain a fire to kindle our
free-will-offerings. And one free-will-offering inflames our heart to a
forwardness to present God with another. So likewise back again, these
extraordinary devotions make us more solemn in our ordinary duties; and the
Lords day employed well, makes every day to be spent the better.

Meditation and retired thoughts fit us for prayer; and prayer again nourishes
and feeds our meditations. Both those fit us to receive holy exhortations, and
useful instructions in Sermons; and they again stir us up to more frequency
and fervency in prayer and meditation. And these together with all the former
that I have mentioned, prepare us for the Eucharist, and the keeping the holy
Feast of Christians in the Supper of the Lord. This again affords such
nutriment, that it makes us strong in the Grace of Christ, and to perform all
other duties with a greater gust and relish, with more delight to God, and unto
our selves.

VII. But it must also be acknowledged, That there is some other preparations
requisite to holy duties, beside all this that I have mentioned. For though
fervency in any one duty of our Religion, does but fit us to be more fervent in
all the rest; and though the works of our employment conscientiously
discharged, do fit us for the duties of Religion, yet to the doing of them
fervently, it is needful that we lay out of our mind all other thoughts that
concern not them. Now the works of our ordinary employment being about a
different matter from the works of devotion, and the mind full of one thing,
not being able presently to be void for other company, we must spend some time
to discharge our thoughts of such objects as are alien to these holy duties we
go about. Constancy in our lawful business does hinder many indispositions and
ill habits in our minds, that else would grow up in us; but yet they themselves
may leave some little indispositions in us, at least to such a fervency in
devotion as we would arise unto. They therefore must be turned out of doors,
and the thoughts of them must be laid aside, that God may come in and possess
himself of us. The Altar of God ( Exodus 27.4, 5.) was made with a grate in the
midst of it, that let the ashes fall through, so that the fire might burn
hotter and more purely. But yet for all this, it is most likely that the
sacrifice would need some stirring, that so the ashes might be shaken off more
perfectly, and it more entirely consumed (and therefore you read of flesh-hooks
among the Utensils of the Altar, wherewith the Priest ordered the flesh while
it burn in the fire:) Just so it is with our hearts, in which a continual fire
ought to burn; though they be like a grate or seive, and let worldly thoughts
pass through and run out of them, which else like ashes would make the flame to
be dim and pale; yet besides this care, there will be need of some shaking
and stirring up of our selves, that we may more fully clear our hearts of all
those earthly cloggs that will stick and cling unto us. Now the higher that
holy act of worship is which we are to perform, and the seldomer it does return
to be performed, and the more vehement that expression of love is which we
would make in it; the more solemn must be our preparation, and the larger time
there must be allowed, for taking our minds from other things, and bringing
them to a serious intention upon this alone. And therefore since our approaches
to the Lords Table are of such moment, and since they profit us not without the
operation of our own mind, and that benefit likewise so great when we come
aright, it cannot be thought but that we should use a great care and
circumspection to fit our selves for such near converses, especially since they
are not so frequently performed as other duties. And yet in this preparation
there is also a latitude, so that I cannot well determine how much is of
absolute necessity to be done; and if I should, still we may go beyond those
limits, and perform more acceptable service unto God.

If you would know now after all that has been said, wherein preparation to
his holy duty does more particularly consist; I may briefly resolve you about
it thus; We must deny to our selves lawful things, by sequestration of our
selves from our ordinary business, by abstinence from food, and from the most
chaste embraces which the Apostle speaks of 1 Cor. 7.5. And this must be done
for no other end, but that we may more fully know the estate of our souls
(which I suppose we are already acquainted withal) and be more deeply
apprehensive of the evil of sin, and more sorrowfully bewail it, and more
rationally resolve against it. That we may pray with greater appetite, and
praise his Name with a more delicious relish when we distaste all other things:
and in short that by disburdening of our bodies, we may ascend up to Heaven
with greater felicity in our thoughts and meditation.

And because preparation to the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood is the
prime end of this discourse; I shall next descend to treat of that, and in the
following Chapter consider what greater degree of holiness may be conceived
requisite to the right performance of that Christian duty.

CHAP. X.
I. THat we are to lay aside (some time before we come to the Lords Table) all
our worldly employments though never so innocent, has been already suggested.
We must so order our affairs, that they may not hinder us in any of those acts
which I am about to mention. And if they prove to be of great weight, then this
thing must needs be premised. For every act must have some time allowed wherein
it is to be done, and we cannot do two things at one time, especially when they
are of such a distant nature as spiritual an carnal things. We find in our
selves that when one faculty is in act, we cannot intend the acts of another.
(...). Porphyr.
We cannot at the same time operate according to the brutal part, and
contemplate the things of a rational life: Much less can one faculty mind two
objects at once; or can our mind be busied both about our earthly affairs, and
our spiritual concernments.

And besides this, Seeing it is the design of a Christian in this duty, to get
as near to Heaven as he can, it is the more necessary that he not only lay
aside his business, but his body too. He is to endeavor to strip himself of
his clothes, to put off his outward man, that he may have a more naked and open
sight of future glory, and render his mind more sensible of God, and fit to
receive a deeper impression from his hand. At this season we are to put forth
the strongest acts of faith, to excite the hottest flames of love, to renew our
resolutions; to bind the obligations that are upon us faster about our souls;
which cannot be done but by a solemn heart. So that this separation from our
business beforehand, seems to come within some degree of a necessary duty.

And give me leave to tell you, that it would be a thing of singular advantage,
if those that have so much room in their houses, would set some little place
apart for holy duties, and let it be acquainted with no other thoughts, but
only of God and their own souls. This would be an easy way of putting all our
employments out of our thoughts, which would all leave us when we came to that
place where they were strangers. None of them would be so bold as to tread in
that place, which is washed with tears; they would not draw breath, nor live in
that place where there is no air but Sighs and Prayers; they would never abide
in that room where no inhabitant is but God alone. For we find that if we come
to any place where something of note and concernment has been done by us,
though it be slipped out of our minds, the very sight of the place revives the
image of that thing, and stirs it up again in our memories. If therefore we
had a place of privacy, where we did nothing but read and pray, and invite God
into our company, as soon as ever we did but look into it, the face of God
would meet us, and we should be struck with a certain awe and reverence from
his presence that uses to be there with us. And a sweet remembrance also of
what pleasure has passed there either in joy or sorrow, would by a kind of
natural way be revived. But if a man pray in his Counting House, the thoughts
of his money will be apt to meet him as soon as he steps in at the door, his
bills and bonds will thrust themselves into his mind as soon as the Book of
God, so that he will find it more difficult to drive away such impertinent
thoughts. Let us therefore resolve on this as the first step to the Lords
Table, to separate our selves at least from all worldly employments, if not
from worldly places. If we cannot have a little Chapel in our own houses, yet
let us look to that in our own heart, that nothing now but God do enter into
it. Say thus in your own meditations; Be gone you vain things, for I am going
to my God. Yea Lord, do thou bid them to be gone, and not dare to appear in thy
presence. Welcome holy thoughts and pure desires! O happy time wherein I may
embrace my dearest love, and solace my self in the arms of my Savior! I
charge you O my companions, that you haste away as fast as the Hinds or the
Roes, and that you stir not, or disturb the beloved of my soul. Come not near I
charge you; make no noise to displease him, or to call me away from his
enjoyment. It is the voice of my beloved; I hear him inviting of me to his
house of banquets, I see him coming to entertain me; let all flesh therefore be
silent, and not be so bold as to whisper in his presence.

II. When you are thus at leisure, set your self to consider what is the end of
this Rite, and what lies hid under the Ceremony. This one thing seems to me to
call for some solemn thoughts beforehand; because it is a piece of our Religion
that is clothed with an outward garment; it has something of a positive
institution in it, and retains something of the ceremony, the signification of
which is to be studied, lest we should not discern the Lords body. 1 Cor. 11.19.
If we look not beyond the shadow, we shall feed nothing but our body; or if we
draw aside the veil but half way, we shall lose a great part of the food of our
souls, which are instructed by every part of this holy action. You must
therefore labor to uncover the face of this mysterious food, and consider it
in all those notions wherein I have laid it open before you. This I judge to be
the more needful (together with the rest of those directions which I have to
add) because now this Feast does return more seldom then it did in ancient
times; and so our minds may have let slip the remembrance of many of the ends
of it, or at least may retain but weak and dark notions of them. For those
things that are not of natural light, do not use to stick so close to our
souls, as those that are engraven upon them; but by the intervening of other
images they may be either blotted out, or else look more pale, and lose the
liveliness of their color. And therefore we had need the oftener to meditate on
them, that so by a new impression they may keep their form, and then especially
when we are going so near to God, lest our acquaintance with them be decayed
through the multitude of other things that we have converse withal. Let every
man then remember himself when he intends to remember Christ, and say after
this sort, O my soul! whither are we going? What is that Table which I see
yonder spread for us? What means that broken bread that is provided? For what
end did his precious blood run out of his side? Do men use to drink a cup of
blood? O my soul! let us enter into this secret, and know the bottom of this
mystery! Let us look into his wounds with joy and gladness, to see how his
heart does beat with love to us. Let us open our heart to him; let us show him
how sorry we are, and how our heart is pierced, that we have pierced him. Let
us lay our hearts together, and tie our selves in an everlasting Covenant, that
he may dwell in us, and we in him. Such as these are most seasonable
meditations, to dispose our minds the better to feast with him.

III. And then thirdly, We should consider with our selves, what acts are most
proper when we shall be at Gods Table. We should think with our selves, what
hatred of sin, what desire, what love to God, and what Charity to our brethren
is then to be expressed; what prayers and intercessions, what praises and
thanksgivings are then to be offered. For we shall scarce spend our time well
there, unless we be provided with some matter for our thoughts, and have put
them into some method and order that they may not hinder one another. And
therefore it is good to consider with our selves, what disposition of soul does
best agree with every part of this sacred action. How the mind is to be
affected at the breaking of the bread, and the pouring out of the wine; how it
is to be moved when the Minister blesses and presents them unto God; and how
when he gives and distributes them unto us and the rest of our brethren. Sect.
3.
Of which and such like things I shall treat hereafter.

IV. And when we have diligently pondered of this, let us begin to stir up
those affections beforehand, which will prepare us to a more lively expression
of them when we come there. Begin to admire at Gods goodness; that he will send
an invitation to such a poor wretch as thou art. Render him many thanks, for
that being a Lord of such Majesty, he would vouchsafe with so much charity to
come and dwell in such a hole as our flesh; and that he would love us better
then his life, and that he will not forget us now that he lives in Heaven. Show
him what a pitiful poor creature thou art, and crave him humble pardon that
thou should put him to much pains and trouble. And entreat him now that he
will not be offended at all the noisome smells and loathsome sights that are in
a soul so sick and diseased as thine into which he is entering. Declare to him
freely all thy maladies, and beseech him that he will not disdain thee, but
come and cure thee. Profess to him sincerely all the love that ever thou can,
and importune him of all loves that he would make thee love him more. And then
imagine with thy self that he is graciously come to such a nasty place as thy
heart is, and so begin to bless and praise his Name for so high a favor;
resolving likewise that thou will never cease to praise him as long as thou
have a day to live, and that when thy tongue shall falter, thou will think his
praises.

These meditations and holy aspirations after him, will be like to the sweet
incense and odoriferous exhalations that perfume the house before the entrance
of so worthy a guest. Or rather they will be as the harbingers of the King of
Glory, that come to prepare the rooms, and make them clean and sweet for his
entertainment. For as you see the Sun does not only illuminate the world when
he is above the Horizon, but a whole hour before his rising, and as much after
his setting, affords his comfortable light unto us: So the Son of
Righteousness, who is under these clouds of bread and wine, does not only
irradiate our minds when we actually receive this Sacrament, but does appear
before unto us (if we will look toward him) and makes it day in our souls by
hopes and desires to receive him; and again he leaves some sweet beams behind
him afterward, by a remembrance how kind he has been unto us in satisfying our
desires.

V. And then (to speak more particularly) every man should consider with
himself, how God has prospered him in his estate, and so lay aside such a
portion for the poor, as bears some proportion to the blessing God has
afforded upon his labors. This was a great piece of this solemnity in ancient
times, as has been already said from the Apostles mouth, 1 Cor. 16.2. which
place I heartily wish every man would more serionsly peruse. This practice I
know continues in the Christian Church, though I fear it falls short both of
the liberality and open-heartedness that was then in use, as also of the gain
and increase that God makes to our estates. Let me therefore herein mind the
pious Reader, that every mite that is given to the poor, is a grain of that
incense that perfumes the house of God; and therefore such charity is called an
odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing unto God, Phil.
4.18. And so the Angel says unto Cornelius, that his prayers and alms were
come up (...), for a memorial before God. Three remarkable forms of speech
there are in those words, to denote that they are a sacrifice or oblation which
we make to the giver of all good, especially when they are given in the hands
of prayer, as at the holy Eucharist they ought to be. First, They were for a
memorial, which is an expression we read in the Law of Moses (Lev. 2.9. and
many other places) to denote that part of the meat offering that was burnt upon
the Altar for a sweet savor unto the Lord. Secondly, They are said to come up
or ascend, which was proper to the Sacrifices that were burnt on the Altar, and
went up to Heaven in pillars of smoke and vapor. And thirdly, They did come up
before God, which signified their acceptance, and that they were a welcome
sacrifice unto the Lord.

From heace it was that the Ancients sometimes call the Lords Table by the name
of an Altar, because they laid upon it these Sacrifices or Offerings (which at
first were bread and wine, etc. and afterward changed into money) part of which
did furnish the Table, and the rest relieve the poor and those that did
minister unto the Lord. For then the custom was for Christians to make the
Minister their Almoner or steward, to distribute their Charity as his prudence
thought most fit. Now if we think it not convenient to entrust them, yet we
should judge it most necessary when we go to this holy feast, to lay aside some
considerable portion, as a just expression of our great engagements unto God,
and the charity which he has exercised toward us. For since Alms are a
sacrifice, there must be some time to fit them and prepare them for the Altar;
and since they are so acceptable to him as to be accounted a memorial by him,
we should be the more liberal, and consider upon some free will offerings to be
brought into his treasury. And the truth is, no man can be called liberal that
is not so upon advice and deliberation. These acts of Charity are to flow from
counsel as well as any other. And therefore beforehand we should determine what
to give; and not throw in a piece of money as it happens into the poor man's
stock. If we could but believe, that this giving to God is a beneficial trade,
and that he who sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully, (2 Cor. 9.6.) and
that the more we have in his bank, the better we shall thrive; then we should
cast in our minds how to make an improvement this way, and be desirous to have
a stock going in his hands. Then there would not need so much entreaty that men
would cast up their accounts in some measure before they go to the Table of
God, and consider how God has blessed them and increased their estates, and
consult how they may further augment them in such an easy and sure way as this
appears to be. Sit down then I beseech you, in a serious manner, and look over
your wealth, and think with your self, how much land or money you are entrusted
withal. Spread it before your thoughts, and say, All this has God given me,
and long preserved it from thieves and fire, and other violences; he is daily
adding unto this heap, and giving more; what therefore out of all this, shall I
return to him? I assure you it is a piece of spiritual employment for a man to
think on his baggs, if it be in order to filling the poor man's box. Say
therefore thus to thy soul when thou art alone, God has blessed us as thou
see very fairly, what can thou find in thy heart to give to him? what use
shall we pay him for all that he has lent unto us? shall we not give one or
two out of a hundred that he has added to our Estate? Shall men demand more of
us, then we will give of our own good will unto our God? Shall not love engage
us faster then any other bands? Has not God given unto us the principal, and
requires nothing back again but a little small pittance for his poor? Alas my
soul, we are too much behind-hand with him already; and have run too far in
arrears. For how many years have we lived in the world, and given nothing
considerable unto his uses? we are so much indebted that way, that we had need
now to be more open-handed, and make satisfaction for our unjustice.

But then what shall we give him for himself and for his Son, if we be so much
bound unto him for these temporal things? O my soul, once more consider what
gift we shall present our Lord withal? Are not thy first thoughts below the
proportion of his love? Is it not too little that thou have consecrated to his
service? Come my Soul, and open thy heart; it is to a good friend, even unto
thy God; never stand upon it, but double the sum, and for every penny thou
first thought of, write down two, for God has prospered us beyond all our
thoughts. Or if we have not thriven, perhaps it is because we gave no more. Let
us try therefore this way of thriving, by offering liberally unto God, and see
how he will improve our goods for us. And I wish heartily that men would try,
not only for their souls sake, but for the good of their bodies, and the
welfare that I wish unto their posterities. For there is no such sure way of
enlarging or preserving an estate, as doing good with it, and giving out of it
to those that need. By this means we do not so much leave God in trust for our
children, as make him become their debtor, who will pay them back again with
large use and advantage.

I would not have writ so many lines of this subject, if I did not fear that
men's Charity comes from them by drops, and those drops likewise are expressed
by accident and chance, rather then by any advised thoughts; And therefore I
desire that this part of our Religion may be made more serious, and have a
deeper foundation in our hearts, so that we should study what sum of money God
may justly expect from us, to whom he has given so much. Now a fitter time
there cannot be to meditate of this, then before our approaches to the solemn
remembrance of Gods bounty and liberality toward us.

VI. We are likewise to endeavor, that all the passions and affections of our
souls may be quieted and stilled. We must take some pains with them, that they
may be so mortified and deadned to the world, that then they may not be too
quick and lively, and hinder our Meditations of heavenly things.

For this (as you have seen) is a spiritual banquet, and the food gives no
nourishment, but what we receive by meditation, by serious thoughts and
affections, which can find no place, but only in still and quiet souls. When
the body feasts, a great part of the good Cheer is pleasant discourse, and
innocent mirth; and there is no welcome unless there be some noise. But the
soul feasts in silence; it eats its morsels in a deep and calm thought; its
pleasure is in conference with its self and God; and all the sound is only the
voice of thanksgiving in hymns or Psalms of Praises to God, into which at last
it breaks and utters its self. (...), etc. Do not thou know (says
Chrysostom) that thy soul ought to be big with a calm at that season, when
thou go so near unto God? There is need of a great deal of peace and
tranquillity, and there should be no tumults of anger, and such like passions,
since thou think of the God of Love. The Sun of Righteousness shines so hot
upon thee, that thou should be as smooth and fair, as the face of the water
in the brightest day. Thou should labor that there may not be a wrinkle
upon thy brow, that all thy storms may be so hushed and laid, as if thou
heard'st thy Saviors voice, saying, Peace, be still. And therefore all holy
men have taken an especial care, when they were going to the Table of the Lord,
to renew their acts of forgiveness, and passing by all injuries and offenses,
to reconcile themselves perfectly to their Brethren, and repair any wrong that
they could possibly conceive themselves to have done to others, which before
they had not observed. I have in the beginning of this Discourse prevented all
mistakes, so that none can reasonably think that he may harbor malice in his
heart, and bear a grudge in his mind unto his neighbor, with sufficient safety
at other times, so he do but discharge all these black passions when he
approaches unto God. And my meaning now is, That seeing we come to this Feast,
that we may more increase our love, we ought to search if there be but any
spark of anger that lies buried in our souls, and take care that it be
perfectly quenched. And seeing there will be many occasions of differences
among Neighbors, that we ought now to consider if there were any heats in the
management of them, and if any seeds of fire yet remain, that they may utterly
be extinguished, and never break forth again. (...), etc. (...) etc. Chrysostom.
Orat. 60. ad Pop. Antioch. Vid. etiam Hom. 3. in Epist. ad Ephesians.
Dare a man touch this holy Sacrifice with unwashen hands? How dare he then
approach with an unwashed and polluted soul? Now there is nothing that does
more soot and black a soul, then an abideing anger, which causes the holy
Spirit to fly away, and (as I may say) drives it out of its lodging, as fire
does us, to seek some other habitation. Valerius Maximus tell us, Cui praeter
cognatus and affines nemo interponebatur, L. 2. c. 1. Sect. 8.
that there was a solemn Feast appointed by their Ancestors, which they called
Charistia, to which none but those that were of kin, or had some affinity, were
permitted to approach: I am sure to the Eucharistia, the Sacrament of Love and
Peace, none shall be welcome but those that are the friends and kindred of
Christ, and are allied to each other in a brotherly affection. We must all (as
you have seen already) come hither as children to feast with our Father; and if
there be any displeasure in our hearts to one another, he cannot be well
pleased, nor give us such an entertainment as we expect. (...). Proc^^s in
Hesiod. (...). Strom. l. 5. which Heiasius says is in some editions of the
LXX. in Isa. 24.16.
Remember that then which Clemens Alex. says he found in some Gospel; My
mysteries or secrets are to me, and the children of my Family. Unless you be
the children of Peace, think not to penetrate into his secrets, and to know the
pleasures of his heart; for they are so still and calm, that they cannot be
perceived where there is any storm. And indeed there can be no thoughts more
fit for our preparation, then these of forgiveness, because we call our selves
now to account for our offenses against God; and alas (...) they are so great,
that they may well drown the remembrance of all offenses that others have given
us, and wash them out of our thoughts, as if they had never been. Seeing then
you go to beg pardon of God when you remember his Sons blood; if you have
offended any man, first go and lay your selves at his feet, and so approach to
take hold of Christ, and kiss his feet in an humble acknowledgment of your
offenses. Say to every one of your passions and corrupt affections, Come forth,
for I am resolved you shall be slain. Methinks you should begin to dye at the
very thoughts of a dying Savior. Methinks you should swoon away at the very
sight of yonder blood; that you should not stay till you come to the Cross of
Christ, but give up the ghost before you see but the image of his death. Do you
not feel the power of his death afar off? Do not his pierced sides strike to
your heart before you behold them? Oh you bloody things! What have you done?
What wounds have you made in the body of my Lord? Do not think to live any
longer, oh you bloody things. Nay, never struggle, nor resist; for I have vowed
you in sacrifice unto him. Lay therefore your necks quietly upon the block, and
prepare your selves for death which is approaching. Ask your evil hearts if
they be not affrighted: Wonder that they should hold up their faces: Tell them
that these are but the Addresses to their Execution; and protest folemnly, That
none of these vile desires shall live a day longer; and then they will begin to
grow pale, sick and languishing, before you come to the Altar, and there the
slaughter will be more easy. In particular, say to thy self, O my soul, wipe
out the remembrance of all offenses that any have done unto thee; let not one
tittle of them remain, but be blotted out. Thy fellow servants has affronted
and contemned thee, but thou have oftener contemned thy God, thy Lord and Master
himself. V. Ch ysoft. Orat. 60.
(...); and what equality is there between a fellow servants and thy Master?
Perhaps he has been insolent toward thee once or twice, when he was provoked
or wronged by thee; and thou behavest thy self basely toward thy Lord every
day, though he be so far from wronging thee, that he is thy continual
benefactor. O my soul, do but collect with thy self how often thou offendest in
one day, yea but in one duty. What sloth is there in thy Prayers? With what
strange irreverence and disregard do thou stand before God when thou speak
to him? Never did a servant speak so carelessly to his Master, nor a Soldier to
his Commander. Yea, when thou speak to a friend, thou mindest what thou
say; but when thou art treating with the Lord about so many sins, and art
begging of him pardon and forgiveness, thou art too often like a man asleep;
and though thy knees be upon the ground, yet thy mind is in the Market, or in
the Fields, and thy tongue blatters thou know not what. Away then all you
angry thoughts, stay not to aggravate offenses. Be gone as clearly out of my
heart, as I desire my Lord to remember my sins no more. If we could bring our
hearts thus bleeding to his holy Table; if the execution were begun before we
came to him; then would our anger and malice, our love of pleasures and all
other worldly affections, receive a deadly and incurable wound from our
Saviors hand when we did receive him.

VII. As a most necessary Instrument to all these, the Apostle directs us to
examine our selves. This is indeed a daily duty, but now should be adverted
with a greater intention and ardency of affection, when we are about these
sacred things. We should examine our selves even about our neglects in the
review of our selves, about the coldness of our prayers, the smallness of our
sorrows, the weakness of our services, and our daily unavoidable infirmities.
We should make more deep reflections into our selves, now that we are at more
leisure, and have so solemnly designed more time from other employments; we
should open a greater vent for our tears, and cut a larger passage for our
sorrow, and affect our heart more deeply with our needs, and the certainty of
supply; and so raise our souls to a greater height of humility, of desire, and
of confidence altogether. Our Savior seems to intimate, that before our
approaches to God in any holy duty, it is a fit and proper time to call our
selves to an account for the trespasses we are guilty of, when he says, Mat.
5.23, 24. If therefore thou bring the gift to the Altar, and remember that thy
Brother, etc. It should seem by this expression that this is a season of
remembering and calling things to mind that are past and gone, which must be
done by an examination of our selves. And you may consider thus much to quicken
you to this duty, that the better we know our selves and our own wants, the
more hungry we shall be; and the more knowledge we have of our own sincerity,
with the greater comfort and sweetness shall we eat. Now we know both the one
and the other by self-examination. For this word (...), which we render
examine, has two meanings, which are to prove and try, and to approve after
trial.

So that in brief I may thus state the whole business of examination.

We are to use an every-day-oversight over our selves. And this general and
daily examination, is nothing else but such a caution and diligence in all our
actions, through the whole frame of our life, that our own Conscience may
approve them upon examination; as accordant with the will of God. Or more
briefly, it is a Christian care, to do every thing so, that God and our own
Conscience may allow of it. And it must needs consist of two parts, First, A
Consideration of what is our duty to do; of what is lawful, and what
unlawful, of what is expedient, and what inconvenient; Socrates used always to
say to every thing that presented it self to his mind, (...), what art thou,
and whence come thou? or as the Watchmen use to do, (...) show me your
ticket, let me see your Pass, that I may know you are a friend, Arrian. L. 3.
cap. 12.
or an information of our selves, upon due advice and search what is incumbent
upon us as our duty, through our whole life. Then secondly, This fore-handed
examination, must be followed with a serious consideration of what we have
done, and whether we behave our selves according to the Rule which we have laid
down to our selves, as the guide of our life. From these two arise the whole of
that, which is necessary to be done continually, for the approbation of our
selves, to be such persons as have a care to please God. Now this may be the
prime and first sense of the Apostles words, when he says, Let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat, etc. i. e. let him have a care that he lead such a
Christian life, that his own heart may approve of him as one of Christ's
Disciples. This you may be best satisfied out of another place where this word
is used, Gal. 6.4. Let a man prove ((...)) or examine his own work, etc. The
meaning of which is, Let every man make his work so approved, and behave
himself in that manner, that both God and his own Conscience may judge it to be
right, and according to the Word of God. That this is the sense of the phrase
in that place, will appear from the whole context, where the Apostle speaks of
bearing the infirmities of the weak, and not thinking our selves to be godly,
because we do not fall like them, by any temptation. And so says he, Thou
shall have glory or rejoicing, (...) toward thy self, and not in regard of
another, i. e. thou shall take comfort simply in thy self, that thou art a good
man; and not only be pleased with comparing thy self with others, and being
better then they; for so thou may be, and yet not be good. From this it
appears, that he speaks not of something that should follow the actions of our
life, viz. a searching whether they be good or no; but of such an institution
and ordering of our lives beforehand, that we may not fall into those sins
which we reprehend in another, nor be beholden to their sins to make us seem
godly.

And the next words, v. 5. plead for this sense: For every man shall bear his
own burden, i. e. Thou ought to make thy work good and approved, for every
man sins at his own peril. One man's sin will not excuse thee who do not sin
in that fashion, but thou art to do thy own duty heartily to God, according to
thy Conscience, or else thou shall suffer as well as he.

And that the Apostle may have respect unto this examination, before we come to
the Sacrament; in that place beforementioned, there is another phrase
following, v. 31. which may persuade us, (...); For if we judge our selves,
etc. i. e. if we do discern our selves, and discriminate our actions, and
determine our duty, and live in conformity to it, we should not be judged nor
punished of God in this sort. But whether this be the proper meaning of
examining or no, I shall not be overmuch solicitous, seeing I have already made
this good, that he must be a holy person that comes to Gods Table.

And that there is beside this, a more particular examination to be used, when
the time is near of communicating with our Lord, I willingly grant. And it
consists of two parts, according to the twofold use of the word (...), which
we render examine. The first is a proof, trial and search into our own souls,
that we may know our estate, and in what condition we stand before God. So the
word is used, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. (...) prove all things, i. e. make a trial of
them, and consider what they are, and then hold fast that which you find to be
good. This examination (considering that I suppose a pious life to precede)
must chiefly consist in a review of those failings, or of those wants which our
every-day proof of our selves does present us withal. If we should never
examine our selves but when we come to the Lords Supper, we should not know
what we are, nor what we need, but in a confused heap of things many would be
unobserved; and yet if we should not also examine then, we should not have such
a lively sense of what we are to ask, and for what we ought to plead the blood
of Christ: But then this examination is but a serious reflection upon the Notes
which we take every day of our selves.

Unless it be needful that we examine our selves, whether we have not forgot
any of the ends for which we go to the Table of the Lord; and though that be a
great part of the Apostles meaning, yet I have already taken notice of it. In
short, we are to search rather in what state our Graces stands, than whether we
be in a state of Grace or no.

Then secondly, We must approve and allow of our selves, and bring the trial to
such an issue, that we pass a verdict on our souls. So the word is used, Romans
2.18. thou approvest, ((...)) the things that are excellent, i. e. Thou
professest to like and embrace them. And so when the Apostle bids the Children
of the light to prove what is acceptable unto God, Ephesians. 5.8, 10. He does not
mean a bare inquisition, but that act which follows it, which is embracing. For
they cannot be deemed Children of the light, who do not so enquire after the
pleasure of God, as to pursue and practice it.

The meaning likewise of the Apostle, Romans 14.22. is this: Happy is he, that
when he uses an indifferent thing, does approve himself, as doing that which is
lawful, and acts not against his Conscience. Or this, Happy is he, that when
he is resolved that he may do such a thing lawfully, and with the approbation
of his Conscience, yet does it with such a care, that he hurts not others by
the use of it.

There is one place more, 2 Cor. 13.5. where you have both these parts of
examination together, Try your selves, whether you be in the faith, prove, (i.
e. approve) your selves. When you know your estate by trial, then pass a
judgment upon your selves, to be what you profess and pretend unto. Now all
the approbation that a good man is to give of himself before he go to the Lords
Supper, is this; 1. He ought to judge himself, to continue a friend of Christ,
and to remain (as far as he can find) in Covenant with God. And 2. He ought to
find that he has used some godly care and diligence, that he come not in a
rude, unbeseeming, and drowsy manner, into so holy a presence. And this is
plainly another part of the Apostles meaning, when he says, Let a man examine
himself, and so eat, etc. i. e. Let him approve himself to come for pious and
holy ends, and with a due regard to the Lords most sacred body and blood.

Lay thy hand then (Christian Reader) upon thy heart, before thou come to
this Table, and feel how the pulse of thy soul beats: mind whether it beat
evenly, or after a distempered sort. Does it move three times as quick, when
thou think of the World, as it does when God is in thy heart? When art thou
all in a heat? When thou art in pursuit of the World, or when thou followest
after God? Ask thy heart, whom do thou love most? What is it that thou do
most constantly desire? In what Company is it thy pleasure to be? Do thou
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy mind, and all thy
strength? Had thou rather dye than displease him? Are thy graces not only
alive, but lively? Come then, let us go to this holy Feast, and thank the Lord
for this Grace, and for all his other favors.

VIII. If we find by examining, that we have fallen into any sin, and through
neglect or ignorance broken our resolution, since the last Communion; Let us
make most serious reflections upon it. Besides all the sorrow that I must
suppose it has cost a good heart, presently after its commission, besides its
hatred of it, and affliction of it self for it, with a most speedy amendment of
the fault: This is a fit time to bewail it over again, to call our selves to a
new account for it, to drown it in another flood of tears, more firmly to
strengthen our resolutions against it, and to prepare it for to receive another
wound, a mortal stroke from the wounds of Jesus, that it may never live any
more. Say therefore thus to thy self, when thou art in thy meditations, What
did thou mean, O my soul, to be so treacherous unto God, and to break thy
resolution? Was there ever a better Master? Were ever any tied to another by
such sacred Bands and Oaths? O perjured wretch that thou art! What was in thy
heart to break loose from God? do thou not blush to think of it? or rather
art thou not pale and wan, and ready to dye, to think of such a horrid thing?
Well, I see these sins are not quite dead, but still they stir and move; or
though they seem to be stretched out, and to have no life, yet they may
recover. But I am resolved, if Christ can kill them, that they shall not live.
Come along with me (if you dare live so long) into his presence, and there
receive your mortal wound from his hand, seeing you will not be killed by mine.
There shall you all be slain at his feet, you shall be nailed to his Cross, and
I will leave you hanging there, till you be ashamed to live.

IX. But if the commission of such a sin have brought any timerousness (as well
it may) upon the heart, so that it trembles to set one foot forward unto the
Lords Table, and its hands shake with a paralitick fear, so that it cannot
stretch them to receive such Pledges of Gods Love; It is most necessary that a
man advise with his spiritual Pastor and Director in the way of life. I wish it
were better understood, for what ends God has set Pastors over the flock; and
that men would look upon them as a kind of Parents, to whom they should go in
all their needs: But now the subject of my Discourse leads me to say no more
but this, That there are two necessary times of receiving the benefit of their
counsel. The one is, when a man's sin oppresses him so sorely with the sense
of the guilt it has contracted, that he can receive no comfort. And the other
is, when it oppresses him so heavily with its strength and power, that he can
get no conquest over it. There is a third season when it is at least convenient
to repair unto them; and that is, when a man is in doubt whether he have passed
a right judgment upon himself, which should make him desirous to have the
opinion of those persons, that can neither be deemed to be deceived themselves
through ignorance, nor to be willing to deceive others through flattery and
partial Judgment. If any one therefore be in the perplexity of such like
cases, when he thinks of coming to this holy feast, let him dis-imbosome his
soul unto him that has the care of it, and desire him, that out of the tender
love a Father ought to have unto his Child, he would be his guide in this
Affair. And so shall a man know how to use these spiritual weapons better, when
he is taught by a skillful Commander; and the more solid comfort shall he have,
when his Physician assures him that (as far as he can discern) he is in a state
of health.

X. And yet when we have done all this, then we should pray to God that he
would prepare us better than all our preparation. As when a King comes unto a
City to stay there for some space, he does not expect that the Citizens (if
they be poor) should provide all the furniture for him, which is a thing above
their power; but he sends the Grooms of his Chamber before with such Hangings
and Ornaments, as may make the house they have prepared, most befitting his
Majesty. So let us entreat the Lord, that after all our endeavor to set apart
our hearts for him, to sweep the house as clean as we can, and fit it to
receive such a glorious Guest; he would be pleased to send his holy Spirit,
that may prepare the place for him, and adorn our souls with such Graces, that
His Sacred Majesty may not disdain to come and make his abode with us. Say thus
unto thy gracious God: Oh Lord! thou see how much dirt I have left behind
after all my diligence, to cleanse and purify my soul. Alas! all my thoughts
of thee are but dreams; all my desires but a vapor; my Love is but a flash; my
Prayers are but a breath; my Tears will scarce fill a bubble; and my Sorrow is
no bigger than a Sigh; all that I do, I am ashamed of it my self, and therefore
thou may much more loath it, and despise it. Come thou, Psalm. 139 23, 24.
O Lord, therefore, and search my heart; try me, and know my thoughts, and see
if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. Do thou
awaken in me most lively thoughts; do thou inkindle a burning affection; open
thou the floodgates of my eyes; and open thou my lips, that my mouth may show
orth thy praise. Seeing my heart (Lord!) is so strait and narrow, that it is
not fit to entertain thee, do thou widen and enlarge it, and then come and fill
me with thy self, and say, Here will I dwell, for I have desired it; this is my
rest for ever. Yea, O my gracious God, unless thou interpose thy Power, I am
very much afraid I shall not keep this little goodness till the next morning,
which now seems to be in me. These weak Thoughts, these faint Desires and
sickly Affections that are in my soul, I doubt will not live a night, unless
thou find ways for to preserve and cherish them; my inveterate habits of evil
will smother and choke these new Resolutions. I am in fear that all these
meditations will be flown away while I am asleep, and my house will be foul
again before I awake, unless thou keep me. Ah my dear God! seeing I have
bestowed some small pains upon my heart, and have conceived some little hopes,
suffer them not to be all dashed in pieces in a night! Spread the wings of thy
goodness over me, and maintain that which not I, but thou thy self have
wrought. Lord! let me find when I awake, that my affections and desires are
grown beyond the strength of man, and that thy power rests up on me. Oh let me
find a greater fervor than ever in thy service; let that spark which I feared
would go out, be grown to a flame that will never expire; and so shall thou
draw mine eyes toward thy self alone, who workest such wonders; so shall my
heart be filled with nothing but thy sweetness; and my lips shall overflow with
thy praises. Lord! if I may beg this grace of thee, I am verily persuaded I
shall languish after none but thee, and seek for no other pleasures but to
please thee. Therefore my good Lord! I leave my self in thy hands, hoping that
either I am or would be such as thou would have me. And if I be arrived but
as far as a will and desire to be what thou would have me, that will is
thine; and therefore seeing that will is mine too, and we both conspire
together, I take the boldness to say, Lord! let thy will be done. Oh my sweet
Savior! I was going to say that I am sick of love, that I cannot live unless
thou love me, and make me better. But I correct my self, and it is enough if I
be sick because I cannot love thee. Do thou make me sick, or rather make me
well with love unto thee; so shall I come to thy Table with joy and gladness,
hoping that thou will kiss me with the kisses of thy mouth, for thy love is
better than Wine. Draw me, and I will run after thee; yea, we will run after
thee; for I will proclaim to others the loving kindness of the Lord. When one
bad Socrates prepare himself for his trial, he answered, (...), etc. Do not I
seem then to thee through all my life, to be prepared for this thing? It has
been my care neither before thee, nor alone, to do any evil. A^rian. lib. 2.
cap. 2.


CHAP. XI.
WHat preparation there should be besides this, I do not understand, it being
directly contrary to the first thing that I propounded, for any to imagine that
we ought just before the Sacrament, to have a greater care of not sinning, than
at other times. We are always pilgrims and strangers, and so ought to abstain
from fleshly lusts that war against the soul. These lusts are always
poisonous, and not only when we are going to take the Cup of the Lord into our
hand. And therefore it is a grand deceit to think that we and our sins must be
severed only then, when we more nearly embrace our Lord; for holiness is our
profession afterward, as much as before we communicate with his Holiness. Or
rather all the time after one Communion, being before the next which does
succeed, it is the time of Preparation for it. We are to keep our selves in a
constant purity, and to labor to keep close to the Covenant of our God; only
when the time does nearly approach, that we may enjoy such another repast, we
should excite our appetite, raise our thoughts and meditations, imprint the
ends of the institution more fairly in our memories, voluntarily offer more of
our time and our thoughts to religious exercises, and do all that over again
with a greater zeal, which we have been doing every day since we were last in
his Sacred Presence. You may observe, that as just before this solemnity, our
thoughts are more deep and serious, and our hearts lifted up to a greater
fervor, and we have stronger longings after Christ and his Blessings which
prepare us for the enjoyment, so the enjoyment leaves us for some time
afterward in a great degree of heat, in more lively apprehensions, and more
vigorous affections. But these through multitude of business, and many
occasions, may languish by little and little, and may abate of that degree and
ardour wherein they were, (which I look upon as the weakness, rather than the
sin of a good heart) and therefore our work is to recover our souls before the
next Communion, to the same, or rather an higher degree of zeal. And then
though afterward there may be again some abatement and fall in our affections,
yet it will be less; and more fervency and heat will remain, than would have
been, if we had not got up our hearts by that Preparation, and that Communion,
to an higher pitch of spiritual love.

The Primitive Christians who communicated every day (as some passages in the
Acts of the holy Apostles would make us think) or at least every Lords Day, had
need of less of this Preparation that I have mentioned; for as soon as ever the
flame began to decay, there was new fuel added; and that degree of warmth (to
which they were raised) was scarce gone from their hearts, before a new fire
was kindled. But now the custom is so, that this Feast returns more seldom,
and we cannot say with Basil, (...), etc. Epist. 2. ad Caesarcam Patritiam. In
the beginning of which Epistle he commends an every-day Communion, (...), as
good and profitable.
We Communicate four times in a week, besides all Festival days, but it is
very much if men be so devout as to Communicate once in four weeks; and
therefore because many things may be slipped out of our minds, and former
impressions may be grown weak, we had need more solemnly to recollect what we
have learnt, to stir up our remembrance, to renew a sense of the ends of its
institution, of our own wants, of the wants of the poor, and the rest of those
things which I have in the former Chapter recommended to your thoughts.

If men understood these things, they would neither wonder that the ancient
Christians communicated so often, nor would they have any excuse left for their
own neglect.

First, I say they would not wonder that the fervor of those primitive souls
was so great, for they had a huge care to lead an holy life, and that made them
both fit and desirous to converse with God every day. We judge of them perhaps
by our selves, and think that it was superstition rather than Religion, that
made them so forward to this Office; and by casting a blot upon their Piety, we
hope in this frozen age to be accounted Pious. If superstition can be believed
to have grown up so early, then we may be thought with less zeal to be more
devout. If they did only flatter Christ with such a busy devotion and frequent
resort unto him; we may hope to pass for better Friends, that are not so
forward, but more discreetly reserved and sparing of our company. So handsomely
do our deceitful hearts teach us to cover our own nakedness, by calling all
that superstition which creates any trouble to us, and crying out upon that as
a spice of Will Worship, which does not sort with our humor. For it too
plainly appears, that if a Child of our own brain do please us well, we are as
fond of it, as any of our Neighbors can be thought to be of their conceptions,
and would have the world embrace it as a divine Ordinance, formed in Heaven.
The very truth is, Men lend to God, and their Devotion, only such Offices as
flatter their passions. There is much of pleasure in having the ears tickled
with a Sermon; and it makes a great noise among our Neighbors, to keep days
of Fasting and Prayer; and therefore these are accepted with a greater
applause, than the sad Meditations of Christ's death, and the frequent
remembrance of the Wounds of a Crucified Savior, which prick too deep, and
make too wide gashes in our hearts. Though this be more expressly commanded than
many other things that men perform with a great noise, and spend much zealous
breath upon; yet they cast but a cold and heavy aspect on it, because it
humors not their ease, and speaks not kindly to their covetousness, but makes
too busy and narrow a search into their souls. And really I doubt that men's
endeavors to be removed as far as they can from Rome, have done our Religion a
great deal of harm. They still retain the custom of celebrating every day, but
the Priest does it alone, and they make it a Sacrifice for the quick and dead.
Now some men, so that this false notion was destroyed, and private Masses
abolished, did not care though the frequent Communions were destroyed also
together with them; and it is our manner to pay this honor to Christ but twice
or thrice in a year. And so because they speak of Justification differently
from us, men are apt to live as though good works were a piece of Popery, and
as if Alms-deeds and Charity to the Poor, were a scandalous thing in Religion.
Though men Communicate very seldom, yet their Offerings are as sparing as if
they Communicated every week, and so their souls and the Poor, are both
defrauded and starved together. Idleness and covetousness are men's darlings;
they are the brats of all new devices in Religion, and these two are nursed up
and dandled on the knees of this trifling conceit, that zealous devout
Christians do bear too great a reverence to this Sacrament, and hope to go to
Heaven by their charitable deeds. Well! let sloth and avarice pride themselves
a while; it will not be long before God take down their Plumes, and make it
manifest, that it was not superstition which pricked forward the first
Christians to such frequent Communion, nor vainglory which made them so
prodigal (as the modern style is) in their liberality. Methinks I see how the
lazy and worldly Christians do thrust themselves into the Arms of Christ, and
do even melt and dissolve into his bosom in raptures of love; their mouths
can relish nothing but Christ, and his Name is so sweet that it is engraven
upon their lips; they court him as if they would ravish his heart, and they
exceed the strains of all Romantic lovers; If he will not bestow himself upon
them, they cannot imagine who should be taken into his heart. They cannot
believe but he will take it very ill if they will not trust him for their
salvation, without troubling themselves whom he is so tender of, that he would
have them void of all care and thoughtfulness. It is a piece of self (think
such men) to be so strict and curious; Alas poor ignorant souls! men would fain
be doing something to procure salvation; they would purchase Heaven, and give
something to attain it, but we will give Christ the honor of doing all, and
only cast our selves upon him, that he may save us. You cannot imagine now how
these men's hearts are tickled and ravished with these Liquorish thoughts; and
the pleasure of them, does but make them believe that they are in greater
favor. In this transport of fancy they do verily conceive that they have the
testimony of the holy Ghost, bearing witness to them that they are the Sons of
God. But how fearfully these persons will one day fall, is a great deal further
from all our conceits. The Lord will shake off all these men with a great deal
of disdain, who offer but to touch the very skirts of his Garments. O you vile
and adulterous souls (will he say) who think that I am altogether such an one
as your selves, depart from me, for I know you not, ye workers of iniquity.
Down you arrogant spirits that thought to build your nests on high, and by the
wings of fancy to fly up unto Heaven; I have no room in my heart for such
flatterers, nor can my foul love such Hypocrites and Unbelievers. But come you
blessed of my Father, (you who have loved me, and kept my Commandments, you
that did what I bid you in remembrance of me,) and inherit the Kingdom prepared
for you. Then shall there be great wailing, and men shall groan for anguish of
spirit. Then shall the worldlings say, this is he whom we had sometimes in
derision and a Proverb of reproach. We fools accounted his life madness, and
his end without honor. How is he numbered among the Children of God, and his
lot is among the Saints? I wish all men would lay it to heart betimes, and not
think that it is preciseness to endeavor to observe all the commands of our
blessed Lord. Which if we did, then this command would not be so slighted, of
commemorating his death in the way he has appointed, nor should men be so
unmeet for it as now they seem to be.

For Secondly; What excuses can men find to palliate the neglect of this duty,
but what arise from an unholy or careless life? Many pretenses there are, I
know, to keep me from waiting upon our Lord, and accepting of his kindness, but
they all grow upon this bitter root of loving the world and the lusts of it. We
put him off with the excuse of too much boldness, and rudeness that we should
be guilty of, if we should give him frequent visits. Truly as the case stands,
most men would be too full of confidence if they should approach; but the only
reason is, because they have a mind to live as strangers to him, and not to be
his household Servants and Domestics; for then they might always come unto him.
Men plead their unworthiness, but it were well if they were more sensible of
it, for then they would not remain so unworthy. They think they must not come
so often, because it costs them so much time to prepare themselves once; but if
they would spare so much time as to lead an holy life, and be at so much
trouble as to please God in other things, they would not find it so laborious
to please him well in this. If they did always keep a fear of God in their
souls, then they would without much pain be fit to approach with fear and
reverence into his presence. One says he is encumbered with business, and has
not time to prepare himself; another has differences with his Neighbor, and
is not reconciled; a third intends it very shortly, but for some reasons must
at present omit it. None of these men fear to live in the known sins of
worldliness, enmity, delays, and yet fear to do a known duty which our Lord a
little before he died, did command us. If these persons would but fear to do
that which God has forbidden, then they would not fear to do that which God
has commanded. But while they refuse to obey him in one thing, it is not to be
expected that they should yield subjection in another. Nay, the world shall do
more with them, than God can do, while they remain such strangers to him. For
if there were a reward of an hundred pounds annexed by some Benefactor to every
Receiving; this golden reason no man would be able to resist, but all business
would be thrown aside upon so rich an account. So base and deceitful are the
hearts of men, that they pretend fear of displeasing God, when it is but a fear
of being engaged too strictly for to please him. They say this is the most
excellent food, but they are loath to taste it, because they would not be at
the pains to get themselves a stomach to it, and digest it.

They keep it for a good bit at last, till sickness make them hungry, and will
give them no leave to sin after it. They look upon it as a strong Cordial, that
must be used only in desperate cases, when soul and body are parting and taking
their leave of each other. But if it have such a power to make men happy, then
why could it not make them holy? and why did they not use it all their life
long to that purpose, but because they had no love to holiness? Therefore as
Antisthenes said to the Priest of Orpheus his mysteries, who persuaded him to
be initiated in his Religion, because all such should receive eternal
felicities; Why then do thou not dye, man? if thou believe so, why love
thou this life so well thy self? So say I to these men, if there be such virtue
in the Sacrament to carry you to Heaven, so that you would receive it when you
die; Why do you not use it that it may carry you thither while you live? why
would you not be in Heaven now, if you think it such a desirable thing? and why
do not you value that which you account a means to bring you thither?

And as for godly people who are afraid to come, because they find not
themselves so prepared as they would be; they had best take heed lest they turn
truly superstitious by fearing more than needs. Do you make it the business of
your lives to please God? do you daily live upon the Lord Jesus, and feed on
him in your hearts by a lively faith? is he before your eyes as the director
and example of all your actions? Why should you think then that he will not be
pleased with your company at his Table? Would you have a thought as strong as
an Angel? would you be able to fly as swiftly as a Cherubim, and love with
such a flame as a Seraphim? And will you stay till you be as richly adorned as
a glorified Saint, before you think it be fit to attend on him? Methinks it
should be some comfort to a good heart that it has such enlarged and noble
desires. But if it may not feast with God till it have what it would, why do
not men tremble to pray without such perfections? why do they not dread to hear
and read the Word of God; and turn away their faces when they look up to Heaven
in any Meditations? Are these such trifling duties? or do not these constitute
the prime and vital parts of this which they so dread? Does not the soul feed
it self at the Sacrament by holy Prayers, affectionate thoughts, devout
thanksgivings, and a hearty oblation of it self to God? I doubt while we cry
out justly against the superstition of Rome, many of us have that too near our
very hearts, which is the very root and life of all superstition. For (...), or
superstition, is a causeless trembling arising out of our own mind, when there
is nothing in the object on which we look to breed such an affrightment. If we
make this Sacrament such a (...), terrible mystery, that we dare not do the
duty which Christ has commanded us, then it is plain our minds are filled with
Heathenish terrors, and we affright our souls with our own childish
imaginations. Take heed therefore of whatsoever it be that would make you run
away from your duty, and do not breed up your souls in such a dread of your
Father, that you should turn reverence into horror, fear into affrightment, and
the cup of gladness into the Wine of astonishment. Why should you turn your
backs when God invites you to him? why should you feed on scruples, when you
may feed on the bread of life? why should you go and weep alone, when God would
have you to rejoice with your Brethren? I can imagine no reason of it but this,
that some have little care to live godlily; and those that have, understand not
well the terms of the Gospel; and one reason why many understand them no
better, is, because this duty is performed so seldom wherein they should renew
their Covenant with God. Men have but little acquaintance with this thing, and
that makes them to be afraid of it; and they seldom come to God in this
manner, and that makes them more fearful when they have a mind to come. If
this Feast should be kept every day, it might be apt to grow into contempt; but
now being rarely observed, it breeds in our ignorant and weak natures a strange
and panick fear. And therefore the best advice that I know of to be given to
all good people, is this; 1. That they thoroughly understand what the ends are
for which this remembrance of Christ is appointed: And, 2. That they believe
the chiefest preparation to it is a holy life.

CHAP. XII.
BUt some perhaps will say, that I have only directed those that are already in
a state of grace, and it may be asked, whether there be not another sort of
preparation for those that are not yet entered upon Religion, and what
qualifications will dispose men for their first Communion with the People of
God.

I answer, That supposing they are Baptized, and have been Catechized and
instructed in the Christian Faith, the duty of such Persons is,

First, To own and profess their Baptismal Covenant now that they are attained
to years of discretion and understanding. Let them own it in the secrets of
their own soul, and let them profess it unto him that God has set over them,
and so desire to be admitted for to strengthen their resolution, by adding a
new Sacrament to the former Engagement. That which they should have done at
Baptism, if they had been men, let them do now that they understand their
Baptism, and enter their protestations against the lusts of the world, the
flesh, and the Devil.

Secondly, As they must well exmine themselves before they make such a
profession, so now intending to receive this holy Sacrament, they should make a
new search into all the parts of their soul. Let such a man therefore first
bring his understanding unto trial, and examine it what it apprehends
concerning Christ and all his Offices. What knowledge it has of the ends of
his death, and the benefits that come thereby unto us, as also of the nature of
the new Covenant, and of this Sacrament whereby we come to partake of those
benefits. Then secondly, Call thy Judgment before the Bar of Conscience, and
ask it how it prizes and esteems of Christ and all his benefits, and whether it
count all things but dung and dross for the excellency of his knowledge, and
whether it value the deliverance wrought by him, from the power as well as
punishment of sin, more than a Kingdom bigger than the world.

Then thirdly, Take thy will under examination, and ask it if it heartily
consent to believe all that he says, to do all that he commands, and to expect
in such a way all that he promises. Here thou must be very inquisitive, lest
thy heart should be divided between two Masters. And it is necessary that thou
represent unto thy self all the dangers thou may undergo, and the hazards
thou may run, if thou cleave to Christ, and not unto the world; and then ask
thy soul if it choose Christ with disgrace, if it embrace him and a stake both
together; and in one word, if it sincerely love a crucified Savior.

Fourthly, Then next of all, Let thy affections be called to an account, which
are but several motions of thy will. See what sorrow, what pain and grief thou
have conceived for offending of thy Lord. What hunger and thirst there is in
thee after righteousness. What desire after the Blood of Christ, to quench the
fire of Gods anger that is kindled in thy soul, and to wash away all that
filthiness which makes him angry. See that thou be in love, in charity with all
men, that there be no hatred nor enmity, no wrath nor displeasure against any
of thy Brethren. See that there be such affections in thy heart as befit that
duty which thou think to perform, ex. gr. Ask thy soul, why did thy Savior
bleed? was he a Malefactor? or were thy sins the Traitors which delivered him
to these horrid torments? What hatred then do thou find against them? how
can thou find in thy heart to use them. Ask again, Was thy Savior overcome
by death, or did he overcome it? O think what triumph it should raise in thy
soul (if thou do consent unto him) and what joy it should create in thy
heart, that he has destroyed sin, death, and the grave, and opened the gates
of life. Ask it once more, What are those glorious things that he has
purchased by his Blood? And what love do thou feel in thy self toward him?
What sympathy have thou with his dear affection? and what can thou find in
thy heart to do for the Holy Jesus?

Fifthly, And then after all this, let all the actions of thy life be brought
again before the same Tribunal, and arraign thy self for all the villainies thou
have committed against thy Lord, for all the breaches of thy faith and sacred
Oath unto him. Yea, if there be but a little passion, a rash word, a vain
thought, whereby thou have given him the least prick of a wound, find them out
as near as thou can, and let them be brought forth to be slain before him.

Then lastly, Dive most seriously into the bottom of thy heart, and fetch up
all the resolutions that thou think lie there, set them in the very face of
thy Lord, and ask thy heart before him, and bid it say true, as it will answer
it at the day of Judgment, What are thy purposes for the future? for what ends
would thou approach to the Lords Table? Yea, go so far as to examine thy self
about thy intention in such things as thou thought formerly could never be
done, or never avoided from being done. Ask thy heart about the faults of thy
nature, of thy temper, and those which through humane weakness will occur;
about thy foolish thoughts; thy little passions, which none discern to swell
but thy self, etc. Art thou resolved to be more watchful against these, to use
more industry to suppress them, to redeem thy time, to avoid all occasions of
evil, to guard thy self more strongly where the temptation used to come?
Resolve thy self, and be satisfied about all these particulars, and so
accordingly proceed forward when thou know thy self, and thy heart has told
the truth concerning thine estate. For examination is not commanded for it
self, but in order to something else that is to follow after this search.

3. Therefore thirdly, Let every man approve himself in these particulars, and
judge that he is a person that means really to live godlily, to forsake all
other Masters, and cleave to Jesus only, having an understanding of the
conditions of his Service. Let thy soul give thee a good Answer upon the
foregoing examination, and then I have little more to say. But be sure of this,
That thy judgment of thy self ( i. e. of thy Understanding, Will, Affections,
etc.) be impartial and unbiassed, and do not incline to any favorable
construction of thy self, but let the Word of God be thy Rule, and thy
spiritual Pastor be thy Guide, if thou doubtest that thou flatterest thy self.

But fourthly, If thou have lately committed some great and scandalous offense,
before thy heart began to be thus pricked and stimulated to ransack it self,
make some trial of thy self before thou come to the Lords Table. Two sorts of
Converts there are. Some have not behaved themselves toward God as they ought,
but lived carelessly without the exercise of Piety and Devotion to him; yet have
not committed any gross sin, which might cast a blot upon the Sacredness of
this Feast, if they should presently come to it, nor offend the flock of Christ
who have Communion with them. If they be touched with a sense of their private
neglect, if their sins against God be a burden to them, though men know them
not, if they heartily abhor them, and betake themselves to the work of
godliness with all their might, and do firmly determine with themselves, that
they will hereafter be more careful and diligent in their duty, and desire to
come to the Sacrament, that they may be more strongly engaged and tied to do as
they resolve, I think they may have a comfortable hope that there is a change
wrought in them, and so should approach unto it.

But there are others whose sins are notorious and ill favored, known to all
the Neighborhood. And perhaps they have been reeking in a sin a few days
before the holy Communion, but their hearts begin now to smite them, and they
find such severe reproofs in their souls, that prick them to some good
resolutions. I would wish these persons seriously to advise with themselves,
whether this may not be a start which comes from some sudden spur; and to
make trial how they can like to travel in the ways of God. There are certain
pangs of devotion that come upon men against a solemn time, and when their
souls are at a little leisure, they speak very freely to them, and their sins
being great, ugly and staring, they may much affright them: Therefore it is the
safest course to stay till this fit be over, and the next day to look upon them
with the eye of a rational consideration, and see whether they have not
recovered their old complexion, and begin to smile again. For else we may add
one sin to another, if we come to this holy duty with a relish of our sins, and
a likelihood to return again unto them, after some little falling out which may
conclude in a greater kindness. It is monstrously unseemly and dangerous for a
man to come from the last days vomit, and his yesternight surfeit to sit at
the Table of the Lord, though he seem never so much ashamed. It is that which
destroys Religion, for men to think, that they can leap so instantly from one
state to another, and change a state of fin for a state of Grace, at a days
warning. Such Crimes must be purged with a great sorrow, and in a deep
humiliation; which if it be true, will make a man think himself unworthy to be
presently entertained by God in so near a Communion, yea to be below the least
good look from his gracious eye. With many tears will such a man seek but for
the hope of a pardon; many punishments will he inflict upon himself for such
intemperance, or uncleanness, or covetousness, or whatsoever other gross sin it
be that he is guilty of, and he will think it but a just punishment, that
though he were invited, he should keep himself from the enjoying of God at his
Table, and from such good company of Gods People. Shall I who am a Beast (will
such an one say) go among the People of Gods Pasture? A mere Wolf go and feed
among the Sheep of his hands? I who have wallowed in vice, like a Swine in the
mire, go and sit me down in so holy a place? I whose meat has been ordure and
filth, to put the Bread of God to my lips? Far be it from me; let me rather eat
ashes, the bread of affliction, and take my tears for my drink. No! let my
tongue rather cleave to the roof of my mouth; let my lips rather be sowed
together, than that I should presume to drink of the Cup of Blessing, who have
deserved such a curse from the hand of God. I sit down with God at his Table! A
Dunghill is a more proper place for such a bruit. Come, let us embrace the
dust, let us kiss the earth, and think it is a strange mercy that we live; and
let us stay a while to see if the Lord will let us live and hope to live for
ever. Sit at the Table of the Lord! Alas! I am not fit to lie upon my own bed.
I dare not sleep, for fear I die. And oh! that I could give no rest to my eyes,
nor slumber to my eyelids, till I had prepared a place for him to dwell in. Oh
that we were but friends, though he would not use me as his friend.

I have but represented to you the sad and pathetick groans of a heart, that
knows what it is to sin. It cannot tell how to move forward so boldly to God,
as men are apt to do; it stands still, or rather it lies down, and knows not
what to do. It wonders at the security and carelessness of offenders; and if
sleep come to stroke its head with the hopes of a slumber, it can scarce tell
how to welcome it, by receiving its kindness, and suffering its blanditions.
But then all this sadness tends to joy; and is but like the Clouds which gather
about the Heavens, which having wept as much as they can, make them look the
clearer. This humility and modesty does not make a soul run from God, but makes
him to approach to it. And when a man perceives really that he has left his
sin, and is become a new Creature, then let him entreat the favor of God, that
he who has done him so much good, would grant him the liberty to be in the
number of those whom he feeds at his own Table.

Fifthly, When thou find that it is the sincere resolution, and likewise
endeavor of thy soul to please God, though in some things thou should break
thy resolution against the very purpose of thy heart; yet let not this hinder
thy coming to the Supper of the Lord. When notwithstanding all our diligence,
we still offend, it is a sign that we must use some other diligence; and
therefore we should be induced rather to fortify our resolutions by so
powerful a means, than to abstain from it. For they that neglect it because
they are weak, may justly fear lest they be therefore weak, because they live
in neglect of a known duty. Let it be the endeavor then of all those that
study to live godlily, though they be feeble and tottering, to understand the
true use and benefit of this duty, and then to perform it for this end, that
they may be strengthened and confirmed.

6. Yea sixthly, If thou breakest thy resolution after thou have received these
holy Pledges, and feel but little strength; yet let it not deter thee from
receiving, but rather make thee frequent it the more, that the repetition of
this action may do that, which a single act was not able to do. For this
Sacrament was instituted for the weak, more than for the strong, though it be
necessary for both; and it is likely men remain therefore weak, because they
seed so seldom, and let the received strength decay, before they give it a
fresh repast. But if they still forbear when they are sensible of a
consumption, what can be expected but a dangerous languishment? If thou have
not got the victory by the use of this weapon, thou can not think but to be
worsted and foiled by the neglect of it. If thou have received no more strength
against thy lusts by this strong food, how shall thou hope by a weaker and thin
diet, to be able to wrestle with them? Approve then thy resolutions to be
smcere, and stir up thy hunger more frequently; awaken thy appetite, that thou
may feed more heartily; and so come with hopes through the Grace of God,
thou may get further ground of them, and give them (at least) a deeper
wound, though they may not presently be trodden under thy feet. But if still
thou find no increase of strength, nor their prevalency abate, I dare not
advise thee that thou should stay away, but search thy heart more narrowly,
if thou wast not too slight in thy former resolution, and bear not some
secret favor to thy sin, and have not some latent unwillingness that they
should be slain. And be assured, that if thou constantly use the means (that
God has appointed) of Prayer and Watchfulness, calling him in daily to thy
assistance, thou shall at last get the better. For nothing can mortify us, if
the death of Christ cannot; and never is the power of his death more felt, than
when we thus solemnly remember it. Therefore do not imagine that thou must
wait, till by some other means thou can effect that thing, which is to be
done chiefly by those means which thou art afraid of.

To conclude then this Discourse, Let me entreat all serious Christians, that
they would more attentively heed their own increase in Grace, by this food,
that so they may encourage the weaker sort to make use of it, when by their own
experience they can tell them what Life and Spirit it does communicate. And
what the heed and care is, which you should take, I have already told you: The
sum of which is this: Excite your hunger, quicken your thirst, and sharpen
your appetite after righteousness, and all the benefits that are to be enjoyed
by Christ. Labor to remove all obstructions and stoppings that may hinder the
free distribution of the nourishment into all the parts. Sound men may
sometimes be so clogged with colds and distempers which they have caught, that
their meat may do them little good, but only engender more rhumes and
oppilations, and make them more indisposed. And therefore some Physic will do
well to prepare and cleanse the ways for their food, that it may freely pass
and disperse it self through the body. Even so may and good man happen to be so
loaded with some Worldly Business, and his thoughts may be so mixed with some
Affairs, that a damp may be cast upon his affections, and his spirits may move
but sluggishly, and at that time be may perceive but little relish in any
Heavenly Food. And therefore he must take some time to remove these
impediments, and cast off these weights. He must blot these worldly Images (as
much as he can) out of his fancy, and discharge himself of his earthly thoughts
and cares. And then having emptied himself of those ill humors that he had
insensibly contracted, he may with the greater clearness of soul, and more
profit to himself, partake of this spiritual nutriment. We may compare the best
of men to a Clock, which though it commonly go true, and be constantly wound
up, and looked after, yet must sometimes be more exactly cleansed and new oyled,
or else it will begin to move more slowly, and not to keep time so evenly; and
moist seasons, you know, and bad weather, are apt to foul it, and to clog the
wheels in their motion. There will be dust falling upon our heart, which we
must often be brushing off; rust will be growing, while we are exposed to such
variety of seasons and occasions in the world; and examination, with an
application of severe truths to our hearts, will be as a file to brighten them,
and furbish them again, without which they will be unfit for the use and
service of our Master, and unprepared for any duty that we are to go about. But
to keep more close to the Metaphor of Eating and Drinking, you know that the
strongest and most healthy person that is, had need sometimes to have the
natural heat excited, the vital spirits rouzed and awakened by exercise and
stirring, else he loses his appetite, and his meat makes him but more
sluggish, by oppressing those spirits more heavily, which before were too much
burdened. Even so before we come to this Table of the Lord, though we be sound
in his ways, and upright before him, yet we must by the exercises of
examination, meditation and prayer, by the discussion of our Consciences, and
by the stirring up the Graces of God that are in us, put our selves into a meet
temper for to eat, and by quickening of our hunger, receive the more
nourishment, and get the greater strength by this food of our souls. For this
you must remember, that as this food nourished the soul only by its own
actions, and as it nourishes only the new man, which can put forth proper
actions; so it is not likely to yield any considerable strength to that,
without some foregoing motion and good exercises.

Mensa Mystica.
SECT. III. Concerning the Deportment of a Soul at the holy Table, and
afterward when the Solemnity is past.
CHAP. XIII.
A Devout person being once demanded, What was the most forcible means that by
long Experience he had proved, to help a man to pray well and fervently: He
answered, An holy life. And to their Enquiry, What he found available next to
that: He still returned the same Answer, An holy life; which is both second,
third, and all means else of praying devoutly. The like I have said concerning
Preparation to the Supper of the Lord: By a constant exercise of piety, we
shall be more fit without other labor, to attend upon our Lord, than he that
is at the pains of a Muscovite Christian, if he do not live holily. It is
reported of them, That eight days before the receiving of the Sacrament, they
drink nothing but water, and eat nothing but bread as dry as a bone. But if any
of us could find in our hearts in this delicate Age, to use our selves with the
like rigor, such abstinence would not make us so hungry, and vehemently
desirous of this Heavenly Food, as a daily abstinence from all forbidden
things, and a care to perform such holy duties, as will maintain a lively sense
of God in our souls. Our aptness to heavenly converses, confists not in some
austerities, and sour devotions, before we come to receive this sweet food;
but in a daily mortification and severity toward our selves, and in a strict
watch over our own hearts. Such persons hearts are like to dry wood, and they
can soon stir up the Grace of God that lodges there, and with one blast (as it
were) kindle the flame of Love. Whereas the hearts of other men having been
soaking in the World, are like green sticks, that with all their puffing,
blowing, and prayers, will scarce catch any fire.

If any now should make a demand of the nature with that I mentioned, and
enquire concerning the next thing that is to be treated of, How a good man
should order his behavior and deportment at Gods Table? I might answer in one
word, Love. Do but love, and that affection is instead of a thousand Masters,
which will teach us all decent carriage, and beseeming expressions, to the
person whom we love. You need not tell one that is in Love, what he shall say,
or how he shall make his Addresses, etc. but Love it self is his Tutor, which
is full of wit and invention, which forms it self into apt expressions, and
puts on becomeing gestures, and turns it self into all arts of insinuation. I
have read in an Anonymous Author, That he knew some Religious persons, who all
the while they were at this feast, did nothing else but only cry with heart and
tongue, I love thee, O my Jesus, truly I love thee O my Jesus; reiterating this
above an hundred times, and professing that they found a singular comfort and
consolation, in these throbs and beatings of love in their heart unto him. It
seems their love taught them, that their Lord would be best pleased, if they
threw themselves into his arms, (as it were) and told him that they were so
full of love, that they could not hold; and yet were so inebriated, that they
could not tell what to say, but only that they loved him. But he says he knew
others that would say nothing, but endeavored to keep their soul from all
thoughts whatsoever, that they might hear the voice of Christ within them, when
all their affections were hushed and still. It should seem that their Love
taught them, that it would be best to be so modest as to let their Lord speak
first, or rather speak all, and they sit and hearken to his sweet voice within
them, alluring them to himself. Thus Love guides every man according to the
temper and complexion of his soul, to make his Addresses in that manner which
will be most pleasing to his Savior, and breed most contentment to himself.

But this very love that is thus quick and sharp, and knows how to tell its
mind, and obtain its end, is of that nature, that it will enquire of others, if
they can afford it any assistance that may polish and refine it to a higher
degree of purity. And as you have seen in the former discourse, That holiness
consists of several actions of our life very different and various, so it is
here to be considered, that love delights to break forth in several acts, and
the soul finds vent for it self in diverse manners, according as the objects
presented, do open a passage, and make their way into our heart. Now it will be
but fit that when we come to remember the great love of our Lord, we should let
the expressions of our love be as various as we can, and suffer our souls to
burst out as many ways as there are occasions offered. When there is an holy
fervor inkindled in them, let them exhale in sundry thoughts, and diverse
breathings of a devout affection, that they may send up a perfume of many
spices unto Heaven. Only if we feel our hearts exhale and evaporate in one
thought or desire more than another, with such a freedom and pleasure, as
though they had a mind to spend themselves in that alone; let us not stop the
passage of those sweet odours, nor quench that ardency of our spirits, by
turning them to any other thing. But rather let us help it forward, till we
find it grow weak and languishing; and then it will be most profitable and
pleasant also to open some other port at which the soul may sally forth upon a
new object, and be encountered with fresh delights.

And truly, considering that I have already led you by the hand as far as the
Table of the Lord, methinks I might leave you there to your own Meditations
upon that matter which I have prepared to your thoughts. Those minds that are
impregnated with good motions, should be all ready (methinks) to teem forth
themselves into most proper Meditations at the sight of their dearest Lord,
without any further directions. But yet I consider again, that the strongest
Army for want of Order and good Discipline, may do but little service; and that
a throng of thoughts, if they be not well ranged and disposed, may thrust
themselves forward to the disturbance and hindrance of each other. And
therefore I shall endeavor to set those thoughts which I conceive will be in
all good minds, in their right place, that they may issue forth, and second
each other to our greatest advantage, and the doing of us most acceptable
service.

CHAP. XIV.
IT will be well becoming Christian Piety, to welcome the day that brings our
Savior so near unto us with acts of joy and thanksgiving, for the approach of
so great a blessing. And since one night may breed too great a damp and
chilness upon our spirits, it will be very wholesome to renew those thoughts
and affections that we left there when we went to bed, and so go to the House
of God in a sense of our unworthiness to entertain so glorious a Person, and in
a sense of sin, which is the cause of that unworthiness together with a joy
in our souls, and praises upon our tongues, that he will forgive them, humbly
desiring of the Lord that he will accept of us for his habitation, and that he
will come and enlarge our souls by a holy love to him, and longing after him,
that there may be room for his Sacred Majesty, and a place clean and dressed
for to receive him.

And then when the time comes that this holy service begins, we must put on
such affections as are most agreeable to the several parts of the action. As
first, We must solemnly and devoutly join with the Minister in those
Confessions, Prayers and Thanksgivings which he thinks fit to use. And,
Secondly, When he invites us in Christ's Name to come and receive him, let us
adore the goodness of God that will call us to his own Table, and let us
compose our selves to a thankful reverence, that we may receive this Heavenly
Food. And, Thirdly, We ought diligently to attend unto those Exhortations and
Persuasions which he shall use, and to endeavor that our hearts may be
affected with them. But these are such things as you can easily instruct your
selves about, and therefore I will apply my Discourse to more particular
considerations.

I. When you see the Minister stand at the Table of the Lord to consecrate the
Bread and Wine by Prayer, and the words of Christ's Institution, then send up an
act of wonder and admiration, that the Son of God should become the food of
souls by dying for us. Then these words (so anciently used) Sursam Corda, Lift
up your hearts, should sound in all our ears, and our souls should spread their
wings, that by the divine inspirations they may be mounted unto Heaven in
adoring thoughts. Nothing more becomes this Sacred Mystery, than such a dumb
admiration; and the love of our Lord is not better praised by any thing, than
loquacissimo illo silentio (as Erasmus his phrase is) by that most talkative
silence. When the apprehensions of the soul grow too big for the mouth; when it
lifts up it self in speaking-thoughts; and this is their language, That they
are not able to understand the Miracles of this Love, it shall not be long
before it perceive how much God is pleased with its saying nothing. Let us
therefore labor at the very entrance, to put our selves into some degree of
wonderment, to think what manner of love this is wherewith he has loved us.
Wonder that he should dye for thee, when he was upon the earth, and that he
should nourish thee with himself now that he is in the Heavens. Be astonished
that Heaven should so condescend to Earth, and Man should be so united unto
God. Lose thy thoughts in contemplation of the strangeness of this kindness,
that God should dwell in flesh, and that this flesh should be our Food. Let it
amaze thee that Christ can never think that he has given himself enough to
thee; but (as the Apostle says) he gave himself to redeem us from our sins,
and now he gives himself to be the strength and health of our souls. He gave
himself when he was among men, he gives himself now that he is with God, and
(as Dionysius relates the story) he told a pious man in a vision, That if it
were necessary he would come and die again for the sons of men. This would be a
rarely good beginning of this holy service, and we should be fitter for all
following actions, if we could put our hearts into a kind of ecstasy or
admiration at the stupendous greatness of this mystery. If our thoughts were
once got so high, we should be out of the reach of other things that are apt to
thrust themselves in, and interrupt us. If we had once climbed above our
selves, and were ascended into Heaven, we should not be enticed while the
Solemnity lasted, to come down to the World again.

II. When we see the Bread broken, and the Wine poured out, it is a fit season
to entertain our selves with these three Meditations, which are big with a
great number of other thoughts that they will bring forth.

1. Remember the pains and dolours, the shame and reproach which our Lord
endured. For which purpose imagine as if you were in Golgotha, the place where
he was crucified, think that you behold him stretched forth upon a Cross, that
you see his precious Blood trickling down his side; and that you look into his
gaping wounds; think that you see the pits that they dug in his hands and
his feet, the furrows that they made in his back, and how miserably the Thorns
scratched and harrowed his holy head. Think that you hear his dying groans,
that the mocks and flouts of the Jews sound in your ears. Yea, think that you
hear the groans of the Earth under the weight of his Cross; and that you see
how the Sun shrunk in his head, as ashamed to look on such a spectacle, and
affrighted with the horror of such a sight. And when you have meditated a while
upon these wonders, it will be greater wonder if there be no passion made in
your hearts. Your own thoughts will teach you such resentments as befit so
strange an object, and you will begin to tremble, and bleed, and desire, and
rejoice, and be in such a mixture of passions, as if you would imitate the
confusion which was in the world at his Sufferings.

But when you have recovered your self a little, think that it will be most
agreeable in the second place,

2. To remember with due affection the great love of our Lord in submitting
himself to such pains and disgrace for our sakes. Never did eyes behold such a
strange thing, that the only begotten of the Father should bleed like a
Malefactor; that the glorious King of Heaven should dye for his own Subjects,
Rebels I should rather call them, and Traitors to their Sovereign Lord. Was
there ever any kindness like to this? Was there ever such a Furnace of Love
burning in any heart? Could he do more for us, than dye for us? Was there any
likelihood that the remembrance of such a Love should dye? That men's hearts
should freeze over such a fire? Lest such a thing should happen, he has left
himself still among us in symboles and representations, he sets before our eyes
his bloody Death and Passion; he makes himself present to our faith; and as if
he would do more than dye for us, he desires to live for ever in us, and be
united to us. How can we choose then but fall into his arms? Yea, how can we
withhold our selves from running into his heart? Can any heart refrain it self
from tears of sorrow, to think of its unkindness? and from tears of joy to
think of his strange love? how can we be but overwhelmed both with floods of
grief and gladness? Can we look upon him whom we have pierced, and not mourn?
Can we see his bleeding wounds, and not be troubled? What heart can be so hard?
It cannot but pain us to think that we love him no more, who put himself to
such pains for us. It cannot but trouble us to think that but hearts should be
so cold, when his was so hot with love, as to send out its life blood for our
redemption. And yet when we consider, that in this stream of blood our souls
are washed, and that by his stripes we are healed, who can choose but rejoice in
his love, and hope that he will accept of our poor acknowledgements? And let us
but look upon him again as I described him on the Cross, and we shall find our
love more large and vehement. Think that you hear him saying to you as he hangs
there, Behold (my friends) how my flesh was torn and wounded for your sakes!
See how your sins have used me: Look into my heart which was pierced first by
love, and then by a spear for you. See how my hands and my feet were bored
through: look how my blood runs out to fetch you home to God. Was there ever
any sorrow like to my sorrow? Has any one loved you so as I have loved you?
Behold here I give my self unto you, as once I gave my self for you. By these
tokens of Bread and Wine, I conveigh unto you all that I have, and make over to
you all that Inheritance which I have purchased by my Blood. My Self, and all
that I have, I freely give unto you. Need any one (now) that has such
Meditations, be taught with what affections he should behave himself toward
his Lord? Needs there any piercing words of him that ministers to wound men's
souls with sorrow and grief? Is any artifice of speech required to wind and
insinuate Christ into their hearts? Is any persuasive Language necessary to
make them accept of the greatest and richest Blessings that all Heaven can
afford? Me thinks I see the pricking and compunction that will be in a heart
that thinks of these things. Me thinks I see such a soul running forth to meet
and embrace its gracious Lord. Me thinks I behold it preparing a gift of its
whole self to offer unto him; and such flames of Love seem to be kindling as if
it would fly up to Heaven. But stay, it must first cast one look downward
toward its sinful self, before it can think of getting up so high, and of
being a gift acceptable to God. It could not indeed but think of giving the
best it had to him who gave all himself to it: But alas! the time of Sacrifice
is not yet come, and it is not good enough for to begiven to him. It will try
if it can make it self a little better (though never good enough) before it
offer up it self, by making its sins feel the weight and sharpness of Christ's
Cross, that they may all dye. It will make a slaughter of them, and then a
sacrifice of it self, which is the third Meditation I have to recommend to your
thoughts.

3. Consider how odious, vile and intolerable every sin is, that brought our
Lord to such miseries, and required such a Blood to expiate it. This hatred of
sin proceeds from great Love; and the viler we see it is, the more will our
love increase to him that will pardon such a shameful act. Think therefore,
what is that which makes God so angry? What bloody thing is it which drinks the
Blood of Christ himself? What hideous Monster that could not be satisfied with
the flesh of all the World? What cursed thing that the Son of God became a
curse for it? The thoughts of Christ's Cross is enough to affright a man out of
the very Arms and pleasant Embraces of a Lust; it is enough to rescue a soul
that is in the mouth of Hell, and ready to go down the throat of the bottomless
pit. If it can but find any place to take hold of, it can drag a man out of the
very Jaws of the Monster; and it can Arm the revenge of the veriest doting
Lover that ever courted sin, and turn his wrath against it. But. then how
amiable does the goodness of God appear, that he would pass by so many
offenses, and require no satisfaction from us for such insufferable wrongs? How
great was his love, that he would transfer the punishment from us unto his
Son? and how great was his Sons Love, that he would bear our iniquities, that
by his stripes we might be healed? Nay, none can tell, nor think how great the
love was; but the more heinous and grievous our offenses seem, the more
gloriously will it shine in our eyes; and again, the more lovely God appears,
the more shall we hate sin that does any injury to so good a God. Let us
therefore stay our thoughts here a while, and think we hear Christ say to us,
You have looked into my wounds, and have seen into my very heart; if you have
any eyes, sure you cannot but discern what has put me into this gore. Do you
not see how sin raked in my sides, and tare my very heart? Do you not see how
greedily it sucked my blood? Behold the very print of its nails; see here the
very place where it has thrust its Spear. You say you are my friends, will you
not take my part against your sins? Have not all these Wounds mouths enough to
entreat you to fall out with sin? Would you have me used thus again? Could you
find in your heart to see me once more upon a Gibbet? Why then can you not be
persuaded by the remembrance of my sufferings for you? Why do you not spit in
the face of your sins? Why do you not buffet and beat them, and do all the
despite you can unto them? yea, why do you not revenge me perfectly upon them,
and cry crucify them, crucify them; not these, but Christ only? Why do I not
see them here nailed to my Cross, never to be taken down till they be quite
dead? If you would have me embrace you, say, None but Christ, none but Christ;
Christ and Wounds, Christ and a Cross, Christ and Death (if he will) shall be
our portion.

What, I beseech you, would our hearts echo back again, if we thought that we
heard him groaning such words from the Cross unto us? What a fury and a rage
would it put us into against these bloody sins? With what a forwardness
should we arm our selves against them? With what a revenge should we fly upon
them? We could not but with all speed drag them to the Cross, and torture them
to death. We could not but pass sentence, and do the severest execution upon
them. Though they begged never so much for life, the voice of Christ would
drown their cries. Though all their friends and familiars entreated for them,
their Petitions would be cast out. Though our eyes should pity them, and
beseech that they might be spared, though our Tongues and Pallates should plead
for their life, though all our senses, though every part of our flesh should
solicit in their behalf, yet we should never endure that our Lord should be
disgusted and affronted any more by them. When Caesar was slain by Brutus and
his Accomplices, Anthony took his Bloody Garments, and spread them before the
eyes of the people, as if every hole which their Daggers had made, would speak
an Oration unto them. Behold (said he) the Blood of your Emperor, see here the
wounds they have given unto him. Can you love these Paracides that have stickt
him like a Beast? Can you look with patience upon the Butchery they have
committed? Can you look through these Clothes, without fire in your eyes? And
immediately he so moved the multitude by that artifice, and the vehemence of
his Oration, that they run upon the houses of the murderers, as Tigers or
Wolves upon their Prey, and would as certainly have torn them in pieces, as a
Lion does a Kid, in the heat of his anger, but that they were before fled from
the danger. Cannot then the representation, not of the rent Garments of our
Savior, but of his very broken Body, more move a considerate heart against
sin, which was the slaughterer? Cannot the very sign of his sacred Blood pierce
with greater Rhetoric into his soul? Think that thou hear Christ himself
say, Behold my Wounds: See here the breaches in my Body; Look upon me whom they
have pierced: Read in me the cruelty of thy sins. Can thou hug and embrace
these bloody Parricides? Can thou show any kindness to so vile an enemy? Have
thou the patience to hear me ask any more Questions, and reason with thee any
further? Surely in the middle of such thoughts as these, the heart of a man
could not but take fire, and be so incensed and provoked against all his sins,
that he would leave them all dead at the foot of Christ. Not one of them could
escape, but every man's hand would be against his particular lust, and there
they should lie bleeding as so many sacrifices at the Altar of the Lord. For
who could lie under the load of sin when he beheld Christ groaning upon the
Cross for it? whose heart could remain unbroken, when he saw his body broken
for us? who could withhold his eyes from tears, when he saw the Wounds of
Christ weeping blood for us? Behold O Lord! would such a man's soul answer unto
him, I am sorry that my sins have lived so long. It was sore against my will
that there should be any of them now to kill; fain would I have had their
lives, but they are hitherto overstrong for me. O do thou strike my soul
through with a sense of thy sufferings, and they will not be able to endure thy
hand. Do thou transfix me first with a sense of my baseness, and then with a
sense of thy love, and sure they cannot but die when they feel thy pains. I am
resolved not to carry away one of them alive. If they had a thousand lives,
they should lose them all, that my soul may live to thee.

How it would delight our Lord to hear such language in men's hearts, it is not
for me to express; nor can you imagine how you should please him better, and
draw him more powerfully into your arms, then by such discourse within your
selves. Nor can you ever think to get the victory over your sins, and bring
them under your hatred and displeasure, if such a sight as Christ crucified
before your eyes, be not able to effect it. Never will they be killed, if they
can outlive the sight of a bleeding Savior. Never shall we get them under our
power, if they can escape with their lives, when we remember so solemnly his
accursed death.

III. When we see him that ministers, come to give the bread unto us, let us
employ our selves in these three Acts of Devotion:

First, It will well become a soul to sink into a very deep humility, and to
abase it self in the sense of its own unworthiness. When thou see that Christ
is coming (as it were) toward thy house, Run forth to meet him at the door
before he come in, and entertain him with an act of reverence, worship, and
humble obeisance to him. Say, Lord, I am not worthy that thou should come
under my Roof; I deserve not the crumbs that fall from thy Table. Say as Ruth
to Boaz, ( Ruth 2.10.) after she had bowed her self to the ground, Why have I
found grace in thine eyes, that thou should take knowledge of me, seeing I am
a stranger? How comes it that my Lord should cast his eye upon me? What am I,
that he should visit me, and come to marry himself unto me? And when thou have
depressed thy self a while at his feet; Then

Secondly, Rise a little up again, and mix some Acts of love with this
humility. Think of the infinite love of God, that would give his own Son; think
of the infinite love of Christ that would so graciously come to save us, and
would leave us these remembrances and tokens of his love. Wish that thou had
a thousand hearts to correspond with so great a love. Say within thy self, Oh
Lord! What am I that thou should command me for to love thee? What compare
between me and thee, that thou should so much desire to make me a visit, and
give to me an embracement? Whence comes it, that thou who art in Heaven, among
them who know so well how to love and serve thee, wilt vouchsafe to descend to
me, who know little else but how to offend thee? Is it possible, O Lord, that
thou can not content thy self to be without me? Did thy mere love draw thee
down from Heaven for my sake? Do thou still give thy self unto me, as if thou
could never be mine enough? Who can abide the heat of this love? Who can feel
thy heart and not be burnt up? There is none can dwell in such flames without
being consumed. No soul that can abide in the body, if a great sense of this
love do long abide. We must therefore entreat our gracious Lord, that he would
stay for the full measure of our love, till he has made us able to do nothing
else but love him.

And thirdly, Let us turn our Love into desire. Let us beseech him to fill us
with his holy Spirit, and to dwell in us by all his divine graces. Say, Lord!
since thou art pleased to come and offer thy self unto me, My soul thirsts
for thee even as the thirsty Land; I humbly stretch out my hands unto thee;
Psalm. 143.6.
I open my mouth wide, that thou may fill me. O satisfy my soul with thy
likeness! O let me taste that the Lord is gracious! And you may be assured that
the Lord loves a soul that lies in such a posture ready to receive him, that
gasps and longs after him, and says in its heart, Whom have I in Heaven but
thee? Psalm. 73.25.
and there is none on earth besides thee. Stir up thy appetite therefore, and
come to him as a chased Heart to the streams of water, as an hungry man unto a
Feast, as a Bride unto her Wedding, a thousand times desired. Labor to feel
something like to those longings, that so thou may taste and savor his love
the more, and it may leave a sweeter gust and relish upon thy soul, and thy
mouth may praise him afterward with joyful lips.

IV. When we take the Bread into our hands, it is seasonable time to do that
Act which I told you was one end of this Sacrament, viz. Commemorate, and show
forth or declare the Death of Christ unto God the Father. Let us represent
before him the sacrifice of atonement that Christ has made; let us commemorate
the pains which he endured, let us entreat him that we may enjoy all the
purchase of his Blood, that all people may reap the fruit of his Passion; and
that for the sake of his bloody sacrifice he will turn away all his anger and
displeasure, and be reconciled unto us. Themistocles (they say) not knowing how
to mitigate, and atone the wrath of King Admetus, and avert his fury from him,
snatched up the Kings Son, and held him up in his arms between himself and
death, and so prevailed for a pardon, and quenched the fire that was breaking
out against him. And this the Molossians (of whom he was King) held to be
(...), Plutarch in Themist.
the most effectual way of supplication, and which of all others could not be
resisted or denied. Of far greater prevalency is this Act, the holding up (as
it were) the Son of God in our hands, and representing to the Father the broken
body, and the Blood of his only begotten. Let us set this between the heat of
Gods anger and our souls; let us desire he would have regard to his dearly
beloved, and the Lord cannot turn back our Prayers that press and importune him
with such a mighty argument. Say therefore to him, Behold, O Lord! the
sacrifice of the everlasting Covenant; behold we lay before thee the Lamb that
takes away the sins of the World. Is not thy soul in him well pleased? Is not
his Body as really in the Heavens, as the signs of it are here in our hands?
Hear good Lord! the cry of his Wounds. Let us prevail with thee through the
virtue of his sacrifice. Let us feel, yea, let all the World feel the power of
his intercession. Deny us not, O Lord, seeing we bring thy Son with us. Hear
thy Son O Lord, though thou will not hear us, and let us, let all others know
that he lives and was dead, and that he is alive for evermore. Amen.

And secondly, It is a seasonable time to profess our selves Christians, and
that we will take up our Cross and follow after him. This taking of the bread,
we should look upon as a receiving the yoke of Christ upon our neck, and laying
his Cross upon our shoulder, if he think fit. We embrace a crucified Jesus, and
we are not to expect to live in pleasures, unless they be spiritual; nor to
rejoice with the world, but to endure affliction, and account it all joy when
we fall into manifold temptations. Protest therefore unto him, that thou love
him as thou see him, stripped and naked, bruised and wounded, slain and dead;
and that thou art contented to take joyfully the spoiling of thy goods, to be
pleased with pains, and to count death the way to life.

V. When we eat, it is a fit season to put forth these two acts of faith:

1. Let us express our hearty consent that Christ shall dwell within us, that
we will be ruled by his Laws, and governed by his Spirit, that he shall be the
alone King of our souls, and the Lord of all our faculties; and that we will
have no other Master but only him, to give commands within us. Eating I told
you is a foederal rite, and therefore when we have swallowed this bread, we
should think that we have surrendered all up into his hands, and put him into
full power over our souls. And we should think also, that we have given him the
possession of our souls for ever, and engaged never to change our Master. For
eating is more receiving, then taking a thing with our hands: It is, as it
were, the incorporating of the thing with the substance of our bodies, and
making it a part of our selves, that it may last as long as we. So should we
meditate, that we receive the Lord Jesus never to be separated from his
service, for ever to adhere unto him as our Prince and Captain, as our Head and
Husband, wheresoever his Commands will lead us. And as we open our hearts thus
to receive him, so let us now fold him in our arms, and embrace him with a most
cordial affection. Let the fire burn now, and make us boil up, yea even run
over with love to him. Now is the time not only to give our selves to him, but
to make a sacrifice of our selves, as a whole burnt-offering unto God. Now
should we lay our selves on the Altar of the Lord, to be offered up entirely to
him who made his soul an offering for sin. That there may not only be a
representative, but a real sacrifice at this Feast, unto Heaven, i.e. that we
may not only show forth the sacrifice of Christ, and represent it before God,
but we our selves may offer up our souls and bodies unto him, and send them up
in flames of love, as so many Holocausts to be consumed and spent in the
service of our God. Then let us wish for the flames of a Seraphim in the love
of God, for the cheerfulness and speed of a Cherubim in the service of God, and
for the voice of an Angel that we may sing the praises of God. Let us like our
choice so well, and think that we are so beholden to him, that we may give our
selves to him, as to begin to leap for joy that we have parted with our selves,
and are become his.

And as a token that we give our selves and all we have to God, we should now
think upon those offerings we intend to make for the poor members of Jesus
Christ, and desire the Lord to accept of our gifts which we present him
withal, as earnests of our selves, which we have consecrated unto him. And
perhaps now our hearts may be stirred with so great compassion, and our bowels
may be so feelingly moved, that our Charity may overflow the banks that we had
set it, and the fire that is within us may require a fatter and larger offering
then we designed. But howsoever we cannot but deal our bread to the hungry with
a more cheerful hand, and give our Alms with a freer heart, when we have
received the Bread of Life into our hands and hearts, and felt what the huge
Charity of our Lord was toward us most miserable and wretched Creatures.

2. A second Act of faith which we should now exercise, is this: Let us really
believe that all the blessings of the New Covenant are made over to us by this
giving and receiving of his sacred body. Let thy soul say, My beloved is mine,
as I am his. Be confident and well assured, that if thou wast hearty in the
former act of says, thou shall as certainly receive pardon, and grace, and
strength, and salvation, as thy mouth thou art sure eats the holy Bread.

The former Act was a receiving him as our Lord; and this as our Savior. Think
therefore that now Christ dwells in thee, and thou in him, that as he must be
Master of the house, so thou shall partake of all his riches, of all his honor
and pleasure. And so begin to ransack his treasures, desire him to spread
before thee his inestimable riches; pray him to show thee if it be but a little
glimpse of the glory of the inheritance of the Saints. And what joy will this
create in thy soul, when thou think that thou and Christ are one; that thou
art united to his most precious Body, and shall certainly receive all the
benefits of his Death and Passion? O what ravishment should it be unto us, to
believe that sin shall not have dominion over us; that the Blood of Jesus
cleanses us from all unrighteousness; that the flames of Hell shall never
touch us; that death is swallowed up in victory; that the grave is buried in
the Wounds of our Savior; that we are sealed with the mark of God, and
consigned to a blessed immortality, and shall inherit the joys of our Lord!
With what boldness now may we renew our requests to him, and importunately
plead with him for a supply of all our wants? We may put up stronger cries now
that we conceive he is in us, and entreat him since it is his pleasure to be so
familiar with us, that we may be filled with all the fullness of God. O my Lord!
(may a soul say) if thou love me so much, fulfill in me all the good pleasure
of thy goodness, 2 These. 1.11.
and the work of faith with power. Romans 15.13.
Fill me with all joy and peace in believing. Let me abound in hope. Ephesians. 3
17.
Let me be rooted and grounded in love. If I have found favor in thine eyes,
let me be filled with the holy Ghost. How say thou that thou love me, if I
have no more love unto thee, no more life from thee, and if I be so barren and
unfruitful in good Works? O my Lord, I take the boldness lovingly to complain
to thee, and expostulate with thee. Why am I so dull and cold in thy service?
why am I so unwilling to execute thy commands? why am I so weak and unable
against the enemies assaults? If thou be with me, who can be against me; Surely
the Lord God is a Sun and a Shield; the Lord will give grace and glory, no good
thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly. Psalm. 84.11.
Through thee I shall do valiantly, thou shall tread down all my enemies. Psalm.
60.12. Psalm. 57.2.
It is the Lord that performs all things for me. I can do all things through
Christ which strengthens me. Phil. 4.13. Psalm. 20.5.
I will rejoice in thy salvation, and in the Name of my God will I set up my
Banners. Lord I believe, Mark 9.24.
help thou my unbelief.

When we have done these things with the best devotion we can, it will be a
great refreshment to the soul, if we turn it a little toward those who are the
friends of your Lord. And therefore,

VI. Sixthly, When we see him give the same Bread to others, let us renew Acts
of Love unto our Brethren. Let us think that we being many, are but one body,
and that we are made members one of another. Let us ardently therefore embrace
them in our arms; let us clasp about them as our friends; let us love one
another with a pure heart fervently. If we feel not the flame hot enough, let
us stir up in our minds again the remembrance of the dear love of our Lord, and
that will make us burn in affection to each other. That will utterly put out
all the sparks of envy, anger, or malice, which are already buried, that they
may never any more revive to glow in our souls. That will teach us a perfect
remedy against all such distempered motions. Let us but resolve that our
thoughts shall dwell in the fide of Christ, and Hell can never shoot any of its
fires unto us. If ever any of those black and dark passions begin to reek, let
us but presently enter into his wounds, and they will all be extinguished. When
we feel but the loving warmth of his heart, all our anger will turn into love,
and all our enemies will find us friends. Let us resolve therefore now that we
remember his love to enemies, that we will never bear any hatred more. Let us
resolve now that we see how he distributes himself to us all, that we will
never contemn nor despise the meanest Brother, that the eye shall not say to
the foot, I have no need of thee; that one member shall not strike another;
that we will live in all peace and love, bearing one another infirmities,
kindly accepting of reproofs, doing all the good we can to soul and body, that
all men may know us to be Christ's Disciples. That we may do thus, let every man
think as seriously as he can within himself: Did Christ dye only for me? Was
his body broken for my sake alone? Are not other persons as dear unto him as my
self? Have we not all eaten of the same Loaf? Are we not about to drink of the
same Cup? How shall I hate those whom my Beloved loves? How shall I envy those
to whom he is so liberal? How shall I offend one of these for whom Christ dyed?
How shall I deny my self to him, to whom my Lord has given himself? O my soul!
have not thou espoused the same loves with thy blessed Lord? Must not all his
friends and relations be thy kindred? Now he is not ashamed to call them
brethren. And therefore let them lie in my bosom, let my soul cleave unto
them, let us keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace.

Such heavenly Aspirations and Affections as these, would be as a sweet perfume
in our souls, that would make our Lord to like of his habitation the better;
they would be as the fragrant Ointment poured on the head of Aaron, Psalm 133 2.
that would invite him to more ardent embraces, and give him the greater
contentment in us. For so you read him saying in the Cant. 4.10. How fair is
thy Love, my Sister, my Spouse; how much better is thy love than Wine, and the
smell of thy Ointments than Spices? She had said cap. 1.3. That his Name was an
Ointment poured forth, the savor of which made all Virgin souls in love with
him; and now he says the very same of her, That he was much enamoured of her
love (yea, even ravished, as it is in the verse before) and that nothing was so
beautiful or sweet unto him as that love. Now by the mention of the Ointments
(to which the Psalmist compares the unity of Brethren) it should seem the
Bridegroom commends not only her love to him, but to all his; not only to the
head, but the whole body. And therefore he compares her presently, (...).
Eusebius. Pamph.
( v. 12.) to a Garden, because (as one of the Ancients speaks) she did bring
forth all the fruits of the spirit, which are Love, Joy, Peace, and the rest of
their kindred: And to a Garden enclosed, (...), Id.
because guarded against the enemy by the hedge and fence of the Commandments;
the sum of which is love to God, and to one another.

VII. Seventhly, When we receive the Cup, it is fit that we should again admire
the wonderful love of God, that he would purchase us to himself by his own
blood. And we should consider the great and inestimable value of this blood,
Acts 20.28.
that could make expiation, and give God full satisfaction for such a world of
offenses. The infinite virtue likewise, as well as value of this sacrifice,
should be taken into our thoughts, which lasts for ever, and is now as fresh
and full of efficacy as if the blood were newly shed upon the Cross. Heb. 12.10.
For so the Apostle says, This man after he had once offered for sin, for
ever sat down on the right hand of God. And that you may wonder more at the
excellency of this Offering. Consider how many sins you have committed, and
then guess how many the sins are which have been committed by all men that
have been, are, and shall be in the World; and yet that this one Sacrifice is
sufficient in Gods account to take away all, being of an everlasting force and
power. And the better again to conceive of this admirable thing, compare it
with the sacrifices of old. One sacrifice could take away but one offense among
the Jews, and that merely against a carnal Commandment, yet this though but
one, can take away all offenses even against the eternal Law of God. And the
strength of a Sacrifice under the Law, continued no longer than just while it
was offered, but was to be repeated again in case of a new offense; but the
blood of Jesus endures for ever, Heb 10.14.
and by one offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. We
that live at sixteen hundred years distance from that sacrifice, may be as much
expiated, and receive as great benefit by it, as they that saw him upon the
Altar, or as he that put his fingers into his wounds, and thrust his hand into
his side. For the Lord laid on him the iniquity of us all; and he bare the
sins not only of that generation, but of all succeeding Ages. Think then now,
that the Cup is in thy hands, now that thou drinkest of his blood, that thou
may receive as real effects of his sacrifice, as if thou had been
permitted to have laid thy hands on his head, and put all thy sins upon him, as
Aaron did upon the head of the Beast that was offered for the Congregation of
Israel. And so let thy thoughts slide to a second Meditation which is hereon
depending.

2. And consider with thy self how firm that Covenant is which is made with us
in the blood of Jesus, and how certainly God will perform whatsoever his Son
has promised. It is called the blood of the everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13.20.
which does intimate, that he sealed the Covenant with his Blood, that he died
to assert the truth of all that he said, he took it upon his death that he was
sent of God; and as he sealed to it by his death, so God did seal to it by his
resurrection, which two put together, are the grand proofs which we have to
show for the truth of the Gospel. And then we may be confident that the mercy
of the Lord endures for ever; for the seal of the Covenant is everlasting, and
never fails. The first Covenant was made by blood, as you may see Exodus 24.7,
8. yea, there is such an affinity between these words, sanctio and sanguis,
that in all likelihood their nearness arise from hence, because by blood all
establishments and sanctions were wont to be made. But the Blood of that
Covenant vanished away, and never rose again, and so in time did the Covenant
it self, as the Apostle tells us, Heb. 8.13. And therefore the Lord sealed the
new Compact by a better blood, which is quickened again to an eternal life, to
assure us that the mercies of it shall never cease. Here therefore thy soul may
again plead with God that he would put his Laws into thy heart, and write them
in thy mind, and that thy sins and iniquities he would remember no more, which
is the sum of the Covenant, as it there follows in the Apostles discourse, Heb.
10.16, 17. Thou may grow confident, and rejoice in God thy salvation; thou
may desire him to remember, that it is the precious. Blood of his Son
which thou remembrest; thou may tell him that is not the blood of Bulls and
Goats that thou pleadest, but of Jesus the Lamb of God, without spot and
blemish. Thou may ask him if he do not see that Blood in the Heavens; if he
be not more pleased with it, than with the blood of the Cattle upon a thousand
Hills. Say, Lord, is the Blood of Jesus dead? Does it not cry as loud in thine
ears as ever? Have thou not made him a Priest after the power of an endless
life? yea, have thou not sworn, and is it not impossible that thou should
repent? Then I humbly crave that a poor sinner which has nothing to offer
thee, may be accepted by that offering. Then let me live by his Life as so many
already have done. Let me know that thou art well pleased with sinners through
him: Let me know that I have found favor in thine eyes. Let all the Prayers
that I have now made, be graciously accepted. Remember all my offerings and
accept of my sacrifice of Prayers and Praises. Yea, remember his blood, when I
do not actually remember it; and when I am silent, and do not pray, let that
prevail for blessings upon me. Psalm 21.
Does not the King joy in thy strength? Have thou not given him his hearts
desire, and not withholden the request of his lips? Thou have set a Crown of
pure Gold upon his head. He asked Life of thee, and thou gave it him, even
length of days for ever and ever. His Glory is great in thy Salvation: Honor
and Majesty have thou laid upon him. For thou have made him most blessed for
ever: Thou have made him exceeding glad with thy Countenance: And therefore
since he lives, let us live also: Since thou have heard him, hear us also for
his sake: Send us help out of thy Sanctuary, and strengthen us out of Sion.
Grant us according to our heart, and fulfill all our petitions. Save Lord! let
the King hear us when we call.

3. Meditate likewise what danger there is in not standing to that Covenant
that is here confirmed by blood between God and us. They used when they made
Covenants by blood, to cut the Beast in sunder, and both parties passed between
the two halfs, (as you may see Jer. 34.18, 19.) Which custom was as old as
Abraham's time, as Genesis 15.10, 17, 18. will inform you. This passing of both
parties between the parts of the Beast, was as much as a wish, that so it might
befall him that should break the Covenant which was made between them. Now when
we behold the Blood of the Son of God poured out, and his Body broken, and so a
Covenant stricken between God and us, by his receiving him into Heaven, and our
drinking of his blood, and eating of his Body here on Earth, we should think
what the danger will be of not being steadfast in his Covenant. God will require
his Sons blood at our hands. The Lord of that servant will come in a day when
he looks not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, (...), and shall
cut him in sunder, and give him his portion with the Hypocrites, Mat. 24.50,
51. I have often thought that he alludes to that custom of cutting the Beast
in twain, and that the meaning is, All persons that are deceitful and false,
Luke 12.46.
or as St. Lukes phrase is, (...), unbelievers, unfaithful souls, all that
break their faith with Christ, and violate his Covenant, they shall be cut in
two (as the word signifies) they shall have such an execution done upon them,
as was done upon the Beast of old, and receive such a horrible doom as is fit
for perjured persons. They shall be broken in pieces as his Son was broken.
Yea, he will fall upon them as a stone, and grind them to powder, seeing they
would not love him as the Bread of Life bruised for them, Matt. 22.44. This sad
Meditation may not be unseasonable at a Feast of joy, no more than a little
vinegar in a mixture of many sweets. And as dreadful as it is, it may bring us
the more abundant comfort afterward, by making us firm to God, and establishing
us in Faith and Obedience.

But whether the Reader will think fit to meditate of this matter at that time
or no; yet let me stay his thoughts a while now, and entreat him seriously to
think what the doom of all those will be, who rebel against him to whom they
have so often sworn subjection. The love of God cannot make them love him; the
Blood of Christ cannot make them bleed, notwithstanding the Death of Christ,
they will dye; and all the bands that he can lay upon them, will not hold them
fast. O what chains of Darkness are they reserved for, who break so many cords
of love asunder! What a sacrifice must they be to the vengeance of God, whom
the sacrifice of Christ on the Cross could not deliver! The wrath of God will
utterly consume, and burn them up. They shall be a whole burnt-offering to his
fiery indignation; they themselves shall satisfy for their fins, and then he
can never be satisfied. These men take all the guilt of their sins upon their
own souls, and fearlesly go to Hell, as though they could bear his indignation,
or fave themselves from the fury of his anger. O let sinners consider what they
do when they neglect so great salvation. So far shall they be from being
Christ's and Saviors to themselves, that they shall be their own Devils and
Tormentors. Their spirits shall turn into fiends, and they shall miserably rage
and fame against their own selves, and eternally crucify their own hearts, in
vexing and racking-thoughts. Their anger and displeasure shall burn against
their own souls, for their contempt of the Covenant of Grace: the blood of
Christ will call for their blood; the pardon that was offered, will plead for
no pardon; and all the Expense which God has been at, will be charged upon
them. What then will they do, when they shall be rendered guilty of the blood of
the Lord, when the Love of God it self will be their accuser, when they shall
be oppressed, and cast under an infinite debt which they can never pay? They
must groan, and sigh, and cry under the burden to all eternity; and the Name of
Christ which is so sweet to converted sinners, will be a name of death and
horror unto them, and the blood of Christ, which is the life of all the holy
Ones of God, will be like red and bloody colors to some creatures, which will
make them raging mad. If I could exaggerate this as it deserves, methinks I
could affright a soul that is in the profoundest sleep in the Devils Arms. And
yet why should I think such a thought? if the blood of Christ cannot do it, but
men will dye in secure-sinning, why should we think to prevail? O think of the
blood of Christ therefore, and let it not be shed in vain. Think how angry he
will be that his dearest heart blood should be spilt on the ground like water,
to no purpose at all as to thy soul. Think how it grieves him to see his love
so undervalued; how it pierces him to see his blood trodden under feet; into
what anger his love will at last turn, and this will move thee more than all
that I can say. If a man could speak nothing but fire, and smoke, and blood; if
flames should come out of his mouth instead of words; if he had a voice like
thunder, and an eye like lightning, he could not represent unto you the misery
of those that make no reckoning of the blood of the Son of God. The very Sun
shall be turned into darkness (says the Apostle out of Joel, Acts 2.20.) and
the Moon into blood before the great and notable day of the Lord, viz. the day
when he shall come to destroy the Enemies of his Cross. And yet he seems there
to speak but of one particular day of Judgment upon the Jewish Nation, who
crucified the Lord of Life, and that was but a type and figure of the last day,
and came far short of the blackness and darkness of that time when the Lord
will come to take vengeance on all them that know not God, and obey not the
Gospel of the Lord Jesus. How terrible would it be to see the Heavens all
covered with clouds of blood, to feel drops of blood come raining down upon our
heads; and next, showers of fire from the melting Sun, come trickling upon our
eyes; and then sheets of flames wrapping about our bodies; to hear the earth
groan, and the pillars of the world crack, as if the whole frame of Nature were
a dying, and the world were tumbling into its Grave? All this would be but a
petty image of that dreadful Day, when the Son of righteousness shall be
clothed with clouds of wrath, when his countenance shall be as flames of fire;
when he shall cloth himself with vengeance as a Garment, when the Lamb of God
himself shall roar like a Lion, and the meek and compassionate Jesus shall rend
in pieces, and devour. There can be nothing more strange, than for a Lamb to be
angry, for a sheep to tear and destroy. If he once gird his sword upon his
thigh, and resolve to dip his feet in the blood of the wicked, it will be a
dismal, a bloody day indeed, and woe be to all those on whom that dreadful
storm shall fall, when the God of Heaven himself shall come in flaming fire to
destroy his Adversaries. For ever shall they lie wallowing in their own blood,
and all their blood shall be turned into fire, and they shall bathe themselves
in streams of Brimstone, and roll themselves in beds of flames, and their
torment shall never cease. Much rather would I have a Lion satisfy his bloody
Jaws with my flesh, or a cruel Tyrant rake in my bowels with the teeth of
burning Irons, or be pricked to death with Needles, or endure all the miseries
that any ingenuous witty Devil can invent, than fall into the angry hands of a
loving Savior. Much rather would I see the Sun scowle, and all the clouds of
Heaven come rattling down in a Tempest upon my head, than behold the least frown
in the brow of the blessed Jesus. What anger must that be which shall lie in
the bosom of Love? What fire burns like to Jealousy? Who so enraged as those
whose love is abused, and grossly contemned? All that the Apostle can tell us in
Answer to this Question, is, that our God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.29. Our
God, even the God of Christians, the God of St. Paul, the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus, the God of Love and Goodness, is a burning, consuming Fire. And who
may dwell with everlasting Burnings? who may abide when he is angry? Lest any
should say that the Blood of Jesus shall quench the flames, and extinguish
these angry heats, observe to whom he speaks these words; not to men under the
Law, from the fiery Mount, but to those who were come to Mount Sion, to Jesus
the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, etc. v. 22,
24. from whence he concludes these two things:

First, That greater punishment shall be inflicted on Christians than others,
if they refuse obedience to Christ's commands, v. 25. Secondly, That therefore
they should seriously betake themselves to the service of their Lord, with
reverence and godly fear, v. 28, 29.
Wicked men conclude, O we shall escape well enough, take you no care, Christ
has died and done all for us. We need not be so scrupulous since he has
satisfied for our sins. But the Apostle makes just the quite contrary
conclusion, We are come to the Blood of Jesus, etc. therefore see that you
refuse not him that speaks, etc. The Blood of Jesus speaks better things to
those that accept of the Gospel and obey it, than the blood of Abel's sacrifice
did; but to all that refuse it, it speaks more sadly than the blood that cried
against Cain; and for ever shall such men be banished from the face of God.

The Apostle you see represents our God thus terrible after he had most highly
magnified the privilege of Christians; and that will apologize for me who have
diverted to this sad discourse, when I was treating of the joyful Feast of
Christians. But to that I shall now return again.

VIII. Eighthly. After all this, Let us meditate of the joys of Heaven, of the
Eternal Supper of the Lamb, and the blessed life that we shall live above.

For the joys of the other world are usually expressed among the Jews, by
eating and drinking, greater plenty of which cheer was in their Country than
any other, being a Land flowing with Milk and Honey. You may see a footstep of
this in the New Testament, beside all those in the Old. One that sat at meat
with our Savior, says, ( Luke 14.15.) Blessed is he that shall eat Bread in
the Kingdom of God. Which some say was an ordinary saying among the Rabbines.
This is most certain, that there are strange things in their latter Writers
concerning the (...) Garden of Eden, or pleasure that is above answerable to
that which was below. Where they speak of delightful Rivers, of Tables
furnished with Leviathan and Behemoth; by which it is likely their Doctors
first understood some spiritual dainties, and under this mythology did hide an
excellent meaning; but the great impostor Mahomet has from thence fabricated
his carnal brutish Paradise, taking them in a gross and unworthy sense. The
like they speak of Wine kept from the beginning of the world in a certain
place, i. e. excellent old Wine, of which their Messiah shall first taste,
together with the Leviathan, and then the Just they expect shall be feasted. So
R. Hai, in his Book of the interpretation of Dreams, says, that it is a sign
of good to see in our sleep white Grapes, and the eating of them signifies the
possession of eternal life, because they show the Wine that is kept in Grapes
(...) from the days of the beginning. All which I bring for this purpose, that
you may see, they used by eating and drinking to set forth the joys of Heaven,
and that you may better understand those words of our Savior immediately after
he had given them this Sacramental Bread and Wine, Mat. 26.29. I will not drink
henceforth of this fruit of the Vint, until that day, when I drink it new with
you in my Fathers Kingdom. Which is no more than to say, I shall never feast
again with you till we meet in Heaven, and partake together of those joys that
are figuratively expressed by new Wine. In some regard, and of some sorts, new
Wine is the best, and in others old is preferred; and so sometimes by the one,
sometimes by the other, those eternal pleasures are denoted. St. Luke also has
the same sense more fully, cap. 22.16. I will not eat any more thereof ( i. e.
of the Passover) until it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God, i. e. I will
not keep with you another solemn Commemoration of Gods mercies (though he did
eat with them when he rose again) but the next festivity that we shall
celebrate together, must be in Heaven, in the very presence of God, when the
Devil your great enemy shall be overthrown and quite destroyed, as Pharaoh was.
And again, v. 18. He says, I will not drink of the fruit of the Vine, until
the Kingdom of God shall come. Which signifies no more but that he and they
should not rejoice together any more, till they came to drink of the Rivers of
Gods pleasures. From all which we may well collect, that the Wine here in the
Kingdom of the Son, is an emblem of the Wine in the Kingdom of the Father.
In this world is the Kingdom of Christ, in the world to come shall be the
Kingdom of God; and what is done here, is a shadow of what shall be done in a
more excellent manner hereafter; and therefore this holy Feast should represent
unto us those Heavenly delights. From this Wine of the Grape we should
endeavor to raise our minds to the (...), that which is apprehended by the
mind, and tasted by the palate of the soul, which flows from God himself. We
should think that these are but some forecasts of those pleasures that he will
hereafter bestow upon us, but the Antepasts of the eternal Supper, but the
Vigils of the everlasting rest; and that now we rather fast than feast, if we
compare these joys with those that are above. We should look upon these as
assurance of better cheer, where our appetites shall be satiated, and our
thirst quenched; where we shall see the Lord Jesus in his Glory, and feast our
eyes with the sight of his beauty; yea, where we shall be ravished with the
sight of God himself, and shall drink of the pleasures that stream from the
light of his blessed face. And after those things in the world to come, should
we strive to stir up the longings of our soul; We should desire to be in
Heaven, we should thirst after larger draughts, to quench our thirst in the
Ocean it self, and to pass from this dark Glass, and this vail of the
Sacraments, to the clear vision of his brightness. For if God do here satisfy
his faithful Servants as with Marrow and fatness, much more in the world to
come will he replenish and fill them with sweetness and joy it self.

IX. Ninthly, And in the conclusion, we should give God thanks for these great
favors, for the hopes of his glory, for the tastes which he gives us
beforehand, for all the fruits of his Sons death, and the earnests we have of
the eternal inheritance. We should begin to praise him with the Heavenly host,
and to join our hearts and voices with the celestial Quire; we should wish that
we could make all the world ring with his praises, and that we could make all
men hear from the East to the West the sound of our thanksgivings. We should
sing that (...), which all the Churches of Christ throughout all ages have
sung, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, See the Learned Mr. Thorndike in his Relig.
Assemb
Lord God of Hosts, Heaven and Earth are full of thy glory. And so we read that
as soon as our Savior had spoken those words, that he would not any more drink
with them till the Kingdom of his Father should come, they sung an Hymn, or
Psalm of praise, and so went forth. And indeed who can sufficiently praise his
divine Majesty! The tongues of Angels stammer in uttering of his goodness, and
we become dumb, the more we endeavor to speak of it. The highest of our
praises is humbly and affectionately to acknowledge that we cannot sufficiently
praise him; the greatest of our endeavors is daily to admire him; the furthest
we can strain our souls, is to long for eternity, wherein it may be our
employment to admire and praise him. Call upon the Armies of Angels, and wish
them to praise him, seeing thou can not; call upon all men, and bid them
praise him; wish thou could awake all the world, that all Creatures might
praise him; and make thine own soul hear more plainly, call upon it more
shrilly, call upon it again and again, call upon it every day to praise him.
Say as the Psalmist does, Psalm. 103.
Bless the Lord, ye his Angels which excel in strength; that do his
Commandments, harkening to the voice of his words. Bless the Lord, all ye
hosts: ye Ministers of his that do his pleasure. Bless the Lord all his works
in all places of his dominion. Bless the Lord O my soul.

Mensa Mystica. The Postcaenium; or of our Deportment afterward.
CHAP. XV.
ANd now that we have had a sight of them, let us remember his love more than
Wine; Let his name be engraven upon our hearts, and his Image remain fair and
lively upon our souls. Let us find a kind of unwillingness to admit of any
other company, and say in the secrets of our mind, None but Christ, none but
Christ. Yea, when we do return to converse again with other things, let us
still be looking back toward him, as one that has got our hearts, and say,
Lord, evermore give us this Bread. Let us labor that other objects may not
come near our hearts, nor make any strong impressions upon us, but that they
may be sealed up by him, and so filled with him, that all things else may look
upon themselves as having nothing to do there. Eusebius Pamphilus has a pretty
Observation on Cant. 5.12. where the eyes of the beloved are compared to the
eyes of Doves by the Rivers of water washed with Milk. (...).
Milk (says he) of all other moist things, has this singular property, that
it will not admit of the image or picture of any thing to be reflected in it;
and therefore it is a fit resemblance of his eyes, in which nothing vain,
insubsistent and deceiving, does cast its shadow, but they do always (...),
behold the being that truly is. Our souls should labor to imitate him as much
as they can, and to endeavor at least, that the world may not deceive and
cheat us with its shadows and pictures of things, but we may see through them
all to that being which is true and substantial; and on that our eyes may be
fixed as our only good and happiness. The Lord expects now that we should
proceed to a greater strength by the higher food that he vouchsafes unto us,
that our knowledge should be more bright, that our love should be more
inflamed, that by our actions we should shine like lights in the world, holding
forth the word of life. Many of the Ancients upon those words, V. Comment.
trium Patrum.
Cant. 6.10. do note, that there are four degrees of Christians. Some are but
newly converted, and they do but look forth as the morning, with weak and
trembling thoughts, being as it were in the twilight, and not far enlightened. A
second sort have made some progress, and are fair as the Moon; they are much
enlightened, but have abundance of spots still in them, and some discernable
darkness still remaining. A third sort are clear as the Sun, very full of
light, very pure, unblameable and bright in their conversations. The world can
take notice of no common failings, yet sometime there may be a partial eclipse,
and if they mark themselves, they will observe many weaknesses, as the modern
Astronomers that have pried more narrowly, have discerned spots in the body of
the Sun. A fourth sort are they that are become such strong Christians, that
they are as terrible as an Army with Banners, and all their enemies fly before
them. Few temptations are able to worst them, but they are (...), as the
appearance of an Agnelical Host, that are so strong in the Lord, and in the
power of his might, that they overcome the world, and tread Satan under their
feet. Now in which soever lower form and rank we be of these, we should strive
to advance to that which is higher; and seeing we have more than Angels food,
we should labor to do the will of God on earth as they do in Heaven. We should
put on all the Armor of God, and gird it closer to our loins, and show greater
valor to the perfecting the conquests we have begun. We should labor to be so
full of Christ, that the Devil may be afraid of us, and run away, when he sees
us grown so steadfast in the faith For we must not judge of the state of our
souls by our fervency in this duty, but by the holiness of our lives, which is
the fruit and effect of it. Unless our lives be better than they were before,
we our selves are not made better. We are but like some of the Sect of
Pythagoras, who held that a man took a new soul, when to receive Oracles he
approached to the images of their Gods; but it was such a new one, as was lent
him but for a time, and then he returned to the same man he was before. Such a
new soul men seem to have some time when they come to the solemn duties of
their Religion, they are inspired with strange and unusual affections, and
moved beyond themselves. But it is a soul that lives but for a day, and then
they fall to their old dullness; and as for their own soul, it gives no sign of
its amendment and further renewal after the Image of God.

It is fit therefore that I should next of all consider what is fit to be done
for the keeping alive, and feeding these flames of love when they are kindled
in our souls. And that shall be the business of the next Chapter.

CHAP. XVI.
FIrst, I conceive it will be a fit expression of our love afterward, to invite
the poor the next meal unto our Table, or to send some portion of our good
things unto them. When God has feasted us at his House, it is agreeable that
we should feast others at ours, or relieve them more plentifully, than at other
times. The Jews used to send portions one to another, and gifts to the poor
upon a good day, (as they call it) i. e. at a festival or time of rejoicing, as
you may see Esth. 9.22. The Portions (I suppose) were part of the sacrifice of
Peace Offerings, which they had offered, and which they sent unto friends that
were absent, and could not be with them; and gifts to the poor likewise
accompanied them, that they might rejoice in God also. And so you read that the
first Christians, Act. 2.46, 47. after they had broken bread, did eat their
meat (...), Dr. Ham.
in singleness, i. e. liberality and openness of heart, (...), having favor,
etc. i. e. doing acts of charity (as an excellent Critic notes) unto all the
people. It may be said, that we make an offering at the Sacrament, and so need
not now renew our charity. But those that think so, forget that I am persuading
to keep the heart from cooling, by laying on new fuel. And therefore as we
praise God again in our private houses, so it will well become us, and will
much assure our good disposition to us, if we again express our bounty as we
are able, unto others. For our charity is to be a running stream through our
whole lives, and therefore this advice is good to keep the passage open, that
it may not be suddenly stopped, now that it has newly found a vent for it
self. The Apostle bids the Christian Jews to offer the sacrifice of praise to
God continually, that is the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name, Heb.
13.15. whereby in all likelihood he understands their offering of Alms
(instead of the fruits of their herds and flocks) joined with praises and
thanksgivings to God at the Eucharist. Which offerings he calls the fruits of
their lips, because they were such as they had vowed and consecrated to God, in
token of their gratitude. And this place of the Apostle seems exactly
answerable to that of the Psalmist 50.14. Offer unto God Thanksgiving, and pay
thy vows to the Most High. But then after he had given them this exhortation
to perform these two duties of Thanksgiving and Almes-doing at the Sacrament,
he adds v. 16. But to do good, and communicate, forget not, for with such
Sacrifices God is well pleased, i. e. Do not think it sufficient to have paid
your vows at that solemn meeting of Christians, but over and above that, you
must be careful to exercise continual Charity, and not to omit any season or
occasion of doing others good; and this is a kind of daily sacrifice wherewith
God is much delighted. As the Jews had their continual Burnt-offerings,
beside those extraordinary Peace Offerings, when they gave thanks for some
great mercy; so Christians besides these offerings at the Table of the Lord,
must be mindful daily to be beneficial unto others, according as they have
objects presented unto them. And that they may not forget, it will be wisdom
to keep themselves in doing, and presently after this Divine Food, to think of
feeding others that stand in need.

II. Secondly, Let us not presently return to our worldly Employments (if it be
not upon the Lords day that we receive) but let us spend the after-part of the
day in entertaining our Lord with acts of Love and Delight, with Thanks and
Praise unto him for his favors. Let us admire his Perfections and Graces; let
us talk with him about the Affairs of our Souls; let us open to him every room
in the House, and lead him into the most private closet of our hearts, show him
all our fecrets, acquaint him with all our wants and weaknesses, spread before
him all our desires, and earnestly entreat him to stay and dwell with us. Let
us tell him again, That all we have is his; let us tie a new knot upon the band
of the Covenant that is between us; let us be afraid, lest by going presently
into the world, it should be loosed and dissolved. It is not fit (you know)
that a Bride, on the day she is married, should go from the company of the
Bridegroom, to follow Houshold-business, or associate her self with other
persons, but she delights only in the presence of her new Love. Even so
unseemly it is to leave the company of our Lord as soon as we have let him into
our hearts, and to divert to other occasions, when we have newly given him our
Faith, and taken him as the Bridegroom of our souls. We should pass that day at
least in heavenly discourses with him, in expressions of our love and affection
toward him, in acts of desire after inseparable union with him, and in promises
and vows that we will always be faithful and loyal unto him; that so the
remaining part of the day may be as a Postcaenium, an lafter-Supper, and second
Communion, like the Feast of Charity, which succeeded (I told you) in ancient
time the holy Sacrament. And indeed it is not only unbecoming us, but likewise
very dangerous and prejudicial to our health, when we are thus warm, to step
instantly into the cold and chilling affairs of this world. Motibus oppositis
nihil permitiosius, is a rule among Physicians; there is nothing more hurtful
to us, than motions quite opposite, immediately succeeding each to other; and
therefore as it is pernicious after exercise, to go and wash in cold water; so
it must needs be extremely noxious to sink our selves into Earthly Employments,
just after our souls have been above in the exercise of love to God.

It argues likewise a soul but little affected, that can presently relish
Worldly things, after it has had any tastes of Gods sweetness. It seems to me
that such a man is like to Ganymede the Shepherds Boy, in Lucian, who though he
was beloved of Jupiter, and carried up to Heaven, yet could not forget the
things that he had left behind, but asks, What now will become of my Fathers
Sheep? Alas! whither will they wander now that I am taken from them? How will
my business thrive, if I spend so much time in Meditation and Prayer, says a
silly soul? How shall I be cast behind in my work, while I am thus employed?
But as the Dialogist handsomely brings in Jupiter, giving him a check, so may
(...), etc. do thou yet think of thy sheep now that thou art made immortal?
Does thy mind run upon thy shop now that thou art with thy Savior? (...)
instead of thy Cheese, thou may feed on Ambrosia; and instead of Milk, thou
may drink Nectar with the gods. Who would long for the World any more, that
knows what it is to be in Heaven? Who would not be unwilling to go his Earthly
Affairs any more, who has once conversed with the sovereign good? Instead of
riches, he is getting an eternal Inheritance; instead of friends, he is
enjoying God.

And therefore if it be not fit nor safe to return presently to our Secular
business, much less can it be tolerable to go to any merry Entertainments or
Compotations, though never so moderate and innocent. We should not so soon
forget these heavenly pleasures, as to relish these that are earthly. We must
not be like the Heathen, who used after their sacrifices, to make merry all
day, and drink even to Excess. Whence some long agone have thought that (...)
(to be drunk) took its Name from this (...), because the Ancients used to drink
liberally after their sacrifices. But we have not so learned Christ; we must
make the savor of Heavenly things sit longer upon our pallates than an hour,
and not wash them off with any long sensual delights. We should cry out again
and again: Cant. 1.2.
Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth; for thy Love is better than
wine. We should long as the Spouse does, to have such tastes of his love, that
we may rest assured of his good affection to us, and may like better of it,
than of any thing that comes within our lips. (...), etc. A^bil. Tatius, l. 2.
Kisses (says a great Master of his Art, who may fitly be heard in this case)
are the seals of Love; and there the Church teaches us to long to feel such
sensible impressions of his love upon us, that we may know he loves us. And
this (says she) is better than Wine, for kisses are the food of Lovers, seeing
they are the seals of Love; and as he says of his Leucippe, (...). lb.
so may I say of the Spouse, she feeds upon the mouth of her Beloved, and eats
his kisses, i. e. desires his love so ardently, that it makes her forget all
other food. So incomparable should the love of our Lord seem to us, that we
should desire, if it were possible, to live upon nothing else, and that our
very bodies could be nourished, and fed with his dear love.

III. Thirdly, If we communicate upon the Lords day, yet let us not take our
thoughts off from this Action, but spend as much as we can of the remaining day
in such exercises as I have now named. Let us entertain with the best cheer we
are able to make, our new and beloved Guest. Let us commend his beauty, and
praise him for his kindness, and extol his Riches, and protest unto him how
much we love him, and crave him pardon for our follies, and desire him not to
be offended at the dark and nasty hole into which we have brought him, and
entreat him of all loves that he will not take exception at his poor
entertainment; and labor to charm him (as it were) to stay with us by all the
songs of praise and thanksgiving that we can devise. For to say the truth,
there is no exercise more meet upon the Lords Day, than that of giving thanks,
and singing Psalms of Praise to God for all his goodness to us, as we are his
Creatures, and as we are Christians. The day it self is a type of Heaven, and
the Eternal Rest; and therefore our work in it should better accord with what
is done in Heaven, where they at every thought indite a Psalm, and at every
breath they chant it forth; and never cease day nor night from blessing God.
And so Justin Martyr tells Trypho the Jew, That they used to thank God on their
holy times for having made the world, and all things in it for the use of man,
etc. And in his second Apology he justifies the Christians against the Heathen,
from this thing, that they consumed not Gods Creatures with fire in sacrifice,
but received them with Prayer and Thanksgiving, for being boin, for all means
of health, all kinds of qualities, and changes of seasons, and such like
mercies, which we should imitate, not only at the Eucharist, but afterward,
when we may more largely think how much we are beholden to him for his
goodness. Let us say, O my Lord! I have been praising of thee, but alas! I have
not praised thee enough, and therefore I cannot cease to praise thee. The birds
that chirp in the Air, would shame me, if I should not still praise thee. For
how long do they sing for a sip or two of Water, or for a Dinner upon half a
Worm, and for a little house within a bush? Shall not I then persist in
blessing of thee for the viands of Heaven, for a Feast on the Body and Blood of
thy Son, for the joys of thine own house, for a long health, for a pleasant
dwelling, for a plentiful Table, for a world of Creatures that minister every
day unto me? Better were it that I should be turned into one of those little
cheerful Creatures, and that I should take my dwelling in an hedge, than that
I should not have a heart to bless thee as long as I live, and sing praise to
thee as long as I have my being. Awake, awake, O my sleepy soul, and let this
day be more than a shadow of Heaven. Yea one day is too short, let every day
have something of this in it, and be a good day unto thee. And then shall
Eternity be joyful, and the everlasting day shall give thee light long enough
to perfect his praises

IV. Fourthly, As we should spend a great deal of the after-part of the day in
such acts of praise, so let some of it be spent in an after-examination. Let us
make some solemn reflections upon our behavior when we were before the Lord;
and if we find our minds not to have been so seriously intended, and our hearts
not so deeply affected as we did desire: We may cast down our selves humbly at
the feet of our Lord, and beg a pardon of our sweet and loving Savior, and
earnestly importune him, that he would help us now by an after-act, that we may
be able to do that, which we should have done before. Or else we may be excited
to rejoice the more in his goodness, and to bless him for the refreshments he
has afforded us, and to render him more hearty thanks that he has satisfied
us so abundantly with the fatness of his house, and made us to drink of the
Rivers of his pleasure. But this examination of our selves, being a thing that
we should exercise every day, and was practiced even by Heathens, before they
went to bed, I shall spare all further discourse about it.

V. Fifthly, Let us spend some time in strengthening of our purposes, and
confirming our resolutions of a more holy obedience, that so there may be some
fruit seen of this day, in many others that follow, till the solemnity shall
return again. Let us labor to fix and plant the meditations we have had so
strongly in our mind, that they may shoot their Roots to the bottom of our
hearts, and nothing may be able to pluck them up. Let us possess our hearts so
much with those persuasions, that when a temptation comes and knocks at our
door, we may readily and naturally say, Cease your importunity, for Christ
dwells here, and I cannot open to you, Ego non sum ego, I am not he that I was
before, the property of the house is quite changed; and though I was, not long
ago, a common Inn to entertain all comers; yet now I am become the sole
habitation of my Lord. Let us make our souls so sensible that he is in us, and
united to us, that we may readily think on every occasion in this manner. How
is it fit that I should treat my gracious Lord, who has taken his abode within
me? Shall I take the Members of Christ, and make them the Members of a Harlot?
Shall I over-charge that body with loads of meat and drink, where he has
chosen for to reside? Shall I force him out of his house by any impunities?
Shall I offend him by the smell of any noisome breath out of my mouth? Shall I
displease him by any unhandsome thought? Shall I be so greedy of the World,
that I shall forget to retire to converse with my dearest Savior? Shall I so
perplex, my self in business, as to omit to pray, to meditate, to sing praise
to him? No, I am not at my own dispose, I have sworn, Psalm. 119.106.
I will perform it, That I will keep thy righteous Judgments. And to provoke
every one the more to do his endeavor thus to strengthen his resolution, let
these two things be seriously considered. First, The more carefully we walk
with God, the less labor we shall find to prepare our selves against the next
Communion; with the less pains shall we dress up our souls to come to another
Feast. There will be some relish of the former food left in our hearts, and we
shall be, though not in the next, yet in no very remote disposition to perform
the same acts again. Secondly, Every return to finne after these Engagements,
makes it more intolerable, and more highly displeasing to God and our Savior.
After a man has seriously considered how hateful it is in its own nature,
after he has resolved against it, and solemnly covenanted to avoid it, the
sin is more black and deadly, a greater wrong to him that we have taken to
lodge in our souls, than Annas and Caiphas, and the Scribes did him, when they
put him to death. If this truth were settled upon men's hearts, sin would find
colder entertainment with them, than it does, and they would not have such
kindness for that which fastens a more odious Character upon them, than they
can put on the very worst of the Jews, the murderers of our Lord. And yet I
shall more than say, that sinners now do greater injury to him, than did the
Sanhedrin, if you will but grant this one Principle, which is clearly proved by
one of our own Writers. Dr. Jackson.
The Rule whereby we must measure the greatness of a wrong done, is the
opposition which it has in it, to the Will of him that is wronged. And so the
more opposite any act or practice is to the will or liking of the party that is
displeased and wronged, the greater are we to account the injury and offense
which is done to him. Now all men that live in sin, and especially those who
lick up their vomit after they have received Jesus Christ the Lord, do those
things which Christ is more unwilling they should do, than he was to suffer all
the indignities of the Jews, and all the torments that the Roman Laws could
inflict. He was willing to dye by their hands, rather than inconvenience should
fall upon us, viz. That sin should reign over us, and Satan keep possession
in us. He was so unwilling that this should be our condition, that he rather
chused to dye, that he might cast the Devil out, and destroy all his works, and
restore us to liberty again. Now if any man hold on Satan's side, and seek to
keep him in his Throne, if any will maintain and uphold his Works, and stand in
the defense of his Cause, he does a thing more displeasing and grievous unto
Christ, than his Death and Passion was. He was not troubled so much to dye, as
he is to see thee live in sin; for he dyed that thou might cease to sin. And
therefore have a care what thou do, unless thou will be worse than a Jew, and
wound him more than he did who lanced his side; and be a greater and more
dangerous Enemy to him, than they that complotted his death. And consider, if
sin be so displeasing to him, so much against his will, that he was willing to
suffer any torment, rather than it should live; how can thou think that he
will stay with thee, if thou again offendest him, and make no conscience to
watch over thy ways, and avoid all temptations, and shun all occasions of
sin? How can he endure thou should lodge Harlots together with him? That
thou should let this world in, to be his Compeere, and divide thy heart with
him? No, he is the High and holy One, he expects to be treated honorably, and
like unto himself; that we should keep the house clean and sweet, that we
should live righteously, soberly and godlily: And then as he has come to us,
so he will abide with us, and will manifest himself to our souls, acquaint us
with more of the secrets of his Religion, and the delights that are in his holy
life. For so he says to his Disciples, He that has my Commandments, and
keeps them, he it is that loves me: and he that loves me, shall be loved of
my Father: and I will love him, and will manifest my self unto him; which he
repeats over again, verse 23. If a man love me, he will keep my words: And my
Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. I
speak the more of this, because there are too many that approach with a fair
behavior, and forward devotion to the holy Table, who soon after take the
liberty to run upon a new score of sin, hoping shortly to humble themselves,
and to wipe all off again. Many that live in secret covetousness and earthly
mindedness, in neglect of their families, and disregard to all their Brethren;
many that fall back into heart-burnings, and evil surmisings, if not into open
quarrels and contentions, who need to be awakened to look into themselves. They
are like to the waters in Sicily, which Ach. Tatius mentions, that appeared to
the sight as if they were on a flame, and the fire leaped out of them
continually, but if you came to touch them, they were as cold as any Snow. And
neither the fire, says he, was quenched by the water, nor the water heated by
the fire, but in that Fountain you might behold (...), an amity and
reconciliation of fire and water together. (...), l. 2 (...).
Just so it is with many professing people, they have a seeming zeal and a
flagrant devotion, they have warm expressions in their mouths, and pray
earnestly; but if you come near to them, and handle them, if you grow
acquainted with their converse, the world lies cold at their hearts, and there
is no life of God in them, but they have made a syncretism between life and
death, a league between the god of this world, and the God of Heaven. The same
Author tells of a River in Spain, (...). lb.
into whose whirlpits, if the wind insinuate it self, it strikes upon the folds
of the water, and plays with them as we do upon the strings of a Cittern, so
that a Passenger would imagine that he was entertained by some Musicians. Which
may aptly resemble many men in the world, who when the Spirit of God breathes
at some solemn time upon them, or when they hear the voice of God, and look a
little into themselves, do seem to be delightfully moved, and to make a
pleasant noise, as though they were tuned to the praises of God; but follow
them home, and let that sweet breath be over, and you shall see they are as
greedy of the world, as a deep pit, and their thoughts roll and turn about,
that they may draw all that comes near them, into themselves.

VI. And therefore sixthly, Let us labor to impress and retain an Image of
Christ upon our souls, whom we have seen crucified before our eyes. Let us
represent unto our selves what a Person Christ was, and what his manner of
behavior was in the world, and then let us labor to carry him before our
mind, and have him in our eyes, that so by looking on him, we may shape all our
affections and all our actions after that rare pattern that he has set us. Let
us endeavor to think every where, that we see him hanging upon the Cross, and
behold him bleeding for our sins, or declaring to us his mind, or doing
something that the Gospel speaks of, so that we may lead a mortified life, and
be in every thing fashioned after his likeness. And this we must do the rather,
because, as I have said, he is now more nearly united unto us, so that when we
are to do any thing, we must act like him, we must consider how he did, or what
he would do in such a case, and we must so behave our selves, that in a very
proper sense Christ may be said to live, and not we. Gal. 2.20.
We must do our endeavor that he may eat and drink, and buy and sell, etc. i.
e. all these things may be done as we think that Christ would do them (were he
in the flesh) who is one with us. We must become so many little Images of him
in the world, that they who see us, may behold him. And that is the meaning I
suppose of another phrase of the Apostle, when he bids us to put on the Lord
Jesus Christ, Romans 13.14.
i. e. to be so transformed into him, (...). Oecumen.
that both in our outward garb and deportment, and also in our inward features
we may be a lively resemblance of him. Now the same Apostle tells us, That as
many as are Baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. and therefore
much more they who have eaten of his Body, and drunk of his Blood, are supposed
to have put him on, and to have dressed their souls completely after his holy
Image. (...). Id.
They must labor to be all over godly, and to have (...) (as his phrase is) an
universal virtue that they may be holy as he is holy. And for our better
direction,

1. Let us labor to do something worthy of the expense of Christ's Blood, and
to think what manner of persons they ought to be, for whom the Lord of life
died, and who are washed in no other laver but the Blood of the Lamb.

2. Something answerable to the dearest love of the great God of Heaven and
Earth, and to consider after what sort they ought to live to whom God has
given so rich a gift, whom he has honored, not only to be his Sons, but to
have his dearest Son for their servant.

3. Something that may correspond with so many, and so great means of
salvation. And in particular we should think what is expected from those who
have now received a greater strength from Heaven. Strong food must not be given
to those that intend to lead a sedentary life, and have not much work to do. A
plentiful nourishment overthrows their health, instead of yielding supports
unto their spirits. It is the greatest folly to come for this divine nutriment
if we intend to sit still, or to go but a slow pace in Religion, as if we were
newly come out of the sickness and disease of sin, and could scarce stand in
the ways of God. They ought to exercise themselves in all godliness, to be
active and full of motion, who feed so abundantly. They ought to be very good
Children who are fed with such food, for whom God furnished such a Table with
so great a cost.

4. We must labor to do something that is worthy of a soul and body consigned
to immortal blessedness. How holy should they be who expect such great things?
who have received such pledges of them? who wait for the Lord from Heaven to
change these vile bodies into his likeness? O do not unhallow and desecrate
that thing which is at present the Temple of the Lord, and which is sanctified
for the eternal mansions. Profane not that body and soul which shall for ever
live with God, are already become his habitation through his holy spirit
dwelling in them. Now consider I beseech you, do you think that he leads a life
worthy of any of these, who delights not to converse with God? who prays never,
or but very seldom, exceeding briefly, and as if he were frozen? who hears
Sermons, and understands them not, or else forgets them as soon as they are
heard? who grows no wiser nor better than he was many years agone? whose time
runs away in eating and drinking, sleeping and playing, working and toyling, as
if these were the things we exhorted them unto? who rarely takes the Bible or a
good Book into his hands, and when he does, throws it away again at the call of
any pleasure or worldly gain? who loves no body but himself, and is angry at
him that would save his soul? Do we eat and drink this Heavenly provision, and
then rise up to play? do we stand in need of such noble nourishment for the
following of our trades, and the encouragement of us in our worldly business? O
consider, beloved Reader, that look on these lines, that an honest Heathen
would do better things than these: He that never heard of Christ, and never
tasted of this Heavenly food, would be ashamed of such a life. Philosophy,
which they called (...); the nutriment of the soul, would produce far more
excellent works. There is no need thou should be a Christian, if thou have
no more noble end. Mere reason will breed up better Scholars, and therefore go
and sit with the Deipnosophists, and come not unto the Supper of the Lord,
unless thou intendest to walk worthy of him unto all pleasing, Col. 1.10.
being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God. Do
but hear what they promised themselves from their Philosophy, Hoc est quod
Philosophia mihi promittit, ut me parem Deo faciat, Epist. 48. (...), etc. l.
2. (...).
and then judge to what it is fit a Christian so divinely nourished, should
aspire. This (says Seneca) Philosophy does make me promises of, that it will
make me a Peer with God. This is that (says Cleomedes) which preserves the
Demy-God that is within us, from being shamefully entreated, which keeps it
unmovable and unshaken, which gives it the better of all pleasures and pains,
which makes it intend some worthy end, and receive all events and contingencies
as coming from thence, from whence it self came, and above all, which learns it
to wait for the coming of death with a cheerful mind.

What man then deserves the name of a Christian, that notwithstanding all the
means of grace which God affords, does strive to make himself equal with a
Beast? that basely uses his noble part? that is like a feather shaken with the
wind, and lies down at the feet of every pleasure, and cannot sustain the load
of the least grief? that vexes and frets at every cross, as if the Devil ruled
the world, and trembles at death as a Child does at a friend with a vizard on?
God expects sure that we should be men of another sort, and that Philosophy
should not beget more lusty souls, than Christianity can. We must be ashamed to
live at a lower rate, than a man that had been but at Plato's Compotation; and
we must make account the Blood of Christ is to nourish better Spirits in us,
than the very soul and spirit of reason, if we could suck it in, can be able to
generate.

Let us look therefore into our hearts daily, and see that he be there. Whether
we eat or drink, or whatsoever else we do, let us ask him if he be pleased. Let
us go to him constantly, that he may know we love him. And let us entreat him
to tell us what he would have us to do, and then let us do it with all our
might.

VII. Seventhly, Let us maintain a longing in our souls after another such
repast. Let us strive every day to keep up a spiritual hunger after this food,
that so we may not neglect the next opportunity which God shall give us of
Communion; or if we should die before we have one, yet Heaven may find us
prepared for the Feast where the marriage shall be completed; Christ may find
such holy longings after him, that our souls may be taken into his bosom, to
dwell in him as he before dwelt in us. When we cannot outwardly communicate,
yet we may in heart, in spirit. Though we cannot always celebrate the
mysteries, yet we may have the thing signified in those mysteries (as St.
Bernard speaks) at all times, in all places. i. e. We may with pious affections
and holy actions receive Christ continually into our souls. As the Sacrament
(says he) sine re Sacramenti, without the thing of the Sacrament is death to
the unworthy; so we may conclude that res Sacramenti, the thing it self without
the Sacrament will be life eternal to the worthy. Whenever in remembrance of
Christ thou art piously and devoutly affected into an imitation of Christ, thou
do eat his Body, and drink his Blood. But then if we do constantly preserve
such longings and hungring after this Feast, and do at all times feast upon
him; we cannot pass by any occasion that God affords us of receiving him in
that manner that he has appointed and blessed; and we cannot but be very
forward to go to remember him when opportunity is presented in the Assembly of
his people. And therefore I shall not make it a distinct advice, that you would
come again when this Table is spread for you. For this is but a just gratitude
to God, a sign that we like his fare, and are well pleased with his cheer, and
are ambitious of nothing more than such an entertainment. And I think we shall
show our selves to have been very unworthy guests at the last Feast, if we like
it so little as to refuse to come the next time that we are invited. In the
beginning of our Religion they received every day, Acts 2.46. Which proceeded
from a great devotion, and fervency of spirit, when the holy Ghost like fire
had descended upon them. And this heat did not abate in all places for the
space of 400 years, but in some Churches of Africa (as St. Augustine writes)
and in Rome and Spain (as St. Hierome tells us) they retained this ardent love,
and continually remembered the dying of the Lord Jesus. And it was proposed to
St. Augustine as a doubt, whether a person of business as a Merchant,
Husbandman, or the like, should every day Communicate; To which he answered, To
receive the Sacrament every day, I neither praise nor reprove; but to
Communicate every Lord's Day, I would wish you, and exhort every one so to do.
And so St. Chrysostom exhorting of the people to build Churches in the
Villages where they might hold Assemblies, he persuades them by this Argument;
(...), in cap. 8. Act. p. 716 edit. Sav.
There Prayers will be sent up daily for every one of you, there God will be
continually praised with Hymns, and every Lords day will there be an Offering
made for you. And though the devotion of Christians fell from once in a day, to
once in a week, and from thence to once in a month, till at last the Church of
Rome has thought it fit to bind men of necessity but to once in a year; yet I
find a devout Papist thus speaking: Fr. Sales Introd.
Though it be hard to say how often a man is bound to Communicate, yet I think
I may boldly affirm, That the greatest distance between the times of
Communicating, among such as desire to serve God devoutly, is from month to
month. And sure the strict observance of the divine Commandments which was
among the Primitive Saints, their despising of all worldly things, their great
charity and love, may be thought to have flowed in great part from this spring,
that they received so frequently the Body and Blood of our Lord. Hence we may
derive their strength, activeness, and zeal; because they were so often
refreshed with this Wine. This gave them boldness against their adversaries;
this made them run so forwardly into flames, because they were constantly
heated with divine fires. From this Table they went away with the courage of
Lions, and were terrible even to that great roaring Lion which devours so many
careless souls. He could not make such an easy prey of them as he does of us,
because they did daily renew their strength by this food, and became as bold as
a Lion, after he has eaten flesh and drunken blood.

And if we did more frequently Communicate, it would be a means to bring us to
a greater resemblance of our Lord (which was the thing that I last pressed) who
you know overcame the evil one, and trod him under his feet. As the Leverets
(says the forementioned Author) in the Mountains of Helvetia, become all
white, because they neither see nor eat any thing but driven Snow; so by often
adorning and eating beauty, goodness, and purity it self in this divine
Sacrament, we should become altogether virtuous, pure and beautiful. And I am
of the mind of another excellent Writer, Dr. J. Tailor.
who judges it very probable, That the Wars of Kingdoms, the contentions in
Families, the infinite multitude of Law suits, the personal hatreds, and the
universal want of charity, which has made the world so miserable and wicked,
may in a great degree be attributed to the neglect of this great Symbol and
instrument of charity. And that is the last thing that I shall commend unto you.

VIII. Eighthly, Let us be sure to live in charity with our Brethren, to which
we are in a special manner engaged by this Sacrament, and of which we make a
most solemn profession. Let us behave our selves as Servants in the same
family, as sons of the same father, as those who have eaten of the same bread.
Let us be very careful that we do not cover the coals of anger and contention
under the ashes for a night, and then blow them up again the next morning, but
let us quite extinguish them, and utterly put them out. Let not your
jealousies, your hard thoughts, your uncharitable and rash censurings, your
differences and enmities ever return again; but let that sentence run in your
minds, 1 John 4.11. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought to love one another.
If he have given his Son; if he still give him to us; if we feed and live upon
him, then let us love as Brethren, and not fall out in our way to Heaven. And
if we find our love to grow sick and weak, and to be fallen to decay, then let
us come hither on purpose for to revive it, and raise it up again. If the Lamp
begin to burn dim, and to cast a very weak light, let us pour in more Oil that
it may not go out. If our love begin to be chill and cold, let us put this fire
the oftener under it, that it may be kept in a flame. For assure your selves,
that they who take up their differences and enmities again, did never truly lay
them aside; they did but mock God when they came to this holy Communion with a
pretense of Love and Charity, their hearts not being thoroughly resolved to
forget all in juries and offenses. Or if they did seriously labor to put to
death all hatreds, one great reason why they are not thoroughly mortified, is,
because they use so rarely this powerful means of suppressing them, and
keeping them in their graves. Men do one with another, Plutarch and alij.
as the Thespienses with married persons, who once in five years space, kept a
Feast called (...), in Cupids honor, for the reconciling of all differences
that had happened between Man and Wife. Such a small Festivity do men make of
this Sacrament of the Lords Supper, to which they come perhaps with an
intention to bury all differences; but then they give them a whole twelve
months time, if not more, to revive and gather strength again. Hence it is
that the temper of the Christian World is as much different from the Spirit of
the elder times, as heat is from cold, or life from death. They held such
frequent Communions, that their love was so flagrant as to make them dye for
one another; and we hold them so seldom, that the heat of our unmortified
passions makes us wound and kill each other. So that I make account there is
but a little difference between doing this seldom, and not doing it at all;
yea, those enmities will be more fierce and untractable, which even the Blood
of Jesus has not quenched.

To put a conclusion then to this Discourse, let me advise you, when you come
from the Table of the Lord, thus to meditate within your selves: I have
received fresh Pledges of the love of my Lord, and I have made new professions
of my own; What now does the Lord require of me? What have I that I can render
back to him? Alas! I have nothing to give him, but only my love; nothing but my
love did I say? Oh how great a thing is love! how much is enclosed in the
bosom of love! It is no such trifle as I imagine. Love brought God down to us,
and love will carry us up to God. Love made God like to man; and love will make
men like to God. Love made him dye for us, and love will make us lay down our
lives for the Brethren. O the power of Heavenly Love! How shall I get thee
planted in my heart? Who can bring thee into my soul, but only love? Love
begets love; and the frequent Meditation of this love of God, and of his Son,
will inflame thy heart in love to them. Oh let a sense of this love lie
perpetually in my breast, that may change me into love. Let me burn and
languish in the Arms of Jesus. Let me long for nothing but him; let him be all
my talk, all my joy, the Crown of my delight. Let me never forget how gracious
he is; let the taste of his incomparable sweetness be never out of my mouth;
let me never relish any thing but what has some savor of him. O my foul!
what should we wish for, but to feast again with him? What should we desire but
to be satisfied with him? Psalm. 27.4.
This one thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may
dwell in the House of my Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of
the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple.

What friend is there to whom we have been endeared, that we can forget? Do we
use to throw the tokens of love, whereby he would be remembered, into a forsaken
hole where they shall never be seen? But how strangely are we affected to the
Relics that a dying friend commends unto us? And how much more should we be
moved, if a friend should dye for us, and should leave us a remembrance that he
saved us from death? Could we ever let him go out of our minds? Should we not
be in danger to think upon him overmuch? Could we endure that the remembrance
he left us, should be long out of our eye? O my soul! let us not deal then more
unkindly with our blessed Savior, who humbled himself to the death, even the
death of the Cross, that we might not eternally dye. Who was made sin for us,
that we might be made the righteousness of God through him. Sure he never
thought when he went to Heaven, that we would remember his love so seldom, and
so coldly. Did he think that those whom he loves so much, would need so much
entreaty to have Communion with him? Is it not a grief unto him now (if he be
capable of any) to see that he has so few Lovers? Does it not trouble him,
that they who profess love to him, testify it so poorly and rarely? Nay
rather, O my soul! he is troubled that we love our selves no better; and
therefore both for the love of him, and the love of our selves, let us
carefully observe his commands, of which this is one, Do this in remembrance of
me.

For this is the love of God, that we keep his Commandments. And this
Commandment we have from him, that he who loves God, love his Brother also.

Mensa Mystica.
SECT. IV. The Benefits of Holy Communion.
CHAP. XVII.
SUch is the nature of all bodies, that the nearer they approach to their
proper place and Center, the more they accelerate their motion, and with the
greater speed they run, as if they desired to be at their beloved rest, from
whence they are loath to be removed. And such is the temper of all holy hearts
when they run toward God, the most natural place of their rest, the very
Center of their quiet and peace; the nearer they come to him, the faster they
move; they rather fly than run; and use their Wings rather than their feet,
out of a vehement longing to be embraced by him. We cannot but think then, that
they who draw nigh to God in this near way of Communion, and are entertained by
him at his own Table, do fly up even unto Heaven, and get into his very
bosom, as those that suffer more strong and powerful attractions from his
mighty Goodness. And there my Discourse may well leave them reposing themselves
in his Arms, and taking their rest in his love, from whence they will not
easily endure a divulsion by the force of any other thing. But as a stone is
unwilling to stir from the rest that it enjoyes in the bosom of the earth; so
hard will it be to draw such souls by the love of other things, from their own
Center, where they feel so much quiet and tranquillity. Such persons I might
well leave to tell themselves (and others if they can) what joy they find in
God, what sweetness grows on this Tree of Life, and what pleasures he has
welcomed them withal at this holy Feast. Have you seen the Sun and the Moon in
their full stand one against the other? Have you beheld a River running with a
mighty stream into the Ocean? Or can you think that you see the fire falling
from Heaven, as it did in Elias his time, to consume a sacrifice? These are but
little resemblances of that light wherewith their souls are filled when they
look upon him, of that fullness of joy wherein they are absorpt when their
affections run to him, of the testimonies that he gives of his acceptance when
they offer themselves to his service. And they themselves (as I said) can best
tell into what a Paradise of pleasure he leads them, when he comes into his
Garden, and beholds there all pleasant fruits.

But yet for the sake of those who are strangers to the Divine Life, and are
loath to leave their sins, though it be to have Communion with God; I shall
labor briefly to declare the benefits of this holy Sacrament, that so I may
invite them for to lay aside their sins, and exchange them for better
pleasures. And I hope I may provoke some to hunger after the House of God, and
especially after his Table, where he seeds the hungry with rare delights; where
he cures the wounded, comforts the weak, enlightens the blind, revives the
dead, pardons the sinner, and strengthens him against his sin. Where he
dignifies our souls, and deifies, as it were, all our faculties, where he
unites us to himself, and joins us in friendship with our Brethren, where he
sprinkles our hearts with his Blood, replenisheth them with his Grace,
refreshes them with his Love, encourages them in his ways, inebriates them
with his sweetness, and gives them to drink of the Wine of the Kingdom, and
sowes in them the seed of immortality.

One would think there should not be a man of ordinary discretion that would
refuse to be amended, and so much bettered in his condition by conversing with
God. For you see men tip up the bowels of the earth, and torment her, to make
her confess her Treasures; they digg even into the heart of craggy Rocks, and
take incredible pains for Silver and Gold; they will break their sweetest sleep
to accomplish an ambitious desire; they will spend their Patrimony, their
Credit, their Bodies, and their very Souls for a drop of drunken pleasure, or
carnal delight. What is the matter then that men cannot be content to spend a
few earnest thoughts, to use a little serious diligence for the purchase of the
riches of Heaven and Earth, for the promises of this life, and that which is to
come, for the glory of God, for a Dignity not inferior to Angels, for a Sea of
delights and pleasures that ravish the heart of God? Poor souls! they are
ignorant sure of the happiness that our Lord calls them unto; they imagine
there is nothing better than to eat and drink, and satiate the body with that
which tickleth its senses; they are sunk into a sad puddle of filthy
imaginations; let us see if we can lift up their heads, let us try to open
their eyes, let us endeavor to persuade that there are diviner delights, that
there is a bread infinitely more delicious, and a Cup flowing with far more
sweetness than that which the World bewitches and inchants her followers
withal. Psalm. 34.8.
O come, taste and see that the Lord is good, (as the Psalmist speaks) Blessed
is the man whom he chooses, Psalm. 65.4.
and causes to approach unto him, that he may dwell in his Courts. He shall be
satisfied with the goodness of his House, even of his holy Temple.

Many rare things there are which the Gospel presents us withal, but nothing
(methinks) is more tempting and inviting than this heavenly Feast, where
pleasure is mixed with profit, and physic with our food. Where at once we may
be both enriched and delighted, both healed and nourished. This Table (if I may
use the language of an holy Man) is the very sinews of our Soul, S. Chrysostom.
Hom. 24. in 1 Corinthians. (...). etc.
the ligament of our minds, the foundation of our confidence, our hope, our
salvation, our light, our life. This mystery makes the earth to be an Heaven;
and therefore if thou will come hither, thou may open the Gate of Heaven,
and look down into it, or rather not into Heaven, but into the Heaven of
Heavens. For that which is the most precious of all things above, I will show
thee lying upon the earth. For as in Kings Palaces, the chiefest and most
precious things are not the fair Walls, the gilded Roofs, the costly Hangings,
but the body of the King that sits upon the Throne; even so in the Heavens the
most glorious thing is the Body of Christ, the King of Heaven. Now behold, and
thou shall see it here upon the earth. For I do not show thee the Angels, or
the Archangels, or the Heavens, or the Heaven of Heavens, but him that is the
Lord and Master of them all; and therefore must thou not needs say, that thou
see that upon the Earth, that is more excellent than them all? yea, thou not
only see, but thou touchest; and not only touchest, but eatest also, yea and
carriest him home with thee. (...), etc. O then wipe thy soul very clean,
prepare thy mind to the receiving these Divine Mysteries. Who would not be
Religious, that he may be thus happy? who would not forsake all things for such
a sight, for such an embracement? If thou might but have the privilege to
take up the Son of a King with his Purple, and Diadem, and other Ornaments,
into thy Arms, would thou not cast all other things to the ground to be so
employed? Tell me then why will thou not prepare thy self, and reverently take
the only begotten Son of God into thy hands? Will thou not throw away the love
of all earthly things for him? Will thou not think thy self brave enough in the
enjoying of him? Do thou still look to the earth, and love money, and
admirest heaps of Gold? Then what pity can thou deserve? What pardon can
thou hope for? Or what excuse can thou think of, to make for thy self? Thus
he. Homil. 27. in 1. ad Corinth.
When a man has heard the sacred Hymns (as he says in another place) and has
seen the spiritual Marriage, and been feasted at the Royal Table, and filled
with the holy Ghost, and has been taken into the Quire of Seraphims, and made
partaker with the Heavenly Powers: Who would throw away so great a Grace? Who
would spend so rich a Treasure? Who would bring in drunkenness or the like
Guest, instead of such Divine Cheer? Drunkenness, I say, which is the Mother of
Heaviness, ((...)) the joy of none but the Devil, and is big with a thousand
evils. What madness possesses a man, that he should not rather choose to feast
with God, than with the Devil? If thou say that thou art merry, and
rejoycest, and wonderfully pleased: I answer, And so I would have thee to be;
only let not thy laughter be like the crackling of Thorns under a Pot, but a
solid joy that will make thy heart to smile for ever. God does not envy to the
Sons of men any happiness, but he would have them to be sure they are happy,
and not please themselves in a fantastical shadow of Happiness.

CHAP. XVIII.
BUT that I may proceed more distinctly, and assault your souls with the
stronger Reasons, to deliver themselves up to a religious life (one single
piece of which has such blessings in it) I shall present you with the profit
of worthy receiving, in these three general Heads, which I shall borrow from a
Devout Author. We have most Princely Dishes (says St. Bernard) served up to us
in the Supper of the Lord, prepared with the most curious and exquisite Art,
and they are Deliciosa multum ad saporem, Sermon. 2 de Caena Dom.
very delicious and sweet to the taste; solida ad nutrimentum, strong and solid
for our nourishment; and efficacia ad medicinam, powerful, and working for the
curing of our diseases. Seeing this Sacrament is a Feast, and is called the
Table, and the Supper of the Lord; under these three heads I shall comprehend
these benefits that may excite every man to the examination of himself, and
invite us all to this Heavenly Cheer. The things that are here set before us,
are, 1. Most sweet, pleasant and refreshing. 2. They are solid, strengthening
and nourishing: and 3. They are Medicinal and Healing.

I. First, Deliciosa ad saporem.
To a well-prepared palate they afford a most sweet and delightsome relish.
This holy Sacrament breeds a Divine pleasure, an Heavenly Joy in a right
tempered soul, and overflowes it with sweetness more than the body is satisfied
with marrow and fatness; now this refreshment arises,

1. From a great sense which is here given us of the love of Christ, which (as
the song of songs says) is better than Wine. Cant. 1.2.
It is more chearing and exhilerating, more cordial and reviveing to think of
his dear love in shedding his Blood for us, than to drink the blood of the
richest Grape; and therefore the Church says, ver. 4. We will be glad and
rejoice in thee; we will remember thy love more than Wine.

It is beyond a ravishment to remember, that men are so beloved by the King of
Heaven, so embraced by the Lord of all the world, and still it is the more
transporting for to consider, that they feed upon this Lord of Love, and that
he gives his very self unto them, and by such secret and wonderful ways
unites himself unto their souls. And it is most of all affecting, and but a
little below Heaven, to think that this is our Jesus, and our Lord; to say as
the Spouse in the same Book, My Beloved is mine, and I am his. Cant. 2.16.
When God thus lifts up the light of his countenance upon a soul, he puts
gladness in its heart, more than the joy of Harvest. This is a Marriage Feast,
and therefore full of pleasure. Here the soul embraces him, and he folds it in
his arms; here they plight their truth mutually each to other; here they engage
themselves in unseparable unions, to hold perpetual intercourse, and live
eternally together in the greatest affection. As the Bridegroom rejoices over
his Bride, so the Lord rejoices over it, and he speaks not to it merely by his
servants, but he kisses it with the kisses of his own mouth. So one of the
Greek Commentators prettily glosses upon those words: (...). Let me not only be
espoused to him (says the Church) by his Prophets and Ambassadors, but let him
come himself, and converse with me. Rebeccah went along with Eliezer before she
knew Isaac, and was resolved to be his Wife before he spoke with her himself;
but at last she beheld him, to whom she traveled, and came into his Arms whose
love she sought, and then was her joy completed. Even so the Messengers of God
become Suitors to us in the Name of Christ, and woo our affections to be
espoused to him, giving us many tokens of his love: And when we consent and
resolve to be his, then by their Ministry we are conducted into his arms, and
at this Marriage Feast we receive the fullest joys that flow from his heart
unto us.

2. It flows from a sense of the pleasures that are in the exercise of true
Religion. That is the greatest delight which arises from the fouls own proper
acts, and which it feels not only within, but from it self. And the more noble
any of its acts are, the more satisfying the objects are on which they are
placed, the higher will the contentment be which they afford. As much
therefore, as acts of piety do surpass all other, so much will the delight
which accompanies them, go beyond all other delights. And as these acts of
Devotion, which are performed by the worthy Receiver at this holy Communion,
are transcendent to all other Religious Acts; so will the feeling of them be
transported beyond all other pleasurable motions in the soul. It is a rare
delight to put forth Acts of Faith and Love, Thanksgiving and Rejoicing; and
here all these Acts are in their top and height; and the soul exerts its
greatest force, and strains it self to do its best. Yea, here must needs be the
greatest sweetness and delight, because part of our duty is joy and gladness,
and we do very ill, if then we do not rejoice. And there is none knows but he
that feels it, how pleasant it is likewise to mourn for sin, and to be
wounded with a sense of our ingratitude, as well as of his love. There is
sweetness in those tears which drop from a heart full of love; that sorrow is
delightful which springs from the sense of a kindness. Here holy souls begin
to feel the truth of what our Savior has said, Matthew 5.3.
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. It is part of their
comfort, that they can mourn and shed a tear over a sick soul, and a bleeding
Savior. What comfort then is there (think you) in the sense of a pardon, if
there be such comfort in mourning for the offense? If tears be such pleasant
food, then what are songs and praises?

3. From the hope of Heaven, and the expectation of the eternal Supper, to
which this is but a preparatory Entertainment. This is some fore-tast to stay
our longings, and yet to excite our desires after the Heavenly Feast above.
Here we break our fast (as I may say) but are made thereby very hungry, till
that great Supper come. Here we have but a praelibation, a little short
antepast of some rare things to come; yet seeing it is an earnest of those
things, it creates in a holy soul a wonderful contentment both from its own
sweetness, and the hopes wherewith it feeds us. It nourishes, I say, in us most
delicious longings; it makes the soul even swell with comfortable expectations;
and we receive it not only as a remembrance of what was done, but as a pledge
of what shall be. We taste not only what he is to our souls at present, but
what he will be for ever.

And indeed it is a great part of the pleasure of this food, that it has so
many tastes, and affords us such various relishes. In it we taste his love in
dying, his love now that he is in the Heavens, and his love when he shall
appear in his glory. We taste of the fruit of his death, and of the fruit of
his Resurrection also, yea and of his coming again to raise us from the dead
too. We feel what he did upon the Cross; and that which was bitter to him, is
sweet to us. We feel what he does for us now in the holy Sacrament, and his
Spirit makes us taste the pleasures of Devotion in our hearts. And we begin
likewise to feel what he will do for us when he shall come to be glorified in
his Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe. And how pleasant must
it be to a soul to have all this Cheer? how delightful to think that Christ
dwells in us, and we in him? ( John 6.65.) How sweet to read that we shall have
eternal life by union with him? ( v. 55.) And how joyful must they be who
carry about with them continually this hope of Heaven?

4. From a sense how well pleased our Savior is with the love of holy souls.
He not only communicates himself to us in this Sacrament, but has also a kind
of Communion with us. He delights to behold our grateful and gladsome
remembrance of him; to behold our love to him, and our love to each other. It
pleases him to see his people flock together with a greediness to receive him,
and forwardness to tie themselves more dearly to him. And therefore he is
pleased to use such words to his Spouse as she does to him: She had said, Cant.
1.2. Thy love is better than Wine: And he says the same, only with a greater
ecstasy of Affection, cap. 4.10. How much better is thy love than Wine! And
this Book holy men (the Fathers of the Church) have interpreted of the
spiritual Marriage between Christ and his Church, which is in this Sacrament
both represented and confirmed. Now what pleasure hence arises to the soul,
when it thinks that its Beloved is pleased, and that it rejoices the heart of
Christ, every one may know that can love another. It is the contentment of
their love that it is accepted; and a great recompense that it is kindly
entertained.

Here is enough (though briefly) said to invite any Voluptuary to become a
spiritual man: He must have a great deal of the Swine in him, that cannot be
tempted by the delights of this Heavenly Food, which offers it self to his
taste. Here a man shall be satisfied with the love of Christ, with the
pleasures of all Religious acts, with the hope of Heaven, which is the
Celestial Manna, with a sense of the joy in Heaven on our behalf. He has
forgotten sure the pleasures of a man, whose soul is not greedy to be filled
with these things. It is part of the punishment of wickedness, to lose the
rarest delights here, as well as to suffer eternal pains hereafter.

II. Secondly: S^lida ad nutrimentum.
But that you may not imagine there is nothing to be had here but what does
delight for the present instant of receiving; you must consider likewise, that
these holy Mysteries yield a solid nourishment, and thereby afford us a
constant cheerfulness. They do not beget a pleasure that lies only upon the
palate; but they are the more pleasing when they are descended as far as the
heart, and there they lay the foundation of a lasting joy, by turning the
affections of the heart toward Christ. The benefits of this food are not like a
blaze of straw, that warms a man for the present, but soon leaves him cold; nor
like a flash of Lightning, darting through the soul for a moment, which returns
presently into its darkness; nor like the frisking of the spirits in our body
after a draught of Wine, which when the adventitious heat is over, fall into
sluggishness again: But they are solid and substantial, like to the warmths of
the Sunbeams when there is no Clouds before his face, nor no winds to sweep
them away; or rather like the pleasures of eating food, which increases our
strength, and fattens our bones, and causes a durable cheerfulness and vivacity
of our spirits. For Bread, you know, is called the staff of Life, and that
which strengthens man's heart; as Wine is that which glads his heart, and
cheareth God and Man.

By a right use of this holy Sacrament, all the faculties and parts of the soul
are nourished and augmented: The understanding becomes more full and clear in
its perceptions; the will is made more free and cheerful in its choice of
good; the affections more Heavenly and Divine, more forward and compliant with
our wills, the passions more regular and orderly, under better government and
command. All which would admit of a large discourse; but seeing I have drawn
this tract already to overgreat a length, I will choose to speak (and that but
briefly neither) of what is most sensible to every good man, viz. the increase
of these three great Graces, Faith, Hope and Charity.

First, Faith is hereby made more solid and strong, whether we consider it in
its direct, or reflex acts: i. e. We do in this holy Feast look most seriously
upon the proper object of our Faith, Jesus Christ, and all the truths of the
Gospel. We do profess with all our souls to embrace a crucified Savior; We do
seal to this truth which he has sealed by his Blood; We make a most solemn and
public confession of what we believe: We do most sacredly protest that we
firmly consent to live according to it, and obey it. And then if we would
reflect and turn our eyes back into our own souls, and believe something of our
selves, we may be able to make a better judgment concerning our selves, and be
more confirmed in the belief that we are real Christians, seeing after serious
examination and advice with our selves, we find that we heartily love and obey
Christ's commands, and seeing that in his most sacred Presence who is the
searcher of the heart, we dare confidently avow it, that there is not any
thing, though never so difficult, which we know to be his Will, but we are
resolved for to do it. We are then in the right use of this Food, more
strengthened both in the premises, and also in the conclusion. As if a man
should make this Syllogism or reasoning, He that heartily believes in Christ,
and obeys the Gospel-commands, shall inherit the promises, and be saved; I do
so heartily believe and obey, Therefore I shall be saved. All these three
Propositions or Affirmations, are by worthy receiving, much strengthened in us.
We do heartily profess to believe the Gospel, and we are more confirmed in our
belief, and in particular of this, That he who does believe in Christ, and obey
him, shall be saved. We see before our eyes such testimonies of Gods love, that
we cannot but be full of this belief, which is a general Faith, and contained
in the first of those now named Propositions. We do likewise here renew our
consent to believe and obey our Lord in every thing he has said; and this
contains the second Proposition, and is a particular, special act of Faith. Now
what should hinder, but that we may conclude most strongly that which is in the
Third, Therefore I shall be saved? And then Faith is manifestly nourished in
every sense that you can take it in; We do directly put forth more lively acts
of Faith, as that implies assenting to the Gospel, and consenting to obey it.
And why should not the consequent be, That we may reflect more comfortably and
solidly upon our selves, that we are in a safe condition. And that we may
continue so, there wants nothing but that we be diligent in the use of all
means, of which this is one, To confirm and establish our faith more by often
receiving the Sacred Body and Blood of Christ.

2. Our Hope is here also nourished and made more lively. And indeed it must be
strengthened in proportion to our Faith, for hope arises out of it, and has its
growth with it, being but the expectation and waiting of Faith, Because I
believe those things that are promised in the Gospel, therefore I wait for
them; the stronger therefore that my belief and obedience is, the stronger will
my hope be. Now he that expresses his Faith in Christ at this Sacrament, and
believes also that Christ is really present there, and likewise that he is
united to Christ through a worthy use of it; He does thereby get a greater
reason to hope and wait for the other appearance and presence of Christ more
visibly and openly, when he shall be divested of all signs and figures, and
shall reveal himself with open face: When we shall not know him so much as that
he dyed, but as he that lives, and reigns, and triumphs.

3. Our Love hereby is manifestly enlarged and nourished, partly by fulfilling
one of Christ's commands. He that loves me, keeps my Commandments (says our
Lord) and this is one of them, Do this in remembrance of me. And partly by
laying new fuel upon the fire which it may feed upon. New considerations (I
mean) and experiences, new arguments and incentives to obedience. And partly by
knitting and uniting of us in a more cordial love and affection to all our
Brethren, which is an expression of love to him. For he has said, 1 John 4.12.
If we love one another, God dwells in us, and his love is perfected in us.

Now Faith, Hope and Love, what will not they do, what cannot they overcome?
All the craft of the Devil is discovered, all his power is broken, all his
temptations are bafled by this Heavenly Nourishment. For if we consider the
first piece of the Devils Policy, which consists in magnifying and extolling
the advantages of that thing to which he would tempt us; it is defeated by the
light of faith which this Sacrament does make more clear and shining. He uses
all the Rhetoric and Sophistry that he has, to persuade us that it is a
harmless, or a pleasant, or a profitable, or a credible thing. He paints sin
forth in the best colors, and provides for it the most amorous dresses. And as
you see a Mountebank commends his Medicines, his Balsomes, and Pomanders with
so many amplifications, and lies, and arts of insinuation, that he cheats poor
silly people: So does the Devil puff up the ambitious man's mind, and swells a
Molehill into a Mountain; and he tickles the wanton fancy with promises of
ravishment in an empty pleasure; and to the covetous heart, he says, Thou
can not tell the contentment that so many baggs of Gold, or such a fair
Lordship would give thy heart: And there is no man but he labors to cast a
mist before his eyes, and to dazzle him with some glittering appearance, in the
midst of which he hopes to work his ends upon him. Now the light of faith
strikes through all those painted shows; and an hearty belief of the truth of
the Gospel (which the holy Eucharist still increases) makes all these shadows
fly away. It will not let us be deceived, as was our Mother Eve, with specious
pretenses; but says, Avaunt thou Impostor; away, you lying vanities; Tell me
not these Tales; For his Testimonies have I taken as an Heritage for ever, for
they are the rejoicing of my heart, Psalm. 119.111. And there is no less power
in this holy food, to enervate a second of his Arts, which is to affright us
with the noise of danger and mischief, that shall seem greater than all the
pleasures of goodness, if we will not be persuaded but that it is pleasurable.
He puts strange vizards upon all things, and makes them look as ugly and foully
as he can, that so he may make us fly from the troubles of a mortified life.
He labors to make us believe that there is nothing but sadness in Gods ways,
and it begins perhaps to make us melancholy with the very thoughts of it. And
if this will not do, he will stir up enes mies against us, to discourage us,
our own friends perhaps shall cast us off, or the fire of persecution shall
burn against us. But now the Hope of the glory of God will make us rejoice even
in the midst of tribulations. Here we embrace also a crucified Savior; and
there is no better Livery, than a Garment rent and torn, a Body wounded and
abused (if need should be) for Christ's sake. There is nothing can affright a
soul that dwells in the wounds of its Savior, as in the holes of a Rock.
Nothing will seem difficult to a heart that is filled with expectations, to
dwell for ever in his embraces in the Heavens. And now how is the world and the
flesh confounded when they see good men rejoice and triumph in the midst of all
miseries and discouragements? How do the Devils howl to see their stratagems
so unsuccessfull, that even Pains are accounted Pleasures, and Losses are
accounted Gains, and Torments are turned into Joys, and Prisons are the
Gate-houses of Paradises?

The Devil, you will say, will study to be revenged on such men, and will not
cease to vent his malice against such souls. And seeing he knows not how to do
them harm but by making of them sin, he will try if like a Serpent he can
insinuate but a part of himself at any little hole. He will persuade them to
self-indulgence in some small crime, that so he may bring them to all the rest;
or he will labor to draw them, if it may be, within the verge of sin, into an
infections place, into the society of a temptation, hoping that by little
degrees and preambles, he may make way for sin to enter. But the love of God,
which is here much inflamed, will make the soul of such a quick scent that it
may easily perceive his wiles. Love does extraordinarily enlighten the soul by
its flames, and will make it more discerning of the least spot that is in it
self, and of the least danger that is without. And the more pure and white the
soul grows by love, the sooner will any speck of filth be espied upon it. The
more full of light it is, the more imperfections will it take notice of, which
before were unobserved; as in the beams of the Sun we see a thousand little
attomes or motes which before were not discerned.

By all this, which in your own meditation may be enlarged, you see what
strength it affords. To which you may add, if you please, that as the Devil
has baits for every palate, and can humor every man's taste, and comply with
all complexions and dispositions: So is the holy Sacrament an Heavenly Manna
which tastes as every man wishes, and (as the Author of the Book of Wisdom
speaks) does serve to the appetite of the eater, Wi^^. 16.20, 21.
and tempers it self to every man's, likeing, being able to give them all
content.

Thirdly, I fficacia ad medicinam.
But this Bread and Wine being spiritually received, are not only food and
meat, but Physic and Medicine also. They are means to preserve health where it
is, and to restore it where it is decayed. Though this may seem more doubtful
then the two former, and you may ask how Bread-and-Wine do signify any thing
of this nature; yet I shall show you that is denoted by them in Christ's
intention, more then any thing else. For the bread (as you have seen) does not
represent the Body and flesh of Christ barely and in general, as it is the food
of the soul, but in a more especial manner, as the flesh of a Sacrifice, and
that a Sacrifice for our sin, whereby it becomes not only our meat, but our
medicine also. The food we eat is in remembrance that Christ died for sin, and
so it is healing to our souls, and killing to our sins; it purges away our
iniquities, and purifies our hearts. And so Christ's Blood is here considered as
the Blood of the Cross, the Blood of Atonement and propitiation for us; and
therefore we do not receive (as has been said) bare Bread and Wine, but Bread
broken and Wine poured out. And here you may take notice of the reason why
Christ did institute Bread and Wine, rather then flesh, to represent himself
by, unto us. Not because flesh was used by the Jews in their Sacrifices, for so
were Bread and Wine: nor only because this was the common food and nourishment
for the body, for so was flesh also: But it is likely Christ chooses things
without life, wherein there was no Blood, viz. Bread and Wine, because he would
show that no Creature was any more to lose its life for the sin of men, and
that no more Blood was to be shed for expiation of it. The Passover, which we
may call a Sacrament of the Old Testament, was bloody, to denote Christ's Blood
that should be shed; but now that it is shed, the Sacrament, which represents
it as already done, is without any bloody thing. He is shown to us as one that
has died by this broken bread and wine effused; and he shows us likewise that
there shall be no more Death, no more blood shed for us (a full Atonement being
made) because it is only bread, and only Wine. These things then having such
a special reference to Christ's Death, the worthy receiving of them must needs
be of great force.

1. As an Antidote to take away the poison and killing-power of sin. The Blood
of Christ does wash away our guilt, and takes off all obligation unto
punishment; and the consideration that Christ has died for us, expels the
poison from the heart which would make us faint and die. It heals the wounds
that sin has made, and takes away the anger of the sore; it asswages the rage
and heat of that sting which the fiery Serpent had sent unto us, and suffers
not the venom to undo us. The pardon indeed is granted to us by virtue of the
Covenant of grace, when we unfeignedly repent and believe, i. e. when we are
converted unto God; but now likewise it is further sealed to such persons. That
which was confirmed before by the Blood of Christ, is now in a sensible manner
applied to us, and ratified by the representations of that Blood. In the use of
these things likewise we receive an increase of Piety, and get more full
victories over our sins; and thereby feel more the virtue of the Antidote, and
have a sense of our pardon made, as lively as if there was a new act of grace
passed to settle it more surely upon us.

2. It is of a Cathartical virtue also, and has in it a force to purge and
cleanse our souls from their impurities. As it takes away the killing-power of
sin against us, so it kills sin in us. By our abiding in the Wounds of Christ,
sin is wounded and slain. If any of you (says St. Bernard) do not feel so
frequently the sharp motions of anger, envy or luxury, etc Gratias agat corpori
and sa^guini Domini, etc. Let him give thanks to the body and blood of our
Lord, and let him praise the power of this Sacrament. The blood of Christ
quenches the fire of anger, the heart-burnings of malice and envy, the
feavourish heats of lust, the raging thirst after sensual pleasures. Consider
what thou art: Do thou delight in drink? Here is a draught to quench thy
thirst. Art thou a glutton? Here is a morfel that will make thee say, Lord
evermore give us this Bread. Art thou worldly-minded? Here is Christ dying to
the world, and leaving the world, who will carry thee away with him in his
arms. Art thou fearful to suffer any thing for Christ? Drink the Cup of the
blood of Christ, that thou may be able to shed thy own blood for Christ.
Calicem sanguinis Christi bibas, ut possis propter Christum sanguinem sundere.
Cypt.
Give (says Cyprian) the Cup of Christ to those who are to drink of the Cup of
Martyrdom. Art thou afraid of the power of the Devil? Christ, O man, comes
here to take possession of thee. And as he upon the Cross spoiled
principalities and powers, triumphing over them; so may thou do also in this
Sacrament of the Cross. Art thou afraid of growing cold and dead in good
duties? Thou drinkest of Jesus that is full of spirit, and will warm and
enliven thy heart. Whatsoever sin thou have unmortified, bring it hither, and
nail it unto the Cross of Christ till it be stark dead. And unto whatsoever
good thou would be animated, show thy Lord thy desire to it, and show him his
blood to move him to bestow it. Only remember that it works not as Physic
does in a natural, but in a spiritual manner. It works as a Sacrament, and
requires thy inward, rational, and spiritual operations, and then thou will
find the profit of it to be greater then all that I have said. Some of the old.
Heathen represented plenty and worldly happiness, by a man with bread in one
hand, and a Cup in the other, and a Crown of Poppy about his head, which
signified sleep and emptiness of care and trouble in the midst of abundance.
That man thou may be; for by this bread and Wine is exhibited to thee all
plenty of grace and blessing, of peace and comfort. Thou may lay down thy
self in peace, and sleep quietly; not in the lap of the world and carnal
security, but in the bosom of our Lord, folacing thy self in his love, and
saying, Thou have put gladness in my heart, more than in the time that their
Corn and Wine increased, Psalm. 4.7.

Let me say therefore to every holy and well-disposed Soul in the words of St.
Ambrose, Venias, venias ad cibum Christi, adcibum, etc. Come, come to the food
of Christ, to the food of the Lords Body, to the banquet of the Sacrament, to
the Cup wherewith the affections of the faithful are inebriated and made
drunken; That thou may put off the cares of the world, the snares of the
Devil, and the fears of Death; and that thou may put on the comforts of God;
the delights of Peace, the joys of Pardon, more sweet than all the Pleasures of
a Paradise.

And thou, O Lord our God, who do provide food for all Creatures, and have
given all Creatures to be food for Man; and feedest not only his body, but his
soul also; and give him for his soul, not only the holy Word, but the
blessed Body and Blood of thy Son: Do thou cause all our hearts to burn with
desires after thee, who art so full of love to us. Make every Christian soul to
relish and savor the things of God. Prepare every one by a full digestion of
thy Heavenly Word, to receive likewise this divine nourishment of their Souls.
Stir up all their hunger after this Feast. Excite all their longing-appetites
after this Heavenly Manna. And let this be the voice and hearty language of
every one that reads this Book, Give us good Lord! Give us evermore this food.
Amen most gracious God, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

CHAP. XIX.
AS the Sun and the showers make those Plants more tall and beautiful which
have any living roots in the earth, but on the contrary do putrify and dry up
those whose roots are dead: So it is with this Sacrament, which renders their
souls more fair and flourishing who receive it rooted in love; but those are
more dried and hardened by it, and tend more to corruption, who have no life at
all in them whereby to convert it into their nourishment. Or as you see it is
in corporal nutriment, those meats which give a plentiful increase to sound
bodies, do more weaken and infeeble those whose stomachs are corrupt; and the
higher and fuller the nutriment is, the more corruption does it breed in those
that are infirm, and not apt to receive it. So it is in this sacred spiritual
repast; the greater and more large stock of spirits and strength it is apt to
afford to a soul that fits it self to receive it; the more distempers and
weaknesses does it leave in the spirit of him that cares not what he does, so
he may but have it. Let me wish therefore every man to approve himself to be a
sincere Christian, and so let him eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup; for
as the benefits are great if we use it aright, so are the dangers great if we
mind not what we do. Presume not to draw nigh hither in your dirty garments.
Let not your souls stand in Gods presence all nasty and filthy. Lay not
unwashen hands upon his Table, and let not your feet tread in his holy place,
unless they walk in the ways of his Commandments. Let not him whose mouth is
full of cursing and bitterness, of blasphemies and revilings, of corrupt and
rotten Communication, dare to put this bread into his mouth. Let not him that
sits with the drunkard, and delights in strong drink, be so bold as to take
this Cup into his hand. Let not the covetous Miser that huggs his Mammon, be so
fearless as to come to the Feast of charity. Let not the heart that is filled
with wrath, and hatred, and uncharitableness, presume to sit down at this Feast
of love. Let not that hand stretch forth it self to receive the Body and Blood
of Christ, which is dipped in Blood, or defiled with unlawful gain. Let every
man that works iniquity, and lives in the neglect of any-known duty, or is not
careful to know it, fear and stand in awe, and keep at a distance, and
instantly fly from his sin which must thus make him avoid the presence of the
Lord, and the society of the faithful. Yea let not the most holy person dare
to draw near to God in this duty, till he has trimmed and dressed up his Soul;
till he has snuffed his Lamp, and made it burn more clearly; till he has
excited those affections in his heart which are most proper to this action;
till he has considered what he is about to do, and has put himself in a meet
disposition to be so familiar with God. For,

1. Though he has some goodness in him that comes unprepared to the Lords
Table, yet he is guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord. So the Apostle says
the Corinthians were, 1 Cor. 11.27, 29.
who professed the faith of Christ, because cause they did not discern the
Lords Body, nor minded for what ends they did communicate. He offers a great
disrespect to the body and blood of Christ, and is guilty of irreverence to it,
who makes not solemn and serious addresses to him, and comes with no mote
purity and cleanness into the presence of the King, then he would take care of,
in the presence of an ordinary man. He makes as if Christ was his fellow, and
that a man may come as rudely into his company, as if he was coming: into his
own house, and sitting at his own board.

2. A good man that eats unpreparedly, and without foregoing consideration, may
eat and drink damnation to himself, 1 Cor. 11.29.
i. e. he may bring upon himself bodily judgments when he minds not seriously
the religious ends of this eating and drinking. For so the word (...), is to be
understood as it relates to the believing Corinthians, as is manifest from v.
30. For this cause many were weak, and others sick, and others were dead. The
cause he speaks of, was their unworthy eating and drinking. i. e. their
maintaining pride and contempt of their poor brethren, their uncharitableness
and want of love even when they were doing this sacred action. This caused God
to scourge them, and inflict some punishments upon their bodies, that he might
awaken and save their souls. Every sin may be the cause of diseases, but this
in particular is noted as the Author of those diseases that rage amongo
Christians. Take heed then how thou come void of humility, or brotherly
kindness, or not attendingl what thou art there to do; He that drinks thus
unworthily, may have a poison run through his. veins; The Wine may breed the
Stone in his kidneys or bladder, and the Gout in his joints; An Ague or Fever
may have commission to invade his Bloudd Or if none of these fall upon him, it
may bring a curfe upon his goods, or relations, or good name. Every time thou
receivest, and art not a man that examines thy self, for any thing thou can
tell, thou killests a Child, or beast, thou blastest thy Corn, or call for
Worms and Catterpillars upon thy fruit. And if we go on, and will not amend in
this thing, whereas God does now plague us with many sicknesses, he may in a
short time send the Pestilence, and sweep us away with the besome of
destruction; he may depopulate our Parishes, and leave but a few Concommicants.

3. As for a wicked profane person that approaches hither with some slight
intentions to leave his sin in which perhaps he the last week lived; He is
guilty of the body and blood of the, Lord in another sense. He is a kind of
murderer of the Lord of life; He makes his Wounds bleed afresh; and he pierces
his sides with a greater cruelty then the Roman Soldier, he grieves and wounds
him more then the Jems that wrung his blood out of his sacred Body. For he
brings that before him which he hates more then he did death, more then the
Nails and the Cross. He pricks him with that which is sorer to him then the
Spear which was thrust into his side. He knows he should do better, when they
did they knew not what. O how does it trouble the heart of our Lord to see men
lay that in their bosom, and cherish its life, which was the cause of his
death. Yea, how grievous must it be unto him to see them do this, even when
they come to commemorate his Death! This sin of unworthy receiving, does strike
above the rest to his heart, seeing all his pains cannot make them leave their
sins. It is as if a Child should kiss the bloody knife which killed his Father;
When he comes to make a solemn declamation against the Authors of his Death,
and pretends to take vengeance upon them as villains, for such an unpardonable
fact. As if a Roman should have run into the enemies Camp, having made a large
commendation of that act of Decius in dying for his Country. And there is one
sin that seems more manifestly than others, to open the closed Wounds of
Christ, that is, hatred and enmity in our hearts, which I doubt few of the
common fort are free of. He that comes with his heart full of passion, and
anger, and rage against his Brother, what does he but rend and tear the body of
Christ in pieces? He separates and divides as much as he can one part of it
from another, and in a most formal manner kills him afresh in his members, who
are called his Body. Whosoever hates his brother, is a murderer; whosoever
divides one man from another, he does what he can to rend the body of Christ,
and to destroy that which is as dear to him as his life. Now whose heart would
not faint and swound to think of being guilty of his most sacred blood? There
is no such load to the Conscience, as to shed innocent blood: Who then can have
a heart strong enough to bear him up of being guilty of the body and blood of
the Son of God?

4. And that is the fourth thing; I would have such persons to consider; that
they eat and drink damnation to themselves in a more spiritual sense than the
Corinthians did; that is, they make themselves liable not only to the plagues
of God in this life, but to his everlasting anger in the world to come. You
have seen already that in this Sacrament we make a solemn profession of our
selves to be Christ's Disciples, we vow our selves to his service; what does he
then but call for all the curses of God upon his head, who takes no care to
keep those engagements. We here profess to believe the Gospel, and to submit
our selves to it; now the threatenings of Christ are a part of his Gospel, which
we choose here to fall under, if we do not obey his commands. We here receive
Christ who is represented to us by the signs of Bread and Wine. He therefore
who embraces him with a dead faith which works not by love, what does he else
but damn himself. He professes Christ as solemnly as any Creature can do, but
he lives not according to him: His own faith then and belief, will condemn him.
And let that man think that he departs from the Lords Table exposed to all the
mischiefs in the world that can fall upon a man unprotected from above. The
shadow of the Lord is departed from his head, and he lies open to all the
Thunderbolts of Heaven. And beside he consigns himself over to eternal death;
he binds himself to endure the torments of Hell fire. When a man can think of
Christ, of his death, of his love, and yet love his sin, and keep the traitor
in his breast; it will at last prove a traitor to him, and hale him to the most
fear-full execution. The flames of Hell will be the hotter, because the blood
of Christ will not quench them: The Anger of God will be more incensed, because
men blew it up by their sins, notwithstanding the stream of Blood which flowed
from the side of his Son to slake it. And you will see that he is in greater
danger of Hell fire then other men, and that he drinks damnation, if you
consider that which follows.

5. Such a profane person does by this act more harden his heart in his sin,
and makes it more obdurate against all the methods of God. It may be in the
heart of some to say, that there is no such danger of damnation; for a man may
repent, and though he do not now leave his sin, yet hereafter he may be out of
love with it. But this imagination will soon fly away, if you set but the light
of this truth (and those that follow) against it, That a man's heart becomes
more obstinate and unmalleable, who is not softened by Christ's Blood, and goes
on in sin, though he then perhaps entertained some resolutions against it. This
Bread will turn into a stone in such a man's heart, and it will become as hard
as the nether Millstone. He that can sin, though he remember often such a love
that is in Christ, and so great evil as is in sin, and though he come and make
engagements and professions of love to him, must needs be very stupid and
senseless. And God withdrawing his Grace, Christ departing away from such an
unhallowed and impudent Creature, must needs make his heart more seared, and
his condition more dangerous. When he approaches to a soul, and finds it a nest
of unclean Birds, he will take the wings of a Dove and fly away to a cleaner
and whiter habitation. Or rather, if we refuse to hear his Law, and obey his
Word which is preached to us, he will not come to us when we are so bold as to
take this Covenant into our mouths, and yet hate to be reformed. And if he will
not come to us, what can follow but coldness and hardness, by reason of his
absence?

6. The Devil enters into that heart which Christ leaves. If the Lord can find
no room in us, we become fit for seven more foul spirits than dwelt in us
before. God leaves men more to the power of Satan when they offer such contempt
unto his Son. The powers of darkness rush with greater fury, and with a greater
throng upon such a person that loves to be in darkness in the midst of such
Heavenly light. The Serpent may infuse his venom more into their spirits, as
well as sting their bodies, and he gets a stronger title to them after they
have offered such an affront and mockery to the Son of God.

7. It must needs be hard for such a person to get a pardon, because he sins
even against that Blood by which the pardon is to be obtained. Upon what score
can he sue for forgiveness, who made so light of the Covenant of forgiveness?
What will he plead for himself, who makes so little Conscience of keeping
Christ commands, that he breaks them all at once? for he that does not receive
Christ when he is so tendered, and submits not himself to him, he refuses all
the Gospel, and rejects all that he says. I tell you, it will cost a man many a
tear, and a very sad repentance, before he obtain the mercy to wipe off those
stains which the Blood of Christ leaves upon the Soul. He must be washed in
that very blood which he uses so irreverently, and which he can sin against so
boldly; and what a strong faith must he have that can think this so easily to
be obtained? Let no man then approach hither that is in love with any sin,
whose heart is not so broken for his Rebellions, that he verily thinks in his
Conscience he shall leave them. Let him bring nothing into the presence of
Christ which his Soul hates, unless he intend to be worse then a Jew, who did
not own him to be the Christ. And if any man do find upon good consideration
that he and his sins are so saln out, that they shall never agree again, and
therefore desires here to make an open defiance of them, and join himself most
solemnly in a friendship with Christ, let him be infinitely careful afterward,
that he do not return with a Dog to his vomit after he has eaten this sacred
food.

But let me add this, that I do not say all this of the danger that is in this
thing, that you may not come (as St. Chrysostom speaks) but that you may not
merely come. (...), etc. Hom. 24. in 1 ad Corinth.
For as to come on any fashion is very dangerous; so not to come at all is
certain famine and death. As he may surfeit and kill himself, that is a
glutton, so it is most certain that he perishes who fasts and never eats at
all. If it be a duty to do this, then there is a punishment annexed to the
neglect, as well as to the ill-performance of it. There is a danger in not
coming, as well as in coming unworthily. God is angry at one sin as well as at
another; and if he shall be condemned that does this ignorantly, or in love to
his sins, or in a half hatred of them, so shall he be that stays away, and will
not get knowledge, nor leave his sins. He that eats irreverently, is guilty by
profaning of Christ's Body, and so is he that eats not at all, by despising of
it, and preferring his lusts before him. As the one eats damnation to himself,
so does the other by not eating, judge himself to be in a damnable condition.
For if we cannot partake of his Supper here, how can we think our selves fit to
feast with him hereafter. Many think that they are safe if they venture not
upon these holy things; and it disquiets them to come in their fins, but it
never troubles them that they stay away and continue in their sins. These men's
Consciences are but half informed, and I seriously wish them not to endure in
that condition, wherein they judge themselves unmeet society for Christ and the
faithful. Remember, that you not only live in sin, but add this sin to all
the rest, that you do not come to remember Christ, and show forth his Death. He
that breaks one of the least of his Commandments, and lives in the known
neglect of it, shall be called least in the Kingdom of Heaven, i. e. shall be
deemed not to belong to it.

Away then with this supine negligence, James 4.8.
Cleanse your hearts ye sinners, and purify your hearts ye double minded.
Purge your souls by hearty sorrow, by humble confession, by great contrition,
by a professed hatred and detestation of all your sins. Col. 3.5, 8, 12, 13.
Mortify your members that are on the earth, fornication, uncleanness,
inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness. Put off all these,
anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy, filthy Communication out of your mouth. Lie
not one unto another. But put on as the Elect of God, bowels of mercy,
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one another,
and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any, even as
Christ forgave you, so also do ye, etc. And come hither to strengthen your
resolutions, and to confirm your purposes. Come and renew your vows of holy
living, and protest in the sight of God and his holy Angels, and before his
faithful people, that you will be the followers of the Lord Jesus. Do not weep
and mourn, and afflict your Souls for a day, do not banish your sins for a
little time, that you may entertain them afterward with a greater kindness, but
give them an eternal divorce, and bid them never return again. Do not go a
little back from your sins, that you may take your rise, and leap into them
with a greater violence; but fly from them as from the Devil, and the mouth of
the pit, resolving never to cast a friendly look upon them any more. And then
come to Christ, and cause joy in Heaven at the return of a repenting sinner.
And if thou take upon thee his yoke, why should there not be joy on earth
too? why should thou not come and praise the Lord for his goodness to thee,
and make the faithful rejoice with thee that they have got more company at
this holy Feast?

But I am very ignorant, will some say, and I dare not come for fear I
understand not these mysteries. I answer, That it is very well if thou art
sensible of thy ignorance, for then there is hope thou will labor after
knowledge. And it is not hard to understand the meaning of these things, but
very easy; for our Lord has made his sufferings sensible to us in these
signs, that we might more easily remember them, and be more quickly moved by
them to due affections to him.

But I am afraid my heart is not right, says another, and that I am cheated
with the shadows of Faith and Repentance. Let that man who speaks thus, tell
himself what he means by true faith which he would find in himself. Is it a
persuasion that God loves thee? Is it a resting on Christ for salvation? A
thousand to one this is the mistake which troubles many. But that Faith is
another thing which the Gospel speaks of, which will be soon understood, if
thou understandest what the Gospel is which thou art to believe. The Gospel is
to be considered either as a Narrative, relation and report of what Christ
Jesus was upon earth, and of what he has done, and suffered; of what he
taught, and what he now is in the Heavens. It is an History of his Life and
Death, Resurrection, and Ascension into Heaven, there to sit at Gods right
hand; and it is a Sermon concerning Christ's Doctrines, of his commands,
promises and threatenings. Or secondly, it is to be considered as it is a call
or proclamation, an offer or tender of pardon, grace and salvation to all that
will accept of them on the conditions that they are propounded. Now Faith is
first an assent of the mind and heart to that report, a firm persuasion that
all is true that is said in the Gospel; and secondly, It is a consent to that
offer, an acceptance of that invitation, an embracement of all that is there
tendered, by yielding up of our selves to obey the Lord Jesus in all things.
This is receiving of Christ, this is believing in the Son of God. And there are
many acts of faith to be in thy heart, before thou can lay hold of the mercy
of God. And proportionably to thy sincere and hearty consent to obey him, will
be thy persuasion of an interest in that mercy. If thy confident relying on him
for salvation, exceed other acts of a lively faith, it is to be suspected of
too sudden a growth, and thou had best fear that it starts up too high. But
consider with thy self, do thou believe the Gospel? does thy heart submit to
that way of salvation there proposed? art thou devoted to the service of Jesus?
Then be of good comfort, if not confident; come and strengthen thy faith, that
thou may still do as thou have resolved. This is one of the commands of the
Gospel, that thou do believe; and therefore if thy faith be true, obey it.

But a third says, That he has so much business that he cannot prepare
himself. But consider I pray you in the fear of God, what greater business can
there be, than to work out our salvation? Had not they business (as they
pretended) of great import, to whom the Lord said, you shall not taste of my
Supper? Consider whether thou can not bring thy business into a less compass,
or may it not be let alone till another time? I cannot believe that any man is
so employed, that constantly when he is to receive the Sacrament, he must omit
it, or be a great loser. It is incredible that his business must be done just
in that nick of time, and that none else will serve. But how comes it that men
can find time for sports and recreations, for visits and friendly
entertainments; and yet can never be found at leisure when Christ comes? And
besides, what do men mean by preparation? Are they so employed that they cannot
read, nor pray seriously, nor praise God for his mercies? If they be, they are
most dangerously busied; it were good for them they had not half that riches
which will not let them go to Heaven. But if they be constantly free for such
good duties, then they are making a daily preparation for this sort of Prayers
and Praises. There is none need be unprepared by business for this duty, who
are not unprepared for all other.

But there are wicked persons, that Communicate, say some other. These it seems
have time enough both to observe themselves and others also. Then, I hope, they
have reproved and admonished their brethren, and they pray continually for
them, or else why do they speak of them as so wicked. None is to be deemed so
wicked as to be excluded from our society, unless he refuse reproofs, and
reject our good counsel, and withstand all the means of amendment. But who made
thee a judge of the matter? Can thou determine who are fit to be debarred all
Christian society? If it belong to some other person to judge of him, do not
take upon thee his office. If he do not do his office, go and tell him of it;
and if he still neglect his duty, do not thou therefore neglect thine. If he
will not do what becomes him, do not thou therefore refuse thine own food, and
starve thy Soul out of I know not what peevishness, that all things cannot be
according to thy desire.

But perhaps this case may be thought worthy of particular satisfaction, and
therefore I shall bestow an whole Chapter upon it. This only I desire, that
none would make it a matter of quarrel, which I propound, but look upon it as a
desire after peace.

CHAP. XX.
ANd first, I suppose every sober Christian will take this for a truth, that no
man is to judge another so wicked as to refuse his Communion, till he be cast
out of the society of the faithful, for his wickedness. No modest person will
be so bold as to pass his censures upon a man whom the Church has not yet
censured. It is too much arrogance for a private man to make himself the judge
of all his Brethren. And such a pride may deserve as severe a censure, as that
which he is pleased to condemn.

II. Secondly, I think this will not be denied neither, that they in whose
power it is to remove the wicked from Communion, are not to do it hastily. Two
or three thoughts will serve many private men to the refusing of their
Brethren. Some passionate discourse shall convert them to separate from all
those whom an hour before they owned. And if they change their thoughts so
speedily, they are very unfit to judge of such a weighty matter. But then they
that are judges, must take great heed that their zeal do not outrun their
knowledge; and they must beware they use not severe medicines, when more mild
and gentle will cure the disease. Is God hasty in judging of us? Does one sin
make him withdraw his grace? Does not he wait to be gracious? and is he not
slow to anger, and of great mercy? Does not he use many means to amend us,
before he sends sicknesses or such punishments upon us? The Ministers of the
Gospel are then to imitate their Master, and to proceed very slowly unto any
sharp courses, though they tend to men's recovery.

III. Thirdly, We must take therefore the method which Christ has prescribed,
before we judge a man so wicked as to be unchurched. And that is this,

1. There is an express command for fraternal admonition, 1 These. 5.14. Every
particular Christian that sees his Brother in a fault, is bound to admonish
him, to open his eyes, to awaken him our of his drowsiness, and stir him up to
repentance. It was a barbarous saying of Cain, Am I my Brothers keeper? If we
be Brethren, we ought to have a charity to each other; and none can be greater
than this, to reprove a sinner, and endeavor his amendment. And so our Savior
bids every Disciple ( Mat. 18.15.) when his Brother trespasses against him,
that he should go and tell him of it privately between them two. What a great
deal would the Devil lose, if this were practiced as faithfully as many other
duties are? Nay, if men were as ready to reprove, as they are to condemn, his
Kingdom would be in danger to be ruined. For not only those quarrels that are
in the Church might be hereby reconciled; but a very noisome part of man's life
would be sanctified and perfumed. Their backbitings, their evil surmisings,
their whisperings, and speaking evil one of another, would at once be amended,
together with their uncharitable separations. And I would to God that they who
have such a care that there should be no wicked in the Church, would not tell
others that such a man is wicked, before they have told him so, and endeavored
his reformation. This would be a great charity to him, by hiding his faults
from being more public; and no less charity to our selves, by converting a
sinner from the error of his ways, and saving a soul from death, which will
hide a multitude of sins.

2. If this prevail not, he is to get two or three honest men beside himself,
to do this duty with him. So our Savior prescribes in that place, Mat. 18.16.
We must not presently give a man up for incorrigible, if our single admonition
be not received or followed; nor must we divulge his faults, and spread them
any further than is necessary for his amendment. And perhaps the fault may be
known to more than one; in which ease they that are of best knowledge and
affections, should undertake his cure, and cover his sin that it be not known
unto all men.

3. But if he refuse to hearken to these men's good counsel, then let them tell
it to the Minister, whom God has set over them, and let him privately admonish
him that has offended, with all love and gentleness. And as the former was a
fraternal, so is this a paternal admonition. And if his fault be known to him
before, then he is bound to admonish him, both as he is a Brother, and as he is
a Father. And I suppose his charity will be so great, as not to think one
entreaty to be enough, but he will extend it to repeated beseechings, before
any course more severe be used. Or he may take, after many admonitions, some
few with him to be both witnesses of what he does, and also to make it more
solemn and effectual to the sinner.

4. But then if after this sort of admonition, the party continue unreformed,
he must be rebuked before all, as the Apostle tells us, 1 Timothy 5.20. For as the
private person was to do it by himself, and then before others; so is the
Minister likewise to use a first and second admonition answerable unto theirs.
He is in the face of the Congregation to exhort him to repentance, to pray for
him that he may repent, which in all likelihood will amend him, or at least dum
unus corripitur, plurimi emendantur, many will fear the like correction. He
that says this is to defame a man, does himself defame Gospel, and finds fault
with the method of Christ to do men good. He does shame himself, qui facit,
quod argui debet, non ille, qui arguit. He that reproves another, does not
defame him, but he defames himself by deserving of reproof. And it is a greater
shame to commit it, and continue in it, than to be reproved for it, and amend
it.

5. And if after these two admonitions of his and theirs, he do not amend, then
let him be rejected and cast from the Communion of the Church, as the Apostle
says, Tit. 3.10. i. e. Let him speak to all the Congregation to avoid such a
man as an infectious person; and not keep society and converse with him. Let
him charge them to withdraw themselves from his company, and not to maintain
familiarity with one so incorrigible. For you must know (which people little
consider) That they that you will not hold communion with at the Lords Table,
you are not to hold converse with at your own. Now what a desperate sinner must
he be, that we would thus use? and how long should we wait before this severity
be exercised? And yet we cannot satisfy our selves (as far as my weak
understanding can judge) in abstaining from his communion till this course have
been taken with him. And let me say it with as much confidence as it has truth
on its side, That the way of the Church of God has not been to gather the
godly from among the profane without any more ado, but to cast out the
profane from among the godly, after all this labor. Believe it, corrupt
Members are of the body, till they be cut off; And no wise man will use such a
sharp remedy, till he sees it will gangrene and endanger the body. He must
first use corroding and healing plasters, sharp reproofs and mild admonitions.
But without any of these, to suppose men ungodly, and gather a select number
out of them, is a path which the People of God have not trod, a practice which
they have not been acquainted withal. I confess the crime may sometime be so
great, that all these courses are not to be taken, but an Adulterer, a
Fornicator, or such like, is to be debarred Christian Communion without this
process, till he have given sufficient proof of his amendment. But because we
live in Faece Romuli, and there is little order amongst us, let me suppose that
they to whom it belongs, do not do their duty, and take this course. Yet

IV. Fourthly, Let it be considered, both that it is no part of thy duty to
judge concerning the state of other men, and that thou can not answer the
neglect of thy duty because other men neglect theirs. Christ bids thee to do
this in remembrance of him; if others will not do it so as they ought, that is
no just cause for thee not to do it. How can another man's sin be a reason for
thy sin? Why should his not being removed, be a cause of thy removing thy self?
If the Minister do not his duty in every thing, do thou do thine, or else you
are both alike. He is negligent in not admonishing of them that offend, and
thou art negligent in not remembering of Christ's Death, and deservest to be
admonished also.

V. Fifthly, Let it be considered also, that when thou do receive, thy
Communion is with the rest of the Church, and not with him that receives not
aright. He only eats the Bread, and drinks the Wine, but receives not Christ,
and so thou do not become one with him. All the communion thou have with him,
is only natural, not moral nor spiritual. His bodily presence is there; and as
to eating and drinking, thou do as he does; but when thou considerest the
manner of the action, which is the morality of it, thou do not communicate
with him, nor do what he does. For thou do all in another sort, for other
ends and designs than he does, so that in a right understanding there is no
communion between you. And then why should thou sever thy self from
communion with the body, for fear thou should have communion with a sinner,
which thou can not have?

IV. Sixthly, But if thou fear that his bodily presence will do thee any
harm, why may thou not as well think that thy bodily presence will do him
good? Thy goodness may as much avail him, as his sin infect thee. You have
influence upon each other (as to harm or benefit) both alike, and that is none
at all.

VII. Seventhly, But perhaps you fear that your presence with him is an
approving of his sin, and you shall be taken to allow his vices. These are mere
fears and groundless jealousies; for there is no man that does so interpret it.
It cannot signify so much, unless the Congregation so understand it, which no
wise man will do. And if you cannot be otherwise satisfied, go to the Minister,
and profess to him, and as many of the Congregation as you please, that you
dislike the ways of such a person, and disallow of the sins wherein he lives,
and that you intend not to have any communion with him, though he be present
with you.

VIII. Eighthly, And if you fear that the sinner himself will make an ill use
of it, and think himself to be good, because he is in good company, you have a
remedy at hand for that, which is private admonition and reproof. And I desire
those that are so scrupulous, seriously to consider whether they have by good
counsel and advice, labored to reform this sinful Neighbor. If not, then
what hypocrisy is it to complain of mixed communions, and that he is there,
when thou have not done what thou can to hinder it by making of him better?
He that says he cannot with any comfort partake with such a person, should
rather consider with what comfort he can live in the sinful neglect of such a
plain duty, as that is, of admonishing his Brother. It is the part of a
Christian not to condemn his Brother, but to labor to make him better: Not to
refuse communion with him presently, but to associate himself with him, to
persuade him to amend.

IX. Ninthly, But if thou have performed this duty carefully, then he cannot
presume thou love his sin, though thou love him; nor will any sin which he
afterward commits, be imputed to thy neglect; nor will the sin of his receiving
unworthily be laid to thy charge, because thou did what thou could to
prevent it. It can only be matter of thy compassion and sorrow, but not thy
burden and trouble, that another does not do his duty when thou have done
thine. And all Gods Servants in all ages of the Church, have received comfort
in such mixed communions, and have patiently waited till Christ's course was
taken with men for their reformation. And it is to be feared that such
objectors seek for too much comfort in outward things, and discomfort
themselves in their own fancies; Whereas their true comfort lies in doing of
their duty faithfully to God and to their Brethren, and in the mercy of God in
Christ. And if they look for other comfort, they will be deceived, for the net
of the Gospel brings both good and bad to the shore; and where there is Wheat,
there are Tares many times also.

Let no man therefore plead this or that in excuse for his not coming to the
Lords Table, but resolve hereafter carefully to perform so necessary a duty.
Let the sinner quit his state of sin and death, and so come and eat of the
Bread of life. Let the ignorant come into the School of Christ, and proceed
till they come to the highest form, to the upper room where this Feast is
prepared. Let those that are in enmity with their Neighbors also come; let
them only first go and be reconciled to their Brethren, and so let them offer
their gift. Let those that have a multitude of worldly employments come, only
let them leave them as Abraham did his Asses at the bottom of the Mount, and
so let them ascend to Heaven in their thoughts, and converse with God. Let the
weak come that they may grow in strength, and let the strong come that they may
not grow weak. Let them who have fears come, that their hearts may be settled by
the acts of a more lively faith; and let them come who have hopes that they may
rise to greater degrees of an humble confidence. Let those who have leisure
accept of this invitation, because they have no excuse; and let those who have
but little leisure entertain it also, that they may the more sanctify their
business and employments; let the sad and sorrowful, approach, that their
hearts may be filled with the joys of the Lord; and let those that rejoice in
the Lord always, approach, that their joy may be full. Do not send your
excuses when you are called, but resolve that a necessity lies upon you, unless
you will be guilty of the foulest neglect of your duty, and the greatest
disrespect to Gods love. If any man can be content to stay away after all these
entreaties, on to come but seldom when he may be so welcome; Let him consider
what a wrong he offers to his own soul, how he robs it of its food and
nourishment, and how he pineth the most noble and excellent Creature in the
world. And let him consider what an affront it is to God to despise the
choicest of his cheer, the most costly provision made by the expense of his
Sons Blood, and the most kind and gracious invitations to it. O foolish people
and unwise! do we thus requite the Lord? do we thus slight the dying of our
Savior? are we no more affected with his singular love? Is this to commemorate
the death of Christ, to come once or twice in a year to this Feast? The Lord
have mercy upon us, and help us. How are we degenerated from the primitive
practice? how cold is our love to God and to his Son grown? Unless we blow it
up by a frequent remembrance of Christ, it is to be feared it will quite go
out. The ashes and dust of this world will bury all the remaining sparks of it
which are not yet extinguished. Let Christ, I beseech you, see that you love
him, by taking all occasions to come to him; by binding your selves faster with
the cords of his love, to all obedience and dutifulness toward him. And let me
but tell you these two truths, and I shall put an end to this Discourse: The
way to have reformed us would not have been to leave off Communions, but to
make them more frequent. Nor secondly, To unite and consolidate Parishes, but
to make more Pastors in greater Parishes, that by more personal instruction men
might be better fitted for frequent Communion. But so it is, that zeal
oft-times has too much passion in it, and too little knowledge. The good Lord
pardon us, and be gracious unto us.

FINIS.

