A PRIVATE PRAYER To be used In Difficult Times.
O Almighty God, who art the refuge and strength of all those that truly fear
thee and put their trust in thee; We thy Servants, who have had long experience
of thy goodness, and often found thee a present help in the needful time of
trouble, most humbly flee unto thy infinite Mercies, to implore thy Grace and
Favor toward us, in this distressed Church: Who know not what to do, but only
lift up our eyes unto thee, from whom comes our Salvation.

Our sins indeed testify against us, that we justly deserve to be forsaken by
thee, and given up as a prey unto those that hate us. For we have done very
wickedly; and been so far from bringing forth the fruits of the Gospel of thy
Grace (which we have long enjoyed in its purity) that too many of us have
turned it into wantonness: and the best of us, have not been so zealous of Good
Works as our most Holy Religion, and the singular benefits we have enjoyed by
it, required from us.

Our contempt or neglect of thy Divine Service, our Unrighteousness and
Uncharitableness one toward another, our Riot and Intemperance, our Filthiness
and Uncleanness, our insensibleness of our Brethrens miseries, and all our
other high Provocations, call for Vengeance upon us: And it is of thy mere
mercy, thy long-suffering mercy, that we are not already laid waste, and made
the scorn and derision of those who are round about us.

Unto that inconceiveable Mercy and most tender Compassion, we still betake our
selves, and sue for further patience and forbearance toward us: beseeching
thee with earnest Cries; Spare us, good Lord; spare thy people, and give us not
up unto a Reproach.

Remember not our sins nor our transgressions, but according to thy mercy,
remember thou us for thy goodness sake, O Lord.

For thy names sake pardon our iniquity: though it be great.

Look upon our affliction and our trouble: and forgive all our sin.

Consider our Enemies, for they are many: and they hate us with a cruel hatred.

But do not thou forsake us, O Lord; O our God be not thou far from us: But
preserve us in the free and undisturbed profession of thy Holy Religion, here
established among us.

Suffer not the Doctrine of the Gospel to be here again corrupted; thy Worship
and Service adulterated; the Holy Communion of Christ's Body and Blood
depraved, and maimed; the just rights and liberties of this Church to be
oppressed by any of those who have evil will unto It.

But preserve us, O Lord, from their evil designs, for thy mercies sake, for
thy holy truths sake (here reformed from many superstitions, wherewith it was
defiled) for the sake of thy faithful people, who cry Day and Night unto thee,
for the sake of Christ Jesus, who dyed for us, and suffered upon the Cross to
testify to that truth, which we maintain: whom we own for our only Mediator
and Advocate; whose Sacrifice, once offered, we believe to be an all-sufficient
satisfaction for us; whose merits alone we mention to thee, and depend upon; by
whose Agony and Bloody sweat, his Cross and Passion, Resurrection and
Intercession, we beg to be delivered by thee.

Deny not, blessed Lord, the suits of such Supplicants: let them never be put
to Confusion; but deliver them in thy righteousness, bow down thy ears unto
them, and make haste to deliver them. Be thou their strong Rock and House of
defense that thou may save them.

And for that end, stir up the hearts of all thy people to be more than
ordinary Zealous in their Religion; more fervent and frequent in Prayers and
Supplications; more serious in their Repentance and Humiliations; more constant
and devout in receiving the Holy Communion; more strict and careful in their
whole Christian Conversation.

Endue all the Ministers of our Religion, with Integrity, Wisdom, and Courage.
Bless their Labors; and protect them in the faithful discharge of their Duty.
And give all the people grace to follow their godly instructions; that they may
be preserved from all dangerous errors and delusions.

Quicken the Magistrates in their several places, to maintain Truth, as well as
execute Justice.

Restore a happy unity among us; that we may stand fast in one spirit, with one
mind, striving together for the faith of the Gospel.

And let it not be in the power of any of our enemies to overthrow that blessed
work of Reformation of Religion, which was brought about by the long study, and
labors, and prayers, and sufferings, and blood of many of thy faithful
servants. But perfect and complete it, we beseech thee, by making us all so
sensible of the inestimable value of that blessing, that it may be more and
more effectual in the Reformation of all our lives.

Continue thy protection also over all other reformed Churches; which hitherto
are in safety. And where they are laid waste, graciously restore them, after
they have suffered a while with patience, to their lost liberties and
enjoyments.

Hear their cry, O Lord, and arise for the sighing of those poor distressed
Christians: and set them in safety from those who swell against them.

Let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end: and establish thou the just.

Break the arm of wicked and evil Men: seek out their wickedness, till thou
find none.

So we thy People and Sheep of thy Pasture, will give thee thanks for ever: we
will show forth thy praise to all Generations, saying,

Blessed be the Lord God, our Savior and Deliverer, who only does wondrous
things.

And blessed be his glorious name for ever, and let the whole Earth be filled
with his Glory, Amen, and Amen.

LICENSED,

July 5. 1687.
LONDON, Printed for Ric. Chiswell, MDCLXXXVII.


