A help to Communicants

Ingredere, ut Proficias



A BOOK FOR BEGINNERS, Or, a Help to Young Communicants; THAT They may be
fitted for the Holy Communion, and receive it with profit.

By S. Patrick, D. P.

Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty. 1680.

To the READER.
THere is no Advice more wholesome or more necessary, then that of Solomon, in
the conclusion of his Meditations upon the Vanity of all things under the Sun;
Remember thy CREATOR in the days of thy youth. Which may serve in stead of a
Preface to this little Book; especially if I change one word, and make it run
thus, Remember thy SAVIOR in the days of thy youth.

Be sensible, that is, how much thou art indebted to Him; and do not forget it,
but carry this always in thy mind, that as thou did receive thy being from
Him, so thou art bought with a great price; and therefore ought to glorify
God with Body and Soul, which are His. 1 Cor. VI. 20.

And do this betime, in thy best days; before thou art tainted and corrupted
by Vice and wickedness. Into which dangerous ways if thou art so unhappy as to
have entered, be advised, and leave them presently. Betake thy self without any
delay to the service of God: and let no buisiness, much less any vain pleasure,
hinder thee from acquainting thy self with the Duty thou owe Him; or from
performing it seriously: Particularly that duty which He has commanded thee to
do in Remembrance of Him.

The Nature, the Necessity, and the Ends of which, together with the manner of
doing it, I lay before thee in the following pages. Wherein I shall treat only
of such things as are most easy, and obvious to every capacity: hoping, by
God's blessing, they will be useful to such as will set themselves to consider
them.

They that would have larger Instructions and Helps, may find them in the
Christian Sacrifice.

CHAP. I. Of the Duty.
WHEN God's Minister declares, as he is required to do, that he intends on such
a day to administer the most comfortable Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood;
and invites you to it, beseeching you to dispose your selves religiously and
devoutly for it: you must consider, that it is your duty to prepare your
selves, to come and partake of so great a Blessing; and not to think it enough
that you have been present at Divine Service, and heard the Sermon, and then
may turn your back on the Table of the Lord. Which is a very great disrespect
to Him, and forgetfulness of Him, and cannot be excused so easily, as men's
naughty hearts incline them to believe. For though God's Goodness. is such,
that He prefers works of Mercy to your Neighbors, before Sacrifice to Himself,
when one of them must be omitted: yet He does not make the same allowance for
your Worldly buisiness, (which well may be let alone till another time;) much
less for your vain Pleasures or Recreations, which never ought to hinder or put
by this or any other holy Duty in the season proper for it.

Come therefore, as often as you are invited; and when God's Minister, after
Sermon ended, goes up to the Holy Table to prepare this Heavenly food for you,
(that is, to consecrate Bread broken and Wine poured out, that it may represent
the Death of Christ to you; and to give it you, saying, Take, eat, and drink
this in remembrance of Christ) do you stay in God's House, and draw near unto
his Table, and thankfully receive it from him, for that end for which he gives
it, in commemoration of Christ's Death and Passion upon the Cross for your sake.

It is the duty of God's Minister, to set the Bread and Wine apart, to present
them unto God, to break the one and pour out the other, to bless them, and to
give them unto you: And then it is your duty, to look upon this Bread and Wine,
thus blessed, as representing Christ unto you; and accordingly to receive them,
not as mere Bread and Wine, but as things deputed by Christ to be in stead of
His Body and Blood, and to communicate them to worthy Receivers.

CHAP. II. Of the Necessity of this Duty.
TO do thus you are engaged,

First, by the express Commandment of our Lord Christ; which you find four
times recorded in the New Testament: by the three first Evangelists, Saint
Matthew, XXVI. 26, 27. Saint Mark, XIV. 22, 23. Saint Luke, XXII. 19, 20; and
by Saint Paul, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians XI. 23, 24, 25. All
which places, especially the last, you will do well to read seriously. And
then consider,

Secondly, that there is the greater regard to be had to this Commandment, [Doe
this in remembrance of me,] which Saint Paul says he received of the Lord,
because it was his last and dying Commandment, in the night when He was
betrayed, just before the day of his Passion. We are wont, in other cases, to
be inclined to remember, and carefully perform the last desire of a dying
Friend: and therefore what other account can we give of it, if we live in a
neglect of this Duty, so solemnly enjoined, but that we are strangers, or, at
best, very cold in our love to Him? which you had need to quicken, because,

Thirdly, your care in this Duty will be a means to make you observe the rest
of his Commandments better; which now, alas! are little regarded, because
little or no regard is had to this last Commandment; which our Lord seems to
have added, when He left the world, for the security of all the other that He
had delivered before. For the doing this has a mighty power in it to stir up
the love of Christ in our hearts. And the love of Christ constrains us, (as
S. Paul teaches, 2 Cor. V. 14, 15.) because we thus judge, that if one died for
all, then were all dead: And that He died for all, that they which live, should
not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto Him that died for them, and rose
again. Do this therefore in remembrance of Him, which is such an efficacious
means to make you always do well. Yea, more then this,

Lastly, it will be a means to make you observe his Commandments with love and
delight: which if they be wanting, your Obedience will be little worth. For
without Love, all that you do will not be acceptable to Christ; and unless you
delight in what you do, it will not be acceptable to your selves. But neither
of these will be wanting, if you religiously frequent this Holy Sacrament;
where He is represented to you as desirous to save you, though it were by dying
for you; saying, when this was first propounded to Him, Lo, I come, I delight
to do thy will, O God. How can you then refrain, when you think of this, from
expressing the same affection and the same joy; when it is so much easier for
you to do God's will, then it was for Him to suffer such things as he did, in
obedience to it.

CHAP. III. Of the Ends for which it was instituted.
YOU will be the more inclined to this, when you consider the Ends for which
this Commemoration of Christ's Death was ordained. Which were such as these.

First, to profess that you are Christians, and believe that Religion which
Christ has sealed by his Blood, to be the true and only way to Happiness; and
that you mean to continue in it, whatsoever it costs you, though it should
engage you, that is, to follow Him to his Cross.

Secondly, to give thanks to God the Father, for sending his only begotten Son
into the world, to be the Propitiation for our Sins:

And to God the Son, our Blessed Savior Jesus Christ, for humbling himself so
low, as to die the death of the Cross; where He offered his own Body, to put
away our sins by the Sacrifice of Himself:

And to God the Holy Ghost, who has brought us glad tidings from Heaven, since
our Savior's ascension thither, that having purged our sins by Himself, He
sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high; where He lives for
evermore, and is mindful of us and of his Promises, which He will certainly
fulfill, as we see by these Pledges He has left us of his endless Love. And
therefore,

Thirdly, you bind your selves, by the remembrance of these things, to be
faithful to Him; and to keep that Holy Covenant, wherein you are solemnly tied
to be wholly His. For as the very coming to his Table, naturally signifies you
are of his Family, and belong to Him: so being there so kindly entertained by
Him, you stand bound to behave your selves as his Servants, or rather Friends;
and engage so to do. Now ye are his Friends, if you comply with his will in
all other things, as well as in this of commemorating his dying Love for your
sake. So He himself tells his Apostles, in those memorable words, XV. Joh. 13,
14. where He represents to them, in what consisted the greatness of his Love,
and the sincerity of theirs. Greater love has no man then this, that a man lay
down his life for his Friends. Ye are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever I
command you. For,

Lastly, being thus of the number of the Faithful, you have, in this Holy
Sacrament, Communion with Christ in his Death and Passion, and in the Merits of
them. For though the things you receive be in themselves but Bread and Wine;
yet by a Divine and spiritual grave they become the Body and Blood of Christ to
the Faithful, who are thereby made partakers of all the Benefits which He
purchased, by his Sacrifice which He made of Himself for our Sins. Thus one of
the Prayers after the Communion excellently instructs you, that God vouchsafes
to feed those, who duly receive these holy Mysteries, with the spiritual food
of the most precious Body and Blood of his Son, our Savior Jesus Christ; and
does assure you thereby of his favor and goodness; and that you are very
Members incorporate in the mystical Body of his Son, which is the blessed
Company of all Faithful people; and are also Heirs, through hope, of his
everlasting Kingdom, by the merits of the most precious Death and Passion of
his dear Son.

I need not add that, by doing this in remembrance of Him, you have Communion
with all your Christian Brethren, (for it is already expressed;) and that you
beg his gracious assistence, that you may continue (as it follows in the Prayer
now mentioned) in this holy Fellowship, and do all such good works as He has
prepared for us to walk in: for this holy action being a Sacrifice of praise
and thanksgiving, (as it is in the Prayer going before,) wherein Christ's
Sacrifice is commemorated; it is in its own nature the most powerful Prayer
(as all Sacrifices were (1 Samuel XIII. 12.) more powerful then any other can
be) to supplicate for, and to impetrate (that is, obtain) the Divine Blessing
upon us.

CHAP. IV. Of Preparation for it.
THIS may suffice, one would think, to excite all those who have any care of
their future Salvation, or present satisfacion, to make it their buisiness to
prepare themselves, to be worthy Receivers of such great Benefits.

And that is not hard to do.

For, having learned your Catechism, or the short Instruction in the
Common Prayer Book, to be learned by every person that is baptized; and then
seriously considered the Promise that was made at your Baptism in your name,
which is there explained: you should, in the next place, take the first
opportunity to have the benefit of Confirmation. Wherein you both openly renew
the solemn Promise and Vow made in your name at your Baptism, ratifying and
confirming the same in your own person, and acknowledging your self bound to
believe and do all those things which your Godfathers and Godmothers then
undertook for you; and also, by the Laying on of hands, have more of the Divine
Grace imparted to you, to confirm and strengthen you in your Christian
resolution, that you may continue his for ever.

After this you may, without any scruple, look upon your self as having a right
to the Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood. And the best Preparation to it
will be,

I. To endeavor faithfully to live according to your Baptismal Vow. And for
that end, to call to mind every day how solemnly you did such a time, in the
presence of God and such a Congregation, ratify and confirm that Vow; and also
promised that, by God's grace, you would always labor to observe such things
as by your own confession you have, assented unto.

They are these three. First, that you should renounce the Devil and all his
works, the pomps and vanities of this wicked world, with all covetous desires
of the same, and the sinful lusts of the flesh; so that you will not follow,
nor be led by them. Secondly, that you should believe all the Articles of the
Christian Faith. And thirdly, that you should keep God's holy will and
Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of your life.

II. Now those Commandments which you have promised to keep, you are taught
afterward contain your Duty toward God, and your Duty toward your Neighbor.

Your Duty toward God, you are instructed, is this: To believe in Him, to fear
Him, to love Him with all my heart, with all my mind, with all my soul, and
with all my strength; to worship Him, to give Him thanks, to put my whole trust
in Him, to call upon Him, to honor his holy Name and his Word, and to serve
him truly all the days of my life.

Then follows your Duty toward your Neighbor, in these words, as you your
self are taught to confess; My Duty toward my Neighbor is, to love him as my
self, so do to all men as I would they should do unto me: to love, honor and
succor my father and mother; to honor and obey the King, and all that are put
in authority under him; to submit my self to all my Governors, Teachers,
spiritual Pastors, and Masters; to order my self lowly and reverently to all
my betters; to hurt no body by word or deed; to be true and just in all my
dealing; to bear no malice nor hatred in my heart; to keep my hands from
picking and stealing, and my tongue from evil speaking, lying and slandering;
to keep my body in temperance, soberness, and chastity; not to covet nor desire
other men's goods, but to learn and labor truly to get mine own living, and to
do my duty in that state of life unto which it shall please God to call me.

All these things you promised, with your own mouth, before God and his People,
(when you was confirmed) that you would be careful to observe: and must
therefore make this the constant Rule of your life; and call upon God, by
diligent Prayer, for his special Graces, without which you will not be able to
serve Him.

Which if you do sincerely, then,

III. I would advise you, every evening, before you go to sleep, to take some
time to think how well you have kept your Resolution, and observed this Rule:
And where you find you have fallen short of it, or done contrary to it, to make a
new Resolution to be more careful the next day. And if you be able to set down
in writing those Negligences, or breaches of your Covenant with God, when you
take notice of them; you will have the less to do when the opportunity of
communicating approaches. For then,

IV. Lastly, you can with much ease examine your selves before the Communion,
and have a full account of your life and conversation ready at hand. About
which you will be lamentably puzzled, and long in drawing it up, if you do not
constantly make some observation how things go with you: but in this Method
shall be able presently, and without any perplexity, to understand certainly
and clearly in what case you are. And so you have nothing farther to do, by
way of Preparation to the Sacrament, but only, first, sorrowfully to bewail
your Sinfulness, and to confess your selves to Almighty God: and that,
secondly, with a full purpose of Amendment of life, and of greater diligence
and watchfulness hereafter; especially in those particulars wherein you have
miscarried. (For sorrowful Confession and Affliction of spirit for your Sins,
is not sufficient; but must end in this unfeigned Resolution.) And if you find,
thirdly, that your Offenses are not only against God, but also against your
Neighbors; then (as you are directed in the Communion-Service) to reconcile
your selves unto them: Being ready to make restitution and satisfaction,
according to the utmost of your powers, for all injuries and wrongs done by you
to any other; and being ready likewise to forgive others that have offended
you, as ye would have forgiveness of your offenses at God's hand.

When all this is done, then you ought not to discourage your selves with a
fancy of your Unworthiness to partake of that Holy Table to which you are
invited. For you will always be unworthy in the strictest sense of the word:
but are really worthy in God's account, when you are thus disposed; and
sensible, at the best, of your unworthiness of such great Blessings, as God, of
his goodness, is desirous to bestow upon you.

CHAP. V. A Prayer for that morning when you intend to receive. Which may be
used any time before.
BEsides those usual Prayers, wherein you constantly recommend your self to
God, and give him thanks for his daily benefits: it will be fit to make a
particular application of your self to Him, for his gracious assistence and his
blessing upon you in that holy Duty, after this manner.

O Lord, I most humbly abase my self before Thee, confessing that I am unworthy
of any of those mercies which I enjoy, in common, with the rest of thy
Creatures. For I have too much forgotten Thee my Creator, and Jesus Christ my
Redeemer; whom I have many ways offended, either through ignorance, or
negligence, or wilful sins. [Here mention the particulars out of your daily
observations.]

And yet, so great is thy Goodness, Thou art pleased to give me an opportunity
to partake of thy extraordinary love and kindness in thy dear Son, the Lord
Jesus. For I am invited by his Minister, to come and feast with Him at his
Table, by a thankful Commemoration of the offering He made, of his own Body
and Blood, upon the Cross for us.

And I am very desirous to go, if Thou will but be pleased graciously to pardon
all my past offenses, either against Thee, or against my Neighbor; and to
accept of my hearty sorrow for them, and unfeigned resolution to do my
endeavor to amend them.

O be merciful unto me, be merciful unto me, I most humbly beseech Thee, for
the sake of Jesus Christ who died for me. And though I am unworthy so much as,
at any time, to approach into thy presence; yet do not reject me now, but
permit me to come, even unto thy holy Table.

For which if I am in any measure prepared, it is to be ascribed to thy grace,
which has wrought such good dispositions in me; and therefore will, I hope,
still so assist me, that I may not be an unwelcome guest unto Thee: but be
filled with such a lively sense of thy Love to me, and with such a sincere and
ardent Love to Thee, and with such satisfaction of heart in being one of thy
Servants, that I may be more sorrowful then ever that I have offended Thee,
and more steadfastly resolved to be strictly obedient to Thee.

And, O most gracious God, let me find, I beseech Thee, all such godly
Resolutions in me more confirmed and strengthened by the heavenly Food Thou have
prepared for me. O that (as I stand already engaged by former Vows which I have
upon me, so) I may faithfully and cheerfully obey thy holy will in all things,
and daily increase in thy holy Spirit more and more, until I come to thy
everlasting Kingdom.

Hear me, O Lord, and help me so to perform my Duty in every part of that holy
action, which I am going to do in remembrance of my Savior, that I may not
only at present rejoice in his Love to me, but be excited thereby to do the
rest of my Duty better, and with more delight, all the days of my life.

Which I humbly beg through his Merits and Mediation; to whom, with Thee, O
Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all honor, glory and praise both now and for
evermore. Amen.

CHAP. VI. The manner of Receiving.
THUS I have led you to the Holy Communion; and now you will expect I should
instruct your behavior there. I know no plainer or more natural method, then
to direct you what to do in every part of that Divine Service.

When the Sermon therefore is done, and you are conveniently placed, that you
may lose no time, (while the Minister is making himself ready, and the
Congregation that does not receive is dismissing) repeat the Prayer above
written, or some part of it.

When you see the Minister going up to officiate, say,

Blessed be the Lord for his Ministers, the Stewards of the Mysteries of God:
especially for those faithful and wise Stewards, whom the Lord has made,
Rulers over his household, to give them meat in due season. XXIV. Matthew. 45. 1
Cor. IV. I.

When he begins the Offertory, say,

Let every one of our Prayers, together with our Alms and Oblations, come up
for a memorial before the Lord: whose holy Angels I believe are present at
these Solemnities.

A poor Servant may add,

The Lord accept of my poor Mite, who have little to offer, but my self, and
all that I can do; which I dedicate to his service.

Then awaken your self to accompany the Minister in the Prayer for the whole
state of Christ's Church, etc. and attend diligently to the following
Exhortation, which begins with these words, Dearly beloved in the Lord: which
the Minister ought to speak, and you hear, with much affection.

Then join as heartily and earnestly as you are able, in the General
Confession; and receive the Absolution (with the comfortable words of Christ
and his Apostles that follow after) as you would do the most joyful news in
the world; stirring up your selves (as the Minister exhorts you, when he says,
Lift up your hearts) to bless and praise the Lord, together with all the
Heavenly host, for such everlasting consolation and good hope, as He has given
us, through his grace in Christ Jesus.

For those precious Promises ought to be sweeter to you (as the Psalmist
speaks) then the honey and the honeycomb; far dearer then thousands of gold
and silver. And now you may be assured (though unworthy to gather the crumbs
under his Table) that, receiving the Creatures of Bread and Wine, according to
Christ's institution, in remembrance of his Death and Passion, you shall be
partakers of his most blessed Body and Blood. Unto to which words, in the
Prayer of Consecration, say secretly to your self, Amen, Amen.

When the Minister himself Communicates, say,

The Lord hear thee. The Lord remember all thy Offerings, and accept thy
Sacrifice: Grant thee thy heart's desire, and fulfill all thy mind. The Lord
fulfill all thy Petitions, both for thy self, and for us, and for all his
people.

When you are going to approach to the Lord's Table,

Propound to your self, by way of Question, the Invitation which the Minister
has given you, saying, Do I truly and earnestly repent me of my Sins? and am I
in love and charity with my Neighbors? and intend to lead a new life,
following the Commandments of God, and walking from henceforth in his holy ways?

(And finding your self able to return the Answer of a good Conscience,
resolve, as it there follows,) Then I will draw near with Faith, and take this
Holy Sacrament to my comfort.

When you are placed there, say,

Lord, what am I, that Thou should be thus gracious to me? What an honor is
it, that I am invited hither to feast, at Thy Table, upon the Body and Blood of
my Blessed Savior? To receive the pledges of his Love, and to engage my Love
to Him? which I desire may abound more and more toward Him, and toward my
Christian Brethren, and toward all men.

When the Minister has delivered thee the Bread, concluding in these words, [
-- Feed on him in thy heart by faith with thanksgiving,] say,

I do believe, O Lord, that Thou art the Bread of life, which came down from
Heaven, by whom we are nourished to eternal Life. And I thank Thee, with all my
Soul, that Thou have both taught us the way of God in truth; and also died for
our Sins, and rose again to give us hope of that immortal Life. Blessed be thy
Name, I have now, by thy own appointment, received the sacred pledge and earned
of it: Wherefore my Soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God
my Savior. Whose Grace I trust will be with my spirit; that I may rejoice in
the Lord always, and ever delight in all well-doing. Amen.

Or this,

I believe, O Blessed Jesus, that Thou art the Lord of all; and give Thee most
humble and hearty thanks, for calling me to the knowledge of thy Grace, and to
Faith in Thee: beseeching Thee, that, as I have now received this new token of
thy Love, (blessed be thy Goodness,) so Thou will ever be my God, and by
continuance in well-doing bring me to everlasting Life. Amen.

A shorter after the Bread.

I thank Thee, O Lord, for calling me into this state of Salvation, and for
giving me this new pledge of thy continued Love. Assist me with thy Grace to
do my duty to Thee and to my Neighbor so faithfully, that I may abide in thy
love for ever, through Jesus Christ, etc.

After you have received the Cup, when the Minister concludes, with those
words, [ -- and be thankful,] say,

I thank Thee, O Lord of Heaven and Earth, that Thou would condescend to take
our Nature upon Thee, and therein suffer for our Sins; yea shed thy precious
Blood upon the Cross for our Redemption. Glory, honor, blessing and praise be
unto Thee, O Lord; to whom, in all reason, I ought henceforth to live, and not
unto my self. And therefore here I devote my self to thy faithful service; and
resolve, if need be, even to take up my Cross, and follow Thee. Assist me, good
Lord, and make me partaker of all the Benefits of thy Death and Passion;
according as Thou see me sincerely resolved, in all things for ever to obey
Thee. Amen.

Or this,

Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me bless his holy Name.
Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his Benefits. Who forgiveth all
thy Sin, and has now filled thy mouth with good things: and who gives thee
hope of better in eternal Life. Sanctify me wholly, O Lord, that I may not fall
short of it: but my whole, Spirit and Soul and Body, may be preserved blameless
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus. Amen.

A shorter after the Cup.

I thank Thee again, O Lord, for thy wonderful Love in sending thy Son to lay
down his Life, and in making me partaker of the Benefits of his precious Blood
shedding for us. Preserve in me for ever a sense of thy Love; and thereby
preserve me holy and without blemish to the second coming of our Lord Jesus.
Amen.

After you are gone from the Lord's Table, to your seat, say,

Blessed be the Lord, for his exceeding great grace and mercy to us in Christ
Jesus. Blessed be the Lord, who has called me into fellowship with Himself,
and with his Son Christ Jesus. Blessed be his Name, that I have now received
the tokens of his endless Love: in which I ought to rejoice without ceasing, as
more valuable then all the goods of this world.

It is my joy, O Lord, my highest satisfaction I have in this world, that I am
beloved of Thee, who art able to make me more happy then I can conceive. O
preserve me for ever in thy Love; and for that end preserve in me the same
thoughts, resolutions, and devout affections, which I now feel in my heart.

Keep them alive by the powerful assistences of thy Holy Spirit; of which Thou
have given me an assurance in thy precious Promises, and in these sacred
Pledges of thy Loving Kindness. For which I again most humbly thank Thee, and
desire I may never forget how much I am indebted to Thee; but be still praising
Thee, and saying,

I will extol Thee, my God, O King of Heaven; and I will bless thy Name for
ever and ever.

Every day will I bless Thee, and I will praise thy Name for ever and ever.

While I live, will I praise the Lord: I will sing praises to my God, while I
have any being.

My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord: and let all flesh bless his holy
Name for ever and ever. Amen.

While others are Communicating, you may say,

Preserve us all, O Lord, pure and acceptable Sacrifices unto Thee; that we may
be all presented spotless before the presence of thy glory with exceeding joy.

Or this,

As we, being many, are one bread and one body: (for we are all partakers of
that one Bread, and have drunk of the same Cup:) so help us to keep the unity
of the Spirit in the bond of peace; and to love one another with a pure heart
fervently.

Or this, Romans 5, 6.

Now the God of patience and consolation grant us to be like-minded one toward
another, after the example of Christ Jesus:

That we may with one mind and one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

This may be added.

Let all the people praise Thee, O God, let all the people praise Thee.

From the rising of the Sun unto the going down of the same, let the Name of
our Lord be praised.

Blessed be the Name of the Lord, from this time forth and for evermore.

Upon Christmas- day and seven days after you may add this to your other
Devotions.

More particularly I now remember, O Lord, thy stupendous Love, in sending thy
Son so unexpectedly to visit us, when the World thought not of Thee, but were
Strangers, or rather Enemies unto Thee. Blessed be the Lord, who has so highly
honored our Nature, as to dwell among us, and to appear in the likeness of
sinful Flesh. Preserve in me such a remembrance of it, that I may never
dishonor Him nor my self, by consenting to any filthiness either of the flesh
or spirit: but always behave my self sutably to the relation I have unto Him, in
righteousness and holiness before Him all the days of my life. Amen.

V;pon Easter- day and seven days after.

I bless Thee, O Lord, who have fulfilled thy promise unto our Savior, that
Thou would not leave his Soul in hell, nor suffer thy Holy one to see
Corruption. Blessed be God, who has thereby confirmed our Faith in the
Promises He has made to us. This is the day [or time] the Lord has made; I
will rejoice and be glad in it. This is the day when my Savior was begotten
again from the dead; and thereby has begotten us again unto a lively hope of
immortal Life. This is the Lord's doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes. The
Lord has showed us light; even the light of Life. I will offer to Him
therefore perpetually the Sacrifice of righteousness, together with these
Sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving, for his Mercy toward us; which, I see
by this, endures for ever.

Upon Ascension- day and seven days after.

Blessed be God, that I see Jesus, who was humbled a while and made lower then
the Angels, for the suffering of death, crowned now with glory and honor. Lift
up my heart, O Blessed Jesus, to that high and holy place, where Thou art
exalted; and keep it fixed there. That setting my affections on things above,
where Thou art at God's right hand, I may never do any thing that is unworthy
of my Christian Profession: but have my Conversation in Heaven; from whence I
expect Thee, O Blessed Jesus, who have told us, Thou art only gone before, to
prepare a place for us.

Where Thou art, O Blessed Lord, there let me be also: And at last change this
vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto thy glorious Body, according to
the working whereby Thou art able even to subdue all things unto thy self.

Upon Whitsunday and six days after.

I rejoice in the comfort Thou have brought us, O Holy Spirit of Grace: I
rejoice to hear (as Thou have testified by the wonderful Gifts bestowed on the
Apostles) that my Dearest Savior is alive; and that He lives for evermore; and
will never cease his Love to us, till we be there where He is. O inspire me
more and more with thy heavenly Grace, that being steadfast in this Faith, I may
bring forth all the fruits of the Spirit; and not only resist, but overcome
all Temptations in my way to Heaven. Guide me by thy Counsel, strengthen me
with thy Might, support me with thy Comforts in all necessities, streights and
dangers; that I may at last safely arrive at eternal glory. Amen.

Upon the Feast of Trinity only.

Adored be the incomprehensible Majesty of the Eternal undivided Trinity, in
whose Name I was baptized; and whom I humbly worship with praises and
thanksgivings, saying,

Blessed be thy Name, O God the Father Almighty, the Creator of Heaven and
Earth; in whom we all live, and move, and have our being.

And blessed be the Eternal Son of the Father, our Savior and Redeemer, the
Prince of Peace, who has purchased an eternal Redemption for us.

And blessed be the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, who inspires me with good
thoughts, pious desires, and godly resolutions; and will conduct me, I hope,
unto everlasting Life. Amen.

CHAP. VII Meditations and Prayers afterward.
IF there be more time left, before all have communicated, (as there is
generally on these great Festivals, and where many receive upon other days) you
may spend it in Meditating, as well as you are able, upon the Ends for which
this Sacrament was ordained. Turn to the Third Chapter of this Book, and there
read them in order;

I. Saying to your self, when you think that you have now solemnly owned your
self to be a Christian, etc.

O Lord, truly I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant; I am sensible that I am not
my own; for I am bought with a great price, and therefore ought to glorify God
in my body and in my spirit, which are God's.

And, Good Lord, assist me (as becomes one who names the Name of Christ) to
depart from all iniquity.

II. And when you think of the next thing, (how thankful you ought to be to
God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,) you may easily turn those words you read
there into a Thanksgiving: or have some such short Ejaculation as this:

What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? especially
for this, that He has not spared his own Son, but delivered him up for us all?

III. To which you may give an Answer, when you think of the Third thing, [your
Fidelity to him] saying,

I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments.

I have inclined my heart to perform thy Statutes always, even unto the end.
CXIX. Psalm. 106.112.

It is reasonable that whatsoever I do in word or deed, I should do all in
the Name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by Him. III.
Coloss. 17.

IV. And when you think (lastly) of having Communion with Him, say,

What greater Happiness can I wish, then to be one with Christ? and to be made
partaker with Him in the Merits of his Death? whereby I am sure that I shall
partake with Him in the glory of his Resurrection.

By this I know that I dwell in Him, and He in me, because He has given me of
his Spirit.

O make me, Blessed Lord, more and more one with Thee, by making me more
perfectly of the same mind, spirit and disposition with Thee.

A Prayer at home on that day.

If you be by such means as these duly affected with our Savior's Love toward
you, the remembrance of it will not presently slip out of your mind; nor will
you be willing to part with it. And while it continues there, it will make all
your Christian Duty easy and delightful; and it will be a hard matter to
persuade you to offend Him. Do not fail therefore to endeavor to preserve it,
by affecting your heart again with such thoughts as these; repeating some time
or other on that day the foregoing Meditations, and adding this Prayer.

I can never thank Thee enough, O Father of mercies, and God of all comfort,
for the innumerable benefits I have received from thy bounty: And therefore
ought to take all opportunities to bless Thee, and to speak good of thy Name;
especially now that I have newly tasted how gracious Thou art, in giving thy
only Son, our Savior Jesus Christ, not only to die for us, but also to be
our spiritual food and sustenance, in that Sacrament which I have this day
received.

When I think only what a kindness it is, that I have my daily bread, and
never want things convenient for the support and comfort of this present life;
I find that I am indebted to Thee upon that account, exceedingly above all that
I can express: But that Thou art pleased to admit me to thy own Table, and
there entertain me with the blessed hope of being with my Savior where He is,
and rejoicing with Him for ever; Lord, how much does it surpass the highest of
my thoughts? and with what delight and satisfaction ought it to fill my heart?

Possess me, I beseech Thee, most merciful Father, with such a lively sense of
this Love, that I may never forget how happy I am, in being so nearly related
to Christ Jesus: But always account it such an honor to be one of his
Servants, that I may constantly and cheerfully obey Him; and delight in this,
and all other Duties of a Christian life.

It is a great favor, I ought to be sensible, that I may have the liberty
always to resort unto Him, as my most gracious Lord and Master; and enjoy Him
not only in the public Offices of Religion, but here at home in these private
addresses unto Him. 0 that by all such means I may grow more like Him! and
carry away such a resemblance of his Holiness, Goodness, Humility, Meekness and
Patience, that every body may see I have been with Jesus!

O that there may be such a pious sense of his Love, and such devout affections
toward Him! left in my heart; that I may not content my self merely with my
daily Prayers, much less with these present expressions of Love to Him: but it
may he my constant care every day to approve my self unto Him so faithfully in
all well-doing, that I may not be afraid to appear again before Him, at the
next invitation I have to his Table!

And let the hearts of all those who have this day devoutly attended on thy
service be joyful and glad in Thee. Help us all to keep our selves pure and
undefiled, and to walk so steddily in the fear of God, and in the comfort of
the Holy Ghost; that others, seeing our good conversation in Christ, may be in
love with Religion, and glorify Thee our heavenly Father.

Have mercy also (as we have this day most humbly prayed) upon the whole
Church. And so rule the heart of thy chosen Servant CHARLES our King and
Governor; that in all his thoughts, words, and works, he may ever seek thy
honor and glory; and study to preserve thy people committed to his charge, in
wealth, peace, and godliness. And grant also unto all them that are admitted
into the fellowship of Christ's Religion, that they may eschew those things
that are contrary to their Profession, and follow all such things as are
agreeable to the same, for thy dear Sons sake Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen.

If this seem too long, here follows a shorter.

I prostrate my self here again before Thee, O Lord of Heaven and Earth, to
bless and praise Thee for all thy Mercies toward me; especially for those
which Thou have this day bestowed on me.

I would not be so ungrateful as presently to forget such a wonderful Grace
as Thou have vouchsafed me: but desire most earnestly to have a lasting
remembrance of it in my heart, provoking me to love and to good works.

And for that end I now renew my humble supplications unto Thee, that Thou will
constantly excite and assist me by thy Holy Spirit, to walk worthy of my high
and heavenly calling in Christ Jesus; by such a sober, righteous and godly
life, adorning his Doctrine in all things, that He may own me for his good and
faithful Servant at that great Day, when we shall see Him not in these shadows
and figures of Him, but face to face.

And have mercy upon thy whole Church. Whose Prayers I beseech Thee to hear for
every Member of the same: more especially for our Sovereign, and all that are
in authority under him; that by their pious care and watchfulness thy Church
may joyfully serve Thee in all godly quietness, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

CHAP. VIII. Directions for a godly Life, suitable to this holy Communion.
I. TAKE some time every day to call to mind how much you stand engaged to our
Savior Christ: first, by your Baptismal Vow; secondly, by your solemn
Ratification of it at your Confirmation; and thirdly, by your renewing it
lately at the Holy Communion, when you professed how much you were indebted to
Him, both upon the account of his offering Himself upon the Cross for you, and
of his giving Himself there again to you.

II. If these three come into your mind as soon as you awake in the morning, it
will be a great security to you. And to make your self more sensible of your
obligation, you may begin the day with this Reflection. I am not my own, but
the Lord's. He has bought me with a price, and I have devoted my self again
and again unto Him. Therefore I will glorify Him with body and Soul, which are
his.

Or to affect your heart the more, you may put it thus. O how happy am I in
being engaged to serve such a gracious Lord and Master as Christ Jesus! I will
never lose this Happiness by being unfaithful to Him, and unmindfull of his
Love.

III. To keep your self steadfast in this Resolution, read seriously every day
your Duty to God and your Duty to your Neighbor, as they are plainly set down
in the Church-CATECHISM. [See p 29. of this Book.] And say at the end of it,
This I have promised, this I have vowed when I became a Christian, this I have
again confirmed; and this by God's grace I will faithfully perform.

IV. And resolve at the same time to be watchful all that day: especially in
those things wherein you observed (at your last examination of your self) you
have been most defective, and most apt to be surprised. Excite your self
therein to use greater diligence, and set a stricter guard upon your heart;
carefully avoiding such places, company, and occasions, as have been wont to
endanger you. And call your self to an account at night; according to the
Advice p. 33. of this Book.

V. There is no body, sure, so employed, but may find time for such short
Exercises as these. In which if they would be serious, and not slubber them
over too fast; they would find the happy fruit of them in their hearts and
lives. And to make them the more effectual, add this short Prayer, as often as
you can, every day.

Almighty God, who have given thine only Son to be unto us both a Sacrifice
for Sin, and also an Ensample of godly Life; give me grace that I may always
most thankfully receive that his inestimable Benefit, and also daily endeavor
my self to follow the blessed steps of his most holy Life, through the same
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

VI. If your buisiness be such, that you cannot every day read over your Duty
to God and your Duty to your Neighbor; do not fail to do it once or twice a
week. And pause a while at the end of every particular, saying, This is my
Duty; this I will do by God's grace. And at the end of all (to make your
reading the more effectual) say, I heartily thank our Heavenly Father, that He
has called me (upon these terms) into the state of Salvation: and I beseech
Him to give me his grace, that I may continue in the same unto my life's end.

VII. Resolve also by this means to fit your self to receive the Holy Communion
as often as you can: remembering that, as by Baptism you are made a Member of
Christ, and enter into the state of Salvation; so by this Communion with Him,
you continue in that blessed state. Which they cannot justly pretend unto, who
constantly neglect to do this in remembrance of Christ. They give no
sufficient testimony that they are of the Christian Society; nor have any
reason to look upon themselves as living Members of Christ, and in a state of
Salvation.

VIII. And if you do not come up to your Resolution in every thing, but find
rather you have several ways failed in the performance of your Duty to God and
your Neighbor; let not that hinder you from going to the Communion, when you
have opportunity. But only humble your self the more before God by unfeigned
Repentance: and go to strengthen your Christian Resolution, by receiving the
spiritual Food which Christ has prepared for you; and beseech Him to impart
more spiritual strength unto you.

IX. And if you still start back again, let not that discourage you, nor make
you think you shall never grow better. But hope in God rather, that by the
constant and frequent use of this and all other holy means, you shall at last
be steadfast and unmovable in well-doing. You will never be so, if you leave off
to communicate; but you will grow more and more careless in other things: and
therefore continue to do this, as Christ bids you; and do it for this end,
that you may tie your self faster to Him, and increase in power and strength to
have victory, and to triumph over the Devil, the World, and the Flesh.

X. And lastly, be not hindered by Doubts and Scruples (wherewith many are wont
to perplex and dishearten themselves) from receiving the benefit of frequent
Communion. I have not room to consider them all in this little Book: but if any
person cannot in this way which I have directed satisfy his Conscience, let him
not fail to follow the Counsel which is given him in the Communion-Service,
which is, to go to his Guide, or some other discreet and learned Minister of
God's Word, and open his grief to him; that by the Ministry of God's Holy Word
he may receive the benefit of Absolution, together with ghostly counsel and
advice, to the quieting of his Conscience, and avoiding of all Scruple and
Doubtfulness.

CHAP. IX. Touching Doubts and Scruples.
IT will do some service, perhaps, to well-disposed Souls, if I show how
easily some of their most common Scruples may be satisfied, (if they will but
advise with God's Ministers about them;) though I cannot insist upon all the
causes of their Doubtfulness. I will bestow this Chapter therefore upon that
buisiness.

I. We ordinarily hear this objected to us, when we tell men of their neglect
of this Duty, I do not delight in that, nor in other holy Duties; and therefore
to what purpose is it to do them?

The plain Answer is this; If you prefer the doing of your Duty before your
Pleasure, or your Gain, then you cannot but take a rational satisfaction (if
you understand your self) in what you have done.

Nay, if you consider it well, you will have a high Satisfaction;
proportionable to the greatness of the Pleasure, or the worldly Advantage,
which you denied for God's sake.

Who, you must remember, is satisfied in your doing what you can, (especially
when you are tempted another way;) and therefore so should you be too:

Hoping that by constant practice of Virtue, He will give you that Delight in
it which you desire.

I am sure this is the way to get it, if it be to be had.

II. Others complain of a great Dullness that is upon them in holy Duties; which
makes them have no list to them.

This does not differ much from the former; and therefore I shall only add,
that when you have taken all the pains with your self which I have directed in
the foregoing Chapter, you ought not to be troubled at your Dullness: but
ascribe it either to your natural Constitution, or to some present
Indisposition of body. Neither of which is in your power to remedy; but only
to submit unto and endure with patience.

In short, let not this afflict you, much less hinder your Communicating; if by
your receiving the Holy Communion, you find that you are made more careful in
your constant Duty.

III. But the greatest Discouragement of all is this, I do not profit by the
Holy Communion, nor grow one jot the better by receiving it so often. Which
language is not more common, then it is, for the most part, causeless. For as
many people think they do grow better, when they do not; so others think they
do not, when they do: because neither of them know what it is to be better.

Examine your selves therefore by your Duty to God and your Duty to your
Neighbor; and try whether they be better performed or no, since you received
the Holy Communion.

Let poor Servants, for instance, examine whether they order themselves more
lowly and reverently to all their betters; and be careful to be just and
faithful; to govern their tongues also, and to abstain from evil speaking as
well as stealing, etc. And more especially, whether they grow more contented in
that state and condition of life, into which God has been pleased to call
them. These are substantial signs of growing better, by which you make a true
judgment of your selves: and either be rid of your Scruple, or know how to be
rid of it, by endeavoring seriously to improve in such Virtues.

In like manner, Children should examine themselves about the same Reverence
and Lowliness; and whether they honor their Parents more then heretofore; and
submit themselves to all their Governors, Teachers, and spiritual Pastors, or
Masters.

And all Young people should examine, whether they keep their Bodies more
strictly in temperance, sobriety, and chastity; because they have greatest
temptations to the Vices that are contrary to these Christian Duties.

And here it will be fit to mention one thing of which many complain, that they
are troubled with the motions of carnal Lusts, unto which Youth is naturally
prone.

The Answer is, that it cannot be otherwise, if they be in health: and
therefore there needs the greater care and diligence to preserve themselves
pure and undefiled. Which they may do, though they feel such Motions, if so be
they do not follow them, nor suffer themselves to be led by them to any act
which God has forbidden.

That Is all you promise in Baptism, to renounce the Lusts of the flesh, so as
not to follow them, nor be led by them. Lusts, that is, Desires, you may have,
and will feel, and they cannot be perfectly subdued: but they do not defile
you, if they do not obtain your Consent to them. And all you have to do, is,
to refuse to follow them whether they would carry you; and to resolve not to
satisfy them in any way, but that which God allows.

And after the same manner you must examine your selves about your Duty to God.
Whether you believe more heartily and firmly what Christ has taught you in his
Gospel, and are verily persuaded of it, so that you fear to offend Him; and
esteem his Promises far above all Riches; and think your selves exceeding rich
in Faith and Hope, though otherwise you be poor and low in the World. These are
the best signs of improvement.

CHAP. X. Directions in case of frequent Relapses into Sin.
BUT suppose a man frequently relapse into those Sins which he constantly
resolves against, and solemnly promises to forsake; what shall he do in that
case?

To this I answer; I. That as it is his duty to judge and condemn himself
severely for it: so I think this ought to be a part of the Sentence he
pronounces against himself, to judge himself unworthy to partake of the Holy
Communion. For so the Church would judge, if it knew what he was, and did
exercise its discipline upon such Offenders.

II. And therefore, looking upon himself to be as vile as a Dog that returns to
his Vomit, let him accordingly refrain from the Table of the Lord; till he be
sufficiently humbled, and so sensible of his Sin, and of his Danger, as to grow
more careful, and better resolved.

III. Which it is to be hoped he will be, if he for this reason, and no other,
forbear to approach thither; because he looks upon himself as too vile to enjoy
such a privilege: not staying away out of carelessness, and lothness to take
pains with himself, much less despair of God's Mercy; but merely out of a sense
of his Undeservings, and by way of deep Humiliation, and to punish himself, for
making no better use of his Savior's Love and Kindness to him.

IV. If this will not do, he must add some extraordinary means of afflicting
his Soul, as the Scripture speaks; by judging himself unworthy to eat or drink,
or enjoy any of the good things of this World: and accordingly casting down
himself upon the Earth before God, with fasting, weeping, and mourning;
bewailing and lamenting his sad condition, as we are wont to do a Friend, when
we fear he is a-dying, or in great danger of it.

V. And if still he find he is not safe, he must after all advise with some
discreet Minister of God's Word, as with a Spiritual Physician; desiring to
know what course to take, that he may get the mastery of those unruly Lusts
which are too hard for him.

VI. And when he comes for this ghostly Counsel and Advice, let him not be
ashamed plainly to confess his Sins, and to open the whole state of his Soul
before him whom he consults: relating how, and by what means, he comes to be
thus entangled in the Snare of the Devil, that he cannot get out of it.

VII. Be sure you conquer the lothness you will find in your self to make this
Discovery, for fear it disgrace you in his opinion. And convince your self,
that you ought the rather to confess your Sins ingenuously, that you may take
shame to your self, and lay your self low in the presence of God and his
Minister.

Do it as a part of your Humiliation.

VIII. Whereby he will be able to judge what Remedies are most proper for your
Cure, when he knows the cause and the root of your Disease. When you deal
sincerely with him, he will be able to tell you of what nature and degree your
Sin is, and whence it proceeds: whether it be from Idleness, or Ill company, or
Carelessness in your Devotion, or Neglect of serious thoughts to quicken your
belief, to call to remembrance your Obligations, and to put your self in mind
of the great Account you must give; or from too much Confidence of your self,
want of Fear and Caution, not watching over your eyes, or the door of your
lips, and abundance of other such like things; which he may observe, and
accordingly give you his Directions.

IX. And be sure you submit to his Prescriptions, and be very careful to
follow them: for this is the last Remedy, which you ought to use with
thankfulness to God for it, and with fear and trembling lest you should not be
the better by it.

Suppose a man had the Falling Sickness, what would he not give, or do, or
suffer, to be freed from it, rather then be in continual danger of falling into
the fire, or water, or other mischief? Make this your own case: for your
frequent falling into Sin, notwithstanding your resolutions and engagements, is
far more dreadful and dangerous: and no means ought to be refused for a cure
of so great an evil.

CHAP. XI. The Duties of Children.
THIS Book being intended for Beginners, and such as may be supposed to have
least knowledge of their Duty; I shall conclude it with a few Advices to
Children, to poor Servants, and to all sorts of Young people.

The Duty of Children is comprehended in two words, to honor, and to obey
their Parents. Therefore remember,

I. First, It is your Duty to Honor your Parents; which is the first of all
the Commandments of the Second Table: And consists,

1. In an Esteem of them as your Superiors and greatest Benefactours; because,
under God, they were the Authors of your Being, and took care of your
Education, when you could not look after your selves.

2. In a reverent Behavior toward them, even when they do not perform their
Duty; but provoke you to wrath, by their peevish crosness.

3. In requiting their Love, by supplying their necessities; if they fall into
a low condition, and you be able to support them. Read I Tim. V. 4. XV. Matt.
5, 6.

4. In bearing with their Infirmities, either of body or mind; especially in
their old age, or declining years.

II. Secondly, Obey your Parents, (VI. Ephesians. 1.) so as to be subject to them,
II. Luke 51. That is,

1. Be subject to their good Instructions and Admonitions; to which you ought
to listen diligently.

2. To their Commands; when they bid you do any thing that is not contrary to
the Divine Commandments.

3. To their Corrections also for your faults; to which you ought reverently to
submit. XII. Hebr. 9.

4. And to their Directions also about the choice of your Calling; if you have
not a natural aversation to it.

5. But especially in the buisiness of Marriage; in which Parents have always
had a right to dispose of their Children. Not indeed to force them to marry one
whom they cannot love; but to oblige them to endeavor to love those whom they
recommend to their choice.

And when you cannot bring your self to a compliance with their desires in that
point; you must with due reverence and respect: dissent from them, and humbly
beseech them to press you no farther.

If they will not harken to your repeated requests, you are not bound (or
rather, you are bound not) to follow their directions in such a case. But, on
the other side, do not marry any body else, without their consent: unless they
be so unreasonable, that they will let you marry none at all; and you find a
necessity of it, to prevent your being led away, contrary to your Vow in
Baptism, by fleshly Lusts.

In that case repair to the Magistrate or your Minister, (who are common
Parents,) and let them deal with them: and if they cannot prevail, I have no
more to say about your Obedience in this particular; use your liberty
prudently, and with good advice of Friends, and due respect to your Parents.

But (as the Common Prayer Book exhorts you in the Office of Matrimony) do not
enterprise nor take in hand such a weighty thing as Marriage, unadvisedly,
lightly, or wantonly, merely to satisfy carnal lusts and appetites; (like brute
Beasts that have no understanding;) but reverently, discreetly, advisedly, and
in the fear of God, duly considering for what ends it was ordained: and then
you cannot do amiss.

Be careful in the performance of these Duties; and God (before whom such
things are good and acceptable) will give you his Blessing. Read III.
Ecclesiasticus, beginning, unto v. 17.

CHAP. XII. The Duties of Servants.
THough Servants be not now mere Slaves and Bondmen, as they were in the
Apostles days; yet they are in a state of subjection, and are tied to such
Obedience as we find enjoined in the Apostolical Writings; even for this
reason, because they are now in a far better condition. Harken therefore to
your Duty, as it is plainly set forth in the Holy Scripture. And remember,

I. First of all, that you are bound to study to please your Masters and
Mistresses, by doing as they bid you, in their buisiness wherein they employ
you. II. Titus 9. A branch of which is, (as you will find in that place) not to
contradict them, and stand disputing with them. Much less ought you to I be
saucy and irreverent in your Answers, or in your Behavior toward them, 1 Timothy
VI. 1.

II. Remember also to be Faithful in your trust, and never to deceive them in
the smallest matter; but be sure to show all good fidelity, as the Apostle
there teaches you. II. Tit. 10.

III. Part of which Fidelity is, to be diligent in your buisiness, and to
dispatch it as soon as you can: and to be solicitous also to do your work
well; which S. Peter and S. Paul seem to mean, when they bid you serve them
with all fear, 1 Pet. II. 18. and with fear and trembling, VI. Ephesians. 5.

IV. And both this Diligence, and Solicitude, and Trustiness, must be performed
not only when they have their eye upon you; but when their back is turned, and
they are absent from you. VI. Ephesians. 6. III. Coloss. 22. If you gad abroad, or
slacken your labor and care, when they are not at home, or do not see you; you
do not serve them as Christians, that study to please God, but as vile Slaves,
and Menpleasers, that mind nothing but to avoid their anger.

V. Be content also with your Allowance; and submit to such Restraints as they
lay upon you: which seems to be included in the Apostolical Precept before
mentioned, II. Tit. 10. For more then this, you ought to take their hard Words,
nay and Corrections, patiently. I cannot say, but you may seek a remedy from
your Governors and theirs, if they abuse you; but a Blow that does no hurt,
much more an angry Chiding, should not seem any great matter to you: But you
had better bear it, saying nothing, or meekly praying them to spare you, then
increase their wrath by answering again angrily. Howsoever all ill words are
utterly unlawful. Read 1 Pet. II. 18.

VI. The Apostles also would have you to serve them with good will, VI. Ephesians.
7. and whatsoever you do, to do it heartily, III. Coloss. 23. One note of
which is, when you go about your buisiness cheerfully, and do not grumble at
your work; much less grumble at this, that you are Servants, and not as good as
those whom you serve.

It is very uncomfortable to your Masters, as well as your selves, when you go
about your work with a discontented spirit and a sour heart, lowering and
pouting, as we speak: which proceeds from hence, that you forget you are
serving the Lord, when you are diligent in their buisiness, and look upon your
selves only as Servants of Men. This the Apostles correct, when they bid you
be obedient to your Masters as unto Christ: Not with eye-service, as
menpleasers, but as the servants of Christ; doing the will of God from the
heart: With good will doing service, as unto the Lord, and not unto men. VI.
Ephesians. 5, 6, 7. Where he four times (within the compass of 3 verses) puts you
in mind of this, that you are doing God's will, and serving the Lord Christ;
when you are doing their buisiness which they enjoin you.

If you think of this, you will not go about it heavily, and discontentedly:
especially if you consider the motive whereby the Apostle incourages you;
knowing that whatsoever good thing a man does, (though in the meanest place,)
the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free. VI. Ephesians.
8. Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance: for
ye serve the Lord Christ. III. Coloss. 24.

CHAP. XIII. Advices to all Young persons.
I. IT is of the greatest consequence, to begin well. And therefore at your
first setting out into the World, take a special care, lest you contract any
evil habit; especially of Idleness, the bane of Youth: and lest you entertain
any prejudices against things, before you be able to judge; as we see too many
have done against the Common Prayers of the Church; which they abhor they know
not why, merely from an early disgust they took to them, before they could
distinguish between good and evil.

II. And check your desire of Pleasure, which now above all other times will
entice you: and of Novelty also, which is comprehended in the youthful Lusts,
as we render the words, spoken of in 2 Timothy II. 22. unto which mankind is
strangely prone in their inconsiderate age, loathing ancient forms, and craving
new entertainment for their fancies.

III. Avoid Harlots, as you would the Plague: remembering the repeated cautions
and admonitions, which the Wise man gives to his Son about this matter. Read
them seriously, II. Prove. 18, 19. V. Prove. 3, 4, 5. VII. the whole Chapter: and
follow his counsels, lest thou mourn at the last, when thy flesh and thy body
are consumed, saying, How have I hated instruction, and my heart despised
reproof; and have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined my ear to
them that instructed me?

IV. In order to Chastity* be exactly temperate in meat and drink. Drink no
wine; which will add fire to fire: study hard; or use your selves to labor,
and watchings: avoid all provocations to your carnal appetite.

V. Take heed what Friendships you contract: for Youth is prone to familiarity,
and thereby drawn easily into ill company.

VI. Reverence your Elders, XIX. Levit. 32. 1 Pet. V. 5, 6. particularly your
Tutors and Guardians, who are in stead of Parents. Which Reverence is to be
expressed not merely by your outward Behavior, and in your Language; but in
desiring their Advice, harkening to their Counsels, enterprising nothing
without their Direction, and submitting to their Reprehension.

VII. In order to which, be sober-minded, as S. Paul exhorts you II. Tit. 6.
Whereby he means either Seriousness, and the study of Discretion; or Humility
and Modesty. Which Modesty is an exceeding great ornament of Youth; an
indication also of a good Mind, and a hopeful blossom of excellent fruit; as
one of the Ancients speaks. But it does not consist merely in your Looks; but
in your low opinion of your selves, sense of your imprudence and weakness, and
in a humble attention to the opinions and counsels of your Elders.

VIII. Finally, remember that Youth is like the Springtime, which will soon be
over; and if you only play in it, and take no care to sow good seeds of
Wisdom and Piety, you will lose the opportunity of making provision for a
happy life.

Of this you are in great danger; because there is nothing to which young men
are more prone, then to squander away their time. Be serious therefore and
considerate, that you may not be undone by the folly of Youth: which, as
Solomon notes, inclines men so eagerly to follow their own humor in every
thing, that they do not love to have any check in their mirth and jollity.

That which will check them most is the thoughts of the future, especially the
remembrance (as he there observes, XI. Eccles. 9.) of the account they must
make. And therefore I conclude with that advice,

Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, etc. But know that for all these things
God will bring thee into judgment.

CHAP. XIV. Directions about them that cannot read.
I. AS for those who cannot read themselves, (which in our days are but few,
blessed be God, in comparison with former Ages,) their Masters, or their
Mistresses, or their Fellow Servants, or some good Neighbor, or Relation, are
desired to be so charitable, as to read to them their duty about this matter;
showing them the necessity, and the ends of it; and praying them to mark and
observe what is read.

II. Or if their Memories be very weak, tell them in short, that they are bound
by their Vow in Baptism to do God's will, and keep his Commandments: and that
this is one of his Commandments, that they should commemorate his Love, by
coming unto the Holy Communion; which will help them to do the rest of his
will better.

III. Read to them also their Baptismal Vow; together with their Duty to God,
and their Duty to their Neighbor, as it is laid down in the Catechism: and ask
them, if they intend to do all this by God's gracious assistence.

IV. If they consent to it, tell them they ought to go and receive
Confirmation, as was said before: and then go to the Holy Communion, to thank
God for calling them into this state of Salvation by Jesus Christ, and for
working such a good will in them; and to promise Him that they will continue
his faithful Servants to their lives end.

V. And let them know, that if they can do no more at the Holy Communion, but
only give God thanks heartily for sending his Son to die for them; and devote
themselves unto Him in resolution of sincere Obedience; it will be acceptable
to Him: and in time they will understand more, and do this Duty better.

VI. Therefore teach them, that the thoughts of their imperfections, and
ignorance, ought not to discourage them from coming to the Communion: for the
very doing of that which Christ commands, I mean, the Minister's taking Bread
and Wine, blessing them, breaking the one, and pouring out the other, giving
them to his people, and their receiving these in remembrance of his Death and
Passion, is a thing in it self grateful to Him. And if they know thus much,
and with honest hearts give thanks to God, and promise Him to be his faithful
Servants; He will take it kindly, and increase his Graces in their hearts.

VII. And that He may, tell them, that since they cannot read, they must be
the more diligent in attending to what is read in the Church or in private; and
to the Sermons they hear preached: laying up the principal things they observe,
carefully in their hearts; that they may find them there upon occasion.

VIII. For which end Masters and Mistresses should take care, their Servants
may have time to go to Church: or rather, they should see them go, and bring
them thither; saying with the holy men of God, I and my house will serve the
Lord.

IX. And if they would help them to learn some short Prayer by heart, besides
the Lord's Prayer; it would be a means to possess them with a sense of their
Duty, and to make them more confident of God's gracious assistence in the doing
of it. Instruct them, at least, after you have read to them their Duty to God,
and their Duty to their Neighbor, to say, Lord, have mercy upon me; and write
all these thy Laws in my heart, I beseech Thee: and this Collect,

O God, whose Blessed Son was manifested, that He might destroy the works of
the Devil, and make us the sons of God, and heirs of eternal life; Grant me, I
beseech Thee, that having this hope, I may purify my self, even as He is pure;
that when He shall appear again with power and great glory, I may be made like
unto Him in his eternal and glorious Kingdom: where with Thee, O Father, and
Thee, O Holy Ghost, He lives and reigns ever one God world without end. Amen.

X. There is reason Masters and Mistresses should be at this pains with their
Servants who cannot read; if they consider how much better Servants they will
be to them, when they are become the Servants of God: and that they themselves
have a Master in Heaven, who expects they should not merely use their Bodies
well, but look also after their Souls; so far at least, as to help them to the
means of Christian Instruction.

This is a thing indeed much neglected; and if their work be but well done,
some Masters and Mistresses concern themselves no farther. But such persons
plainly declare, that they love themselves better then God; else they would not
be satisfied till God's work was done also, and carried on together with their
own.

CHAP. XV. Directions to those that can read.
I. AS for those who are able to read, I need not, sure, advise them to use
that ability; but only to use it well: avoiding vain and idle (especially all
filthy) Books, and being conversant in those that are good and profitable; such
as will improve their minds in useful knowledge, or excite in them devout
affections toward God, or direct them in the practice of Justice and Mercy, of
Temperance and Chastity, and of all other Christian Virtues.

II. But above all other Books, acquaint your selves with the Holy Scriptures;
which Timothy (S. Paul says) had known from a child; and were able to make him
wise unto Salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy III. 15.
Which is a high commendation of the Old Scriptures, and a great encouragement
to study those Holy Books; from whence we may reap the greater benefit, now
that we have the New Scriptures added to them, which contain the Faith in
Christ Jesus, which the Apostle speaks of.

You do but pretend to love God, (which you acknowledge is a part of the Duty
you owe Him,) if you do not seek after his mind and will, which is only to be
found in the Holy Scriptures.

III. And of all other parts of the Scripture, I have observed young people
delight (as it is natural to do) in reading the Historical Books of the Old
Testament. Which truly are writ with such a spirit of Piety, as is to be found
in no other History; designing visibly these two things. First, to instill into
the people a belief of Divine Providence, which governs all things; and
presides not only over Nations, but particular Persons: who therefore ought to
have God in all their thoughts, to whom all events are ascribed by the holy
History. And secondly, to nurse them up in a sense of the difference of Good
and Evil: the former of which always received remarkable testimonies of God's
Favor; and the other was ever attended with the effects of his severe
Displeasure.

IV. Do not think therefore that you have profitably read these Books, unless
you come away from the reading of them more sensible of these two things, and
more affected with them. Possessed, that is, with a more lively apprehension of
God's overruling Power and Providence, whereby all things are disposed: and
therefore resolved to commit your selves unto Him in well-doing; and to make
that difference between Good and Evil that He does; resting satisfied with what
He is pleased to order, when you have taken care to order your selves so, as to
avoid what He hates, and to follow that which He loves.

V. But above all other Books of the Old Testament, the Psalms are of most
general use: and therefore ordered by our Church to be read over publicly once
every month. Some of which you would do well to get by heart, that you may say
them upon all occasions, as anciently they were wont to do: nothing being more
ordinary then to hear the Husbandman chanting them as he followed the Plow, the
Seaman as he sat at the Helm, the Waterman at his Oar, the Weaver at his Loom,
the good Houswife at her Spindle or her Wheel; nay, the poor Ditcher sang them
at his Spade, and the very Children in the streets. In short, they sucked these
in with their Mothers milk, and from their very infancy, as soon as they could
learn any thing, were taught a smattering of them, before they could speak
perfectly: such a love they had to the sweet Music of these Holy Songs.

VI. The very first of which will put you in mind of your Duty; and of the
Happiness it will bring you if you do it faithfully. Let that therefore, and
the rest that are of most general use, (and relate not merely to David's
present condition, or to some public calamity,) be read most frequently, and
pondered most seriously. Such are the VIII. XV. XIX. XXXIII. XXXIV. CIII. CIV.
CXIX. CXXXIX. CXLV. with many other, which every one may observe for his own
use: particularly the VII Penitential Psalms; which are most proper when you
are in a sad afflicted condition, or bewail any Sin you have committed, to
which they may be also applied. They are the VI. XXXII. XXXVIII. LI. CII. CXXX.
CXLIII.

VII. But when all this is done, you must chiefly read the Books of the New
Testament, or Covenant made with us in Jesus Christ: to which the Books of the
Old Testament refer you, as the perfection of that Knowledge which was but
obscurely delivered by them. And first, the Holy Gospels, which mostly contain
the History of our Savior's Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension:
in all which principally observe the mighty power of God giving Testimony unto
Him, and declaring Him to be the Son of God. Whom therefore you are bound to
obey; and in order thereunto study what his Will is: which is most fully
delivered in the Sermon on the Mount, recorded in the V. VI. and VII. Chapters
of Saint Matthew. Read these at least once a week.

VIII. Then follow the Acts of the Apostles; which abundantly declare their
authority, by whose Ministry we have received the Gospel; and bid us attend to
their Instructions, which are left us in their Epistles, as the words of men
divinely inspired. And in these content your selves with those parts of them
which are most easy and plain, and of general use and concernment: and meddle
not presently with those which are hard and obscure, and which relate to some
particular cases, which now are not so well known, as to make their sense
apparent to every one. For it is a very ill sign, when you stand puzzling your
selves about some dark passages in the Apostolical Writings; when there are
plain ones in abundance to exercise your thoughts. I will direct you to some,
that will be fittest for your Meditation. In the Epistle to the Romans read
often the XII. and XIII. Chapters; with the XIII. of the first to the
Corinthians; the IV. V. VI. to the Ephesians; III. and IV. to the Colossians;
IV. and V. of the first to the Thessalonians; and (to omit others) the I. II.
X. XI. XII. XIII. of the Epistle to the Hebrews; the whole Epistles of Saint
James, and of Saint Peter.

And when you read them, let it be with a design to grow better, rather then
more knowing.

And then think you grow better, when you are made more humble; more sensible
of God's love, and your own undeservings; more thankful; more meek and
patient; more submissive to God's Providence, and to your Governors, whether
civil or spiritual, private or public.

IX. When you are thus disposed, by these and such like Christian Virtues, you
may venture to read the harder parts of Scripture; and not be in danger to
wrest them (as those do who are settled upon no principles) to your own
destruction. For then you will not be forward to frame a sense of those places
out of your own head: but confess your ignorance; and look upon them as
containing things not necessary to be known: for all necessary things are
plainly set down; and perhaps some of those very things about which you trouble
your selves, are elsewhere delivered in clearer words. As you may be satisfied
if you take the next opportunity, to consult with those whose lips are to
preserve knowledge.

Which is the best way to be resolved in such cases.

X. As for other good Books besides the Scripture, you may find some time to
read them. And the less you have on other days, spend the Lord's days and
other Holy days the more seriously in this work. When I would advise you to
read V. VI. and VII. of Saint Matthew; with some part of the Whole Duty of
Man. And when you have made some proficiency in knowledge, read Dr. Hammond's
PRACTICAL CATECHISM; where you will find that Sermon of Christ's upon the Mount
expounded.

XI. But whatsoever godly Book you read, whether the Holy Scriptures or any
other, be sure you endeavor to come away bettered by the reading of them. For
if you get no good by them, that very thing will incline you, at last, to
slight and neglect them: as many do, we see, the hearing of good Sermons,
because they do not perceive, that they or others are at all the better for
them; but after much hearing, there is little doing of God's will.

But this the Scripture it self foretold, and has exactly described such
people, as are ever learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth. 2 Timothy III. 5, 6, 7. and intended hereby to breed in every one of us a
due caution, least we be of that unprofitable number. Which you must prevent,
by being more serious, attentive and diligent in reading holy Books for that
end for which they were writ: and hearing Sermons, not for fashion sake, but
that you may be taught, or remembered of your Duty; and excited or directed to
do it with greater care and constancy.

XII. And if you meet with the very same thing over and over again, either in
reading or hearing; do not therefore nauseate it, or grow weary of it, or pass
it by hastily and carelessly: But rather look upon it as a very useful Truth,
of which you have great need, because it comes so often in your way; and
thankfully acknowledging that God is very kind to you (in putting you so
frequently in mind of that which is so necessary to your Salvation) give the
greater heed to it, and ponder it with such seriousness, as a thing of that
moment deserves.

CHAP. XVI. A necessary qualification to receive benefit by all this.
IF every one had so much Humility, and such a hearty desire to be truly good,
wrought in their Souls betime, they would read and hear God's word to better
purpose.

I. Therefore Parents should above all things instill this into their Children
very early; how necessary it is, and how much it becomes them to be humble: and
that by no means they grow conceited of their own parts or understanding; but
be desirous to learn of every one, with simplicity and meekness, without any
other design but to know their Duty.

II. This we may be sure would dispose them to receive benefit by the Holy
Scriptures, and by all other good instructions: For it is the very
qualification which Christ requires to make a person fit to be one of his
Disciples, that He first become like a little Child. XVIII. Matthew. 3. There is
no good to be done upon him in Christ's School, unless he first learn to be
humble, subject to his Teachers, simple hearted, and without guile, contented
with a little, heartily in love with those that take care of him. And when he
is thus freed from pride, ambition, desire of Riches, or any thing else but
only of Knowledge (as little Children naturally are, till the seeds of those
vices be stirred up in them by others) he will be a fit soil to receive
Christ's heavenly Doctrine.

III. And doubtless he had reason to say it, who told this Nation long ago,
that it is for want of acquainting Childhood and Youth with such plain Rules as
this (which the Scripture it self delivers for our right understanding it) that
the Scripture either seems obscure and difficult to them, or that they mistake
it, where it seems evident.

IV. For when they grow to men's estate, or are engaged in worldly buisiness, or
come to honor, before they be acquainted with the Holy Scripture, and
especially these plain directions which it gives us for our profiting by it;
one of these three things is the consequence of it. The seeming difficulty of
the Scripture either makes them to seek for other Rules, which they apprehend
more easy; or 2. not to care for any Rule of Faith at all; or else 3. to
transform this (which God has given for the renewing his image in them) into
the nature of their corrupt affections.

V. Let this Lesson therefore, as He advises, of becoming like little Children,
thoroughly be planted in the hearts of Children, and then Knowledge in other
parts of Scripture will grow up with them: and Faith thus planted in humility,
while their hearts are tender, (and easy to be wrought on by this plain and
familiar Precept) will take deep root, and increase more and more, as they do,
in strength and stature. For though at the first their Faith be but as a grain
of Mustard Seed, yet having in the Spring time got the start of Pride and
desire of worldly wealth or greatness, it will afterward flourish in all
heavenly knowledge, and fructify in every good word and work.

VI. And above all other pieces of Humility, it is absolutely necessary that
Children be brought up to a great reverence of God's Ministers; and a high
opinion of their Calling, Place and Persons. If Parents or Guardians would
teach them to honor them as their spiritual Fathers, and to look upon them as
men appointed by God to take care of their best part, their immortal Souls; and
to bring Divine blessings to them; If they would tell them, Children, these are
the men by whom you are baptized and made Christians; by these you must
therefore be instructed, and confirmed also in Religion, and assured more and
more of God's blessing: it would have a mighty effect upon them, and dispose
them for all the good they may hereafter reap by them. Whereas, those words of
reproach or undervaluing which they now daily hear, must needs have the quite
contrary effect; or at least for want of such Admonitions, and frequent
inculcating the respect, honor and esteem which is due to God's Ministers,
they mind so little what they say, that when they become capable of it, they
receive no benefit by them.

A short Prayer tor the Morning.
ALmighty God and most merciful Father, I most humbly bow down my self before
Thee, to worship thy Divine Majesty; by whom I was brought into the world, and
have been preserved and provided for all my life long, and now this last night
(blessed be thy Goodness) protected from all Dangers; and raised up in health
and safety to see the light of another day.

I thank Thee, O Lord, for these and all the rest of thy Mercies; especially
for thy singular Love in Christ Jesus: beseeching Thee to awaken and preserve
in me such a lively sense thereof, that I may never prove ungrateful to Him;
but constantly do Him all faithful service.

Particularly this day I earnestly implore the assistence of his Holy Spirit,
to enable me to keep those Vows that are upon me, not to follow nor be led by
worldly and carnal Lusts; but to obey thy holy Will and Commandments, and to
walk in the same all the days of my life.

Help me, Good Lord, in my place and condition, to perform my Duty toward
Thee, and toward my Neighbor, with such care, fidelity, and cheerfulness,
that I may with some confidence present my self again before Thee in the
Evening; and comfortably hope for thy continued good Providence over me.

To which I humbly recommend thy Church and Household; beseeching Thee to keep
it in thy true Religion, and to defend it evermore by thy mighty Power, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. In whose most blessed Name and words I still beseech
Thee to be merciful to me, and to all thy people, saying, Our Father, etc.

A short Prayer for the Evening.
I Thank Thee, O Lord of Heaven and Earth, that, by thy merciful Providence, I
am here prostrate again before Thee: not only in health and safety of body;
but in integrity of heart, I hope, and with sincere purposes to continue always
thy faithful Servant.

Pardon, O most merciful Father, whatsoever I have done or omitted this day,
contrary to my resolutions and obligations. Pity my great weaknesses; and
accept of my honest endeavors to keep a good Conscience void of offense,
toward Thee, and toward Man.

Which that I may do every day better and better, vouchsafe me the assistence
of thy special Grace, to strengthen me in the performance of all my Duty. That
where I have been wont to slip, I may be more watchful; and where I have been
negligent, I may use the greater diligence; and so continue thy Child, a lively
Member of Christ, and an Inheritour of thy heavenly Kingdom.

And hear the Prayers of thy whole Church, which have been made this day for
every member of the same: especially for our Sovereign Lord the KING; for all
that minister under him, in holy or civil things; for all that are distressed
in mind, body, or estate: beseeching Thee to dispense thy Graces and Blessings
to every one of them suitable to their several necessities.

And be my merciful Protector all this night: and, after a refreshing Rest,
raise me up again in the morning with a thankful heart to Thee for thy care
over me; fully resolved continually to mortify all my evil and corrupt
Affections, and daily to proceed in all Virtue and Godliness of living, through
Jesus Christ our Savior. In whose Name and words I commend my self to thy
mercy, saying, Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for one of riper years before the receiving of Baptism.
O Lord, the Creator of the World, and Redeemer of Mankind, I fall down before
Thee to acknowledge that I am thine; and to beseech Thee, though I have
offended Thee, to receive me into thy service again.

Pardon, good Lord, all the Follies of my Childhood, with all the Sins,
Negligences and Ignorances of my riper years. Let them all be done away in that
Fountain, which Thou have set open for us to wash in, and be clean.

I desire to be admitted thither; and intend there to devote my self entirely
to Thee: renouncing the Devil, the World, and the Flesh; and resolving
obediently to keep thy holy will and Commandments, and to walk in the same all
the days of my life.

Vouchsafe me, O Lord, the assistence of thy Holy Spirit, that I may both
seriously make, and faithfully keep, those holy Vows and Promises. Preserve in
me a perpetual remembrance of them; that I may never, by any Sin, lose so great
a Grace as Thou intendest to bestow upon me: but always continue a lively
Member of Christ, and an Heir of his heavenly Kingdom. To which I beseech Thee
at last to bring me, through the Merits of Christ Jesus. Amen.

A Prayer for one that intends to be Confirmed.
O Most Blessed God, by whose grace I was called into a state of Salvation when
I was Baptized, and from whom comes every good thought, desire, and purpose,
which I have since felt in my heart; Assist me, I beseech Thee, in the new
dedication, which I am going to make of my self unto Thee; whose I am, and
resolve to be to the end of my days.

Fill me, O Lord, with such a lively sense of the honor Thou do me in
admitting me into thy Service; that I may give up my self, not only with the
full, but with the most cheerful consent of my heart, to believe and do
whatsoever Thou would have me.

And then be pleased to confirm me in thy Grace, and to strengthen me with
might by thy Holy Spirit in the inner man; that I may ever discern, and choose,
and follow those things which are acceptable in thy sight.

Arm me, good Lord, against all the Temptations of the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil; with a will steadfastly resolved never to yield to any of them; but
to persist faithfully in the performance of my Vow, which was made in my name
when I was baptized, and which I now intend with my own mouth to ratify openly
before (...) Church. Whose devout Prayers I beseech Thee to hear for me,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer after Confirmation.
ALmighty and everliving God, who have vouchsafed to regenerate me by Water and
the Holy Ghost; and also (...) farther certified me (...) the hands of thy
Minister lately laid on me, of thy Favor and gracious Goodness toward me:
Accept, I most humbly beseech Thee, of my hearty thanks for such great and
undeserved Benefits; and continue in me those good thoughts, desires and
purposes which I found then in my heart, to persist in faithful Obedience to
Thee for ever.

For which end be pleased daily to impart unto me more and more of the Holy
Spirit, to preserve me in thy fear and love; and to enable me to do all the
rest of my Duty, not only toward Thee, but toward my Neighbor: Especially
to those by whom, as thy Stewards, thy heavenly Mysteries are conveyed to us;
that reverently attending to their Instructions, and receiving their godly
Admonitions, and obediently following their Guidance and direction, I may be
finally owned for one of thy good and faithful Servants, at that Day, when the
great Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls shall appear again to our Salvation. To
Him with Thee, O Father, and the Holy Ghost, be eternal praises. Amen.

They that need Prayers for other particular occasions, may be furnished in a
Book called the Devout Christian, etc.

THE END.
The Contents.
Chap. I. Of the Duty. page 1. Chap. II. Of the Necessity of this Duty. p. 7.
Chap. III. Of the Ends for which it was instituted. p. 14. Chap. IV. Of
Preparation for it. p. 23. Chap. V. A Prayer for that morning when you intend
to receive. Which may be used any time before. p. 39. Chap. VI. The manner of
Receiving. p. 46. Chap. VII. Meditations and Prayers afterward. p. 81. Chap.
VIII. Directions for a godly Life, suitable to this holy Communion. p. 99. Chap.
IX. Touching Doubts and Scruples. p. 114. Chap. X. Directions in case of
frequent Relapses into Sin. p. 127. Chap. XI. The Duties of Children. p. 138.
Chap. XII. The Dutier of Servants. p. 147. Chap. XIII. Advices to all Young
persons. p. 158. Chap. XIV. Directions about them that cannot read. p. 168.
Chap. XV. Directions to those that can read. p. 179. Chap. XVI. A necessary
qualification to receive benefit by all this. p. 203. A short Prayer for the
Morning. p. 213. A short Prayer for the Evening. p. 216. A Prayer for one of
riper years before the receiving of Baptism. p. 221. A Prayer for one that
intends to be Confirmed. p. 224. A Prayer after Confirmation. p. 227.
The End.

