SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Cylonian Plant.

SHOWING Its Admirable VIRTUES against DEAFNESS.

Written by a Physician to the Honorable Esquire Boil.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1695.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Cylonian Plant.
SHOWING Its Admirable VIRTUES against DEAFNESS. In a LETTER, etc.
SIR,
I Perceive that Petrus de Ossma tells us of an Indian Doctor who cured all
Diseases with the juice of one Plant.

And Piso says, that the Brasilian Botanists make all their secret Remedies
out of simples, with which they work wonders.

Dr. Willis, in his Treatise of Epilepsys, says, That Specific Remedies,
although they cure Diseases without any sensible Evacuation, yet not without
some formal Reason or Virtue of acting proper to themselves, which may be
wondered at, but not described; they resist the Heterogenious matter, causing
the Diseases just as Gunpowder sprinkled with Oil of Vitriol loses its
thundering Virtue.

My Design in this Sheet is only to give the World an account of a particular
Plant brought from India, that has a Specific quality against Deafness, and
has cured many who have been thought to be incurable; it is called Em-wort, the
Indian Name I know not: One of your London Quacks, who in his Printed Bills
promises great matters, and performs little; for when many Deaf People have
been tired out by his pretended Secrets, and found no advantage, they have been
relieved by this Herb, partly by drinking the Spirits drawn out of it, and
mingled in all their Drink, and partly by Syringing the Ear with the Tincture
of the same, and taking as much as a Pea of the Extract at Night going to rest.

The Herb is of an excellent Aromatique Quality, it tastes warm like a Nutmeg,
and yet cool like Niter; it mightily comforts the Brain, and quickens the
Senses, and has been found wonderful useful to Deaf Persons, as might be
proved by many Examples.

Its real use and admirable virtue much excels the two costly Jewels that the
Queen of Egypt wore in her Ears for Ornament, It must be confessed, that many
Bruit Creatures, whose Ears are suffered to grow large, and according to Nature
are much quicker in hearing than many Men, forasmuch as Midwifes and Nurses by
the Fillets and straight binding of the Ears close to the Heads of Children,
they hinder the Contraction of the Air.

In a Battle between the Turks and the Christians the General gave order that
one of the Ears of the slain Christians should be cut off, and put into a sack,
that the Number of them might certainly be known. Such dreadful Effects are
many times produced by extremity of cold Weather in some Northern Climates,
which rotts off the very Ears of People, and then the remedy is a Silver
Trumpet, or the hollow Shell of a Fish applied to the Ear.

The account which you have given the World of the Nature of Specific.
Remedies, and the manner how they opperate is very satisfactory: And we find by
Experience that this Plant opperates strangely upon the Sense of Hearing; if
the Deafness proceed from the Obstructions of the Auditory Nerves, this
Specific removes those stoppages; it also wipes off those moist clammy Humors
which cover the Drum of the Ear, and hinder the penetration of sounds; it also
disperseth windy Vapors, which by their Noise in the Head cause Deafness: The
Spirit of this Herb held in the Mouth by a secret passage from the Ear, purge
them by Salivation; that there is such a passage is evident, forasmuch as many
People hear best when their Mouths are open.

I knew an old Man who was exceeding deaf, that he could not hear the Bells
ring, although he were near the Church, yet upon the use of this Herb taken
inwardly, and the fume of it received into the Ear through a Funnel, was
wonderfully restored to his Hearing.

A young Person who by standing at a Window lost his Hearing, that he could not
go to Church for many Weeks, at last being recommended to this Herb, he was
restored to his Hearing in one Months time after he had purged his Head with
some proper agreeable Pills.

If the Deafness comes and goes by intermissions, the Cure is the more
probable; but if the Membranes of the Ear are broken or eaten through by
corroding Humors, the Case is incurable, and it is best to acquaint the Patient
with the true state of the Case, and not deceive him with false hopes, as many
Pretenders do.

I knew an old Lady, who went to the Bath to have those Waters pumpt upon her
Head, to Cure her Deafness, but proved very ineffectual, (although I have known
them do service to others) the Tincture of this Plant drank once a day in Sack
cured her.

I knew another who had used Oil of Almonds and Civet, and Oil of Ants Eggs,
and all the other usual Remedies, but to no purpose, until she applied her self
unto the use of the Medicines drawn out of this Herb, and then she could hear
the least Noise, and the Watchmen knocking at the Doors in the Night was a
great disturbance to her.

As I have promised to give you an account of the Virtues and Specific
Qualities of several Indian Rarities, I shall continue to gratify your Learned
Curiosity, and approve my self

Your Faithful Friend, James Mullins.

FINIS.

