SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the ROOT CALLED Casmunar, IMPORTED FROM The
EAST INDIES: SHOWING Its Nature and Virtues above any other as yet written of,
in Curing Apoplexies, Convulsions, Palsies, Lethargies, Tremblings, Fitts of
the Mother, Giddiness in the Head, and all Distempers of the Brain and Nerves.

Published by a Doctor of Physic in Gloucestershire.

LONLON, Reprinted in the Year 1693.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the ROOT called Casmunar, Imported from the
East Indies.
THis rare and excellent Root being sent me by my Brother, who is Factor to the
East India Company, and it being so wonderfully commended, and approved of by
the Brachmanes, for its great Cures, I could not choose but publish it to the
World, for the Advantage of Mankind.

The Brachmanes are a sort of Indian Physicians, much celebrated not only by
the Natives, but by Foreign Merchants that reside there, the English preferring
them before their own Country Doctors, when they labor under any Distempers.
They are of the Sect of the Pythagoreans, and as they eat no Flesh, but are
nourisht by the Produce of the Earth, so they rather choose to cure Diseases by
Plants than Minerals. They have Great skill in Herbs, and know their Natures,
as if they had been instructed by Adam or Solomon.

This Root is warm but not hot, of a very temperate Quality; it consists of
very fine, subtle, spirituous parts, and has a peculiar Odor, distinct from
any that I ever smelled to: It exceedingly recreates the Vital and Animal
Spirits, and by its Taste and Color may easily be known to be Aperative and
Cephalic, comforting the Brain and Nerves, and putting the Animal Spirits into
Order, when they have been in a Tumult by any Passion or Convulsive motions.

When persons are in Convulsive Fitts, Nature seems to be as it were in an
Earthquake, and in its last Agony; and by the frequent Returns of such Fitts,
those Endowments which distinguish us from Brute Creatures, are in a great
measure lost: our Understanding, that great Light, is darkened, and our Memory
that excellent Repository is broken, and like a Sive lets through whatever is
put into it.

A Gentlewoman who had a Concussion of her Head, caused by a Fall down Stairs,
with great Debility of her Spirits, was Cured by this Root, to her and my great
admiration; and although whilst her Vapors were upon her, she would not be
persuaded but that she was dying; yet afterward she would smile at those
Gentlewomen who talked so, and would name her self as an Example of so great
Folly.

Perhaps it is the best Medicine in the World for Women in Childbed, or any who
have received prejudice by Frights, they quickly restore them to the use of
their Senses, and make them lively and cheerful.

A Shopkeepers Wife at Gloucester, who had dreadful Fits of the Mother, with
unusual Symptoms, and great Oppressions, almost strangled with suffocating
Vapors in her Throat, was cured, that they have not returned, nor I see no
suspicion of it. But I must say, that I have ever found the Spirit, the
Tincture, and the Extract drawn out of this Root, far more effectual than any
Composition whatsoever.

It Is very lamentable to observe, three thousand in a Year tumbled into their
Graves by these Distempers, as we find by the Bills of Mortality.

When our Compassionate Savior was upon Earth, he demonstrared his Divine
Power in the Cure of these Distempers more than in any other; because laboring
under these Diseases, we are neither fit for the service of God or Man, nor are
capable of the Exercise of Reason or Faith.

I could tell you of a Learned Divine, whose Disorder in his Head was so great,
caused by Cephalic Distempers and Vertiginous Fumes, that he could not preach,
being attended with frequent Convulsive Motions in all his Nerves, yet by the
use of the Drops drawn out of this Root, was perfectly cured.

Many young Children have been miraculously restored by it from Convulsion
Fits, both in the Brain and Bowels: For as Dr. Willis well observes, The
Griping in the Guts is but an affection of the Nerves in those parts, and no
Remedies so efficacious in that Disease, as those that strengthen the same.

I cannot choose but recommend it to all Nurses, to drop into their Childrens
Victuals, it being so exceeding temperate and pleasant, that I have known them
take it, when they have refused all other Forms of Medicines.

By this wonderful Root some Children when they have been Toothing, were cured
only by Rubbing their Gumms with the Electuary: Others by the Nurses taking the
Drops in all her Drink, for which Cause it is called by some the Childrens
Guardian.

I know a young Gentleman, who being subject to Convulsions from his Cradle,
and could have no relief from the best Remedies in vulgar use, but was to the
grief of his Relations cast sometimes into the Fire, and sometimes into the
Water, by the Force of this Disease; and at last by the using of these Drops
every New and Full Moon, was restored, and Married a Wife, and none of his
Children ever had Fitts.

A poor Old Woman also who was many years afflicted with Fits of the Mother,
that the Common People thought her Possessed, her Symptoms of Skreeching, and
strange Motions and Distortions were so terrible; yet by the Use of this Remedy
found great Advantage, and recommended it to all she knew.

I am credibly informed by an Eminent Chyrurgion who came from the Indies, that
the Inhabitants in those Countries Anoint their bodies with a mixture of the
Powder of this Root, and only by that External Application cure many
Distempers, and live to a great Age.

An able Physician of my Acquaintance boyls the sliced Root in all his Broth,
as a great Secret against Gripings in his Guts and Bowels proceeding from the
Wind Colic, and finds Admirable Advantage.

I am well assured that there is an Hospital in Italy, for the Cure of
Lunatical persons, where the Doctors use this Root with wonderful success, it
mightily Relieving all Discomposures of the Brain.

To see Persons foaming at mouth, Tearing their Hair, beating their Breasts,
Weeping, and Wailing, and Gnashing their teeth, is a Melancholy Prospect, and
may well move pity: And therefore none but the Devil or his Agents can Envy
mankind the Knowledge of so useful a Remedy.

Let none despise this Root because it is a simple uncompounded thing, for I
remember the Great Lord Bacon reckons it amongst one of the Deficients in
Physic, that we study Art more than Nature, and Elaborate Methods more than
simple Medicines. Whereas nine parts in ten of the known World trust to the
latter more than the former.

A Captain of a Ship who is Extremely troubled with Griping in his Guts, and
Cramps in his Bowels, constantly procures Ease, only by Chewing a bit of this
Root and Swallowing his Spittle.

I know a modest discreet young Gentleman, that on a sudden when he is Writing,
o^ Talking with a Friend, or at Meals, shall be surpised with Dreadful
Convulsive Motions, as if he were blown up with a train of Gunpowder; and he
finds that the very Odor of this Root carried about him, and often applied to
his Nostrils, prevents many fits, better than Spirit of Sal Armoniack, Amber,
or Hartshorn, which are too strong for him.

Twenty Drops of the Tincture are to be taken every Morning in Tea, the same
Quantity of the Spirits every Afternoon in Mum, and also twenty Drops of the
Extract at Night in Chocolate, for Men or Women; half the Quantity for Children.

FINIS.

