Richard Pearl Gent. Plaintiff; Sir William Powel alias Hinson Baronet, Dame
Mary his Wife, and al. Defendants.
ANswers to the Objections that may be probably made, against the admitting the
Plaintiffs Bill in Parliament.

Ob. 1. The Plaintiff if he had any good Title, Would have sought for Remedy
long since, it being above 9 years since the Idiot John Pearl, his elder
Brother, died.

Res. 1. Sir John Bridges, under whom the Defendants Claim, had by his
deserting the King, and complying with the late usurped Powers, made himself so
powerful an Interest in Herefordshire, and elsewhere, that the Plaintiff had
enough to do to preserve his person, having always adhered to the Kings
Interest, much less to contest then with so powerful a man, yet has always
made his Claim.

2. Since His Majesty's happy Restoration, the Plaintiff Richard Pearl has
always endeavored the finding out the Records of the Ideory, which he was
still in hopes to do, the Clerk of the Lunatic Office, and some of the
Defendants, having often confessed the having them in their custody; but he
believes did and does conceal them, in hopes of a Composition, which has been
often offered to the Plaintiff.

Ob. 2. Sir John Bridges paid a valuable Consideration for the Estate. Res. 1.
He gave but 40 l. per annum to the Idiot during his life, who had the sole
Estate in him: And what he gave to others, was in his own wrong, and for the
furthering his design.

2. The Estate is really worth 420 l. per annum; the Grandfather had no other
Estate, yet was pricked for Sheriff of the County.

Ob. 3. The Defendants have gotten a Common Recovery, and though from an Idiot,
(yet being one of the Common Assurances of the Nation) ought not to be avoided.

Res. Fines and Recoveries obtained by Design, Fraud, Force, Covin, and Deceit,
are not reckoned the Common Assurances of the Nation, and therefore not
favored by the Common Law. Vide Fermors Case at large, Co. 3 Rep. so. 77.
where it is adjudged by six Justices, Litt. cap. Remitter 151. quod alias bonum
and justumest, si per vim vel fraudem petatur malum and injustum est.

And there is a late Case in point between Leveston and Powel in both Houses,
where a Fine was damned because it was obtained by Force, Fraud, and Covin.

This Case is accompanied with more Deceit, etc. than the Case cited, or any of
the Cases cited in our Books: For, 1. Sir John to get the Idiot into his
custody, Petitions his Majesty's Attorney in the year 44. for a Commission de
Ideota inquirendo; and does not inform him, that the Idiot was and ought to be
a Ward; so to carry on his design, he first begins to deceive his Majesty. 2.
Francis Rinardes, Tho. Tomkins Esquires, and al. Petition his Majesty's
Attorney, informing him of his Ward, and thereupon obtain a Supersedeas to the
said Commission, and a new Commission de diem clausit extremum, for finding the
Kings Ward; both which the said Sir John Bridges did suppress in the executing
thereof, and by force did take them away, and executed his own Commission, and
did find the said John an Idiot in due form of Law. 3. So by color of having
the custody of the Idiot, did by force take possession of his Estate, in right
of the Idiot as he then pretended; and having gotten the possession, he
complies with the Parliament, and then falsifies the Trust committed to him in
the preservation of the Idiot. Vide Stat. Praerogativae Regis. Ita quod
nullatenus per eosdem fatuos alienentur, nec quod little haeredes exhaeredentur.
4. For having by such Force, Covin, Fraud, and Deceit, gotten the Idiot into
his sole possession, procures him to suffer a Recovery; and that by Attorney,
and makes his Menial Servants his Commissioners.


So that where Design, Force, Fraud, and Covin, are the supporters of an
Assurance, be it Fine, Common Recovery, or otherwise, the Law will not call it
one of the Common Assurances of the Nation. Vide the Preamble of the Statute of
4 Hen. 7. cap. 24.41. Ass. Pla. 28.44. E. 3.25.12. Eliz. 295. Dier.

Ob. 4. There has been several other Fines and Assurances passed of the
Estate, since that Recovery.

Res. 1. Those that Claim under an Estate got by Covin, shall be in the same
plight as those that got the Estate by Covin. 39 E. 3. Br. Remitter 47.
Littlet. 678.

2. And if any be, it is by one of the Defendants to the other, who are parties
or privies to the first Recovery.


