PATPS KTOPTPA KA PAIDS GONYKLISA: THE Father's Spectacles TO Behold his CHILD
by, AND The Child's Cushion TO Kneel before his Parents.

By a Lover of Parental and Filial Unity.

For I know Abraham, that he will command his Children, and his household after
him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord,

Genesis 18.19. In the last days perilous times shall come, some shall be proud,
disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affections,

2 Timothy 3.2. Pater adversus filium, and filius adversus patrem.

LONDON, Printed by John Astwood for the Author, 1695.

To all Parents of Children, and Children of Parents.
True Grace be multiplied in Christ Jesus.
BE it known unto you, Oh ye Children of men, that the signs of Christ's second
coming sounds daily in our ears, how often have we seen wonders in the
heavens above us? and how has the earth trembled and quaked beneath us? how
many false Prophets have there been, that own no other Christ but the light
within them? how great is the apostatizing from the truth? how is Antichrist
getting up to his height? how does the noise of Wars sound aloud in our ears?
how many thousands has the pestilence swept away in a moment? how have the
Saints been afflicted and persecuted, of whom the World was not worthy? how
much treachery and deceit is there in every corner? how much hatred and malice,
merely for professing Religion? how many deceivers have spread themselves
abroad in the world? how does iniquity abound in every village? how cold is
love grown in all persons? how does drunkenness and gluttony surpass ages past,
and famine succeed in many places? how great are the variances that are in
Nations, Churches and Families; nay, among own Relations, they are directly
opposite one to the other? among these sixteen signs of Christ's coming, this is
none of the least, for Satan has but a short season, and therefore he is the
more busy to keep people ignorant of their duty, that they may be employed to
serve sin; to hinder him in his purpose about the breach of Amity is my main
design, for at present it is my purpose to let you know what amity has been,
and ought to be, between near Relations, that so we may arrive at that ever
lasting amity and felicity which we all aim at. Many there are that have tuned
a string or two on this subject, but I at present never saw, nor heard of any
that have played a whole lesson on it, and therefore I who am induced to this
task, for the Honor of God and the grace of Religion, have cast my small mite,
into the great and rich treasury of Knowledge, though I know this Learned,
Critical, Penetrating, Eagle-eyed Age may look on my lines and censure them or
me, as not being Rhetorically adorned, and Logically digested, and drawn out in
the flourishes of the times, but let them know, that the manner of the ancient
times was to be plain, 1 Cor. 1.27. The Subject matter plain Scripture
Language, Acts 17.2. The method and style according to the capacity of the
persons spoken to, John 16.12. My intent is to stir the dull and ignorant to
their duty, and not to teach them that know enough; but yet there be some that
know and do not practice their duty, these lines may reach them a rap; it is
the doer of the Law is justified, Romans 2.13. I have taken notice of the evil
carriage of some parents to their children, which has been against nature and
the plain words of the Scriptures, and the abominable wickedness of some
children, who regard not their parents at all as to appearance, in no sense nor
kind: I wish I could be instrumental to reform the one, and convert the other,
and that going in this tract, some other which is more expert in knowledge,
better read in Scripture, having more endowments of the Spirit, and of a larger
capacity than I am, would undertake this task, to perfect this work, which I
have now in a short figure, but as it were but a little begun, which if any
good shall come by this, or any be persuaded to parental or filial affections
by it, and those that shall by this be persuaded to make a larger discovery in
this kind, I have my end, and hope the Lord will be glorified in it, that the
curse may be taken off from the land of the living, Mat. 15.4. Levit. 20.9.
Malachi 4.6. He that likes these lines, let him receive and practice them, and
he that likes them not, let him sit down and take his Bible and Pen, (as I
did) and produce better. I am content that in this I have done part of my duty,
do you do all yours, and then sit down to rest, but do not rest with the
foolish Virgins without oil in your vessels, least Christ's coming be to your
terror, which is the desire of him who is a Lover of your Souls Eternal
Consolation.

Vale.
I Our duty from the Scriptures: have noted,
O And to confirm it have some Authors quoted;
Hence you may learn what duty you do owe,
How unto God, and to your Neighbors too;
Come learn this Lesson, and do not gainsay
Ought that is in it, but always obey.
What God commands, do not give a deaf ear,
Prepare thy Heart the Lord always to fear.
Ever remember thy own frail condition,
Regard thy conscience, peace and souls submission;
Offend not God, nor Man, in heart nor deed;
(...) from thy sin the Lord thy soul has freed,
Serve God, Instruct thy Child, and him correct,
And always pray the Lord may thee direct;
Let Parents speak, and Children hold their tongue,
(...) in mild speeches let them show their wrong;
Here is a blessing if in love you live,
And Christ, his Peace unto you he will give,
Remember then thy duty, and still obey,
Serve God always, and do not go astray,
Till he by death do call you all away;
In ignorance many live, and also do
(...) get the way in which they ought to go.
Some Parents scarce their duties ever know,
Uncircumsised in ears and heart they grow;
O spend each day and time in contemplation,
Search out Gods will, and mind thy souls salvation.
Ever to the most High, O let thy Spirit sing,
Xanto like, his High Praises Everlasting.
A short TABLE of the General Heads.
1. THe Text opened in six Considerations. 2. Five Doctrines, in which four
parties are concerned. 1st. The Lord is concerned in his love and care, Doct.
5. 2ly. The Minister is concerned to inform all of their duty. 3ly. Parents are
concerned in their general Duties. 4ly. Children are concerned in honor, love
and obedience. Sixteen ways Parents may provoke their Children. Ten Motives to
move Parents to love their Children. Thirteen Reasons to prove the first
Doctrine. Forty Rules to direct Parents to their Duty. Eleven Rules for
Christian Correction. The acts and effects of the light within, twelve ways.
Prayer spiritual, showed in ten heads. Christ's love universal, proved by
thirteen reasons. Seven things ensue each other in Election, and three in
Reprobation. (...) ten Commandments, how they are broken. Seven causes how
justification is wrought. 2d. Doct. by two reasons, and the 3d. by five proved.
4th. Doctrine proved by thirteen Reasons. Forty Rules to direct Children in
their duty. The twelve Articles of the Nicene Creed proved. Four principal
Motives to move all to their duty. The Conclusion with the fifth Doctrine.
THE Father's Spectacles, etc.
EPHESIANS. VI. 4. And ye Fathers provoke not your Children to Wrath, but bring
them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord.


THe Holy Apostle writing to those that were Gentiles by nature, knowing that
they were naturally subject to may failings, might violate natures bounds, by
being induced by corrupt nature to sin, which they were formerly dead in; he
exhorts them to general rules of Christianity, as Humility, Long-suffering,
Unity, Peace and Holiness of Life.

First, In Mortification; by putting off Lying, Anger, Malice, and corrupt
Communication, and the like.

Secondly, By having no Society with Evil Company, but to live in Brotherly
Love; and to be diligent in their callings, and to submit themselves one to
another; as also to know all their duties, as they stand related one to the
other; which he discourses at large. And then he sets forth very
excellently, the great and wonderful work of their Redemption by Jesus Christ:
Also he shows them their undone state by Nature without a Christ; and that
Humility and true Faith is the true way of attaining true Peace: And that the
right way of retaining of it, is, by perseverance: First, To search into, and
to know the love of Christ, Chap. 3.19. Secondly, To keep in unity, and to walk
worthy of that Vocation in which they were called, Chap. 4.1, to 6. Thirdly, To
be firm and steadfast, Chap. 4.14. Fourthly, To let their Conversation be
suitable to their profession, Chap. 4, 22, to 29. Fifthly, To put on the whole
Armor of God: (not to flinch or draw back, for there is never a Backpiece: See
Chap. 6.11, to 18.) Sixthly, The Duties of Honor, Respect, Service, Obedience
to Superiors, and Familiarity, and true Love, to each other part^cularly; that
so their Christian work may be thoroughly accomplished. Lastly, It appears that
the many failings and neglects of duties in the last age foreseen by the
Apostle, occasions him to write thus unto this Church, etc.


And ye Fathers, provoke not your Children to wrath, but bring them up in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord. The Words being thus read, here is, First,
The Person speaking, Paul: Secondly, The Persons spoken to, Fathers: Leigh in
his Critica Sacra says, is of a large extent than the Male kind; it properly
sets forth natural Parents, implying as well Mothers as Fathers, as the
usual method of the Spirit is to include both Sex in one Expression, Genesis 5.2.
1 Cor. 11.28. Thirdly, The Duty enforced by a positive Command, negatively
expressed, Provoke not, etc. Fourthly, Here are the Persons not to be provoked,
viz. Children: Such as are under the care and tution of Parents: This Negative
Precept may possibly extend it self so high as Kings to their Subjects, 2 Kings
5.13. 1 Chronicles. 28.2. Isa. 22.21. Judges 5.7, 17, 10, 11. And also to Judges and
Magistrates, to those that cry to them for Right, Equity and Justice, Deuteronomy.
20.5, to 11. Numb. 11. 17, 18. And to Executors, Trustees and Governors of
Orphans, to Officers in Towns, Liberties and Cities: In a word, to all that are
in Authority, to teach, instruct, rule and govern, any persons whatsoever, Heb.
13.17. Fifthly, Here is the true nature of the defined subsequent, or that
inveterate, exasperated passion that is prohibited, set forth, viz. Wrath.
Sixthly, Here is an absolute Direction, 1st. To educate them in good
discipline, as the Word (...) signifies. 2dly. To instruct them in divine
knowledge. Thus much by way of Explication.


I now come to the Doctrinal conclusions, that do naturally arise from this
Text: Which are these which follow, 1 Doct. That Parents should take all care
possible, to avoid all Occasions of Provocations, as not to give any just
Offense; whereby their Children are exasperated, or so far provoked, as to
offend the Lord, or disobey their Parents. 2 Doct. That if Parents have real
affections for their children, they will use the best means possible to keep
them from sin. 3 Doct. They that are true Christians indeed, have such tender
love to their Childrens Souls, that they will use all means possible, to
nurture them up in the right way of the Lord. 4 Doct. That Children ought to
yield obedience to all their Parents Commands in the Lord, with holy Reverence,
Honor and Zeal. 5 Doct. That the Lord does take great care for the eternal
good of those that cannot any ways take care for themselves.


But to the first Doctrine. That Parents should avoid all occasions of
Provocations, etc.

First, Here I shall show you, what may be properly called Provocations, that
so Parents may take them out of the way, that they do not cause their Children
to stumble, fall, and be broken to pieces, Which are these sixteen as follows:

First, When Parents will not teach and instruct their Children, and slight and
abuse them if they do not learn: This is a hard Lesson; if the Lord should deal
so with the Sons of Men, who of them but would fall immediately into the gulf
of Despair? among all the Children of men can we expect to reap where we never
sowed? If I had not known such a thing as this to be, I could hardly have
conceived, that ever any should be so very austere and unnatural, or ever had
been to the fruit of their own bowels: The wise man's Counsel to Fathers, is,
Prove. 23.12. Apply thine heart to instruction; it should be part of thy every
days meditation, to consider how thou should instruct, teach and train up
thy Child, in all things uppertaining to this Life, and that which is to come.
Train up a Child (says Solomon) in the way he should go, Prove. 22.6. which is
rightly done by mild and gentle instructions, and not by causeless slighting
Reflections.

A Second Provocation is, when Parents shall never give their Children a good
Word, nor a good Look, though the Child do whatever it possibly can to please
them; if the Lord should always frown upon thee, and ever speak to thee with an
angry Countenance and Words, how could thou be able to stand before him;
consider, it is a mild carriage and loving speech that does win the heart: It
was St. Paul's way, 1 These. 2.7. 'twas by gentle words and carriage that Abigal
overcome David, though he was in great wrath, 1 Samuel 25.24. Love is a special
winning grace, 1 Cor. 13.5. It does not behave it self unseemly; soft words
will stop sin in its course, Prove. 15.1. Mild Speeches become good Men; My Son,
faith Abraham, God will provide, etc. Read Isaac's manner of Speech to his
Sons, Genesis 27. Chap. 28.1. When Jacob had offended him, yet he blessed him a
second time. To dissuade your Children from sin, let your Arguments be as hard
as you will, but let your words be soft, 2 Timothy 2.24. Hear me, my Brethren,
says King David, 1 Chronicles. 28.2. To all Israel, not like Rehoboam, who answered
them churlishly. Naphtali is said to give goodly words, Genesis 49.21. Courteous
Language has an acceptance among all men, and the blessing of God is with it,
Deuteronomy. 33.23. Let your words be seasoned with grace, the Ornament of Scripture
Language, Phil. 1.27. avoid corrupt Speeches, that administer no grace to the
Hearers, Ephesians. 4.29. it is better not to speak at all, than to speak evil
words, Mat. 12.36. Prove. 18.21. by the nature of the expressions of a man, the
intent of his heart is made manifest, Mat. 12.34. Prove. 12.25.15, 13.

Third Provocation is, when Parents are never contented with any thing that
their Children do, though they do to their utmost abilities what they can to
please them. Such is the wickedness and hard heartedness of some covetous
Parents, who would wring out their Childrens labors by a kind of Extortion,
something whereby to satisfy their greedy and discontented minds; though the
Apostle says, Let your moderation be known to all men, Phil. 4.5. But their
Children shall know but little of it: And again he says, be content with such
things as you have, Heb. 13.5. He that is never content shall never be happy.

Fourth Provocation is, when Parents shall pretend love to their Children
before their Neighbors and Friends, and the Child can never find in very deed
that they have any love at all for them: Such Hypocritical Parents will one day
recieve a double stroke for this twofold Wickedness: Such Parents have not
learned divine wisdom, James 3.17. that teaches other things, Luke 7.35.
According. to your sins shall your recompense be, Isa. 65.6. These outward
Lovers and Whited Sepulchers are all in Tongue, and none in Heart, their Hope
shall be like the Spiders web, Job 8.13.14. and their Joy but for a moment, Job
20.5. Says st. Paul, Let your love be without dissimulation, Romans 12.9. Plain
dealing and true love never fails, 1 Cor. 13.8. Methinks natural love is taught
by all the birds in the Air, and Beasts of the field; who many of them will
lose their own lives to preserve their young; their Love is real and purely
natural, without flattery or deceit: Why then should some Parents be (worse
then Beasts) without natural affections, it is a sign that the coming of Christ
draws near, 2 Timothy 3.3.

Fifth Provocation is, when Parents shall let their Servants, or any body else,
chastise, beat and abuse their Children, and they take no notice of it, but do
often allow of their so doing, with good liking and approbation, this very
thing the wife man says, is one of the four things the earth is disquieted
with, and so tedious that it cannot bare it; viz. A Servant when he reigns,
prove. 30.21, 22. If Christ call him an evil Servant, that smites his
Fellow Servants, Mat. 24.24. much more evil is he, that lifts up his hand in
smiting his Masters Child, 1 Kings 2.32. If Servants are to give to their
Masters double Honor, 1 Timothy 6.1. They are to show some reverent respect to
their Masters Issue, 2 Samuel 18.12. The Lord has promised to punish such
Servants as are so wicked to fill their Masters House with violence, Zach. 1.9.
When he comes to search Jerusalem with candles; therefore Servants, if your
Masters be so ignorantly wicked, as to allow to you correct his Children, you
may not, must not, do so vile a thing, by which the Child may be provoked, the
earth disquieted, and the Lord offended, and your masters house filled with
violence and distraction, for the Lord loves Unity, Peace and Concord, 1 Cor.
14.33.

Moreover, you of the Neighborhood may not correct your Neighbors Children,
but if they have transgressed, you must mildly acquaint their Parents with the
offense, and the Parents are to give them due correction, Prove. 13.24, 29, 17.
Heb. 12.9. For the Lord has put them in that place to rule and govern their
Children at all Seasons, and to correct them according to their offenses, with
a severe Countenance, without flattery, with savoury expressions, showing them
the nature of their offense without railing or evil words, least they learn
that of you for which you correct them; also forbear giving threatening and
provoking words, and then thy Correction will be no provocation but to good,
and the obstruction of evil: It Is good for every one to be employed in their
own business, and not in the concerns of another.

Sixth Provocation is, when parents hurry their Children night and day in their
Worldly Business and take no care about their Childrens Souls, or their Eternal
Happiness; when Children come to years of Understanding, and are capable to
know the lost state of their Souls, and that its worth is more then the whole
world, Mu. 16.26. Mark 8.36. And their Parents have made no provision for them
in this kind, not so much as to teach them to read the Word of the Lord, nor
have instructed them in their duty to God, nor taught them how to pray unto
him, and worship him in no sense nor kind, nor have instructed them to believe
in Christ their Savior; neither acquainted them with the Baptism of Repentance
for remission of Sins, also do keep them ignorant of the benefit of the body
and blood of Christ in the sacrament, and of holy walking with God and Man, in
all duties of Love and Piety: These things when the Child comes to understand,
and that he can have no time nor means allowed in order to obtain his Souls
peace, but all ways possible rather used to hinder him in all good ways: This
is a very great Provocation, and therefore Parents above all things have a care
in this, viz. That you instruct your Children in the way of the Lord betimes,
Prove. 22.6. Let them suck in the Word with their Mothers Milk. From a Child
thou have known the Holy Scriptures, says St. Paul to Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.15.
The Lord commands the first fruits, Exodus 22.29. Sanctifies the first born to
him, Exodus 13.2. The fat was the Lords, viz. the best; therefore do not neglect
early instruction, Prove. 13.24. And the Lord will give you an early recompense,
Prove. 12.14. Isa. 3.10.

Seventh Provocation is, When Parents shall neglect their Children in temporal
Education, as not to bring them up in such a lawful calling, as that they may
by it get a necessary livelihood: And herein Parents ought to study their
Childrens Constitutions and Abilities, and to put them out to such employments
as their ability of Body and Estate will not fail in the management of; for
want of such good Education many have been bred so idly, who have had no
Estates to maintain them, when their Parents are dead, and they come to Men and
Women's state, that some have made away with themselves, others have sled to
Sea; some to be Soldiers, some fall into deep melancholy, and dye, others
take to the Highway to Robbery, and abundance of Evils: Therefore Parents, you
that have any king of Love at all for your Children, take Solomon's advice, To
train them up in the way which they should go, Prove. 22.6. Better unborn then
untaught; it is far better to spend an hundred to give them good Education, than
to give them thousands without any Education at all; for that will abide with
them, and be a portion, when riches fail, for they many times flee away as an
Eagle toward Heaven, Prou. 23.5.

Eighth Provocation is, When Parents shall promise their Children, that which
they never intend they shall have; some have gone and tied themselves by
Covenant to Virgins, by virtue of their Parents Promises, and when the Parents
have relinquished it, it has been the ruin of them both; Parents wickedness in
this case, may be, and many times is, an hourly and daily Provocation to their
Children, which makes them to live in Horror, Bondage, Discontent and Slavery,
until the very day of their death, because their Parents hindered them by it of
their first choice, and ever after their affections can never be truly settled;
also it causes them to suspect their Parents love; but this know, that Love
ought to be honest, and without dissimublation, Romans 12.9. Do to your Children
in this case, and esteem their Peace as your own: There is no joy nor true
peace where content is wanting; an hearts content is a continual feast, Prove.
15.15.

Ninth Provocation is, When Parents shall threaten their Children, that they
will give them no portion, or cut them off, as many do, with a shilling: The
Lord in the case of giving of Parents Estates, has given forth a possitive
Law, which though it were given to the Jews, yet it being not ceremonial or
typical, but moral and perpetual, it extends its power to all Ages, Nations,
Sects, Kindred, Tongues and People, to whom this Precept shall come, it being
never as yet abolished, which law you will find recorded in Deuteronomy. 21.15, 16,
and 17. That the Eldest if hated, yet he shall have a double portion, and the
youngest though best beloved, shall share all alike: Have a care Parents in
breaking this Law in threatening words, Ephesians. 6.9. much more in wicked actions;
He that breaks one commandment is guilty of all, James 2.10. The Ten
Commandments was given to the Jews, but who dares to deny, but all the moral
part thereof, is perpetual, and extends its power to every individual person
in the whole world, which Law to transgress would be a sin in any, and then the
Lord may look on them, as he he did on Cain, and say, If thou do not well,
sin lies at thy door, Genesis 4.7.

Tenth Provocation is, When Parents shall give all, or some part of their
Estates, to those that be not heirs by Birth: There are they that give many and
great Legacies, and to the impoverishing of their Children, or diminish their
Birthright; and look on it as a small fault, some have such foolish affections
for their name, that they will give their Lands from their female natural Issue
of their Bodies, to a Stranger, as though their Names were their chief
Happiness; though the Lord be offended with them, and for the continuance of
their Name, they will as it were go one step beyond him, but he will meet with
them by death, and put out their name for ever, as the Psalmist says, Psalm.
49.11, 12. This their way is their folly: There be some that will disinherit
their Children for a word speaking, when they themselves have provoked their
Children to it by their wicked words and Deeds; to all such Parents I must say,
1st. If the Lord should disinherit you for one Offense, nay, for ten, an
hundred, nay, a thousand, I fear you will never possess Eternal Happiness. 2ly.
He that takes that from me which is my Birthright, is a Thief and a Robber,
and has broken the eighth Commandment, Exodus 20.15. 3ly. He that provideth not
for his family (chiefly for his Children) has denied the Faith, and is worse
than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. 4ly. These are more unnatural than the savage
Beasts of the Field, who will not leave their young, but provide for them, till
they be in a capacity to live in the world, they peaceably live with them, and
leave them their Possessions at Death. 5ly. This causes Heart-burnings and
Animosities in those Children, against those that give, and those that possess
their Estates, it is much if it do not terminate in Outrage and Murder, except
the Lord endow them with his special Grace. 6ly. You that have no Male Issue,
Numb. 27.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Here the Lord gives you a Law, break it upon your own
peril, and look to it, you are bound by this Moral Commandment (why will you
not? to give your Lands to your Daughters) as above, to possess, Numb. 36.8.
and not to deprive them for their Sex, if they be your natural Issue. 7ly. Let
me advise you Parents in this case, to do to your Children, as you would your
Parents should have done to you; is not that a Moral Precept, which if
neglected, you neglect to do as you would be done unto; you should not so
deprive them of any part of your Estates, if you would not have been pleased
that your Parents should have disinherited you. 8ly. This causes a suspicion
in the Child, that you doubt whether they are your natural Issue, since so me
wicked men are jealous of their innocent Wives without any just reason or
cause, and some foolish women are misted with that vulgar Error, and fond
foolish, Conceit of Changelings, which seems to be the working of Satan in the
minds of some, it being beyond the Bounds of Nature, Reason and Common Sense,
that Women should leave their natural Issue to Strangers, and take theirs to
themselves. 9ly. What will you Parents do, in the Judgmentday, if your
disinheriting your Children should be the only cause of their Eternal Ruin? can
you answer for them at the Bar of Justice? 10ly. Let your loving Instructions
and Counsels, with your blessing and estate, be divided and given to your
Children, (save what is wisely given to charitable uses) that you may win their
hearts to God and your selves, that so long as your Estates continue with them,
and their Lives last, you may be had in their Affections, that Satan tempt them
not to evil.


Eleventh Provocation is, Where Parents shall and do require more of their
Children than their natural Abilites will permit, or that is possible for them
to undertake, or to accomplish with undertaking; such Parents (if they may be
so called) show their Malice, by Frowns, Sour-Looks, Evil Words, nay, and many
times by Cursings and Bannings, and sometimes with cruel and merciless blows;
here they let loose their reins, and run at random in the road to Destruction,
without either pause, consideration, or affections, as though they were
destitute of all grace; such Parents want patience. Heb. 6.6. and cannot wait
till their Childrens Acquirements will in time produce their desired effects:
Look not for an old head on young shoulders. Children are not perfect Men the
first year; wait and instruct them with love and patience, and in time you will
have of them what you required, as the Proverb is, Rome was not built in one
day.

Twelfth Provocation is, When Parents will not suffer their Children to ask
them a Question, but answer them with blows, or throwing something at them.
Jonathan did but ask Saul his Father, wherefore shall David be slain? what has
he done? but he was so angry with him, that he threw a javelin at Jonathan.
These are hard lines, when Parents will not suffer their Children to speak one
word to pacify their Wrath, or to know another faults: The Lord says, When
thy Children shall ask thee Questions, thou shall answer them rightly to what
they ask, Joshua 4.6. Exodus 12.26. Let Parents look to themselves, that they
break not these Precepts.

Thirteenth Provocation is, When Parents shall set a higher esteem on one Child
than on another; this is a great Provocation, this caused Joseph's Brethren
consult his death, Genesis 37.18. But being interposed by Reuben, they sold him
into Egypt, Genesis 37.27, 28.

Fourteenth Provocation is, When Parents will take no care to bestow trades on
their Children to their Content, but will force them to be brought up in an
Employment which they neither like nor love; this causes them to be careless
and idle, and many times to be very ill Husbands and extravagant, that they
ruin their Estates, and beggar their Children, it many times brings them to ill
Courses for a Livelihood, which ends in Imprisonment, and their Souls are in
danger of Eternal Woe, Isa. 3.11. The Lord gave this Liberty in the time of the
Law, Deuteronomy. 23.16.

Fifteenth Provocation is, When Parents will force their Children against their
will, to be yoked to those they cannot love, nor at all affect; for a little
filthy Lucre, as though the only Happiness and chiefest good were in the Mammon
of Unrighteousness, Luke 16.9, 13. Piety and Virtue was the only thing Solomon
and his Mother took notice of, Prove. 14.4. 19.14. 31.30. But instead of Piety,
Prudence, Honesty and Virtue, now a days if they be Sullen, Self-willed, Cross,
Obstinate, Malicious, Deceitful, Jealous, Envious, Light-Carriaged,
Insatiably-Lustful, Proud, Peevish, Foolish, Inconstant, Discontented, Impure
in Body and Mind, if Blear, Goggle, or Squint-Eyed, Wheezel-Faced,
Hare-brain'd, Quarter-witted, Nonsensical Idiots, Sanded, Tanned, Souer-lookt,
and much deformed in all parts: Yet Money and Land must make up all the matter,
and oil the wheels of Matrimony, but do not forget that they that marry only
for money, live all their Life time in bondage, in a kind of a lawful adultery,
therefore in disposing of your Children let love be the main, the primum
mobile, let Prudence, Virtue, Piety and Honesty, be the Objects, and the Hearts
content the only Subject, and the Lord will be glorified in such a choice: It
is but reason you should let your Children choose where and whom they like
best, all their Life's content depends upon it. Love and Affections, ought to
teach Parents this Lesson, but the time is now come that some are without
natural Affections, 2 Timothy 3.3. Nay, some Parents are so wicked and ungodly, as
if a Child be so weak to marry without their consent, yet marry a sober person,
but not riches answerable to their Estate, they through Pride and Ambition are so
cruel, that they reject such a dear son or daughter, and will not forgive them,
nor be reconciled to them, but take such devilish courses that tend to destroy
their Child both Body and Soul: Such show they are so far without the true fear
of God, that they are cruel Monsters, and without Natural Affections, nay, and
they will not own nor look upon the Son-in-law or Daughter-in-law, nor the
lawful Issue such a Son has by such a Daughter-in-law, or such a Daughter has
by such a son-in-law, by which they show themselves malicious, filled with
wrath and Envy, as well as unnatural, and violate Christ's Precepts, will not
forgive such that have trespassed against them, that is, from their heart, and
so must expect never to be forgiven, but perish eternally, if they do not
spedily repent.

Sixthteenth Provocation is, When Children are come to a state of Marriage, and
capable to trade for themselves in the World, their Parents will not give them
any thing to assist them, but keep all in their own hands till they are dead;
by this their Children live almost, if not all their days, in bondage and
slavery, till they have almost, if not altogether lost their natural love to
their Parents, and many times are under that grievous Temptation occasioned by
their Parents, to wish and desire their days may be shortened, which sin cannot
be justified; but all good Parents should do their utmost endeavor to take
this block out of their Childrens way: Also this causes them to take up
dishonest courses, by private and public Robberies, and Cheating Shifts, to
get something whereby to supply their wants, and when they have escaped well
once, it may be they are so far hardened, that they can never stop till it be
too late: This is a Provocation indeed which terminates in the excution of
Justice. I hope Parents my whetting up of your Memories will not offend you, if
they do, I have in this done my duty in part, do you do all yours, and then see
where you will have Occasion of offense. I leave off with these sixteen, which
are the material Sum of my Experience, and leave it to them that are more
accute to find out as many more as they please, and I will be content with
these Enlargements.

And so I pass to the proof of this first Doctrine.

That Parents should take all care possible to avoid all occasions of
Provocation, etc. Col. 3.21. Provoke not your Children to anger, Psalm. 103.13.
As a Father pitieth his Children, etc. Prove. 17.6, 10. The Glory of the
Children is their Parents, Prove. 31.28. They call her blessed, Mat. 9.15. Can
the Children of the Bridechamber mourn so long as the Bride is with them: It
will be very hard for Children to glory in their Parents, and call them
blessed, when they are under Provocation and Mourning for their Parents
misusing of them, in hard, unjust and wicked carriges, but I come to the
Reasons of the Doctrine, to prove that they ought not to provoke their Children.

And the First Reason is taken from the Title, Father, Parents; now they ought
as they hear themselves called by that Title, to be touched with a feeling of
the natural affections which is only proper to the fruit of their own Bowels
and relation, as being their Image, and Spark of their Brightness,
successively; their own representation and proper Offspring. Would not he be a
Monster and not a man, that should so far violate the Bounds of Nature, and so
wilfully and willingly destroy his natural Issue: David, though his Son Absalom
were his mortal Enemy, yet he took great care, and gave a strict charge for his
preservation, 2 Samuel 18.5. Parents should think thus with themselves, the Lord
is our Father, even as we would he should do unto us, even so should we do to
our Children; and if thus, I am sure no Parents will give any just cause of
Provocation to them.

2d. Reason. Why Parents should not give their Children any just Occasion of
Provocation is, Because their Children be of their own Substance: Who is so mad
as to cut his own Flesh? how does it cut the Child, even to the very heart,
that it makes it weary of its life? to be under continual provocation, it is a
Pain intolerable, a Disease incurable, but as Scorpions Blood will best cure
its own stinging, so no salve to heal the Child's wound but its parents true
love and real affections, what a sacred Bond of Unity is there in the
Firmament? what natural union is there among the Birds of the Air, and Beasts
of the Field? no dissolving it, but by inducements to Hatred; Love and Concord
continues still; then why should not Men be taught by natural things, to have
and continue natural affections to their Children, and learn of the Lord, who
does not afflict willingly nor grieve the children of Men, Lament. 3.33. But
bemoans their conditions, and wills them to turn from iniquity, Hosea 11.8. And
is very pittyful and of tender mercy, James 5.11. So should all Godly Parents
be.

3d. Reason is, Because the Lord does highly esteem of all such Parents as are
godly, that be careful for, and tender of their Children: Shall I, says the
Lord, hide from Abraham the thing that I do? why because he will command his
Children and Household after him, to keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18.17, 19.
The Lord commends Job for a perfect and upright Man, whose work it feems was
daily to offer Sacrifice for his Children, Job. 1.5, and 8. For fear they had
sinned against the Lord; by this Parents should learn to pray with and for
their Children every day, the just man walks in his integrity, his Children
are blessed after him, Prove. 20.7. It is the Character of a Godly Bishop, to
have his Children in subjection, 1 Timothy 3.4. with all gravity. The Lord did
make Israel to hear and fear, that they might teach their Children after them,
Deuteronomy. 4.10. Chapter 6.7. Chapter 31.13. The Lord was so well pleased with King Jehu,
that he says, His Children shall sit on the Throne of Israel, to the fourth
Generation, 2 Kings 10.30. The Lord has established a Testimony in Jacob, and
appointed a Law in Israel, which he commanded our Fathers that they should make
them known to their Children, that the Generations to come might know them,
even the Children which would be born, who should arise and declare them to
their Children, that they might set their Hope in God, and not forget the Works
of God, but keep his Commandments at all times, Psalm. 78.5, 6, 7. Deuteronomy. 4.9.
which truly being performed, takes off all just occasion of Provocation.

4th. Reason is, because Provocation is the high road to Childrens
Disobedience, and an evil instrumental means to cause them to break the fifth
Commandment, which says, Honor thy Father, and thy Mother, Exodus 20.12.
Provocation disputes a Child into Fude and Anger, and what will you do to
quench that flame? what will you call him then, but a furious, turbulent,
outrageous Monster, no ways then to be disputed with. Wrath carries down all
before it, and cares not if he dash himself in a thousand pieces, he carries
the Blood of Revenge in his Face, and his Eyes sparkle like Fire, his Hair
stands an end, and his Teeth gnash one against another, his Countenance is
fierce, and his Voice thundereth without sense or reason, his Brows are knit in
fury, and the motion of his Head declares his destruction, his Hands strike one
against another, and falls with violence on his own Breast, he stampeth and
teareth his Clothes, and if it were possible his Flesh from his Bones, he has
detestation in his mind, and Firebrands in one Hand with a drawn Sword in the
other, yelling and houling with hideous Outcries, saying, I will ruin all, for
I am undone. Wrath and Anger defaceth the Image of God in Man, and casts a
mist before the Eyes; it stops the Ears that he will not hear Instruction, and
hinders his Understanding from receiving Counsel; it is an Obstruction of the
Judgment and Reason, the Senses and Conscience are dulled and blinded by it,
and it causes the heart to be continually stubborn, and subject to much evil,
and what not. O then Parents provoke not Children to Anger, for in that
condition you will hardly persuade them to the Duty of Honor, learn patience
and be kind to them, and what great quiet of Conscience can you have whilst you
see your Children ruined before your Eyes, by your folly and madness? would you
have your Child hate you who begat him, and be your Enemy, because you show
your self an Enemy to him or to her? besides, if the cause of your anger to
your Child cannot now be prevented, as if it be in the Case of Marriage it
cannot, what aggravation of Folly and Shame is that in you? would you be feared
and not loved, and strive for that sweet Harmony of Love and Fear together?
regard your Honor, but join with it Parental Affections; between such Parents
and Children that live as they ought, what a sweet Harmony is there, James 1.4.
Romans 12.16. Ephesians. 4.32. Col. 3.13, 23.

5th. Reason is, Because when Children are provoked, they are in the fittest
posture for Satan to work upon them by his Temptations: Satan delights to
fish in troubled Waters, the terrible smoke of Fury that does ascend,
occasioned by Provocation, it so far darkeneth the Eyes of the Mind, that now
any Temptation suits, and the Party being blinded cannot discover it, (without
the special grace of God.) The Astronomers tell us, that the Inferior Orbs are
restrained in their motion by the primum mobile, or else they would set all the
World on fire. So if the Grace of God and true Religion do not keep Persons in
due Order, Satan has too much combustible matter to work upon in the Soul, to
set the whole course of Nature on fire, by his manifold Evil and Subtle
Temptations, therefore Parents, take heed of giving Satan an Inch, least he
when he has gotten a little footing on them, instead of an Inch he take an
Ell, Ephesians. 4.27. James 4.7.

6th. Reason. Because the very Evils that do attend Provocation is, or ought to
be a sufficient Argument against it: A Person under Provocation may be fitly
compared to a bed of Serpents, when the wind blows cold they lie still, but
when they are stirred or chafed with heat, let every body look to themselves.
1st. A Person under provocation is hard to be workt upon, Prove. 18.19. 2dly.
Moses himself being provoked by Israel's Idolatry, brake the Tables of the
Commandments, Exodus 32.19. 3dly. Cain, Esau and David being provoked, resolved
upon murder, but Cain only was in the Act, Genesis 4.8. The other two were
overcome by length of time and loving importunity, Genesis 27.41. 1 Samuel 25.21.
4thly. The Patriarchs being provoked by Jacob's special love to Joseph, sold
him into Egypt, Genesis 37.27. 5thly. Simeon and Levi being provoked by Sechem's
deflowring their Sister Dinah, they destroyed them all, Genesis 34.25. 6thly.
Samson being provoked several times by his Wives, and the Philistines, he burnt
their corn, and destroyed many of them, and himself with them at the last,
Judges 14. Chapter 16. Chapter 17. 7thly. Saul being provoked by Nahash the Ammonite,
destroyed his Army, 1 Samuel 11.11. I might tell you of Jehosaphat, Josiah,
Hezekiah, Jeremiah, and many more both of the Kings and Prophets, as also some
of the Apostles, who were provoked to do that, and also to speak that, which
otherwise they would not, had they not been urged to it; but it will be too
large a Task here to enter upon. You may observe the Effects of Provocation in
them, as you read of them in your Bibles. I pass to the seventh Reason.

7th. Reas. is, Because by Provocation they are tempted many times to destroy
both body and soul, which is both accomplished by felo dese, it being a breach
of the sixth Commandment; my self has been by (...) Provocation tempted to
this evil, had not the grace of God restrained me. Benedictus fit Deus: What
Horrid extremity, and Inveterate Cruelty, in opposition to the Commandment of
God, and love to our own selves, does Provocation drive such into, who beyond
any brutal act, do lay violent hands on themselves, how has it emptied them of
all Faith, Fear, Love, and Hopes of a future Happiness, that were as Saul and
his Son Jonathan, Achitophel, Zimri and Judas, provoked to destroy themselves,
1 Samuel 31.4. 2 Samuel 17.23. 1 Kings 16.18. Mat. 27.2. The true fear of the Lord
was fled from before their eyes, who are under a Provocation to act in this
kind. Parents, for the love of your Childrens Souls, least this Temptation
attend them, give them no just occasion of Provocation, least their blood be
required at your hands, and you will have enough to do to answer for your
selves, 1 Pet. 4.18. For if the righteous scarcely shall be saved, where will thou, O poor sinner, appear?

8th. Reason is, Because Provocation is the first step to take off Childrens
natural Love from their Parents, and so a means to teach them to break Gods
Commandment, Honor thy Father and thy Mother; and will you teach them to
dishonor you, by being unnatural to them and provoke them to wrath, and so to
disobedience. True natural Love is not so settled in the heart, the Child being
under the Continual Dropping of this dark Cloud of Provocation. First, Doubts
of its Parents true Love to it, and then being chaffed a long time by it, comes
to believe they have none at all, and so that love that was before seated in
the heart, is now (as I minded before) turned into a kind of an Antipathy;
which 1st. If the belief of being their natural Issue, And 2dly. If the Grace
of God, did not bear them up, their pure natural Love would be turned into an
absolute Hatred; but Parents, take the stone out of their way, least they
should stumble and fall, and none to help them, Col. 2.2. Let your hearts be
knit together in love.

9th. Reason is, Because the faithful in all ages have been to us in this a
good Example: What great love had Abraham for Isaac, as the Lord testifies,
Genesis 22.2. Isaac to Esau, Genesis 25.28. Rebeckah to Jacob, Jacob to Joseph and
Benjamin, Genesis 37.3. David to Absalom, though a Rebel, 2 Samuel 13.39. Hannah to
Samuel, 1 Samuel 1.22. Job to his Children, Job 1.5. Which the Lord takes
special notice of, Oh how tender are the Ews of their young, and the Hinds,
which the Prophet Jeremiah seems to wonder at, Jer. 14.5. It is said of Monica
the Mother of Austin, while he was addicted to sin, her Prayers and Tears were
so abundant, that St. Ambrose comforted her with these words, Impossible est,
ut filius tantarum Lachrymarum periret: It Is impossible a Son of so many
Prayers and Tears should miscarry. It Is reported of several Parents in
Carthage, who when their Sons were exiled, as soon as they were aboard, they
threw themselves down into the Sea, and were drowned. How many in this our age
have been seized with death, as soon as they have lost their Beloved Children?
Time will fail, and I should be too tedious, if I should travel this Field any
further, I leave it to your judicious reading, Contemplation and Experience,
and pass it.

10th. Reason is, Because Provocation may be the great Hindrance of their Souls
Salvation: If the value of one Soul be of more worth than the whole world, as
is most certain, Mark 8.36.37. Mat. 16.26. Then how tender of, and what care
should Parents take of their Childrens Souls; Emit chare, qui solvit animam; He
buys dear that pays his Soul. But much more dearer, that pays two at once.
Parents should stand in the Gap with Moses, Exodus 32.32. and plead with the
Lord for their Children: Paul was so vehemently affected for Isreal's Salvation,
that he wishes himself, ((...)) Separated from the fruit of Christ's Love for a
Season, so they might be eternally saved, Romans 9.3. It will be sad at the last
day, if you must answer for their Souls, who I fear will have too much to
answer for your selves; endeavor to win them, (and not to provoke them;) this
know, that he that wins Souls is wise, Prove. 11.30. Take the yoke of Christ
on you, and learn to be meek, and then you will find rest unto your souls, Mat.
11.29. You should with the good Shepherd, watch for your Childrens Souls, Heb.
13.17. And with Paul, be glad to spend and be spent for them, 2 Cor. 12.15.

11th. Reason is, Because all Carriages of Parents to Children, ought to be
sweetened with true Love: Love is a winning Grace; My Son, says Abraham, (when
he was to sacrifice Isaac, Genesis 22.8.) God will provide himself a Lamb; a
Loving Speech; your Looks, your Carriage, your Words and Deeds, should be all
seasoned with Love, it is the first, the last, the new and the old Commandment,
1 John 2.7.3.11, 23. God is love, 1 John 4.8. It will surely please his Sacred
Majesty most, to have all his of the same nature as himself; if thou do all in
love, the Lord will love thee freely, Hosea 14.4. He will preserve thee, Psalm.
145.20. Paul says, Ye are taught of God to love one another, 1 These. 4.9. It
will do well to learn this Lesson, and then every wheel, being oyled with this
grace, will go round very pleasantly, and all your lives will be sweet and
comfortable each to other, 2 Cor. 13.11.

12th. Reason is, Because Provocation is like a fire, continually burning; what
man living will be so mad as to burn his own flesh, while he is yet alive? If
the provocation of the Tongue, as St. James says, be so terible, that it will
set the whole course of nature on fire, James 3.6. Provoking Actions will do
much more; therefore avoid them, and all the motives and allurements thereto,
be unto your Children a burning and shining light in the way of Christ; and
have the loins of your Minds girt about with Truth, always seasoned with the
salt of true and amicable Affections, Luke 12.35. Col. 4.6. And that will
quickly extinguish that fire, that St. James says burns like the fire of
Hell, James 3.6. by so doing, you will avoid the grand Occasion of Provocation.

13th. Reason comes with Authority, the Lord by the mouth of his Blessed
Apostle, says, Col. 3.21. Fathers, provoke not your Children to anger, (why?)
least they be discouraged: Almost the same words as our Text, Ephesians. 6.4. Paul
says, 1 Cor. 14.37. If any be a Prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge
that the things that I write are the Commandments of the Lord. He that says by
Moses, Thou shall do no murder, Thou shall not commit Adultery, nor Steal, nor
bear false witness, Nor Covet, says by St. Paul, Provoke not your Children to
Wrath; which is the greatest evil, to disobey the Precepts of the
New Testament, or of the Old? True, if they that despised Moses Law died
without mercy, Heb. 10.38. What will become of him that despises the Gospel or
Law of Christ? See Romans 2.8, 9. Indignation, Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish,
and Everlasting destruction is their portion, 2 These. 1.8. Learn to believe,
keep the law of Christ, and thou will avoid the danger.

I come in the next place to give you some general rules for your better
direction in almost all your carriages, toward your Children, from their Birth
to Marriagestate, and further. And here I must begin with you Fathers first,
for so is our Text.

1 Direction. Do not let your Children be too long absent from you, when they
are young and tender, neither in person as well as in heart; by long absence
real natural love is worn out: I do here appeal to the experience of many Men
and Women too, who have, when they have had a loving Husband or Wife, resolved
never to forget their Embraces, nor to be joined to another in marriage, yet
when Death has parted them, length of time has worn out the sharp edge of
their affections, their real natural love which was so in very deed, is now
become dull, lame, and very weak, that another Object shall take place, which
before length of time had worn out the sharpness of it, it would have been
utterly despised and condemned, (though now embraced) makes the Proverb true,
Long absent, soon forgotten. You Fathers which never had the Care and Tuition
of your Children, when young, are not apt to put that value upon them which
your constant presence, and their tattleing pleasant Company, would always
induce you to; we are apt to value those things most, that costs us most; so
our Children that are with us always, we our selves have always the trouble
with, and care for, we do really love, when the very same Children if brought
up without our care, in our absence, love, except true grace prevent and prompt
us to it, will be but yea, very much wanting, if any at all; so that I do
advise you Parents, if you would bare and continue real natural and true love
to your Children, take the pains to have the Tuition of, and Care for your
Children while young, that your heart, love, with your pains and care, may be
toward them always, at all Times and Places, Prove. 8.30.

2 Direction is to you Mothers, (for our Text reaches you as well as Fathers)
That if it be possible, give your Children suck your selves. The Mothers milk
is fittest to nourish the Child, as being congruous to its nature and
complexion; it is a General Maxim, that Children take after them they suck;
it is said of Tiberius Caesar, that he sucked a drunken Nurse, and he was much
given to that Vice. Dogs love most that game that you feed them with the blood
of when young: Let a Lamb suck a Goat, and its nature and property shall be
altered; so let a Whelp suck a Cat, and his game will be Rats and Mice: So
likewise Children will share with their Nurse (except true grace prevent) of
all their Vices. Mothers best know their own Inclinations, but they may be
greatly mistaken in a Nurse, whose natural Inclinations may be very great to
many gross evils, but either they carrry it very secretly and close, or else
they want fit Opportunity to act in their Vices. You do not know the nature of
a Serpent, but by stirring and provoking of him: So Some Women are never known
what they are, till they be proved. If illness of body will not permit you to
nurse them your selves, or if you know you are naturally given to some gross
evil, that you would not have your Child follow you in, it is far better to take
one years trouble, to bring it up by hand, than to venture it under the slender
care of one who can have no natural love to it, (whose care may be like
Mephibosheths Nurse, to make him a cripple all days of his life, 2 Samuel 4.4.)
more especially, since you know not what vices they may suck in with the Milk;
besides, Women have not that real, natural, love, for those Children that they
do not nurse themselves, as they have to them they do. So likewise, their
Children being long absent from them while young, their love is weaned from
them so much, that they have scarce any love to them at all. Parents generally
love those Children most, that resemble them in Persons, Qualities, and
Actions; then Mothers, if you would have your Children resemble you, nurse them
your selves: Isaac, Jacob, Samuel, Solomon, Moses, and many others were nursed
by their own Mothers, as the Scripture witnesses: Many are the advantages and
benefits that arise both to Child and Mother too, by nursing of them
themselves: As, First, The Mother letting it lie and suck near her heart, her
heart love is toward the Child continually. Secondly, The Mothers care in
preserving it, is far way beyond a Nurse in preserving it, from too much cold
or heat, from hunger and crying, from fretting and chaffing of the Skin, from
Vermin, and many other evils, as Worms, Vomitings, Costiveness and Fluxes,
Coughs, Hiccoughs, Inflammations, Contusions, trouble of Wind, and Ruptures, all
which are incident to Children; as also to preserve them from fire, water, and
bruises, and the like. Thirdly, As their Love is naturally toward them, so
their care is continually of and for them in all things. Sarah rejoiced that
she should give her Child suck, Genesis 21.7. She was not so unnatural as to send
it out of Doors so soon as it was born, not regarding it, as though it were
none of her own, as some Women do, (who are worse to their young than the
savage beasts of the field) that will not take care to nurse, preserve, and
protect their young ones; it is looked on as a judgment by the Prophet, Hosea
9.14. What, (says he) will thou them give a miscarrying womb and dry breasts?
most Women are much troubled, if they cannot bare Children, then why not much
more, if they do not let them suck of that Milk which nature has provided for
the Child's nourishment? it is a small sign of remorse, when they are not
troubled for that which is their own proper faults. Fouthly, All Children do
naturally love those Parents most whom they sucked, to take care for, assist
and help in their necessities when old; if there be a kind of an Affection in
Nurses to those they nurse, and a peculiar love in the Child to the Nurse whom
it sucked till death, much more the Natural Affections of a Child to its
Natural Parents who bore it, and nourished it with their own milk; what other
Benefits arise thereby, I leave it to your Experience to witness in length of
time. Nurse your Children your selves, do not, as it is said of the Deer, that
they repulse and separate those that are impotent; do not turn your Children
out of doors, least they in time have the same Opportunity, and you your selves
share of the like fare from them; it is the sin of the last times, to be without
natural Affections, therefore take away the cause that the effect may cease.


3 Direction is, Dedicate your Children to the most High, offer them up in your
Prayers, Wishes and Desires to the Lords omnipotent Care and Protection. Hannah
dedicated Samuel unto the Lord, 1 Samuel 1.28. Every First born was to be offered
to the Lord, Exodus 13.12. O that Ishmael might live before thee, says Abraham,
Genesis 17.18. How excellently did Zathariah yield up John to the Service of the
Lord, Luke 1.76. So Parents should do, and pray continually with good Job, for
their Conversion, and offer daily Sacrifice for them; do not forget to offer
your Souls in Prayer with and for them, that they may be sensible how great
care you have of their Souls eternal well-being, Job 1.5.

4 Direction. Parents, be sure you agree together in your Commads: Let not the
Father command one thing, and the Mother presently contradict it before the
Child, this will harden them in Disobedience; the first Precept to the Woman
after the transgression, was, to be subject to her Husband, and he should rule
over her, Genesis 3.16. But that Woman is very impudent, that is so far from
obeying her Husband, that she will Lord it over him, by contradicting his
Authority in just commands, and more especially when so much evil attends it,
as in this case, Parents should both take great care, not to oppose each other
before their Children, but chiefly when it is about their Childrens duty, but
to take another fit Opportunity in cool Blood, in Love, and in their Childrens
absence, to dispute the lawfulness of the matter.

5 Direction. Keep your Children in due subjection, before they be too
stubborn; He that spares the rod hates his Son, but he that loves him
chastneth him betimes, Prove. 13.24. Chasten thy son while there is hope, and
let not thy soul spare for his crying, Prove. 19.18. Rods and Reproof give
Wisdom, but a Child left to himself, brings his Mother to shame, Prove. 29.15.
Correct thy son, and he shall give thee rest, and delight unto thy soul, Prove.
29.17. A Bishop is commanded to have his Children in subjection, with all
gravity, 1 Timothy 3.4.

6 Direction, Let your Children be your chiefest joy in this World: Rejoice in
them, as they are the gift of the Lord, but do not idolize them; good Job took
delight enough in his Children, as himself expresses, Job 19.17. Chap. 29.5.
Yea, when the Lord has permitted their death, by a great wind, he seems to
rejoice, that as the Lord gave them, so he has now taken them away, and (says
he) blessed be the name of the Lord, Job 1.19. without sorrow, repining and
murmuring; he seems to joy in this affliction, hopeing they were gone to a
better Father. All the Patriarchs did take delight in their Sons and Daughters,
except when they sinned, Genesis 34.30.

7 Direction. You must reprove and rebuke your Children if they sin: This Work
must not be done to halves, as Old Eli did, 1 Samuel 3.13. If they sin against
the Lord, and no Reproof nor Rebuke will prevent them, they must be restrained
with due severity: Folly is bound up in the heart of a Child, but the rod of
Correction drives it away, Prove. 22.15. Withhold not Correction from thy
Child, for if thou beatest him with rods he shall not die, Prove. 23.13. St.
Paul says, We had Fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them
reverence, Heb. 13.9.

This Duty must 1st. be done with Love; because it is God Ordinance to restrain
them from iniquity, Deuteronomy. 8.5.

2dly. You must show them their sin, for which you rebuke or correct them:
Saying with the holy God, O Do not this abominable thing, which I bate, Jer.
44.4.

3dly. Tell them, that thou do correct them out of Conscience to God, and
Love to their precious souls, Prove. 11.30.

4thly. Reprove and Corect them with pity; telling them, if good Words would
have restrained them, you would not have used Blows, Psalm. 103.13.

5thly. Show them by some place of Scripture, How much the Lord is offended
with them for this their sin, Deuteronomy. 29.20.

6thly. Keep them from evil Company, that are the Inducements to sin, 1 Cor.
15.33.

7thly. Correct them not in anger, but with fair and loving words; as it were
with severity, according to the Fact, but all in a Cool Blood, Jer. 30.11.

8thly. Be often in Prayer with and for them; that if all other means fail,
that this may work upon them for their Souls eternal good; thus rebuke and
correction may be rightly performed, and the Child not provoked to anger, but
love, 1 These. 5.17.

9thly. Be sure that the Sin that thou correct thy Child for, be not an evil
which he has seen thee often guilty of; then it is to be feared that thy
Correction will do no good, 1 John 3.20.

10thly. Forbear many chiding Words and Threatening Expressions, Ephesians. 6.9.

11thly. Smile not on them in their sin, nor use no show of approbation toward
them in it, for this will harden them: Solomon says, a flattering Tongue
works ruin, Prove. 26.28.

12thly. Do not rail on them, nor miscall them, when you correct them: This
does not become a Servant of Christ, 1 Pet. 3.9.

8 Direction is, Be sure look well to it, that at all times your Children obey
your lawful Commands, do not let them run at full length of Reins: See that
they speedily and duly perform what you order them to do, without neglect or
^^^ness, or truanting away their time; if they get once into such an ill
Custom, it will be very hard work to break them off from it; it will be easier
to break a rough Colt, than to make it bow to your Precepts, when once they
have had a long time an evil Habit, in running in their own ways; you ought not
only to have eyes, to see that they duly and truly obey you, but to let your
whole heart to the observance thereof: See what the Lord says, Deuteronomy. 32.46.
And he said unto them, set your heart unto all the Words, which I testify
among you this day; which ye shall command your Children to observe to do, all
the words of this Law: The neglect of this duty, brings all the curses upon thy
self and thy Children, Deuteronomy. 28.15, 20. Remember, to obey is better than
sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15.22. In their Disobedience they will be too apt to make up
their Excuses with vain stories, bad put offs, and many times with lies; which
thing the Lord hates, Prove. 6.16, to 19. Chap. 12.22.

9 Direction is, Keep your Children, if possible, from foolish Covenants and
Contracts: If a Child in its Nonage make a Covenant and Contract by Promise or
Vow, and the Parents know nothing of it, the Parents have power by the Law of
God to disanul it, Numb. 30.5. But if they, do know of it, and hold their
peace, and do not disanul it, oppose it and disown it at the first knowledge,
it stands, and they cannot afterward disanul it in any kind but by consent.

10 Direction is, You must inform your Childrens Judgments: Take heed to thy
self, and keep thy soul diligently, least thou forget the things which thine
Eyes have seen, and least they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life,
but thou shall teach them thy Sons, and thy Sons Sons, Deuteronomy. 4.9. And thou
shall teach them diligently unto thy Children, and shall talk of them when thou
sit in thine house, and when thou walk in the way, and when thou lieft
down, and when rifest up, Deuteronomy. 6.7. Chap. 11.18, 20. Set your hearts unto all
the words which I testify among you this day, which ye shall command your
Children to observe to do all the words of this Law, Deuteronomy. 32.46. As our Text
says, Bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord; nourish your
Children with the sincere milk of the Word, 1 Cor. 3.2. 1 Pet. 2.2.

11 Direction. Always give your Children godly Counsel: David says to Solomon,
My son, keep the charge of the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, to keep his
statutes, and his Commandments, and his judgments, and his testimonies, as it
is written in the law of Moses; that thou may prosper in all that thou do,
and whithersoever thou turnest thy self, 1 Kings 2.3. And Joshua said unto
Achan, My son, give I pray thee glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make
confession unto him, Joshua 7.19. Says David, and thou Solomon, my son, know
thou the God of thy Fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a
willing mind, for the Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the
imaginations of the thoughts; if thou seek him, he will be found of thee, but
if thou for sake him, he will cast thee off for ever, 1 Chronicles. 28.9, 20. Says
the Wise man, My son, fear thou the Lord, Prove. 24.21. Be wise, Prove. 27.11.
Despise not the Chastening of the Lord, Prove. 3.11. Nor faint when thou art
rebuked of him, Heb. 12.5. Follow the Examples of these and other godly,
Patterns, and give your Children Godly Counsel at all times, that they may
always learn to fear the Lord, and honor their Superiors, and the Lord will be
with you always, Isa. 41.10.

12 Direction is, Give your Children pertinent Answers to their Godly
Questions: When your Children shall ask you in time to come, saring, what
means these twelve stones? then you shall let your Children know, saying,
Israel came over this Jordan on dry land, Joshua 4.21, 22. And it shall come to
pass, when your Children shall say unto you, what mean you by this service? ye
shall say, it is the sacrifice of the Lords passover, who passed over the House
of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, Exodus 12.26, 27. So when our
Children shall ask us, why Christ was born, dyed, was buried, and rose again?
We must answer them, Because Man had sinned away his happiness, and by no other
means could be brought again, but by a glorious Sacrifice, for as the whole
lump of Mankind by Adam's Sin were brought under Death and Condemnation, so
also by the death of the second Adam, ( viz. Christ) a door of Salvation is set
open to all that believe, to obtain Eternal Salvation through him, John 3.16. 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 2.9. 1 John 2.2. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. 1 Cor. 8.11.

So likewise when they shall ask you, what the Sacrament of Baptism does
signify: You must answer them, (if you answer them truly and directly) in
Scripture Language.

1st. The going down into the Water, Acts 8.38. signifies Christ's carrying
all our Sins down into the Grave, John 1.29. He takes away the sins of the
World. 2dly. Being baptized in the Water, does signify our dying to all our
sins, Romans 6.2. 3dly. Coming up out of the Water, Mark 1.10. signifies our
rising again to newness of life, Romans 6.4. Again, if your Children shall ask
you, what does the Sacrament of the Lords Supper signify? Mat. 26.26. You must
answer them, it signifies the breaking of Christ's Body for us, by Faith to
feed on, to share and partake of it, and that as Christ's body was one before
it was broken, so every one feeding on Christ by Faith, by it are made one
entire body, or Church, and as Bread is the stay and staff of our Natural
Lives, so is Christ the bread of our souls, or the stay and staff of our
spiritual lives; and as bread is first broken before we can eat of it, so
Christ was first broken before he could become proper food for our souls. And
as we must eat bread if we would live, so we must by Faith feed on Christ,
receive Christ for Life, Righteousness, and Eternal Life, if we would
spiritually live and be saved. So likewise the Blood of Christ, (or Wine in
that Sacrament) signifies Redemption from, and the remission of all our sins
by Christ's Blood shed, For without blood there is no remission of sins, Heb.
9.22. Revel. 5.9. And as we drink down that Drink before we can receive any
refreshment by it, so by Faith we must apply or partake of the virtue of
Christ's Blood, before we can receive any saving benefit thereby. Now Parents,
let me desire you, as you will answer it in the great day; do not give your
Children crabbed or churlish answers, but answer their good Questions in mild
and loving words, that agree best with their Capacities, that they may rightly
understand you.
13 Directon. You must endeavor to exclude all those Persons, or not receive
them into your Houses, that do disturb them, or that are any ways a hinderance
to your Childrens Good. Ishmael did but mock at Isaac, but Sarah desired
Abraham to put him out of his Family, and the Lord approved of his so doing,
Genesis 21.9, 12. Know this for certain, that Evil Communication corrupts good
manners, 1 Cor. 15.33. The Lord would have all the wicked Persons excluded out
of the Land of Canaan, least their Children should learn any of their wicked
ways, Deuteronomy. 9.13. The Church is to excommunicate Notorious Sinners, Mat. 18.17.
1 Cor. 5.5.7.13. 2 Cor. 6.17. For not doing of which the Church at Pergamos was
much blamed, as well as Thyatira, even for retaining or not casting out of
sinful persons, Rev. 2.14, 20. Nay, we must not retain vain thoughts, Jer.
4.14. For fear they will corrupt us, and hinder all good motions; faith David,
I am the Companion of all them that fear thee, Psalm. 119.63. Such good
Companions all Christians should choose for their Children, if they have true
christian love for them at all Times and Places.

14 Direction. You must take great care of their Chastity, and justify their
Innocence, and to dispose of them in Marriage to Godly Yoke-fellows, timely to
prevent their committing of Fornication; but if they are falsely accused, do
your uttermost to clear them, whether married or single persons. The Lord gave
strict charge to the Children of Israel, that they should not prostitute their
Children to Adultery, Levit. 11.29. If a Man accuse his Wife of Unchastity, the
Father shall stand by her, and clear her before the Judges, Deuteronomy. 22.13, 21.
Sampson's Parents were not willing he should marry into that adulterous crew of
the Philistines, Judges 14.3. Isaac and Rebeckah were very much against Jacob
and Esau's marrying with any of the Canaanites, Genesis 27.46. Chapter 28.1, 9. It was
the good counsel and advice of Solomon's Mother to him, to keep himself chaste,
give not thy strength unto Women, Prove. 31.3. Paul's Advice young Women, in
Tit. 2.5. was to be chaste, keepers at home, not to straggle abroad, as Dinah
did, Genesis 34.1. You must ever have a Watchful Eye over them, knowing that they
are ever in danger.

15 Direction is, You must endeavor their sanctification: It is said, Job sent
and sanctified his Children, Job 1.5. But in what manner is not expressed. The
First Step to Sanctification is Regeneration: O show them the necessity of the
New Birth, which is wrought by the Holy Spirit, as the Effects of our Union
with Christ. The Tree must first be made good before there can be good fruit;
you must teach them to know the necessity of Faith, and being implanted into
Christ, if you would have them cleansed from all filthiness of flesh and
spirit, and to perfect holinness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. The Apostle
says, This is the will of God, even your Sanctification, 1 These. 4.3. Tell
them the way how they must be kept from evil; if you will do the will of God,
Heb. 12.1. Endeavor to cause their conversations to be holy, 1 Pet. 1.15.
Direct them to keep close to the Truth in the Doctrine of it, many Erroneous
Principles now abound, John 17.9. a good Doctrine and Holy Conversation must be
joined together; there are damning Principles as well as damning Practices, 2
Pet. 2.^, 2, 3. Exhort them to be zealous in every good work, Tit. 2.14.
Persuade them to labor after Piety of Mind, 1 John 3.3. Direct them to pray
and cry for the Holy Spirit, which is the only agent that works regeneration,
Romans 8.13. Direct them to put on Christian Armor, Ephesians. 6.13. Instruct them to
deck themselves with the Ornaments of a Christian, which are these, 1st.
Wisdom, Prove. 4.9. She shall be an Ornament to thine bead, (a choice Jewel.)
The 2d. is Humility, Prove. 22.4. By it comes Riches, Honor and Life, and that
which all desire. 3d. is Meekness, The Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, is
in the sight of God of great price, 1 Pet. 3.4. 4th. Ornament is Love, Let your
adorning be with the hidden man of the heart, 1 Pet. 3.4. which is hearty Love.
5th. Ornament is Holiness, It becomes the House of God for ever, Psalm. 93.5.
6th. Ornament is Zeal; as Ornaments are a Temptation and Provocation to others,
who have an aptness to imitation, so says the Apostle, Your Zeal has provoked
many, 2 Cor. 9.2. Persuade them to present themselves daily before the Lord, to
offer up their souls to him in prayer and praises, Romans 12.1. Instruct them to
make the word of God the rule of their Faith and Practice, Psalm. 119.9. By your
so doing, you may in some good measure attain your end in so good a Design; but
if you should prescribe Mediums, Measures and Rules, for your Children to walk
by, either of Piety or Virtue, and you your selves at the same time do not in
any sense or kind observe them your selves, nor set a good Example before them;
how can you expect if you command them to do it, that they should at all obey
you; for, says the Child, my Parents do thus and thus, why may not I? O know
that the evil Example of Parents hardens their Children: In the way of Virtue
be sure of this, that it is the nature of Children to imitate their Parents in
any thing that they see, know, or observe their Parents to do, either in Vice
or Virtue, therefore you must show unto your Children a Good and Christian like
Example. Some Parents are given so much to debauched Language, that they cannot
forbear it before their Children, many Parents are apt to swear, a Sin that
has neither pleasure nor profit in it, which is so much forbid in the
Scripture, Levit. 5.1. Deuteronomy. 5.11. Zach. 5.3. Mat. 5.34. James 5.12. Some
Parents are given to Lying, Cousening and Cheating, which their Children are
private too, and sensible of, as also to Thieving, and the like: How can such
Men reprove, or rebuke their Children for any of those Evils, which they learn
of them. Parents, you must first reform your selves, and then you may the
better and easier prevail upon your Children. Paul was a good pattern to all
good Parents, Be ye followers of me, says he, 1 Cor. 4.16. even as I am of
Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1. And mark them which walk so as ye have us for an example,
Phil. 3.17. Paul also exhorted Timothy to be an example to Beleivers, in word,
in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in says, in purity, to attend reading,
exhortation and doctrine, 1 Timothy 4.12, 13. Also to improve his gift, 2 Timothy
4.2. Here is an excellent lesson indeed, if all Parents would but learn it,
they would be not only good, but godly patterns for their Children to take
Example by, Prove. 20.7.


16 Direction is, Do not give them any just occasion whereby they are provoked
to sin. 1st. Let not your evil presidents be a block in your Childrens way, for
this will be a grand Occasion. 2dly. Carry your selves kindly to your children
in word and deed: This will be one means to prevent provocation to sin. lastly,
To prevent their provocation to evil, turn to those sixteen Demonstrations at
the beginning of this book, read them, and so learn them, that you may take all
Obstacles out of your childrens way.

18 Direction is, Teach and Instruct your children in the knowledge of the Holy
Scriptures Christ blames the Sadduces because they erred, the cause was,
because they did not know the Scripture, Mat. 22.29. It seems that ignorance of
the Scriptures is the first step to Error; surely Christ did not speak in vain,
when he bid the Jews search the Scriptures. John 5.39. For by them we obtain
the knowledge of Christ: The Bereans were called noble, because they searched
the Scriptures, Acts 17.11. Philip preached out of the Scriptures, Acts 8.32,
35. Apollos is said to be mighty in the Scriptures, Acts 18.24, 28. Paul his
usual manner was to reason out of the Scriptures, Acts 17.2. Romans 1.2. Chapter 4.3.
Chapter 11.2. Paul highly commends Timothy for his knowledge in the Scriptures:
For, says he, they will make thee wise unto Salvation, through faith which is
in Christ Jesus: They are profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction,
for Instruction in Righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect and
thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. Wherewith shall a
young man cleanse his way, (says the Psalmist,) but by taking heed thereunto
according to thy word, Psalm. 119.9. If you would have your children to be
perfect, and furnished to all good works, then teach and instruct them in the
knowledge of the Scriptures.

18 Direction is, You must not set too high an Esteem upon your children, so as
to idolize them: Parents may, as it appears by Christ's words, love their Sons
and Daughters better than they love Christ, Mat. 10.37. it is possible for a man
to idolize any thing; the Apostle calls Covetuousness Idolatry, Colos. 3.5. If
Men shall love Riches so much, as to bow down their Souls, Affections, Wit,
Memory, Judgment, Understanding and all their Faculties to it, what can we call
it less? may we not say, that some make their Honor, their Pleasures of Eating
and Drinking, Phil. 3.19. Hunting and Hawking, Carding and Dicing, and what
not, their God? therefore Parents look to it, that you do not put too high a
Value upon your children; you ought to look up unto him first that gave them
unto you, who can as he did good Job's, take them all away in a moment of Time,
Job 1.19. It seems as though David had too much love for his Son Absalom, whom
God left to murder his Brother Amnon, and to rebel against his Father, 2 Samuel
13.39. Chapter 18.33. The Lord permitted both these, and also suffered him to be
taken away, possibly that David might see the vanity of his too much Toleration
and fond Affection and Indulgence.

19 Direction is, Be often, yea constantly exhorting them to walk in the way of
God, according to the best of your judgment, to the Law and to the Testament,
says Isaiah 8.20. Stand in the way and see, ask for the old paths, where is
the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls, Jer.
6.16. says Samuel, God forbid that I should sin against the Lord, in ceasing
to pray for you, but I will teach you the good and right way, 1 Samuel 12.23.
This is a sure Maxim, that all the Ordinances that our Lord Jesus Christ
appointed his Church to observe, are by his true Church to be uphold, contended
for, Jude 3. Both in matter and manner, and to be truly and rightly maintained
by all the true Servants of Christ, in all ages, by all Persons, in all places,
and at all times, to the end of the World, Mat. 28.20. Who it was that gave men
power to alter the subject of Baptism from a Believer to an Infant, and the
manner of doing of it, from dipping to sprinkling, (except Pope Innocent the
first, and the Milevitan Council) I know not, this I know; that the Cate chism
of the Church of England, confesses that the persons that are to be baptized,
are such as have repentance, whereby they forsake sin, and have Faith, whereby
they steadfastly believe the promise of God made to them in that Sacrament,
(which no Infant of a day, or two, or a week old, could ever perform,) also it
confesses that the manner is by dipping, which they have since altered, and
thus express it, Water, wherein the person is baptized. Also how they come to
alter the Lords Supper from Night to Noon, from breaking the Bread to cutting
of it, and from sitting at a Table to kneeling; I say, how this comes to be
altered, and kneeling one by one, (at Noon) at the Altar, and there to receive
a piece of Bread cut square, I leave the Critics of our age to determine; for
certain, Christ gave no Man power to alter his Sacraments, neither in matter
not form, but they are to continue as they were first instituted to the end of
the World, or till Christ's second coming, 1 Cor. 11.26. It must needs be a
nullity of the Sacraments, if the right matter and manner be wanting; may I be
so bold to say with the Apostle, This is not to eat the Lords Supper, 1 Cor.
11.20. Plain it is, that Paedorantism is not Christ's Ordinance of Baptism. O
it is very dangerous to alter any thing in the worship of God, Prove. 30.6. Deuteronomy.
4.2. Chapter 12.32. Revel. 21.18. Nadab and Abihu did but take common fire, and did
not take it from the Altar, according to the command, Exodus 30.8. and the Lord
slew them, Lev. 10.2. Here they had the right matter, (fire) but only they
missed the right place where they should have taken it: Also Dathan and Abiram,
who were not of that tribe which the Lord appointed to offer incense, but
rebelled against the Lord, and they were swallowed up alive in the Earth, Numb.
16.1, 3. Here was the wrong subject. Moreover, the Lord commanded that the
Altar should be made of unhewed stone, ( Exodus 20.25. Dent. 27.5. Joshua 8.31.)
But Israel sinned in making Altars of Brick, Isa. 65.3. And the Lord was
provoked thereby; their sin was in the false subject; also the Lord commanded
that the Offering should be offered at the door of the Tabernacle, Levit. 17.9.
but they offered in Groves, 2 Kings 23.4, 6, 15. Here they missed the place,
and are charged with great guilt, Isa. 66.4. what shall I say more, they that
add to any of Christ's commands, or diminish from them in any kind, the Lord
will visit them in his anger, Rev. 21.18. therefore teach your children to walk
in the footsteps of the Church, in its primitive Institutions, as near as you
can comprehend and understand it, and as you find it recorded in the
New Testament. And this is our only rule to walk by, both for our children and
our selves.

21 Direction is, Often awakening your Childrens consciences, by stirring them
up to avoid all sin, and to live to God in all holy duties: Conscience is like
a closet, being locked up none sees what is in it, but the Owners conscience
may (like Jonah in the Ship) lie fast asleep in the midst of the greatest
dangers, till it be rouzed up, but being awakened, 'twill show the danger of
their condition: It is the Candle of the Lord, in man, Prove. 20.27. Psalm.
18.28. Job 21.17. While it is shut up none sees its light, but expose it and
then it is splendent, to keep out the cold, and wholesome Diet, is healthful for
the Body, and so to keep sin out of the conscience, and feed it with the
wholesome food of the Word, 1 Pet. 2.2. This is the best Medicine for Souls
health, but withal remember, that conscience (or the light within) is not the
only means of Salvation, if we heed it never so much, (as that fond People
called Quakers do imagine or dote upon) calling Conscience, or the Light
within, [God, Christ, and the Holy Spirit.] Know this, that conscience is a
principle in every man of Knowledge, Wisdom, Justice, and Purity, it is common
to all, all are endowed with it by the Lord, it is like the weight of a clock,
the which being down, all the wheels stop, so conscience lies quiet in man,
till the Lord by his Goodness, Justice, Mercy, or Threatenings of Judgment, and
by his Word and Spirit does ^ouze it up, and then it is in quick motion, and the
Tongue confesses sin to the Lord, the Eyes weep, the Hands wring, the Knees
smite together, the Heart acheth, the Voice cries to the Lord, all parts are
moving, no part can be at ease. 1st. Its Office is, when by knowledge man's
eyes are opened, to cheek and reprove for all sin, John 8.9. 2dly. Being purged
of sin, it will excuse a man that he may look God in the Face through a
Mediator, Acts 23.1. Chap. 24.17. 3dly. Being sanctified, it is said to be
good, such was St. Paul's conscience, which was void of Offense, Acts 24.16.
4thly. It will bear witness to our Actions, both to God and Man, Romans 9.1.
5thly. It will accuse a man when he knows by the word he has not done well,
Romans 2.15. 6thly. Yet know that it may be defiled with sin, Tit. 1.15. 7thly.
Being made truly sensible that man continues in sin, it will as it were fly in
his face, and convict him, John 8.9. 8thly. The power of sin is such, that by
it some have mortified conscience, so that it has lain in them as it were dead,
which the Apostle calls putting away a good conscience, 1 Timothy 1.5. Sin has
such powerful dominion over it, if yielded unto, that it will become altogether
without the sense of feeling of Gods Goodness, Justice, Mercies or Judgments,
having their conscience seared with an hot iron, 1 Timothy 4.2. 9thly. It is of
that uncertain nature in it self, that it may be led and guided in a wrong way,
and yet a man may believe, think, and be persuaded by his conscience that he is
right, when he is in the midst of a Sea of Superstition, Sedition, Errors and
Heresies, 1 Cor. 10.28, 29. 10thly. It is of that lenity and facility to be
wrought upon, that by the grace of God and true Faith in his word, it may be
purged from dead works, Heb. 9.14. 1 Timothy 3.9. Acts 15.9. 11thly. It is
unconstant, sometimes quiet, 1 Pet. 3.4. sometimes stirred and troubled, Job
3.26. sometimes doubtful, Romans 14.23. sometimes erroneous, 1 Timothy 6.21.
sometimes wounded, Prove. 18.14. sometimes evil, Heb. 10.22. and sometimes good,
1 Timothy 1.5. But how this faculty which is so uncertain, unsettled and
unconstant, in man, that may be led to this to day, and to that to morrow, and
a third the next day, can be called God, Christ, or the Holy Spirit, or a sure
Guide, I see not, but shall leave it to the men that refuse the Law and
Testament to be their Guide, to call conscience [or the light within] what they
please, but the day of the general Judgment, after the resurrection of our
Bodies out of the Graves of the Earth, will awaken these Men's consciences, and
testify to them the whole Truth of the matter, whom at present I do fear and
believe that they are now in a wide wilderness of gross and blasphemous Errors
and Heresies: But Parents, for all this you must not neglect to stir your
children up to keep the light within alive, and quicken them in their duties,
so far as it is guided by the Scriptures of Truth, and not one step short or
beyond that.

22. Direction. You must and ought in conscience to god, and love to your
children, make your daily Prayers for them; you are to pray for a blessing on
them in spirituals and temporals, as also by your godly Exhortations,
Informations, and Loving Instructions, together with your protecting care of
them, and bowels of kindness toward them, in all Godly Examples, and it will
be a blessing to them when you are dead and gone. Isaac blessed Jacob, Genesis
27.27. Laban Jacob's Children, Genesis 31.55. Jacob blessed his Sons, Genesis 49.28.
Be as good Patterns to your Children, and the most High will bless both them
and you.

23 Direction. Sweeten all your carriages to your children with true love and
bowels of affection: The Apostle says, Teach your young Women to be sober, and
to love their Children, Tit. 2.4. It seems by this Exhortation, that some
Parents may want love to their natural children. Love is that oil that sets all
the wheels in a free posture and motion, for by it Parents will be moved, to
nourish, educate, instruct, direct, exhort, persuade, dehort, restrain,
protect, correct, and continually pray for, and endeavor after their
conversion, and holy walking before the Lord, and what not.

24 Direction is, As you must pray for them, so you must daily also pray with
them: Be careful for nothing, says the Apostle, but in every thing by prayer
and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your request be made known to God,
Phil. 4.6. Praying always with all prayers and supplications in the spirit, and
watching thereunto with all perseverence and supplication, Ephesians. 6.18. Every
thing is sanctified by the word of God and prayer, 1 Timothy 4.5. Pray
continually, 1 These. 5.17. Pray one for another, James 5.16. Daniel prayed
three times a day, Dan. 6.10. Evening, Morning, and at Noon, I will pray and
cry aloud, says David, Psalm. 55.17. Paul seems to exhort to it, as a family
Exercise, Continue in prayer, Col. 4.2. Though there be no positive rule to go
by in this Gospel dispensation, yet the Lords Prayer intimates to us, that it
is and ought to be our daily Exercise, from these words, Luke 11.3. Give us day
by day our daily Bread: Implying, that this duty should be still performed day
by day, ((...)) panem necessitatis nostrae, Our necessary bread, or every day
bread, which does imply that we should pray with our family daily, and every
day; now this duty sincerely, zealously, and heartily performed, will be one
means to win the hearts of your children, both to love the Lord, and to obey
you in all your just Impositions and lawful Commands.

25 Direction is, Let them not spend their time in Idleness, but bring them up
in some lawful honest calling: As Jacob and his Sons were, Genesis 46.32, 34. Chapter
47.3. (...) of the Root ((...)) Summum Studium diligentiae, assiduitas, sicut
((...)) negotior, facio, opus factum, operor, officium, ministerium, exercisse,
Diligence, Labor, Occupation, Work, Doing, Office, Ministration, are derived
from the Radix, which is translated Trade, implying any kind of Exercise, in
Traffic, Craft, Art, Mystery or Occupation; so Saul and David were of the same
calling, James, John and Andrew were Fishers, Paul a Tent-maker, although he
was bred a great Scholar, at the feet of Gamaliel, Sam. 9.4. Mat. 4.18. Acts
18.3. Chapter 22.3. Know this, that there is a General Command given to Adam, Genesis
3.19. In the sweat of thy brows shall thou eat thy bread; and this extends to
all in him. Sodom is blamed for idleness, Ezekiel. 16.49. Paul labored, 2 These.
3.8. Acts 20.34. and commanded others to labor, 2 These. 3.10, 11, 12. Romans
12.8, 11, 17. Not that I think all must labor with their hands; Ministers work
is hard work, and Paul looked upon his laboring with his hands among his
afflictions; he blames idleness, 1 Timothy 5.13. Heb. 6, 12. Romans 12.11. Solomon,
the wisest of Men, says, by idleness comes poverty, Prove. 10.4. Chapter 28.19.
Eccles. 10.18. Moreover, know that there is abundance of evils attends
idleness, they that are idle are like a standing pool, that hatcheth Toads,
Effets, and other noisome Creatures: So if we are idle, like Sodom, Satan can
bring no temptation to that heart (that suits not with it) but in some sense,
either in the Affection, Action, or Expression, it will recieve it, brood and
hatch it, and so that soul becomes guilty of sin. Moreover, Avoid those
callings, if it be possible, in which there is any great Instigations or
Temptations to Sin; if the Vocation be not honest, that which is gotten by it
will eat like a Canker, James 5.3, 4. And corrupt, wast and consume other
honest gotten Goods, no man can conceive how: He that gets riches and not by
right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at the end shall be a
fool, Jer. 17.11. Says Solomon, Better is a little with righteousness, than
great Revenues without right, Prove. 16.8. A little that a righteous man has,
is better than the riches of many wicked, Psalm. 37.16. That which is
deceitfully gotten ought to be restored, Levit. 6.4. The treasures of the
wicked profit nothing, Prove. 10.2. Wealth gotten by Vanity shall be diminished,
Prove. 13.11. Read Levit. 19.13. 1 Cor. 6.8, 9, 10. Prove. 11.1. Hosea 7.1. Prove.
20.17. Psalm. 10.7, 8. Prove. 12.5. Ezekiel. 22.7, 29. Hesea 12.7. Amos 8.5. Romans
3.13. Prove. 28.8. By these Scriptures you may learn, that there is no eternal
peace, nor profit, nor yet safety, nor true peace of conscience, in getting,
nor in keeping of ill gotten goods, therefore choose an honest Calling, as also
such an one as there is no Temptation to cheating, or drunkenness, nor any
other great and notorious sins, and then be diligent to get an honest Estate
and Livelihood in such a calling, for the Lord does not approve Slothfulness,
nor Idleness, but Labor and Diligence: The counsel of the five men of the
Danites to their Brethren was good, Be net slothful to go up, to enter, to
possess the land, Judges 18.9. The Slothful is Brother to him that is a great
waster, Prove. 18.9. Abundance of Idleness is charged upon Jerusalem, Samaria
and Sodom, as being the first step, the Root, or the Occasion of all other fins
and vices whatsoever, Ezekiel. 16.49. Six days shall thou labor, and do all thy
work, says the Lord, Deuteronomy. 5.13. The hand of the diligent makes rich, Prove.
10.4. Therefore exhort them to be diligent in an honest calling, that Satan may
have no opportunity to tempt them to evil.

26 Direction is, Carry an equal hand to all your Children, do not let one have
all your love, nor do not despise any one of them: Remember, you are the root
from whence the worst sprang, as well as the best; let your good, loving, kind,
mild, just, equal and christian-like Carriage to the worst, be the only means
under God, that may win them to become as excellent in your Affections as the
best beloved: The Lord has put a bit in the mouth of Israel (if I may so call
it) to check them in their unequal carriage and dealings toward their
Children, and therefore he says, The Son of the hated, if he be first born,
shall have a double portion of all that thou have, Deuteronomy. 21.17. As if the Lord
should have said, if they will not love him at all with a natural love, thou
shall upon force, show twice as much love to him thou hate, as thy evil
Nature would show to him that thou love best; to curb and check thee, and
show thee thy Evil, in not loving all thy Children alike: It were good, if all
Parents did make it their prayer with David, That their eyes might behold the
things that are equal, Psalm. 17.2. He that applies his heart to understanding,
shall understand righteousness, judgment, and equity, and every good way, Prove.
2.9. If some of your Children be half-witted, crooked, or deformed, or of a
perverse nature, this is no sufficient argument to withdraw your love from
them; the Lord might suffer these things, on purpose to prove your natural
Affections, that ye sin not, Exodus 20.20. Good David divided the spoil of the
Amalikites equally to those that did not, nor could not fight, as well as to
those that were able and stood battle. 1 Samuel 30.24. Take him in this, for your
pattern, and let your love be to all alike, mind this, that unequal carriage is
one step to the Child's provocation, as I showed you before.

27 Direction is, If you cannot tutor, teach, instruct and educate your
Children in Learning your selves, you must choose one to teach them: If
possible, that is truly religious; Train up a Child in the way he should go,
Prove. 22.6. What they learn when they are young, becomes in the use of it as it
were natural, therefore let them not learn of one that is profane: Children
are like new Vessels, which will always have a Tincture of those things that
are first put in them: We should count them very wicked Parents, that should
instead of food, give their children poison to eat: So likewise, they are much
more wicked, that will knowingly, let their Childrens Souls be suffocated with
the poison of sin, which may be sucked in, by the profaneness of a Wicked
Tutor; the Lord has said, He will cut off Master and Scholar that are wicked,
Malachy 2.12. Good Job is said to have instructed many, Job 4.3. It were well,
if only learned, sober and christian-like, religious Persons, were sound in the
exercise of this weighty Vocation.

28 Directiom is, Allow them those things that are necessary in their
Condition: That it be not a hindrance of their Advancement in Learning, allow
them suitable Books, and other things, so far as your ability will permit, but
let not your Money be bestowed upon Romances, Plays, Profane Histories,
Ballads, and Lying Pamphlets, for they teach Youth Debauchery and Vice, but not
Truth and Piety: Provide (them) things that are honest in the sight of all men,
Romans 12.17.

29 Direction is, Be often visiting them, and endeavor to know their
condition, in what capacity they are, and how they profit in Learning: Here you
must encourage your children, by loving persuasions, or loving and
heart-winning Letters and Invitations, with supplying them with Moneys and such
things as they stand in need of, according to their degree and your own
Abilities, provided they are virtuous; Let ours (says Paul) also learn to
maintain good works, for necessary uses, that they be not unfruitful, Tit.
3.14. As much as if he had said, be diligent in an honest Employment to procure
necessaries both for you and yours.

30 Direction is, You must study their Abilities and natural Condition: If they
are stubborn and will not yield, you must give them due correction, but not in
anger, for then perhaps you will correct them too immoderately, and the child
may then justly think that it is corrected to appease its Parents wrath and
evil passion, more than for the fault it has committed, you should make your
child as sensible of its fault by words to the purpose, as of the smart by the
rod of correction, and then you may bow their stubborn heart, Prove. 22.15. Also
if they be dull and slow of capacity, you must not be too fierce, hasty and
violent upon them, it will hurry them beyond, or out of themselves, that they
will be capable of just nothing at all; if they be wild, you must be fierce,
but if they be mild, you must use all the lenity and mildness that is possible,
Gal. 5.22. The fruit of the spirit is gentleness.

31 Direction is, You must let them have some liberty, not to tie them up
altogether like a Horse in a Mill: At School a quarter of an hours time in the
Forenoon, or Afternoon, refreshes youth, and they will be the better capable
to go through their lesson, when their veins are stirred and brains are
quickened by far, than they are to fit half a day congealed like Momes, it does
but hinder their Learning: So likewise, if you keep them at work from morning
till night when young, it dulls them much, and especially if their Vocation be
matter of art, then a small Journey of a quarter of an hour on an Erand, or
some other little business, will refresh, quicken, and do them abundance of
good. Moreover, you ought to let them have some time to read, and to pray, if
they be capable, Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, 2 Cor. 3.7.
But use not this liberty as an occasion to the flesh, Gal. 5.13.

32 direction is, You must, if it be possible, preserve and increase your
estate, that your children may have something to live on comfortably when you
are dead and gone: Says the Wise Man, A good man leaves an inberitance to his
Childrens children, Prove. 13.22. St. Paul informs us, That the children ought
not to lay up for the parents, but the parents for the children, 2 Cor. 12.14.
But they unparent themselves, who give away their Estates from their children
for want of love: Such are destitute of true grace, and others love their name
better than their children, who give their Estates from their daughters. It is
much better to obey the Lord, and to give your Estates to your own children,
(if Daughters) than to give it to one that is no kin to you, though they be of
your name; more especially, if he should prove wicked that possesses it, it
would be but a grand blot to your name, and a perpetual stain for your wicked
Act: Their inward thoughts is, that their houses shall continue for ever, this
their way is their folly, Psalm. 49.11, 13.

33 Direction is, When your children are capable of holy Duty, you ought to
instruct them to pray with the spirit, and with their understanding, 1 Cor.
14.15. Humane Traditions are not always good, Mat. 15.3. Nor yet a stinted
form, 2 Timothy 3.5.

1st. Stinted Forms made and imposed, seems to put an affront upon the Dignity
and Free Grace of the Almighty, which freely gives the gift of his Holy Spirit
to them that ask him, Luke 11.13. (If they ask in Faith (...) teach them to
pray, John 14. 26. Romans 8.15, 16. Ephesians. 6.18. 1 John 2.27. 2dly. It quenches
the Spirit, contrary to 1 These. 5.19. Man is sometimes sensible of his great
wants, and would pour forth his Soul to the Lord in a very vehement and large
measure and manner: But in a form, his Wants it may be are not expressed, or he
knows not where to get a prayer suitable; and if he does, yet it is a doubt,
whether it agree with his Spirit in all cases and conditions; and before he
has learned it, the through sense of his wants (which formerly he had) are
damped, cold and flat, that now the fiery zeal of his spirit and good desires
are altogether quenched, as fire is quenched by the want of fuel, and the
continual pouring on of water. 3ly. We are commanded, in every thing by prayer
and supplication to let our request be made known to God, Phil. 4.6. Now if
this command to the Church of Philippi do extend to all persons, I am apt to
think that there is not one of an hundred that has a memory to contain forms
of Prayers, that have Words in them suitable to pray for every thing, so that
this Precept cannot extend it self in any sense, to the using of stinted forms
of Prayers, but altogether to the Exercise of Spiritual Prayer: Tutius ex puro
font bibuntur aquae; Waters are drank more safely out of the purest fountain:
4ly. stinted Forms destroy Divine Meditation, and the Study of our Wants and
Conditions: Divine Meditation made David fervent in holy duty, Psalm. 63.6, 7.
119.93, 94. and St. Paul exhorts thereunto, Phil. 4.8. Abimo omnia tecum
peragere, Choose to ponder all things well in thine own mind. 5ly. As our Wants
are various and many, so are the Temptations of Satan, the World and our own
Heats, that it is impossible to have stinted forms, suitable in all conditions
of Man's life, Ephesians. 6.11. Prove. 7.27. 1 John 2.15, 16, 17. Ardua via virtutis,
the way to Virtue is very difficult, painful and perilous. 6ly. Stinted Forms
hinder those that daily use them from seeking after the help of the Spirit in
this holy duty, which the Apostle says, Helps our infirmities with groanings
which cannot be uttered, Romans 8.26. 7ly. Stinted Forms keeps Persons in a lame,
stupid, dead and lukewarm posture; so long as they do continue in the use of
it, they are neither hot nor cold, Revel. 3.15, 16. What the Fruits and
Benefits that forms do conduce, I leave it to those that have received it (if
any have) to declare; but this is certain, that the Letter kills, but it is the
Spirit that gives life, 2 Cor. 3.6. John 3.63. 8ly. By spiritual Prayer we
have access unto the Throne of Grace, Ephesians. 2.18. (...) is, 1st. Accessus.
2ly. Manuductionem. A drawing near, by leading by the hand to God, as Persons
are led or conducted into Kings Courts, but I do not find any promise in all
the Holy Scriptures, that any shall have access to God by reading or saying
over of stinted forms of Prayer. 9ly. There are many good Presidents in
Scripture, that the faithful in all ages have poured out their Souls to the
Lord omnipotent in Spiritual Prayer: It is said, Isaac went out into the field
to meditate, Genesis 24.63. The Margin reads it to pray, agreeing with Ainsworth
in loc. David poured out his soul to the Lord, Psalm. 142.1, to 7. Jehoshephat
was fervent in this duty, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. Hezekiah prayed against Senacherib's
Blasphemy, 2 Kings 19.15. It will be too tedious to set forth one quarter of
the instances of this kind: Take St. Paul for your Example, who says, He will
pray with his Spirit, and with his understanding also, 1 Cor. 14.15. Epaphras
is said to be fervent in this duty, Col. 4.12. 10ly. Spiritual Prayer is
commanded, Praying always with all prayers and supplication in the Spirit,
Ephesians. 6.18. Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by prayer and
suplication let your request be made known to God, Phil. 4.6. I will that men
pray every where, 1 Timothy 2.8. Pray for them that despitefully use you, Mat.
5.44. Luke 6.28. Pray ye the Lord of the Harvest, Mat. 9.38. Pray one for
another, James 5.16. If ye sow to the spirit, ye shall of the Spirit reap life
everlasting, Gal. 6.8.
34 Direction is, Be often minding of them, that they let the love of God in
Christ be the principal Motive upon their Hearts to persuade them to love God
above all, to uphold them from being dashed in pieces upon that rock of Despair
about Personal Election and Reprobation: Know for certain, that as all were
brought into a state of Condemnation by the first Adam's Sin, so all that
believe are in a state of justification by the death of Christ, Romans 5.18. For
God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life. For God sent
not his Son into the World to condemn the World, but that the World through him
might be saved, John 3.16, 17. There is Salvation open to every Soul that
believes, the Lord has taken such care for every man's Salvation. 1st. That he
has commanded the Gospel to be Preached to every Creature, Mark 16.15, 16,
2dly. That Prayers and Supplications be made for all men, 1 Timothy 2.1, to 6.

3dly. The Lord would have all men come to the Knowledge of the Truth, that
they might be Saved, 1 Timothy 2.4. as touching those that are Elected, they are
Elected through the Sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth, 2
These. 2.13. to believe on Christ, is the first step to enjoy the promise of
Eternal Salvation, Heb. 3.9. Revel. 22.14. Heb. 10.36. Jam. 1.25.

2dly. True Faith is the spring of true love to God in Christ, which is also
the true and only ground of our Obedience, Romans 6.17, 18.

3dly. A right Knowledge of Gods love in justification by his Son, is the chief
ground of our love to God, 1 John 4.19.

4thly. True Faith is that hand whereby we receive Christ, and Christ's
Righteousness is the matter or material Cause of our Justification, as Gods
Imputation of it to us is the formal Cause, and Faith (I think I may say
without any blame) may be said to be the Instrumental Cause thereof, but no
procuring Cause or meriting Condition of our Justification, for Faith is in the
Covenant of Grace, as it is the Gift of God, and therefore not a procuring
Condition of it, Romans 3.28. Gal. 2.16. Romans 5.1. Gal. 3.24.

5thly. Preaching the Gospel, through the working of Gods Spirit, is the cause of
Faith, Romans 10.17.

6thly. The love of God in Christ's Death and Resurrection, is the ground and
cause of the Gospels being Preached, 1 Cor. 15.1, to 23.

7thly. The love of God to those he gave to Christ, is the only ground and
cause why he sent his Son to dye, John 3.16, 17. Heb. 2.9. So on the other
hand, Sin is the cause that any are reprobated; it is for the Sin of their
Nature which they love, and for Unbelief, Romans 11.23. all which remains, they
do not, will not hear the Word, so as to set their hearts to ponder on the
same, their understandings are blinded, their wills rebellious, their
affections are carnal, their hearts are immoderately set upon Earthly things,
If any man loves the World, the love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2.15.
Because they believe not the Word of Life, they remain in a state of
Condemnation; the Scripture holds forth, that man's Destruction is of himself,
Mat. 23.37. Hosea 13.9.

35 Direction is, Teach your Children to avoid the Seeing, Hearing, Receiving,
doing or Allowing of those things that are directly prohibited, or forbid in
Scripture. First, You must Teach them the Ten Commandments, recorded in Exodus
20. Deuteronomy. 5. the Lord by these Precepts has prohibited all from gross and
capital Sins, to teach men Morrality, and Divine Adoration and Invocation,
having called him from all Corruption unto the integrity he first Created him
in: And therefore, 1st. Man is denied to have any other object of Divine
Adoration beside his Creator. 2dly. Man must not have the least show of any
kind of Worship, in Expression, Gesture, or Habit, not so much as in affections
too, nor toward any Image, or the likeness of any Creature, Made, Engraven or
Portraied, of any Mass or resemblance whatsoever, no, not so much as to go into
the place where an Idol is, nor to eat of the Meat that has been offered to an
Idol, Acts 15.20.29. Chap. 21.25. keep your selves from Idols, 1 John 5.21.
Flee from Idolatry, 1 Cor. 10.14. Levit. 19.4.


Any thing that is set up in our Hearts, and extolled above our Maker, which we
take all care possible to please our selves in, to admire and set our Chief
Love upon, that we give more Service, Love and Adoration too, then is properly
due to a mere Creature, is by us made an Idol; and though it be no God, yet we
make it a God unto our selves: Fourteen several ways Men may make to themselves
Gods, and Serve, Love, and Adore them more then they do their Creator. And

1st. some make their Bellys their God, they lay up all their time, and spend
their whole Estate to Pamper and feed their Carcass, whose God is their Belly,
and whose glory is in their shame, who mind Earthly things, Phil. 3.12. Feeding
themselves without fear, Jude 12. The iniquity of Sodom was, Pride, and fullness
of Bread, with abuudance of Idleness, Ezekiel. 16.49. Iniquity in the most
strictest sense is Idolatry, ((...)) the house of an Idol, or the house of
Iniquity, Hosea 4.15.17. the Iniquity of Glutony was such an heinous Sin in the
time of the Law, that the Glutton was to be stoned to death, Deuteronomy. 21.20.
Secondly, Some make their riches their God, setting too much love on them, and
trusting in them, as the rich man in the Gospel, who said to his Soul, Eat,
Drink and be Merry, Luke 12.19. St. Paul gives charge to the Rich, that they
trust not in uncertain Riches, 1 Timothy 6.17. and that Covetousness be not once
named by them, Ephesians. 5.3. because it is Idolatry, Col. 3.5. it was well said of
good David, if Riches increase, set not you heart upon them, Psalm. 62.10. for
riches profit not in the day of Wrath, Prove. 11.4. 3dly. Some men love their
Wives, and some Women their Husbands, above Christ; they that so do, Christ
says, are not worthy of him, Matt. 10.37. there ought to be a natural and a
mutual love, but we ought to love our Creator above all, Matt. 22.37. Deuteronomy.
6.5. Luke 10.27. Deuteronomy. 10.12. 4thly. Some love their Farms and Merchandise
above Christ; I have bought a piece of ground, says one, I have bought five
Yoke of Oxen, says another, Luke 14.14. They think their houses shall continue
for ever; they call their lands after their own name, Psalm. 49.11. this their
way is their folly. 5thly. Some men love their Dogs or Horses, better then they
love Christ; as appears, 1st Some men expend hundreds by the year on them.
2dly. They build stately Houses for them. 3dly. They pride up themselves in
them, and always delight in their company, they do not love to walk without
them at their heels. 4thly. They feed them with man's food, and are at the
charge of great fires, and costly Clothing for them, but these very Men will
not admit Christ to have any such Charges bestowed on him at any time; his
Interest, Ministers, and Poor, are slighted by them: Judge ye, whither these
men do not love them more then they love their Maker, or Christ the Savior.


6thly. Some men make their pleasures their God; they will spend whole days and
nights, yea, almost all their Lifetime in Carding and Diceing, and other vain
and foolish Gaming and Pastime, as they call it, and quite forget the Lord
their Maker, Isaiah 51.13. Job 35.10. The Lord accepted not of Isreal's service,
because that in the days of their Fasts they did find pleasure, Isaiah 58.3.
St. James plainly sets out wicked men by this, among other marks to know them
by, that they lived in pleasure, James 5.5. not that they had pleasure now and
then, but it was the Summum bonum of their Life, these shall receive the reward
of unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2.13. it being at best but mere Vanity, Eccl. 2.1.
as Idols are, Isaiah 41.29.

7thly. Some people Idolize their Children.

1st. They lay up almost their whole time upon them. 2dly. They think the Earth
brings forth nothing good enough for them to feed on. 3dly. They bestow great
charges upon Costly and Superfluous Clothing them, and attendance on them.
4thly. They set their whole heart on them, to admire them, quite for getting
that they are but lent them of the Lord, and they are to be brought up in his
Service, Deuteronomy. 6.7. and not to be loved, served, admired, and adored above
their Creator.
8thly Some have innovated Sacraments, and Anathematized them that would not
fall down before them, here the Church of Rome may admire her Multiplication of
Sacraments; Christ has but two Sacraments in his Church, viz. Baptism, and the
Lords Supper; but they have made a large edition, besides altering of
Sacraments.

As First, Baptism, from a Believer to an Infant, from Dipping to Sprinkling:
(or Pouring, as the mincing Reformers would have it.)

Also they altered the Supper from Night to Noon, from breaking the Bread to
putting a melting Wafer into the Mouth, (not only of Men and Women, but of
Children, so soon as they received their Cristendum) all which (if omitted)
must be punished with Anathema's, or Death, as are many of those Vanities which
they enjoin to be believed or done. As, 1st. The Infalibility of their Church.
2dly. Mass. 3dly. Prayer for the Dead Saints. 4thly. Prayer to the dead Saints.
5thly. Transubstantiation. 6thly. Purgatory. 7thly. Auricular Confession.
8thly. Prayer in Latin, with Beads. 9thly. Merrits of Works. 10thly. Denying
the Laity the Cup. 11thly. Absolution and Indulgencies. 12thly. Images.


They that enjoin matters in Religious worship, which Christ has not
appointed, and punish the offenders with Excommunication, Imprisonment, or
Death, (or that which is Ten times worse, viz. the Hellish Inquisition) these
do set up their own inventions, and adore them above their Maker, when we ought
to extol him only that rides upon the Heavens, Psalm. 68.4.

9thly. Great is the Folly and Madness of some, who worship the Image of any
Creature, in which they imagine there is Divine Goodness; as those which adore
the Image of the Virgin Mary, and the like, when we are directly commanded, not
to make to our selves the Image of any thing that is in the Heaven above, or on
the Earth beneath, nor yet to fall down and Worship it, Deuteronomy. 5.8, 9.

10thly. To make to our selves an Image of our Creator, and to fall down to
worship it, is Idolatry in an high degree, yea, great Folly and Vanity, for any
to imagine, that they can make an Image of such an incomprehensible Essence;
Job says, He does great things that we cannot comprehend, Job 37.5, to 8. read
Isaiah 40.12, to 20.

11thly. Some men commit Idolatry by extolling, adoring and worshipping of Men,
such was the evil of the Jews concerning Herod, Acts 12.21, 23. Peter was
afraid that Cornelius would have worshipped him, and therefore, says he, stand
up, I my self am a man, Acts 10.26. The Priests of Jupiter were guilty of this
fact, in that they endeavored to offer a great sacrifice to Barnabas and Paul,
which makes Paul to cry out, Sirs, why do ye these things, we also are men of
like passion with you, Acts 14.13.15.

12thly. It is Idolatry to worship an ^mage^; twice St. John was reprehended
for this fact, in falling down to worship an Angel, Revel. 19.10. Rev. 22.9.

13th. It is Idolatry to worship the Sun, the Moon, or other Planets, or any of
the hosts of Heaven; in the days of that young, good, excellent King, Josiah,
The people of Judah did burn Incense to the Sun, and to the Moon, and to the
Planets, and to all the Hosts of Heaven, 2 Kings 23.5. This good man caused
this their wickedness to cease, he being convinced of the evil of such worship,
by the words of the Book of the Law, as you may read more at large in that
Chapter.

Lastly, Some men do extol their Learning, their Arts, their Acquirements in
knowledge, yea, their gifts, above the giver; saying, can such learned men as
we are Err? when they themselves full well know, that almost all the greatest
Heretics that ever were since the Apostles time, have all been very great
Scholars, these men stretch themselves beyond their due measure, 2 Cor. 10.12,
13. Such ought to labor after true Humility, and that will teach them to extol
the Most High, and to worship and serve him only, that will be Worshipped and
Served in Spirit and in Truth, John 4.24. And to make Learning the Handmaid not
the Mistress.

3dly. You must not take the Name of the Lord in Vain; that is, you must not
express that Sacred Name in vain discourse, but always express it with holy
Fear and Reverence, as is becoming Christianity. An Oath is a Sacred thing in
point of Controversy, to cease strife, Heb. 6.16, 14. being commanded by the
Lord himself, Deutt. 6.19. Chap. 10.20. Jer. 12.16. but all vain Swearing is in
many Scriptures positively forbidden, Amos 8.14. Matt. 5.34. James 5.12. Yea,
he is a Sinner that hears the voice of Swearing and allows of it, Levit.
5.1. by so doing we may partake of others Sins, 1 Timothy 5.22. Therefore have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of Darkness, but rather reprove them,
Ephesians. 5.11. Twelve several ways men may commit this Sin, of taking the Name of
the Lord in vain: As, 1st. When men do Swear when there is no lawful call, nor
cause for an Oath, Ephesians. 4.29. 2dly. In Swearing falsely, Levit. 19.12. 3dly.
In Vowing and not performing, 2 Chronicles 36.13. 4thly. In vain repetitions in
Prayer, Matt. 6.7. 5thly. By Preaching false Doctrine, 2 John, v. 10. 6thly. In
unjust Excommunication, Isaiah 66.5. 7thly. In jesting vainly, Ezekiel. 33.31.
Ephesians. 5.4. 8thly. In abusing the Lords Table, 1 Cor. 11.27.29. 9thly. When the
Mouth and Heart do not agree in performing of Holy Duty, Ezekiel. 33.31. 10thly.
In Hearing, Reading, or Praying without Faith, Romans 14.23. 11thly. In calling
the Lord to witness, without a true sense and Holy Reverence of his Name, 1 Samuel 19. 12thly. When any of the Names, or Titles of God are vainly expressed,
by which the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are understood.


Fourthly, You must not Profane the Sabbath, by needless Labor, or other
exercise that is vain, the Sabbath-Breaker shall surely be put to Death, Exodus
31.14, 15, 16. Ezekiel. 20.22.

Men may break the Sabbath Eighteen several ways: As,

1st. By Sleeping, or lying on Bed too long on Sabbath Day Morning; Solomon
says, The Sluggard desires, and has nothing, Prove. 13.4. The Sabbath Day is
the Harvest-day of the Soul; to sleep in harvest, causes Shame, Prove. 10.5.

This was one of the Sins, for which Israel went into Captivity, Amos, 6.4.

2dly. Some break the Sabbath by Idleness, they will sit still, and neither go
to hear a Sermon, nor yet will they read in the Bible or other Book of
Divinity, by which they might receive some good Instructions, nor will they
Pray, nor use Divine Meditations, or other Holy Duty, Col. 4.2, 3. but their
Idle Soul shall suffer Hunger, Prove. 19.15. Thus says the Lord of Hosts,
consider your ways, Hag. 1.5.

3dly. Some break the Sabbath by employing themselves in their Worldly
Business; Nehemiah Testified against such doings, shut the Gates of Jerusalem
to keep out the Traders, he forced them to keep off till the Sabbath was over,
Nehem. 13.15, to 22. Many will employ themselves secretly on the Sabbath day,
and do that which they are not willing their Neighbor should know of; but some
will Sin more openly, but they do that which the Law will not take hold of them
for their so doing, or choose Morning and Evening for the doing it, that it may
be the easier passed by.

4thly. Some break the Sabbath by gaming, sporting and playing that Day;
Against whom do you Sport your selves? against whom do you make a wide Mouth,
and draw out the Tongue? are ye not Children of Transgressors, and seed of
Falsehood? Isaiah 67.4. Such are Spots and Blemishes in the Church, who Sport
themselves with their own deceiving, 2 Pet. 2.13. Israel is complained of, that
they Sat down to Eat, and to Drink, and rose up to Play, Exodus 32.6. 1 Cor.
10.7.

5thly. Some break the Sabbath by their needless Journies; they that will not
work that day, will spend the whole day to go to such and such a Place, to
visit their Friends, or to do such Worldly Business as may be done by
agreement, or appointment of Business, and the like; from Even to Even shall ye
Celebrate your Sabbath, Levit. 23.33. Then surely the Lord has not given any
time on that day to go any Frivilous Journies, or to do any needless Business.

6thly. Some break the Sabbath by using much vain discourse: That day, they
will gather together in Companies to tell and hear any kind of vain Stories and
Tales, by which comes abundance of evil, yea, and ill will among Neighbors,
Friends and Relations, therefore well might the Lord give it in charge to
Israel, Thou shall not go up and down as a Talebearer, Levit. 19.16. The words
of a Talebearer are as wounds, Prove. 18.8, 26, 22. Therefore meddle not with
him that flattereth with his lips, Prove. 20.19. where there is no Talebearer
the strife cease, Prove. 26.20. In the multitude of words there wants no sin,
Prove. 10.19. Death and Life are in the power of the Tongue, Prove. 18.21. For
every idle word that a man shall speak, he shall give an account in the day of
judgment, Mat. 12.36. Therefore let thy Words be few, Eccles. 5.2. Curb thy
Tongue (with David) as with a bridle, Psalm. 39.1.

7thly. Some Men break the Sabbath by letting their eyes wander after diverse
Objects, and they immediately carry away the heart from the benefit of the Word
preached, that they can have no profit by it; such had need with good Job
resolve to make a Covenant with their eyes, Job 31.1. The Lord complains of
Jerusalem, saying, They have hid their eyes from my Sabbath, Ezekiel. 22.26. But
good David was very careful in this matter, when he prays, O let me not
wander from thy Commandments, Psalm. 119.10.

8thly. Some break the Sabbath by letting their hearts run after the concerns
of this life, while they are under the hearing of the Word; of this sort of
People were they which the Lord complains of, They sit before thee as my
people, and they hear thy words, but they will not do them, for with their
mouth they show much love, but their heart goes after their Covetousness,
Ezekiel. 33.31. They cry. when will the Sabbath be over, that we may sell corn,
Amos 8.5. It Is they that hearken diligently with all their heart that have the
promise, Deuteronomy. 11.13, 14. Chapter 15.5. Jer. 17.24, 25. Deuteronomy. 7.12, 13. But the
Lord complains of the heart-wanderers; says he, how long shall thy vain
thoughts lodge within thee, Jer. 4.14. Therefore keep thine heart with all
diligence, for out of it are the Issues of Life, Prove. 4.23.

9ly. Some break the Sabbath by counting the time of hearing a Burden: Such
were they the Lord exclaims against, saying, When will the New Moon be gone,
that we may sell corn, and when will the Sabbath be over, that we may set forth
wheat, making the Ephah small, and the Shekel great? Amos 8.5. The Word of the
Lord is to them a reproach, they have no delight in it, Jer. 6.10. These do not
take delight in approaching to God, nor do they call the Sabbath a delight,
Isa. 58.2, 13. He that delights in the Law of the Lord is the blessed man,
Psalm. 1.1, 2.

10ly. Some break the Sabbath by their spend it in reading vain Books, that do
rather instigate their vile nature to sin, than to show them the way of
Mortification, Regeneration, and Eternal Life, which is contained in the Holy
Scriptures, which ought to be the only Book which a Christian should read and
study: St. Paul reasoned out of the Scriptures, Acts 17.2. The Bereans are
commended for searching the Scriptures daily, Acts 17.11. The Scripture is the
most profitable Book in the World, 2 Timothy 3.15, to 17. And therefore Christ
bids the Jews search the Scriptures, John 5.39. Yea, the Apostles themselves
were ravished with Christ's expounding of the Scriptures, Luke 24.32. It were
much better that they that have any vain books, would do as the people of
Ephesus did, to burn them, rather than to spend time on the Sabbath day to read
them, or any other time else, Acts 19.19.

11ly. Some break the Sabbath in Drunkenness and Gluttony; many will flock
together in private Alehouses, and other private Houses, and send for such
things as their Hearts lusts after, and fill themselves till they are
overcharged with sufeiting and drunkenness, which ought not to be, Luke 21.34.
And when Sermon is over, they let their Reins run at random, and take their
fill without control of any, till they are under that woe, Isa. 5.11. These
that count it pleasure to riot in the day time, and have their eyes full of
Adultery, and cannot cease from sin, 2 Pet. 2.13, 14. which St. Paul positively
forbids, Romans 13.13.

12ly. Some break the Sabbath in sleeping in the time of Hearing of the Word
preached: These are totally without the sense of their eternal Happiness or
Misery, they are as it were men without Souls, for they have no real Sense nor
Knowledge of their future being, they quite forget that hearing the Word is
their Souls harvest: Learn of the Ant O thou sluggard, which gathers her meat
in the harvest. Prove. 6.6, to 12. If thou do not, thy want shall come on thee
as an armed Man, Prove. 24.34. He that sleeps in harvest, is a Son that
causes shame, Prove. 10.5. Sleepiness discovers a slothful heart, Prove. 19.15.
And too great want, when it is too late, will be the Issue, as in the case of
the five foolish Virgins, Mat. 25.5, 8. Such Sleepers ought to pray with good
David unto the Lord, To enlighten their eyes least they sleep the sleep of
death, Psalm. 13.3. Were these very people but hearing of a Tale told, or any
vain Discourse, it is a great chance but they would be awake enough to laugh at
it, and perhaps to help it forward too; all implying that they have no feeling
in their hearts of a future being, Ephesians. 4.18, 19.

13ly. Some break the Sabbath in letting or forcing of their Children,
Servants, or Cattle, to do any unnecessary business that day: The Lord gave it
in charge that the Children of Israel should do no servile work in the day of
the Feast of unleavened bread, Levit. 23.7, 8. of the wave offering, Levit.
23.21. in the convocation of blowing Trumpets, Levit. 23.25. Numb. 29.1. on the
day of the passover, Numb. 28.18. in the days of fasting, Levit. 23.28. Numb.
29.7. on the week of the Feast of Tabernacles, Numb. 29.12, 35. So they that
are Governors of Families must neither command nor any ways suffer any thing
that are under their power, to break the Sabbath by labor: That which the Lord
allows to be done on the Sabbath, the doing of it is no breach of the
Commandment, as First, Works of Charity. 1st. Laying up for the poor, 1 Cor.
16.2. 2ly. In pulling our Neighbors Cattle out of a pit, Luke 14.5. Mat.
12.11. 3ly. Feeding or watering of Cattle to keep them alive, Luke 13.15. 4ly.
In giving to young children and sick persons, such things as is for their
health and comfort; Christ himself healed on that day, Luke 14.4. Mark 3.3.
John 9.14. Luke 13.14, 16. 5ly. In taking care to preserve the life of mankind,
as in necessary food, in taking pains and care for Women in Travel, in keeping
Children and others from fire and water, and other eminent dangers.
Secondly, In relation to the worship which the Lord appointed: We are to go to
the places of our Christian Assemblies, and return to our own habitations with
such convenient helps and supplies as are necessary, Acts 11.26. Thirdly, In
the defense of our Persons, Estates and Lives against Robbers, and the
Government of our Nation and Country, to keep peace, and to keep out foreign
Enemies, may be done by us on the Sabbath Day, Jericho was taken on the
Sabbath Day, Joshua 6.15, 20. Seven days Israel pitched over against the
Syrians, and on the Seventh Day Israel slew 120000 of the Syrians; but in all
remember that he that did wilfully break the Sabbath was to be put to death,
though I confess that is no law to us Christians, and it serves to show us that
the Jewish Sabbath is not our Sabbath, Exodus 31.15. Numb. 15.32, to 36. But O
do not work nor yet suffer any of thine so to do on the Lords day.


14ly. Some break the Sabbath in neglecting to hear the word: They will sit at
home and sleep, or walk in the fields, or take Physic to prevent the loss of a
working day, which is to rob God to serve our selves, or give themselves over
to some vain exercise, to such the Apostle gives charge, Not to for sake the
Assembling of your selves, as the manner of some is, Heb. 10.25. If you cannot
find the Truth in a public Oratory, you may seek it from House to House, Acts
5.42. For the true Church in the Apostles days met in houses, Romans 16.5. 1 Cor.
16.19. Philemon 2. You are commanded to give all diligence, 2 Pet. 1.10. To
prove all things and hold fast that which is good, 1 These. 5.21. Not to be
slothful in business, but fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord, Romans 12.11.

15ly. Some break the Sabbath in neglecting of the general duties of the day:
When they are off from hearing the word, they omit to pray in their families,
and neglect to instruct their Children and Servants, and do not call them to
read the Scriptures, nor do they reprove, rebuke, or correct them if they sin,
altogether omitting an holy discipline in their families, as keeping of their
Children and Servants close in the attendance on the aforesaid duties, 1 Timothy
3.4. Chap. 4.13.

16ly. Some break the Sabbath in going to false worship, therefore let no man
beguile you of your reward, in a voluntary humility and worshipping of Angels,
Col. 2.18. Here you had need to follow in the footsteps of the Apostles, and
all the primitive Churches in the New Testament, as ye have them for example, 1 Timothy 4.12. Phil. 3.17. 1 These. 1.7, to 10. All that preach any other Doctrine
or Worship, in any other way under the Gospel, than that which was the practice
of the Apostles and first Churches, is for certain, not the true worship, Gal.
1.8. for they that worship the Father must worship him in spirit and Truth,
John 4.24.

17ly. Some have broke the Sabbath in their often persecuting of Christian
Assemblies: Christians ought not to persecute one another, for as all are to
give an account to God for themselves, Romans 14.12. It is but reason, that they
themselves should choose that religion that they believe to be the Truth, The
Tares and the Wheat ought to grow together till the harvest, Mat. 13.30. There
are many reasons why Christians should not persecute one another. As, 1st. The
Apostles and first Churches did not persecute, but often were persecuted, 1
Cor. 4.12. They honestly confessed, that they had no dominion over the Churches
Faith, 2 Cor. 1.24. 2ly. It Is a Mark of a false Church to persecute, Mat.
10.16. Gal. 4.29. 2 Timothy 3.13. 3ly. Christ would not have the Tares rooted out,
least the Wheat should be rooted out with them, Mat. 13.30. 4ly. It is
impossible that I can see with another eyes, or believe with another Faith,
Mark 9.50. 5ly. They that persecute are not infallible, they may err in their
Doctrine as well as in their Discipline, Romans 3.23. 6ly. Christ commanded his
Ministers to teach all Nations, and preach the Gospel to every Creature, Mat.
28.19. Mark 16.16. not a word of Persecution. 7ly. Persecution does make weak
Christians, that in time might have been good Christians, to turn Apostates.
8ly. A Person that is an Heretic is to be excommunicated, not persecuted, but
admonished as a Brother, Tit. 3.10. 2 These. 3.15. 9ly. If you force persons to
do things in religious Worship against the light of their own Consciences, you
force them to sin, Romans 14.13. 10ly. The strong ought to bear with the weak,
Romans 14.1, to 14. 11ly. All Persons ought to observe that good old Rule, viz.
To do to all Men as you would have they should do to you, Mat. 7.12. Luke 6.31.
and then all Persecution would quickly cease. 12ly. The Scripture forbids us to
judge one another in matters of Religion, Mat. 7.1. James 4.12. Romans 2.1, to 3.
If you may not, must not judge one another in matters of Conscience and
Religion, surely you must not persecute them: More especially, to break the
Sabbath in such a wicked act, when that day they are in their religious
Worship, according to the best light of Knowledge that they have recieved of
the Lord, least over and above you should offend one of the little ones that
believe in Christ, and then it were better that a Millstone were hanged about
your neck, and you cast into t^h depth of the Sea, Mat. 18.6. Luke 17.2.


18ly. Some break the Sabbath by common War, burning and destroying of
Villages, Towns and Cities: Christ bids his Disciples pray, that their flight
might not be on the Sabbath Day, Mat. 24.20. Wars and Rumors of Wars is one of
the signs of the last times, Mat. 24.6. How Rapine and Murder, and destruction
of Towns and Cities, is justifiable by the Scripture, I cannot see, and more
especially on the Lord's Day: I must leave it to those that are the cause of the
action to answer for it in the great day of account, and say no more to it, but
remember to keep holy the Sabbath Day, Exodus 20.8.

5ly. You must not disobey your Parents, but do them all Service of Honor,
Luke 18.20.

6ly. Thou must not commit any kind of Murder, either on thy self, as King
Saul, Ahithophel and Judas did, 2 Samuel 17.23. 1 Samuel 31.4, 5. Mat. 27.5. Nor on
any other Person whatsoever; secretly or openly thou must not thirst after the
blood of any Man, Prove. 29.10. No, nor yet if it be possible, let not the blood
of any beast or fowl enter in at thy mouth, as Food, or Drink.

1st. Because the Lord has positively forbid it to be eat in Noah's Time, Genesis
9.4. As though the eating of blood were a grand inducement to move Frail Man to
shed Man's Blood, without a just cause.

2ly. In the Levetical Law, the Lord says, whose eats the blood of any
manner of flesh shall be cut off, Levit. 17.14. Here its use is not allowed,
but to be condemned by an immediate judgment.

3ly. In that first great Council and General Assembly at Jerusalem of the
Apostles, Elders and Brethren, who drew up their result, and confirmed that
Canon by the approbation of the Holy Ghost, Acts 15.28. They sent it to the
Gentiles in Antioch, Syria and Cilicia, by the hands of Paul, Barnabas, Judas
and Silas, four chief Men, the Substance of the Canon or Epistle is recorded in
Acts 15.29. That ye abstain from meats offered to Idols, and from blood, and
from things strangled, and from fornication, from which if ye keep your selves,
ye shall do well. St. James proposing this very Sentence to the Assembly, in
Acts 15.20. The Church at Jerusalem confirmed the Truth of the beforementioned
Canon, and express it verbatim, Acts 21.25. From all which I must conclude,
that the Gentiles under the Gospel may as well commit Fornication as they may
eat blood, or things strangled; the abstaining from all the four are enjoined
in Acts 15.29.

Seventhly, You must not commit Adultery: This Precept forbids all manner of
filthiness of fleshly Vice, as Fornication, Uncleanness, Ephesians. 5.3. Unnatural
Filthiness, Levit. 19.22, 23. Chambering and Wantonness, in Words, Gesture or
Attire, Romans 13.13. Prove. 7.10, to 22. 1 Pet. 2.11. So that Man had need with
good Job make a Covenant with his eyes, Job 31.1. For Christ himself in his
first Sermon, says, He that looks on a Woman to lust after her, he has
committed Adultery with her already in his heart, Mat. 5.28. Incestuous
Marriages, Unjust Divorces, Bigamy, Polygamy, and all Unchastity in Body and
Mind, is not to be allowed nor practiced by any, but every one ought to live in
purity of Life and Conversation, that every one possess his Vessel in
Sanctification and Honor, 1 These. 4.4.

Eighthly, Thou must not steal: That is, Thou must not rob any one of their
Goods, neither publicly, nor yet privately, by cozening nor cheating, by
fraud, nor by force; nay, thou must not rob thy Wife nor Children of their
Dowre nor Birthright, or of that which is given thee to maintain them, to live
comfortably in this world with, which kind of Robbery may be committed many
ways. As, 1ly. By excessive eating, drinking, or in needless or superfluous
costly Apparel, 1 Pet. 3.3. Phil. 4.5. 2ly. By Idleness: By sloth and idleness
a man may wast a considerable estate, and poverty will come on such as an armed
Man, Prove. 24.33, 34. Idleness is the Key of Beggary, and the mother of all
evil, Semper aliquid praesta, ne te ignavum inveniat Diabolus, Be always doing
of something, least Satan find thee idle. 3ly. Thou ruinest thy Family by using
unlawful and excessive Gaming: He that loves Sport shall be a poor man, Prove.
21.17. Nocet empta dolor voluptas; That Pleasure is a grand mischief that is
bought with sorrow. 4ly. Thou may rob thy Family by Suretyship: He that is
Surety for a Stranger shall smart for it, Prove. 11.15. If for thy friend, thou
art snared, Prove. 6.2. Such an one is void of Understanding, Prove. 17.18. Be
not thou one of them that strike hands, or of them that are sureties for debts,
Prove. 22.26. Least thou be forced to pay the whole, and receive no pledge for
reward, Prove. 20.16. Chap. 27.13. 5ly. Thou may rob thy Family by
carelessness; in not looking after thy Servants, thy Scock, thy Wares, thy
Debts, and all other of thy Concerns; The Slothful is Brother to him that is a
great Waster, Prove. 18.9. 6ly. Thou may rob thy Family by giving away thy
Estate from thy Wife and Children, which thing the Lord does not allow, Number.
27.7, to 11. Chap. 36.9. For in so ding thou breakest this Commandment, and
thou have denied the Faith, and art worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. Lastly,
A Man may rob himself and Family, by not allowing of them that which is
necessary, or by taking away from nature that which is its proper due and
right: Such a one is he, that Solomon says bereaveth his soul of Good, Eccles.
4.8. He that robeth himself and family of what is needful, this is vanity and
an evil disease, Eccles. 6.2. Moreover, a man may be said to rob another, 1st.
When he shall sue for that which he has no right at all to, yet by
overpowring, and tedious, vexatious Suits, he wresteth it out of the Defendants
hands, and forces him to yield it up full sore against Equity, Right and
Conscience: Such doings is directly forbid by St. Paul, 1 These. 4.6. 2ly. By
moving of thy Neighbors Landmark, Deuteronomy. 19.14. Chap. 27.17. Prove. 22.28.
Chap. 23.10. 3ly. By marking and keeping of other Men's goods for their own, if
it stray into their Grounds, or any other way come into their Custody, Job
24.2. 4ly. By taking the Goods of Orphans, and never restoring of them, Job
24.3. The Lord has said he will be a swift Witness against such, Mal. 3.5.
5ly. Lending moneys upon Pawns, and extorting of great Interest, or the loss of
their Goods upon demand: Extortioners shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1
Cor. 6.10. 6ly. By keeping those goods for their own that are left in their
hands for the uses of Wills of the deceased, Job. 24.3, to 13. 7ly. By keeping
of the Goods that are loft, and not restoring of them, when they certainly know
who is the right Owner of the same, Levit, 6.4. 8ly. By unjust giving away any
part of another Man's Estate, when it is committed to their Fidelity and
Honesty, which may be many ways done: I will give you one Instance, in the lieu
of many more; Suppose one Man sue another for that which he has no right at
all to, in a short time they do agree to bind themselves in a penalty of one
thousand pounds to stand to the judgment of such a Man, or Men, upon full
hearing, he or thy condemn the innocent person to pay to him that is guilty
(who sued unjustly) one hundred pounds, in this case the Arbitrators or Judges
rob the poor innocent defender of one hundred pounds, besides all his charges,
which he was in his own wrong unjustly forced unto. 9ly. In keeping all or any
part of the wages of a Labourer, or Servants, James 5.4. Deuteronomy. 24.14. 10ly. In
selling less than measure, or less than weight, or using of false weights, and
false measures, Deuteronomy. 15.14, 15. A false balance is an abomination to the
Lord, Prove. 11.1. Lev. 19.36. Prove. 16.11. Chap. 20.10, 23. 11ly. In putting
that to their own use which is given to the use of others, John 12.6. 12ly. By
forestalling Markets, or withholding Corn, keeping it for a great price, when
the poor want Bread, Job 22.7. Job. 24.10. 13ly. By selling bad Goods, colored
over, or counterfeited, and vouching it to be that which is good, nay, the very
best, Prove. 21.6, 7. 14ly. When Men by color of Law shall make the Law as a
Nose of Wax, to turn which way they please, to take away the right of the poor
and innocent, Deuteronomy. 21.9. 15ly. By exposing of other men's goods, on purpose to
be taken away by another; when thou saw a Thief, then thou consentedst with
him, Psalm. 50.18, etc. 16ly. By Embezling or making away of any man's goods that
is committed to thy trust; so then, some rob by violence, others by malicious
craft, some by fraudulent deceit and guile, others secretly convoying away of
Men's Goods, what shall I say more: Let him that has stole steal no more, but
rather let him labor, working with his hands the thing which is good, that he
may have to give to him that needs, Ephesians. 4.28.



Ninthly. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor: This Evil
may be committed fifteen several ways. As, 1st. By lying: It is most certain
that this Sin cannot appear in any, against any, without committing this gross
and capital Sin, or Breach of this commandment, which is so abominable in the
eyes of the Lord, being one of the six things which the Lord does hate, Prove.
6.17. The Devil is the Father of Lies, John 8.44. If thou art a Liar, thou art
a Child of the Devil, Lying lips are abomination to the Lord, Prove. 12.22. Let
thy Prayer be with good David, Deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying lips, and
from a deceitful Tongue, Psalm. 120.2. Remove from me the way of lying, Psalm.
119.29. David abhorred it, so that he says, He that tells Lies shall not
tarry in my sight, Psalm. 101.7. And again, I hate them that regard lying, Psalm.
31.6. I hate and abhor lying, Psalm. 119.163. Ye shall not lie one to another,
Lev. 19.11. nor yet unto the Lord, Acts 5.4. 2ly. This Commandment may be
broken by Deceivers and Hypocrites, some Men are so audacious and impudent,
that they will carry themselves in a fair show of love and friendship to their
Neighbor, but a third person may make a full and ample discovery of their many
cunning ways they have to vilify and reproach their Neighbor, which he that
is faithful dares not to do; but he that is false and deals in hypocrisy is
so foolhardy that he dares to attempt to betray his Neighbor with deceit,
Prove. 14.5, 25. 3ly. This evil may be committed by public slander: Which,
says Solomon, He that utters a slander is a fool, Prove. 10.18. It was one of
the abominable sins of Jerusalem, Ezekiel, 22.9. Take ye heed every one of his
neighbor, and trust ye not in any Brother, for every brother will utterly
supplant, and every Neighbor will walk with slanders, Jer. 9.4. Chap. 7.6.
Micah 7.6. 4ly. This Sin may be committed by reporting of false Reports of thy
Neighbor, Thou shall not receive a false report, Exodus 23.1. Keep thee far
from false matter, Levit. 23.7. I heard the defaming of many, fear on every
side, report, say they, and we will report it. All my Familiars watched for my
halting, saying, peradventure he will be enticed, and we shall prevail against
him, and we shall take our revenge on him, Jer. 20.10. 5ly. This Commandment
may be broken by evil speaking: In the latter days some shall depart from the
Faith, speaking lies in hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. Wandering from house to
house, Tatlers also, and busiebodys, speaking things that they ought not, 1 Timothy 5.13. Keep thy Tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile, Psalm.
34.13. Let Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor, and Evil-speaking be
put away from you, with all Malice, Ephesians. 3.1. Wherefore laying aside all
Malice, and all Guile, and Hypocrisy, and Envies, and all Evil-speakings, 1
Pet. 2.1. 6ly. This Sin may be committed by false Accusations: This is one of
the six things that the Lord hates, Prove. 19.6. A false witness shall perish,
Prove. 21.28. Not false Accusers, Tit. 2.3. as Job's Friends, in whose Answers
there remains Falsehood, Job 4.34. 7ly. This Commandment may be broken by
whispering: Says David, All that hate me whisper together against me, Psalm.
41.7. A froward man sows strife, and a whisperer separateth chief friends,
Prove. 16.28. The words of a whisperer are as wounds, and they go down into the
innermost parts of the belly, Prove. 18.7. It is a right character of a
wicked-man, Romans 1.29. But where no whisper is, the strife cease, Prove.
26.20. 8ly. You may transgress by Backbiting: This sin is so common a fault,
that it is hardly minded, that many have committed this sin by speaking that
which is true behind men's backs, when Truth is spoken to gain favor, or out of
envy, as the Ziphites, 1 Samuel 23.19. And Doeg against David, 1 Samuel 22.9. Or as
the Men that accused Daniel, Dan. 6.13. Neither Truth nor Falsehood ought to be
spoken behind a man's back, if it tend to the hurt or damage of his Good Name,
slandering of his person, or prejudicing of his Estate or Calling, but all such
speaking ought to be with sparingness, vigilance, great care, and true love, 1
Cor. 16.14. 9ly. It may be broken by Scoffing and Jearing: Many a bad man will
deliver a false Testimony against another in this evil manner, though manner
and matter are largely forbid in Scripture, Let no corrupt communication
proceed out of your mouth, Ephesians. 4.29. Col. 3.8. For evil communication
corrupts good manners, 1 Cor. 15.33. Let your yea be yea, and your nay be nay,
Mat. 5.37. Be ye not mockers, Isa. 28.22. nor Scoffers, 2 Pet. 3.3. nor do not
use filthiness, foolish talking nor jesting, Ephesians. 5.4. of this sort of people
David greatly complains, Psalm. 22.7, 8. and Jeremiah, that he was a derision
daily, Jer. 20.7.8. Every one mocked him, and he became the subject of their
song, Lam. 3.14. A good man sits not in the seat of the scornful, Psalm. 1.1.
but his conversation is such as becomes the Gospel of Christ, Phil. 1.27.
10ly. This Commandment is broken by Perjury: Ye shall not swear falsely, Levit.
19.12. I, says the Lord, will be a swift witness against false Swearers, Mal.
3.5. Every one that swears falsely shall be cut off, Zach. 5.3, 4. If any one
make a covenant or vow, and break the same himself, 2 Chronicles. 36.13. Or as
Samson did, by showing Dalilah where his great strength lay, by it he broke his
vow of a Nazarite, Numb. 6.5. Know this, that breaking of Vows and Covenants,
the Scripture calls false swearing, Hosea 10.4. Ezekiel. 17.15, 16. And by perjury
our Lives are not safe, but always in jeopardy; our Liberties are enfringed,
and always in danger, our Estates are not our own, being always subject to the
malice of perjured Persons; besides, it is a grand abuse, and great affront to
the dignity of the Name of the most high, it roots out all moral duty in them
that use it, it undermines the Christian Religion, it greatly abuses the
Magistrate, and condemns justice and mercy, and takes away all security from
all persons, and by it they renounce the divine omnipotency, and bring
themselves under an high degree of Atheism, and the Sentence of Eternal
Punishment, Mal. 3.5. Prove. 6.19. Chap. 19.5. Chap. 21.28. 11ly. It may be
broken by passing of rash and false judgment, Mat. 7.1. We ought to enquire
into all the Circumstances of a matter before we pass Sentence, Deuteronomy. 1.16. and
then to be very sparing, without prejudice, Prove. 27.4. or slander, Psalm.
101.5. Jer. 9.4. 12ly. It may be broken by false Letters forged, Jer. 25.25,
29. by scandalous books, or infamous Libels, or false Records, Ezra 4.19. 13ly.
This Command may be broken by Tatlers, which walk about with Tales, Levit.
19.16. 1 Timothy 5.13. Prove. 11.19. Chap. 18.8. Chap. 20.19. Chap. 26.22. Ezekiel.
22.9. 14ly. It may be broken by those who make it their business privately to
abuse men without a cause, Him that privately slandereth his Nieghbour, him
will I cut off, Psalm. 101.5. 15ly. This Commandment may be broken by
misconstruing of men's words, and giving forth another meaning than they
intended when they spoke them, Job 23.3.


Tenthly, Thou shall not covet, etc. The Root (...) of whence Covetousness is
derived, signifies, 1st. Solent homines avari, He or she that is accustomed to
be greedy. 2ly. Defraudavit, He that takes away the profit of another by
guile. 3ly. Complevit, He that fills up his Desires to the top. 4ly. Scalpo,
To scratch, scrape, to rake together. 5ly. Saucio, To hurt or wound: They that
are covetuous, do not only hurt and wound others whose goods and lives they
take away, but they pierce themselves through with many sorrows, 1 Timothy 16.10.
The Covetous Man is called (...), Luke 16.14. Amator pecuniae, one that loves
Money, Which is the reot of all evil: This Commandment forbids the least motion
of the heart, in consenting to desire after the least thing that is our
Neighbors, without his free consent, as not to ask nor desire any thing that
is not properly ours, is it not out of Covetousness that the Riotous and
Prodigals get what they car, and how, and study how to bestow all on their
concupiscible lusts; and the Usurer extorteth great, excessive interest of the
poor, by its instigations; the Adulterer brayeth after his Neighbors Wife, and
the Landlord raketh his poor industrious Tennant; by it Neighbors trespass one
another, and go to law in hopes of reward; by it Brethren fall out, each one
desiring his Brothers right. It is Covetousness makes Masters and Dames of
Families to be over eager, up early and late, to be too sparing and pinching in
necessary provision for their Families, and to be fierce, mistrustful,
outrageous, harsh, ridged, over-greedy, discontented, often chaffing at, and
chiding with their Children and Servants, oppressing, over-tormiling them,
letting them have no time to serve the Lord, or if they have a little time,
they are so over-wearied with labor, that their bodies and senses are both
asleep, and their sacrifice at best is but blind and lame, Mal. 1.7, 8. It is
covetousness that makes Children and Servants to plot and contrive how they may
pilser, imbezzle, steal, take and dispose of their Fathers and Masters goods,
and employ them to their own use; and it instigates a poor Labouner to take
that many times which is none of his own, which doings teaches his Children to
steal; it is Covetousness that makes some Ministers act like Elie's Sons, 1 Samuel 2.18. sets them to buying and selling of livings, to act Simony, Acts
8.18. And to make Merchandise of Men, 2 Pet. 2.3. And forsake their flock for
larger benefits; and it is covetousness that makes the people to oppress their
Ministers, leaving of them to the cares of this world, and not allowing them a
competent and comfortable maintenance, but let their Wives and Children after
their decease be exposed to want and poverty; by it the Judges judge for
reward, Micah 7.3. Zeph. 3.3. by it the Magistrates cease to do justice, and
grind the face of the poor, Isa. 3.14, 15. and the Lawyer pleads for hire, Ezra
4.4, 5. Nehem. 6.13. by it Causes are mispleaded and delayed, yea, moved from
one Court to another, witnesses are subborned, evidences counterfeited,
writings forged, wills concealed, and the like; by it Statesmen ease
themselves, and lay heavy Burdens on other Men's shoulders, Mat. 23.4. Luke
11.46. It makes the Physician take more care of the Payment of his large Bill
than of his Patients health, and the Soldier to venture his life for Honor and
Plunder, it makes the Mariner and Merchant to venture their all, to the
gaining and obtaining of prizes unjustly, and Stewards, Bailiffs and Officers
of trust, to sacrifice their Oaths and Honesty; it makes Pirates and Thieves to
rob by Sea and Land, and Gamesters to get what they can by cheating; it makes
Tradesmen to lie, deceive, defraud, cousen and cheat, and others to commit all
manner of Villainy, and what not: What shall I say more? Thou shall not covet:
1st. Because these abovesaid Evils, with many more attend it, John 12.6. Josh.
7.21. 2ly. Because there is a woe pronounced against it in these six several
Scriptures, Isa. 5.8. Hab. 2.9. Micah 2.1, 2. Isa. 10.1, 2. Jer. 22.13. Ezekiel.
34.2, 3. 3ly. Because Riches when so gotten bring no peace, but Terror of
Conscience, Ezekiel. 13.10. 4ly. Because they that possess ill gotten goods, it
consumes, none can tell how, James 5.2, 3. 5ly. Because they do not only
consume, but flee away, Prove. 23.5. 6ly. Because Covetousness is Idolatry, Col.
3.5. The Covetous Man makes his riches his God, and places his happiness in his
substance, Luke 12.15, to 20. 7ly. Because (...) is the root of all evil, and
causes them that use it to err from the faith, 1 Timothy 6.10. 8ly. Because the
Lord abhors the Covetous Person, Psalm 10.3. 9ly. Because by hating of
Covetousness our days are prolonged, Prove. 28.16. 10ly. Because no covetous Man
shall inherit the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.10. I shall give you some
Scripture-Marks of a Covetous Man, and pass it. And, 1st. They grasp and take
what they covet, Joshua 7.21. 2ly. They take fields by violence, Micah 2.2.
3ly. Their heart runs after it, Ezekiel. 33.31. Psalm 62.10. 4ly. They take
Bribes, 1 Samuel 8.3. Deuteronomy. 16.19. Exodus 23.8. 5ly. They are greedy of gain,
Prove. 1.19. 6ly. They are never satisfied with silver, Eccles. 5.10. 7ly. They
enlarge their Desires, still crying, Give, Give, Hosea 4.18. Hab. 2.5. 8ly.
They serve unrighteous Mammon, Mat. 6.24. 9ly. They mind earthly things, Phil.
3.19. 10ly. They love the wages of Unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2.15. 11ly. They
withhold more then is meet, Prove. 11.24. 12ly. They give sparing and
grudgingly, 2 Cor. 9.6. 13ly. They trust in their Riches, Prove. 11.2^. 1 Timothy
6.17. 14ly. They think gain to be Godliness, 1 Timothy 6.5. 15ly. They deal falsely
for gain, Jer. 8.10. 16ly. They make Gold their hope, Job 31.24. 17ly. They
keep back part of the Wages of the Labourer, Jer. 22.13. James 5.4. 18ly. They
love abundance with increase, Eccles. 5.10. 19ly. They will shed blood for
gain, Jer. 22.17. Prove. 1.19, 20. 20ly. They oppress the poor, Job 20.19. James
2.6. Eccles. 5.8. 21ly. They shut up the bowels of compassion toward them that
are in need, 1 John 3.17. Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be
content with such things as ye have, Heb. 13.5. yet you may covet earnestly
spiritual gifts, 1 Cor. 12.31. yea, desire and seek after them, 1 Cor. 14.1.




36 Direction is, Be often stirring up your Children to hear the preaching of
the Word, with such diligence, that they may give you a good account of every
Sermon, immediately after the hearing thereof. My son, keep thy Fathers
Commandment, and forsake not the law of thy Mother, bind them continually upon
thy heart, and tie them about thy neck, when thou go it shall lead thee,
when thou sleep it shall keep thee, and when thou wakest it shall talk with
thee, for the Commandment is a lamp, and the law is a light, and reproofs of
instruction are the way of life, Prove. 6.20, to 24. These words which I command
thee this day shall be in thine heart, and thou shall teach them diligently to
thy Children, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. Hear the instruction of thy Father, and be wise,
Prove. 1.8. Chapter 13.1.

37 Direction is, Teach your Children to pay to every one their due, that they
may carry themselves in a civil, sober, decent and Christian manner toward all
people, of all Ranks, Degrees and Qualities whatsoever: Render therefore to all
their dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom
Fear, Honor to whom Honor, Romans 13.7. in honor preferring one another, Romans
12.10. Let the elder that rules well be counted worthy of double honor, 1 Timothy 5.17. Honor all Men, 1 Pet. 2.17. Let as many servants as are under the
yoke, count their Masters worthy of all Honor, 1 Timothy 6.1. And not
irreverently, as some impudent people do, to come into their Fathers, or
Masters presence, yea, into the Kings Courts, in the presence of Magistrates,
without bowing their Bodies, 2 Kings 1.13. 1 Kings 1.16. Genesis 42.6. Genesis 33.6,
7. or so much as uncovering their heads, or wagging their hats, because the
three Children, Dan. 3.21. were cast into the Eurnace with their Hats on, they
think it not lawful to pull off their Hats to any.

1st. The Scripture does not express any thing, when they came into the
presence of the King, whether they were covered or not, but in that time they
did Obeisance one to another, is evident, Dan. 2.46. 6.21. 8.17. 2ly. It does
not appear that they came into the Kings presence covered, for that which is
expressed is a forced thing, they were bound in their Coats, their Hosen, and
their Hats: Their Coats were Mantles, or short kind of Cloaks to keep off the
Sun, and let in the Air to their Bodies, their Hosen were Slops, or long, loose
breeches, their Hats were Turbants, (not one jot like our Hats) they were made
of Linen like a Sash, its use was to tie about their head in bad weather, in
wind and cold to spread and cover all parts of the body, it being as large as a
winding sheet; it being tied about their waste it served for a Girdle. Neither
will Christ's words excuse these Men, which says, How can ye believe, which
receive Honor one of another, John 5.44. There is a vast distance between
Humility and Arrogance, we ought not to be so arrogant as to love and delight
in the honor and praise of men, John 12.43. But we ought to be so humble, as
to render to all persons due honor and respect, 1 Pet. 2.17. Let each esteeem
others better than themselves, Phil. 2.3. Also you must be careful to pay to
every one their just due, they are wicked which borrow and pay not again, Psalm.
37.21. Christ allows the paying of Tribute, Mat. 22.21. pays tribute himself,
and works a Miracle to do it, Mat. 17, to 27.
38 Direction is, Teach your Children to avoid, shun and oppose that general
received and overspreading sinful Doctrine, or Dogmatical Sentiment, viz. That
Justification is by Works; as though the sprinkling of a little Water in a Child's
Face, in the Name of the Deity, did make an unregenerate Sinner a true Convert,
and bring it into a state of justification; which work so acted and done I
could never find, nor yet be informed by any, that Christ or his Apostles did
ever leave any Precept or President for the so doing, and therefore it is an
Innovation of Men, and largely forbidden in the Scriptures, Mat. 15.9. Col.
2.21, 22. Josh. 1.7. Deuteronomy. 12.32. Jer. 7.31. Deuteronomy. 4.2. Jer. 19.5. Prove. 30.6.
Revel. 22.18, 19. Secondly, Is not the blessing in those that were
Excommunicated for Trifles? I do not find in Scripture that any ought to be
Excommunicated, but for Impenitency in notorious and criminal Facts, Mat.
18.17. 2 These. 3.14, 1 Cor. 5.5. 9.13. 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. Let me add here a word
or two concerning Justification. The real causes of Justification are these:
1st. The efficient cause is God's free grace, Romans 3.24. 2ly. The meritorious
cause is the Blood of Christ, Romans 5.9. 3ly. The material cause is Christ's
active and passive obedience, Romans 5.19. 4ly. The formal cause is the
imputation of Christ's righteousness, Romans 4.6. 5ly. The instrumental cause by
which it is applied, is Faith, Romans 5.1. 6ly. The final cause is, 1st. The
glory of God, Romans 5.2. And, 2ly. Man's Salvation, Ephesians. 1.11. but where good
works have any place as a cause of justification, I find not, for they do
certainly flow from Faith, and are the fruits and effects of true Faith. 1st.
What is not of Faith is sin, Romans 14.23. 2ly. Without faith it is impossible to
please God, Heb. 11.6. 3ly. Man is united to Christ by Faith, and by it its
fruits appears, Col. 1.4, 6. 4ly. As Men cannot gather grapes of thorns, or
figgs of thistles, Mat. 7.16. So those works cannot be good that do not spring
from a good root, viz. True Faith and Union with Christ.

39 Direction is, When your Children are come to years, you ought to take care
of their being disposed in Marriage, and that in that seasonable and due time,
as you find their natural inclinations prompt them to and require it.

1st. See and know that they have Natural Love to them that you would marry
them to: If Love be wanting on either side, they are betrayed into a multitude
of evils, which all the Gold of Ophir cannot repair, also see that they choose
such as are equal to their degree and quality, if they are too high above them,
they will be apt to slight them, if below them, to discredit them, if too old,
the love of youth (from such) is apt to vanish; also choose such, if possible,
that truly fear the Lord; Virtue, Piety and Honesty are far better than all the
Carriage, Breeding, Beauty and Riches in this World. Favor is deceitful, and
Beauty is vain, but a woman that fears the Lord, she shall be praised, Prove.
31.30.

40 Direction is, You that have Estates, (as there is few but have little or
much) let me advise and direct you to settle your Estates in good time; as it
is too late to repent when the door of mercy is shut, so many times it is too
late to settle your Estates when you come to a dying bed, you will have enough
to do then to go through that painful Task, more especially if you have not
made your calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. Good Hezekiah was ordered to
set his house in order, Isa. 38.1. Abraham settled his Estate, Genesis 25.5, 6.
The exactest rule that I do find in all the Scripture to this put pose is that
in Deuteronomy. 21.17. Where the Lord says, The eldest shall have a double portion;
that is, If a Man have five Children, he shall divide his Estate into six equal
parts, and the eldest Son shall have two parts, and the other four shall have
each one his equal part, how or when this Law was abrogated Ido not find. I
leave it in all these forty Rules to you, to make the best use of the whole in
your daily practice, as you will answer it in the great day of account. And now
I come to the --

2d. Doct. Which I intend to be very brief in which is, That if Parents have
real affections for their Children, they will use the best means possible to
keep them from sin, they will not provoke them to it: This Subject is enough to
fill a whole Volume.

1st. To show you how many ways people may sin, And 2ly. To set forth who they
are that the Scripture calls Sinners. 3ly. To discover the nature of sin. 4ly.
To let you understand the danger of sin. 5ly. To discover the Remedies, as
Helps against sin. 6ly. To let you know the fruits and effects of sin. 7ly. To
pen down the Scripture-Marks to know a sinner by. 8ly. To show the degrees of
sin. 9ly. To show how the Lord does many times punish for sin in this life as
well as in the life to come. 10ly. To mind you of the benefit that does ensue
by avoiding of sin. But I must leave these things to be amplified in your daily
Meditation, as you read the Scriptures of Truth, and in short give you a reason
or two to prove, that Parents love is manifest by keeping their Children from
sin.
Reason 1. Parents if they know any thing at all, know that sin is a
transgression of the Law, and by it the Lord is offended with them that break
his Commandments, He that keeps the whole Law, and offends in one point, is
guilty of all, James 2.10. Whosoever commits sin, transgresses the Law, for
sin is a transgression of the Law, 1 John 3.4. Parents knowing this, if they
love their Children, they will keep them from sin, if possible.

Reason 2. Parents know that the wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23. not only the
death of the Body, but the second Death, or the eternal depravation of the Soul
from Eternal Happiness, and sentenced to eternal wrath, Mat. 25.41. I pass to
the Third Doctrine, which is,

Doct. 3. That they that are true Christians indeed, have such entire love to
their Childrens Souls, that they will use all means possible to nurture them up
in the right way of the Lord: This Doctrine seems to be one perfect Character
of a Christian, and it naturally arises from the Text, viz. Bring them up in
the nurture and admonition of the Lord. The 1st. Reason is, Because Parents
know, that if the Soul be eternally lost, there is no recovering of it again:
There is a great gulf fixed, Luke 16.26. It Is the eternal decree of the Lord,
that none can pass it, none can enter in when the door is shut, Mat. 25.10. 2d.
Reason is, Because Nurture and Instruction is the way to eternal Life, This is
life eternal to know thee (says Christ) the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom thou have sent, John 17.3. As, 1st. To know him in his Titles, John 1.5,
14, 29, 45, 49, 51. 2ly. To know him in his Nature, Romans 1.3. Acts 13.23. Gal.
4.4. 3ly. To know him in his Attributes, as he is all Wisdom, Justice, Life,
Light, Mercy, Power, Majesty, Immortality, Incomprehensible and Immutable, 1
Cor. 1.24. John 1.4. Mat. 28.18. 1 Timothy 6.16. James 1.17. 4ly. To know Christ
in his Person, in his Excellencies, and in his Offices, as, 1st. King, 1 Timothy
6.15. 2ly. Priest, Heb. 7.21. 3ly. Prophet, Acts 3.22, 23. 5ly. To know him in
his Promises, John 14.16. Mark 10.29, 30. 6ly. To know him in his Conception
and Birth, Mat. 1.20, 25. 7ly. To know him in his Life and Doctrine, Acts
10.38. 8ly. To know him in his Death, 2 Cor 5.15. Heb. 2.9. Romans 5.10. 9ly. To
know him in his Resurrection, Romans 8.11. 1 Cor. 15.14, 20. 10ly. To know him in
his Ascension, John 3.13. Acts 1.11. Ephesians. 4.9, 10. 11ly. To know him in his
Glorification, Mat. 25.31. John 17.5. 12ly. To know him in his infinite and
special Love, John 3.16. Mark 16.15. 13ly. To know him in our hearts by Faith,
Ephesians. 3.17. 2 Cor. 13.5.



This is a Work that is not truly attained to, but by Nurture and wholesome
Instruction, and God's gracious Inspiration, Romans 10.17. And it requires great
labor, diligence and care.

3d. Reason is, Because Nurture and Instruction in the right way of the Lord,
is a thing that is hard to be attained. As, 1st. All the promises of the Gospel
are spiritual, and they that embrace the Gospel must be spiritual men, 1 Pet.
2.5. John 15.19. 2ly. The Doctrine of the Gospel holds forth a state of
self-denial, Luke 14.26. 3ly. The way of truth is a way of of Persecution,
either in word or deed, 2 Timothy 3.12. 4ly. In spiritual Communion all true
Believers must separate from sinners, Jer. 51.6. Isa. 52.11. 2 Cor. 6.17.
Revel. 18.4. John 15.19. 5ly. There is required great diligence, in that there
are so many voices in the World, and all conclude themselves in the truth, that
a person that will find the right way, had need as Paul says, To prove all
things, but let them remember, to hold fast that which is good, 1 These. 5.21.
That Doctrine which is according to the commands of Christ, the practice of the
Apostles, and that in which all the first Churches were constituted must needs
be the truth, and no other.


4th. Reason is, Because, He that believes, and walks in the way of the Lord
with a perfect heart, shall be by Christ made free from the law of sin and
death, Romans 8.2. He that is in Christ is a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. Parents
if they truly love their Children, will endeavor their conversion.

5th. Reason is, Because all the promises in the Gospel do belong to those that
believe and walk uprightly, in the right way of the Lord: All is yours, says
St. Paul, 1 Cor. 3.22. I must not travel any further in this large field, but
pass to the fourth Doctrine, which is,

The Second Part.
Wherein the Duty of Children to God and their Parents is opened.
4th. Doct. That Children ought to yield obedience to all their Parents
commands in the Lord, with boly Reverence, Honor and Zeal.

If in our Text Parents are commanded to bring up their Children, (as it is
plain) in the nurture and admonition of the Lord: Then it is most certain, that
those Children are Rebels if they do not obey, and this Obedience must be
performed according to the best Rule or Rules prescribed in the Holy
Scriptures. And they are these two: First. What they must not do to their
Parents. Secondly, What they must do to and for their Parents. But, First, What
you must not do to your Parents: You must not do any thing that does withdraw
and withhold from them that Honor, or diminish their Dignity, nor that holds
you back from Love, Reverence, Obedience and Thankfulness, or that which does
seem to lessen their Authority. And therefore, 1st. You must not mock at them,
when they command you to do that which is lawful right; you must not scornfully
imitate their words, nor their Gestures, Looks or Carriages, least the Lord be
offended with you, as he was with those Children 2 Kings 2.23. who by two Bears
slew forty two of them Job counts Mockage a great Provocation, Job 17.2. As
Parents are commanded not to provoke their Children, so likewise by Childrens
wicked Carriages Parents may be provoked several ways, as you will find these
Negative Precepts do declare and confirm, The eye that mocketh at his Father,
and dispiseth to obey his Mother, the Ravens of the Valley shall pluck it out,
and the young Eagles shall eat it, Prove. 30.17. Jeremiah enters his complaint
to the Lord, very Pathetically saying, Every one mocketh me, Jer. 20.7. It Is a
grievous sin in the sight of God, and a great offense to Man, therefore do not
use it at all to any, least thou forget thy self, and use it to thy Parents,
and so thou provoke them, and offend the Lord, Job 21.17. 2d. Direction is, You
must not revile or reproach your Parents: He that revileth his Father or Mother
shall surely be put to death, Exodus 21.17. Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor
curse the Rulers of thy People, Exodus 22.28. Margin, Judges, Hebrew, (...) Dijs
non detrahes, Thou shall not report ill against the mighties; that is, they
that have Power and Authority over thee; Magistratus ne exsecrator, Thou shall
not be he that curses the Magistrate, that is, the Powers that rule over thee:
He that wastes his Father, and chaseth away his Mother, is a Son that causes
shame, and brings reproach, Prove. 19.26. St. Paul says, That no Revilers
shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.10. Therefore have a care, and do
not speak slighting and deriding Words to thy Parents, nor of or to any person,
of what Rank, Degree or Quality whatsoever. 3d. Direction is, You must not
curse your Parents: For every one that curses his Father or Mother, shall
surely be put to death, Levit. 20.9. He that curses his Father or Mother, his
lamp shall be put out in obscurity, Prove. 20.20. He that curses his Father or
Mother, let him dye the death, Mat. 15.4. Mark 7.10. Prove. 30.11. As you must
not curse them in words, so you must not curse them so much as in your Hearts
or Thoughts, Eccles. 10.20. For the Lord sees and knows the Heart, and all
its purposes, intents and imaginations; for all things are naked before him
with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.13. 4th. Direction is, You must not set light
by your Parents: Cursed is he that sets light by his Father, or his Mother,
and all the people shall say Amen, Deuteronomy. 27.16. The Prophet Ezekiel reckons it
up among the sins of Jerusalem, in that Catalogue, Ezekiel 22.7. In thee, (says
he) have they set light by Father and Mother: For which sins the Lord was so
much offended, that he threatens them with Captivity and Destruction, Ezekiel.
22.15, 16. The Commandment says, Honor thy Father and thy Mother; But he that
sets light by them, as not to regard them, does no part of Honor to them,
and so by it becomes a Transgressor against God and his Parents. 5th.
Direstion is, You must not despise them when poor or old: Joseph, who was then
a Ruler in Egypt, when his Father came to him, who was old, blind, and poor too
in respect to Joseph, who was the next Man to the King, yet it is said, He
bowed himself with his face to the ground, and fell on his neck, (as their
manner was) and wept, Genesis 46.29. 48.12. So far was Joseph from despising his
Father, though he did sustain him and his in Poverty and Necessity, that he
shows him great Tokens of Honor; says the Wise Man, Hearken to they Father
that begat thee, and despise not thy Mother when she is old, Prove. 23.22. Also
he counts him a Fool that despises his Fathers Instruction, Prove. 15.5. And a
foolish Son despises his Mother, Prove. 15.20. Therefore despise them not, and
be wise. 6th. Direction is, Thou must not stain their Innocence, by thy unjust,
uneven and wicked Walking: The Lord took so much care that Parents should not
be stained with their Childrens sins, that he gives it in charge, that if the
Daughter of a Priest profaned her Father by wheredom, she should be burnt with
fire, Levit. 21.9. They that stain themselves by Murder, shall dye, Dent.
19.13. The rebellious and stubborn are to be stoned to death, Deuteronomy. 21.21.
Therefore walk in Innocence all thy days, Phil. 2.15. 7th. Direction is, Thou
must not smite nor prosecute them: He that smites his Father or his Mother,
shall surely be put to death, Exodus 21.15. in the latter days our Lord
foretold, that the Wickedness of some would be so great, that they would not
only rise up against their Parents, But they would cause them to be ut to
death, Mat. 10.20. Absalom that went about to persecute his Father David, was
hanged in an Oak, as not being fit for Heaven, nor yet to live on Earth, 2 Samuel
18.9. Therefore Children have a care of Rebellion and Persecution, least the
Lord take you away, as he did Absalom. 8th. Direction is, You must not use so
much as any show of revenge, if you think you are wronged: You must not harbor
such a thought in your breast, it may be it is an Instigation of Satan to tempt
you to evil, or what is done is done on purpose to prove you, whether you have
any grace in your Hearts or no. Avenge not your selves, but rather give place
unto wrath, Vengeance is mine (says the Lord) I will repay it, Romans 12.19.
9th. Direction is, You must not use any slighting Expressions, neither of them
nor to them, nor yet slander them: If he that utters a slander is a fool; (as
the Wise Man says) Prove. 10.18. What shall he be counted that is the first
framer thereof: Children should always count their Parents much better than
themselves, which if they did, there would be then no ground to slight and
reproach them; A Wise Son makes a glad Father, Prove. 15.20. Then he that
slighteth, laugheth at, and reproacheth his Parents, is but a fool, and a
Capital Sinner. 10th. Direction is, You must not, (if your Parents are wicked)
follow them in evil Examples: It is recorded to the everlasting shame of many
of the Kings of Israel and Judah, how they followed the evil Examples of their
wicked Parents, 2 Kings 21.4. in Idolatry, and other grievous, crying Sins, as
you may read at large in the two Books of the Kings and Chronicles. 11th.
Direction is, Thou must not steal from thy Parents, nor pourver away their
Goods, nor like the Drone Be, to wast and consume thy Parents Estate: Whosoever
robs his Father or his Mother, and says it is no transgression, the same is
a Companion of a destroyer, Prove. 28.24. He that wastes his Father, and
chaseth away his Mother, is a Son that causes shame, and brings reproach,
Prove. 19.26. Therefore let him that has stole, steal no more, Ephesians. 4.28.
12th. Direction is, Thou must not follow thy Parents in any kind of Sedition,
Heresy, Schism, Superstition, false Doctrine, or Idolatry. If thou know it so
to be by the plain words of Scripture, but thou must avoid it, and persuade thy
Parents to turn from it: In this case it is far better to obey God rather than
Man. Now in the second place I come to the positive Rules, to show you what you
must do: And, 1st. Direction is, Thou must stand in fear of them; this is a
positive command, Ye shall fear every man his Father and his Mother, Levit.
19.3. He that fears them not, will never do them any honor; he that truly
stands in fear of his Parents, how does he seek all means, and use all ways
possible to please them? 2d. Direction is, You must do your best endeavor to
hide your Parents faults. Children may see many gross faults in their Parents,
which they themselves ought not to mind to be such; they ought not to discover
it; but as Shem and Japhet, hide their Fathers nakedness, if possible, Genesis
9.23. It is one way to oblige their Parents to love them at all times, and in
all places. 3d. Direction is, You must do your duty, in all service of honor:
Such is the fifth Commandment, and the first with promise, Ephesians. 6.2. You must
honor them, by showing them all reverence, both in word and carriage, that
occasion, opportunity, time, place, matter and manner does require and permit,
Deuteronomy. 5.16. 4th. Thou must rise up at their presence, when they pass by you,
and bow when you meet them in the Streets, Levit. 19.32. Thou shall rise up
before the hoary head, and honor the face of the old man, and fear thy God. It
is a positive command, King Solomon rose from his Throne to meet Bathsheba his
mother, coming to him, 1 Kings 2.19. Abraham stood up, and bowed himself to the
people of the Land, Genesis 23.7. Haman was greatly offended with Mordecai,
because he did not rise up before him as he passed by, Esther 5.9. Job
expresses his admirable honor in his prosperity, says, The young men saw me,
and hid themselves, and the aged arose and stood up; the Princes refrained
their talking, and the Nobles held their peace, Job 29.8, 9, 10. Her children
rise up and call her blessed, Prove. 31.28. 5th. You must bow at their presence
when they come to you, or you go to them; when you deliver any thing to them,
or take any thing of them; when they speak to you, or you to them; when they
pass by you, or you pass by them. The Sons of the Prophets came to meet Elisha,
and bowed themselves to the ground before him, 2 Kings 2.15. Jacob bowed to
Esau seven times, (after his long exile) Genesis 33.3. Jacob's Hand maidens and
their Children, as also Leah and Rachel, and their Children, when they met
Esau, bowed themselves before him, Genesis 33.6, 7. Joseph bowed to Jacob, Genesis
48.12. David to Saul, 1 Samuel 24.8. Saul to Samuel's Emblem, 1 Samuel 28.14.
Mephibosheth bowed to David, 2 Samuel 9.8. So did Joab, 2 Samuel 14.22. So did
Absalom, 2 Samuel 14.33. Cushi bowed to Joab, 2 Samuel 18.21. Araunah bowed to
David, 2 Samuel 24.20. or Ornan, 1 Chronicles. 21.21. Nathan bowed to David, 1 Kings
1.23. Adonijah bowed to Solomon, 1 Kings 1.53. Solomon bowed himself to his
Mother, 1 Kings 2.19. Joseph's ten brethren bowed themselves to him, Genesis
43.28. What an odious thing is it, to see Children show no respect nor
reverence to their natural Father? and more odious to see Members of Churches
to show no respect nor reverence to their Pastors, who are their Spiritual
Fathers; nay, more, they are Ambassadors of Christ, whose person they
represent, it is a dishonor therefore done to Christ. They that deserve double
honor from them, have perhaps not single honor showed them, but upon every
small occasion of offense, some carry it to them in an irreverent manner, to
their shame, and shame of Religion. The Scripture is very full of civil
Obeisance, of all sorts of persons to their superiors; but those men that
disown the Scriptures to be the Word of God, and the Rule for a Christians
Faith and Practice, may not only deny tribute to whom tribute is due, honor to
whom honor, and fear to whom fear, but any Command, what they please, and deny
that which is recorded, though never so plain in the Holy Scriptures of Truth,
Dan. 10.21. Romans 13.7. 6th. Therefore you must show all Christian-like
reverence to your Parents; true reverence is an inward work of the mind, and
appears in all good deportment and carriage of the body toward them to whom
we show due respect; we ought to behave our selves with all humility and
observance possible, in outward decent behaviout: (Says St. Paul) We have had
fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them reverence, Heb.
12.9. We are commanded to give an answer of the hope that is in us, with
reverence, 1 Pet. 3.15. Mephibosheth fell on his face before David, and did
reverence, 2 Samuel 9.6. And Bathsheba bowed with her face to the earth, and did
reverence to the King, and said, let my lord King David live for ever, 1 Kings
1.31. 1st. She bowed very low. 2dly. She did reverence. 3dly. She gives him his
true Title, (King.) 4thly. She adds his proper name to his Title. 5thly. She
complements him to an high degree, let my Lord King David. 6thly. She shows how
much she honors and reverences him, by desiring his perpetual being; Vivat Rex
in seculum: How can the Enthusiasts of our time read this place (and such like
Scriptures) but that they must conclude complemental acts and expressions are
lawful; since it is there recorded, either for her praise, or our example, as
appears by the Apostles words, 2 Timothy 3.16. Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him
Lord, 1 Pet. 3.6. If we ought to rise up before our betters, and bow to them,
as is evident, then to show our reverence, as the manner of our Country is, to
stand uncovered, to give them their proper Titles, as Sir, And it please your
Worship, your Honor, your Highness, your Majesty, or the like; to stop, and do
obeisance to any of our Superiors when we meet them, and to give them the
upper hand in standing, sitting or walking; to be humble and tractible to and
before all our betters, in all moderate and civil, complimental Ceremonies;
then, as the Apostle says, we do show honor to whom honor is due, fear to
whom fear, Romans 13.7. in so doing, we do our civil duty in part, each one in
our proper places. 7th. You must help them in such their necessities, and
afford all accommodations you are able, as they stand in need of; says St.
Paul, If any Widows have Children or Nephews, let them learn to show pity at
home, and to requite their Parents, 1 Timothy 5.4. For it is good and acceptable
to God. This rule good Joseph observes to his poor, distressed Father, in the
midst of famine, though he himself were the second man in Egypt, Genesis 47.12.
Thou ought to nourish thy Parents when they are poor. First, Because of
them, next to God, thou had thy first being. Secondly, They preserved and
nourished thee, when thou could not help thy self. 3. Their pains, fears,
charges and cares for thee were many and great, in bringing thee up, for which
thou can never recompense them enough. Our Lord greatly blames them that did
what they did to their Parents, by way of gift, and not out of filial duty or
love, as being transgressors of the fifth Commandment, Matthew. 15.5, 6. If those
proud Pharisees are charged with rejecting of the Commandment of God, by
relieving their Parents by way of gift, and not by way of duty, or out of
filial obedience, what may be said of those who when their Parents are poor,
low, aged, weak, and not able to subsist, that do not supply their wants, and
relieve them; but instead thereof, look over them, and by them, and will
neither send them relief, nor come at them at all, to assist their destitute,
aged, and impotent, poor, distressed Parents, in the midst of great extremity
and need? No pretense or excuse (except impotency and poverty) can absolve or
acquit any from their duty in this kind; nor yet properly that neither.
Ainsworth mentions an Hebrew Commentary, called Chazkuni; We read, (says he)
Honor the Lord with thy substance, Prove. 3.9. Honor thy Father and thy
Mother, Exodus 20.12. The Lord is honored if thou relieve thy Father and thy
Mother. If thou have nothing, thou art bound to beg for them in their great
need. 4thly. They take care to seek after thee when thou go astray, or art
lost, 1 Samuel 9.5. 5thly. To be dutiful is a comely ornament to Christianity,
and as Chains about thy neck, Prove. 1.9. 6thly. The Lord has very often
inflicted immediate Judgments on those that rebel against their Parents, as on
Absalom, 2 Samuel 14.9. Hophni and Phinchas, 1 Samuel 2.25. the Forty two
Children, 2 Kings 2.25. 7thly. Doing thy duty to thy Parents is well pleasing
lunto the Lord, Coloss. 3.20. 8thly. The Lord reproves Isreal's rebellion, by
the good example of the Rechabites obedience to their Parents, Jer. 35. the
whole Chapter. 9thly. This duty is a righteous thing, Ephesians. 6.1, 2. 10thly.
Children ought to follow the good example of all such as have been in the
exercise of this duty, as there be many Examples in Scripture. 11thly. This
duty is commanded, Exodus 20.12. Deuteronomy. 5.16. 12thly. Those that are faithful in
this duty are under a promise, Ephesians. 6.2. Let these Twelve Reasons, though out
of due place, suffice for the proof and confirmation of the Doctrine.
8th. You must obey their just and lawful Commands, says the Apostle St. Paul,
Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is right, Ephesians. 6.1. Children
obey your Parents in all things, for this is well pleasing to the Lord, Coloss.
3.10. If any Parents be so wicked, as to command their Children to lie, steal,
cousin and cheat, or do any thing that is forbidden by the Lord in his Word,
they must not obey their Parents in that, for the word all things, intends all
things that the Scriptures, or rather God, allows as lawful for the Child to
obey his Parents in; but here mind to do it in modesty, meekness, and a good
and clear Conscience; as in fear to offend the Lord, and disobey his Word, and
not to act in stubbornness and rebellion against thy Parents, for this is not
well-pleasing to the Lord, nor approved of by men, and was of old to be
punished by death, Deuteronomy. 21.21. Isaac obeyed Abraham, in going to the place of
sacrifice, Genesis 22.5. Jacob obeyed his Father and Mother, and fled from Esau to
Padam Aram, Genesis 28.7. Joseph obeyed Jacobs command, in visiting his brethren,
when they sold him into Egypt, Genesis 37.14. Israel is reproved by the good
Example of the Rechabites, in obeying their Fathers, Jer. 35.8. to the 14th.
Christ our good and holy Pattern, is said, after he was twelve years of age, to
be subject to his Parents, Luke 2.42.51. The Scripture is full of Examples of
this kind, as Moses, Samuel, Saul, David, Jephthah's Daughter, Esther, and many
others, who were all obedient to their Parents, 1 Samuel 17.17. Exodus 18.24.
Judges 11.26. 1 Samuel 1.28. 9th. You must have an honorable esteem of your
Parents, in hearty affections, actions and words; you must abhor and detest the
doing of any thing that you may dishonor, vex, grieve or disquiet your Parents
by; also, you must carry your selves with an aw and respect, and must most
gladly do those things in kindness and hearty affections, which may bring much
joy, peace and comfort to your parents; since you can never pay that debt which
is due to them for their care and pains for you when young; you must call upon
the Lord for his help, both for your Pareuts in their need, and for your
selves, for assistance, to supply their wants; In every thing by prayer and
supplication, with thanksgiving, let your request be made known to God, Phil.
4.6. 10th. You must be ready and willing to suffer any hardship, travel,
service and care for your Parents, without grieving, murmuring and repining:
What a great and good pattern was that good Woman Ruth, in this case, who said
to Naomi, (though but a Mother-in-Law) Whither thou go I will go, and where
thou lodgest I will lodge; thy People shall be my People, and thy God my God;
where thou die I will die, and there will I be buried, Ruth 1, 16, 17. Here
is a lesson of Honor indeed, though but a poor, alienated, Moabitish young
Woman; and the Lord remembered her, and was always with her in all her
undertakings, Ruth 2.8. chap. 4.13. 11th. Be often speaking in their praise,
and taking your Parents parts in all companies and places. The Children of
Israel spoke very honorably to Joseph of their Father, Genesis 43.28. and 44.24.
The Daughters of Zelophehad spoke in their Fathers praise, justifying him, that
he did not cause others to sin, as Korah did; but had only his own sins to
answer for, Numb. 27.3. Children had better not to speak at all concerning
their Parents words or deeds, if they cannot speak in the behalf of their
Parents Praise, to augment their dignity or honor; let thy parents be either
godly or wicked, thou must not (...) diminish one jot or tittle of their
honor, for they are thy Parents still, let them be never so vile; but still
labor to let thy good and Christian-like carriage be that which may win their
hearts to Christ, and then how happy will it be for Parents if they be
converted by the fruit of their own bowels. 12th. Let thy Parents be thy
chiefest joy and glory in this World, Childrens Children are the crown of old
men, and the glory of Children are their Fathers, Prove. 17.6. Her children call
her blessed, Prove. 31.28. What should we joy in, and talk most of, but of the
original fountain from whence we sprang? and this will put us in mind of our
duty to God also who made us, and gives us our life and being, and all things
necessary for this life, and that which is to come, Acts 17.26, 28. 13th.
Hearken to your Parents instruction, and observe to do and believe, so far as
it is agreeable to the Scripture; it is said, Jehoash did that which was right
in the sight of the Lord all his days, wherein Jehoiada the Priest instructed
him, 2 Kings 12.2. A wise Son hears his Fathers instruction, Prove. 13.1. My
Son hear thou the instruction of thy Father, and forsake not the law of thy
Mother, Prove. 1.8. He is a fool that despises his Fathers instruction, Prove.
15.5. Reproofs of instruction are the way of life, Prove. 6.23. Give instruction
to a wise man, and he will be yet wiser, Prove. 9.9. If thy Parents do instruct
thee in the Articles of the Christian Faith, as it is expressed in the Nicene
Creed, all which is confirmed by plain Scripture, as you may observe in this
ensuing Discourse, thou must obey.





Article the First.
I Believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, and of
all things visible and invisible, (...) Jehovah: An eternal Self: Being, a most
powerful and Spiritual Substance, the Maker and Preserver of all things in
Heaven above, and in the Earth beneath, substantial and sublunary, visible and
invisible: Who was, is, and ever will be; omnipotent, omniscient, omniparent
and omnipresent; who is incomparable, invisible, incomprehensible,
unchangeable, immutable, infallible and immortal; who has all Strength,
Wisdom, Understanding, Justice, Life, Will, Power and Majesty; whose Judgments
and Wrath is terrible, and Love unspeakable, his Favor and Mercy unmeasurable,
glorious in Holiness; out Defense in Trouble and Adversity; who is all
Goodness, Support, and Everlasting Love, ((...)) Blessed for ever, Amen, etc.
His most Sacred Name must not be expressed at all in common Discourse, Deuteronomy.
5.11. It must be used with as great care and reverence as possible, in Prayer,
and other Divine Service, for fear of using it as a vain repetition, which
Christ positively forbids, Matt. 6.7. and when he prescribes the manner of
prayer, he seems to forbid the use of that sacred Name: First, By saying, When
ye pray, say after this manner: (Our. father.) Secondly, By teaching them to
sanctify his holy Name: (Hallowed be thy Name.) Thirdly, By his omitting that
Sacred Name in all that prayer of Direction; and using only the pronoun ((...))
thy and thine, four times in that short, but ample Petition and Direction;
fignifying the eternal Being by it. Surely then Preachers ought to be very
cautious how they express that Sacred Name, with too often repeating it in many
sentences in their Sermons, when they have so done and broken the third
Commandment by it; their Doctrine would have been much better set forth by
other expressions, and much better accepted by an Auditory, whose hearts are in
dread to hear that Sacred Name so numerously and needlessly expressed. And in
the Confession of our Faith we ought to use it with great Reverence and Zeal.
Oh! how should our hearts dread and fear when we speak or hear that holy Name
mentioned, by which the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit is signified. The
Jews hold, it is not lawful to use the Name ((...)) at all, but by the Priest
in the Sanctuary only; and that but once a year they use the Title ((...))
Lord, to express it by; yea, they are so very careful in their Names of
Numbers, when they express the number fifteen, which is ((...)) one of the
Names of the Most High, they always use ((...)) which being nine and six is
fifteen, as is seen in the numbers of the Chapters and Verses in the Hebrew
Bibles. Coals, in his Expositor, says, JEHOVAH, is never pronounced by the
Jews on pain of death, only by the Priest in the Sanctum Sanctorum, and that on
the Day of Expiation, being but once a year. Most Sacred should the Name of the
infinite Being be, whose Residence is in Eternal Glory, who is continually
Adored by the Celestial Angels, who is worshipped daily by Terrestial
Creatures, Men; and wicked, infernal Spirits fear and tremble at his most
terrible Majesty; yea, the Beasts of the Field dread when they hear his voice
in the Clouds; and no Creature but is under the dread of Divine Power, which is
the true object of our Faith, To us there is but one God, the Father, of whom
are all things, 1 Cor. 8 6. Psalm. 86.10. Isaiah 37.16. 44.8. 45.22. By him
were all things created that are in Heaven, and that are in the earth, visible
and invisible, Col. 1.16.


Article the second.
And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, begotten or the
father before all Worlds, etc. In the beginning was the word, and the word was
with God, and the word was God, John 1.1. And the word was made flesh, and
dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of
the Father) full of grace and truth, John 1.14. Jesus said unto them, Verily,
Verily, I say unto you, before, Abraham was, I am, John 8.58. And now, O
Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with
thee before the world was, John 17.5. He had on his Vesture and on his Thigh a
Name written, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Revel. 19.16. 1 Timothy 6.16. Rev.
17.14. Then spoke Jesus unto them, saying, I am the light of the World, John
8.12. He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the World knew
him not, John 1.10. I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world,
John 16.28. Read Heb. 1.1, to 13. and Col. 1.14, to 18. For in him, (viz.
Christ,) dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2.9. The
Scripture is very full and clear against the ancient Ebionetes, Marcionists,
and Arrian, and Socinian Heretics, which once abounded, and too much spread it
self in these days, to the great trouble of the Churches here in England, and
in these parts of the World, which said detestable errors lead men to deny the
eternal Divinity of Christ, as though Christ were not the most high God, and of
the same Essence with the Father, according to his deity, but a mere Creature.

Article the third.
Who for us Men, and for our Salvation, descended from the Heavens, and was
incarnate of the Virgin Mary, by the Holy Ghost, and became Man, etc. For I
(says Christ) came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of
him that sent me, John 6.38. Ephesians. 4.10. And the Angel answered, and said unto
her, the Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest shall
overshaddow thee, therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee
shall be called the Son of God, Luke 1.35. In this was manifested the love of
God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world,
that we might believe through him, 1 John 4.9. Here 1st. He is said to be
begotten, John 1.14, 18. 3.16, 18. 2ly. To be born of the Virgin Mary: Now when
Jesus was born, Herod demanded of the chief Priests and Scribes, where Christ
should be born, and they said in Bethlehem of Judea, Mat. 2.1, 4, 5. And unto
you is born this day, in the City of David, a Savior, which is Christ the
Lord, Luke 2.11. To this end (says Christ) was I born, to bear witness unto
the truth, John 18.37. 3ly. Christ had a Body: A body have thou prepared me,
Heb. 10.5. The Women beheld the Sepulcher, and how his Body was laid, Luke
23.55. Joseph went to Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus, Mat. 27.58. Mark
15.43. Luke 23.52. and he gave the body to Joseph, Mark 15.45. Mat. 27.58, 59.
4ly. Christ is said to have flesh: for as much then as Children are partakers
of flesh and blood, be himself likewise took part of he same, Heb. 2.14. Handle
me, and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me to have, Luke
24.39. He was of the seed of David, according to the flesh, Acts 2.30. Romans
1.3. Of whom concerning the flesh Christ came, Romans 9.5. Every spirit that
confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God, 1 John 4.2. 5ly.
Christ had also blood: One of the Soldiers with a spear peirced his fide, and
forthwith came there out blood and water, John 19.24. Thou have redeemed us
unto God by thy blood, Revel. 5.9. We have redemption through his blood, Col.
1.14. You are redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.19. And the
blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. Ye are made nigh by the
blood of Christ, Ephesians. 2.13. Heb. 9.14. Being justified by his blood, we shall
be saved, Romans 5.9. 6ly And as he had flesh and blood, so also bones: These
things were done, that the Scripture might be fulfilled; a bone of him shall
not be broken, John 19.36. Handle me, a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye
see me have, Luke 24.39. 7ly. Christ died: Jesus when he had cried again with a
loud voice, yielded up the Ghost, Mat. 27.50. Mark 16.37. Luke 23.46. John
19.30. To this end Christ died, Romans 14.9.15. Christ died for our sins,
according to the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15.3. And through thy knowledge shall thy
weak brother perish, for whom Christ died, 1 Cor. 8.11. If righteousness came
by the law, Christ is dead in vain, Gal. 2.21. And that Christ died for all, 2
Cor. 5.15. Christ humbled himself, and became obedient to death, even the death
of the Cross, Phil. 2.8. In due time Christ died for the ungodly, Romans 5.6.
While we were sinners, Christ died for us, Romans 5.8. 8ly. Christ was buried:
Joseph brought fine Linen, and took him down, and wrapped him in the linen,
and laid him in a sepulcher which was hewn out of a rock, and rolled a stone
unto the door of the Sepulcher, Mark 15.46. And that Christ was buried, and he
rose again the third day according to the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15.4. Being buried
with Christ in baptism, Col. 2.12. Romans 6.4. How are the Valentinian and
Utichen Heresies detected; it is plain Christ was begotten, born, had a body of
flesh, blood and bones, died, and was buried, which body, etc. he received of
the Virgin Mary, being complete and perfect, God-man in one person, Heaven and
Earth being as it were united in one person, in an Hypostatical Union, by which
divine and miraculous Union all the Elect are come to obtaining Union with God,
and Eternal Salvation.


Article the Fourth.
Crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate, suffered and was buried, etc.
Pilate said unto them, what shall I do then with Jesus, which is called Christ?
they all said unto him, let him be crucified, and he delivered him to be
crucified, Mat. 27.22, 26. Let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God
has made that same Jesus whom ye have crucified both Lord and Christ, Acts
2.36. 1 Cor. 1.23. Acts 4.10. 1 Cor. 2.2. Then took they the body of Jesus, and
wound it in Linen Clothes with the spices, as the manner of the Jews is to
bury, and laid it in a new Sepulcher, John 19.40, 41.

Article the Fifth.
And rose again the third day, according to the Scriptures, etc. -- 1 Cor.
15.4. We have testified of God, that he raised up Christ, 1 Cor. 15.15. But now
is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that sleep,
1 Cor. 15.20. And he said unto them, thus it is written, and thus it behooves
Christ to suffer, and to rise again the third day from the dead, Luke 24.46. He
has begotten us again to a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ
from the dead, 1 Per. 1.3. Christ the first fruits from the dead, Col. 1.18.
Christ the first begotten of the dead, Rev. 1.5. That Christ must needs have
suffered, and risen again from the dead, Acts 17.3. That Christ should be the
first that should arise from the dead, Acts 26.23. Christ being risen from the
dead, died no more, Romans 6.9. He that raised up Christ from the dead, shall
also quicken your mortal Bodies, Romans 8.11. To this end Christ both died and
rose again, Romans 14.9. Gal. 1.1. He spoke of the resurrection of Christ, that
his Soul was not left in hell, Acts 2.31. It is Christ that died, yea rather,
that is risen again, Romans 8.34. 10.9. According to the working of his mighty
power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, Ephesians.
1.19, 20. Remember that Jesus Christ, of the seed of David, was raised from the
dead, according to my Gospel, 2 Timothy 2.8.

Article the Sixth.
And ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of the Father, etc. So
then after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up into Heaven, and
sat on the right hand of God, Mark 16.19. And it came to pass, while he blessed
them, he was parted from them, and carried up into Heaven, Luke 24.51. While
they beheld, he was taken up, and the cloud received him out of their sight,
Acts 1.9. Who is even at the right hand of God, Romans 8.34. Ephesians. 1.20. If ye be
risen with Christ, seek those things that are above, where Christ fitteth at
the right hand of God, Col. 3.1. Heb. 1.3, 8. But this man after he had offered
one sacrifice for sins, for ever sat down on the right hand of God, Heb. 10.12.
12.2. (Christ) who is gone into Heaven, and is on the right hand of God, 1 Pet.
3.22. Acts 2.33. a Prince and a Savior, Acts 5.31.

Article the Seventh.
And is to come again in Glory, to judge the living and the drad, of whose
Kingdom there shall be no end, etc. If I go and prepare a place for you, I will
come again, John 14.3, 28. This same Jesus which is taken up into heaven, shall
so come in like manner, as ye have seen him go into Heaven, Acts 1.11. For the
son of man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his Angels, Mat. 16.27.
And they shall see the son of man coming in the clouds of Heaven, with power
and great glory, Mat. 24.30. Mark 13.26. Luke 21.27. It is he which was
ordained of God, to be judge of quick and dead, Acts 10.42. I charge thee
therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and
dead at his appearing and his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.1. Whose Kingdom is an
everlasting Kingdom, Dan. 7.27. The kingdoms of this world are become the
kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever,
Rev. 11.15.

Article the Eighth.
And in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and Giver of Life, who proceeds from the
Father and the Son, who with the Father and the Son together is worshipped and
glorified, who spoke by the Prophets, etc. But the Comforter, which is the Holy
Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things,
John 14.26. It is the Spirit that quickens, John 6.63. The Father, the Word,
and the Holy Ghost, these three are one, 1 John 5.7. Holy Men of God spoke as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21.

Article the Ninth.
And I believe (...) one Catholic and Apostolic Church. My Dove, my undefiled
is but one, Cant. 6.9. Other sheep have I, which are not of this Fold, them
also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one fold,
and one Shepherd, John 10.16. But that also he should gather together in one
the Children of God that were scattered abroad, John 11.52. After this I
beheld, and lo a great multitude which no man could number, of all Nations, and
Kindreds, and People, and Tongues, stood before the Throne, and before the
Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands, Rev. 7.2. The Church
is ((...)) universal, which comprehends all People that truly fear the Lord
at all times, and that walk in his ways, in all places, of what Sex, Age, or
Generation, from the beginning of the World to the End thereof.

Article the Tenth.
I Confess one Baptism for remission of sin: One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism,
Ephesians. 4.5. Go ye therefore, teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19. He that
believes and is baptized slall be saved, Mark 16.16. Repent and be baptized
every one of you, for the remission of sins, Acts 2.38. Philip and the Eunuch
went both down into the water, and he baptized him, Acts 8.38. Jesus when he
was baptized, went up straightway out of the water, Mat. 3.16. And straightway
coming up out of the water, he saw the Heavens opened, Mark 1.10. John also was
baptizing in Enon, near Salim, because there was much water there, John 3.23.
But when they believed Philips preaching, they were baptized, both Men and
Women, Acts 8.12. This one Baptism, the right manner of doing it, is by burying
the body in the water, Romans 6.4. Col. 2.12. Ananias said to Paul, arise, and be
baptized, and wash away thy sins, Acts 22.16. The Greek Word ((...)) is derived
of ((...)) mergo, immergo, tingo quod fit immergendo, To dip, plunge or
overwhelm: To dip in that manner as they do that dye Cloth or Colors, those
Men well know that this is the native and proper signification of (...), that
do understand Scapula or Stephanus; and Leigh in his Critica Sacra, in his
sixth Demonstration of the Word (...), says, the native and proper
signisication of it is, to dip into the water, or to plunge under water, and in
his Supplement, (...) signifies properly mergo, immergo, to drown or sink in
the waters, to dip, to overwhelm, to plunge. Mr. Symson in his Greek Lexicon,
seems to be willing to pass by the Native and Proper Signification of the Word
(...), but yet is forced to give it a double stroke with his Pen, and
confesses the Word, though it be derived from (...), to dip or plunge into the
water, and fignifieth primarily such a kind of washing, as is used in Bucks,
where linen is plunged and dipped; yet it is taken more largely for any kind
of washing, rinsing or cleansing; surely as Christ has but one Baptism in it,
he has but one right subject, not an (infidel) infant with a believer. If
Christ had intended that Infants should have been members of the Gospel Church
by baptism, he would have appointed it in some place of the New Testament, for
Circumcision was appointed, Genesis 17.12. Again, if Christ has but one Baptism,
he has but one essential form, and one sort of subjects; but dipping and
sprinkling are two distinct Actions, yea, or two differing Acts, neither can
pouring or dropping a little water on a Child's face be called Christ's own
Baptism, because Christ has no where appointed Infants as the Subjects of it,
nor that to be the manner of the administration of it, it being at best but
Man's tradition, which Christ says is vain, Mat. 15.9. The Earth is defiled
under the Inhabitants thereof, because they have transgressed the Laws, changed
the Ordinances, broken the everlasting Covenant, Isa. 24.5.

Article the Eleventh.
I look for the Resurrection of the dead: He seeing this before, spoke of the
resurrection of Christ, Acts 2.31. But now is Christrisen from the dead, and
become the first fruits of them that sleep, 1 Cor. 15.20. 1 Pet. 1.3. Revel.
1.5. Col. 1.18. 1 Cor. 15.3, 15. All that are in the graves shall hear his
voice, and shall come forth, they that have done good to the resurrection of
life, and they that have done evil to the resurrection of damnation, John 5.28,
29. That there shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of just and unjust,
Acts 24.15. Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they
arise: awake and sing, ye that dwell in the dust, Isa. 26.19. Many that sleep
in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life and some to
shame and everlasting contempt, Dan. 12.2. It is sown in corruption, it is
raised in incorruption, it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spirtual
body, 1 Cor. 15.42, 44.

Article the Twelfth.
And the life of the World to come: Then shall the King say unto them on his
right hand, come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the World, Mat. 25.34. This inheritance is
incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, it is reserved in
Heaven for you, etc. 1 Pet. 1.4. Fear not little flock, it is your Fathers good
pleasure to give you the kingdom, Luke 12.32. And they shall reign for ever and
ever, Revel. 22.5. And the Saints of the most high shall take the kingdom, and
possess the kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever, Dan. 7.18.

14th. Direction is, Hearken to your Parents reproofs: When they put (as it
were) a bit in your mouths to check and stop you in the road to Destruction:
You must lend them a diligent and an affectionate ear; Reproofs of instruction
are the way of life, Prove. 6.23. He that regards reproof shall be honored,
Prove. 13.18. The rod and reproof give wisdom, Prove. 29.15. 15th. Direction is,
Endeavor to imitate your Parents in all things that are good: Whatsoever
things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are
of good report, if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on
these things, Phil. 4.7. and follow them in it. Young Josiah is highly
commended, for that he did that which was right in the fight of the Lord, after
the example of his Father David, 2 Chronicles. 34.2. Good Hezekiah is likewise
commended in following the Example of David, 2 Kings 18.3. St. Paul exhorts the
Philippians, that what they heard and see in him, to do, Phil. 4.9. 18th.
Direction is, Let your eye be toward your Parents Abilities in all that you
request of them and ask no more of them then you well know that they can give
you, without too much impoverishing of themselves: You must bear a share of all
burdens with them, And be content with such things as ye have, Heb. 13.5.
Having Food and Raiment (if it be not so voluptuous and gaudy as pleases you)
yet you must be therewith content, 1 Timothy 6.8. If the Angels which kept not
their first state, but were discontented therewith, and left their own
habitation, are reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day, Jude 6.2 Pet. 2.4. Job 4.18. What do thou think
will become of thee, if thou art not contented with they lot and portion, that
thy Parents can conveniently bestow on thee in this world? If thou art
discontented with one Talent, the Lord may justly take it from thee, and leave
thee none; it were an happy and good lesson, if you could truly say with Paul,
I have learned in whatsoever state I am in, therewith to be content, Phil.
4.11. 19th. Direction is, Receive all, whatsoever your Parents in love bestow
upon you, with hearts filled with thankfulness both to the Lord and them: It is
a sign of true Grace, Let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which
also ye are called in one body, and be ye thankful, Col. 3.15. Ingratitude is
reckoned by the Apostle such a capital sin, that it is the Original, for which
the Lord let man fall into great and notorious sins, as you may read Romans 1.21,
to 32.2 Tim. 3.2. 20th. Direction is, So far esteem thy Parents above all
others, as to let them be always thy chief Subject in thy petitions: St. Paul
exhorts, that Prayer and Supplication, etc. be made for all that are in
Authority, 1 Timothy 2.2. Thou need not at all to fear, so long as thou art in
thy duty, that the Lord will forget thy works and labor of love, Heb. 6.10.
21th. Direction is, Thou must not affront thy Pareuts, in speaking that in
their presence which is unseemly, or that which they allow not of, or blame
thee for. 1st. Thou must not speak any unsavory words, Phil. 1.27. 2ly. Thou
must not parrot at them when they speak to thee, or when they command thee in
any thing, Titus 2.9. 3ly. Thou must not use swearing nor cursing, Mat. 5.34.
4ly. Thou must not go swelling about, or fling away in a rage, when they speak
to thee, Prove. 14.16. 5ly. Thou must know, that if thou do not with patience
hearken to thy Parents Commands, thou art a Transgressor of the Law: Hear thy
Fathers Instruction, Prove. 1.8. Chap. 4.1. Chap. 7.1, to 5. Hearken to Israel
your Father, Genesis 49.2. Prove. 7.24. 8.32. Thou must be like Job's Princes, to
refrain thy talking, and lay thy Hand upon thy Mouth in thy parents presence,
when they speak, Job 29.9, 10.
22th. Direction is, Thou must arm thy self with much patience in all thy
Duties toward thy Parents: 1st. Quietly to submit thy neck under that yoke,
and not to show violence, if they reprove, instruct, correct, or direct thee;
yea, if they be bitter to thee, thou must bear it patiently; they ought to show
severity, if thou sin. Old Eli his too much lenity and mildness, in restraining
his Sons from sin, was that for which the Lord was greatly offended with him, 1 Samuel 3.13. 2ly. If the thing for which thou art reproved and corrected, be not
true; that is, that which thou did not do, but it was done by another, if
thou consentedst to it, thou art guilty, Psalm. 50.18. If thou art altogether
innocent, thou must arm thy self with patience, and overcome evil with good,
Romans 12.21. 3ly. Thou must lay Aside all Obstinacy, Disdain, Ambition,
Stoutness, Stubbornness, Lowering and Swelling, with all heart-burning against
thy Parents, together with all malice, 1 Pet. 2.1. and let true affections
overcome all. 4ly. If Love and Patience be wanting in thee, all Instructions,
Reproofs and Corrections will be spent in vain; Reproofs of instruction are the
way of life, Prove. 6.23. But it is to them which receive it with patience, and
a good resolution to an amendment of life, and then the Rod and Reproof will
give Wisdom, Prove. 29.15. to 17.
23th. Direction is, Be always humble and meek before and toward thy Parents:
The Ornament of a Meek and Quiet Spirit is in the sight of God of great price,
1 Pet. 3.4. Know this, that God resists the proud, but gives grace to the
humble, James 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5. Prove. 3.34. 24th. Direction is, Do not grudge or
murmur, nor any ways do not be in any unseemly posture in the doing thy duty:
When Children have disdained their Parents commands, and muttered, and
murmured, raged, and raved, fretted and fumed against their Parents, and
despised and hated them in their hearts, they are not one jot bettered by it,
but are in the high road to Hell and Destruction, and the Lord will meet with
the obstinate, stubborn and rebellious Child at the last, Prove. 30.17. 25th.
Direction is, Avoid, if possible, the least show of any arrogant Carriage
toward thy Parents: Know this, that the Lord hates a proud look, Prove. 6.17.
Yea, much more a froward arrogant Carriage, Prove. 8.13. 26th. Direction is, If
it it be possible, when thou partest from thy parents, either into any calling,
or into the state of Marriage: Be sure first to get thy Parents consent to it,
how can thou expect a blessing from the Lord if thou live in rebellion
against thy Parents: Yea, and against the Lord too, who commands thee to fear,
reverence, obey and honor thy Parents, Levit. 13.3. Heb. 12.9. Col. 3.20.
Deuteronomy. 5.16. He that steals a Virgin unknown to her Parents, who is more dear
to them than any of their worldly goods, he is a breaker of the eighth
Commandment, and no less is she that freely yields her self to such a fact.
27th. Direction is, When thy Parents have ended this life, be sure take care
that they be decently buried, according to their Degrees and Qualities: Be not
too peevish in their Funeral expenses, nor yet too over-lavish, prodigal and
sumptuous, as to make such a Solemnity a Feast for Gluttons and Drunkards, but
let it be solemnized decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14.40. 29th. Direction is,
You must so far esteem your Parents credit, as to pay all their just due debts
when they are dead: So far as that Estate they left will Permit, and not to let
them when they are dead be numbered among the wicked, who borrow and pay not
again, Plal. 37.21. 29th. Direction is, When Children shall hear their Parents
evil spoken of when dead, they ought to put a check and stop to it, if
possible: It is one of the last duties they can do in honor to their Parents;
those that favor ill reports of their Parents are a generation that curse
their Father, and do not bless their Mother, Prove. 30.11. Such as seem to mock
at their Parents, and despise them when dead and gone, their interment is in
the field, and their grave the birds of the air, Prove. 30.17. and their end
shame and everlasting contempt, Dan 12.2. 30th. Direction is, Let all thy
duties be sweetened with a true, hearty and ever lasting affection toward thy
Parents, in their Life, Death, and after: This is the first Commandment, 1 John
2.7. and the last commandment, 1 Timothy 1.5. 1 Cor. 13.8. the new commandment,
John 13.34. and the old commandment, Levit. 19.18. If thou do all in love, thou
have a stamp of the divine nature in thee, for God is love, 1 John 4.8. and
love is the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.10. Gal. 5.14. Love covers a
multitude of infirmities, Prove. 10.12. Love works no ill, Romans 13.10. it is
the fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. This should be the first mover of thee to
thy duty, and that which should keep thee close to it unto the last, 1 Cor.
13.4, to 13.
So also thou must with patience submit thy self under the discipline of a true
Church of Christ: Remember to submit to the Authority of Magistratical Power
and Rulers, under all moral and civil Laws also; for they in a Nation are as
Parents, ruling under Divine Authority. Atheism and Idolatry are as opposite to
divine power, as Adultery, Theft or Murder, and other criminal Facts, and ought
to be suppressed by the civil laws, but in point of matter, time and manner,
relating to the worship of the Trinity in Unity, none have power, neither
Prelate nor Magistrate, to make or impose laws to compel the conscience, it
being Vicegerent, only under divine Authority, that none can compel or command
it; the carnal Sword may put the Mind into fear, and also wound the Body, but
it cannot hurt the Conscience; the most it can do, is to fright some into
Hypocrisy, but for certain it never makes good Christians. We read 2 Cor.
1.24. St. Paul had no dominion over the Churches faith, neither can Pope,
Conclave, Councils, Convocations, nor Magistratical Powers, by Fines,
Imprisonment, Inquisition, Exilement or Confiscation of Goods, nor Death; but
the Tares and Wheat ought to grow together till the Harvest, (which is the end
of the World) Mat. 13.30, 39. Our Savior taught a good Lesson, if those in
Authority could but learn it, To do to all men, even as we would have they
should do to us, Mat. 7.12. Luke 6.30. When the Apostle says, Let every soul
be subject to the higher powers, Romans 13.1. He cannot mean in matters of
Religion and Conscience, for then he himself would not have been continually
under Persecution for his Religion and Conscience, as he was at all times and
places, Acts 20.23. But his meaning must be in civil things. Again, where St.
Peter says, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, 1
Pet. 2.13, 14. He shows you their Authority is only to afflict evil doers, not
the conscientious persons, for if so, he himself had been guilty, Acts 4.18,
19. In yielding thy self with patience under the Authority of thy Governors,
thou art in a state to receive the Blessing in that (fifth) but first
Commandment that has the promise, Ephesians. 6.2.

In the next place I shall add some motives as inducing arguments to persuade
you to be mindful of your duties each to other. And, First, Let the necessity
of the work be the primum mobile, to move you to those duties preceding: And,
1st. If you omit your duties each to other, you are under the guilt of sin, Sin
lies at thy door, Genesis 4.7. 2ly. You are Bondslaves to the Devil, 2 Timothy
2.26. 3ly. Every spiritual part in you is altogether out of joint, James 3.16.
4ly. You are totally void of an holy life, 1 These. 3.13. 5ly. You desace the
image of Christ in your Souls, Romans 8.10. 6ly. None of your works can be
pleasing to the most high, Romans 13.7. 7ly. You leave your selves without a
promise of eternal life, Heb. 6.12, 15. 8ly. You are still under the wrath of
God, Romans 2.5. 9ly. You live always in fear and danger of the Execution of
divine justice, Heb. 2.15. 10ly. You have no true peace in this life, nor
assurance of eternal peace in the world to come, Isa. 57.21. 11ly. You are
destitute of an heavenly heart, Romans 8.6. 12ly. You are under the Dominion,
Power, Curse, and Thunderclaps of the Law, Deuteronomy. 27.16. For there is but one
Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy, James 4.12. The Lord is our
judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, Isa. 33.22. Whosoever breaks one of his Laws,
and teaches Men so to do, is guilty of all, James 2.10. Mat. 5.19. If he that
despised Moses Law died without mercy, what will become of them that despise
the law of Christ? Heb. 10.28. Therefore Parents obey this Law, and educate
your Children betimes, Prove. 22.6. And you Children honor, love, fear,
reverence and obey your Parents, that you may not come under the lash of the
Law, Deuteronomy. 5.16.
A Second Motive is, Consider the woeful state of thy Soul, if thou live and die
in disobedience: Die thou must for certain, sooner or later, the time when, the
place where, the manner how, the matter for what, none knows. Remember, 1st.
Christ will come in Flaming Fire, taking vengeance on the disobedient, 2 These.
1.8. 2ly. The Lord himself will be a swift witness against those that fear him
not, Mal. 3.5. 3ly. Thy own conscience then will be worse to thee than a
thousand witnesses, 1 John 3.20. Mark 9.44.46.48. 4ly. The Disobedient as
Goats, will Christ set apart as cursed for everlasting fire, Mat. 25.41. 5ly.
When death comes, it deprives us of the means of grace, which has been often
offered to us, if we would but have had hearts to have embraced it, Eccles.
9.10. Mat. 23.37. Luke 13.34. 6ly. It will be a weeping time, too late, to see
the Saints in glory, and you your selves thrust out, Luke 13.28. 7ly. It will
be very dreadful to repent, when repentance will do no good, Luke 16.24. 8ly.
For those that omit their duty now, it will be a sad time when they shall pray,
and it will be too late, Mat. 25.11, 12. 9ly. It will be bad, and sad, to have
the damned and infernals to be thy Companions, Mat. 25.41. 10ly. It will be a
woeful time, to stand at the very gate of Heaven, crying, calling and knocking,
yea, beholding the Saints in their glory, Luke 13.28. when you must be cast
down into eternal flames, Mat. 25.41. This is enough to make an heart of Stone
to melt, but yet, moreover, thy Torment is aggravated still. 1st. Thy sins will
hang on thy back heavier than ten thousand mountains, to press and keep thee
down into Hell fire, Isa. 24.21. Chap. 30.27. Jer. 25.27. Thy sins will be set
in order before thine eyes, Psalm. 50.21. A 2d. is, Because they had time, means
and power, while they were in this world, to embrace the means of Grace offered
to them, but they refused it, and abused the Lord, his Word and Ministers, Job
21.14. Chap. 22.17. Acts 7.59. Oh what jofulness would it be to the damned in
Hell, if they might have but one Sermon of Mercy and general Redemption from
their torments preached unto them, they would all, without all doubt, embrace
it upon any terms, without any put offs or delays. 3ly. Thy Companions will add
to thy torments, if thou wast the cause of their sin, or they of thine; the
Rich Man in the Gospel did not desire the company of any of his Brethren in
Hell, Luke 16.28. 4ly. If by thy evil Examples others have followed thee to
Hell, it will be very grievous for thee to bear: If the weight of their
damnation must hang on thy back, and be a continual Reflection on the, dropping
on thy Conscience hotter than scalding Lead, Mal. 4.1. 5ly. To be truly
sensible when it is too late, (which is never till the door of Mercy is shut,
and thou art under condemnation) that Christ died to save thee Sinner, John
3.16, 17. 2 Pet. 2.1. Heb. 2.9. 1 John 2.2. as well as the best Saint, if thou
had not slighted and abused his eternal favor: This to know will be a
continual torment, that the door of Mercy was set open to thee, and thou
refusedst to enter therein, nor suffered others if possible, Acts 13.46. 6ly.
If thou play the Hypocrite with the Lord and thy Soul, this will be an
augmentation of thy Horror, Isa. 33.14. Job 36.13. If thou art so void of
integrity as to dissemble with thy Creator, thou might have had so much
consideration, as not to have flattered with thy own Soul, to pay for it so
dear at last. 7ly. Breaking thy Covenants, and not putting in practice thy good
Resolutions, will be a great aggravation of thy dolor, Romans 1.31, 32. it is a
breach of a Command to break a godly covenant made, Numb. 30.2. Good David
resolves to pay his Vows, Psalm. 22.25. 66.13. 116.14, 18. 8ly. Putting off of
time till it is too late, will be an everlasting grief to thy Soul: Great is
the folly and madness of many, who are warned and made sensible, that they
ought to believe, repent, and obey the Lord in the Gospel dispensation, but for
some by-ends or other they will delay till old age, or the hour of death, and
then thy soul-work is at an end, for there is no work to be done in the grave,
Eccles. 9.10. and if thou repent in eternal fire, it will be too late. 9ly.
Mocking at the Ministers of Christ, and slighting of Religion and the
professors thereof, will multiply thy torment, to think that when thou
should have practiced the true religion, thou made a derision at that
salve which should have healed thy wounded Soul, Luke 10.16. 10ly. The
consideration of Eternity will greatly increase thy torment: To think, that
when ten thousand years are expired, and twenty thousand are added to that,
still thy torment will have no end, thy Soul remains still under the curse, in
eternal fire, Mat. 25.41.

3d. Motive to persuade you to your duty is, the excellency of a christian
state, or the enjoyment of a Saint, living up as far as he is able, in all holy
duty. And, First, They have great peace in their Souls, Psalm. 119.165. 1st.
They have peace of Conscience while they live, 2 Cor. 1.12. 2ly. They have
peace in their Death, Psalm. 37.37. Revel. 14.13. 3ly. They have peace in the
Resurrection-day, Mat. 25.34. John 16.22. 4ly. Their peace will be for ever and
ever, Rev. 22.5. A Second Enjoyment is, They are out of the power of Satan: He
can only tempt them to evil, he cannot carry them on by force, nor has he
power over them as he has over the wicked, who have given themselves up to
sin, 2 Timothy 2.26. for the Saints are beyond his power, Acts 26.18. 3ly. They
that are faithful have a gracious Majesty to extol and to implore, who is of
great patience, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. and of tender mercy, Psalm 145.9. great
compassion, Lam. 3.33. full of pity, James 5.11. He is a guide to the blind, a
help to the lame, Romans 8.26. safety in Persecution, Psalm. 27.5. a deliverer in
adversity, 2 Samuel 4.9. strength in weakness, Heb. 11.34. comfort in trouble,
Isa. 49.13. Yea, He is all in all, Col. 3.11. 4ly. They have all their sins
pardoned, Col. 1.14.2.13. Ephesians. 1.7. 5ly. And all tears shall be wiped away
from their eyes, Rev. 7.17. 6ly. They are joynt-heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17.
7ly. They shall be freed from pain, sickness and death, Rev. 21.4. 8ly. They
shall be invested with a beautiful, comfortable, delightful and celestial
possession, John 14.2. There is light without darkness, joy without sorrow,
health without sickness, wealth without trouble, ease without pain, beauty
without deformity, riches without corruption, comfort without end, and life
without end; it is an incorruptible inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.4. an Heavenly
Kingdom, Heb. 12.22. the Residence of Eternal Glory, Rev. 21.23. 9ly. The
Saints shall have glorious Companions, the Glory of the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, to behold also, all the Saints that ever lived in the World, Luke
13.28. Yea, glorious Seraphims, Isa. 6.2. and all the Holy Angels, Mat. 25.31.
10ly. They shall be changed into an heavenly state of Splendour, Beauty and
Immortality, and made like unto the glorious Body of Christ, Phil. 3.21. 1 John
3.2. 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. 11ly. The greater thy Works are here, the greater will
thy glory be in Heaven, 1 Cor. 15.41, 42. yet he that has the least glory will
have enough, Psalm. 16.11. 12ly. That which makes all perfect and complete, and
causes thy great felicity to be superexcellent, is, that all this felicity and
glory is to continue for ever and ever, Dan. 7.18. Rev. 22.5.
A Fourth Motive is, Let the shortness of your life, and the uncertainty of the
time of your death or dissolution, let this be a great obligation on your
Hearts to persuade you to do your generation-work, so far as it concerns your
eternal happiness in the life to come; do but consider the many similitudes
that the days of man's life is set out by: 1st. It is likened to a shadow, Job
14.2. that with the swift course of the Sun, or Wind, vanishes. 2ly. To grass,
that to day flourishes in great beauty, Psalm. 103.15. Isa. 40.6, 7. but to
morrow it is cut down and destroyed, Luke 12.28. Mat. 6.30. 3ly. To a cloud,
Job 30.15. that flees swift away with a strong wind. 4ly. To an Eagle flying,
a Ship sailing, and a Post riding, Job 9.25, 26. all which pass out of sight
immediately. 5ly. To a Weavers shuttle, Job 7.6. that flees out of hand in a
moment. 6ly. To an Hireling, Job 7.1, 2. that is here to day and gone to
morrow. 7ly. To a fading leaf, Isa. 64.4. which the wind carries presently out
of sight. 8ly. To a Sleep, Psalm. 90.5. that passes the time away insensibly.
9ly. To smoke. Psalm. 92.3. that flees up into the air, and is not seen. 10ly.
To a tale that is told, Psalm 90.9. that is soon forgotten. 11ly. To a Pilgrim,
Genesis 47.9. Heb. 11.13. that lodges here to night, and to morrow he is gone.
12ly. To an hand-breadth, Psalm. 39.5. so that with Job we may conclude, that
Man that is born of a woman is of few days, and full of trouble, be comes
forth like a flower, and is cut down, he flees also as a shadow, and
continues not, Job. 14.1, 2. so that every man in his best estate is
altogether vanity, Psalm. 39.5. For as the fishes that are taken in an evil net,
and as the birds that are caught in the snare, so are the sons of men snared in
an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon them, Eccles. 9.12. For when they
shall say, Peace and Safety, then suddenly Destruction comes upon them, as
travel upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape, 1 These. 5.3.


I come now in the lat place, to signify to you the danger of disobedience to
Parents: 1st. They that despise their Parents shall be destroyed, Prove. 20.20.
Exodus 21.17. Lev. 20.9. 2ly. Poverty and Shame is their portion, Prove. 13.8.
3ly. They were of old to be stoned to death, Deuteronomy. 21.21. 4ly. The Lord will
suffer the fowls of Heaven to execute justice upon them, Prove. 30.11. 5ly. The
Lord will bring such as disobey their Parents into captivity, Ezekiel. 22.7, 15.
6ly. Ishmael was cast out of his Fathers family, for mocking at Sarah, Genesis
21.8, 12. Gal. 4.30. 7ly. Hophin and Phinehas were slain, 1 Samuel 2.25. 8ly.
Absalom was hanged on an Oak in his rebellion against his father David, as
being neither fit for Heaven, nor yet to dwell upon the earth, 2 Samuel 18.9. I
might enlarge these Doctrines with many Uses, but I leave them all to the
industry and practice both of the Godly Parents and Dutiful Children, to make
the most excellent use of all these Precepts and Directions, in all their
loving Exercises and Carriages each to other, and shall return to the plough;
but by the way I have met with a sort of People which positively deny Christ
come in the flesh, impudently and confidently affirming, that Christ was never
seen with mortal Eyes, and never died, and therefore if any of these people
will believe the Scriptures to be the word of God, and a rule for their Faith,
so far as it relates to the real and true History of Christ our Savior, let
them read those Scriptures which concern Christ, and they may know that Jesus
is the true Christ, and Savior of all men, but especially of them that
believe, and that he was seen of many, and did dye, was buried, and rose again
and ascended into Heaven.

But to conclude, To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according
to this word, it is because there is no light in them, Isa. 8.20. Let us walk
by the same rule let us mind the same thing, Phil. 3.16. And as many as walk
according to this rule, peace be unto them, and mercy upon the Israel of God,
Gal. 6.16. Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord
Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, thorough the blood of the everlasting
Covenant, make you perfect in every good Work, to do his will, working in you
that which is well pleasing in his fight, thorough Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory for ever and ever, Amen. Heb. 13.20, 21.

FINIS.

