Imprimatur.

March 12th. 1693/4. Ra. Barker.

JESUS is GOD: OR, THE DEITY OF Jesus Christ VINDICATED.

Being an Abstract of some Sermons Preached in the Parish Church of St. James
Clerkenwell, By D. Pead.

Heb. 10.23. Let us hold fast the Profession of our Faith, without Wavering.

LONDON. Printed for George Conyers, at the Golden Ring; and Will. Newton, over
against Bartholomew-Close Gate, in Little Britain. 1694.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN, EARL of CLARE, Baron Haughton of Haughton, Grace
and Mercy from our Lord Jesus Christ.
My Lord,
THAT I Presume to Usher this Small Piece into the World under so Great a NAME,
proceeds not from any Opinion, that the Author, his Labors, have Right to your
Patronage; But, having Received an Honor from your Lordship without Desert, I
was unwilling it should be also without Gratitude.

The Subject of the following Discourse (Jesus Christ) is so Noble, so Useful,
and Comfortable, that it were Unpardonable in me to doubt a Free and Candid
Reception, seeing that he is Worthy of All Acceptance; and, that God does with
this his SON, freely give the Worthy Receiver All things.

A more Precious Pearl is not to be found: And, if God shall vouchsafe so great
a Blessing, that within your Noble Heart these Lines may kindle an Ambition for
the PURCHASE, the way will be to Imitate the Merchant in the GOSPEL, to Sell
all things to Make it.

The Wealth, the Pleasures, and the Honors of this World must be Sold,
Dismissed, and Parted with, if ever they shall dare to stand in Competition
with the Riches of his GRACE, or in the least attempt to draw away the Heart
from his Love and Service.

He that would be Purchaser of this INESTIM BLE MERCHANDICE, must sell All,
must tread under-foot all Opinion of Self-Righteousness, or Merit, and with a
Lively Faith lay hold on the Sufficiency of his Righteousness only: He must
Sell All; he must Devote his Time, Health, Estate, Parts, Life, and all that he
is, or has, to Advance the Honor, Glory, and Praise of the Son of God Jesus
Christ, and of the Father through him.

Hoping to be somewhat Serviceable to so Pious, yet Difficult Undertakings,
these Following Lines are Most Humbly Presented; thereby intending, not only
your PERSONAL, but the General Advantage.

While others, from your Unshaken Faith in, and Constant Obedience to, the ever
Blessed JESUS, may observe, that though it be Hard, yet it is not Impossible
for the Rich to enter into the KINGDOM of GOD.

Where, in God's Time, may your Temporary Coronet be Exchanged into an
Incorruptible CROWN of GLORY, is the Humble Prayer of,

Your Honors Most Faithful, and Most Obedient Chaplain, D. Pead.

For the PARITIONERS, Especially of St. James's Clerkenwell, as likewise, any
other into whose Hands this Book shall come, the Author heartily prays growth
in Grace and the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
I Am not insensible what Hazards he runs, who in this Nature appears in
Public; the Critical Remarks and Reflections which daily come forth, are
warning enough to all that indulge their peace to keep within; but when I
consider how ready the faithful Shepherd is to adventure his Life for his
Sheep, I dare not judge the fear or foresight of Censure and Cavils sufficient
to suppress my Endeavors for the General Good, much less to keep from the
Light this which you once having heard with the Ear, now desire may be open to
the Eye. We live if not in the last, yet to be sure in the loosest of times,
wherein our Savior's Prediction, as also that of the Apostles is exactly
accomplished; Truth is already pout up and trampled under Foot of Error and
Falsehood, Hypocrisy has got the upper hand of Religion, and it is now so
much out of Fashion to be really Good, that Men are shy of but appearing so,
and therefore take great care to prevent the least suspicion thereof.

Piety, Sobriety, and Virtue are condemned as infallible signs of a Phanatick;
but excess in Drinking, Pride in Apparel and Behavior, Ranting and Swearing,
Leudness and Vanity in Discourse are taken for the effects of Christian
Liberty, and the surest marks of Loyalty.

This corruption of Manners among Christians calls loud for a Deluge of Tears,
that a Deluge of Judgments wash us not away: But though this be as I noted
deplorable, yet in our Age the Devil seems to strive for the complete Victory.
His Envy at God's Glory was formerly satisfied in beholding Men to Profane the
Days, to despise the Word and Ordinances, and to Blaspheme the Name of God with
various Oaths and Imprecations; but now although they are most desperately
improved in these, yet his Arms are higher: for he and his Agents have dared
openly to Impugn the Trinity, and deny the Deity of our Blessed Savior, Time
was the Jew for his barbarous Rejecting the Messiah was every where looked upon
with an evil Eye, (though by what means I know not they have roosted among us
till we see our Faith as much corrupted as our Coin) but it were a shame to be
Angry with them, when Professors do the same.

I confess for my own part, could I be once persuaded to doubt whether Jesus
Christ the Son of the Virgin Mary were God, I see not which way to find Sense
or Comfort in the rest of the Creed. It must be terrible to think of God cut of
Christ, and but fondness to believe him Reconciled through Christ, if this
Christ were not God as well as Man; I highly Reverence the Wisdom and Piety of
the Honorable House of Parliament which condemned that late Hellish Pamphlet
to the Flames in so ignominious a Manner; but it is my judgment, the Son of God
himself has also more sufficiently Vindicated his doubted Deity, in that
signal Cure wrought much about the same time upon the Cripple; for it was Faith
in his Name only which has brought this strange thing to pass, that we have
seen even in our Days. I am not free, nor do I think it necessary, to engage in
the justifying this to be according to the exactest Rules, of a Miracle; nor
will I be so rash on the other hand, to deny its being one, for though I find
where the first and second Miracle that Jesus wrought are Recorded, yet I no
where find the last that shall be; this were not only to rob our Faith and
fervent Prayers of the Efficacy we are told is in them; but to determine that
Divine presence which was promised should continue to the end. I have not been
large upon this Point, because my chief Design was to furnish you with an
Antidote against the poison of Theism which has so much infected this
Generation. From my weak Labors I hope you may gather some strength to help
you in contending for the Faith delivered unto the Saints, and now greviously
assaulted by incarnate Devils. An unconcernedness in this great Quarrel I could
not dispense with, because I observe that every Faithful Ambassador no sooner
discovers a Reflection upon his Prince's Honor, but that he is uneasy and
restless, till it be adjudged and condemned, be the matter never so notoriously
true; how then can I do less but endeavor to Right and Uphold the Honor of
the King of Glory, whose Ambassador to you I profess my self to he, and my
hopes are that others that are in the same Commission with my self, especially
they to whom the head of the Church, Christ Jesus, has committed greater
Talents, will also put some of theirs into this Bank, that at this Time, and in
this Case, our Lord may have his own with usury. Now unto hint that is able to
keep you from falling, and to present you faultless before the presence of his
Glory with exceeding Joy, to the only wise God our Savior, be Glory and
Majesty, Dominion and Power, now and ever. Amen.

Your Servant for Jesus's Sake. D. Pead.

Matthew XIII. 58. And he did not many Mighty Works there, because of their
Unbelief.


GOD is Immutable, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever: Old 1 Samuel 2.30.
Eli was told, Them that honor me, I will honor; and they that despise me;
shall be lightly esteemed: Which, to him, did import, That seeing the
extraordinary Exaltation of his Family to the Priesthood, had not produced that
Reverence and Sanctity as was expected, he should not look for any farther
increase, nor yet a continuation, but rather a short enjoyment of what he had
already obtained. In like manner, though the Son of God had honored Nazareth
with his Conception and Education, yet her Inhabitants not Re-honouring him
with their Faith and Love, they were told, That he would turn the course of his
Favor, and bestow his Miracles, and Extraordinary Works upon remoter Places,
for so says the Text, He did not many mighty works there, viz. in Nazareth,
because of their unbelief.

We read of a certain Cripple miraculously cured by Peter and John Acts 3.
: The healed rejoiced not so much in his restored Limbs, as the Priests and
Sadduces were tormented to behold the Power of that Name they had made so
contemptible; and therefore though they had not the Impudence to deny, yet they
hoped they had still power to suppress the spreading abroad the fame of the
Miracle, and prevent the increasing of the Faith of the Crucified Jesus. To
this intent Acts 4.5, 6.
, the Rulers, Elders and Scribes, Annas, Caiphas, John, Alexander, and such of
the Kindred of the High Priest, as were Privileged to sit in the Sanhedrim, met
and Consulted what was most expedient to do, seeing so notable a Miracle indeed
was done; and considering that not only the Captain, whose place, (to prevent
Tumult and Sedition) was at the Porches of the Temple, and thence was called
Luke 22.52.
(...), the Captain of the Temple, must necessarily be privy to it, in that
this poor Cripple was one of them that lay daily in Solomon's Porch: but also
that all who dwelt at Jerusalem knew it by sight, or hearsay, it was looked upon
as more difficult to obscure it; they did, no doubt, remember, that once they
had the luck to find a pack of Soldiers, who, for a little Money, did belie
their eyes, and Swore down the Resurrection; but now, all the Soldiers in the
World, though their Tongues as well as Swords could pierce through an Inch
Board, were not able to Stab this Miracle to death; it would live, for it was a
notable Miracle, such an one as every one had set down in their Note-Books; so
that all they find they can do, is to Command the not Teaching, or Acting any
farther in this Name; as if they had said, The matter is so plain, we cannot
for shame deny it, yet for fear our Infidelity be exposed, we will do our best
that it be forgot.

Thus earnest have the Devil and the World ever been to stifle Goodness, and to
render as much as in them lay, the Means of Grace ineffectual; if they cannot
stop up the Fountain of Life, yet they will endeavor to defile, or conceal the
Streams issuing thence, least men, by Drinking, should find such a Spring of
Comfort, as was not likely to dry up, till they came from Believing to Fruition.

The Forecited Miracle has even in our days been in diverse particulars
paralleled.

A Cripple from her Birth, I mean not so born, but one that had an inveterate
Lameness from her Cradle; a Cripple that did frequent the Temple, more for
Devotion than Alms, this Cripple is now by Faith in Jesus Christ only,
standing whole before us, as it is Written, Acts 3.16.
the Name of Jesus, i. e. Faith in his Name, has given her perfect soundness:
And, in this case, there can be no Collusion neither, it being done in the
presence of us all.

If I may not for fear of incurring the Censure of the Nice and Curious, term
this a Miracle, yet I may call it a Wonderful Work, a Signal Honor done to the
Place and Age, as also a Great Help (if rightly considered and well applied) to
awaken the Obstinate Jew, and reform the Vain and Dissolute Christian, who by
Profaneness, Hypocrisy and Infidelity, has too long Blasphemed the Holy Name
of Jesus.

He did not many mighty works there, because of their unbelief.

In which words we cannot but observe these Two Parts;

First, That there was a Time and Place, When and Where the Holy Jesus refused
to do Mighty Works, or Miracles.

Secondly, The Reason, Because of their unbelief.

In speaking to the former of these, Three Enquiries must be made, viz. 1. What
a Miracle is. 2. How we may know a True Miracle from a False. 3. What is the
use or end of Miracles; how far they are necessary, and where not.


In speaking to the latter Branch of the Text, The Reason; Two other Enquiries
will arise, viz.

First, What is meant by Unbelief, or wherein their Unbelief did consist.

Secondly, How it was possible for a People that had such plenty of Means for
their Conviction, to persist in their Unbelief.

Little will here be related in reference to most of these particulars; the
chief design of this Book's appearing abroad, being contained in one only,
which, in its place, I shall more largely insist on.

First, There was a Time and Place, When and Where, the Holy Jesus refused to
do his Mighty Works, or Miracles. It is an undoubted Truth, that our Savior,
during his abode in the Flesh, went about doing good; yet he made a
Discrimination, and would not sow the Barren Sands, but having an eye to his
Father's Glory, as well as to the Peoples Necessities, wherever he saw the
former not like to be effected, his Zeal overcame his Pity, and he left such
Places and Persons Neglected.

Jerusalem, Bethsaida, Chorazin and Capernaum, had his Doctrine, and beheld his
Miracles after a Plentiful manner:At Bethsaida particularly he was so
Conversant in Teaching and Working Mighty Works, that he Gathered Five Apostles
there, viz. Peter, Andrew, John, James and Philip. Capernaum also was Highly
Exalted by his Miracles, for there the Centurion's Servant, and the Nobleman's
Son were healed; there the Paralytick, and the Woman with the Bloody-Issue were
Cured, and the Ruler of the Synagogue's only Daughter were Raised to Life;
yet, in the mean time, Tire and Sidon, two Ancient and Renowned Cities, not far
distant from Jerusalem, were not alike Honored, as appears, Matt. 11.21.
and we hear them of Nazareth importuning him to Parallel among them the
Miracles he had done at Capernaum, and elsewhere, but were not Answered in that
they Prayed for. This is so plain to all that Converse with Scripture, that the
labor of farther Quotations may be spared; I pass therefore to the First
Enquiry,

1. What a Miracle is.

We Read in Scripture, of Signs, Wonders and Miracles, in either of which is a
great difference.

A Sign is some outward sensible thing, by which some other thing is brought to
Mind; to this purpose Matt. 16.1, 2.3.
the Pharisees and Sadduces requested of our Savior a Sign; that is, the doing
some notable thing, whereby they might be convinced that he was the Messiah.
That this was their meaning, is evident from the Reply; for they were told,
that they could from the Face and Appearance of the Sky, and from the Color of
the Clouds, Collect what Weather was coming, and therefore he admired they
could not as well discern the Sign of the Times; for had they been as observant
of Scripture, as they were of the Heavens, they could not but have known by the
Signs there foretold, and now full filled, that this must be the exact time of
the Messiah's coming, and had they judiciously scanned his Doctrine and Doings,
these were so correspondent to the Types, that they must have concluded them
infallible Signs of his being the Messiah.

A Wonder is nature greatly improved, and is called a Wonder, either that it is
worthy of Admiration for its rareness or greatness. I cannot foresee any cause
of reproof, should I say that Signs and Wonders (Deo permittente) are in the
power of Devils to effect; for if the Art of Man can heighten natural things to
the wonder and admiration of others, the subtilty of Satan may be allowed to be
capable of heightening them much more and easier.

Under the Notion of Wonders, we may comprehend the Great and Glorious Works of
God, the making of the Heavens, the founding of the Earth upon no other Basis
than his Providence, the making those great Lights, the Sun, Moon and Stars,
and all his Works of Providence, and our Eyes may daily see one of the Wonders
of his Power, to wit, that a single and dead grain of Corn, should sometimes
multiply into Thirty, Sixty or an Hundred Fold.

A Miracle is a work of God, for though Man may be the instrumental cause
whereby, yet is he not the Original cause which effects a Miracle, but every
Miracle is effected and brought to pass by Divine Power only; a Miracle is of
two sorts, fometimes the Operation transcends the Power of all second Causes,
as Sight given to such as were born Blind, or raising the Dead to life;
sometimes it lies within the Power of second Causes, yet they are not employed
as when Diseases and Infirmities are cured without means, which it was
possible, due application of means in time might have effected.

A Miracle is a work of God, and in Hebrew takes its Name from a Root (...),
signifying to Separate, for such works are separated or removed from Man.

First, In respect of his Reason being not acquainted with their proper and
positive Causes, humane reason is too short to Fathom such an Abyss.

Secondly, In respect of our Senses, my meaning is, that though the thing
wrought be discernible, as in the forecited instance: She now walks upright
that could not before; yet the power that brought this work about, and the
manner of bringing it about, are imperceptible to our Senses, which well
considered, the Romanists have not so fair pretenses for their Miracle of
Transubstantiation; for not only is the power and ways of effecting it
Mysterious and Indiscernible, but the Work, as they say, Wrought, surpasses our
sensitive Understanding, we can neither see it, feel it, or taste it, and
therefore should be but Block-heads to believe it an invisible Miracle.

Thirdly, In respect of our imitation, there can be so little probability of
parallelling that, of whose cause and way of doing it we profess our selves
wholly ignorant.

2. The next enquiry was, how we may distinguish between a true Miracle and a
pretended one.

The Devil by his great Subtilty and Agility, may sometimes for the promotion
of his own ends, assist evil men in the doing some great and strange things
resembling Miracles, which if really examined come far short; this evil Spirit
can pry into the fertile Womb of Nature, and there find out the Seeds or
Beginnings of things, and understanding the different Qualities and Operations,
their Sympathies and Antipathies he can so temper and apply them as to
counterfeit a Miracle, but a real one he cannot produce, it requiring a Divine
Power to act beyond, above or contrary to Nature; there is no doubt by his aid,
the Magicians of Egypt did many curious things, yet not real Miracles. In this
case, that we may make a right Judgment, we have some necessary Rules.

First, The first thing that ought to be considered, in order of trying or
judging of a Miracle, is the power whereby it is wrought; in whatsoever is real
Digitus Dei discernitur, we may discover the Finger or Power of God. Other
Operations, though Peradventure wonderful, are brought about by natural means,
such as Slight, Wit, Skill and the like, or else by the help of Satan.

Secondly, The Agents or Persons: Those concerned in the Operation of Miracles,
are ordinarily Holy and Virtuous, while about the counterfeit Magicians,
Sorcerers, Conjurers, Witches and other evil Persons are generally the chief.

Thirdly, The manner of Working: Between the true and pretended Miracles is
very great difference, as to their ways of bringing about. The real are not
under the power of any other means, but what are Lawful, Good and Holy; such
as Faith, Fasting, Prayer and Invocation of the Name of Jesus, whereas about
the pretended, Charms, Enchantments and Superstitious Methods are observed.

Fourthly, The end also must be well weighed: The pretended are ever done to
deceive and mislead, or in hopes of worldly applause and profit; but the end
and purpose of real Miracles is to advance the Glory of God, to honor the Name
and Power of Jesus Christ, to confirm the Faith. To defend and relieve the
Church of Christ in General, or some of its distressed Members, as also to
awaken the stupid to Repentance and newness of Life.

3. The next Enquiry is, What is the use or end of Miracles, how far they are
necessary and where not?

When God was pleased to send some extraordinary Messengers into the World,
upon a Religious Account to give Holy Laws, or reform unholy Manners, to
conciliate them Power and Credit convenient to their Employ, he did condescend
to entrust them with the power of working Miracles, as is deducible from the
case of Moses and the Prophets Elijah and Elisha; it being expected from the
People to whom they were sent; that they should believe and obey them, it was
necessary, that they should have this extraordinary power of effecting things
above and contrary to Nature, thereby to induce the Peoples Faith; for had not
the People had the Argument of miraculous Power to convince them of the
Commission of the Ministers, and consequently what compliance was due unto
them, they could not so justly have been charged with Infidelity as Ignorance.

In process of Time, when the Ceremonial Law was to be abolished, when all
Types were to cease the substance being come, that an easier and ready way
might be made for that new Dispensation of the Gospel; Christ and his Apostles
had a full power of working Miracles for the same end to create Faith in them
that should see and hear them. Thus far Miracles were of use, but now the Will
and Mind of God being fully revealed to us in Holy Scriptures, which through a
Miracle of his Providence are continued to us, Miracles appear not farther
necessary to this end.

Yet there being other ends and intentions in Miracles, besides the confirming
and propagating Religion, I see no reason why any one should conclude all
Miracles ceased. It were great rashness to expect the great and mighty God
should prostitute his Miracles to gratify Men's curiosity; and as derogatory, I
take it to he to his Goodness to deny that he shall sometimes step a little out
of the course of his ordinary Providence, and do some mighty Work above the
power of Nature; when he is pleased either to defend his Church, fore-warn a
sinful Nation, or Vindicate the Honor of the Blessed Jesus, whose Name and
Deity are Blasphemed by Jews and Atheists.

In short, to deny all farther Miracles, must, at least seemingly, reflect upon
the Honor of God, as if his Goodness were Exhausted, or his Power Shortened;
it must straiten the Promise of Christ, and bring it into a narrower compass
than was at first intended; he having promised those Persons on whom he had
bestowed suffcient Power of Working Miracles, to be with them to the end of the
World; that is, not only with Them, but their Successors; and how this Promise
shall be understood, distinct from the Power and Privilege he engaged, to be
with it, I confess I see not: They that are fearful, that New Miracles might
bring the Old into Contempt, may be pleased to consider in the Primitive days
of the Church, we have an Account of Miraculous things done by the Elders, who
were no Apostles, as Healing the Sick by a Faithful and Fervent Prayer; it is
my opinion, had not the World declined in Piety and Devotion, that Power had
not so palpably decayed; Why should it seem improbable, that Miracles should
now be done, when God has still left us the most Effectual Means thereunto,
viz. Faith and Prayer?

Secondly, The Second Branch of the Text was the cause of Jesus's not doing
mighty works among them, which is Assigned to be, their unbelief. Here,

I. We are first to enquire what their unbelief was, or wherein it did consist.
The Answer must be, there were Four Principal Points, or Arguments of their
Infidelity.

First, They Misinterpreted the Power by which he Wrought, instead of Ascribing
it to God, they Interpreted it to be of Satan.

They rather chose to Proclaim themselves Fools, by Asserting a Contradiction,
holding, That Satan did cast out Satan, than submit to Ascribe to God, the
Honor due unto his Name.

Secondly, They did not Believe; for notwithstanding all they heard and saw,
they continued Impenitent, and Unreformed.

Thirdly, Their Unbelief was so great, as to Reject the Gospel, which was the
Glad Tidings of Salvation; they had rather abide by the Law of Works, than
Embrace the Conditions of Faith and Repentance.

Fourthly, Their Unbelief was, That notwithstanding so clear Light, and
Manifestations, they would not acknowledge the Deity of Christ, their eyes were
so intent upon the Veil of his Flesh, that they could not pierce through it,
and Contemplate his Godhead; some had such Opinions, as to hold him to be John
the Baptist, some Elias, others Jeremias, or one of the Prophets (for they were
Pythagoreans, and Believed the Transmigration of Souls, by them called (...) a
Removal from Vessel to Vessel) but none of them Believed him, when he said, He
came from God, and that He and the Father were One.

Now, before I pursue the Intended Design of this Book, I shall briefly declare
some Reasons which made it possible for the Jews to Continue in Unbelief,
notwithstanding such Plenty of Means as they had.

1. The Pride of their Hearts turned them away from the Faith, they were
Supercilious and Haughty, and that New Doctrine required Meekness and Humility.

Upon this our Savior fixed their Infidelity, Joh. 5.44.
How can you believe, which receive honor one of another, and seek not the
honor that comes from God only? Faith and Pride are not so Reconcilable, but
that we may conclude, where there is much of the one, there is but little of
the other.

2. Their Exorbitant Love of the World, made it hard to believe.

Our Savior told them, It was Impossible to serve God and Mammon Luke 16.13.
for God required the whole heart, and Mammon, the World, was apt to steal away
too much; therefore, what share they allowed the World, that they denied to
God; and God would look upon himself as Despised by their so doing: Yet how
little was he Believed? for it is said, Verse. 14.
The Pharisees, who were covetous, heard all things, and they Derided him, they
Scoffed and Mocked him, and therefore not likely that they should have Faith,
who Repudiated, and held in Scorn the Means that Led unto it.

3. They were Obstinate, Perverse and Self-willed, and this Evil Temper
Obstructed their Believing. They would not come unto Christ that they might be
healed.

4. They were Envious, and that hindered their Believing.

5. They were Carnal and Sensual, and that prevented their Believing. The
Natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit 1 Cor. 2.14.
, he neither believes, nor values them.

6. They Neglected the Scriptures; and, by means of these Obstructions they did
not believe Jesus Christ the Son of the Virgin Mary, to be True and Essentially
God; in which Error and Unbelief, seeing many, who bear the Name of Christians,
are, in this Unhappy Age, most Hotly Engaged, occasion was taken to Assert and
prove his Deity.

Theodoret, in his Ecclesiastical History, tells us, That when Valens the
Emperor had, with his Arrian Principles, Poisoned and Disturbed a great part
of the Christian World; Aphrates a Monk, (contrary to the Custom of his Order)
left the Monastery, and put himself in the Head of such as rose to maintain and
support the Truth; And being demanded why he left his Cell, his Answer was, The
great danger Threatening the Church constrained him.

I conceive the same Answer as Satisfactory, to Justify this Undertaking,
seeing there is an Equal Necessity; and seeing New Heads are sprung out of the
Old Hydra of Heresy, and that some Devils Incarnate are Strangely Zealous, to
drive the Belief of Jesus Christ to be the Son of God, out of the World: Woe
were unto us, Ministers, if we Preach not the Gospel of Jesus Christ the Son of
God.

The Devil was a Murderer from the beginning, he labored to Stifle
Christianity at its first Birth, by Inclining Herod's Mind to a Massacre,
wherein he made no doubt but the Son of God should have been Comprehended; but
finding himself disappointed in this first Project, he be comes the carefuller
in the next, and used such Methods for stirring up Envy, Malice, and Wrath,
that he soon dispatched his Life, who brought Light and Life into the World:
However, though he had Most Industriously watched all Opportunities of Stealing
away the Heavenly Seed, and had, at last, compassed the Death of the Sower;
yet, beholding, to his great grief, that some of the Seed did spring up, and
that a New Order of Persons was Instituted to proceed in Sowing the same Good
Seed; to Frustrate their Endeavors, he raises such a Tempest, as could not be
laid but by a Sacrifice of their Blood; but even in this, this Great Deceiver
saw himself Deceived; for, Sanguis Martyrum fuit semen Ecclesiae, The Blood and
Sufferings of these Seeds-men, became as Seed Effectual to the Spreading of the
Faith: Hereupon, the Adversary Selects Men of Curious Parts, and Subtle Brains,
and these he employs in Sowing Tares, (Heterodox Opinions) among the Good Seeds
of Piety and Truth; among such were Simon Magus, the Gnostics, and other
Antichrists: These were Persons of Proud, Lawless, and Dishonest Principles;
and he Chose them, because Proud, being satisfied, that such as were Conceited
of their own Parts and Learning, would more willingly Rely on their Own
Fancies, and Philosophical Notions, than on any Divine Revelation; wanting the
Grace of Humility, he foresaw they should never obtain that of Faith: For though
God gives this, and all other Graces to the Humble, yet he, in all, Resists
the Proud. He also Chose them, because Headstrong and Lawless; for, knowing
how Irksome it was to Men of this Temper, to be Confined within the Limits
Prescribed by the Doctrine of Christ, he was well assured, such Libertines
(such Wild Asses) would quickly kick against the Gospel, because they would not
bear the Yoke of it; he had also observed, that they wanted that Honesty,
Sobriety, and Gravity, that Integrity and Simplicity as was necessary in true
Christians* and therefore concluded they would soon ridicule a Gospel of sober,
plain, and honest Principles; nor were his expectations deceived; he also
raised another Legion out of the Arrians, Samosatenians, and Photinians, and
with these he waged War against the Son of God, laboring to impugn the Truth
of his Deity.

The true Catholic Faith ever taught two Natures in Christ, Deity, as being
the Second Person of the Trinity, and Humanity: Which though differing as to
Essence and Substance, yet did constitute but one Hypostasis, or subsistent
Person, as the Soul and Body make one Man.

Some of the Nestorians did so far agree with the Catholic Faith, that they
held two Natures in Christ; but they had this Reservation, that they did
believe each Nature made a several and distinct Person by it self; nay, so
subtle they were, and so resembling Angels of Light, that they ^sed the same
words (one Person) as other Catholics did; yet who so peruses the
Ecclesiastical Records, will find that they no ways meant that the two Natures
of Christ were united by a personal Subsistence, but merely by an Unity of
Affection, Consent, Liking, or Co-habitation; that is, to speak in their Sense
the Person of the Son of God did affect the Son of the Virgin Mary to that
degree, that it did only inhabit or dwell therein as in an House or Temple.
According to this Doctrine of the Nestorians, God did not become the Son of
Man, nor was the Son of the Virgin Mary God, but only the Temple or House of
God; whereas the truth is, the second Person of the Trinity was Hypostatically
united unto the Manhood, the Son of God assumed humane Nature, and of both
Natures one Person was Constituted, called (...) God-man, not that the Godhead
inhabited humane Nature, nor that the Godhead was converted into Flesh, but by
taing of the Manhood into God, so there is no confusion of Substance, but
unity of Person, God and Man became one Christ. No Heresy which ever infected
the Church of Christ, has been defended with such Sophistical Subtilties, such
fineness of Wit, as this of opposing the Deity of Christ; and even at this Day,
some Persons having more Wit than Grace, and indulging that more than became
them, are endeavoring to revive this abominable Heresy, but that these
Scoffers and Mockers as St. Jude v. 18.
terms them, might not proceed insultingly, I have undertaken to make appear,
That Jesus Christ Born of the Virgin Mary was God, Blessed for Evermore.

My Undertaking shall be directed by this following Method.

1. I will enquire into his particular Names and Titles; from whence the Truth
of his Deity will explain it self; Viz, Jesus, Christ, Emanuel, The Word, The
Son of God.


2. I shall consider the Properties of the Deity are attributed to Him, which
are especially conspicuous in the great Works of Creation and Redemption.

And that I may the better put to silence the most impudent Gainsayers; as
also farther confirm your Faith in this great Article, I shall appeal to, 1.
God the Father. 2. God the Holy Ghost. 3. The Holy Scriptures.


First, I shall argue and prove the Deity of Jesus Christ the Son of the Virgin
Mary, from the Names and Titles given him.

Here I must Observe, That the World has generally agreed in the use of Names,
viz. That Nomina sunt Notamina, Names serve as well for the discovery of the
nature of Things and Persons, as for Distinction.

Next, least any should cavil with me, and plead that the Virgin Mary's, Son
was only called Jesus, Emanuel, and the like, and was not really so, I shall
judge this sufficient in answer hereunto; that to be called in these Scriptures
I shall Name, signifies not only to be so Named, or to be so Reputed, but also
to be that in Deed and in Truth; which one is said to be, or named to be; for
proof hereof I referr to Matthew. 1.16.
where it is said, Of whom was born Jesus who is called Christ, i. e. he was
the Christ in Deed, and should be declared to the World to be so. One place
more to justify that this Phrase called, implies a being really the thing so
called, is that Romans 9.25, 26.
I will call them my People, which were not my People, i. e. I will make them
my People, who were not so before.

This being Premised, I come to the Names or Appellations given to the Son of
the Virgin Mary.

I. Jesus, Mat. 1.21.

This was the proper Name of the Son of God when he took humane Flesh; I
confess others as Types of him had bore this Name, yet never did the
Signification of the Name fully agree with the Bearer till now.

This name Jesus shows him to be of Heavenly Extract, in that it was given him
from Heaven, Probat Angelus caelitus conceptum, cui nomen caelitus imponitur;
none but God knew the Dignity of this Person, and therefore he particularly
Assigns him this Name, as sufficiently comprehending his Dignity.

This Name coming from Heaven, did plainly demonstrate him to be the Son of
God, in that none on Earth had Power over Him to give Him a Name.

The Etymological Reason which the Angel gave of this Name, illustrates the
Deity of Him to whom it was given, Mat. 1.16.
Thou shall call his name Jesus, for He shall save his People from their Sins;
so that he really was Sui nominis, he in all things answered his Name;
Salvation in other Jesus's was either an empty Name, or at most but a faint
shadow of the Salvation which was found in him. Acts 4.12.
For neither is there Salvation in any other, neither is there any other Name
under Heaven given among Men whereby we must be saved.

Salvation from Sins is God's Peculiar; for so it is said, Isa 45.21.
There is no God else beside me, a just God and a Savior, there is none beside
me; so again, Hosea. 13.4.
For there is no Savior beside me. Thus we see God challenging Salvation as
his peculiar Prerogative; and hence I Argue, Since by God's special Command,
this Name Jesus was conferred on the Son of the Virgin Mary, because he should
give Salvation from sins; it is plain that he was God, for he must necessarily
be believed to be the Lord of Life, in whose power it was to bestow Life.

Secondly, He was called Christ, and from hence also it will appear that the
Son of the Virgin Mary was God.

Christ is a name of Dignity, it is a Greek Word and of the same Signification
with Messiah in the Hebrew. For him the Jews looked, and him they did really
believe to be no other than the Son of God, and this may reasonably be
concluded in that they interpreted the second Psalm to be a Prophecy of him;
wherein we find it declared Psalm. 2.2.
That he was the Anointed of God. And of this Christ, this Messiah, it is
expressly said by God himself, v. 7.
Thou art my Son, this Day have I begotten thee.

That Christ and the Messiah were Synonymous Terms, and that both belonged to
the Son of the Virgin Mary, is evident from, Joh. 1.41.
We have found the Messiah, which is, being interpreted, the Christ; both these
Names signify Anointed. Kings, Priests and Prophets under the Law were
Anointed with Holy Oil. thereby intimating that they were Separated, Sacred,
and Consecrated to God in the discharge of their respective Offices, and were
therefore called Messiae or Christi, but this Son of the Virgin Mary was
Messiah or Chris (...), emphatically, as being both appointed to perform all
those Offices, and moreover anointed extraordinarily above any or all of them,
for Joh. 3.24.
God gave not unto him the Spirit by measure. To give by Measure or Weight,
implies giving with a cautious or sparing Hand; and contrarily, to give without
measure, argues giving plentifully, even the whole; others, albeit they were
anointed, yet were limited; they had the Spirit by measure, some having one
Grace, others another, but this Jesus the Son of the Virgin Mary was anointed
with the fullness of the Spirit; for says the Apostle Col. 2.9.
, In him dwelled all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.

Whosoever allows the Son of the Virgin Mary to be the Messiah, the Christ,
must allow him to be the Son of God; that the Jews did ever believe the Christ,
to be the real Son of God, is very perspicuous Joh. 1.49.
, where Nathanael allowing Jesus to be the Christ (i. e. anointed to be King of
Israel) immediately concludes he must be the Son of God; his Words are, Rabbi,
thou art the Son of God, the King of Israel; and that he as Honestly as
Rationally spoke what he believed, there is not the least cause to doubt,
seeing that this Christ who knew what was in Man, and needed not that any
should testify, v. 47.
declared of him * That he was an Israelite indeed in whom was no guile.

Hear we also Martha's confession of Faith grounded upon the same Reason Joh.
11.27.
I believe that thou art the Christ the Son of God.

What shall we say? the High Priest (though enraged) had not forgot this truth,
that The Christ must necessarily be the Son of God Mat. 26.63.
, I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou be the
Christ, the Son of God, for he was satisfied if he was the one, he must be the
other also.

Now that the Son of the Virgin Mary was The Christ, is evident, in that he so
punctually executed the Office of King, Priest, and Prophet; to those that
would hear and believe, he taught the Will of God; to those who would submit to
his Scepter, he became a King ruling in their Hearts by Faith and Love (for he
acknowledged his Kingdom was not of this World) and to such he was a Priest,
not only in offering himself a Sacrifice for them, but in Blessing them, and
turning them from their sins; so that the Son of the Virgin Mary thus
manifesting himself to be The Christ, must by the Jews own concession be
acknowledged to be the Son of God.

Thirdly, The Son of the Virgin Mary was called Emanuel, and this was likewise
a demonstration of his Deity.

Emanuel Mat. 1.23.
, which being interpreted is God with us; i. e. He that was God from all
Eternity, has now assumed. humane Nature, and is become one with us in all
things, sin excepted.

This name does plainly imply the Union of the two Natures in the one Person of
our Redeemer; it does moreover point at his mediatory Office between God arid
Man, and demonstrates him a complete Savior able to save to the uttermost.

In him there were two Natures, and yet nec inferiorem consumpsit Glorificatio,
nec superiorem minuit Assumptio, the Deity did not swallow up his Humanity, the
Humane Nature was not swallowed up and lost in the Deity, nor did the Deity
suffer Debasement or Diminution, by the Assumption of the humanity, but both
Natures remain whole and entire, constituting but one Person (...) or Emanuel,
Godman, but of this we shall understand farther in speaking to the next Name.

There is a secret Harmony between these names Jesus and Emanuel, and both
declare the Deity of the Virgin Mary 's Son; for he that can be a Jesus to save
from sin, must necessarily be God, and so have Life and Salvation in his power
to bestow; nor can God (with respect to his own Decree) be a Savior from sin,
except he become one of us, seeing the same nature that sinned, was sentenced
to suffer.

Fourthly, The Son of the Virgin Mary was called The Word, which name does also
vindicate his Deity.

It is said Ioh. 1.1.
, In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God: in which words the very Heathen have ingenuously confessed there was more
of the Divine Nature comprehended, than could be found in all the voluminous
Writings of their Philosophers. The better to gather the full sense of this
Verse, we must first enquire who is here meant by The Word, for it is evident
that is the subject of which three things are here predicated; namely that it
was Eternal, a distinct Person from God the Father, yet of the same Nature and
Essence.

I shall first make it appear that the Messiah, the Christ, the Son of the
Virgin Mary, he whom we acknowledge for our Lord and Savior, was called the
Word.

He was known to the Jews and others by this Appellation, the Lord Psalm. 110.1.
, which Title Lord, and that of the Word, were interchangeably used by them;
for whereas according to our Translation we read Genesis 1.23.
, So the Lord created Man, the Targum renders it, The Word of the Lord created
Adam. Again Genesis 3.22.
our Bibles have it, The Lord said, the Targum, The Word of the Lord said.
Moreover we find the Rabbis and Jewish Doctors frequently expounded Jehovah by
(...) the Word of the Lord; particularly Jonathan the Son of Vzziel who was
before Christ, and Author in part of the Chaldee Paraphrase. Our Bibles Read
Isai. 45.17.
Israel shall be saved in the Lord; but the Chaldee Paraphrase, Israel shall be
saved in the Word of the Lord; so that this Apellation was no new thing of St.
John's invention, but the Messiah, the Son of God, was known thereby to the
Jews of old; and which may give our Testimony herein the greater Credit, the
same name, The Word, was known to the Philosophers; for Trismegistus, Zeno,
Plato and others have spoken of The Word; nay even in Mahomet's Alchoran Christ
is called The Word; so the Person signified by The Word we understand to be the
Messiah, The Christ, the Son of the Virgin Mary. I shall therefore proceed to
the things promulged of him in this Verse, which if found true, our Faith
stands fixed as on a Rock, and we must believe that Jesus Christ the Son of the
Virgin Mary, had a Divine Essence prae-existing before the World, and that he
is a distinct Person from the Father, but yet that he is very God.

1. The Word was from everlasting, In the beginning was the Word.

In principio Verbum Erat, the Verb being here of the Preter imperfect Tense,
does imply that The Word was so in the beginning of Time, as that he also was
before it; had the Apostle put in Est in the Room of Erat, it might have given
occasion to think that The Word then received its being, or began to be. There
had been the like danger had he used Fuit, for then some would have
conjectured, that upon the Creation of the World The Word was, but that before
or after, it was not in being; but the Word used is Erat of the Preter
imperfect Tense, which standing between the Present and the Preter, is not
absolutely either but participates of both times, to demonstrate that The Word
was so in the beginning, that he was both before, and after the beginning; he
had a subsistence before all times; for being at that time when all things were
beginning to be made, plainly implys he was before the beginning of all things,
and so must be of the same Eternity or Everlastingness as the Father; and this
is yet more clear as we shall see immediately in that Phrase, The Word was with
God, he was of the same Eternity and Coexistency with the Father.

Accordingly the Word is called by Nonnus the Poet, (...), quod nullo tempore
sit comprehensum; others give him the same Title, Quasi carens Principio, and
Rev. 1.11.
Christ is called Alpha and Omega the first and the last, without any
Restriction or Limitation; he was ever truly and essentially God, and there is
not the least ground for Arrius's Blasphemy, (...), time was when he was not.

2. The Word was with God, this demonstrates him a distinct Person from God.

Apud Deum, not as a Property or Quality; not as an Attribute or Faculty, but
as a Person distinctly existing, and that by a different manner of Generation
from the Father.

Apud Deum, we cannot properly speaking, say, any Person is with himself; he
may be said to be with another, but not with himself: so that from hence we
must necessarily infer a Distinction of Persons; he that is with, being one;
and he with whom he is, being another; which makes flatly against the
Sabellians, who denied a Distinction of Persons.

Thirdly, And the Word was God.

This Demonstrates the Identity of Nature, and that the Word was of the same
Nature and Essence; he certainly was Alius, a distinct Person from the Father;
but not Aliud, of another (but the same) Nature.

This very Name Word is most apt to represent the Two Natures of Christ, the
Divine and Humane; because that in a Word, we must consider there is Sonus, a
Sound, the Elision of the Air passing from the Mouth of the Speaker, and
possessing the Ear of the Hearer; there is also Verbum, the Word, carried by
that Sound, and Informing the Understanding; so that the Sound and Word, though
two, are neither to be separated, nor are they confounded.

Fourthly, The Son of the Virgin Mary was called, The Son of God; and this Name
also vindicates his Deity.

This Title is given in Scripture upon Various Considerations, as sometimes
times Mankind in General are called, The Sons of God, and Acts 17.28.
(...), we are his offspring; this is spoken in reference to the Creation; and
upon the same account the Angels Job 38.7.
are called, The Sons of God.

Again, Sons of God are taken in a larger sense; for such as from the Dignity
Psalm. 82.6.
of their Offices were so called.

The word is also used in a Spiritual sense, they are called, 1 John 5.1.
(...), Born of God, or Sons of God; who, by the Spirit of God, are Changed, or
Renewed, being Regenerate, and Born anew, changed from evil to good.

But this Son of whom I am speaking, was neither by Creation, Adoption, nor
Regeneration; but by Eternal Generation out of himself; in which respect God
has no Son but this; and therefore he is called, The Son of God, (...),
Discriminatively, Joh. 1.18.
The only begotten Son of God: of which Generation, I presume not to make any
Declaration: for I see not how we can understand farther of this Mystery, than
that it is the Communication of the Divine Essence, or Personality, or both, by
the Father, by which he has Begotten the Son: but the Manner how, we shall
never understand while we are in these Houses of Clay.

Christ is called, Luke 1.35.
The Son of God: by which words is meant, that he took not his beginning when
he was Born of the Virgin Mary, but that he was the Eternal Son of God, that he
was True God as the Father is, and bath the same Nature, Essence, Will and
Power with him: and because this Truth was so opposed by the Arrians, a Council
of 318 Bishops Assembled at Nice, and Expounded this Article of our Faith in
Larger Terms, as you may Read in your Common-Prayer-Books: I Believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ, Nicene.
the only Begotten Son of God, Begotten of his Father before all Worlds, God
of God, Very God of very God, Begotten, not Made, etc.

When St. Peter had made his Confession of Faith, Matt. 16.16.
Acknowledging Christ to be the Son of the Living God, it is worthy our Serious
Observation, that not only was this Confession made the Standard of Faith, by
those words, Verse. 18.
Upon this Rock will I Build my Church; but our Savior did also declare, that
the Knowledge of this Great Truth came to Peter from above, Verse. 17.
Flesh and Blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in
Heaven: From whence it is obvious to a very ordinary capacity, that if the
Virgin Mary's Son, had been the Son of God, no other way, but by Eminency, in
respect of the Excellent Gifts that were in him, there had been no occasion for
this Revelation from Heaven; seeing that those Gifts and Graces were sufficient
to testify this; this Revelation therefore amply declares his Filiation, or
Sonship, to be of a more Transcendent Nature.

He was a Son by Real, and Eternal Generation; he was a Son Consubstantial with
the Father, the thing Begotten being of the same Essence and Substance with
that which Begets it; and, for this cause, our Savior Averred, John 10.30.
I and the Father are one; Vnum, not Vnus; not one in Will, but in Nature; he
is not only (...), of Like Being, but (...), of the same Substance.

Thus has it appeared, that the Names Ascribed to the Son of the Virgin Mary,
as Jesus Christ, Emanuel, The Word, the Son of God, do all Assert, and Prove
his Deity.

Our next undertaking was, to show that the Properties of the Deity are
attributed to him, from whence his Deity will necessarily be Inferred.

There are not properly speaking, any Attributes, Properties or Qualifications
in God, because whatsoever is in God, is God, but in compliance to the capacity
of our shallow Understandings, they are admitted; and here the Caution takes
place, that we should not account these Properties parts of the Divine Essence,
because that every Property is really his very whole Essence; as for Instance,
the Wisdom of God, is no other but the Wise God; the Mercy of God, includes the
Merciful God, etc. The use of these Properties, or Attributes, is to declare
and set forth unto us the Essence of God.

I have already manifested the Eternity of Jesus Christ, and shall distinctly
speak next of his Immense Power, Wisdom, Mercy and Goodness, discernible in
those Great Works of Creation and Redemption: I shall not so confine my self to
those, but that in handling I shall give you such light into his other
Attributes, that you may thereby gather a clear Manifestation of his Deity.

I. The Work of Creation is ascribed to Jesus Christ, the Son of the Virgin
Mary.

To Create, is to make something out of nothing; to do which, requires an
Infinite and Uncontrollable Power, such as can no where be found but in God.

St. John brings this as a farther Proof of the Deity of Christ, whom he had
called the Word, Joh. 1.3.
All things were made by him: as if he had said, The Word, or Jesus Christ
(whom he meant by the Word) was certainly God; for, he, made all things, and
without him was not any thing made which was made: This was so manifest, and
withal so full a Proof of his Assertion, that he reinforces it, Verse. 10.
The World was made by him, and the World knew him not: It is sad, that the
Generality of Men did not formerly, nor will not latterly take notice of him in
the Capacity of a Creator.

That this Jesus Christ, when he lay in the Bosom of his Father, was a
Principal Coagent, or Efficient with the Father, and the Holy Ghost; in the
Work of Creation. Solomon declares it, for Prove. 8.22, 23, etc.
Christ is there called the Wisdom of the Father, by whom the World and all
things were made: For all Interpreters not excusing Arrius himself, agree, that
these Words of the Wise Man were spoken concerning Christ; but being intended
to oppose the Deity of Christ, that Arch- Heretic, though he had not the
Impudence to deny the words to be spoken of Christ, yet such was his
Perverseness, that he Corrupted the Text, and for (...), He Possessed me, Verse
22d, he Read (...), He Created me; and so Blasphemously, from his own Corrupted
Text, Argued, That Christ was no more than a Creature. We have great need to
look well to our Bibles, to Read, Mark, Learn, and Inwardly Digest the Sound
Doctrine thereof; because there are too many in the World, besides those of
Rome, who, could they get all our Bibles into their hands, would soon Teach
them to speak a strange Language.

The Apostle St. Paul does as plainly Ascribe the Creation to Jesus Christ,
Col. 1.16.
For by him were all things created, that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth,
visible and invisible; whether they be Thrones or Dominions, or Principalities,
or Powers, all things were created by him: All things, both those that are the
Subject of our Sight, as the Corporeal; and those, whose Nature and Spiritual
Being, as Angels, and the Souls of Men, submits not to Mortal Intuition. That
which most chiefly makes for our Present Purpose, is to declare, That this
Creator was Jesus Christ, the Son of the Virgin Mary; and this is Justified, by
calling him, v. 15.
That Created the Image of God, and the Firstborn of every Creature; and he is
styled, v. 18.
The Head of the Church.

But, for fear any should stumble at that Expression. The Firstborn of every
Creature, it will be convenient we understand this to be a Figurative Speech,
and bears reference to the Privileges of the Firstborn, as being Lord, and
to exercise Dominion over his Brethren; so that the Phrase Firstborn, has
been customarily used, to signify Precedence; as Ps. 89.27.
David is there called, The Firstborn, higher than the Kings of the Earth; not
that his Kingdom was the Ancientest, or himself the Oldest King then Reigning,
but as the clause of the Verse explains it, higher than the rest; so that it
would be most absurd from this Expression, to Argue Christ to be a Creature,
whenas the Apostle therefore uses it, to show that he was higher than all
Creatures, and consequently God.

To conclude this Point; We being by God's Word Instructed, That Christ made
all things, We must Believe and acknowledge him to be God; for what says the
Scripture, Heb. 3.4.
He that Built all things is God.

That the Word in the First of St. John's Gospel, was understood to be the
Creator, we may conclude from Amelius a Heathen, who, Reading those Words, In
the Beginning was the Word; Cried out, Iste Barbarus cum nostro Platone sentit
Verbum Dei in ordine Principii esse, i. e. John is of our Plato's Opinion, That
the Word of God is in Order of Principles, i. e. The Beginning of things.

II. The Work of Redemption is ascribed to Jesus Christ the Son of the Virgin
Mary.

The Word Redemption does naturally suppose Loss and Misery; and that brings to
Mind, a Sad and Dismal Story as old as Adam.

In the Beginning of Time, the Great and Mighty God Created Heaven and Earth;
who, when he had richly decked the Firmament with Glorious Lights, and furnished
the Elements with Variety of Creatures, the Emblems of his Wisdom and Goodness,
did then make Man, to whom he intended to commit the Government of the Lower
World; That therefore so Great Authority might be Beneficial to, and
Indisputable by, the rest of the Creation, he stamps upon him his own Image:
Man is Created in Holiness, his Mind was Ennobled with choice Faculties and
Graces; he had a Rational Soul, placed in a Body well built, and every way
fitted for the Service of God and Himself. This Glorious Creature had a
Plantation of God's own Planting allotted him for his Court, (a place richly
provided) and freedom of enjoying every thing, one Only Tree Excepted.
Abstinence from this was the Chief Standard of his Obedience, and the Trial of
his Love and Duty to the Great Creator: Thus Gloriously Made, and Plentifully
Provided for, God left him, together with the Partner of all this Happiness, to
their Own Free-Wills: A Blessed State sure, wherein, besides the Holiness of
their Nature, they had the Advantage of Intelligent and Rational Souls; The
Lively Sense of Divine Favor to Restrain every Illegal Motion, and the Hopes
of Future Beneficence to preserve them in their Native Integrity: But over and
above all these, lest Forgetfulness, or Inconsiderateness, might, on one hand,
betray; or any Subtle Temptation on the other, overpower, or surprise them,
the Forbidden Tree was committed to the Guard of the King of Terrors, DEATH,
Genesis 2.17.
In the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die: Grim, Ghastly DEATH!
Death, that Implacable Tyrant, who, with his Iron-Mace, does Break the Vessels
of the Almighty Potter to Dust: One would have thought, a bare Glimpse of him
would have made a Lump of Clay to Quake; and, if Love could not, yet Fear of
him would have kept Them within their Conceded Liberty; but Death, as yet, had
no Sting: The Arch-Fiend, Lucifer, well-vers'd in all the Black-Arts of
Rebellion, resolves, if possible, to draw this Happy Couple to Revolt from
their Creator; and being full of all Subtilty, he Attacks this New Exalted
Prince in his Weakest and most Defenseless Part, his Wife; 'twas true, he had
not Rays enough left of his former Glory, under which he might shroud this
Dreadful Guard: yet knew he how to instill into Eve's Too Listening Ears a
Prejudice, hinting, That the Reason of God's Strict Prohibition, was no other
than his Averseness to Their Happiness, being extremely unwilling that their
Eyes should be Opened; by means of which Prejudice, he Bolts up Her Heart too
fast, for any Thoughts of God's Favor, or Her Duty to Re-enter; he then fills
Her Fancy with Great and Glorious Appearances of a God-like Being, or
Knowledge, Genesis 3.5.
In the day ye eat thereof ye shall be as Gods, knowing Good and Evil: These
Goodly Appearances beget in Her Mind Passionate Desires, and Eager Wishes, so
Vast, that the Supposed Joy and Delight thereof soon Inclined and Bowed Her
Will; and straight the Fascinated Eyes look up, and behold the Deadly Fruit
with Pleasure; the Mouth Waters, the Feet Hasten, the Hands Pluck, the Lips
Receive, the Teeth Grind, and the Throat Swallows the Bitter Morsel; her
Tongue, besides the help it contributed to Chewing, does straight engage the
Ears of Her (as yet Innocent) Partner, and with the Powerful Charms of Pleasure
and Wisdom, Genesis 3.6.
It was Fruit good for Food, pleasant to the Eyes, and Expedient to make one
Wise. She soon Overcame, and Captivated his Understanding, and so drew him into
the Conspiracy; hereupon a Deluge of Miseries Broke in upon them and their
Posterity; for the Law of God was Violated, his Honor Blasphemed, his Anger
Incensed, Guilt Contracted, the Favor of Heaven Lost, and God's Justice
Provoked to that degree, that Mankind had inevitably Perished under the Weight
thereof, had not the Son of God stood in the Gap, and made such Proposals for
our Redemption, as were every way Satisfactory, Offering himself, in Person, to
Satisfy the Wrath that Man had so justly Incurred, by the Humiliation of
Himself, to Repair the Honor Man had Injured; by his Obedience to Recover the
Favor Man had lost; by His Blood to Purge away the Guilt Man had Contracted;
by His Grace to break the Chains of Blindness and Perverseness (the Seeds of
all Sin) which Man was so Fast Tied and Bound with, and by the Merits of His
Life and Passion, to Re-open the Kingdom of Heaven, which Man, by his
Transgression, had Shut against himself.

Now he that could bear the Wrath of an infinite God, could give Divine Justice
a complete satisfaction; he that could repair God's wronged Honor, that could
reconcile God to Sinners, that could cure Ignorance, and renew Man's depraved
Will and Affections, and he that could set open the Kingdom of Heaven, could be
no other nor less than God; for humane Nature could not stand under the Wrath
of God, Infinite Justice required Divine Merits; he that could give unto God
the full Honor due unto his Name, must perform Obedience beyond the Impotency
of Lapsed Creatures; he that undertakes to Satisfy for the Sins of others,
must Himself be without Sin, and also Offer a Sacrifice truly Propitiatory. He
that recovers for others the Lost Favor of God, must be one that never did
Displease Him: He that can Remove Natural (and to Humane Power) Invincible
Ignorance must be the fountain of Knowledge: he that can reform unruly Wills
must be the God of Spirits, and he that can open the Kingdom of Heaven which
Sin had shut, must find out a new and a living way to it. But all this, Jesus
Christ the Son of the Virgin Mary, did, and much more, in order to redeem us;
he must be therefore God.

Man cannot Redeem his Brother Psalm. 49.7.
, nor make an Atonement for him, no though he should live long, viz. in God's
Service, and to his Glory; man cannot find a Ransom to give to God which he
will accept of; the Reason follows v. 8.
, For the Redemption of their Soul is Precious, or as it is in another
Translation, It cost more to redeem it; God required more than Man could give,
so that Man must let the redeeming of his Brother's Soul alone for ever.

Man become guilty of the breach of God's Holy Law, and consequently subject to
the Penalty, Eternal Condemnation, it was impossible (upon the account of God's
Justice) he should be restored, i. e. acquitted, received into God's Grace
here, and Glory hereafter, unless a Righteousness were found sufficient to
satisfy that Law, as well in respect of the Obedience required by it, as the
Punishment justly due upon the Violation of it. The reason of this is plain, in
that the Law was part of God's Will, and must therefore have its Effect, that
is to say, Man must either punctually observe it, or suffer for the contempt of
it; otherwise, God must depart from his Nature, and leave his Justice
unsatisfied, which were Blasphemy to suppose Mat. 5.18.
, now no Creature (Man being fallen from his Integrity) was in a capacity for
either of these; and had Man sought for help to the Angels, he had been
deceived, seeing that they were chargeable with Folly Job 4.18.
; and for the suffering part, if their Love could have engaged them to the
undertaking, (which is not Rational to conjecture) yet having a nearer access
to, and a more intuitive Knowledge of God, than* Man was capable of; they could
not but have clearer Apprehensions of the fierceness of his Wrath, than to
expose themselves to the bearing of it; and if (which is too great a
Peradventure) their Love could have surmounted their Fear, yet their
Imbecility would have sunk under the Burden. But we will go farther: admit
they could have sustained it, yet the Dignity of their Persons being no way
proportionable to the Honor of the offended Deity, this would have occasioned
their Sufferings to fall short of their necessary Merit, and so the Redemption
by them hoped for, must have been imperfect and of no sufficient Validity.

We are told farther Heb. 10.4.
That it is impossible the Blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sins,
should by any Virtue inherent in them Expiate or Atone for sins; these were but
Typical; nor can the blood of one Man, though never so Righteous, have
satisfied for the sins of others; because there could not be in his
performances or sufferings a sufficient Merit. He must be God therefore as well
as Man, that there may be found an infinite Value in all things done by him, as
a Redeemer.

We can never be assured that our Reconciliation is perfected, that a complete
Reparation is made to the Honor and Justice of God, except we are assured that
the person who undertook this, be of the same infinite Dignity as the offended;
for weak Causes can produce but weak Effects. So that if our Redemption did not
proceed from an infinite Power, it would be imperfect and uncertain.

Therefore are we Taught that our Souls are Redeemed 1 Pet. 1.19.
, With the precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without Blemish and without
Spot.

We might collect a farther Justification of the Deity of Jesus Christ, the Son
of the Virgin Mary from his Omniscience.

It is proper to God only to know all things. Yet it is apparent, that the Holy
Jesus knew all things Past, Present, and Future, without the help of Discourse
or Reasoning, they were all present to him. David ascribes to God as an
Excellency of his Nature, that he knew his Thoughts, the Ideas and Reasonings
that skulked in the most secret Recesses of his Mind Psalm. 139.2.
; Thou know my thoughts afar off, even before I know them my self, and how
often did our Savior reprove the malicious Thoughts of the Scribes and
Pharisees, thereby manif sting that he made the Heart, seeing he was so privy
to it.

It was an impertinent Question which the Jews put forth Joh. 7.15.
, They marvelled, saying, How knows this Man letters, having never Learned?
i. e. How does he thus understand the Law and the Prophets, whenas we know he
never was brought up in the School of the Prophets? This I say, was very
ridiculous in them, when they were daily sensible as is Recorded Luke 6.8.
, That he knew their Thoughts; he could tax them with their evil Conceptions
not yet brought forth in Words Mat. 9.4.
, Wherefore think ye evil in your Hearts? He that did understand what was
conspired in the secret Cabinet of their Hearts, could be no stranger to what
was open and legible in the Books of their Law.

For our full satisfaction of the Son of the Virgin Mary's Omniscience, let us
hearken to the Samaritan Woman Joh. 4.29.
: Come, see a Man that told me all things that ever I did: Is not this the
Christ? He has discovered those things, that it is not to be imagined how he
should know them; I had thought my Heart had been deeper than the Well, but yet
he whom I concluded incapable to come at Water, because he wanted a Bucket to
draw with, has fetched up from the bottom of my Heart things that have been
long kept Secret, things that have been hid from others by Fear and Care, and
from my Self, by the forgetfullness of many Years. What can he be less than
God, to whose Eyes all things are so open and naked? Heb. 4.13. If any judge
the forecited instance not satisfactory to the point before us, let them
consult Jo. 21.17.
Lord thou know all things, etc. This Jesus not only heard what Men were
speaking, but saw also what they were thinking.

If we reflect upon his Nativity, such was the Mystery of his Incarnation, a
Virgin to become a Mother; such the Majesty and Attendance as gave ample
Testimony of his Deity; St. John dances in the Womb, a new Star arises in the
East, three great Kings (led as may be supposed by Balaam's Prophecy Number. 24.17.
) undertake a tedious Journey to pay their Homage to the King of Glory become
incarnate, a Choire of Angels ushered in this King of Israel with their
Heavenly Anthem.

What shall we say? The very Oracles (that is Images) wherein the Devils acted,
and imposed upon Men, did attest at this Nativity; that Nature had brought
forth a King, and having thus Declared, they submitted to his Scepter; for
whereas formerly they received Worship and Adoration, they now prostrate
themselves even to a breaking in pieces.

We read likewise that Augustus Caesar having first presented his Sacrifice,
enquired of the Oracle who should succeed him in the Empire; as if this had
been too difficult, or rather because the Resolution must produce his own
shame; the Devil refused all answer till after a second Sacrifice, and then did
Declare.

Me puer Haebreus, Divos Deus ipse gubernans
Cedere sede jubet, Tristemque redire sub orcum,
Aris ergo dehinc Tacitis abscedito nostris.
The Newborn Hebrew Infant, who is God, far transcending all other Gods, has
Commanded me to withdraw, and to retire to my desolate Mansions of Darkness.
Seeing therefore I must obey, give your self no farther trouble to frequent my
Altars, for you will always henceforwards find here a profound silence.

Hereupon, Augustus Erected an Altar, bearing this Inscription,

Ara Primogeniti Dei;

The Altar of the First Begotten Son of God.

Farther, St. Paul speaking of Jesus Christ Romans 1.4.
, averrs, That he was declared to be the Son of God with Power; the Powerful,
or Mighty Works which he did, throughout the Course of his Life, were
Demonstrations, that he was the Son of God, because no other could do such
things.

The Case may thus be stated, No Ordinary or Natural Means could possibly
induce that Faith among Men, That Jesus Christ, the Son of the Virgin Mary, was
the Son of God; but seeing this Faith was necessary, in order to the obtaining
Eternal Life, therefore was he pleased to do many things beyond the reach of
Natural Power.

His own Discourse imports as much, Joh. 11.4.
where he Interprets the occasion of Working a Miracle, to be an happy
opportunity of Manifesting Himself to be the Son of God; for, says he, This
Sickness is not unto Death, but for the Glory of God, that the Son of God may
be glorified thereby. All his Miracles did publish the same Truth; I shall
Instance at present but in Two.

The Winds raging, and the Sea roaring, and both being deaf to Humane Commands,
or Entreaties, did readily submit to His Authority, Matthew. 14.33.
upon his Speaking of a Word they were hushed into a Calm: What could the
Spectators hereupon conclude, other than of a Truth, thou art the Son of God?
Humane Flesh cannot possibly so conceal thy Deity, but that these Admirable
Effects of thy Power will more discover it.

Nay, the Devils themselves paid such Ready Obedience, as did declare the
sufficiency of his Authority; they disputed not the Case, nor would they try
their Power and Strength, but foreseeing they were to be dispossessed, Mark
5.7.
I Adjure thee (says one, in behalf of the rest) that thou Torment me not:
(...), not to send him to his Prison, to his place of Punishment and Restraint,
where he was to be kept Close and Tormented. What could be a plainer Proof of
his Deity, than the Acknowledgment of those Infernal Spirits, how that they
were wholly at his Disposal? It is evident, that having formerly felt the
Effects of his Irresistible Power, when they were turned out of Heaven, they
dreaded, by the least Act of Disobedience, to Provoke him, least he drove them
to their Torment before the Time.

With Instances of like nature the Holy Writ is so plentifully stored, that the
Reader will not take it discourteously to be referred thither, especially when
he will there find, the Jews Acknowledging, the Gentiles Admiring, the Apostles
Proclaiming, the Evangelists Recording, and Multitudes offering to Seal with
their Blood the Truth of the Doctrine and Miracles, which were Ample
Demonstrations of the Deity of Jesus Christ the Son of the Virgin Mary.

Lastly, For farther Proof of the same Assertion, we Appeal unto another
Trinity of Witnesses, viz. God the Father, God the Holy Ghost, and the Sacred
Scriptures.

I. We Appeal to God the Father.

If Two or Three Creditable Persons Affirm a Thing, the Wisdom of Men has
Subscribed to such an Affirmation, as a Rational and Warrantable Ground for
Belief: Hence the Apostle Argues, 1 John 5.9.
If we Receive the Witness of Men, the Witness of God is greater, i. e. ought
to be received with greater Deference and Veneration: Ver. 11.
We have the Testimony, this is the Record, that God has given to us Eternal
Life, and this Life is in his Son. The direct way to Acquire this Life, is
Rightly to Believe in him, as the Son of God Ver. 10.
; The Reason is given, why we ought not to Fear, Doubt, or Waver in this
Fundamental Article; because we cannot doubt, in this Case, but with manifest
Injury offered to the Truth of God; for, we must make him a Liar, because God
has given this Testimony of his Son: And the same Apostle says, 1 John 2.22.
They are Liars that deny Jesus to be the Christ; and not only Liars, but
Antichrists, for they deny both the Father and the Son; they deny the Son
directly, and the Father by consequence, because he has Testified of the Son:
So that a Man cannot depart from, or deny this Article of Faith, That Jesus
Christ, the Son of the Virgin Mary, is the Son of God, without becoming a Liar
and an Antichrist.

At the Baptizing the Son of the Virgin Mary in the River Jordan, God the
Father did openly declare this Truth, Matthew. 3.17.
Lo a Voice from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased: The Time at which, the Place from which this Voice came, and the
Substance of the Voice, are all manifest Declarations, that he that was then
Baptized, was no other than the Son of God.

Again, when our Savior condescended to give to his Disciples a more
Convincing Testimony of his Deity, he blessed their Eyes with a Glimpse of his
Glory Mat. 17.2.
, and for their farther Confirmation, that they were under no Delusion, nor
were encouraged to greater hopes than what should in time be accomplished,
beside the extraordinary Majesty of his Face, the Heavenly Fulgure and Luster
of his Raiment, the Tendance and Ministry of Moses and Elias, they have from
God's Mouth, Verse. 5.
This is my beloved Son. in whom I am well pleased.

The Apostle Illustrates this whole matter 2 Pet. 1.17.
, For he received from God the Father, Honor and Glory, when there came such a
Voice from the Excellent Glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased: If we consult the Verses preceding, we shall find the Reason why the
Apostle urged this so strongly, viz. least after his departure (which he looked
for every day) the Deity of Christ, and the Redemption wrought by him might be
forgotten or disbelieved, as the Gnostics were busy it should; he therefore,
by way of Prevention, delivers this Testimony of God the Father, in the behalf
of Jesus Christ his Son our Lord; and assures them, that he was an Eyewitness
of the Majesty of Christ at his Transfiguration Verse. 16.
, and also an Ear-witness of the Voice from Heaven, Verse. 18.
We heard it when we were with him in the Holy Mount.

Moreover, that the Tragedy of his approaching Death might not startle their
Faith in this Article, a little before his Passion, while our Lord was
Discoursing of it, John 12.28.
There came a Voice from Heaven, Attesting, He was heard in what he desired;
for, the Voice said, I have both glorified my Name, and will glorify it again;
(this was the Subject of our Savior's Prayer) I have glorified the Name of my
Truth and Mercy to Mankind, in sending my Son into the World, according to my
Purpose and Promise, and I will also now Glorify the Name of my Wisdom, Mercy
and Justice, in exacting and taking of that my Son, the Punishment due unto the
Sins of Believers. Our Savior's Words justify this exposition v. 30.
, for he told the Disciples and the rest of the Spectators, This Voice came not
because of me, but for your sakes; I needed neither satisfying nor reminding me
who I am, or what I am to do, my Father's gracious intent in this Voice was
your good, it was merely for your sakes, in compassion to your hard heartedness
that you might believe; you were not willing to believe me telling you that the
Father and I were one, but now you cannot refuse believing, seeing he speaks
the same thing from Heaven.

God the Father did also testify this Truth at the Ascension of his Son Heb.
1.6.
, And again, when he brings in the first begotten into the World, he says,
let all the Angels of God worship him. If you look to the end of the v. 3.
, you may know the particular date of this Command; When he had by himself
purged our sins, he sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on High, and then
the Father said, Let all the Angels of God worship him.

The same is also declared by St. Paul Phil. 2.9, 10.
, How that God the Father had highly exalted his Son Jesus Christ, and had
given him a Name above every Name, that at the Name of Jesus, every Knee should
bow, of things in Heaven, and things in the Earth, and things under the Earth.

II. We pass on to the Testimony of the Holy Ghost.

The Spirit of God which is called the Spirit of Truth, because it is
impossible he should bear false Witness, testified the Deity of Jesus Christ
the Son of the Virgin Mary at his Conception Luke 1.35.
; The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall
over-shadow thee; therefore also that holy thing that shall be Born of thee,
shall be called the Son of God: The stress of which Words lies upon the
Illative therefore, and the Sense may be thus taken; That the Son of God was
designed to be Born of a Woman, because the Holy Ghost shall over-shadow her;
the Blessed Spirit was concerned to prepare that Nature after an extraordinary
manner, which the Godhead was determined to assume; and seeing the Holy God
was pleased to dwell in Flesh, the Holy Ghost must prepare and form that Flesh.

Again: At his Baptism, the Holy Ghost testified the Deity of Jesus Christ the
Son of the Virgin Mary, for he Descended upon him Mat. 3.16.
as a Dove, not in the shape or form of a Dove, says the learned Dr. Hammond
on the place; but he lighted upon him as Doves use to light, who hover over,
and over-shadow the place first, which they intend to light upon.

At this Baptism of our Savior, there was Concilium Augustissimum, a most
Majestical meeting of the Trinity; God the Father spoke from Heaven,
challenging and owning him whom John Baptized for his Son, God the Holy Ghost
descended in a bodily appearance, God the Son was there clad in humane Nature,
and being in the form of a Servant, he submitted himself to the fulfilling of
all Righteousness.

Again the Holy Ghost particularly declared this Truth to Simeon Luke 2.26, 27.
, It was revealed to him by the Holy Ghost, that he should not see Death,
before he had seen the Lords Christ, and that this Son of the Virgin Mary was
he, Simeon was informed by the same Holy Spirit, as may be collected from his
Action and Profession *; v. 28, 29, 30.
For he then in the Temple took this Son of the Virgin Mary up in his Arms and
Blessed God, saying, Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in Peace
according to thy word, (i. e. promise by the Holy Ghost) for mine Eyes have
seen thy Salvation; the Person in whom Salvation is appointed.

This very Descent of the Holy Ghost upon our Savior at his Baptism, is called
by St. Paul 1 Cor. 2.4.
(...), The Demonstration of the Spirit, a Testimony given by God from Heaven,
intimating and confirming the Verity of Christ's Godhead, a Demonstration, for
the Holy Ghost then Demonstrated to John and others, that he who was then
Baptized was the Son of God.

I might have argued the Testimony of the Holy Ghost from the Prophecies of the
Old Testament; for as says the Apostle 2 Pet. 1.21.
, The Prophecies came not by the Will of Man, (Men undertook not this office of
their own Heads, nor did they deliver their own fancies and persuasions for
Prophecies) But Holy Men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, as
they were inspired and instructed by the Holy Spirit of God; therefore they
that deny the Deity of Jesus Christ, would do well to take heed unto the sure
word of Prophecy, given by the Spirit of God, and there they will find most
ample Declarations, that he who should be Born of the Virgin Mary, was God as
well as Man.

The gift of the Holy Ghost was the effect of Christ's promise, the Time and
Place of his coming was expressly assigned by Christ Luke 24.49.
, Tarry ye at Jerusalem till ye be endued with power from on High. John
Baptized his Disciples with Water but, Acts 1.4, 5.
, Christ promised to Baptize his Disciples with the Holy Ghost, and commanded
them not to depart from Jerusalem, but there to wait for the completion of the
promise; and accordingly in the place, and at the time, we find the Holy Ghost
was plentifully poured forth upon them. Acts 2.1, 2, 3.
When the day of Pentecost was fully come, the Apostles were all with one
accord in one place, viz. in an upper Room of the Temple, where they constantly
performed their Devotions, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost.

Farther, the Holy Ghost did Testify the Deity of Jesus Christ, because of the
ends and purposes of his coming; which our Savior expresses to be two.

1. He was to glorify Christ Joh. 16.14.
, He shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine, and show it unto you;
whether he instructs, whether he comforts you, in all he shall accord with me,
and thereby it will be manifest that I came from God.

2. He was to reprove the World Joh. 16.8.
: (...), as the learned Dr. Hammond observes, is to act the part of an
Advocate, to convince the Accuser, and maintain a Cause against all
Gainsayers; inexcusabiles penitus demonstrabit, arguet evidentibus Argumentis,
and probationibus docebit, ita ut tergiversari non possit. The Holy Ghost was
to plead and justify the cause of Christ in three particular Acts.

I. He was to convince the World of their Sin of Unbelief v. 9.
. His descent was an Argument of Christ's Deity; what could they farther object
against his being God, when now their Eyes beheld the Effusion of the Holy
Ghost? The various Operations of this Spirit of Grace, were so many proofs of
the Deity of Christ.

II. He was to plead the cause of Christ and to convince the World, as to the
point of his Righteousness v. 10.
, He shall reprove the World of Righteousness, because, I go to my Father. The
Spirit of Grace descending from above shall testify my Ascension, whereby by
it will be manifest that I am God, and that there was no Unrighteousness in me,
as they Blasphemously reported.

III. He was to plead the Cause of Christ and to reprove the World of Judgment
v. 11.
, Because the Prince of this World is judged; not only that the Spirit of Grace
sent by me shall manifest that he that Reigned in the hearts of the Children of
Disobedience, and excited them to Betray, Condemn, and Crucify me, was the
Spirit of Error, and the Enemy of their Salvation; but also this Spirit
assisting my Disciples to work Wonders and Signs in my Name, as curing
Diseases, and casting out Devils, shall thereby judge, overpower, and conquer
the Prince of this World.

III. The Scriptures also Testify that Jesus Christ the Son of the Virgin Mary
was God.

We are commanded to search the Scriptures, to look into them carefully, with
an earnest desire and endeavor to find out the meaning thereof. Whereupon St.
Chrysostom's Exhortation was, Audite saeculares, comparate vobis Biblia; but
Bibles now are of little more estimation than old Almanacks; if a matter of
doubt arises, we do sometimes, but very rarely consult them; our Hands delight
not in handling the Word of Life, whereas they are too busy with Romances, and
Play-books, with Folly and Ribaldry; and I fear this is not altogether the
effect of Sloth, Vanity or Laziness in the Laity, but occasioned by an odd
Fashion crept up of late among such, whose lips should preserve Knowledge, the
only care and study now, being that public Discourses be well larded (if not
to Nauseousness) with flowers of Rhetoric; Terms of Philosophy, Tropes and
Figures to Tickle itching Ears are plenty, but Quotations of Scripture so thin
and sparing, that sometimes in an hour's Discourse, not one place of Scripture
is to be found besides the Text; this makes some conclude it a trouble to carry
their Bibles with them, seeing the spirit of the Prophets will not come to this
Touchstone, and by degrees they arrive to the Opinion that they are as useless
at Home as at Church. I shall here presume to declare a true observation, that
when Scripture was used as a Principal part of the Sermon, the Instruction sank
deeper into Men's hearts, and Piety and Holiness was much more visible in Men's
Conversations. I might add, many Pernicious and Blasphemous Principles had yet
lain in Darkness, or at least had not been vented in Public, had not care been
first taken to leave off the Light.

We are charged to search the Scriptures Joh. 1.49.
, because, they testify of Christ We cannot turn over the Bible, but the
Majesty of Christ will appear; he is as well the matter as the Author; and if
you will hearken to their Testimony, you shall hear them declare, that Jesus
Christ the Son of the Virgin Mary is God.

Take heed therefore unto your selves, Acts 20.28.
and to all the Flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to
feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his Blood; to any
considering person two things here offer themselves.

1. He that purchased the Church was God, the Church of God which He has
purchased, i. e. God.

2. That this God was Jesus Christ, because it is said, he purchased the Church
with his Blood, neither the Father nor the Holy Ghost having any Blood, but
Jesus Christ as he assumed Humane Nature; so that Jesus Christ the Son of the
Virgin Mary, was the God that purchased the Church with his Blood; read
likewise 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Romans 9.5. Christ is called, God blessed for ever.
Amen.

Great is the mystery of Godliness: 1 Timothy 3.16.
God was manifest in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels,
preached nto the Gentiles, believed on in the World, received up into Glory.
Now it is manifest, this Scripture sets forth him to be God, of whom all these
things were verified; and it is also manifestly set down in the Scriptures,
that all these were true of Jesus Christ; he was found in the form of a
Servant, he took our Nature upon him, he was justified by the Spirit of God to
be the Messiah, he was preached unto the Gentiles as the true and only Savior,
by Faith in whose Name they might receive Salvation; he was believed on in the
World; while he was in the World, his Disciples and some others believed him to
be the Son of God; he was received up into Glory, he openly in the sight of
many Witnesses ascended up into Heaven; wherefore he that was thus manifest in
the Flesh, justified by the Spirit, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in
the World, and received up into Glory was God, and this is the great Mystery of
Godliness or of the Christian Religion.

The Scriptures Testify that Jesus Christ the Son of the Virgin Mary was God,
in that both the Prophecies Recorded in the Old, and the performances in the
New exactly accord and center in Christ.

Adam, that had the first Promise was told, it should be in the Humane Nature
that the Son of God should appear to redeem the World, Genesis 3.15.
The seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents Head.

Abraham was informed that he should be of his Posterity, Genesis 12.3.
In thee shall all the Families of the Earth be Blessed.

Jacob had a Revelation of his Tribe, Genesis 49.8.
Judah, thou art he whom thy Brethren shall praise.

David was told that he should be particularly of his Family, 2 Samuel 7.12.
And when thy days shall be fulfilled, I will set up thy Seed after thee, which
shall proceed out of thy Bowels, and I will establish his Kingdom.

Isaiah received a Message from God, that this Son of God should be born of a
Virgin, Isa. 7.14.
A Virgin shall conceive.

Micah had notice of the place of his Nativity, Micah 5.2.
* But thou Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of
Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be Ruler in
Israel: All these Prophecies were exactly accomplished in the person of Jesus
Christ the Son of the Virgin Mary.

Was it said the Seed of the Woman? This was punctually performed in the
strictest Sense, Mat. 1.18.
The Birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise, when as his Mother Mary was
espoused to Joseph (before they came together) she was found with Child of the
Holy Ghost. Was he to be of Abraham's Posterity? it is accordingly Recorded
Mat. 1.1.
, The Book of the Generation of Jesus Christ the Son of David, the Son of
Abraham. To this purpose the Apostle Argues Gal. 3.29.
, They that are Christ's, viz. true Believers, are Abraham's seed; being one in
Christ they must be so accounted, in that he was so. Was he to be of the Tribe
of Judah? So says the Scripture he was Heb. 7.14.
, It is evident our Lord sprang out of Judah. Was he to be of the Family of
David? This was so manifestly true of the Son of the Virgin Mary, that even the
Blind saw it. Hear them Mat. 9.27.
, Thou Son of David, have Mercy on us. Was he to be born of a Virgin? You heard
it proved Mat. 1.18.
. Was he to be born in Bethlehem? So testify the Scriptures he was Mat. 2.1.
, Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judaea, in the days of Herod the King.

Again: The Scriptures Testify, that Jesus Christ the Son of the Virgin Mary
was God, because to that very end, they had their being Joh. 20.31.
; These things are Written (not only what I have wrote, but what Matthew, Mark
and Luke have Wrote also) that you might believe Jesus is the Son of God, and
that believing you might have life through his Name; they must therefore
necessarily testify sufficiently of him, what they were intended to induce us
to believe of him; viz. that he is God.

There want not plenty of other Arguments to evince the Deity of Jesus Christ;
As, that we are Commanded to be Baptized in his Name, and Baptism ought not to
be Administered in the Name of any Creature: We are also Commanded to Believe in
his Name, and it were bootless to Believe in any Name but the Name of God: We
are called Christians from him, and it cannot be thought that the Church of God
has so far degenerated, as to lay down the Name of God, and submit to be
called by the Name of a Creature: We might have Argued, that Divine Honor,
Praise and Glory, are Ascribed to him: We have that Knowledge, that God has
declared himself Jealous of his Honor, and he has said expressly, Isai. 42.8.
He would not give his Honor to another. Nay, we have known his Jealousy burn
like Fire against such as have presumed upon his Glory; for this cause the
Angels were thrust out of Heaven Isai. 14.12, 13, 14, 15.
; Herod, Alexander, Caligula, and Domitian, have paid dearly for their
Usurpation in this Kind.

Ascribing Glory and Honor, was by the Jews allowed an Acknowledgment of the
Deity. Whenever the Priest in she Sanctuary made Mention of the Name of God,
the People used some Forms of Blessing, or Praising God. This may be gathered
from Deuteronomy. 32.3.
, where Moses said, Because I will publish the Name of the Lord, Ascribe ye
Greatness unto our God: In this cafe we shall find the like Glory Ascribed to
the Son of the Virgin Mary, Matt. 21.9.
Hosanna to the Son of David. The Jews were ordered to observe the Feast of
Tabernacles, which, as Expositors agree, not only* remembered them of their
Dwelling in Tents, but did also Prefigure God's pitching his Tabernacle in our
Flesh: At this Feast, whenever any. Name, or Title of God was recited by the
Priest, the People Repeated Hosanna, which signified, Save us we beseech thee.
St. Jerome was of opinion, That much about the time of Christ's Incarnation, the
Jews were wont often to Read the Hundred and Eighteenth Psalm, which they
Interpreted of Christ; in the Twenty fifth Verse whereof, this word Hosanna is
found; this was frequently Sung in their Synagogues; and the Jews being at this
time big with Expectation of the Messiah, met him Riding to Jerusalem, and
Saluted him with Hosanna, the very word they used to Salute the Majesty of God
on their Feast of Tabernacles, a Type of Christ's Incarnation; so that by this
Salutation, at this Time, they cannot be thought to have meant any other, than
an owning, That GOD was come among them. To Justify this Opinion, I have Two
Reasons; 1. Because in the latter part of the Verse, viz. Matt. 21.9.
it is said, Hosanna in the Highest. 2. Because we Read, Luke 19.40.
That if they should have held their peace, and have forborne to Ascribe this
Honor and Glory to Christ, the Stones out of the Wall would have done it: So
that if Men had been obstinate, and would not have Acknowledged him as God
their Redeemer, the Stones would have Glorified him as God their Creator.


The Christian Church has continued even to our days Two Representations of
the Deity of Christ, which the Prince of Darkness has labored to get decry'd,
as too Superstitious and Ceremonious, only that they growing out of Request,
he might gradually obliterate the Sense and Belief of the Deity of the Holy
Jesus; the one of these is Bowing at the Name of Jesus, and the other is the
Eulogy given unto him, whenever his Gospel is Read in the Church, saying, when
the Gospel is named, GLORY BE TO THEE, O LORD; and when it is ended, THANKS BE
GIVEN TO THEE O LORD FOR THIS GOSPEL: I referr it to modest men to Judge,
whether laying aside the use of these, be not a Departing from one kind of
Evidence of the Deity of Christ.

I might have added, that in the end, as also in other places of the Epistles,
Writ to the Church of God, by the Apostles, Christ is Prayed to as God; for God
the Father is Supplicated for Love, Jesus Christ for Grace, and the Holy Ghost
for the Communication of his Gifts. 2 Cor. 13.13.
The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the Communion of
the Holy Ghost be with you all, Amen.

Gal. 1.3.
Grace be to you, and peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus
Christ.

But next to Plainness, my great Care has been Brevity, as much as so weighty
a Point will admit of.

Having thus Vindicated the Deity of Jesus Christ, and from the Names given
him, from the Properties of the Deity Attributed to him, that is to say, from
his Infinite Power, Wisdom, and c. visible in the Great Works of Creation and
Redemption, as also from the Testimony of God the Father, God the Holy Ghost,
and from the holy Scriptures, proved, that Jesus Christ, the Son of the Virgin
Mary, was, and is, True and Perfect God:

Now permit me to speak unto you in the words of St. Peter, 2 Pet. 1.16.
I have not followed cunningly devised Fables, nor have I offered you any other
Arguments or Proofs than what are Proper, and tend naturally to evince this
Article of our Faith; I have, in the whole management of them, followed the
plainest method, hoping, that in so doing, I have spoke to your Understanding;
if I have shown any zeal, or warmth, it is upon the account that I take it for
granted, could the Wit of Men, or Malice of Devils overthrow this Foundation,
it could not be long before the Gates of Hell would prevail against the Church
of Christ; And now, blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who, by making known to us, that Jesus Christ, the Son of the Virgin Mary was
also the Eternal Son of God, has Taught us,

First, That we Christians of the Gentiles, as it is Written, Ephesians. 2.19.20.
Are no more Strangers or Foreigners, but Fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and
of the Household of God, and are built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the Chief Cornerstone; so that he that
ever was, still is the Head of the Church, viz. Jesus Christ, God blessed for
evermore.

I find our Savior declaring. Matthew. 16.18.
Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church: Thou art Peter, I
so Surnamed thee Mark 3.16.
, and as thy Name imports, so thou art, viz. a Living Stone in my Spiritual
Temple; upon this Rock, this Confession of me to be the Son of the Living God
Matt. 16.16.
, I will build my Church: The word Rock I take here to be mentioned
Allegorically, only alluding to that Memorable Rock in the Wilderness; and
thus taken, it signifies, that as that Rock then Refreshed the Israelites in
the Parched and Barren Wilderness; so now, the Knowledge and Confession of my
Deity shall be as Refreshing, Comfortable, and Satisfactory to all Believers,
to allay the heat and burning of their Guilt, to quench the fire of Divine
Wrath and Vengeance, as were the Streams that issued out of that Rock, to cool
your Forefathers Thirst, and to satisfy their Appetites. It were certainly a
great mistake, with the Church of Rome, to take such notice of the Affinity of
words, as to Interpret Peter and the Rock to be the same thing, as if Christ
had here Promised to Build his Church upon Peter, or were weary of his Spouse,
and did now intend to give her a Bill of Divorce, and leave her to another;
this must be the consequence of that Interpretation which our Adversaries so
highly favor; and before we can consent to it, we must Contend with Two such
Difficulties as I judge Unconquerable.

I. If we say that Christ Promised to build his Church upon Peter, How shall we
answer that of the Apostle 1 Cor. 3.11.
, Other Foundation can no Man lay, than that which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ; yet not him, but Peter, say the Romanists; but let these wise
Master Builders know, that the Stone they refuse is Realy and Rightfully the
Head-stone in the Corner, and so dangerous is it here to stumble, that he that
falls on this Stone, that makes this a Rock of Offense, that doubts and
will not admit Christ to be the Head of the Church shall be broken, shall be
wounded in his Soul, but on whomsoever it shall fall, viz. such as through
Pride or Contumacy shall strive to shake, or pull this Stone out of its place,
it shall grind them to Powder, divine Vengeance shall dash them into a thousand
pieces.

How will they who expound these Words (Upon this Rock) of Peter and not of
Christ, or that Confession made of him by Peter, get over the clause of that
Verse, where it is said, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, viz.
the Church built on this Rock, i. e. neither the Power, nor Policy of Hell,
should prevail against it; yet it is visible that against Peter the Gates of
Hell greatly prevailed: Then how must the Church totter and shake, when,
according to them, this famous Rock on which it was built did so tremble and
reel.

But, to put an end to this Controversy; we have a sure Rule, to which all
Christians do well to have regard Ephesians. 1.22.
; God, the Father of Glory has given his Son Jesus Christ to be Head over all
things to the Church: Which words do abundantly condemn the Impudence of such
as presume upon a Power to order things in the Church, contrary to the Revealed
Will of the Head thereof.

On the other hand, seeing the Son of God is Head of the Church, how
Blameworthy, nay, how Audacious and Inexcusable are they, who spurn against,
and deny any of his Ordinances? I mean such, whose Froward Zeal has Exploded
the Lord's Prayer as a Form Obsolete, and have laid aside the Sacraments as
useless, which the Head of the Church Instituted as Generally Necessary for
Salvation: Seeing Jesus Christ is Head of the Church, it is a Riddle to me
whence Men derive their Power of Altering, Adding to, or Diminishing from what
he has Ordained.

Having now so Sure, and Sufficient a Foundation, our Main Care must be what we
Build upon it: We are told, 1 Cor. 3.12.
if we Build Wood, Hay, or Stubble; that is, Wooden, and Heterodox Opinions,
the Trash of Philosophical Notions, or, the Dry Stubble of Humane Inventions
and Fancies, these will not abide the Trial; but if we Build thereon Gold,
Silver, or Precious Stones; Solid, Clear, and Ornamental Truths, such as may
Direct, Justify, and Adorn our Conversations, these will Abide; therefore I
shall accordingly Rear this Truth upon this Foundation.

II. Is Jesus Christ the Son of God? And is this Son Head of the Church? then,
(as says the Apostle Phil. 2.11.
) Let every Tongue Confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God the
Father.

Let all the Nations and Kindreds of the Earth Acknowledge his Doctrine to be
the Only Word of Life, and that he that Brought it, was Rightly Jesus a
Savior: Let every Soul Bend the Knee, and Submit to his Commands, as being the
Commands of the Lord of Lords; Let this Acknowledgment and Confession be made,
this Obedience and Homage tendered to the Glory of God the Father; for, by his
Order and Decree, this Eternal Son of God, became, in Fullness of time, the Son
of Man: Now therefore, tho there be some who would Pervert, and Change the
Gospel of Christ, yet if an Angel from Heaven should Preach any other Gospel
unto you, than that Jesus Christ, the Eternal Son of God, is the Head of the
Church; Let such Person be Accursed: Look upon him as one Excommunicate, and
with whom consequently none ought to have any Commerce in Sacred Matters.

The Heathens had a Saying, Mutus sit oportet, qui non laudarit Herculem; He
deserves not to Speak, who cannot find something to say in the Praise of
Hercules: Shall not Christians be thought worthy to lose their Tongues, if they
cleave to the Roof of their Mouths, and refuse to sound forth the Noble Praise
of the Blessed Son of God, our Great Savior and Redeemer? How should our
Tongues be Talking of his Praise all the day long? It would extremely well
become Christians to be telling one the other, What wonderful things this
Blessed Jesus has done for them; I do not mean in the General Works of
Creation and Redemption only, but his particular Favors also, the Peace, the
Joy, the Resolution, the Strength, the Grace, they daily receive from Communion
with him. It can be no other than a Splendid Entertainment to the Piously
Affected (for they have Meat to eat that the World knows not of) to recount,
how sweetly they were at first Translated from the Power of Satan, into the
Kingdom of the Son of God; to tell, how often and long this Blessed Son of God
stood and Knocked, by his Word, Ministers, and Spirit, at the door of their
hearts, before he obtained Audience; to declare, how he put his finger into the
hole, and lifted up the latch, i. e. took care to put back all Obstructions and
Impediments with which the Devil, the World, and the Flesh had bolted up our
hearts; how pleasant would be the Repetition of those Passionate Persuasions,
and Loving Promises, which the Son of God used, notwithstanding the Unkindness
he found; how he shed abroad in their Hearts his Gracious Influences, till at
last, by the Assiduity of his Courtship, the Unweariedness of his Patience, and
the Fervor of his Love, he overcame their Folly and Perverseness.

If the Shepherd not only looks with pleasure on the Lamb he wrenched from the
Jaws of the hungry Wolf, but also believes the Relation of that Exploit
acceptable to every Mild and Gentle Disposition; Why should not Christians
believe it as grateful to Communicate among themselves, how often, and by what
ways, this Great Shepherd, the Son of God, has delivered them his Sheep from
the Paws of that Cruel Lion, who daily surrounded the Fold in expectation of
his Prey? What can be more Joyful, than for one Christian affectionately to
relate to another, in what Combats with the Flesh, what Bickerings with the
World, and in what Buffetings of Satan, they have been Supported, Relieved, and
Comforted by this Son of God? How delightsome must it be for the formerly
Afflicted to comfort one that at present is in the like condition, by relating,
how when he was overwhelmed with dismal Storms of Grief and Anxiety, when he
sailed in a Tempestuous Sea of Fears and Agonies, and no Comfortable Light
could on either hand be espied, that then this Son of Righteousness brake out
upon him, his Grace, Love and Mercy set them upon a Rock higher than
themselves; he brought them out, and set them in a large place, free, and far
enough from all their Troubles: What Grace must such Discourses Minister to the
Hearers? And moreover, this way of entertaining one another, would prevent a
world of filthiness, scurrility, foolish, and inconvenient talking.

There is naturally so great Correspondence between the Heart and the Tongue,
that they are but few who delight not to speak of that Subject which most
possesses and pleases their Mind; Thus the Husbandman's whole Discourse is of
his Land, Manurement, Team, Plough, and Crop. The Soldier's Tongue runs of his
Arms, Colors, Officers, Camps, Marches, and Engagements; and the very Huntsman
will deasen your ears with the Names and Qualities of his Dogs, the
Obstreperous terms of his Art, and the Diversity of his Game; Must it not
therefore argue a great poverty of Grace, and that our Souls delight not
themselves in the Lord, when good and Edifying Discourse is so rare among us
Christians; especially if it be considered, that we have the greatest reason,
not only barely to confess, but to make our boast of this Son of God all the
day long.

But I must urge this Point farther; It is not an Oral Confession only, or an
Exultation in Christ the Son of God that I aim at: For we Read among the
Primitive Christians, there were some Tit. 1.16.
, viz. the Gnostics, who did profess to know God, but in works they did deny
him, being Abominable, and Disobedient, and unto every good Work Reprobate: too
many such Titular Christians are to be found, who, were it not for the Oaths
that fall from their Tongues, it were hard to say, that they had ever heard of
Jesus Christ, or did in the least believe him to be the Son of God; they are of
such Unchristian Tempers, such Unsanctified Lives, that they can be accounted
no other than Enemies of the Cross of Christ. I do heartily wish that all loose
and dissolute Christians would seriously digest this Consideration; How ill
does Cursing, Swearing, Drunkenness, Whoredom, Profaneness, Envy, Malice, or
whatever else is of Evil Report, become them, who Profess themselves Servants
to the Holy Son of God; such Persons, notwithstanding their specious Pretenses,
are not his Servants; for it is as well the Result of Reason, as the
Declaration of Scripture Romans 6.16.
, That Men are properly and rightfully their Servants, to whom they obey: The
dishonor must necessarily be very great, that Ungodly Professors do to the Son
of God; for, they cause his Name to be Evil Spoken of, his Deity Doubted, and
his Gospel to be Despised: for the Grand Reason why neither the Jews among us,
nor other Infidels abroad, make more have to the Mountain of the Lord, is the
palpable difference between the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and the Lives of them
that Confess him; for they cannot escape all Wild and Extravagant Opinions of
Christ, when they perceive how little Influence his Precepts (allowed for Holy,
Just, and Good) have, upon their Manners, who pretend to be Governed by them.

Moreover, to Confess This Jesus Christ the Son of God aright, does imply the
suppressing all Contradicting, or Blaspheming of his Deity; were I worthy, I
should humbly tender this Note where the power of a Redress is lodged.

Impiety is come to an high pass, when openly in our Streets, the Blessed and
Glorious Trinity is Libelled, and the Deity of Jesus Christ impugn'd; this is
one, but the worst way of saying, Farewell to Christianity: In this case, being
God's Cause and Quarrel, I must take the liberty of saying, No Christian
Answers the end of his Profession by a Cold Indifferency; he that contents
himself with his own Orthodox Confession, and Regular Life, and does not
contribute, what lies in him, to Discountenance and Suppress such Blasphemers,
and their Blasphemy, is but Almost (not so Altogether) a Christian. Jude 3.
We are Exhorted, Earnestly to contend for the Faith once delivered to the
Saints: Once delivered; so that when once delivered, and received, if it be
corrupted, or lost, we have great Assurance of a Second Edition.

It was Israel's Fault, that when Elijah was Contending hard with the Prophets
of Baal for the Honor of the God of Israel, King. 18.21.
The People answered him not a word: they seemed wholly unconcerned, as if
Religion had been a Matter only for the Men of God, the Prophets and Priests,
to trouble themselves about; or, as if it were all one to them, to Serve God or
Baal: The Prophet had called them to Recollect themselves, and Judge which was
the True God, and to Follow Him; I grant, the People were so Mannerly, as not
to oppose the Prophet; but what was this, when in a matter of so great
Importance, they should have spoken on his side. But in this untoward
Generation, How unconcernedly does one Christian hear another? Nay, How
patiently does the Magistrate hear most Men Rend, Tear, and Blaspheme the
Precious and Honorable Names of this Holy Son of God, yet show little or no
zeal, exert not the least shadow of their Power to Control them? and, which
aggravates the matter, by so doing they are Injurious both to God and the Poor:
Such Persons may be reputed Civil Magistrates, but their overmuch Civility is
the Shame of their Office, the Growing Contempt of their Power, and the General
Reproach of Christianity: I will yet Pray against this Wickedness, that if such
Careless Magistrates may not be overthrown in Stony places for their too great
Easiness and Connivence; yet, that the Accustomed Swearers would hear my Words,
and they must find them sweet; You that can Deafen Men's Ears, and even Chill
the Blood of Conscientious Christians with the Vollies of most Desperate Oaths
and Curses, what Answer will you shape at the last day? Think you that you
shall not blush, and be confounded, when you behold him Arrayed with Glorious
Majesty, and sit on the Great Tribunal, whose Name you have made so Vile and
Trivial, whose Blood you have despised, and Trampled under Feet; whose Wounds
your Mouths have Torn Wider and Rankled; here Men looked upon you as desperate
Fools, so Often, so Loudly, so Heartily to Imprecate, what you would not, for
the World, should have befallen you: there you shall find your Jest converted
into Earnest, and feel that Punishment Inflicted, that, had you Ten thousand
Worlds to give, you could get no Release from: Oh that Men were wise, and would
consider what shall befall them in the end, who, in stead of Confessing Jesus
Christ the Son of God, so Monstrously Blaspheme his Name and Deity.

Upon this Foundation, that Jesus Christ, the Son of the Virgin Mary, is the
Son of God, and Head of the Church, next to that of our open Confessing of him,
we may raise this other Story Romans 13.14.
, Put on the Lord Jesus Christy, and make not provision for the Flesh to
fulfill the Lusts thereof.

Their Conversations who are called by the Name of Christ, and profess to
believe him to be God, ought to be in all Purity as becomes the Gospel of
Christ; they are obliged to act as is most suitable to their being Members of
that Body, of which the Son of God is Head; they must in all things live as
true Disciples in that School of which the Holy Jesus is the head Master, not
entertaining themselves with carnal and sensual Delights. Hypocrates ordered
each of his Followers to take this Oath; (...), I will maintain my Professtion
unspotted, and my Conversation uncorrupted. If he judged it so expedient for
the Honor of Physic, that the practisers thereof should be so Upright and
Virtuous, how much greater care may the Institutor of our Religion challenge
from us that in no good thing we come behind other Men; insomuch as the
Precepts he has commended to our Observation, are of a more Sublime and
excellent Nature, and lead to a greater perfection than ever was attainable by
that or any other Art whatsoever.

A Christian ought to be no other than a lively pattern or representation of
Christ, exhibiting daily in his Conversation those admirable Graces and Virtues
which were so eminent in the Original; therefore are such commanded to put on
Christ, by a most strict imitation of him; Qui Christum induit omnem virtutem
habet, he that puts on Christ must become Holy in every respect as he was;
moreover this putting on, must be without any intentions of depositing again; I
grant there are some (would their number were less) who put on Christ after the
same manner that the resemblance of a man's Face is put on a Glass, which is
but for a moment, no longer than the Person stands by; thus some have put on
Christ by Baptism, and others for a fit ad Sacramenti perceptionem, in order to
receive the Sacrament, but this is not the putting on which is required, for
that ought to be usque ad vitae sanctificationem, to the sanctifying of the
whole life; their Souls and Bodies, Minds and Spirits, their Thoughts, Words
and Deeds ought to be influenced and directed altogether by their Profession.

We Christians are bought with a price 1 Cor. 6.20.
, viz. The Blood of the Son of God, and therefore must glorify God in our
Bodies and in our Spirits which are Gods; our Bodies as well as Souls were his
purchase, and therefore both are to be devoted to his service; no Christian is
Vir sui Juris, his own free Man; we are not to serve our selves, nor to live
unto our selves, but unto the Lord. It is said of Scipio, that when at a Feast
(where it might have been thought his Blood had been heated) an Harlot,
beautiful and gay, presented her self; such a Temptation, together with such an
Opportunity, was gallantly resisted upon this single consideration, Vellem si
non essem Imperator, were I not a General I should comply. Menedemus preserved
Antigonus in the like Assault, by timely advising him to remember that he was a
King's Son; Christians have the advantage of far greater considerations to put
back all evil Suggestions, we are Sons of God, Friends of Christ, we are a
peculiar People, a Royal Priesthood, nay Co heirs with Christ, and therefore
as says the Apostle Phil. 2.5.
, The same mind ought to be in them as was in Christ, i. e never to condescend
to any thing repugnant to their Principles, or beneath their present Dignity
and future Expectations.

How monstrous a sight is it to see such who believe in God, offering
themselves in Vassalage to Sin and Satan, or such who are acquainted that it is
God's pleasure to give them an Heavenly Kingdom, losing themselves in the
pursuit of Earthly things, or for such who acknowledge the Son of God to be
their only Lord, to be led Captives by the Devil at his will; let us therefore
as becomes Christians cast off every work of Darkness, and serve the Lord that
bought us in Holiness and Righteousness; let us put on Christ in our Affections
and Actions, let us be renewed in our Minds, that our Affections may become
Holy and Spiritual; let us sanctify God in our hearts, that so our Actions may
be pious, just and unblameable, that all may see the life that we henceforward
live in the Flesh, we live by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved us and
gave himself for us.

There is a Seemliness or Comeliness proper to every Calling, as is very
observable, but Christianity is a peculiar Calling distinct from, and vastly
surpassing all other; some things may be tolerable in others, which are no ways
allowable in this, and therefore we are called upon Ephs. 4.1
, to walk worthy of our Vocation; we have more ample Revelations of the will of
God than others, we have better Principles, greater Helps, fairer Promises, and
a most perfect Example, and therefore for us after all these to walk after the
customs of the present evil World, were altogether inexcusable.

Luther was wont to say, that Christians in their strongest Assaults might make
much better Defense than they usually do, if they replied when tempted,
Christiani sumus, we are Christians. We are Christians, such as are bound by
our Baptismal Vow to fight against the World, the Flesh and the Devil; we above
all Men are not to play the Cowards, and make a faint Resistance, seeing that
we have an Armoury and are provided for all points; we have an Helmet and
Brestplate, a Girdle and Shield, and likewise we have the Sword of the Spirit
wherewith to Wound and Baffle our Enemies; this is an approved Weapon, with
this our Savior conquered the Devil. We are Christians, we profess to have our
Conversation in Heaven, notwithstanding our commoration be on Earth; and
therefore an Eagle may as soon stoop at a Fly, as a Christian to worldly
Allurements. We are Christians, such as declare themselves dead to these
things, and therefore to give them any room in our hearts, were to give the lie
to our Profession. We are Christians, such who have a sure word of promise for
things necessary, and therefore how unbeseeming us is it to use any indirect
means to compass that which is already secured to us in the bountiful
Providence of our Heavenly Father? We are Christians, the Servants and
followers of the Son of God, and we believe his Eye to be upon us, during all
our Conflicts with Temptations: We cannot likewise but believe our noble,
resolute and courageous behavior will be acceptable to him, and that to the
intent we may prevail and persevere, he will in pure Compassion (knowing our
Frailty,) proportion the Grate he sends us by the Temptations he permits upon
us; and so if we are called forth to; wrestle against Principalities and
Powers, all the Ranks of Devils, yet Jesus Christ the Son of God, and Captain
of our Salvation, will afford us such supply as we shall be able to stand. We
are Christians, we must therefore Watch and Pray that we fall not under
Temptation, we must strengthen our selves in the Lord, in his Example, in his
Precepts, and in his Promises; we must gird our selves unto the Battle, because
we shall reap if we faint not, if we finish our warfare gallantly and as
becomes Christians, there is certainly a Crown of immarcessible Glory prepared
for us; this is worth sighting for, which brings me to the last and highest
Story I shall or can raise upon this Foundation.

Is Jesus Christ the Son of the Virgin Mary God? Is he the head of the Church?
Do all true Christians put him on, walking after his Example and to his Will,
then as true as he is God, all such as thus do, shall be most plentifully
rewarded.

The Christian Religion was calculated, it is true, for the Humble and Poor in
Spirit, but yet not for such mean Spirits as act no farther than they are
instigated by a prospect of advantage, when we have done all our acknowledgment
must be that we are but unprofitable Servants, our Lord has been no gainer by
us, we have not answered what of right was due from us upon the Score of our
Creation; therefore not being solvent and in capacity to discharge that first
Debt, it is no other than Arrogance and Presumption to make Conditions with
God, and to limit our performances by the Hopes or Emanations of his Bounty;
yet such is his infinite Condescension, that though a Reward may not be the
sole Reason, yet we permitted to look upon it as the encouragement of our
services.

Moses expressed great Faith and Patience, refusing the pleasures of Egypt,
which were doubtless every way corresponding to the desires of Humane Nature;
the purchase of these required no farther toil and labor of him than a
grateful acceptance; yet these so great, so easily acquired, he forsook and
chose rather to endure Afflicton. That which chiefly encouraged this exchange,
was Heb. 11.26.
He had respect unto the Recompense of the Reward.

Our Blessed Savior sweetened the burden of his Yoke and the Tortures of his
Cross, by the proposal as well of present as future Rewards; he did assure them
that if they would diligently mind the one thing needful, all other things
should be added to them, they might do their Duty and cast the care of
themselves upon God, and they should find from him Providential Goodness that
he did certainly care for them; this can infer no less than that we abound in
the Work of the Lord, in as much as we are ascertained our Labor shall not be
in vain in the Lord, our Hopes shall not be frustrated. He that had the love to
promise a Remuneration, has the power to bestow it, for now we know he is God,
and does as well in Heaven as on Earth whatsoever pleases him.

Hearken we therefore for our encouragement to his gracious Promises Mat. 10.32.
, Whosoever therefore shall confess me before Men, him also will I confess
before my Father which is in Heaven. He that on Earth shall confess my Deity,
and by Words and Deeds, make an open Confession of me, and if thereunto called
shall in despite of Danger and Death stick to the same profession of Faith,
every such Person may rest satisfied his so doing shall not be forgotten, but a
faithful Reward shall be made thereof in Heaven; no wonder therefore to hear
St. Paul crying out, Woe unto me if I preach not the Gospel of Jesus Christ, or
to see him and others of the same Principles rejoicing in that they were
counted worthy to suffer shame for the confessing of Christ, for they had the
promise of being glorified with him for whom they suffered.

What therefore though Troubles and Crosses, though Shame and Sorrow, though
Want and Misery, (...) Torture and Death abide us for professing the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, yet let not us be daunted, but in such extremities let us follow
the Apostles Counsel; Heb. 12.2.
Look unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith, who for the Joy that was
set before him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the
right hand of the Throne of God: This Consideration, this noble President will
help us against fainting in our Minds, under the greatest Persecutions, what
extremities did the Son of God submit to for the pleasure he took in restoring
lost Man? The happiness he was about to purchase for them, outweighed all the
Trouble and Anguish that lay in the way to it; in like manner seeing we have
the expectation of Bliss and Joy grounded on never failing Promises, let us
call to mind this Example of our Lord, and if the time come that we the
Servants shall meet with harsher Treatment than what the Master of the Household
found, let us bear up courageously, remembering the Joy set before us in the
promise, and which shall be fullfill'd in the Kingdom of Heaven. Nor is this
consideration only useful to the sustaining part of a Christian's Life, but it
has its force and energy in the abstaining part also; we look upon it as the
effect of an immature judgment to exchange Pearls for Shells, or Gold for
Glass; and shall our Consciences condemn us as Children in understanding, as
novices in the Faith; while for the Tantalizing Pleasures, the glittering
Honors, and faint profits of this life we hazard the Joys, the Pleasures, the
Honors, and the Happiness of the next, especially when it shall be considered
we had a title to a competency of these without our inordinate care, and
wilful neglect of the other.

Remember how careful and sollicitous our Savior was for his Disciples;
Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me be with me, where I am
that they may behold my Glory which thou have given me, this provision was not
bounded in the Apostles, but extended to all Ages and Corners of the World, in
as much as it is said Joh. 17.20.
, He did not pray for his Disciples alone, but for them also which should
believe on him through their Word. You may hear the whole matter, Joh. 14 1, 2,
3.
Our savior before his Departure was comforting his Disciples, Let not your
heart be troubled, you believe in God, believe also in Me, in my Father's House
are many Mansions: Heaven is Spacious, I go to prepare a place for you, I
desert you not as one weary of your Society, or as one sickle in my choice and
love, but I design your Good, I came on Earth to prepare you for Heaven, and
now I go again to prepare Heaven for you, for my full intention is where I am
you shall be, as I am you shall be.

Let us pluck up our Spirits and buckle to the several Duties of our Christian
Calling without fainting, not being weary of well doing, for we have great
things beyond expression to receive hereafter; I shall conclude with St. Paul's
Exhortation 2 Timothy 1.12, 13.
, we Christians are not to be ashamed, nor is there any reason we should be
ashamed, for we know whom we have believed, viz. Jesus Christ who is the Son of
God, and therefore we may be satisfied that he being God is able to keep what
we commit unto him; let us therefore hold fast and inviolable, both as to
corruption from others, and from contradiction in our own lives, that Jesus
Christ the Son of the Virgin Mary is perfect God and Head of his Church, that
we are bound to confess this both in word and in the manner of our living, and
that we are to live to his Honor and Glory, and thus doing, we shall at the
last Day receive Crowns of Glory at the hands of that Righteous Judge, who has
prepared most glorious Rewards for all that love his Appearing. To whom he
Glory and Honor, might Majesty and Dominion, World without End. Amen.

FINIS.

