SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Malabar Nutt, IMPORTED FROM The INDIES:
SHOWING Its Admirable VIRTUES In Curing the King's Evil, Beyond any thing yet
found out.

Written by a Doctor of Physic in the Country to his Friend in London,
Troubled with that Distemper.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1694.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Malabar NUTT, IMPORTED FROM The INDIES: In a
LETTER, showing Its Admirable Virtues, in Curing the KINGS EVIL, etc.
SIR,
WHen I call to mind the Saying of the Excellent Mr Boil, viz. That if we were
Masters of Specific Remedies, we might render the ways of Curing Diseases less
painful, and thereby Gratify sick Persons, and not affright them by the use
of tormenting Methods, by Blisters, Cupping glasses, Purges, Vomits, Issues,
and Scarifications: I could not choose but set Pen to paper, and communicate
this wonderful Remedy, which I have had so much Experience of. In the use of
the abovenamed smarting Remedies, many that recover endure much more for
Health, than many that are justly reckoned amongst Martyrs, did for Religion.
Upon which account (says Mr. Boil) I look upon the discovering of specific
Remedies as the Greatest acts of Charity, and such as by which a man may really
more Oblige Mankind, and relieve more distressed persons, than if he built an
Hospital.

The strange and almost miraculous Cures, that I have known wrought by the
Malabar Nutt, in the King's Evil, would fill a man with wonder and Amazement:
And indeed, to see so many Tumors under the Throat, and in other parts, to fall
and disappear; to see running Soars dried up, and weak Limbs restored to their
Strength, upon the use of such a plain simple Medicine, is exceeding
remarkable, and the Author of Nature ought to be highly magnified, for giving
such Virtue unto Plants and Trees, for the Good of his Creatures.

I am told by a good Author, that a Divine who was sent to Preach the Gospel to
the Indians, being a man skillful in Physic, wrought such wonderful Cures
amongst them, by the use of their own Remedies, that they thought he confirmed
his Doctrine by Miracles.

The Nature of this admirable Nut, is to rectify the Blood, alter the Humors,
mend the Liver and Spleen, restore the Digestive Ferments of the Stomach and
Bowels, and changes the whole Habit of the Body, casting Salt as it were into
the Springs of Nature, whereby they become pure and wholesome, and thereby
conveighs kindly Nutriment to the parts.

I knew a young Lad in our Town, who was grievously afflicted with Scrophulous
Tumors under his Throat, had been touched by the Royal Hand, and worn Gold,
and that a long time, yet the Distemper returned Spring and Fall, until he was
directed unto the use of this sovereign Nutt, and then his Sores dried up like
a Brook in Summer.

I could tell you of another Young man, who had consulted with diverse
Chyrurgeons, and had been stroaked by seven Seventh sons, and all to no
purpose, until he applied himself to the use of this Remedy: And then he
wonderfully recovered.

A pretty young Gentlewoman, who had her Face extremely disfigured by the Evil,
and her spirits broken with Grief upon that account, was speedily restored to a
great measure of her former Beauty, by Drops chymically drawn out of this Nutt.

A Woman whose Limbs were Distorted, like the Woman's in the Gospel, whom Satan
had Bound Eighteen Years, and when she walked was an Object of great pity,
gained wonderful Strength in her Limbs by the use of this Remedy; but she
could not have a perfect Cure without a Miracle.

Many young Children have received complete Cures by the Use of this Remedy,
whose Bodies were wonderfully annoyed with loathsome Humors proceeding from
this Disease, therefore I think the World ought to take notice of it.

FINIS.

