Bust of Dr. John Whitgift The most Reverend Dr. JOHN WHITGIFT Ld. Archbishop
of Canterbury.
R. White sc^lp


THE LIFE OF JOHN WHITGIFT, Archbishop of Canterbury In the Times of Q.
Elizabeth and K. James I.

Written by Sir George Paul, Comptroller of his Grace's Household.

To which is added a TREATISE Entitled, Conspiracy for Pretended Reformation,
Written in the Year 1591. By Richard Cousin, LL. D. Dean of the Arches, and
Official Principal to Archbishop Whitgift.

LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell, and to be Sold at the Rose and Crown, and at
the Rose in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCXCIX.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in God, GEORGE, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
Primate of all England, and Metropolitan; One of the Lords of His Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council.
Most Reverend, and my ever Honored Lord,
I See it incident to Personages of high Place and Deserving, to win by their
Living Favors many obsequious Followers; who, after their decease, prove but
cold Remembrancers of their Bounty, or other Virtues. Which slackness in others
forced that boldness in me, rather to choose the hazard of disreputation to my
Pen, which was never cunning, than to my Heart, which shall never be
ungrateful. And therefore I have presumed to set down the Godly and Religious
Courses of the most Reverend Archbishop WHITGIFT, your Grace's late
Predecessor, to show mine own obligation to his Memory, and to make known his
worthy Parts to future Ages. And because your Grace's beginnings show how
careful an Embracer you are of his chiefest Virtues, as well in your
industrious Studies, as in your private and public Government; I held it my
Duty to present both this, and my best Services to your Grace. That here you
may see, if nothing else, those Virtues in another, that are so aimed at by
your Self. Which make many true affected Hearts pray, that by your godly,
vigilant and prudent Guidance, his Church may long and happily flourish among
us, To

your Grace's most bounden, Geo. Paul.

TO THE READER.
IT was far from my Thoughts that these first Draughts of mine, which I only
intended as Minutes and Directions for a more skilful Penman; should ever have
showed themselves to the World, had not the backwardness of some, and the
importunity of others, driven me to the Orator's Resolution; who says, I had
rather any Man should do it than my self; yet my self, rather than none at all.
The Argument may peradventure sooner find some Maligners, than just Reprovers.
Wherein yet, as far as the importance and necessity of the Cause will suffer, I
have so warily tempered the sharpness of my Pen, that I hope none of moderate
Humor himself, will justly charge me of being immoderate herein. But yet, if
any where I shall seem otherwise, the discreet Reader will see it is out of the
Instructions, Records, and Authors, whom I follow, and not out of mine own
Disposition, who desired as well herein, as in other of my Courses, rather to
imitate my Master in his mild and moderate Carriage, than willingly to be
offensive or displeasing to any. Neither is it my purpose to have the Ashes of
the Dead raked up again. But as no Man can rightly commend a Commander, or
skilful Pilot, without relating their past Exploits, and dangerous Storms: So
neither could I, without wronging my Reader, and the principal Subject, commend
him for so Worthy and Prudent a Governor, unless I had withal given a taste of
his Adventures, and the stormy Time wherein he lived. And therefore I pray
thee, Courteous Reader, both charitabby and modestly to Censure my Travel and
Pains herein.

THE LIFE OF THE Most Reverend Prelate JOHN WHITGIFT, Archbishop of Canterbury.
1. A Wise and Excellent Tacit. Annal. lib. 4.
Historian says; It has always been a Matter of free liberty, and least
subject to Detraction, to speak of those, whom Death has exempted from hatred
or favor. A Speech that moved me to write (whilst many other, better able,
look on) the Life of the most Reverend, and Worthy Prelate John Whitgift,
Archbishop of Canterbury, to the end that Posterity might take true notice of
the worth of such, as have well guided the Stern of this Church, and settled
the Peace thereof; and render unto him, as unto other Men, the due Honor and
Commendation, which he has deserved.

2. He came of the Ancient Family The Archbishop's Descent.
of Whitgift of Whitgift in Yorkshire. His Grandfather, John Whitgift,
Gentleman, had many Children; some whereof he made Scholars, others he placed
abroad in several Courses of Life, disposing his Father Henry Whitgift, to be a
Merchant at Great Grimsby in Lincolnshire. Where he married Ann Dynewell, a
virtuous young Woman, of good Parentage in that Town, of whom this our
Archbishop came, and was there Born in the Year of our Lord, He was born, Anno
1530. at Grimsby in Lincolnshire.
1530. being the Eldest of his Fathers Sons, who were five in number, besides
himself, viz. William, George, Philip, Richard, and Jeffery.

3. He had an Uncle called Robert Whitgift, Abbot of the Monastry of Wellow, in
the County of Lincoln, near Grimsby, who teaching diverse young Gentlemen, took
like pains also with him. In which time (as he was pleased often to remember)
he heard his Uncle, First instructed by his Uncle, Robert Whitgift, Abbot of
Wellow in Lincolnshire.
the Abbot say, That they, and their Religion could not long continue, because
(said he) I have read the whole Scripture over and over, and could never find
therein that our Religion was founded by God: And for proof of his Opinion, the
Abbot would allege that saying of our Savior; Omnis plantatio, quam non
plantavit pater meus caelestis eradicabitur: Every planting which my Heavenly
Matthew. 15. 13.
Father has not planted, shall be rooted up.

4. His Uncle, finding an extraordinary towardliness in him, sent him
afterward Sent up to London.
to London, where he became a Scholar in St. Anthony's School, and boarded at
his Aunts House in Paul's Churchyard; she being the Wife of Michael Shaller, a
Verger of that Church. There he escaped a great danger, lying with another
Scholar that had the Narrowly escaped the Plague.
plague, and coming in the Summertime Hot and Thirsty from School, drunk his
Urine out of a Pot or Cruse, standing at his Beds-head in stead of Drink; and
was not sick after it, though his Bedfellow died.

5. From St. Anthony's School he repaired Sent back to Grimsby for refusing to
go to Mass.
to Grimsby to his Parents, being thrust out of Doors by his Aunt, because he
would not (as she often required and solicited him by the Canons of Paul's) go
with her to morrow Mass; imputing all her Losses and domestic Misfortunes to
her harboring of such an Heretic within her Doors; and, for a farewell told
him, That she thought at the first, she had received a Saint into her House,
but now she perceived he was a Devil.

6. His Parents finding that he had Sent to Cambridge; first of Queen' s
College, then of Pembroke-Hall.
much profited in his Learning, sent him, by the advice and direction of his
Uncle, the Abbot, to Cambridge, where he was first of Queen's College; but
liking not the Education and Disposition of some there, went to Pembroke-Hall:
Dr. Ridley (afterward Bishop of London) being there Master, who hearing by Mr.
Bradford, his Tutor, of his great towardliness and small means, (by reason of
his Father's Losses at Sea) made him Scholar, and then Mr. Gurth became his
Tutor; from thence he was Chosen Fellow of Peter-House, May 1555.
chosen Fellow of Peterhouse, Dr. Pearne being then Master there.

7. Whilst he was Fellow of that Had a grievous Sickness.
House, he fell grievously Sick, and was by commandment of Dr. Pearne (who much
tendered him in regard of his good Parts) carried to an House near the College,
whither Dr. Pearne came often to visit him, and willed the Woman Dr. Pearne's
special Care of him.
of the House that he should want nothing; neither should she spare any cost
for his good, and the recovery of his Health, saying, that if he lived, he
would be able to defray the Charge himself; but if he died, the said Dr. Pearne
would satisfy her, and pay for all things.

8. When it pleased God to restore him to his former Health, he determined
Recovering his Health, determined to Travel.
to Travel beyond the Seas, purposely to avoid certain Visitors sent in Queen
Mary's time to the University, to establish Popery, and to enjoin the young
Fellows and Scholars to take Primam tonsuram, being their first entrance into
Popish Orders.

9. Dr. Pearne hearing of this his purpose, Dissuaded by Dr. Pearne.
talked with him, and found him resolute in his Religion, yielding (as Dr.
Pearne often acknowledged afterward) many good and sound Reasons therefore;
whereupon the Doctor willed him to be silent, and not troublesome in uttering
his Opinion, whereby others might take occasion to call him in question: and he
for his part, would wink at him, and so order the matter, that he might
continue his Religion, and not travel out of the University; which accordingly
the good old Man justly performed. For which his Favor the Archbishop carried
a loving, faithful, and true heart toward him unto his dying Day.

10. He Commenced Bachelor of Commenced Bachelor of Arts, 1553. Master of
Arts, 1556. Bachelor of Divinity, 1562. Doctor of Divinity, 1569.
Arts in the Year 1553. Master of Arts, 1556. Bachelor of Divinity, 1562.
Doctor of Divinity, 1569. at which time he answered the Divinity Act publicly
in the Commencement, wherein he maintained this Position, Papa est Ille
Antichristus.

11. After he was entered into the Ministry, (which was upon the Year 1560.)
being to Preach his first Public Sermon in St. Mary's, he chose His Act-Sermon
at St. Mary' s, 1560. on Romans 1. 16.
for his Text that excellent saying of St. Paul, I am not ashamed of the Gospel
of Christ, etc. wherein his singular Method, choice of Matter, and judicious
handling thereof, were such, that his whole Auditory, especially the chief of
the University, grew into great admiration of those great Parts in so young
Years.

12. From being Fellow of Peter-house, Made Master of Pembroke-Hall, Chaplain
to the Bishop of Ely, Prebendary of Ely, Pars^n of Teversam.
he succeeded Dr. Hutton, late Archbishop of York, in the Mastership of
Pembroke-Hall; being then Chaplain to Dr. Cox, Bishop of Ely, by whose means he
had a Prebend in Ely, and the Parsonage of Teversam near Cambridge.

13. He was also chosen Divinity Divinity Reader.
Reader of the Lady Margaret's Lecture, which he discharged with so great
liking of the whole University, that for his sake they increased the Stipend
from Twenty Marks to Twenty Pounds, and afterward he was made the Queen's
Queen's Professor.
public Professor of Divinity.

14. Whilst he read these two Lectures, the public Schools were frequented
with throngs of Students in Divinity, Young, and Old; such was his diligence,
great learning, and extraordinary gifts showed in the reading thereof; insomuch
as many of the precise Faction were his daily Auditors, and the Lectures
themselves so highly accounted of (especially those, which he read upon the
Apocalypse, and the Read upon the Apocalypse and the Hebrews.
Epistle to the Hebrews) that through the importunity of diverse his honorable
Friends (then his Pupils) and others of great learning, and judgment, he was
persuaded to set down those his Lectures in writing, which are like shortly for
their excellency and worth, to be published for the common benefit.

15. His singular, and extraordinary 1567.
gift in preaching, caused him, upon the recommendation of Sir Nicholas Bacon,
the then Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, and Sir William Cecill,
principal Secretary (afterward Lord Treasurer of England) to be sent for to
preach before Her Majesty, who took Sent for to preach before the Queen.
so great liking of him, for his method, and matter, that, hearing his Name to
be Whitgift, she said he had a whitegift indeed. And as his Gifts were then
esteemed white, so his Fortune afterward proved white, and happy; his good
Name and Reputation white, and spotless: so that it may be properly said of
him, that he was gallinae filius albae.

16. Her Majesty within four Months Was made Master of Trinity College, July 4.
1567. and the Queen's Chaplain.
after that he was Master of Pembroke-Hall, made him Master of Trinity College,
and caused him immediately after to be sworn her Chaplain.

17. IN the College, at his first entrance, Found Divisions in the College;
he found much division, (especially amongst such as labored innovation in the
Church) being begun and headed in the government of his Predecessor Master D.
Beaumont. Yet did he in short time wisely appease these Wisely appeased them.
Stirs, and governed for five years space with great quietness both of the
whole Company, and himself, until Master Thomas Cartwright (a Fellow of that
College) his last return from beyond the Seas.

18. The first coffeehouse of the Cartwright' s first discontent.
said Master Cartwright grew at a Disputation in the University before Queen
Elizabeth, because Master Preston (then of King's College, and afterward Master
of Trinity Hall) for his comely Gesture, and pleasing Pronunciation, was both
liked and rewarded by her Majesty, and himself received neither reward, nor
commendation; presuming of his own good Scholarship, but wanting indeed that
comely grace and behavior which the other had. This his no small grief he
uttered unto diverse of his inward Friends in Trinity College, who were also
very much discontented, because the honor of the Disputation did not redound
unto their College.

19. Mr. Cartwright, immediately after His Self-conceit.
her Majesty's neglect of him, began to wade into diverse Opinions, as that of
the Discipline, and to kick against her Ecclesiastical Government; he also then
grew highly conceited of himself for Learning, and Holiness, and a great
Contemner of others that were not of his mind. And although the Learning and
Qualities of any were never so mean, yet if he affected Master Cartwright, and
his Opinions, he should be in great estimation with him, according to the
saying of the Poet: --

Praecipui sunto, sitque illis aurea barba.
But if he were against him in his fanciful Conceits, though he were never so
good a Scholar, or so good a Man, he could not brook or like of him; as of Dr.
Whitaker, and others: And although in their Elections of Scholars into that
College, they made as good choice as any other, either before, or in their
time, yet could he never afford the Electors, nor Parties elected, a good word,
unless they sided with him in his Fancies.

20. And that he might the better Cartwright went to Geneva; affected the
Discipline of that Church.
feed his Humor with these conceited Novelties, he travailed to Geneva; where
observing the Government and Discipline of that Church to be by certain
Ecclesiastical Superintendents, and Lay Elders, or Presbyters (as they called
them,) he was so far carried away with an affection of that new devised
Discipline, as that he thought all Churches and Congregations for Government
Ecclesiastical, were to be measured and squared by the practice of Geneva.

21. Therefore, when he returned His opposition to the Established
Church Government in England.
home, he took many exceptions against the Established Government of our
Church, disallowing the Vocation of our Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, and
other Ecclesiastical Officers; the Administration of our Holy Sacraments, and
observation of our Rites and Ceremonies; and buzzing these Conceits into the
Heads of diverse young Preachers and Scholars of the University, he drew after
him a great number of Disciples and Followers. And upon a Sunday (Doctor
Whitgift being from home) Master Cartwright with some of his Adherents, made
three Sermons in that one day; wherein they so vehemently inveighed (amongst
other Ceremonies of our Church) against the Surpless, as those of Trinity
College Preaches against the Surpless.
were so moved therewith, that at Evening Prayer they cast off their Surplesses
(though against the Statutes of the House) and were all placed in the Chapel
without Surplesses, three only excepted; Doctor Leg, Mr. West, and the
Chaplain. By reason of which Stirs, both that private College was greatly
distracted, and the whole University much perplexed and troubled.

22. For these his Opinions were now broached not only at home in their College
Sermons, and Domestical Common-Places, but by Master Cartwright himself, and
his Adherents, in the public Church of the whole University; wherein they
mightily declamed against the Ordination of our Priests, and Deacons, and
greatly traduced the Heads and Governors of the Colleges, because they attended
the Service of those Places. The Reverend Bishops, and Fathers of the Church,
for their due observing Ecclesiastical Rules, and Constitutions, were by them
much perstringed, the Established Church paralling (as they termed it) the
Romish Hierarchy, was also much reproached and disgraced.

23. Dr. Whitgift, after that Master Whitgift preaches against Cartwright' s
Opinions.
Cartwright and his Accomplices had broached this his dangerous Doctrine, would
always the Sunday following in the same Church, answer and confute their
Opinions, with such commendation, and applause, as thereby he much quieted and
settled the judgment of many, that otherwise were enclining to this Innovation,
and gained a singular opinion of the most Learned and Judicious throughout the
whole University.

24. When by this course he had Cartwright and his Followers oppose Whitgist.
somewhat appeased these Stirs, Master Cartwright did not yet cease, but by
secret Instigations set on others of his own humor to continue them; who in
their College Exercises (which they call Common-places) and also in their open
Sermons, would prick at him with the Swords of their Tongues, and otherwhiles
uncharitably through the Sides of others pierce and wound him; sometimes
furiously without regard of duty, shame, or modesty, would strike downright at
him. For it then was (and I pray God it still be not) a thing too frequent with
that Generation to tax their Superiors, and to accuse their Government, as also
to asperse them and it with many unjust Calumniations.

25. Notwithstanding, so far was he from entering into any rigorous course of
proceeding against them (as justly he might have done by the Statutes of the
College, and public Laws of the State) as that with great sufferance he winked
at and passed by many of Whitgift' s gentleness.
these Wrongs and Enormities, and instead of revenge, he by gentleness and
goodness heaped coals upon the Adversaries heads, as also for rough and
unseemly Speeches, he breathed nothing but sweet breath of love, and peace,
often exhorting them to call to God for Grace, that they might have more sober
consideration and better judgment of Orders established, which then they
mistook to be amiss. For (as a Learned man truly says of them) those fervent
Hooker' s Eccles. Policy, lib. 5.
reprehenders of things established by public Authority, are always confident,
and bold spirited men: but their confidence, (for the most part) rises from
too much credit given to their own Wits; for which cause they are seldom free
from Errors.

26. The state of the University being The State of the University disturbed by
Cartwright.
in this sort mervailously disquieted by Master Cartwright, and his Abettors,
Doctor Whitgift wisely foresaw that these sparks of Sedition, if in time they
were not quenched, would grow to a great flame, to the endangering not only of
the University, but of the whole Church (as every one knows it afterward fell
out); and therefore to cure this Evil, if it might be, in the beginning, he
oftentimes sent to Master Cartwright, Whitgift advises him to be quiet.
and in friendly and kind manner, advised him to surcease from those Courses:
But finding him always wilfully bent, and finally obstinate; to prevent further
mischief, he with the Seniors of the House, called him in question; Calls him
in question.
and having sufficient matter of Expulsion against him, for uttering some
Errors in his Lectures, and not recanting, nor expounding them; being by the
Master and Seniors so appointed, and for exercising the Function of a Minister,
having no Letters of Orders (which he had either torn, or suppressed, for that
he thought it not lawful by his own Doctrine to use them) and for transgressing
the Statutes of the House in diverse other Points, he expelled him the House;
Expells him the House, and deprives him of the Lady Margaret's Lecture.
and being Vice Chancellor, caused him likewise to be deprived of the Lady
Margaret's Lecture, which then he read.

27. Before which course of proceeding with him, Doctor Whitgift (understanding
that Master Cartwright had given it out, that his dangerous Assertions were
rather repressed by Authority, than refelled by Truth, and strength of Reason)
wished him to forbear such disturbance of the public Peace of the Church, and
often offered him to enter a quieter course for trial of the truth of Offers
him a Conference; which Cartwright refuses.
his Cause by Conference, and Writing; which he always refused to accept, as
may appear by an Act recorded in the Registry Book of the University of
Cambridge, under the Testimony and Subscription of the chief Heads, bearing
date the 18th of March, 1570. in these words.

WHereas it is reported that Master This Recorded in the Register of the
University.
Cartwright, offering Disputations and Conference, touching the Assertions
uttered by him, and subscribed with his Hand, and that he could not obtain his
request therein; This is to testify, that in the presence of Us, whose Names
are here-under written, and in our hearing, the said Master Cartwright was
offered conference of diverse, and namely of M. Doctor Whitgift, who offered,
that if the said Master Cartwright would set down his Assertions in writing,
and his Reasons unto them, he would answer the same in writing also; The which
Master Cartwright refused to do. Further, the said Doctor Whitgift, at such
time as Master Cartwright was deprived of his Lecture, did in our presence ask
the said Master Cartwright, whether he had both publicly and privately diverse
times offered the same Conference unto him by writing, or not. To which Master
Cartwright answered, that he had been so offered, and that he refused the same.
Moreover, the said Master Cartwright did never offer any Disputation, but upon
these Conditions; viz. That he might know who should be his Adversaries, and
who should be his Judges; meaning such Judges as he himself could best like of.
Neither was this kind of Disputation denied unto him, but only he was required
to obtain license of the Queen's Majesty, or the Counsel, because his
Assertions be repugnant to the state of the Commonwealth, which may not be
called into question by public disputation, without license of the Prince, or
her Highness's Counsel.

John Whitgift, Vice Chancellor. Andrew Pearne. John Mey. Edward Hawford.
William Chadderton. Henry Harvy. Thomas Ithell. Thomas Bing.
ET ego Matthaeus Stokis Sarum Dioces, in Artibus Magister publicus Authoritate
legitima Notarius, quia interfui deprivationi dicti Cartwright factae undecimo
die Decembris, Anno 1570. and tunc and ibidem audivi Doctorem Whitgift
interrogantem eum Cartwright de praemissis allegatis, and M. Cartwright eadem
confitentem; Ideo, in fidem and testimonium praemissorum, nomen meum requisitus
superscripsi, Anno Domini 1570.

28. Not long after (at which time her Highness had summoned a Parliament) some
of principal note amongst these Disciplinarians thought that the fittest time
either to effect their desires by some Abettors in that high Assembly, or at
least to disperse their Opinions into all the parts of the Kingdom. To which
end they then published a Seditious Treatise, entitled, An Admonition The
Disciplinarians publish An Admonition to the Parliament.
to the Parliament; being indeed the very Summary both of their Opinions
touching Church matters, and of their shameless Slanders against the Governors
thereof.

29. And albeit Doctor Whitgift considered that this Libel was unworthy any
serious confutation, yet in regard of the great applause it found among the
green Heads of the University (who were greedy of Novelties) and to stop the
current of so dangerous Positions, he spared not his pains in writing a learned
Whitgift answers it, 1572.
Answer; therein laying open the weakness of that Cause, and the strength of
their Malice, who so hotly pursued the same; which being published upon the
Year 1572. won him no less reputation with the learneder sort, than the former
had with the young and weaker Brains, yea even those who had formerly thought
the Admonition unanswerable, found the rashness of their Censures by the
soundness of that Refutation.

30. Whereupon Master Cartwright, notwithstanding his former refusal to enter
into the list with Doctor Whitgift (as is aforesaid) seeing both the walls and
foundation of his new-founded Church Government already shaken, and tottering,
endeavored to underprop the same with a Reply. The weakness Cartwright
replies. Whitgift defends his Answer.
whereof Doctor Whitgift displayed in his Defense of the Answer to the
Admonition, against the Reply.

30. But Master Cartwright (glorying belike to have the last word) published a
second Reply, fraught with no other Cartwright's Second Reply.
stuff, than had been before refuted, yet Doctor Whitgift addressing himself to
answer it, was by the advice of some (whose Judgments he much esteemed)
dissuaded from troubling himself, in refuting that which he had already
overthrown. Amongst others who dissuaded him, the learned Doctor Whitaker was
one; against whose Judgment the Adversary can no way justly except. His words
in his Letter to Doctor Whitgift are these; Quem Cartwright us Mr. Whitaker's
Letters concerning Mr. Cartwright's Reply, and his censure of him.
nuper emisit libellum ejus magnam partem perlegi. Ne vivam, si quid unquam
viderim dissolutius, ac pene puerilius. Verborum satis ille quidem lautam, ac
novam supellectilem habet, rerum omnino nullam, quantum ego judicare possum.
Deinde, non modo perverse de Principis in rebus sacris, atque Ecclesiasticis
aucthoritate sentit, sed in Papistarum etiam castra transfugit, a quibus tamen
videri vult odio capitali dissidere. Verum nec in hac causa ferendus, and aliis
etiam in partibus tela a Papistis mutuatur. Denique ut de Ambrosio dixit
Hieronimus, verbis ludit, sententiis dormitat, and plane indignus est, qui a
quopiam docto refutetur. I have read over (says he) a great part of the Book
which Master Cartwright has lately set forth; Let me not live if I ever saw
any thing more loose, and almost more childish. As for words, indeed he has
store of them, both trim, and fresh enough; but as for matter he has none at
all: Besides this, he has not only peevish Assertions touching the Princes
Authority in matters Sacred, and Ecclesiastical, but he also flatly revolteth
from us to the Camp of the Papists, from whom he would seem to fly with deadly
hatred. And not in this Cause only is he unsufferable, but in other Points also
he borrows his Weapons and Arguments from the Papists. And in a word, as
Hierome sometime said of Ambrose; he is in his words but a trifler, and for his
matter but a dreamer, and altogether unworthy to be refuted by any man of
Learning.

32. Master Cartwright after these Controversies thus begun, and continued by
himself, as you see, lived sometimes beyond the Seas, now in one place, and
then in another, without attaining any eminent or certain Place in the
Commonwealth, save only the Mastership of an Hospital in Warwick.

33. But Doctor Whitgift having continued Master of Trinity College ten years,
and being twice Vice Chancellor, was by her Majesty preferred also to the
Deanery of Lincoln, which he held for Whitgift made Dean of Lincoln.
the space of seven years; so long as he remained in Cambridge.

34. By his Government in Trinity Norwich, Redman. Worcester, Babbington. St.
David' s, Rud. Gloucester, Golsborough. Hereford, Benet.
College he made many excellent Scholars, that came afterward to great
Preferment in the Church, and Commonwealth, five whereof were in his time
Bishops, that then were Fellows of the College when he was Master, and some of
them his Pupils; besides many Deans, and others of Dignity and Estimation in
the Church at this day.

35. He had diverse Earls and Noblemens Several Noblemen, etc. his Pupils.
Sons to his Pupils, as namely the Earls of Worcester, and Cumberland, the Lord
Zouch, the Lord Dunboy of Ireland, Sir Nicholas, and Sir Francis Bacon, now his
Majesty's Solicitor General, in whom he took great comfort, as well for their
singular Towardliness, as for their observance of him, and performance of many
good Offices toward him. All which Their respects toward him.
together with the rest of the Scholars of that House, he held to their public
He holds the Scholars strictly to their Exercises and Devotion.
Disputations, and Exercises, and Prayers, which he never missed, chiefly for
Devotion, and withal to observe others absence, always severely punishing such
Omissions and Negligences.

36. He usually dined and supped in the Common Hall, as well to have a watchful
Eye over the Scholars, and to keep them in a mannerly and awful obedience, as
by his Example, to teach them to be contented with a Scholarlike College Diet.

37. The sway and Rule he then did bear through the whole University, the
Records themselves will sufficiently testify; for by his mere travail and
labor, and the Credit which he had with her Majesty, and the Lord Burghly,
then Lord Treasurer of England, and Chancellor of Cambridge, he procured an
alteration and amendment of the Statutes Procures amendment of the University
Statutes.
of the University. In which kind of Affairs, and Business, all the Heads of
the Houses were directed and advised by him, as from an Oracle; For commonly
whatsoever he spoke or did, they still concurred with him, and would do nothing
without him.

38. He never took the foil at any man's hands, during his ten years
continuance in Trinity College; being therein not unlike unto Pittacus in his
Diog. Laert. de vita Philosoph.
ten years Government of Mitilene, Cui nunquam, per id tempus, contigit in
aliqua causa, quam in se susciperet cadere. For as the Causes he dealt in were
always just, so his Success was ever prosperous, wherein his singular Wisdom
was to be noted, and his Courage and His Wisdom and Courage.
Stoutness in his Attempts were observed of the greatest; and the general Fame
thereof remains yet fresh in the University, and will continue as his Badge,
and Cognizance, so long as his Memory lasts. And yet that Stoutness of his
was so well tempered, and mingled with his other Virtue of Mildness, and
Patience, His Moderation. Mr. Hooker's Character of him in his Eccles. Policy.
that Master Hooker made this true observation of him, He always governed with
that moderation, which uses by patience, to suppress boldness, and to make
them conquer, that suffer, which, I think, well suited with his Posey, or Motto;
Vincit Qut Patitur.

39. The first Wound which those fervent Reprehenders received at Doctor
Whitgift's hands, and his prudent order of Government, together with his
singular gift in Preaching, made his Fame spread, and gained him so great
estimation, that her Majesty was pleased to make choice Whitgift's esteem with
the Queen. Consecrated Bishop of Worcester April 21. 1577.
of him, before many others of eminent Place in the Church, to be Bishop of
Worcester. Upon which his Advancement he first took his leave of the whole
University, by a public Sermon which he preached in St. Mary's Church; wherein
he exhorted them to peace. And afterward by a private Sermon in Trinity
College he gave unto that Society such a godly and learned Exhortation Takes
leave of the University, with an Exhortation to Peace and Unity.
for their continuance and constancy in peace and unity, as it so moved their
Affections, that they burst out into Tears, insomuch that there were scarce any
dry Eyes to be found amongst the whole number. He chose for his Text the same
Farewell which St. Paul gave to the Corinthians; Finally, brethren, fare His
Farewel-Text. 2 Cor. 13. 11.
you well: Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and
the God of love and peace shall be with you.

40. IN June following he was attended, Sets out for Worcester, June 1697.
attended with the Heads of Houses, etc.
and accompanied on his way from Cambridge toward Worcester, with a great
Troop of the Heads, and others of choice account in the University, and with
exceeding lamentation, and sorrow of all sorts, for the loss they conceived
they had of so worthy a Governor.

41. But their grief for the loss of The Queen forgives his Firstfruits, and
gives him the disposal of all the Prebends of that Church.
him was not so great, as was the joy of them who had found him, amongst whom
it pleased her Majesty to grace his very first entrance both in forgiving him
his First Fruits (a Princely and extraordinary Bounty) as also in bestowing on
him (for the better encouragement and provision of his Chaplains, and other
learned men about him) the disposing of all the Prebends of that Church of
Worcester, during his continuance there.

42. He found the Bishopric at his He finds the Bishopric impaired by Grants
of long Leases.
first coming much impaired by his Predecessors granting away in long Leases,
diverse Manors, Parks, and Mansionhouses: But that which much troubled him, and
wherein he most of all stirred, Particularly the Rent-Corn of Two of the best
Manors, Hollow and Grimly.
was the letting to Master Abington, Cofferer to the late Queen, the Rent-corn
of his two best Manors, Hollow and Grimley, which is the chief upholding of the
Bishop's Hospitality, and without which (especially in dear Years) he is not
able to keep House. This Lease being let to Master Abington (a great Man then
to contend withal; his Wife also being sometimes the Queen's Bedfellow) the
Bishop notwithstanding did He questions the said Lease.
call it in question; having now (besides his Honorable Friends, the Lord
Keeper, and the Lord Treasurer) gained by his attendance at Court many more
about her Majesty, who much favored him, and professed great love unto him;
especially the Earl of Leicester, Sir Christopher Hatton, Vice-Chamberlain, Has
great Friends at Court.
and Sir Francis Walsingham, Principal Secretary; all in special grace with her
Highness. Master Abington by his Wife's greatness, procured her Majesty's
gracious Letters, written very earnestly in his behalf. The Bishop returning
Satisfies the Queen.
answer unto her Majesty, and enforming her by means of his honorable Friends,
how prejudicial it was unto the Bishopric, she was thereupon much displeased
with Master Abington, and took part with the Bishop; insomuch as Master
Abington was willing to have yielded the said Rent-Corn for the Bishop's own
time, so that his Lease might have still stood on foot against his Successor,
which the Bishop utterly refused, and in the end was rather contented, by way
of composition (notwithstanding Recovers the said Rent. Corn, paying 300 l out
of his own purse.
that the Lease was void, because the Rent-Corn was never before let) to give
Master Abington Three hundred pounds out of his own Purse, to have the Lease
surrendered, and to redeem the said Corn; which yet remains, and I hope ever
will, unto his Successor in that See.

43. Some have accounted Worcestershire happy, in having so kind and loving men
to their Bishops, and others impute it to the good Nature and Disposition of
the People, that so love and kindly use their Bishops, that thereby (unless
they be too inflexible, and harsh) they cannot but in requital of their loves,
entertain them with reciprocal kindnesses. But howsoever it be, such He has
great respect from the Gentlemen and People in the Country.
was the mutual love betwixt this Bishop, and the Gentlemen there, that they
delighted much to converse together; especially at Assizes and Sessions, the
Bishop would commonly reside at Worcester to give the Judges and Justices
entertainment. There was no speeding of Commissions for service of the Country,
nor any appointment for the Justices meeting for such purposes, but ever the
Bishop's pleasure was first known for time, and place; and the rest of the
Gentlemen accordingly attended him: He would oftentimes make appointment of
Meetings, either at his own House, or some of theirs, for some commendable
Recreation, or Exercises; whereby still to keep the Gentlemen by their
continual repair to each other, in mutual love and concord.

44. If he had understood of any Jar, Is a great Peacemaker among them.
or Discord, he would send for both Parties, unawares to each other, under
pretense of some service to be done, or some meeting appointed; and before
their departure would make them Friends. If he perceived a frowardness in
either of them, and that by entreaty he could not prevail, then would he leave
persuasion, and entreaty; and, as being Vice President of the Marches of Wales
(which Place her Majesty shortly after he was made a Bishop, bestowed upon him)
threaten the Obstinate with imprisonment, or safe custody, till he should
reform himself. Of which his Resolution, when the Gentlemen of the chiefest
sway and account had experience, they then would grow calm, and submit
themselves, and he as mildly and gently did use them, when he saw them coming.
One particular instance (among many) I will give you, of Sir John Russell, and
Makes up a Remarkable Quarrel betwixt Sir John Russell and Sir Henry Barkeley.
Sir Henry Barkeley; betwixt whom was so deadly a Quarrel, as that great
Bloodshed was like to have ensued at a Sessions in Worcester, by reason of
their many Friends, and Followers, had not the Bishop wisely prevented it, by
providing a strong Watch at the Gates, and about the City, and requiring them
to bring both Parties, with their Attendance, well guarded to his Palace, where
he caused them all to the number of four or five hundred, to deliver their
Weapons into his own Servants custody; and after two hours pains taken,
sometimes in persuading, and otherwhiles in threatening them, he made them so
good Friends, as they both attended him Hand in Hand to the Town Hall, where
they performed the Service of their Country in amity and love, and ever after
held him in great honor and estimation therefore. Wherein he was much happier
than Bias, who reports of himself, that He never arbitrated Diog. Laert. de
vita Philosoph. lib. 1.
any Controversy between two of his Friends, but he made one of them his Enemy.

45. A year after his Consecration to that Bishopric, he was (as before is
mentioned) made Vice President of Is made Vice President of the Marches of
Wales.
the Marches of Wales, (Sir Henry Sidney, his very honorable Friend, being
then Lord President, and at that time, Lord Deputy of Ireland) where albeit the
Bishop might immediately have taken upon him, according to his place, to direct
the Court, having an excellent quick Understanding, a good facility in Speech,
and a deep and sound Judgment, gained by his long experience in Government in
Cambridge, and elsewhere, where his Sufficiency and Patience were tried to the
proof; yet notwithstanding it was a whole Year before He had great experience
in Government, yet backward to bear sway.
he would almost speak in the public Affairs, much less take upon him to bear
any sway, but still observed the Orders and Practice of the Cour t, and looked
into the Affections and Dispositions of his Associates; hearing the Complaints
of the Suppliants, and enforming himself by others of Integrity, and Honesty,
and sometimes noting their partial Orders, and corrupt Dealings; but at the
Years end, he then took upon him the directing and ordering of things himself,
taking exceeding pains from Morning till Bedtime, affording himself only some
small times for Meals and Study.

46. And when he had found the corruption of some of his Associates, as well by
his own observation, as by the confession of the Parties that corrupted them
(for the property of some amongst them, was to leave nothing unassayed to
corrupt any man to serve their own turn for the present, though they ever after
hated him to the death, and would revile him) he would dismiss these Associates
by sending for others under pretense of ease to the Parties.

47. He had also a special care (as Has a special Watch over his own Family and
Attendants, to avoid all color of corruption.
behoved him) of his own Family, and Attendants near unto him; and therefore to
avoid all color and suspicion of Corruption, he would never hear any Cause or
Informations, or receive Petition in his private Chamber, but abroad, by the
Petitioners themselves, either in going to the Chapel, Court, Dinner, Supper,
or at the Councilboard; insomuch as a Gentleman of his Bed chamber (employed
sometimes by him) making request unto him that he might have the delivery of
Suitors Petitions, and indorse their Answers, he grew into such dislike of the
young Gentleman (as supposing he had been tampered withal) that he presently
discharged him of his Chamber, and could never afterward very well brook him.

48. For this his Integrity and just dealing, Is highly esteemed by the People
of Wales.
the People of Wales especially had a very reverend and honorable opinion of
him, the rather because they observed His great Integrity, Justice, and mild
Government.
in him a temperate and mild government, without reviling or harsh Speeches;
and oftentimes moderating their Fines and Punishments, which in strictness of
Law, and opinion of his Associates, would have lighted heavily upon them; for
which they highly esteemed him as their Patron and Protector, and said he was
sent amongst them to deliver them from the oppression of the Mighty, and
corruption of the Wicked, yea such was their opinion and conceit of him, that
if he had imprisoned, whipped, or inflicted any other grievous Punishment upon
them, they would have undergone it with patience, confessing their Offenses,
and lauding his Uprightness and Justice.

49. Her Majesty out of her experience He is made Commissioner by the Queen for
reforming the Disorders in the Cathedrals of Lichfield and Hereford.
of his wise and prudent Government, was pleased (upon complaint made unto her,
of the many Discords and Disorders that were in the two Cathedral Churches of
Lichfield and Hereford) to make choice of him alone, amongst a number of worthy
Prelates, for redress thereof; directing two Commissions unto him for the
visiting of the said Churches, which accordingly he did, and reformed them both
(being very far out of order) and ordained them Statutes for their better and
more peaceable government afterward.

50. These his Courses thus held for his government, and reforming both of
Church and People, gained him so general an opinion and liking in the lifetime,
and disgrace, of Archbishop Grindall, that her Majesty designed him The Queen
designs him for Archbishop of Canterbury, in the room of Grindall then in
disgrace.
Archbishop of Canterbury, as was signified unto him, and earnestly wished by
some of his honorable Friends about the Queen, and also by Archbishop Grindall
himself much desired, who, out of the great estimation he had conceived of his
government, and other his many Virtues, and worthy Parts, and by reason of his
own Years and Infirmity, labored him in like earnest manner, presently to
accept thereof, being himself well contented to shake off those Cares, and
receive from her Majesty some yearly Pension, which Bishop Whitgift utterly
refused, He utterly refuses it during Grindall's Life; the Queen is contented.
and in presence of the Queen her self, besought pardon in not accepting
thereof upon any condition whatsoever in the lifetime of the other. Whereupon
the Queen commiserating the good Old man's Estate (being a grave and learned
Father of the Church; and at that time blind with years and grief) was
graciously pleased to say, That as she had made him an Archbishop, so he
Grindall dies.
should die an Archbishop, as he did shortly after.

51. Upon whose decease, Bishop Whitgift sent for to Court.
Whitgift receiving Letters from a great Counselor for his repair unto the
Court, and the Speech thereof, together with the report of Archbishop
Grindall's death, being spread abroad, you would have wondered to have seen the
repair, and flocking of Gentlemen and others, unto him, both out of
Worcestershire, and the Marches of Wales, not to congratulate his Advancement
(which they upon such his preparation to the Court, conjectured was to follow)
but to express their true love, and hearty affection toward him, and to
beseech him not to depart from thence; and so with tears and sobs took their
leave of him, as kind natured Children use to part from their Parents, whose
Face they are out of hope ever to see again. Plutarch observes, that it
falls out very seldom with Magistrates, and those who are in Authority, that
they should please the multitude, or be acceptable to the common People,
because they, striving still to reform the disordered, do grieve them as much
as Surgeons do their Patients, when they bind up their Aches with Bands to cure
them. For though by that binding they restore and bring to their natural places
again the broken Bones, and Members out of joint, yet put they the Patient to
great pain: But this Bishop was not so boisterous a Surgeon, for he had learned
the Art of curing the Diseases of a Commonwealth, from a more skilful Surgeon,
even from him that taught, that as Wine was to be poured into the Wound to
search, so Oil was also necessary to supple, but both expedient for the Cure.
And therefore as he always resolutely endeavored the redress of the
ill-affected, so with an excellent Temper of rare Mildness, he ever effected it
without exasperation of those, whose good he was desirous to procure. For which
singular mixture of two so requisire Virtues in a Magistrate, he was most
worthily, and most happily, both for the Church and Commonwealth, advanced from
the By Is translated to the Archbishopric of Canterbury, September. 24. 1583.
shoprick of Worcester, to the Archbi shoprick of Canterbury, September 24.
1583.

52. AT his first entrance he found the Archbishopric surcharged Finds the
Bishopric overvalued: gets an abatement in the Firstfruits for him and his
Successors.
in the valuation, and procured an Order out of the Exchequer, for the
abatement of One hundred pounds, for him, and his Successors, in the Payment of
his First Fruits: He also shortly after recovered from the Queen, as Recovers
Lands that had been detained.
part of the Possessions of the Archbishopric, Long-Beachwood in Kent,
containing above a thousand Acres of Land, which had been many years detained
from his Predecessor by Sir James Croft, then Comptroller of her Majesty's
Household, Farmer thereof to her Majesty. In letting Leases of his
Impropriations, if he found the Curates Wages Amends Curats Wages, where small.
but small, he would abate much of his Fine to increase their Pensions, some
Ten pounds by the year, some more, some less, as at Folkstone, Maidstone, and
others.

53. But to leave these particular Affairs, The Queen jealous of the Puritans,
charges the Archbishop to see strict Conformity observed to the Established
Church and Government.
and to come to those public Employments, for which he was specially made
Archbishop; her Majestly fearing the danger that might ensue by the assembly of
diverse Ministers to Exercises, and Prophesying, (as they termed it) straightly
charged him to be vigilant, and careful for the reducing of them, and all other
Ministers by their subscription and conformity, to the settled Orders, and
Government; adding, that she would have the Discipline of the Church of England
formerly established, of all men duly to be observed, without alteration of the
least Ceremony; conceiving belike, that these Novelists might have wrought the
same mischief here, which the turbulent Orators of Lacedemonia did in that
Commonwealth, so wisely settled by Lycurgus his Laws; which whilst they took
upon them to amend, they miserably defaced, and deformed. The inconvenience of
which kind of reforming, that Prudent and Judicious Queen had learned out of
the Poet Aratus, his Answer to one Diog Laert. de vita Philosoph. lib. 90.
who asked him, How he might have Homer' s Poems free from Corruptions, and
Faults; Get (says he) an old Copy not reformed: For curious Wits laboring to
amend things well done, commonly either guite mar them, or at least make them
worse.

54. The Archbishop endeavoring His care of the Queen's Command.
to perform this her Majesty's Commandment, had notwithstanding much ado, and
many conflicts with them. For they had gotten such strength by his
Predecessor's connivency, that many of them were then planted both within his
Province, and particular Diocese: In whose favor sundry Gentlemen of the
chiefest account there came to entreat the Archbishop, and some of the younger
sort would needs argue and dispute matters in controversy on their behalf. But
he gave so good satisfaction unto them all by his mild and temperate Answers
(albeit he yielded not unto their Requests) that they loved him after; some of
the chiefest of them preferring their Sons unto him, and the rest performing
many kind Offices and Services toward him.

55. The next Year following, for December. 1584. For satisfaction of some great
Persons, he with two other Bishops receive the Reasons of some Ministers for
their Nonconformity. They sufficiently answer the same.
farther satisfaction of some of the greatest, and most honorable Counselors
of State in these Points, the two Archbishops, and the Bishop of Winchester
were pleased to hear the Reasons of some Ministers that refused to conform
themselves unto the Orders of the Church established. At which time albeit the
said learned Prelates sufficiently cleared all their Doubts, and Exceptions;
yet after this, these honorable Personages affying much in the Sufficiency and
Scholarship of some others, not yet dealt withal, and supposing that they had
been able to have said much more in defense of themselves, and the impeaching
of the Ecclesiastical Government established (for so they were born in hand)
were desirous to hear at Lambeth the Controversies A Conference at Lambeth, and
a further debate of the Controversy, to the seeming satisfaction of those Great
Personages.
further debated on both Sides. Whereunto the Archbishop, for their
satisfaction yielded; and after four hours Conference spent, these Honorable
Personages professed, that they would not have believed that the Archbishops
Grounds and Reasons had been so good and strong, and the Others so weak and
trivial, but that they heard them once and again with their own Ears; and so,
they said they would inform her Majesty; seeming to be there well resolved, and
also persuaded the Ministers to Conformity.

56. Howbeit afterward, when those Honorable Personages saw that they might
not sway (as formerly in the restraint of Archibishop Grindall) and prefer The
Archbishop perplexed with Oppositions, is grieved.
whom they listed unto Ecclesiastical Promotions; they with some others linked
themselves against the Archbishop, and gave him, (being yet no Counselor of
State) many thwarts at the Council board, wherewith he was so much perplexed
and grieved to see things thus carried, as thereupon advising with some of his
Honorable Friends (whose assistance he knew might avail him) if their
Affections were not otherwise overswayed by the potency of so great Personages,
he thus imparted his mind in several Letters, Writes his mind.
as follows.

GOD knows how desirous I have been, from time to time, to have my Doings
approved by my ancient and honorable Friends. For which cause, since my coming
to this Place, I have done nothing of importance against these Sectaries,
without good Advice. I have risen up early, and sat up late, to yield Reasons,
and make answer to their Contentions and their Seditious Objections. And shall
I now say, I have lost my labor? Or shall my just dealing with disobedient and
irregular Persons, cause my former professed and ancient Friends, to hinder my
just Proceedings, and make them speak of my Doings, yea and of my Self, what
they list? Solomon says, that an old Friend is better than a new. I trust
those that love me indeed will not so lightly cast off their old Friends for
any of these new fangled and Factious Sectaries, whose fruits are to make
division, and to separate old, and assured Friends. In mine own private Affairs
I know I shall stand in need of Friends; but, in these public Actions, I see
no cause why I should seek Friends, seeing they, to whom the care of the
Commonwealth is committed, ought, of duty, therein to join with me. And if my
honorable Friends should for sake me (especially in so good a Cause) and not
put their helping hand to the redress of these Enormities (being indeed a
matter of State, and not of the least moment) I shall think my coming unto this
Place to have been for my punishment, and my hap very hard, that, when I think
to deserve best, and, in a manner, consume my self to satisfy that, which God,
her Majesty, and the Church, requires of me, I should be evilly rewarded. Sed
meliora spero. It is objected by some, that my desire of Uniformity, by way of
Subscription, is for the better maintenance of my Book. They are mine Enemies
that say so; but I trust my Friends have a better opinion of me. Why should I
seek for any confirmation of my Book after twelve years approbation? or what
shall I get thereby more than already I have? And yet, if Subscription may
confirm it, it is confirmed long ago by the Subscription almost of all the
Clergy of England before my time. Mine Enemies likewise, and the slanderous
Tongues of this uncharitable Sect, report that I am revolted, become a Papist,
and I know not what. But it proceeds from their lewdness, and not from any
desert of mine. I am further burdened with Wilfulness; I hope my Friends are
better persuaded of me, to whose Consciences I appeal. It is strange, that a
man of my Place, dealing by so good warrant as I do, should be so encountered,
and, for not yielding, be counted wilful. But I must be content, Vincit qui
patitur. There is a difference betwixt Wilfulness and Constancy. I have taken
upon me, by the Place which I hold under her Majesty, the defense of the
Religion, and the Rites of the Church of England, to appease the Schisms and
Sects therein, to reduce all the Ministers thereof to Uniformity, and to due
obedience, and not to waver with every wind; which also my Place, my Person, my
Duty, the Laws, her Majesty, and the goodness of the Cause do require of me,
and wherein the Lords of her Highness's most Honorable Privy Council (all
things considered) ought in duty to assist and countenance me. But how is it
possible that I should perform the Charge which I have undertaken, after so
long liberty, and lack of Discipline, if a few Persons, so meanly qualified (as
most of these Factions Sectaries are) should be countenanced against the whole
State of the Clergy of greatest account both for Learning, Years, Staidness,
Wisdom, Religion, and Honesty, and open Breakers and Impugners of the Law,
young in Years, proud in Conceit, contentious in Disposition, should be
maintained against their Governors, seeking to reduce them to Order, and to
Obedience? Haec sunt initia Haereticorum, and ortus, atque conatus
Schismaticorum male cogitantium, ut sibi placeant, ut praepositum superbo
tumore contemnat. Sic de Ecclesia receditur, sic Altar profanum foris
collocatur, sic contra pacem Christi, and ordinationem, atque unitatem Dei
rebellatur. The First fruits of Heretics, and the first Births and Endeavors
of Schismatics are these, to admire themselves, and in their swelling Pride to
contemn any that are set over them. Thus do men fall from the Church of God;
thus is a foreign unhallowed Altar erected; and thus is Christ's Peace, and
God's Ordination and Unity rebelled against. For mine own part, I neither have
done, nor do any thing in these Matters, which I do not think my self in
conscience and duty bound to do, and which her Majesty has not with earnest
Charge committed unto me, and which I am not well able to justify to be most
requisite for this Church and State; whereof, next to her Majesty (though most
unworthy, or at the least most unhappy) the chief care is committed unto me,
which I will not by the grace of God neglect, whatsoever come upon me
therefore. Neither may I endure their notorious Contempts, unless I will become
Aesop' s Block, and undo all that which hither to has been done. And how then
shall I be able to perform my Duty, according to her Majesty's Expectation? It
is certain, that if way be given unto them, upon their unjust Surmises and
Clamours, it will be the cause of that Confusion, which hereafter the State
will be sorry for. I neither care for the Honor of this Place I hold (which is
Onus unto me) nor the largeness of the Revenue, neither any worldly thing (I
thank God) in respect of doing my Duty; neither do I fear the displeasure of
Man, nor the evil Tongue of the uncharitable, who call me Tyrant, Pope, Knave,
and lay to my charge things that I never did, nor thought. Scio enim hoc esse
opus Diaboli, ut Servos Dei mendaciis laceret, and opinionibus falsis,
gloriosum nomen infamet, ut qui conscientiae suae luce clarescunt, alienis
rumoribus sordidentur. For I know that this is the work of that Accuser, the
Devil, that he may tear in pieces the Servants of God with Lies, that he may
dishonor their glorious Name with false Surmises, that they, who through the
clearness of their own Conscience, are shining bright, might have the filth of
other men's Slanders, cast upon them. So was Cyprian himself used, and other
Godly Bishops, to whom I am not comparable. But that which most of all grieveth
me, and is to be wondered at, and lamented, is, that some of those which give
countenance to these Men, and cry out for a learned Ministry, should watch
their opportunity, and be Instruments and means to place most unlearned Men in
the chiefest Places and Livings of the Ministry, thereby to make the state of
the Bishops and Clergy contemptible, and I fear saleable. This Hypocrisy and
dissembling with God and Man (in pretending one thing, and doing another) goes
to my heart, and makes me to think that God's Judgments are not far off. The
day will come, when all men's hearts shall be opened. In the mean time I will
depend upon him, who never fails those that put their trust in him.

Thus far his Letters.

57. After this he linked himself in a After which he is in strict league with
Sir Christopher Hatton by means of Dr. Bancroft.
firm league of friendship with Sir Christopher Hatton, then Vice-Chamberlain
to the Queen's Majesty; and by the means of Dr. Bancroft (his then Household
Chaplain, and afterward Lord Archbishop of Canterbury) had him most firm, and
ready upon all occasions to impart unto the Queen, as well the Crosses offered
him at the Council Table, as also sundry impediments, whereby he was hindered
from the performance of many good Services toward her Majesty and the State.
He had always the Lord Burley (then Lord Treasurer Burley his firm Friend.
Lord Treasurer of England) his firm and constant Friend, and one that would
omit no opportunity for his advancement, who prevailed so far, that when the
Earl of Leicester (one of those honorable Personages afore-mentioned) was in
the Low Countries, the Archbishop, The Archbishop sworn of the Privy Council.
and the Lord Cobham, were first sworn Counselors of State, and Thomas Lord
Buckhurst was sworn the day after, whereat the Earl was not a little
displeased. The Lord Buckhurst was joined Lord Buckhurst his faithful Friend.
in like affection to the Archbishop as the other two were, and continued after
he came to be Lord Treasurer, his faithful and loving Friend to the time of his
death.

58. When the Archbishop was thus established in friendship with these Noble
Personages, as aforesaid, their Favors, and his Place, wrought him free He has
free access to the Queen.
access to the Queen, and gracious acceptance of his Motions in the Church's
behalf. His Courses then at the Councilboard His Oppositions abated.
were not so much crossed nor impeached as heretofore; but by reason of his
daily attendance and access, he then oftentimes gave impediment to the Sir
Thomas Bromeley. Lord Chancellor, died, April 12. 1587.
Earl's Designments in Clergy Causes.

59. About this time Sir Thomas Bromely (the then Lord Chancellor) died;
whereupon it pleased her Majesty The Queen disposed to make the Archbishop Lord
Chancellor.
to discover her gracious Inclination to have made the Archbishop Lord
Chancellor of England. But he excusing himself in many respects, that he was He
excuses himself, and recommends Sir Christopher Hatton.
grown into years, and had the burden of all Ecclesiastical Businesses laid
upon his back (which was as much as one man could well undergo, considering the
troubles with so many Sectaries that were then sprung up) desired to be spared,
and besought her Highness to make choice of Sir Christopher Hatton, who Sir
Christopher Hatton made Lord Chancellor, Ap. 29. 1587.
shortly after was made Lord Chancellor in the Archbishop's House at Croydon,
thereby the rather to grace the Archbishop. His advancement did much strengthen
the Archbishop and his Friends, and withal, the Earl of Leicester and his
Designments, came soon after to an end. For, the Year following, taking his
Journey to Kenelworth, he died in the way at Cornbury Park, whereby the
Archbishop took himself The Earl of Leicester died Sept. 4. 1588.
freed from much opposition.

60. Upon the death of the said Earl, the Chancellorship of Oxford being Oxford
desire the Archbishop for their Chancellor in the Earl's room.
void, diverse of the Heads and others of the University, made known unto the
Archbishop their desire to choose him their Chancellor, although he was a
Cambridge man. To whom he returned this Answer, That he was already their
Friend, whereof they might rest assured; and therefore advised them to make
choice of some other in near place about the Queen, that might assist him on
their behalf: And both at the Councilboard, and other Places of Justice, right
them many ways, both for the benefit of the University, and their particular
Colleges. And therewithal recommended unto them Sir Christopher He recommends
Sir Christopher Hatton, who is chosen: He is the Archbishop's constant
Assistant in bridling the Puritan Faction.
Hatton, being sometime of that University; whom accordingly they did choose for
their Chancellor, and whom the Archibishop ever found a great Assistant in
bridling and reforming the in temperate Humor of these Novelists, who by the
Countenance of the aforesaid Great Personages (E. Leicester, etc.) were now
grown to a strong head.

61. For, in the Year 1588. came Martin Marprelate, and other Libels published,
1588.
forth those hateful Libels of Martin Marprelate, and much about the same time,
the Epitome; the Demonstration of Discipline; the Supplication; Diotrephes; the
Minerals; Have you any work for a Cooper; Martin Junior, alias Theses
Martinianoe; Martin Senior; More work for the Cooper; and other such like
Bastardly Pamphlets, which might well be Nullius filii, because no man durst A
Private Puritan Press erected at Kingston and afterward removed to several
Places.
father their Births. All which were printed with a kind of wandering Press,
which was first set up at Moulsey, near Kingston upon Thames, and from thence
conveyed to Fausly in Northamptonshire, and from thence to Norton, afterward
to Coventry, from thence to Welstone in Warwickshire, from which place the
Letters were sent to another Press in or near Manchester, where (by the means
of Henry, that good Earl of Derby) the The Press discovered at Manchester.
Press was discovered in printing of More work for a Cooper. Which shameless
Libels were fraughted only with odious and scurrilous Calumniations against the
Established Government, and such Reverend Prelates as deserved honor with
uprighter Judgments.

62. Some of the Printers, whilst they were busied about the last Libel, The
Printers apprehended, prosecuted and fined in the Star Chamber. On their
submission, and the Archbishop's Mediation, were released, and Fines remitted.
Penry and Udall Authors of the Libels.
were apprehended; who, with the Entertainers, and Receivers of the Press, were
proceeded against in the Starchamber, and there Censured; but upon their
submission (at the humble Suit of the Archbishop) were both delivered out of
Prison, and eased of their Fines. The Authors and Penners of some of these
Libels were, John Penry and John Udall; the chief Disperser of them was
Humphrey Newman, a Cobbler, a choice Broker for such sowterly Wares, and in
regard of his Hempenly Trade, a fit Newman a Cobbler, Disperser.
Person to cherish up Martin's Birds, who (as Pliny writes) do feed so
greedily upon Hemp Seed, that they be oftentimes choked therewith. Such was
the unfortunate end of some of his Martin Birds, as appears upon Record in
the King's Bench, against John Penry, Clerk, John Penry condemned, 1593. Udall
pardoned.
Termino Pasch. 1593. and at an Assize in Surrey against John Udall, whose
Pardon the Archbishop afterward obtained.

63. Thus the factious Ministers, zealous of pretended Discipline, having with
these seditious Libels (as the Forerangers and Harbingers of their further
Designs) made way in the hearts of the Vulgar (who ever are apt to entertain
Novelties, though it be with danger and detriment to themselves; and specially
if it have a show of restraining the Authority of their Superiors) they thought
it the fittest time to prosecute their Projects. And while one sort of them
were maliciously busied in slandering Thomas Cartwright (with others) proceeded
with in the Starchamber for their Conventicles, 1591. and for publishing their
Book of New Discipline.
the State of the Church already settled, the other were as seditiously employed
in planting the Discipline which they had newly plotted. Whereupon shortly
after Thomas Cartwright, and Edmund Snape, with others, were called in
question, and proceeded withal in the Star Chamber, for setting forth, and
putting in practice (without Warrant or Authority) a new Form of Common Prayer,
and Administration of the Sacraments and Presbyterial Discipline. The
particularities of which their dangerous Plots, and Positions (though most
secretly carried amongst men only of their own combination) were by Doctor
Bancroft first discovered, and by the Archbishop and the Lord Chancellor
farther brought to light, as the Records themselves in the Star Chamber do
testify, and may at large appear in Doctor Bancroft's Survey of the Pretended
Discipline; and dangerous Positions under Dr. Bancroft writes two Books against
the Disciplinarians, and their dangerous Practices and Positions.
pretense of Reformation: Wherein also you shall see these Disciplinarians to
exceed other Ministers, from whom they have their Presbyterial Platform, in
Threatening, Railing, and undutiful Speeches, against their Sovereign, the High
Court of Parliament, the most Honorable Privy Council, the Archbishops and
Bishops, the Reverend Judges of the Land, and Lawyers of both Professions: And
generally against all Magistrates, and other inferior Ministers of Justice, and
Officers under them, that do maintain the present Government of the Church of
England, and withstand their desire.

64. It was therefore high time for the Archbishop and State to look strictly
to The Archbishop and State's vigilant watch upon them.
these Perturbers of our Churches happy quiet. But if we shall take a further
view of those enormous, and desperate Courses, which after ensued (though all
Branches growing out of the same Root) we shall be far from accusing either the
Archbishop of too much Vigilance, or the Civil Magistrates of overmuch
Severity, in cutting off some of those outrageous and unbridled Sectaries.

65. Three Principal there were among them deeply infatuated with this
reforming Spirit; William Hacket, Yeoman; Edmund Coppinger, and Henry
Arthington, Gentlemen; all of them strongly possessed, at the first, with an
earnest desire of the late invented Discipline, and carried violently with the
strength of their erroneous Fancy, into a desperate and lamentable Course;
whereof, though I will suppose that many are innocent, who were led with the
same Spirit and desire of Reformation with them in the beginning; yet I am
induced by just and weighty Reasons to conceive, that, unless the Vigilance of
the Magistrates had timely prevented their Courses, the intemperate Zeal of
these Novelists, finding no certain ground to stay it self upon, nor any
determinate end where it might finally rest, would have broken out into some
like Combustion, and Flame, as these aforenamed did, whereof I will give you
but a little taste. Two of these, Edmund Coppinger and Henry Arthington,
Coppinger and Arthington their preaching in a Cart in Cheapside, Julii 16.
1591. That Hacket represented Christ, and Themselves Prophets from God.
came into Cheapside, and there in a Cart proclaimed News from Heaven, to wit,
That one William Hacket, Yeoman, represented Christ, by partaking his glorious
Body in his principal Spirit; and that They were two Prophets, the one of
Mercy, the other of Judgment, called and sent of God to assist him in his great
work, etc. But because the weight of the Matter requires a larger Discourse
than is fit to be inserted in this Work, I refer the Reader for the rest unto
the perusal of Doctor Cousin his Book, entitled, Conspiracy for Pretended
Reformation: Conspiracy for pretended Reformation, wrote by Dr. Cousin.
Where he shall find their Purposes, Plots, and Designments, with many other
markable things at large discoursed, and taken truly out of their Conference
and Writings under their own hands, with their Confessions and Examinations,
subscribed by themselves before sundry honorable and worshipful Personages, of
great gravity and wisdom, employed in those Affairs. By all which, together
with their temperate, direct, and pertinent Speech, and congruity of Phrase and
Matter, both before, and after their Apprehension, it will clearly appear, that
the said Conspirators were not Madmen (unless it be a kind of Madness to be a
violent Promoters
Prosecutor of This Reformation; as indeed it is) howsoever some of that
Fraternity, and Sect, have so given it out; choosing thereby rather to accuse
the honorable Justice of the Realm, and all the Ministers thereof, than that
any, professing desire of pretended Reformation, should be noted with deep
Disloyalty, as they were charged withal.

66. When the Queen and State saw the incredible height of these audacious
Attempts, so dangerous to the Commonwealth, thus knotted and countenanced under
pretense of reforming the Church, they found it necessary to stop the Fountains
of these Proceedings; lest it might grow to the like outrage. Amongst whom
there were very forward to the like presumption Henry Barrow, Gentleman, and
John Greenwood, Clerk, who were convented before the High Commissioners for
Causes Ecclesiastical, in November 1587. for 1587. Barrow and Greenwood their
Schismatical and Seditious Positions.
their Schismatical and Seditious Opinions, viz. That our Church is no Church,
or at the least, no true Church; yielding these Reasons therefore. First, That
the Worship of the English Church is flat Idolatry. Secondly, That we admit
into our Church Persons unsanctified. Thirdly, That our Preachers have no
lawful Calling. Fourthly, That our Government is ungodly. Fifthly, That no
Bishop, or Preacher, preaches Christ sincerely, and truly. Sixthly, That the
People of every Parish ought to choose their Bishop; and that every Elder,
though he be no Doctor, nor Pastor, is a Bishop. Seventhly, That all the
Precise, which refuse the Ceremonies of the Church, and yet preach in the same
Church, strain at a Gnat and swallow a Cammel, and are close Hypocrites, and
walk in a left handed Policy; as Master Cartwright, Wiggington, etc. Also in
Norwich, Master Moare, Pawmone, and Burges, that all which make Catechisms, or
teach and expound printed and written Catechisms, are Idol Shepherds; as
Calvin, Ursin, Nowell, etc. That the Child of ungodly Parents ought not to be
baptized, as of Usurers, Drunkards, etc. nor any Bastards: That Set-Prayer is
blasphemous.

67. The fore said Brochers of these The Ringleaders on being convened, make
show of Conformity, but afterward go back.
Opinions at this their first Convention, made show of their conformity, upon
conference with some Divines; and in hope thereof, were enlarged upon bonds;
but all in vain. For after their liberty they burst forth into further
Extremities, and were again committed to the Were re-committed July, 1588. and
proceeded against March, 1592.
Fleet, July 20. 1588. where they pub lished their Scandalous and Seditious
Writings; for which they were proceeded withal at Justice-Hall, near Newgate in
London, March 21. 1592.

68. For suppressing this kind of People (which as you see were grown unto a
great height of violence and outrage) the State held it fit at the next
Parliament An Act of Abjuration and Banishment made against Schismatics.
following to make a Law of Abjuration, or Banishment, of such as should either
persuade others, or be present themselves at these their Conventicles, or
Meetings, which Law is entitled; An Act to restrain the Queen's Majesty's
Subjects in their due obedience.

69 LET the Reader now consider with what Contagion, and Leprosy, many poor
Souls had like to have been infected through the divulging of their wicked
Libels, and dangerous Positions, tending to Innovation and Rebellion, had not
the stroke of Justice, and providence of the State, wisely prevented the same;
selecting as out of an hundred thousand seditious Mutineers (for, so many they
confessed were ready for that purpose) only four Only four Persons prosecuted
of a very great Number.
Persons, as the chief Ringleaders, whose lot it was to be proceeded withal,
for the quenching of the fiery outrage of the rest, kindled already to the like
Attempts, as those in Germany of the Great Troubles in Germany; just cause of
sears here from like Principles and Pretenses of Reformation.
Cabinet-teachers, and Reformers, both at Mulhusin, and Munster in Westphalia:
Which Seditions could not be appeased, till Fifty thousand of them were killed,
and cut in pieces by the united Forces of most of the Princes of the Empire:
And though some, not of the greatest foresight, may think that the fear which
our Archbishop conceived of Dangers to ensue out of these Sectaries Attempts,
was far greater than there was just cause, yet the Examples of those foreign
Pretenders of like Reformation as is aforesaid, compared with these our
Reformers Designs, taught him not to be without fear, or care, for preventing
these dangerous Events at home. For all their Intendments sorted to one end,
viz. Reformation, and to be brought to pass by one and the self-same means;
viz. by commotion of the unbridled multitude.

70. For was it not in their Assemblies The Discipline decreed in their
Assemblies to be put in Practice.
Classical and Synodical concluded, That the Discipline should, within a time
limited, be put in practice, and erected all in one day by the Ministers
together with the People? whom these Disciplinarians bragged to be already
enflamed with Zeal to lend so many thousand hands, for the advancement of their
Cause, by whom they hoped, and said, such Reformation must be brought in: And
how, I pray you, did they incense the common People, not only in their private
Conventicles, (decreeing that the Queen's Authority The Queen's Authority
Ecclesiastical to be restrained.
ought to be restrained in Causes Ecclesiastical) but in their public Sermons,
and Exhortations; alienating the hearts of their Auditors from all obedience of
the Ecclesiastical Magistrates? As namely Master Cartwright, who says, That no
obedience Cartwright' s seditious Doctrines.
ought to be given unto them, either in doing that which they command, or
abstaining from that which they prohibit: And that it should not be lawful for
any one of the Brotherhood to take an Oath, whereby he may discover any thing
prejudicial to himself, or his Brother, especially if he be persuaded the
matter to be lawful, for which the punishment is like to be inflicted; or,
having taken it, he need not discover the very truth. And in his Prayer before
his Sermons, he used thus to say; Because they Cartwright' s charitable Prayer
for the Bishops, in his Sermons at Banbury, 1589. Penry' s Supplication to the
Parliament; threatening them with Plagues.
(meaning the Bishops) which ought to be Pillars in the Church, do band
themselves against Christ, and his Truth, therefore, O Lord, give us grace and
power, all, as one man, to set our selves against them. Which words, by way of
Emphasis, he would often repeat. And how, I pray you, does Penry, in his
Supplication to the Parliament; incite both the Lords and Commons, threatening
them with Plagues, and Bloodshed, if they gathered not Courage, rage, and Zeal?
And withal, scoffing at their unwillingness hitherto for disturbing of the
State, forsooth, to set upon the Hierarchy of the Bishops; telling them, if
they refused so to do, they should declare unto their Children, That God had
raised up but a company of White-livered Soldiers to teach them the Gospel in
the sincerity under Queen Elizabeth. And does not Udall threaten that the
Presbytery Udall' s Threats against the Resisters of the Presbytery.
shall prevail, and come in by that way, and means, as shall make all their
hearts to ache, that shall withstand or hinder the same?

71. And when, I pray you, were These Stirs set on foot at the time of the
Spanish Invasion. 1588.
these Classical Assemblies, and these Seditious Stirs, and Hurli-burlies of
Martimists, and that Reforming Sect put in practice? In the Year 1588. at that
time, when the Invincible Spanish Navy (as some vainly termed it) was upon our
Coasts, and should have invaded us; albeit it was by the gracious Providence of
our Omnipotent God, prevented, and their Ships so dispersed, as that no Enemy
was able to put foot on English Shore, but as a Prisoner or Captive. At which
time, as the Care of her Majesty, for the preparation of Forces to encounter
and resist them, was very great; so might her Grief also be, to behold a
discord and dissension of her own Subjects within her Realm. The Archbishop
also himself had not the The Archbishop's preparation for Defense of his Prince
and Country. The whole Clergy of his Province Armed.
meanest part to perform in so great and weighty an Action; when the whole
Forces of the Clergy, not only within his particular Diocese, but through his
whole Province, were committed unto his care, and charge, to have in readiness,
besides his own Family, and Tenants, which were by him gathered together, and
all prepared, mustered and trained for defense of Prince and Country.

72. Now, of the aforesaid Stirs, and Seditious Attempts of sundry Persons in
this our Archbishop's time, that Master Cartwright was the Fountain, and
Cartwright the Head of the Puritan Party.
principal Author, it may appear by sundry Passages, and also by the Opinion
and Dependencies which all the Fore* named had upon him, especially in their
Proceedings; as their Conferences, and Conventicles do sufficiently declare,
which are extant in the Records of the Star Chamber; whence I have taken my
chiefest Instructions in this behalf. The recourse of Hacket, Coppinger and
Arthington unto him, and Hacket, Coppinger, and Arthington resort to him.
his Fraternity, and the vain Conceits of extraordinary Callings which they
were put into, both by Speech, and Letters, and the Opinion which they all
three conceived of Master Cartwright by name, both before, and after their
Apprehension, Penry and Udall his Consorts.
may appear sufficiently, both by the Records, and Conspiracy for pretended
Reformation.
Books published, whereof mention is already made. That Penry, Vdall, and the
rest of the Libellers, Dangerous Positions.
were of his Consort, by his sight of diverse of the Books, and knowledge both
of the Authors, and Publishers, and his not revealing them to the State, he
could not deny, being examined thereupon. And that he approved their hateful
Libels, it appeared by his own words; when, being asked his Opinion of such
Books, he said; Seeing the Bishops, Cartwright's words in the Articles in the
Star Chamber.
and others there touched, would not amend by grave Books and Advertisements,
it was therefore meet they should be dealt withal to their further reproach.
Which was not unsuitable to one of his own Decrees in a Synod, where it was
determined, That no Books should be put in The Disciplinarians Decree about
Books to be printed.
print, but by consent of the Classes; that some of those Books must be
earnest, some more mild and temperate; whereby they may be both of the Spirit
of Elias and Elizeus.

73. That Barrow and Greenwood were Barrow and Greenwood infected by Cartwright.
so infected with his Grounds, and Opinions, which brought them unto their
fatal Ends, shall manifestly appear unto you upon Barrow's own Confession. For
when Doctor Ravis (then Chaplain to the Archbishop, and late Lord Bishop of
London) at the earnest desire of Barrow himself, and direction of the
Archbishop, dealt with Master Cartwright to confer with Barrow, they being then
both Prisoners in the Fleet: Master Cartwright (having been once before with
him at the entreaty of Master Sperin a Minister) would by no means be drawn to
further Conference with him again: Which his refusal, when it was by Doctor
Ravis signified to Barrow, in Bishop Ravis's Conference with Barrow and
Greenwood, 1592.
the presence of diverse of good Reputation and Account, he fetched a great
sigh, saying, And will he not? Has he only brought me into this brake, and
will he now leave me? For from him received I my grounds, and out of his
Premises did I infer, and make the conclusion of the Positions which I now
hold, and for which I suffer bands.

74. Again, when Sentence of death Bishop Androws and Bishop Parrey, with
others, their Conference with Barrow and Greenwood.
was given against the said Barrow, Doctor Androws (now Lord Bishop of Ely)
Doctor Bisse, and Doctor White, were sent unto him to counsel him for his
Soul's health. There also accompanied them Doctor Parry, now Lord Bishop of
Worcester. After many passages of Speech with Doctor White (unto whom he then
seemed especially to address himself) he brake forth into these words. You are
not the men whom I most dislike in these Differences. For although you be out
of the way, yet you think you are in the right: But I cannot but complain of
Master Cartwright and others of his knowledge, from whom we have received the
truth of these things, and have been taught that your Callings are
Antichristian; who yet utterly, against their Consciences, forsake us in our
Sufferings, and will not come out of Babylon for fear of their lives. It being
farther replied by Doctor White that those Callings which Barrow reproached as
Antichristian, were the very same which Archbishop Cranmer, and Ridley, and
many other holy Bishops, etc. (that suffered Martyrdom in Queen Mary's time)
did embrace; Barrow replied in this vainglorious manner; True it is that
Cranmer and others Barrow's Vainglorious Answer.
were Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, but these holy Bands of mine (and
therewithal shook the Fetters which he did wear) are much more glorious than
any of theirs, because they had the mark of Antichrist in their hands. Thus he,
in Newgate at that time, in the presence of many, with great insolency, did
triumph.

75. Men therefore, not partially affected, The danger of Innovation.
may hereby observe and conceive what danger Innovation brings to the People,
and what hazard to a State; when, by little and little, it increases like the
swelling or flowing of the Sea; which if it surpass the bounds wherewith it was
confined, or gain never so small a Breach, it spreads it self over a whole
Country, and grows to that violence, and stream, that it cannot by any
contrary force be kept back, but without pity or mercy puts all things to
wreck where it rages. Which, as it seems, Master Cartwright himself did now
find; when after his first Conference, he perceived how impossible it was for
him to make up the Breach which he had unfortunately begun; for that Barrow,
like a tempestuous Surge, would have forced him (by finding his own oversight
and Errors) back again from his former Positions, or drawn him inevitably to
his Conclusions.

76. And therefore observable it is, Cartwright withdraws privately.
that Master Cartwright, having upon his first coffeehouse (as has been
delivered) made a desperate assault and breach in Sion's peaceable and blessed
City, now like a sly Captain did steal away secretly (after Summons given) from
his own Siege, fearing upon his entry by the force and press of his own
Soldiers, to be environed and kept within the Walls (as Pyrrhus was) to the
loss of his life; or doubting belike, the outrage and violence of his Army,
whose Fury he could not have appeased when he list, but have been enforced (as
Titus was) to see his Soldiers sack, spoil, and burn the Holy City of
Jerusalem, though he vehemently labored, and with great earnestness cried out
unto them (whom yet himself first set on work) to save the Sanctuary of the
Lord, but could not be heard, or at least, was not able to stop their rage and
fury, until it was with fire consumed and destroyed.

77. Not much differing from the said Positions of Barrow and Greenwood, Brown
the Author of a New Sect of that Name.
were the Opinions of Robert Brown (sometimes of Bennet College in Cambridge)
from whom that Sect bears the Name even to this day. But because His
Positions little differing from Barrow and Greenwood.
in this Archbishop's time the said Brown was changed from those Fancies, and
afterward obtained a Benefice called Achurch in Northamptonshire (where he
became a painful Preacher) I will not much insist upon him.

78. I let pass many like Schisms in The Archbishop suppresseth many Schisms,
and also Controversies in the Universities.
other parts of the Realm which this good Archbishop suppressed, and the
Controversies in both Universities, which by his Wisdom were appeased; as also
the reverend Opinion which diverse honorable Personages had of him for his
great temper and moderation in handling these Businesses toward some of great
Place (whose Reputations, if he would, he might have blemished with her
Majesty, for favoring the aforesaid Libellers, and Libels, which He procures
Cartwright's Pardon of the Queen.
had stowage and vent in their Chambers) as also in procuring, at her Majesty'y
hands, both pardon and dismission for Master Cartwright, and the rest, out of
their Troubles.

79. For which, and sundry other his Favors, Master Cartwright held himself
much obliged unto him, as he confessed in his Letters, written with his own
hand to that effect. In which Letters he is also pleased to vouchsafe him the
style of a Right Reverend Father in God, Cartwright's Letters, March 24. 1601.
acknowledging the Archbishop's favor.
and his Lord the Archbishop's Grace of Canterbury. Which Title of Grace he
also often yields him throughout his Letters, acknowledging his bond of most
humble duty so much the straighter, because his Grace's favor proceeded from a
frank disposition, without any desert of his own. Yea the Archbishop has been
heard to say, That if Master Cartwright had not so far engaged himself as he
did in the beginning, he thought verily he would in his latter time have been
drawn to Conformity. For when he was freed from his Troubles, he often repaired
to the Archbishop, who used him kindly, and was contented to tolerate his
Preaching in The Archbishop tolerates Cartwright to perach publicly without
Conformity.
Warwick diverse years, upon his Promise, that he would not impugn the Laws,
Orders, and Government in this Church of England, but persuade and procure, so
much as he could, both publicly, and privately, the estimation and peace of
the same. Which albeit he accordingly performed, yet when her Majesty
understood by others that Master Cartwright did preach again (tho temperately,
accordingly to his Promise made to the Archbishop) she would by no means endure
his Preaching any longer without Subscription; and The Queen requires his
Subscription.
grew not a little offended with the Archbishop for such connivency at him. Not
long after Master Cartwright died rich, as it was said, by the benevolence
Cartwright dies Rich.
and bounty of his Followers.

80. After these Stirs, thus suppressed, they began to tamper with the Earl of
Essex; who was grown into a great height of favor with the Queen; and by
reason that sundry of his Kindred The Earl of Essex favors the Puritans as far
as he durst.
and Allies were inclined that way, they so far prevailed with him, that he did
privily, and far as he durst for fear of the Queen's displeasure, give way and
countenance to them. But upon better consideration, finding by the heady
Courses of some of them, the danger that thereby was like to grow to her
Majesty and the State, and the Resolution had of all hands to cut them off by
the Law aforesaid, he grew very calm, and was careful how to carry himself
uprightly betwixt both. And yet the Archbishop had still a vigilant Eye over
him, that he could not, though he would, do any great hurt.

81. For, to say the truth, by this Upon timely execution of the Laws, the
state of the Church at quiet.
due execution of Laws, in the beginning, and the provident Courses of the
Archbishop, with the Assistance and painful Endeavors of Doctor Bancroft, and
Doctor Cousin, and the publishing of their learned, and unanswerable Books, the
state of the Clergy was in good quiet; especially, so long as Sir Christopher
Hatton the Lord Chancellor did live.

82. Immediately after whose death, Sir Christopher Hatton died Nov. 20. 1591.
Lord Buckhurst chosen Chancellor of Oxford on the Queen's Letters.
the Archbishop attending upon her Majesty, and advising with her who was
fittest to succeed him in the Chancellorship of Oxford, found her graciously
inclined toward the Lord Buckhurst; in whose behalf she presently dispatched
her Letters to the University, and prevailed: Whereat the Earl of Essex was
Earl of Essex offended at it, is pacified by the Archbishop.
so offended (his Friends having labored exceedingly therein, on his behalf)
that being then Lord General of her Majesty's Forces in France, he made open
profession of his dislike of the Archbishop. But, upon his return into England,
finding how firm her Majesty stood for him, and that his stirring in the matter
must needs call in question her Majesty's Judgment, did therefore in a
temperate manner expostulate the matter with the Archbishop, from whom he
received such an Answer, as he knew not well whom to be angry withal, unless
with the Queen her self, who thought him too young a man (being yet no
Counselor) for so grave a Title; and fearing happily, lest if she should have
committed the guiding of that University unto his young Years, and
unexperienced Judgment, some hot and unruly Spirits there (like Phaeton's
untamed Horses) might have carried him in such an headlong course of
government, as that the sparks of Contention, which were then scarce kindled in
that University, might have broken forth into open flames, to the utter
destruction and devastation of the whole State Ecclesiastical. And, besides
this, she held the Lord Buckhurst (being an ancient Counselor, and her
Kinsman,) more fit for the Place a great deal. And so much it seemed the Queen
had told The Queen justifies the Archbishop to Essex.
the Earl in justification of the Archbishop, before his questioning of the
matter with him; for in effect, he acknowledged so much, and thereupon they
parted in no unkind terms, but with due respect of each other in very friendly
manner. The Queen, not long after, She makes them firm Friends.
was the mean of their entering into further Friendship; having oftentimes
recommended unto the Archbishop the Earl's many excellent Parts, and Virtues,
which she thought then rare in so young Years. And the Earl likewise confessed
to the Archbishop, that her Majesty's often speech of her extraordinary opinion
of him, and his worth, was the cause of his seeking after the Archbishop; and
therefore did offer to run a course for Clergy Causes, according to his
directions, and advice, and to cast off the Novelists, as indeed he did,
immediately after Sir Francis Walsingham's Sir Francis Walsingham died Apr. 6.
1590. The Archbishop's firmness to Essex in his Troubles.
death; which was a special cause of the Archbishop's constancy and firmness to
the Earl in his disgrace and trouble afterward.

83. But now to return to our former course: The Lord Chancellor's death much
troubled and perpexed the Archbishop; The Archbishop fears on the Lord
Chancellor's death.
fearing that new Troubles would befall him and the Church. Howbeit, things were
then so well and firmly settled, that he had no great ado afterward, saving
with their dispersing New Pamphlets dispersed by the Puritans.
of Pamphlets, and that some few Persons (though thanks be to God not powerful)
both in Court and Country, Attempts in Parliament on their behalf.
did attempt, as much as in them lay, by motions in Parliament, and Bills there
preferred, to bring in I know not (nor they themselves) what kind of new
Government in the Church, but were prevented by the Wisdom of her Majesty, who
always suppressed those Bills and Motions, and still comforted the Archbishop
(who was oftentimes The Queen comforts the Archbishop with fresh Assurances of
her Countenance and Favor to the Church.
much grieved with their causeless Complaints) and assured him they should not
prevail to do any hurt, except it were to hurt themselves. For she did see in
her Princely wisdom, how dangerous they were to her and all Imperial
Government. And when she found them still bent to pursue such Bills, and
Motions, she (to deliver the Archbishop from farther trouble and vexation)
before it was expected, and as it were with silence, brake up the Parliament.

84. AFter the death of Sir Christopher Sir John Puckering Lord Keeper, June 4.
1592.
Hatton, Sir John Puckering was made Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England,
of whom (because he lived not long) I shall not have occasion to say much: But
for ought that I ever Upon Hatton' s death the Queen offered the Archbishop his
Place: But he declined it, because of his Age and Ecclesiastical Business Sir
Thomas Egerton made Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, May 6. 1596.
heard, he showed himself a Friend to the Church, unto the Archbishop and his
Proceedings, and acknowledged him to have been amongst his other good Friends,
a Furtherer of his Advancement.

85. Sir Thomas Egerton, Master of the Rolls succeeded him, May 6. 1596. Her
Majesty and the State had long experience of his Integrity and Wisdom, as may
appear by the great Places which he worthily held; being first her Highness's
Solicitor, and then Attorney General. In which time (besides his many great
and weighty Services) he was very careful and industrious in laboring earnesty
to suppress the aforesaid Libellers; a lover of Learning, and a most constant
Favourer of the Clergy, and Church Government He is a constant Friend to the
Church before and after his Advancement.
established; as also a faithful loving Friend to the Archbishop in all his
Affairs; insomuch, as after his advancement to that Honor, and that the Earl
of Essex and the Archbishop concurred together, being also (out of the
affection of his most honorable Friend, the Lord Burghley, Lord Treasurer)
further strengthened by the friendship The Archbishop cherished and strengthened
by union of many Friends.
and love of Sir Robert Cecyll, principal Secretary, (and now Earl of
Salisbury, and Lord Treasurer of England) he began to be fully revived again,
and as well fortified by them as ever he was, when he was most and best
friended. And her Majesty finding in him a zealous care, and faithful
performance of his duty and service toward the Church, and her Highness, shook
off those Clergy Cares, and laid the burden The Queen throws the whole care of
the Church upon him.
of them upon his Shoulders, telling him, That if any thing went amiss, be it
upon his Soul, and Conscience to answer it; for she had rid her hands, and
looked that he should yield an account, on her behalf, unto Almighty God.

86. And now, though the Archbishop He disposes of Bishoprics and all other
Ecclesiastical Promotions.
was in this singular favor and grace with her Majesty, so that he did all in
all for the managing of Clergy-Affairs, and disposing of Bishoprics, and other
Ecclesiastical Promotions, yet was he never puffed up with Pride, His great
Humility and Lenity.
nor did any thing violently (by reason of his Place, and greatness with her
Majesty) against any man. For he ever observed this Rule, that he would not
wound, where he could not salve. And I leave to the report of the Adversaries
themselves, when he had that sway in Government, and favor with her Highness,
whether his Carriage were not exceeding mild, and temperate, and whether he did
not endeavor rather by gentle Persuasions, and kind Usages to win them, than
(as the Law and his Place required) to pronounce Sentence, or lay any sharp
Censure upon them. Has he not many a time, when Sentence has been ready to be
given by consent of all the Commissioners, found some occasion to delay the
Sentence to another Court-day, and in the mean time so plied the Delinquents,
and set on others to persuade them, as thereby many of them were won, which
otherwise would never have been brought unto Conformity? Wherein he was of
Antoninus Pius his mind, who Opus de temporibus mundi in vita, Antonini Pii.
said, when he was taxed by Aurelius for like Remisness, and Lenity, That he
had rather save one Citizen of Rome, than kill a thousand Enemies. And yet they
knew this Archbishop had Courage enough in him, and Credit, and Authority to
back him, if he would have extended it unto severity.

87. But it was truly noted in him by The Earl of Salisbury's Observation on
him.
a great Counselor in the Star Chamber, when Pickering was there censured for
libelling against him after his death, That there was nothing more to be feared
in his government (especially toward his latter time) than his mildness and
clemency. And he said that which was most true; for did he not, after that
Udall and others were condemned unto death, draw upon him the dislike of his
dear and honorable Friend Sir Christopher Hatton.
, in making earnest Suit, and never ceased until he had obtained pardon for
them at her Majesty's hands? And, besides the dismission of Master Cartwright
and his Consorts out of the Star chamber, did not diverse Gentlemen of special
note, find the like favor there, by his Intercession, and were eased both of
Many favored and eased by the Archbishop's intercession.
Fine and Punishment for entertaining the Presses and Printers
beforementioned? The very truth is, I cannot sufficiently express his singular
Wisdom, and Clemency, albeit some Younger Spirits were of opinion, that he was
much to blame in that kind, and imputed it unto his Years, and want of Courage,
and sometimes would be bold to tell him, that he knew not his own strength with
her Majesty.

88. But he knew the Court well, and that Queen Elizabeth was the wisest The
wisdom of the Queen in her moderate Government.
Governor of any Prince then living; and that she had always entreated her
Subjects graciously, and ruled with all mildness, and moderation, and that she
brought her Subjects oftentimes rather by gentle means to yield unto her just
and profitable Demands, than enforce them thereunto by Rigor and Authority;
which peradventure she would have used, considering her absolute Sovereignty,
and great Occasions, had she not found out of her singular Wisdom, and long
Experience in Government, that she was the more observed and reverenced of her
People, by intermingling and tempering her Authority and Sovereignty with
Mildness and Lenity. And this her Highness's Example The Archbishop follows her
Example. Plutarch, in vit.
the Archbishop followed; agreeable to that which was said of Pericles, That he
would steer and govern the Commonwealth with two principal Rudders, Fear, and
Hope; bridling with the one the fierce and insolent rashness of the common
People, when they were in prosperity, and in their jollity; and reviving and
comforting with the other their discontented Spirits, by giving way for the
time, unto their Humor and Passion. And happy surely was it for that crasy
state of the Church (for so it was at this Archbishop's first coming, and a
long time after) not to meet with too rough and boisterous a Physician; for he
preserved it with Conserves, and Electuaries, and some gentle Purges, which
with strong Purgations in all likelihood might have been much more endangered;
so that it may be very well verified of him, which Ennius wrote of Fabius
Maximus. Unus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem; Ennius Torent. Annal. lib. 1.

Ergo postque magisque viri nunc gloria claret.


89. As you may perceive his Clemency toward the irregular sort, so, toward
the Conformable he was carried with an exceeding tender respect and kindness.
He loved a learned Minister, virtuous and honest, with all his heart; framing
himself unto that Rule of Aristotle, which directs a good Magistrate Aristot.
Polit. lib. 1.
to be as careful in encouraging good men, according to their merits; as in
punishing the bad, according to the quality of their offenses. If he found a
Scholar of extraordinary Gifts, or Hopes, that out The Archbishop a great lover
and encourager of Learned and Virtuous Clergy.
of wants, grew discontented, and inclined to Popery, or Puritanism (as most of
their discontentments and waywardness proceeded thence) him would he gain both
with supplies of Money out of his Purse, and Preferments of his own gift, or
otherwise, as opportunity served.

90. Now as our own Countrymen of all sorts had daily taste of the kind
disposition of this our Archbishop, so was it not wanting unto sundry Men of
Learning, Was bountiful to Foreigners of Learning and Quality.
and Quality, of Foreign Countries, whom he entertained both with his Love, and
his Bounty. He sent sundry times much Money to Master Beza out of his own Purse,
besides the general Collections and Contributions to Geneva, which he also
greatly furthered. Upon which occasion many Letters passed betwixt them,
especially toward his latter time. In some of which Letters Master Beza
confesses, That in his Theod. Beza his Letters to the Archbishop, March 8.
1591. Approving the Policy of the English Church.
Writings, touching the Church Government, he ever impugned the Romish
Hierarchy, but never intended to touch or impugn the Ecclesiastical Policy of
this Church of England, nor to exact of us to frame our selves, or our Church,
to the Pattern of their Presbyterial Discipline; and that as long as the
substance of Doctrine were uniform in the Church of Christ, they may lawfully
vary in other matters, as the circumstance of Time, Place, and Persons
requires, and as prescription of Antiquity may warrant. And to that end, he
wishes, and hops, that the sacred and holy College of our Bishops (for so he
calls them) will for ever continue and maintain such their right and title in
the Church's government, with all equity and Christian moderation. Yea so far
was he from denying our Church to be a Church, that often, and in most pithy
manner he confesses, That as Queen Beza his high commendation of the Church of
England.
Elizabeth was the true nursing Mother of the Church of Christ, so England and
our English Church was both the harbor of all the godly, and the preserver of
all other reformed Churches. So far was he also from esteeming the Archbishop
an Antichristian Prelate, as he never omitted to term him, A most Reverend
Father in His great respect to the Archbishop.
Christ, and his most honored good Lord. I wish that our Disciplinarians, who
seem to direct themselves by the Rule of Geneva, would learn thus to discipline
their Tongues with him, and imitate his Modesty.

91. The Archbishop, as from Master Beza, so from other famous Men beyond the
Seas received many Letters, arguing their great love, and due respect of him.
At their request and recommendation, he relieved and entertained into his
House, for many years The Archbishop's kindness and charity to Foreign Divines
of the Reformation.
together, diverse distressed Ministers out of Germany and France, who were
enforced to forsake their own Countries; some by Banishment, others by reason
of Wars and extremity which they were put unto. And at their departure he dealt
bountifully with them; as namely Drusius, Renicherus, Frigevill, and Monsieur
Buse, a French Minister, who read weekly a Lecture in Latin in his Chapel. And
although his French pronunciation, and want of good delivery, did somewhat
blemish the goodness of the matter which he handled; yet the Archbishop's
property ever was, to cherish and encourage him, and all others that preached
before him, and was never heard to give the Preacher distaste, but rather would
commend, or excuse him against other men's Censures; saying, If he were young,
better experience would correct his defaults; and if he were in years, he was
in that respect to be born withal; alleging for both, that some would take
exceptions sometimes rather to satisfy their own too much curiosity, than for
any just cause of dislike in the Preacher.

92. Wherein he showed a Disposition very rarely to be found; in that, having
himself an excellent gift in that Faculty, his modesty in prizing himself, and
his mildness in censuring others, was extraordinary, and very singular: His
backwardness to censure other men's Gifts and Performances.
so that thereby he gave great encouragement unto some, whom otherwise his
exquisite Judgment might have daunted.

93. Neither herein did he, as in service of War the Trumpeters use to do, who
encourage others to fight, never taking Weapon in hand themselves, or as
Plutarch notes in Aristogiton, who Plutarch, in vita Phocionis.
animated others to take Arms, but himself in excuse, pleaded lameness, and
came halting to the Musters in pretense thereof: But as his continual
Endeavors were to reward those of best Gifts, and to encourage those of
meaner; so (as often as Church, and State Affairs gave him leave) he was
industrious in propounding wholesome Doctrine unto the People, and a worthy
Pattern of true Divinity and Diligence unto all others of the Clergy to follow
him therein. When he was Bishop of Worcester, unless The Archbishop a constant
Preacher when public Affairs would admit.
extraordinary businesses of the Marches of Wales hindered him, he never failed
to preach upon every Sabbathday; many times riding five or six Miles to a
Parish Church, and after Sermon, came home to Dinner. The like he did also when
he was Archbishop, and lay at Croydon, the Queen being in her Progress. No
Sunday escaped him in Kent, as the Gentlemen there can well witness, who would
exceedingly resort unto him: And he would oftentimes preach so early in the
Morning in some Parish Church, both in Worcester, and Canterbury, that he came
afterward to the Sermon in the Cathedral Church.

94. His Gift that way was excellent, Had an excellent Tallent in Preaching.
Learned, eloquent and judicious. His Gesture grave and decent, without
affectation.
as if you had heard Saint Augustine himself, or some of the ancient Bishops in
the Primitive Church. His Gesture, and Action in the Pulpit, so grave and
decent, his words coming from him so fatherly, and comely, and though plainly
(for the most part) and without affectation, yet always elegantly, with special
choice, and substantial matter, full of good and sound Learning, plentiful in
Authorities out of Scripture, Fathers, and Schoolmen, so singularly applied,
that he much affected his Auditory therewith. Thus he oftentimes stirred and
moved men's minds and affections; and that not by the force of Eloquence only,
but by his pious Life, answerable to his religious Sentences; the opinion and
confidence which the People had of his Integrity, being very Of great Integrity
and unspotted Life.
great, because he did live unspotted of the world, and would not any way be
corrupted.

95. He never preached, but he first He wrote the Notes of his Sermons.
wrote his Notes in Latin, and afterward kept them during his life. For he
would say, That whosoever took that pains before his preaching, the elder he
waxed, the better he should discharge that Duty; but if he trusted only to his
memory, his preaching in time Disapproved trusting only to Memory.
would become prattling. Wherein (out of a true religious care, and divine
wisdom) he did express the grave and prudent Counsel that Demosthenes held in
his Orations, and pleadings in the Court. For (as Plutarch says) He would
never Plutarch. in vit. Demosth.
offer to speak unto the People, before he had made briefs of that which he had
to deliver, alleging that he loved the People well, that would be careful
beforehand what to say unto them. And this preparation (says he) does show
that a man honors and reverenceth them too. Contrariwise, he that passes
not how the People takes his words, it is a plain token that he despises
them, and their Authority, and that he lacks no good will to use force
against them, if he could, rather than reason or persuasion.

96. When he was Bishop of Worcester, When at Worcester, he treated the
Recusants mildly, and won many of them over.
and Vice President of the Marches, he did exceeding good by that his continual
preaching, as also by his often conference, and conventing of the Papists, whom
he used with mild and temperate speeches, and thereby got many of them to
conform themselves, both Gentlemen, and others, whereby, as at his first coming
unto the Sea of Worcester, he found many Recusants, so he left very few at his
coming thence.

97. Immediately after he came to be When he came to be Archbishop, he dealt
with the Learned of them by Authority Ecclesiastical.
Archbishop, he convented before him the chiefest and most learned Recusants
throughout all England. He also wrote Letters to the Bishops, his Brethren,
within the Province of Canterbury, to proceed with the Recusants by their
Authority Ecclesiastical, and Censures of the Church, and called yearly upon
them for an account of their doings. He sent forth also many Warrants, by
virtue of her Highness's Commission for Causes Ecclesiastical, and thereby had
daily brought before him both Recusants and Priests; who according to the
quality of their Offenses were restrained, and proceeded against, or delivered
over unto the Civil Magistrate to be dealt withal, as to Justice appertained,
after the Laws were enacted against Recusants and Seminary Priests.

98. Thus this grave and prudent He kept a straight hand over the Seminary
Priests and subtle Papists.
Archbishop always carried a most vigilant eye, and straight hand over the
subtle-headed Papists; as fearing lest they conceived an hope of advancing
their Cause and Quarrel by help of the aforesaid Contentions betwixt the
Bishops and these Sectaries; and so soon as they should have found the Forces
on both sides sufficiently weakened and enfeebled by a long continuance of the
Conflict, to have destroyed the Vanquished with the Vanquishers, whereby to re
establish their Papal Jurisdiction, and superstitious Impieties; as not long
after this Archbishop's death they attempted to do, by the divelish Device of
that damnable Powder Treason; which if it had succeeded, their intendment then
was, to have put both alike to the Sword.

99. You may perceive by the Premises, He is unjustly traduced by the
Sectaries.
how untruly some of the uncharitable and precipitate Sectaries traduced him
for a Papist, and called him The Pope of Lambeth in their Libels, and
Conventicles, and most unjustly reproached him with the Title of Doctor Pearn'
s Servant, whom they likewise taxed with Popery, and falsely charged him to have
infected the Archbishop therewith, because of his affection and love unto him,
for the reasons specified before. The truth is, as the Archbishop was of his
own nature a very loving kind man, so he did hate ingratitude He hated
Ingratitude.
in any, and could never be taxed with that fault. He was likewise (as the
Gentlemen of Worcestershire and Kent had daily experience) very firm, Is firm
in his Friendships.
and marvailous constant, where he affected and professed love, which brought
him in great displeasure in the Cause of the late Earl of Essex; with whose
Life, and Actions, though I have nothing to do (having only taken upon me to
report another Man's) yet thus much I may truly say, that his misfortune drew
upon the Archbishop the greatest coffeehouse, and severest reprehension
Censured for his affection to the Earl of Essex.
from her Majesty, that he had ever before undergone in all his life.

100. For after that the Earl began to fall upon Courses displeasing and
distastful unto her Majesty, nevertheless such was the confidence the
Archbishop had in the Earl's Loyaly, and his own stedfastness in that
Friendship which he had formerly professed unto him, that he could not be drawn
from being a continual Intercessor for him; wherewith her Majesty was so highly
displeased, The Queen displeased at his inter cession for the Earl, which much
grieves him.
and so sharply rebuked him for the same, that the good old Archbishop came
sometimes home much grieved and perplexed.

101. Within a while after, the Earl (forgetting that unto Princes the highest
Tacit. Annal. lib 4
judgment of things is given, and unto us the glory of obedience is left) went
out indeed. The Archbishop being that Sunday Earl of Essex apprehended, Feb. 8.
1600.
Morning at the Court (whether by direction, or by his own accord, I know not)
hastened home without any Attendant, and commanded as many men as he then had in
the House to be presently armed, and sent them over unto the Court, but not to
go within the Gates until Master Secretary Cecill, or some other by his
instruction, should appoint them a Leader. There were immediately The
Archbishop arms his Servants for the Queen's defense.
presented unto him Threescore men well armed, and appointed, who with a
Message from the Archbishop, showed themselves before the Court, of whose
arrival there Master Secretary Cecill, with the rest of the Lords of the
Council, were right glad, and said he Well taken at Court.
was a most worthy Prelate. They had speedily a Leader appointed unto them, and
marched presently, and were the first that entered into the Gates of Essexhouse;
and in the first Court made good the place until the Earl yielded himself, Earl
of Essex brought to Lambethhouse, then sent to the Tower.
and was by the Lord Admiral brought to Lambeth-house, where he remained an
hour or two, and was from thence conveyed to the Tower. The Archbishop had
likewise in readiness that Afternoon Forty Horsemen well appointed, and
expected Directions from the Court how to dispose of them. The next Morning he
sent a Gentleman to know how the Queen did, and how she rested all night. To
whom she made answer, that she rested and slept the better for his care the day
before; but I beshrew his heart (said she) he would not believe this of Essex,
though I had often told him it would, one day, thus come to pass.

102. After this, when her Majesty understood that her own recommendation of
the Earl had wrought that good The Archbishop in the Queen's good opinion and
favor to her dying-day.
opinion of him in the Archbishop, and that she now found his readiness for her
defense, with Horse, and Men, and the nearness thereof unto the Court, to stand
her at that time in great stead, she began to entertain him in her wonted
favor and grace again, and ever after continued her good opinion of him unto
her dying day.

103. Toward which time, though Queen Elizabeth died March 24. 1602. The
Archbishop, Dr. Bancroft, Dr. Watson, Dr. Parry, attend the Queen in her
Sickness.
by reason of her melancholy Disease, she was impatient of others speeches with
her, yet was she well pleased to hear the Archbishop, the then Bishops of
London, and Chichester, and the now Bishop of Worcester, with some other
Divines, give her comfort and counsel to prepare her self to Godward, and most
devoutly prayed with them, making signs and tokens unto her last remembrance of
the sweet comfort which she took in their presence, especially when toward her
end they put her in mind of the unspeakable Joys she was now going unto; where,
no doubt, she remains a glorious Saint of God, and as a most religious
Prince, rewarded with a Crown of Immortality, and Bliss.

104. NOW the much-lamented The Faction take heart on the Queen's death.
death of this noble Queen gave great hope to the Factious of challenging forth
with all exemption from the Censures, and subjection of Ecclesiastical
Authority: But how vain their hopes were, the issue has declared; and although
the Archbishop was much dejected and grieved for the loss of his dear Sovereign
and Mistress, who had so highly advanced him, yet he, with the rest of the
Lords, repaired immediately to Whitehall, and after two hours sitting in
Council about the penning of the Proclamation, he principally (as his Place
required) with a cheerful countenance, and the rest of the Lords in like sort
accompanying him, first at the Court-gate at White Hall, with the applause, and
unspeakable comfort of all the People, proclaimed her most rightful Successor,
JAMES (then King James proclaimed King of England, March 24. 1602.
King of Scotland) King of England, France, and Ireland. Afterward, in like
cheerful sort, the Archbishop with the rest of the Lords, trooped up to the
Cross in Cheapside, and there with like acclamation of the Lord Mayor and
Citizens, Sir Robert Leighe, Lord Mayor. The People are pleased at the
Archbishop's presence in proclaiming the King.
proclaimed him again.

105. I am doubtful to speak (lest I might seem to detract from others) of the
great comfort which the common People and Citizens took in the presence of the
Archbishop, and how heartily they prayed for him at his return, as if they
nothing doubted, but that all went well for the State in that Counsel, among
whom he was present.

106. He was indeed beloved of all sorts of People, yea even of some of them
who were the most fervent Reprehenders themselves, as they have confessed since
his death. And well worthy was he so to be, for that he carried a most mild and
moderate hand over them. A more particular love also he deserved of many, for
his affection Archbishop a lover and incourager of Liberal Arts.
unto liberal and ingenious Arts, whereof his domestic government and care was
no less argument than his public; which I have formerly spoken of. For,
besides the pains which he took himself (after he was Bishop of Worcester, and
Archbishop of. Canterbury) many years with a number of worthy young Gentlemen,
in reading unto them thrice aday, he took into his House, besides his
Chaplains, diverse of quality to instruct them in the Mathematics, and other
Lectures of sundry Arts and Languages; giving them good allowance, and
Preferments His Liberality great.
otherwise, as occasion was offered. And besides the many poor Scholars, He
kept many poor Scholars in his House,
whom he kept in his House till he could provide for them, and prefer them (as
he did sundry to good Estates) he also maintained diverse in the University And
maintained diverse in the Universities.
at his own charge, and gave liberally to them and others of any towardliness,
as he heard of their necessity, and wants.

107. He kept likewise for the exercise of Military Discipline, a good Armory,
Is an incourager of Military Exercises.
and a fair Stable of great Horses; insomuch as he was able to arm at all
points both Horse and Foot, and diverse times had One hundred Foot, and Fifty
Horse of his own Servants mustered, and trained; for which purpose he
entertained Captains. He had also skilful Riders, who taught them to manage
their Horses, and instructed them in warlike Exercises, all whom he rewarded in
liberal manner. By this means he had diverse of his own Gentlemen that
afterward proved good Soldiers; many whereof became Captains and Commanders,
and some for their Valor and Service were Knighted in the Field. There were
also diverse others, that for Learning, Languages and Qualities, were fit to be
employed by any Prince in Christendom. Insomuch as his House, for the Lectures
and Scholastical Exercises therein performed, might justly be accounted a
little Academy, and in some His House a little Academy.
respects superior, and more profitable; viz. for Martial Affairs, and the
Experience that Divines and other Scholars had, being near, and often at the
Court, and chief Seats of Justice, from whence they continually had the
Passages and Intelligences both for Matters of State, and government in Causes
Ecclesiastical and Civil. By which their continual Experience, many of his Dr.
Bancroft, Archbishop of Canterbury. Dr. Ravis, Bishop of London. Dr. Barlow,
Bishop of Lincoln. Dr. Goldisbury, Bishop of Gloucester. Dr. Parry, Bishop of
Worcester. Dr. Redman, Bishop of Norwich. Dr. Buckeridge, Bishop of Rochester.
Domestical His Chaplains promoted.
Chaplains, both before, and since his death, attained unto the chiesest
Honors and Dignities in our Church and Commonwealth.

108. And here I may not forget his religious care and provident order for the
due execution of his Charge, and determination of all such Causes as belonged
unto his proper cognizance and place. To which end and purpose, he appointed
every Thursday in Term a solemn and set Commission day; upon which he had a
Sermon in his Chapel by one of his Household Chaplains, and entertained the
Commissioners, and their Attendants, though to his great expense, which he
little esteemed in regard of the well guiding, and ordering the Affairs, then
by him undertaken. That day you should have had a Senate of the worthiest and
greatest Counselors of State, with the assistance of the chief Prelates,
Justices, Judges, and sufficientest Lawyers of both Professions, that those
Times afforded.

109. You may then hereby observe the The Archbishop's care and wisdom in
determining Causes.
Archbishop's exceeding care and singular wisdom in proceeding with the Advice
of so many worthy, prudent, and learned Men of several Faculties; whereby the
Subjects came cheerfully to the hearing of their Causes, and without fear of
partiality in any particular Person. And howsoever the Cause went, the
Archbishop could not be impeached of rash or inconsiderate proceeding, seeing
he had the consent and approbation of all Professions. For the Archbishop
always gave Sentence, and ordered matters as the greater part of the Court did
incline, beginning at the Junior first, although himself would sometimes
dissent from them in opinion, and so he would tell them, but without tartness;
yea in such kind and loving manner, as no man was hindered in delivering his
mind. By which means he was sure always to have the Cause fully debated, and
every man's opinion fully known; which when he found concurring with his own,
and the Proceedings ordered according to the Rules of Justice, he would go on
to sentence and determine the Cause.

110. Wherein he carried himself His Resolution in Judgment.
with great resolution, and courage, were the Persons never so great that were
interested in the same, as you may perceive by one Instance (among many) when
himself was yet no Counselor of State. A Gentleman of good Note seeing An
Instance.
how the Court was inclined to order his Cause (not according to his desire)
told the Archbishop, that upon another occasion there grew some speech of that
Cause before the Lords of the Council, and their Lordships were of another
opinion than his Grace, and the rest of the Commissioners, seemed to be; what
tellest thou me (said the Archbishop) of the Lords of the Council? I tell thee,
they are in these Cases to be advised by us, and not we by them. He would upon
such like Occasions oftentimes say unto his private Friends toward his latter
time (when they talked familiarly with him, and observed his courage and
stoutness) That two things did help much to make a man confident in good
Causes, namely, Orbitas, and Senectus; and (said he) they steed me both.

111. This orderly proceeding and He upholds the Dignity of the High
Commission-Court.
course upheld the Reputation and Dignity of the Commission Court; which albeit
it be of great Authority, and deals for the most part in matters of great
weight and importance, yet the want of worthy Assistants and Counsel (if the
like care should not be continued) may make it grow to be of little reputation,
as experience has somewhat taught us since the decease of this good
Archbishop: Whereunto not unaptly may be applied that which Plutarch reports
Plutarch. in vita.
of Cato Utican, When he was Praetor: For he would oftentimes go on foot, bare
legged, and without his Gown, unto his Praetorian Chair, and there give
sentence of life and death, whereby he rather defaced and impaired the majesty
and dignity of his Office, than gave it countenance by his manner of
proceeding; although otherwise he were a good Commonwealth's man, and ministered
justice uprightly unto all.

112. But I return unto our Archbishop His dispatch of Causes to great
satisfaction.
again. He gave audience unto Suitors twice a day, and afforded them set hours
for their dispatch, at which time he would so courteously entreat them, giving
them so mild and gentle Answers, that even they that sped not of their Suits,
did depart without coffeehouse. Wherein I may justly compare him unto Titus,
qui neminem Sueton. in vita.
unquam a se tristem dimisit; he dismissed no man sorrowful from his presence.
Wherefore he gave also express commandment unto his Officers, that Suitors and
Strangers should ever be courteously entertained, as well for expedition of
their Suits, as for Hospitality sake.

113. He had a desire always to keep His great Hospitality.
a great and bountiful House; and so he did, having the same well ordered and
governed by his head Officers therein, and all things in plentiful manner, both
for his own service and entertainment of Strangers, according to their several
Qualities and Degrees. He often feasted the Clergy, Nobility, and Gentry of his
Diocese and Neighborhood. And at Christmas, especially, his Gates were always
open, and his Hall set twice or thrice over with Strangers: Upon some chief
Festivaldays he was served with great solemnity, sometime upon the Knee, as
well His State.
for the upholding of the State that belonged unto his Place, as for the better
education and practice of his Gentlemen and Attendants in point of service.

114. Every Year he entertained the His entertainment of the Queen.
Queen at one of his Houses, so long as he was Archbishop; and some Years twice
or thrice; where all things were performed in so seemly an order, that she went
thence always exceedingly well pleased. And besides many public and gracious
Favors done unto him, she would salute him, and bid him farewell by the name
of Black Husband; calling also his Men her Servants, as a token of her good
contentment with their attendance and pains.

115. Every third Year he went into He was always honorably received by the
Gentlemen of the Country.
Kent (unless great occasions hindered him) where he was so honorably attended
upon by his own Train (consisting of Two hundred Persons) and with the
Gentlemen of the Country, that he did sometimes ride into the City of
Canterbury, and into other Towns, with Eight hundred or a Thousand Horse. And
surely the Entertainment which he gave them, and they him, was so great, that,
as I am verily persuaded, no Shire in England did, or could, give greater, or
with more cheerful minds, each unto other. The Fatherly care which he had of
his Clergy, (whom he never charged with visitation, but once in twenty Years)
his Affability amongst the Gentlemen, and courteous usage of his Tenants,
gained him so great a love, that he might very far prevail with them; yea, they
never denied him any request that he made unto them.

116. At his first Journey into Kent His first journey into Kent, July. 1589.
with pomp and solemnity.
he rode to Dover, being attended with an hundred of his own Servants, at
least, in Livery, whereof there were forty Gentlemen in Chains of Gold. The
Train of Clergy and Gentlemen in the Country, and their Followers, was above
Five hundred Horse. At his entrance A Romish Intelligencer accidentally lands,
he admires the Appearance, and owns a mistaken prejudice concerning the
meanness of our Church.
into the Town, there happily landed an Intelligencer from Rome, of good Parts,
and Account, who wondered to see an Archbishop, or Clergyman in England, so
reverenced, and attended: But seeing him upon the next Sabbath day after in the
Cathedral Church of Canterbury, attended upon by his Gentlemen, and Servants
(as is aforesaid;) also by the Dean, Prebendaries, and Preachers in their
Surplesses, and scarlet Hoods, and heard the solemn Music, with the Voices,
and Organs, Cornets, and Sagbuts, he was overtaken with admiration, and told an
English Gentleman of very good quality (who then accompanied him) That Sir
Edward Hobby.
they were led in great blindness at Rome by our own Nation, who made the
People there believe, that there was not in England, either Archbishop, or
Bishop, or Cathedral, or any Church or Ecclesiastical Government; but that all
was pulled down to the ground, and that the People heard their Ministers in
Woods, and Fields, amongst Trees, and bruit Beasts: But, for his own part, he
protested, that (unless it were in the Pope's Chapel) he never saw a more
solemn sight, or heard a more heavenly sound. Well, said the English Gentleman;
I am glad of this your so lucky and first sight, ere long you will be of
another mind, and, I hope, work miracles when you return to Rome, in making
those that are led in this blindness, to see and understand the truth. It is
(said the Intelligencer) the chief cause of my coming, to see with mine own
eyes, and truly to inform others. Whereupon the said English Gentleman
accompanied him to London, and so to the Court, where he saw and heard many
things to confirm the Gentleman's report, for the government of the Church, and
civil carriage of the People, in their obedience to the Clergy and Magistrates
in the Commonwealth. Afterward this Intelligencer had private The
Intelligencer had private speech with Secretary Walsingham.
speech with Sir Francis Walsingham (then principal Secretary to her Majestey)
who related all this to the Archbishop with due approbation of his Kentish
Journey; confessing that he should reverence and honor him therefore while he
lived. And although he were one of the honorable Counselors, before
mentioned, that seemed to favor the precise Faction, yet, undoubtedly, he was,
after this time a kind Friend to the Archbishop, and did him many good Offices
with the Queen.

117. Howbeit, some of near alliance unto Sir Francis, bearing themselves very
boldly upon his favor, would oftentimes handle the Archbishop very roughly,
and much provoke him by vain Speeches, and brags of their own worth and
scholarship; and (being mere Laymen) would very unmannerly compare themselves
with the best conformable Divines, for true knowledge, and understanding of the
Scriptures. But the Archbishop smiling at their Vanities, would notwithstanding
courteously handle and entreat them in his own House, according to the true
Rule of Hospitality; not unlike unto Pericles, who being reviled by a lewd
Plutarch. ^n vit.
Fellow in the Marketplace all the day long, returned no bad languge, but
dispatched his Affairs in hearing the Suppliants, and determining their Causes;
and when night came on, the Party followed him still, railing upon him till he
came to his own House: It being now dark, Pericles, as he entered in, commanded
one of his Servants to light him home.

118. You see now of what an excellent The Archbishop's good nature.
Nature this Archbishop was, how far from giving offense, how ready to forgive
a wrong, merciful, compassionate, and tenderhearted. Yet was he not void (as
no man is) of infirmities. The Holy Scripture notes of Elias, that James 5. 17.
he was a man subject to the like passions as we are. But, as Horace says, --
optimus ille Sermon. lib. 1. sat. 3.

Qui minimis urgetur --
So may it be confessed of this Archbishop, that the greatest, or rather only
fault known in him was Choler: and yet in him so corrected, not by Philosophy
alone (as Socrates confessed of his Faults) but by the Word, and Grace of God,
as it rather served for a Whetstone of his Courage in just Causes, than any
Weapon whetted against the Person, Goods, or good Name of any other. So that it
may (as I am verily persuaded) be rightfully said of him, That he was such a
Magistrate as Jethro advised Moses to take in judging the People of God, and
such a Bishop as St. Paul requires in the Church of Christ. Provide (says
Exodus 18.
Jethro) among all the People, men of courage, fearing God, dealing truly,
hating covetousness, and appoint such over them to be rulers. And a Bishop
(says St. Paul) 1 Timothy 3.
must be unreproveable, the husband of one wife, watching, temperate, modest,
harbarous, apt to teach, not given to wine, no striker, not given to filthy
lucre, but gentle, no fighter, not covetous, one that can rule his one house
honestly. He may not be a young Scholar, lest he, being puffed up, fall into
the condemnation of the Devil. He must also be well reported of, even of them
which are without, lest he fall into rebuke, and the snare of the Devil.

119. And now what is there that the Devil himself, with all his Imps, Popish,
or Schismatical Libellers, can rebuke or condemn, in this good Archbishop's
Saintly Life? Let them examine his Actions, in all his carriage and course, if
so they can convince him in any thing, that was not agreeable to the directions
of Jethro for a Magistrate, and answerable unto the Rule of Saint Paul for a
Bishop.

120. As for good Works (whereof His good Works in Lincoln, Worcester, Wales,
Kent, Surry.
the Papists so vainly brag, as particular effects of their superstitious
Doctrines, yea, for which Heaven it self is a due reward by condignity) many
Towns, Cities and Counties can yield a plentiful Testimony for him in this
behalf; namely, Lincoln, Worcester, the Marches of Wales, Kent and Surry,
wherein he lived, and, in particular, that notable Monument of our time, his
Hospital of the Blessed Trinity in Croydon, which he built very fair, and
College-wise, for a Warden, and Eight and twenty Brothers and Sisters. He
builed also near unto it a goodly Free school, with a Schoolmaster's House,
allowing unto the Schoolmaster Twenty pounds by year for ever. All which he
performed with such alacrity, and good success, that he has been heard diverse
times to profess with great comfort, that, notwithstanding the charge of the
Purchase and Building was not small unto him, in comparison of his Estate (who
neither impaired Housekeeping, nor Retinue at that time) yet when he had
finished and done that whole Work, he found himself no worse in his Estate than
when he first began, which he ascribed unto the extraordinary blessing and
goodness of God.

121. After the finishing of this Hospital, among many other his good Deeds,
the French Lieger Ambassador in England, called Boys Sisi, enquired what Works
the Archbishop had published, for that he would willingly read his Books, who
was reputed The Peerless Cambden Britan. in Commit. Lincoln.
Prelate for Piety and Learning in our days, and whom in conference, he found
so grave, godly, and judicious; when it was answered, that he only published
certain Books in the English Tongue, in defense of the Ecclesiastical
Government (although it be very well known to many, who were near unto him,
that he left diverse learned Treatises in Written-hand, well worthy the
printing) and that it was thereupon incidently told the Ambassador that he had
founded an Hospital, and a School, he used these words; Profecto Hospitale,
Boys Sisi, the French Ambassador, his opinion and speech of Archbishop Whitgift.
ad sublevandam paupertatem, and Schola, ad instruendam Juventutem, sunt optimi
Libri, quos Archiepiscopus conscribere potuit; Truly an Hospital to sustain the
Poor, and a School to train up Youth, are the worthiest Books that an
Archbishop could set forth.

122. And albeit the Archbishop had His love to Croydon for retirement.
ever a great affection to lie at his Mansion house at Croyaon, for the
sweetness of the Place, especially in Summer time; whereby also he might
sometimes retire himself from the multiplicity of Businesses and Suitors in the
Vacations; yet, after he had builded his Hospital, and his School, he was
farther in love with the Place than before. The chief comfort of repose or
solace that he took, was in often dining at the Hospital among his poor
Brethren, as he called them: There he was often visited by his entire and
honorable Friends, the Earl of Shrewsbury, Worcester, and Cumberland, the Lord
Zouch, the Bishop of London, and others of near place about her Majesty, in
whose company he chiefly delighted.

123. In the absence of his Friends, Cheerful and affable in his Family.
he would be exceeding cheerful and affable with his own Gentlemen and
Servants, though his Bounty toward them and the Poor did not consist in words,
but in deeds, for he was very liberal in Liberal to his Servants.
rewarding them, both with Leases, Offices, and otherwise with Supplies, as
their Occasions required, out of his Purse; and would, I make no question, have
done much more for them out of his own Estate, if he had had ability, and time
(after his Sickness first seized upon him) to dispose of his worldly Affairs.

124. As his Bounty was very great Bountiful to the industrious Poor, and to
the Disabled and Necessitous.
toward his own (for in that number likewise he always accounted the poor
Society of his Hospital) so were his Hands everywhere reached out to the
necessities of all sorts. Yea such was his Charity, that if he had seen poor
men addicted to labor, he would have given them Money, and waste Ground to
employ in gardening, or some such use as might be for their relief. Or if he
heard that any of his poor Neighbors were decrepit, or destitute of means to
follow their Trade, he would supply their needs either with Money or Fuel, and
sometimes poor Watermens wants with Boats, and such like; wherein he dealt no
worse with them, than that famous Bishop of Lincoln, Robert After the manner of
Robert Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln his usage of his Kinsman.
Grosthead, dealt with his poor Kinsman; in whose behalf when he was solicited
to advance him, and thereupon enquiring what course of life he followed, and
receiving answer that he was an Husbandman; Why then (quoth he) if his Plough
be broken, I will repair it, or rather than fail bestow a new one upon him,
whereby he may go on in his course of life; but so to advance him, as to make
him forsake his Trade, or Condition, in which he was brought up, that mean I
not to do.

125. I fear lest I have held the Reader too long in these private matters:
therefore I will for brevity sake, omit to speak of the fair Library which he
left behind him, with many other memorable things (worthy the observation) and
return again unto his public Affairs.

126. THE Archbishop (respecting the welfare of the Church, and public Cause)
albeit he was very confident of the King's Princely wisdom, by the experience
he had thereof (being now an ancient Counselor) and well understanding the
passages of Matters betwixt his Majesty, and state of our Country, (whereby he
did conceive that it was not probable so wise and learned a Prince could be
overcome with the Conceits of such Innovators, whose Fancies could not stand
but with hazard of the State) yet he held it most expedient to send that
Reverend Gentleman, Master Doctor Nevill, Doctor Nevill, Dean of Canterbury,
sent by the Archbishop and Clergy into Scotland to King James.
Dean of Canterbury, into Scotland to his Majesty, in the name of the Bishops,
and Clergy of England, to tender their bounden Duties, and to understand his
Highness's pleasure for the ordering and guiding of Clergy Causes. The Dean
brought a most gracious Answer of his Highness's purpose; which was, to uphold
and maintain the Government of the late Queen; as she left it settled. Which
Answer did much The King's Answer that he would uphold the Church, comforts the
Archbishop.
comfort the Archbishop; and the rather, because it did yield full satisfaction
unto some others, who peradventure might conceive some doubt of alteration, by
reason of the Puritan brags, and their affections unto the Presbyterial
Government in Scotland.

127. In this mean while, the preparations Queen Elizabeth's Funeral, April.
28. 1603. very sumptuously performed.
were great for solemnization of the late Queen's Funeral; which being
performed very sumptuously, as became the dignity of so great a Prince, the
Archbishop, as he was the principal in the Custody of the Kingdom, and chief in
all Councils of State, under his Majesty in his absence (for there is no
interregnum in England, as Watson the Priest did traitorously pretend) so in
this last Solemnity of Obsequy unto his ever honored Sovereign, and Mistress,
he was the most eminent Person of the whole Land, and principal Mourner; The
Archbishop the chief Mourner.
who received the Offering, and had the Banners presented unto him.

128. After this, when at his Majesty's King James gives him personal assurance
of preserving the settled State of the Church.
first entrance into England, the King had spoken with him at Theobalds,
whereby he more fully conceived his religious pleasure touching the Affairs of
this Commonwealth, he was therewith put into heart, especially, when after his
coming to London, he did again perceive his Resolution for the continuance of
the well settled state of the Church, which made him more cheerfully prepare
himself for performance of his Duty (as a thing belonging unto King James's
Coronation, July 25. 1603. by the hands of the Archbishop.
his Place,) against the day of Coronation, July 25. 1603.

129. At which time the Archbishop, with all due Ceremonies and observances for
so great a Solemnity, crowned and anointed his Sacred Majesty King JAMES in the
Collegiate Church of Westminster. Then also, and there he crowned our most
noble and gracious Queen ANN, his Majesty's Queen Ann also crowned at the same
time.
happy and fruitful Wife; whose blessed Seed God grant so to increase and
continue, as there may never be wanting thereof to rule and reign in this
Kingdom.

130. The Puritan Faction did not surcease, until by their importunity they
obtained a Conference before his The Conference at Hampton Court, Jan. 14.
1603. betwixt the Bishops and the Puritans in the King's presence. The King
satisfied with the Bishops reasonings, And orders the reprinting the Liturgy.
Highness, which continued for three days. His Majesty having now at full heard
their Objections, and the Bishops Answers (the weakness of the one, and the
foreible Reasons of the other, much confirming his Royal mind in his former
Opinion) was pleased immediately thereupon to signify publicly his Resolution
for the continuance of the Religion, and Ecclesiastical Government, formerly
established: highly commending the Wisdom, Care, and Constancy of his Sister
the late Queen Elizabeth, in constituting and maintaining all things so well;
as also approving the Bishops Learning Wisdom, and endeavor to uphold so godly
and well governed a Church; which himself (by God's assistance) would ever
advance and defend. Likewise he gave present command touching the new printing
of the Common Prayer Book, for the further ratifying of the Liturgy and Orders
of our Church.

131. The Parliament now growing A Parliament comes on.
on, the Archbishop, that he might be the better prepared, did appoint a
meeting at Fulham, at the Bishop of The Bishops have a meeting at Fulham.
London's House, to confer with some of the Bishops and Judges of his Court,
concerning the Affairs of the Church, which were then to be treated upon. As he
was thus going in his Barge upon an extaordinary cold day, and having his
Barge-cloath tied up (as his custom was) to the top of the Bales, the Wind blew
very sharply; so that the young Gentlemen (shaking with cold) desired to have
the Cloth down, which he would by no means permit, because the Water was
rough, and he would therefore see his way. By reason whereof the flashing of
the Water, and sharpness of the Air, did so pierce the Archbishop (being above
Threescore and The Archbishop 73 years old, is seized with a cold on the Water.
thirteen years of Age) that he complained the same night of a great cold,
which he had then taken in the mould of his Head.

132. Notwithstanding which distemperature, for performance of his accustomed
duty unto the King's Majesty (as formerly unto the Queen) he went upon the next
Sabbath following (being the first Sunday in Lent) over unto the Court at
Whitehall, where Goes to the Court, has speech with the King about Affairs of
the Church.
meeting the then Bishop of London, they both had long speech with his Highness
about the Affairs of the Church, both before and after his Majesty's coming
from the Chapel. For which cause, staying long at the Court, and having fasted
until it was near One one of the Clock, as he was going from his Majesty unto
the Council Chamger to dinner, he was taken with a dead Is taken with the dead
Palsy.
Palsy; whereby all his Right side was benumbed, and he bereaved of his
Speech. From the Council Chamger he was, by means of his dearest Friends, the
Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, and the Bishop of London, with the aid of
the King's Servants, carried to the Lord Treasurer's Chamber, and afterward in
his Barge conveyed home Is conveyed to Lambeth.
to Lambeth.

133. His Majesty (being much troubled with the report of his Sickness) came
upon the Tuesday following to visit The King visits him.
and comfort him with very kind and gracious Speeches; saying, That he would
beg him of God in his Prayer: Which if he could obtain, he should think it one
of the greatest temporal Blessings that could be given him in this Kingdom. The
Archbishop made offer to speak to his Majesty in Latin; but neither his
Highness, nor any there present, well understood what he said, save only, that
by the last words, pro Ecclesia Dei, He earnestly recommends the Church to his
Royal Care.
pro Ecclesia Dei (which in earnest manner with his Eyes and Hands lift up, he
oftentimes iterated) his Majesty conceived (as it pleased him afterward to
report) that he continued the Suit, which sundry times before, and at his last
attendance on his Highness, he had earnestly recommended unto his Royal and
Special Care in behalf of the Church.

134. After his Majesty's departure, the Archbishop had neither perfect use of
his Speech, nor ability to write his mind; as he did desire, by the signs that
he used for Ink and Paper. Which being brought unto him, and he making offer to
write, had no feeling of his Pen, for it fell out of his Hands. When he
perceived his impotency to write, after two or three assays, he setched a great
sigh, and lay down again; and on Wednesday following (at Eight of the Clock at
night) the last of February, 1603. He departs this Life, Feb. ult. 1603.
he quietly, and like a Lamb, died the Servant of Christ; as in the time of his
Sickness, by many infallible signs, was manifest unto my self, and those that
attended him in that time of his visitation. Which cannot be better testified
by any, than by Doctor Barlow, the now Bishop of Lincoln, together with Doctor
Buckeridge (now Bishop of Rochester) and Doctor Charryor, his then Household
Chaplains; who for the most part, were continually with him, from the beginning
of his Sickness, unto the end of the same. Of the manner of whose death, though
some undiscreet men have censured uncharitably, yet I may truly say, as Solon
did for the happy ends of Eleobis and Biton, who in the absence of their
Mother's Oxen, did yoke themselves, and drew her in her Coach to the Temple,
and after their Sacrifices performed, went to bed, and were found the next
Morning dead, without hurt or sorrow: So fared it with this good Archbishop,
who wanting the assistance of some, who by their Places should have undergone
with him the Charge of guiding and supporting of Ecclesiastical Affairs, took
the yoke and burden thereof himself for his Mother the Church's sake. And when
he had performed his Oblations of Prayer and Thanksgiving to God; was carried
to bed, and there died, without suffering hurt or sorrow. Thus he, as Abraham
Genesis 25. 8.
(of whom he was a true Son) yielded up the Spirit, and died in a good age, an
old man, and of great years, and was gathered unto his people. He was Bishop He
was Bishop of Worcester six Years and five Months. And Archbishop of Canterbury
twenty years and five Months. Camden. Britannia, in Com. Kent. page 338. He was
libelled after his death by Lewis Pickering.
of Worcester six Years and five Months, and Archbishop of Canterbury twenty
Years and five Months.

135. Now though he lived and died, no doubt, a chosen and beloved Servant of
God, and one, who as a learned Man truly says, had devoutly consecrated both
his whole life to God, and his painful labors to the Church; yet there wanted
not some, who after his death fought by an infamous Libel to stain the glory of
his ever honorable Name. But their Malice was soon discovered, and the Author,
at least the Publisher, punished by an honorable Sentence, given in the High
Court of Star Chamber.

136. And if what was then spoken by their Lordships, and the rest of that
great and judicious Court, concerning this Archbishop's Piety, Wisdom,
Learning, and Government, were published in Print; he that would have
adventured to write any thing more of him, might justly have been condemned of
indiscretion. Therefore, as a burden that I am not able to undergo, I forbear
to enter into any particular relation of their Speeches and Sentence.

137. His Funeral was very honorably Was honorably interred at Croydon, March
27. 1604.
(as befitted his Place) solemnized at Croydon the 27th of March following,
1604. where the Earl of Worcester, and the Lord Zouch, did him the honor in
attending the Hearse, and carrying his Banners: Doctor Babbington, Bishop of
Worcester, made his Funeral Sermon; His Funeral Sermon by Bishop Babington.
who like wise was his Pupil in Cambridge, and performed that Duty (among many
other due observances of him in his lifetime) with very great commendation,
choosing for his Text a portion of Scripture most fitting the worthiness of his
Person. But Jehoida waxed old, and The Text. 2 Chronicles. 24. 15, 16.
was full of days and died. An hundred and thirty years old was he when he
died. And they buried him in the city of David, with the Kings, because he had
done good in Israel, and toward God and his house.

138. Having now committed the Body of this most Reverend Personage (which was
sometimes the Mansion of a most excellent Soul) unto his Grave (where it rests
in assured expectation of a glorious Resurrection) I will for conclusion, speak
somewhat of the outward shape and proportion thereof. He was Description of his
Person.
of a middle Stature, of a grave Countenance, and brown Complexion, black Hair
and Eyes, he wore his Beard neither long nor thick. For his small timber, he
was of a good quick strength, straight and well shaped in all his Limbs, to the
habit of his Body; which began somewhat to burnish toward his latter years.

139. And thus, gentle Reader, that I may not extend this Discourse beyond the
period of his Life, who was the Subject thereof, I withdraw my Pen from Paper,
entreating either thy friendly acceptance of this my Labor, or thy farther
pains in writing and publishing some more complete and learned Observations of
thine own, touching this renowned Archbishop's Actions, and Fame; which could
not without great shame unto my self, and others his Followers, be buried in
Darkness with his Body.

FINIS.
THE TABLE TO THE Life of Archbishop WHITGIFT.
THE Archbishop's Descent, Page 2 He was born, Anno 1530. at Grimsby in
Lincolnshire, Ib. First instructed by his Uncle, Robert Whitgift, Abbot of
Wellow in Lincolnshire, 3 Sent up to London, Ib. Narrowly escaped the Plague,
Ib. Sent back to Grimsby for refusing to go to Mass, Ib. Sent to Cambridge;
first of Queen's College, then of Pembroke-Hall, 4 Chosen Fellow of
Peter-House, May 1555. Ib. Had a grievous Sickness, Ib. Dr. Pearne's special
Care of him, 5 Recovering his Health, determined to Travel, Ib. Dissuaded by
Dr. Pearne, Ib. Commenced Bachelor of Arts, 1553. Master of Arts, 1556.
Bachelor of Divinity, 1562. Doctor of Divinity, 1569. Ib. His Act-Sermon at
St. Mary's, 1560. on Romans 1. 16. Ib. Made Master of Pembroke-Hall, Chaplain to
the Bishop of Ely, Prebendary of Ely, Parson of Teversam, 7 Divinity Reader,
Ib. Queen's Professor. Ib. Read upon the Apocalypse and the Hebrews. Ib. Sent
for to preach before the Queen. 8 Was made Master of Trinity College, July 4.
1567. and the Queen's Chaplain, Ib. Found Divisions in the College, 9 Wisely
appeased them, Ib. Cartwright's first discontent, Ib. His Self-conceit, 10
Cartwright went to Geneva; affected the Discipline of that Church, 11 His
opposition to the Established Church Government in England, Ib. Preaches
against the Surpless, 12 Whitgift preaches against Cartwright's Opinions, 13
Cartwright and his Followers oppose Whitgift, Ib. Whitgift's Gentleness, 14 The
State of the University disturbed by Cartwright, 15 Whitgift advises him to be
quiet, Ib. Calls him in question. Ib. Expells him the House, and deprives him
of the Lady Margaret's Lecture, 16 Offers him a Conference; which Cartwright
refuses, Ib. This recorded in the Register of the University. Ib. The
Disciplinarians publish An Admonition to the Parliament, 19 Whitgift answers
it, 1572. Ib. Cartwright replies, 20 Whitgift defends his Answer, Ib.
Cartwright's Second Reply, Ib. Mr. Whitaker's Letters concerning Mr.
Cartwright's Reply, and his censure of him, 21 Whitgift made Dean of Lincoln,
22 Several Noblemen, etc. his Pupils, 23 Their respects toward him, Ib. He
holds the Scholars strictly to their Exercises and Devotion, Ib. Procures
amendment of the University Statutes, 24 His Wisdom and Courage, 25 His
Moderation, Ib. Mr. Hooker's Character of him in his Eccles. Policy, Ib.
Whitgift's esteem with the Queen, Ib. Consecrated Bishop of Worcester April 21.
1577. Ib. Takes leave of the University, with an Exhortation to Peace and
Unity, 26 His Farewel-Text. 2 Cor. 13. 11. Ib. Sets out for Worcester, June
1597. attended with the Heads of Houses, etc. Ib. The Queen forgives his
Firstfruits, and gives him the disposal of all the Prebends of that Church, Ib.
He finds the Bishopric impaired by Grants of long Leases, 27 Particularly the
Rent-Corn of Two of the best Manors, Hollow and Grimley, Ib. He questions the
said Lease, Ib. Has great Friends at Court, 28 Satisfies the Queen, Ib.
Recovers the said Rent-Corn, paying 300 l. out of his own Purse, Ib. He has
great respect from the Gentlemen and People in the Country, 29 Is a great
Peacemaker among them, 30 Makes up a Remarkable Quarrel betwixt Sir John
Russell and Sir Henry Barkeley, Ib. Is made Vice President of the Marches of
Wales. 31 He had great experience in Government, yet backward to bear sway, 32
Has a special watch over his own Family and Attendants, to avoid all color of
corruption. 33 Is highly esteemed by the People of Wales, Ib. His great
Integrity, Justice, and mild Government, 34 He is made Commissioner by the
Queen for reforming the Disorders in the Cathedrals of Lichfield and Hereford,
Ib. The Queen designs him for Archbishop of Canterbury, in the room of Grindall
then in disgrace, 35 He utterly refuses it during Grindall's Life; the Queen
is contented, Ib. Grindall dies, 36 Whitgift sent for to Court, Ib. Is
translated to the Archbishopric of Canterbury, September. 24. 1583. 37 Finds the
Bishopric overvalued: gets an abatement in the First Fruits for him and his
Successors, 38 Recovers Lands that had been detained, Ib. Amends Curats Wages,
where small, Ib. The Queen jealous of the Ruritans, charges the Archbishop to
see strict Conformity observed to the Established Church and Government, Ib.
His care of the Queen's Command, 39 December. 1584. For satisfaction of some
great Persons, he with two other Bishops received the Reasons of some Ministers
for their Nonconformity, 40 They sufficiently answer the same, Ib. A Conference
at Lambeth, and a further debate of the Controversy, to the seeming
satisfaction of those Great Personages, 41 The Archbishop perplexed with
Oppositions, is grieved, Ib. Writes his mind, 42 After which he is in strict
league with Sir Christopher Hatton by means of Dr. Bancroft, 48 Lord Treasurer
Burley his firm Friend, Ib. The Archbishop sworn of the Privy Council, Ib. Lord
Buckhurst his faithful Friend, 49 He has free access to the Queen, Ib. His
Oppositions abated, Ib. Sir Thomas Bromely, Lord Chancellor, died, April 12.
1587. Ib. The Queen disposed to make the Archbishop Lord Chancellor, Ib. He
excuses himself, and recommends Sir Christopher Hatton, Ib. Sir Christopher
Hatton, made Lord Chancellor, April 29. 1587. 50 The Earl of Leicester died
September 4. 1588. Ib. Oxford desire the Archbishop for their Chancellor in the
Earl's room, Ib. He recommends Sir Christopher Hatton, who is chosen: He is the
Archbishop's constant Assistant in bridling the Puritan Faction, 51 Martin
Marprelate, and other Libels published, 1588. Ib. A Private Puritan Press
erected at Kingston, and afterward removed to several Places, Ib. The Press
discovered at Manchester, 52 The Printers apprehended, prosecuted and fined in
the Star Chamber, Ib. On their submission, and the Archbishop's Mediation, were
released, and Fines remitted, Ib. Penry and Udall Authors of the Libels, Ib.
Newman, a Cobbler, Disperser, Ib. John Penry condemned, 1593. 53 Udall pardoned,
Ib. Thomas Cartwright (with others) proceeded with in the Starchamber for their
Conventicles, 1591. and for publishing their Book of New Discipline. Ib. Dr.
Bancroft writes two Books against the Disciplinarians, and their dangerous
Practices and Positions, 54 The Archbishop and State's vigilant watch upon
them, 55 Coppinger and Arthington their preaching in a Cart in Cheapside, July
16. 1591. 56 That Hacket represented Christ, and Themselves Prophets from God,
Ib. Conspiracy for Pretended Reformation, wrote by Dr. Cousin, Ib. Barrow and
Greenwood their Schismatical and Seditious Positions, 58 The Ringleaders on
being convened, make show of Conformity, but afterward go back, 59 Were
re-committed July, 1588. and proceeded against March, 1592. Ib. An Act of
Abjuration and Banishment made against Schismatics, Ib. Only four Persons
prosecuted of a very great Number, 60 Great Troubles in Germany; just cause of
Fears here from like Principles and Pretenses of Reformation, Ib. The
Discipline decreed in their Assemblies to be put in Practice, 61 The Queen's
Authority Ecclesiastical to be restrained, Ib. Cartwright's Seditious
Doctrines, 62 Cartwright's charitable Prayer for the Bishops, in his Sermons at
Banbury, 1589. Ib. Penry's Supplication to the Parliament; threatening them with
Plagues, Ib. Udall's Threats against the Resisters of the Presbytery, 63 These
Stirs set on foot at the time of the Spanish Invasion, 1588. Ib. The
Archbishop's preparation for Defense of his Prince and Country, 64 The whole
Clergy of his Province Armed, Ib. Cartwright the Head of the Puritan Party, Ib.
Hacket, Coppinger, and Arthington resort to him, 65 Penry and Udall his
Consorts, Ib. Cartwright's words in the Articles in the Star Chamber, Ib. The
Disciplinarians Decree about Books to be printed, Ib. Barrow and Greenwood
infected by Cartwright, 66 Bishop Ravis's Conference with Barrow and Greenwood,
1592. Ib. Bishop Androws and Bishop Parrey, with others, their Conference with
Barrow and Greenwood, 67 Barrow's Vainglorious Answer, 68 The danger of
Innovation, Ib. Cartwright withdraws privately, 69 Brown the Author of a New
Sect of that Name, 70 His Positions little differing from Barrow and Greenwood,
Ib. The Archbishop suppresseth many Schisms, and also Controversies in the
Universities, Ib. He procures Cartwright's Pardon of the Queen, Ib.
Cartwright's Letters, March 24. 1601. acknowledging the Archbishop's Favor, 71
The Archbishop tolerates Cartwright to preach publicly without Conformity. Ib.
The Queen requires his Subscription, 72 Cartwright dies Rich, Ib. The Earl of
Essex favors the Puritans as far as he durst, Ib. Upon timely execution of the
Laws, the state of the Church at quiet, 73 Sir Christopher Hatton died November.
20. 1591. Ib. Lord Buckhurst chosen Chancellor of Oxford on the Queen's
Letters, Ib. Earl of Essex offended at it, is pacified by the Archbishop, Ib.
The Queen justifies the Archbishop to Essex, 74 She makes them firm Friends, 75
Sir Francis Walsingham died Apr. 6. 1590. Ib. The Archbishop's firmness to
Essex in his Troubles. Ib. The Archbishop fears on the Lord Chancellor's death,
Ib. New Pamphlets dispersed by the Puritans, 76 Attempts in Parliament on their
behalf, Ib. The Queen comforts the Archbishop with fresh Assurances of her
Countenance and Favor to the Church, Ib. Sir John Puckering Lord Keeper, June
4. 1592. Ib. Upon Hatton's death the Queen offered the Archbishop his Place:
But he declined it, because of his Age and Ecclesiastical Business, 77 Sir
Thomas Egerton made Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, May 6. 1596. Ib. He is a
constant Friend to the Church before and after his Advancement, Ib. The
Archbishop cherished and strengthened by union of many Friends, 78 The Queen
throws the whole care of the Church upon him, Ib. He disposes of Bishoprics
and all other Ecclesiastical Promotions, Ib. His great Humility and Lenity, Ib.
The Earl of Salisbury's Observation on him. 80 Many favored and eased by the
Archbishop's intercession, Ib. The wisdom of the Queen in her moderate
Government, 81 The Archbishop follows her Example, Ib. The Arcbishop a great
lover and encourager of Learned and Virtuous Clergy, 83 Was bountiful to
Foreigners of Learning and Quality, Ib. Theod. Beza his Letters to the
Archbishop, March 8. 1591. Ib. Approving the Policy of the English Church, Ib.
Beza his high commendation of the Church of England, 84 His great respect to
the Archbishop, Ib. The Archbishop's kindness and charity to Foreign Divines of
the Reformation, 85 His backwardness to censure other men's Gifts and
Performances, 86 The Archbishop a constant Preacher when public Affairs would
admit, 87 Had an excellent Tallent in Preaching, Ib. Learned, eloquent and
judicious, Ib. His Gesture grave and decent, without affectation, Ib. Of great
Integrity and unspotted Life, 88 He wrote the Notes of his Sermons, Ib.
Disapproved trusting only to Memory, Ib. When at Worcester, he treated the
Recusants mildly, and won many of them over, 89 When he came to be Archbishop,
he dealt with the Learned of them by Authority Ecclesiastical, Ib. He kept a
straight hand over the Seminary Priests and subtle Papists, 90 He is unjustly
traduced by the Sectaries, 91 He hated Ingratitude, Ib. Is firm in his
Friendships, Ib. Censured for his affection to the Earl of Essex, 92 The Queen
displeased at his intercession for the Earl, which much grieved him, Ib. Earl
of Essex apprehended, Feb. 8. 1600. Ib. The Archbishop arms his Servants for
the Queen's defense, 93 Well taken at Court, Ib. Earl of Essex brought to
Lambeth-house, then sent to the Tower, Ib. The Archbishop in the Qucen's good
opinion and favor to her dying-day, 94 Queen Elizabeth died March 24. 1602.
Ib. The Archbishop, Dr. Bancroft, Dr. Watson, Dr. Parry, attend the Queen in
her Sickness, Ib. The Faction take heart on the Queen's death, 95 King James
proclaimed King of England, March 24. 1602. 96 The People are pleased at the
Archbishop's presence in proclaiming the King, Ib. Archbishop a lover and
incourager of Liberal Arts, Ib. His Liberality great, 97 He kept many poor
Scholars in his House, Ib. And maintained diverse in the Universities, Ib. Is an
incourager of Military Exercises Ib. His House a little Academy, 98 His
Chaplains promoted, Ib. The Archbishop's care and wisdom in determining Causes,
99 His Resolution in Judgment, 100 An Instance, 101 He upholds the Dignity of
the High Commission-Court, Ib. His dispatch of Causes to great satisfaction,
102 His great Hospitality, 103 His State, Ib. His entertainment of the Queen,
Ib. He was always honorably received by the Gentlemen of the Country, 104 His
first journey into Kent, July 1589. with pomp and solemnity, 105 A Romish
Intelligencer accidentally lands, he admires the Appearance, and owns a
mistaken prejudice concerning the meanness of our Church, Ib. The Intelligencer
had private speech with Secretary Walsingham, 106 The Archbishop's good nature,
108 His good Works in Lincoln, Worcester, Wales, Kent, Surry, 110 Boys Sisi,
the French Ambassador, his opinion and speech of Archbishop Whitgift, 111 His
love to Croydon for retirement, 112 Cheerful and affable in his Family, Ib.
Liberal to his Servants, Ib. Bountiful to the industrious Poor, and to the
Disabled and Necessitous, 113 After the manner of Robert Grosthead Bishop of
Lincoln his usage of his Kinsman, Ib. Dr. Nevill, Dean of Canterbury, sent by
the Archbishop and Clergy into Scotland to King James, 115 The King's Answer
that he would uphold the Church, comforts the Archbishop, Ib. Queen Elizabeth's
Funeral, Apr. 28. 1603. very sumptuously performed, Ib. The Archbishop the
chief Mourner, 116 King James gives him personal assurance of preserving the
settled State of the Church, Ib. King James' Coronation, July 25. 1603. by the
hands of the Archbishop, Ib. Queen Ann also crowned at the same time, Ib. The
Conference at Hampton Court, Jan. 14. 1603. betwixt the Bishops and the
Puritans in the King's presence, 117 The King satisfied with the Bishops
Reasonings, Ib. And orders the reprinting the Liturgy, Ib. A Parliament comes
on, 118 The Bishops have a meeting at Fulham, Ib. The Archbishop 73 years old,
is seized with a Cold on the Water, Ib. Goes to Court, has speech with the King
about Affairs of the Church, 119 Is taken with a dead Palsy, Ib. Conveyed to
Lambeth, Ib. The King visits him, Ib. He earnestly recommends the Church to his
Royal Care, 120 He departs this Life, Feb. ult. 1603. 121 He was Bishop of
Worcester 6 years and 5 months. And Archbishop of Canterbury 20 years and 5
months, 122 He was libelled after his death by Lewis Pickering, Ib. Was
honorably interred at Croydon, March 27. 1604. 123 His Funeral Sermon by
Bishop Babington. Ib. The Text 2 Cor. 24. 15, 16. Ib. Description of his
Person, 124
FINIS.
CONSPIRACY FOR Pretended Reformation: VIZ.

Presbyterial Discipline.

A TREATISE Discovering the late Designments and Courses held for Advancement
thereof, by William Hacket, Yeoman, Edmund Coppinger, and Henry Arthington,
Gent. out of Others Depositions and Their own Letters, Writings and Confessions
upon Examination.

Together with some part of the Life and Conditions, and the two Indictments,
Arraignment, and Execution of the said Hacket.

Also an Answer to the Calumniations of such as affirm they were Madmen: And a
Resemblance of this Action unto the like, happened heretofore in Germany.

Written by Richard Cousin, LL. D. Dean of the Arches, and Official Principal to
Archbishop Whitgift.

Finished Ultimo Septembris. 1591. And Published by Authority. 1592.

LONDON: Reprinted for Ri. Chiswell, MDCXCIX.

Prove. cap. 30. v. 12. There is a generation that are pure in their own
conceit, and yet are not washed from their filthiness.

2 Timothy cap. 3. v. 5. Having a show of godliness, but have denied the power
thereof; turn away therefore from such.

TO THE READER.
DIVERSE have hitherto diversely reported of this Action, and of the Actors in
it, according to their own several Intelligences attained thereof, and to the
Humors they are led by. And albeit the Matter (falling out not many Months
since) might seem to be in fresh remembrance of many; yet sundry there are
which hitherto know not the very particular dangerous Attempts and Outrages,
into which these men burst out, and the most part (I think) have not heard what
was the original cause of such their coffeehouse, or the main drift and
purpose of all their Designments, nor of any the ways and means by them used,
for furthering and atchieving the principal scope they shot at, nor of any
their Counsels and carriage of the Action, nor yet who were their Accomplices
that were made acquainted with the matter, in some general or more special
terms.

By want of knowledge of which things, sundry perverse and sinister Conceits
and Misdeemings have arisen, and are blown abroad amongst the People, which
seem meet to be abated, and reformed in them.

For the Papist, our common Enemy, in some late Writings from beyond the Seas,
has (as I am informed) wrested these men's dealings to another end. And sundry
at home, who would seem more moderate than many other of their own Judgment;
yet in favor of the Persons or (which I judge rather) upon liking of their
Opinion in matter of Church Government, have allowed their meanings to have
been good, though they mislike (somewhat they say) of the manner. Others seek
to disguise the very Purposes of these men, as if that which (in truth) was
most, had been least of all intended by them. There are some also, purposing to
extenuate the Fault, and to prevent that so just a blot may not fall upon the
meanest Favourer of pretended Reformation, who will needs make them to have
been stark mad, and such as knew not what they said or did. And there want not
certain also, who under pretense of pity and commiseration toward them, are
said not to spare to mutter abroad, that Matters are made worse, and of greater
consequence and peril than they be in deed: And that these Men, with some
others, were prosecuted with greater vehemence and sharpness, than the Cause it
self, or quality of their several Offenses might justly minister occasion.

All which untrue Surmises and Imputations, what do they else but apparently
and directly tend unto the injury, depravation and slander of the honorable
Justice of this Realm and State? For assertion and clearing whereof from such
Calumniations, and to make manifest also the very truth of these matters unto
all that are desirous to be informed aright in them: It is thought meet that
this Treatise (for good Considerations hitherto stayed since it was finished)
should now at length be published.

Whereby I make no doubt, but it will appear to any that shall be pleased to
peruse it with a single eye, how important these Causes are to be thoroughly
looked into, for the weight and danger of them; how honorable the Proceedings
in them have been for manner; and how exceeding mild and merciful a course has
been holden by the State, not only with some of the chief Dealers, but also
with sundry others notable Concurrents in the Action, who though they be
sufficiently well known, yet hitherto have not been so much as called into
question; how far soever (perhaps) they may seem unto some (not unwise) to have
waded therein, or to have entertained intelligence of it, both dangerously and
undutifully. So far is her Excellent Majesty, and the whole State, from
aggravating men's Offenses, yea, and from taking advantage, even when most just
occasion (sometimes) is offered.

I pray God this notable rare Clemency may be hereafter answered (by those who
both in this and other matters stand not a little in need of it, how little
soever they acknowledge it) with that measure of dutiful remembrance and
thankfulness, which it worthily deserves at their hands.

Amen.
R. C.

THE PREFACE
WHEN in the time of professing the truth of Religion, such as pretend greatest
sincerity and zeal, do fall into fanatical Fancies and dangerous Attempts; Then
some do thereupon stagger in the Doctrine, and are scandalized: Some be quite
driven back; And others are carried even with open mouth to slander and to
reproach the very profession of the Gospel. The two first of which are of the
weaker, but the last are of the wickeder sort. For these are straightway ready
to make comparisons betwixt the Times, and to declaim largely concerning the
sweet and golden quiet, with agreement in Judgment, which they (erroneously)
conceive to have continually accompanied the Times of Superstition and
Blindness.

But though this were universally true, which is far otherwise; yet both the
one sort and the other, are dangerously deceived and transported into
misdeeming by want of due consideration, what is the very wellspring and
occasion of such Accidents under the profession of the Gospel.

For when Satan, the deceiving Enemy of Mankind, had in the Times of Popery,
by insensible, and as it were obscure degrees (under a color of Religion and
Devotion) envenomed once the very Fountains of Doctrine with many pestilent
Errors, much Superstition, and gross Idolatry, and had almost quite damned up
the light of the glorious Gospel; Then was it no marvel, though he here rested
his Labors, as being (in some sort) arrived unto the main end of all his
drifts and purposes. Insomuch, as this once achieved, the rest were
sufficiently able to go forward of themselves. For upon corruption of Faith and
Doctrine, must needs ensue either open corruption of Life and Conversation, or
at least Corruption, masked under a vail of Hypocrisy: Because he that walks
in darkness, knows not whither he goes, and a corrupt Tree cannot bring
forth good fruit. Therefore after the victory gotten, that he might more deeply
deceive, and surely retain, whom he had caught, he thought it requisite (at
some seasons) upon these Corruptions, to weave a vail of pretended unity, and
as it were to candy and sweeten them over with the lovely show of peace and
agreement: Which nevertheless being without verity, is nothing else but a lewd
Conspiracy, and is rather a deadly sleep, wherewith men be overwhelmed, than an
unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. For where all is subdued, what needs
any further resistance? And where a strong man keeps the House, all that he
possesses are in quiet, till a stronger than he do come to dispossess him.

But when as God taking compassion of his Church in the eyes of his mercy, had
in these latter times made the day star to shine again in our hearts, no sooner
did the beams of his Gospel begin to glimpse and break forth, but the old
crafty Serpent (knowing his Kingdom to be invaded afresh, and his time but
short) began in great wrath to rouse up himself again, and to hammer over anew
all his long-approved wicked Experiments, and to plant new Engines for the
discredit and hinderance of the passage and propagation of the Gospel.

This he plotteth (besides many other means) by seducing some that profess it,
into sedition and error: And so in their Persons he brings the Profession it
self into obloquy and hatred with such as before did think hardly of it, or were
not persuaded it was the truth. For by reason of his Angelical Substance,
corrupted with Diabolical Malice, and by long Experience, even of 5553 years
continuance, he is now become (...), mille-artifex, his perfect Crafts-master
in infinite Devices and Subtilties. So that he does at sundry times very
manifoldly and variably suggest and plot, not only several and diverse, but
sometimes even contrary Opinions and Actions, one to another; howbeit all to
one and the self-same general end, of seducing Mankind. Therefore (amongst his
infinite Deceits for hinderance of the Gospel, and of Man's Salvation by it)
some whom he cannot pervert in Doctrine, he seeks to attaint in Life: Others
whom he cannot so easily seduce in their Conversation, he oftentimes sows his
cockle and darnel of Superstition, Schism, and Heresy in their hearts, and so
perverteth them in judgment, and matter of Religion. Some, whom he cannot
entangle by one sin, he tempts to overthrow by a sin contrary unto it. Others
whom he cannot snare by gross and actual Sins, he gets ground of, by making
them have overgreat estimation of their own supposed Virtues and Purity: So
that they grow hereby both to a conceit and self-love of themselves, and also
to contemn and condemn others with the Pharisee, saying: Oh God, I thank thee,
that I am not as other men are: Or as the Prophet speaks touching such proud
Hypocrites, Depart from me, for I am holier than thou. Others he draws into
error by mistaking of the true quality or cause of things, as when, not being
able to corrupt the general Doctrine of the Church, he persuadeth Preachers
most to insist upon matters of mere circumstance, as if they were of especial
necessity, and procures the outward Government and Discipline to be obtruded
and beat upon, for a principal Point of Doctrine. So that matters of the
substance of Doctrine and Faith in deed, do either wholly slip by untaught, or
else are so slightly and ignorantly slubbered over by such Preachers, that the
common Adversary the Papist, is thereby rather hardened, than convinced in his
Opinions. Which practice may hereby appear to be the very subtilty of Satan,
for that such do use far more earnestness and diligence to plant and bring in
that their Discipline, than they do for retaining of purity and soundness of
Doctrine, and are less incensed and vchement against Papists, than they are
against such as impugn that Fancy.

Out of this Head springs also that Error of some, who do attribute all
disorder and personal faults of men about execution of Laws, unto the Laws
themselves, and unto the very Policy of the Church: Thereupon gathering with
themselves, that the Plot of Discipline (if it might come in place) will surely
serve as a Mithridate, and a sovereign Salve, to heal (with short applying) all
Diseases and Sores both of Church and Commonwealth. Certain be so bewitched (in
like sort) by a kind of admiration of that, which is (in it self) most
necessary, as that in the mean time they overslip matters of no less importance
in the Life of a Christian, because they think it sufficient to be occupied
only about the other.

Hereupon it comes, that sundry do attribute so much to the hearing of the
Word preached, that neither public nor private reading of Scripture, Works of
Charity, Praying, nor practice of that which is preached, is any whit almost
regarded of them. Whereby they are always learning, but never come unto the
knowledge of the truth, as if the very work wrought of hearing alone could make
them good and perfect Christians. So that where in old time there were certain
Heretics called (...), who did nothing but pray: So (not without cause) have
some feared, lest such Persons would bring in an Heresy of (...), putting all
Religion in bare hearing of Sermons. Diverse also there are, who are so whetted
against the abuse of things, that the Seducer hereby takes opportunity to draw
them to omit even the good and commendable use of them. Such are those, that
because they will not seem to confirm God's truth by human Testimony, do
therefore despise all light and help of good Arts, and learned Interpreters,
and instead of them, do in their Sermons nothing else, but blaze out their own
frivolous and unsound Collections, trifling out the time (without order and
method) by an heap of earnest and resonant, but undigested words, vain
Repetitions, Tautologies and Battologies, without any substance of matter, to
the great abuse of their Auditory, and of that excellent Work. Many also are so
afraid to fall into superstitious observation of days, commanded for abstinence
and avoiding of most nutritive Diet, that at such times they do usually most
pamper their vile Flesh, even with a purposed and settled contempt of good Laws,
in that behalf provided. Neither will this kind of Persons (for the most part)
use any private fasting, for subduing the Body, but must have a whole side of a
Country, or a whole family at least, know when they fast, and will not stick to
ride out a dozen or twenty Miles from home to fast with others for company
(though without public Authority) there to make ostentation of great humbling
themselves, by abstaining perhaps from one Meal, how plentifully and delicately
soever they do fare at Suppers, or at their next Meal. Likewise, to avoid
opinion of superstitious worship of the outward Elements at Communion, sundry
do refuse to kneel at the perception of it: And of the contrary side do fall to
a profane and swinish (at least outward) irreverence of that high and
excellent Mystery. Others there are, who in avoiding Superstition, are
themselves become little less than superstitious. For albeit the Holy Ghost
condemns want of (...). Romans 1.
natural affection as a sin; yet such Persons, when their Husbands, Parents, or
Friends do die, are so far from moderate sorrow or mourning for them (lest
happily they should seem to do it superstitiously and excessively, as those do,
who have no hope) that on the contrary, they do, (even with a kind of
superstitious singularity) avoid all show of sorrow, as if it were a matter
unlawful for any Christians, of their degree of perfection. And therefore they
take unto themselves at such times, Music, Rose-mary Branches, and other
tokens of joy and great solace. Howbeit, the Holy Ghost greatly commends the
devotion of them, who buried the Martyr St. Stephen, and Acts 8. 2.
made great lamentation for him. Of whose resurrection nevertheless unto
Eternal Life, those Mourners had as good assurance, as any man now can have
touching such, whom these do so pleasantly and jocundly tumble into the Pit.
Many also he deceives and drowneth in sin and impiety by some similitude and
resemblance that it has unto virtue and godliness, as, by making that which in
deed is (...), Will Worship, to seem to be nothing else, but an earnest care to
serve God: Superstition, to be taken for obedient Devotion: Hypocrisy, for true
sincerity: A show of humbling a man's self by a meal or two's abstinence, and
hanging down the head like a bullrush, for true fasting, and subduing of the
flesh: Calumniation, slander, and disdain of others, for an hatred of sin:
Rancour and male-contentment, for zeal of God's glory: Schism and Division, for
an avoiding of the works of darkness, and of pollution by them: Seditious
Innovation, for lawful Reformation: Presumptuous expostulation in prayer with
God, for fervency of the Spirit: Bitter invectives against others in praying,
for desire of amendment in them, and to advance God's glory: Overweening
Conceits, for extraordinary Callings and Gifts: Hot and bloody pangs of Malice
and Cruelty, for motions of God's Spirit, and revelation from him, with such
like a great many, more than a good number. All these, and such like, are usual
practices and sleights of Satan, whereby even in the time of the Gospel, he
cunningly inveigleth and slily entrappeth many, to the danger of themselves, to
the scandal and downfall of others, and to the obloquy of true Religion. It is
necessary (says Christ) that offenses come; yet woe be to them, by whom they
come. And there must needs be heresies, (says St. Paul) that such as be
approved, may be made manifest. But of all the other, the last sort of them
(being suggested by Satan, under the vizard of Virtue, Godliness, and
Religion) are most pernicious and devilish: And the poison of them spreads
and rankleth furthest, to the disturbance and peril both of Church and
Commonwealth, because hereby the Devil transformeth himself into an Angel of
light. For as the most noble Creature engendered, is most loathsome and base in
his corruption: So is the untrue pretense and color of Piety and Religion
(things of themselves of chiefest price and excellency) the most dangerous
snare, and deadly dart, that Satan can shoot forth. The profane Politic of
our Age could Macchiavel.
observe, That show of Piety and Religion was the readiest and surest way to
blind and seduce a multitude. If then this Imp of his could mark it, shall we
doubt, but that Satan himself, the Forger of all Subtilties, can see it, and
accordingly also put it in practice? Yea, he has put in ure this most
dangerous Device, not only in this Action (whereof we entreat) done in our late
sight and knowledge, by his seduced Instruments, William Hacket, Edmund
Coppinger, and Henry Arthington; but at sundry other times also, by other his
like Factors, since the last renewing of the Gospel, begun in Germany, in our
Fathers days. One or two of the most memorable of which Examples recorded in
History, it shall not (I trust) be amiss to compare with these late Attempts
and Actions; both that the one and the other may be better known, and avoided
hereafter, and that the efficacy of this strong Illusion may more fruitfully be
weighed and considered.

In Military Instructions it is prescribed, not to Polyaenus in Stratag.
use a Stratagem twice together in one Age, for fear of over-fresh remembrance,
and thereby of prevention. Therefore Satan an old Leader, might not in his
great Policy, so soon after, have again assayed this Practice so like (in most
points) to the former in Germany, had he not perfectly known (by experience)
the efficacy and rare working thereof, and therefore did repose in it, an
especial confidence for raising of Tumult, shedding of Blood, and overthrow of
States.

But before I enter into that Comparison, it is requisite first to make
narration of this late Conspiracy, with the Circumstances thereof, as it was
plotted and carried forward by them, so near, as I could inform my self
therein, either by Depositions of others, or from their own Letters, Writings,
and original Confessions upon examination.

CONSPIRACY FOR Pretended Reformation.
ONE of the three principal Persons in this Action (whereof we entreat) was
Edmund Edm Coppinger, Gent. a younger Brother of small Estate.
Coppinger, a Gentleman descended of a good House and Lineage, and one of her
Majesty's sworn Servants, but a younger Brother, having no great Livelihood.
His chief abode (as I have learned) for some years past, has been in and about
the City of London.

Another of them is Henry Arthington, a Henry Arthington a Yorkshire Gentleman
of mean Estate, and in debt.
Gentleman likewise, whose place of Birth and Dwelling is said to be in
Yorkshire: Howbeit for the greatest part of certain years past, he has
remained and sojourned in or about London. It is constantly (how credibly I
know not) reported by some, who pretend to know it, that this Arthington (at
the times of his long abodes at London) did most converse with another
Gentleman of Yorkshire, by whose means he presently stands more deeply engaged,
than his mean Estate might well bear, and whose company is feared to have
wrought in him small dutiful opinion of the godly Reformation planted and
established by the means of her Majesty. It is discovered by the mutual
Dispersers of Seditious Books printed in Scotland against the Established
English Reformation.
Letters of Arthington, and the aforesaid other Yorkshire Gentleman, that
certain Seditious and Slanderous Books against the Council, Judges, and this
whole Estate, were received and dispersed by them, being printed in Scotland.

Now by such remaining about the City of Coppinger and Arthington, they fell to
be acquainted together for some Years past.

These two made semblance, and so were Both zealous Professors of the Gospel,
and hot for Innovation.
holden to be Professors of the Gospel, neither of the coldest or lewk-warm
sort (as such do untruly term others, who be indeed godly wise, with a sober
moderation) but rather of those that more justly may be said, to be scalding
hot in desire of Innovation, which they falsely call Reformation. They
therefore standing thus affected, most willingly They consort with such who
spend their zeal in reproaching the Government Ecclesiastical.
sorted themselves in familiarity with such, as by their demeanor may seem to
repose a great part of their Christian Profession and Zeal in the only
reproacing, and odious traducing of Governors and Government Ecclesiastical.

These two having itching Ears, most usually They hear and follow chiefly such
Preachers as inveigh against and deprave the Established Ecclesiastical Polity,
and are for advancing that they call the Discipline.
heaped to themselves, and made choice to hear and follow such Preachers as
were thought fittest to feed their humor: Which Preachers with their sad
looks, frequent sighs abroad, long and vehement conceived Prayers, bitter and
plain Invectives in private, and privy depraving in public, of the Laws and
Policy Ecclesiastical, joined with their usual Speeches, besides sundry
infamous Libels and other Pamphlets spread already for advancing that
Government (which they strangely term The Discipline) may seem so to have
inflamed these two Persons, as that they thought this Discipline a worthy
Subject whereupon they should spend most of their Actions and Cogitations.

Their minds being thus prepared, it happened Some Preachers of the Discipline
prosecuted in the Star Chamber.
that some Preachers of this Discipline were begun to be proceeded with in the
most honorable Court of Star Chamber, about the same time that this Coppinger
(by means of one Giles Wigginton) came acquainted Coppinger brought acquainted
with Hacket by Wigginton a Puritanical Minister of Northamptonshire.
with William Hacket, the third Actor and chief Setter forth of this Tragedy.

Concerning the said Wigginton (because this also tends to the better
understanding of the whole Action) he was born or bred up in Oundel in
Northamptonshire (where Hacket dwelt) and he often resorted into that Country
by that occasion. He was not long since a Minister, and Vicar of Sedberghe and
Dent in the North parts, but for Wigginton some time Vicar in the North, for
his insolences and contempt against the Laws and Peace of the Church, deprived
ex Officio and Beneficio. Hacket lived at Oundle, Servant to Mr. Hussy,
afterward to Sir Thomas Tresham; a quarrelsome Fellow.
his intolerable Insolences and Contempts against Laws, and the Peace of the
Church, was both deprived of chat his Benefice, and deposed from his Ministry
by Authority of her Majesty's Commission for Causes Ecclesiastical, a man (by
report of such as know him best, and favor him not a little) whose zeal never
came behind knowledge, nor bold-hardy forwardness, at any time went after
discretion in him.

This Hacket had dwelt also by a long space in Oundel, where first he served
one Master Hussy an Esquire, by the space of ten Years; and after, for some
time, he served Sir Thomas Tresham, Knight: He was a notable bragging and
quarelsome Fellow, yet thought in truth to be but a very recreant Dastard.

He long together used one lewd and ungodly practice, which was to resort unto
He frequently resorted to Sermons to mock and carp at them.
Sermons (of purpose) to gibe, mock, and carp at them: And having a good Memory
(which was the only commendable part in him) he used in scoffing manner to
preach over again in Alehouses the Sermons that he had heard, most insisting
and sporting himself and others at such Passages thereof which pleased him
least, or whereat he imagined any likely matter of deriding might be gathered.

Whilst thus he served Master Hussy, he Married a Widow with Substance, but
wasted it by Idleness and Lewdness.
obtained (by his Master's countenance) the marriage of one Moreton's Widow, of
reasonable Substance, having also a good Farm in that Town. But he following
loose and licentious Company, and an idle course of life, without labor or
industry either to get or save, lewdly and riotously misspent and wasted in
short space all her Goods.

It fell so out, that at length he pretended Pretended from a Papist or Atheist
to be converted to the Truth, got intimately acquainted with Wigginton.
from a Papist or an Atheist, to be converted to Religion and knowledge of the
truth: At what time he grew to be of familiar and inward acquaintance with the
said Giles Wigginton, and was an especial Follower and Disciple of his, both at
public Sermons and private Conventicles. Of late times he was also consorted
in Partnership of Maltmaking with Wigginton: Their great acquaintance and
familiarity may appear by a Letter sent from Hacket unto him, the third of
March last, and by his lending unto Hacket of ten Pounds: The Superscription
is, To the Worshipful Minister of God's Word, M. Giles Wigginton at Newgate. In
the Letter thus he writes: M. Wigginton, I desire to communicate my Spirit at
large with you, but I know not your Keeper. And in the end thereof, thus: Good
M. Wigginton make my sound heart known to Master Cartwright, Master Snape,
Master Udall, Master Lord, etc.

By his and such others (like affected men's) Grew a forward Professor, and
great Railer against the Laws and Orders of the Church.
Instructions and Example of life and behavior, he so profited, that in short
space he proved one that professed with the forwardest, and practiced with the
frowardest. For falling as Fools do, from one extremity to another, Qui dum
vitant vitia, in contraria currunt, he grew to a most insolent, proud, and
contemptuous disdain of all Preachers and others whomsoever, that flew not his
pitch, or lay not to the level of his pretended zeal. But most gladly, and with
greatest felicity that might be, he used to spend his mouth largely in
Invectives, Railings and Contumelies against Bishops and other Governors of the
Church, and also against the Laws, Orders, and whole Government Ecclesiastical,
not sticking (as was probably suspected) to procure also sundry lewd infamous
Libels against them and other Preachers, etc. to be framed and set up
thereabouts.

His detestation of Ecclesiastical Orders Despised the Town-Minister for his
Conformity.
commanded was so great, that he could not endure to frequent the Sermons which
Ray the Minister of that Town did preach, because he seemed to him a little
more conformable in some few matters (by Authority established) than Hacket
liked of. Wherefore on Sabbath days Hacket usually did resort to a Place a Mile
off called Stoke (where the Minister fitted his Humor better) in company of
some of like strain to himself, and of certain light idle Gossips, whereof some
of the sincerest were said to love and like him so little, as that she could
oft-times be content to take the Meat off his Trencher, which he had cut for
himself, and to eat it up from him. But whenever this devout Slighted the
Divine Service.
Flock came so near to Stoke Church, as they might perceive the Minister to be
yet at Divine Service and Prayer; then they used to stay abroad and rest
themselves in the Green Churchyard there (without going into the Church) until
they heard the Psalm begun before Sermon, for fear lest they should be polluted
by those Prayers.

One most memorable Prank (above others) was played in Oundel by Hacket, which
is renowned far and near for the unmanly brutishness of it. It happened that M.
Hussy his Master fell at debate, and was offended with one Freckingham an
Artificer of the Town. This Freckingham had a Son which was a Schoolmaster, who
(as in nature he was bound) did take part with his Father. Now Hacket meeting
this Schoolmaster in an Alehouse or Inn, did lovingly (as seemed) signify unto
him how sorry he was, that there should be any breach betwixt his Master and
him the said Schoolmaster, entertaining him (that suspected no Treachery) with
such good Speeches, till spying an advantage, he so grasped both Freckingham
his Arms, as that he might easily hold him, and throw him to the ground. Thus
having gotten him down on the ground under him, He treacherously bit off a
man's Nose in a Quarrel.
Hacket most savagely and currishly bit off the poor Schoolmaster's Nose with
his teeth, which when he had so barbarously performed, both the said
Freckingham and one Clement (a cunning Surgeon) instantly desired the Nose of
him again, that whilst the Wound was fresh and green, it might be stitched on
and grow again (as they conceived it would) to avoid so foul and great
deformity: But the Canibal Varlet not only utterly refused so to part with it,
but held it up triumphantly, and showed it with great vauntery and glory, to
all that would behold it; and after (as some have reported) did in a most
spiteful and divelish outrage eat it up.

In process of time it happened that his Master fell out with him, and put him
from his Service (I think for no good Conditions) yet it is said that he was
retained afterward Retained in the Service of Sir Charles Morrison.
in service (by what means I know not) with a very worshipful Gentleman, Sir
Charles Morrison, Knight, Nephew to his first Master; and one of those against
whom he lately caused his two small Prophets so vilely to exclaim, and so
unworthily to charge, even openly in Cheatside.

Besides his former Virtues and good Qualities, Hacket a great Swearer and
Blasphemer in his Youth.
this Hacket was also a very great Swearer and Blasphemer of the Name of God in
his younger years; which course, when afterward, to retain the reputation of a
Professor of the Gospel (whereof he made great pretense) he was forced to
leave, he turned his single Oaths (in truth) into worse and more horrible,
joined with most fearful Imprecations Which after his pretended Conversion he
turned into areadful Execrations.
against himself, whenever he would make any Asseverations, wherein he
desired to be credited, as namely these: So God judge me, I renounce God, and
God confound and damn me, or do so, or so unto me, if this be not true: which
was so usual, and by long custom so inveterate in him, even till the time of
his apprehension, that in the midst of his counterfeit Holiness (whereby he
seduced Coppinger and Arthington) he often burst forth into this kind of
execration against himself, as an especial motive (amongst others) to have his
words to be better believed by them. Arthington noted this course of Hacket's
as a notable virtue in him, and a matter of rare zeal. His manner (says he) of
praying is as it were speaking to His strange Expressions in Prayer.
God face to face, denouncing his Judgments against himself, if he dissemble,
lie, or seek himself in any thing, but the honor of God only. He prayed so
confidently for Mistress H. that he charged God to have given her unto him, to
restore her to her former health and liberty every way, saying, Lord, according
to thy promise thou have power, and I have faith, therefore it shall come to
pass. This Mistress H. is a Gentlewoman of London, who pretends or fears to
be possessed with a Devil now fourteen years together.

Besides these he was given to quaffing and Addicted to Drunkenness and
lascivious Life.
drunkenness: Being not only a Maltster, but a Malt-worm, and was addicted also
to lascivious life with Women, which commonly accompanies the other vicious
Excess: For credit whereof his own Story or Legend (which himself endited as a
notbale Monument of his excellent Virtues and special Holiness) may give too
sufficient testimony: For therein he tells of many temptations in this kind
with Women, which (as himself confesses) he rejected not altogether, but went
further than either godliness or yet civil honesty would permit. But he
pretends that these Baits were offered and laid by his Enemies (who sought
matter against him) as Snares and Traps whereby to take his holiness tardy,
that belike was so hard to be entangled. Insomuch as Arthington in the
forefront of that History (which he did whilst he was yet seduced by Hacket)
does stamp this brand and censure upon it, That they were profane Speeches and
matters of Women, which he would not have set down, but that he could not
otherwise reveal the villainous practice which Hacket's Enemies intended for the
overthrow of the Gospel of Christ, as he most childishly and ridiculously
excused then the matter. For further proof and manifestation of his lascivious
Disposition, it is also informed from the Place of his Abode, that on a time
(under color of giving godly Counsel) he attempted to have wickedly ravished a
poor man's Daughter, whereupon he was forced to step aside out of the way for a
season.

Neither did the wickedness of this Wretch here rest it self: For he was
vehemently holden in suspicion for committing also of sundry Robberies.

But that which makes up the heap of Covers his Wickedness with Profession of
Religion, and zeal for Reformation.
all Wickedness, is this: That the sink of these Sins in him he always smoothly
covered and parieted over (especially for sundry late years) with a very rare
outward earnestness in profession of true Religion, and with a most entire (yea
burning) desire of reforming (forsooth) the Church and Commonwealth, by
establishing the Presbyterial Discipline, which he did imagine would prove like
the Box of Pandora, for it promises cure for all Maladies and Disorders.

But this his zeal and desire of Reformation, Which he then chiefly pretended
to after he had wasted his Substance.
begun then most of all to enkindle it self in him, and to break forth, after
that (by riotous mispending and licentious life) he had wasted the Wealth that
he had with the Widow, whom he married, whose hap was very hard to match with
him, albeit he made more of her than she desired, for he made the uttermost
penny. For then he begun He pretended to a Prophetic Spirit, and to miraculous
Works, in order to erecting the Discipline.
with counterfeit Holiness to set out himself (amongst such of the simpler sort
as had zeal without knowledge) to be a man endued with an extraordinary and
singular Spirit, such as (in old time) the Prophets and Holy Men of God were;
making show withal, as if he had some peculiar Gifts and Qualities, to be able
even to tell Secrets and work Miracles, which many believed; whereof some did
attribute them to Sorcery and Enchantments, but the simpler sort unto his rare
Spirit and Holiness.

For he trusted by this persuasion to get such credit with the unstable
Multitude, as that by their hands he might one day be able (whosoever should
withstand it) to bring his Purposes about, for erecting of such pretended
Discipline, to his own great estimation and advancement. In this vain and
seducing Humor he is reported (I know not how truly) to have traveled in the
North parts unto York: For among the simpler People (where he was not known) he
hoped by the Vizard of Holiness and Religion not a little to prevail in setting
forward his Designments. For which purpose he took upon him there the Office
and Spirit of St. John Affirmed at York to have the Office and Spirit of John
Baptist.
Baptist, affirming, that he was sent thither by God to prepare the way of the
Lord before his second coming to judgment. But the counterfeit holiness and
lewd seducing purpose of the Varlet being discovered unto some in Authority, he
was welcomed not with loss of his Head (as that holy man unjustly was, whom he
wickedly counterfeited) Being detected he was whipped out of the City.
but was well whipped and after banished that City.

This Medicine wrought not so effectually with him, as that it could terrify
him wholly from the like Attempts. For it is reported, that after this he
assayed again to put on the like Person or Mask at Lincoln, where Had the same
usage afterward at Lincoln.
he also found the same Cheer and Entertainment for his pains, as he received
before at York.

But this erroneous Opinion (whereby through self-love and illusion of the
Devil, he thought that he was reserved of God for Fancied himself reserved of
God for some great Work.
some great and excellent Work, being blown forward by the show of zeal, and of
an earnestness for such a Reformation) could not thus easily be quenched and
rooted out of him: the rather, for that by use and imitation of such as he most
followed and conversed with (though wholly otherwise he were unlettered) he had
grown to such a dexterity in conceiving of Extemporal Prayers, with bumbasted
and thundering words, as that Was an illiterate Fellow, but had acquired a
great dexterity in Extempore Prayers.
he was thereby marvailed at, and greatly magnified by some Brethren and
Sisters, as a man greatly vouchsafed with God, and adorned with rare and
singular Endowments from Heaven, so that through admiration of such supposed
Excellencies in him, he still continued to fancy unto himself, that he had rare
Gifts and an extraordinary Calling. For he gave out to diverse that he was a
Prophet Was much admired, and affirmed himself a Prophet of God's Vengeance.
of God's Vengeance, where his Mercy is refused: Saying, That if Reformation be
not established in England this present Year, three great Plagues shall fall
upon it, the Sword, Pestilence and Famine. He pretended also that God had
revealed unto him most wonderful things, Which he would (he said) utter to none
but such as himself knew to be very resolute in God's Cause: But he told unto
Arthington and Coppinger, that there should be no more Popes hereafter.

Upon confidence of which Spirit and Gifts in himself, in Places of his resort,
with an intemperate and fanatical boldness, With Fanatical boldness uttered
seditious Speeches against the Queen, etc.
(even as if he had sufficient warrant for it) he dared oftentimes to utter
most vile, lewd, and seditious Speeches both of the Queen's Majesty, and of
certain the greatest Subjects whom he thought to be hinderers of his Practices.
Which his Outrages being once or twice brought unto the Ears of certain in
Authority in Northamptonshire, and elsewhere (not sufficiently acquainted with
the strange Humors of such Anabaptistical Wizards and Fanatical Sectaries) and
perhaps unwilling to let his words be drawn so far against him, as they justly
might; they were therefore content to attribute them to some spice of phrensy
in him, and in that Was corrected in Northamptonshire as Phrantick.
quality to be corrected, rather than to construe them to have proceeded from
any settled and advised malice, as the event has since made most manifest they
did. For in the whole course besides of other the Speeches and Actions of his
Life, both before and after, no alienation of mind or madness could be noted in
him.

At one of the times that he was brought in question for his Seditious, and
indeed Treasonable Speeches, it happened that he was convented before that
honorable Counselor Sir Walter Mildmay, who commanded him (for more safeguard)
to be watched the night before he was to be conveyed to Northampton Gaol, at
what time the counterfeit dissembling Wretch willed Put into Northampton Gaol.
his Wife to let him lie alone in the Chamber that was to be watched, for that
he had to confer with one that would come unto him that night: Insinuating unto
her, as if he were to have at that time some special Conferences with God, or
some Angel. Whereupon Pretended to have conference with God or some Angel.
it was straightway blown abroad thereabouts amongst the credulous multitude of
those, that either favored him for supposed Zeal, or feared him for Sorceries,
that (albeit there were no Candles used) yet there was a great light (that
night) seen shining in his Chamber: so that by this Tale the erroneous Opinions
before conceived of him, were greatly increased.

After he had lien in Northampton Gaol a good space, and was come unto his
Trial (in the absence of Sir Walter from thence) the matter is thought to have
been so handled by some (who in favor of his forwardness, would needs
interpret his Felonies to be but Follies) as that (no Evidence being given
against him) he was dismissed for that pull; upon Bond entered for his
appearance, when he should be called for again.

Now Hacket (a man thus qualified as ye Wigginton brings him acquainted with
Coppinger.
hear) was of all other men thought by Wigginton most fit and worthy to be
recommended, and straightly linked unto Coppinger's Familiar acquaintance; as
most aptly consorting with his humorous Conceit; long ere this apprehended by
him, whereof it seems Wigginton was not ignorant, nor misliked.

Their acquaintance was wrought in this An Account thereof out of Hacket's
History, Arthington's Prophesies. Both Manuscripts.
manner, as Hacket testifies in that Discourse (which they since call Hacket's
History enlarged) endited by himself, written by Coppinger, and afterward
copied out fair by Arthington, as it should have gone to the Press, being
annexed to Arthington's Prophesy. For there it is said: That the Lord brought
Hacket to London (about the beginning of Easter Term last) to see what would be
done against Job Throgmorton, and partly to reckon with M. Wigginton about the
making of malt between them together: At what time Wigginton said, That there
was a Gentleman in the City, a very good man; but Hacket (as the Lord knows)
did not think that there had been one godly man in the Land; and supposed the
Twelfth Psalm belonged to this time. When Wigginton was describing the Man, and
the matter that he was entering into, viz. that the Man whom he spoke of, had a
message to say to his Sovereign, concerning some practice intended against her,
from dealing wherein, the Preachers in London had wonderfully discouraged him:
then Hacket answered thus: Did you so also? No, says Wigginton: Then said
Hacket, encourage him in any wise: for what know you what matter it is he has
to say? Hereupon Wigginton sent for the said Edmund Coppinger to come to the
Counter to speak with him; who (by God's Providence) came forthwith, and
Wigginton willed them to take acquaintance one of the other, assuring Coppinger
that he knew Hacket to be a man truly fearing God, and such a Person, as by
whose Conference God might minister some comfort to Coppinger: Whereupon they
two, (viz. Coppinger and Hacket) went from thence presently unto Hacket' s
Chamber, at the Sign of the Castle without Smithfield-Bars: So soon as they
were entered the Chamber, Coppinger desired that before any speech should pass
between them, they might first pray to God together, which they did: Hacket
speaking to the Lord first. After which Prayer, Coppinger delivered unto
Hacket, how he had been very strangely and extraordinarily moved by God to go
to her Majesty, and to tell her plainly, that the Lord's pleasure was, that she
must (with all speed) reform her self, her Family, the Commonwealth, and the
Church: And that the Lord had further told him, by what means all the same
should be done; but that Secret he would not then deliver unto Hacket. Then
Coppinger also prayed into God, desiring him, if he would be with him, and
bless that Business (which he had committed to his charge) that then he would
both furnish him with Gifts fit for so weighty an Action, and knit the heart of
Hacket and his so together, as David' s and Jonathan' s, Moses' s and Aaron' s:
For answer hereof, Hacket took further time till the morning, at which time in
the morning (a Prayer being first made) Hacket laid all the Lord's business
(which was to be done by himself) upon Coppinger' s back; telling him the Lord
had appointed him to it, and would stand with him in it. Thus far in this Point
goes that Discourse.

But long before this time of their two first Acquaintances, Coppinger (upon
his return forth of Kent, in Michaelmas Term last) had signified unto
Arthington, and to one T. Lancaster, a Schoolmaster in Shoe-lane, (both being
of his familiar Acquaintance, and whom he had requested to fast and pray
Coppinger pretends to a secret Mystery revealed to him relating to the
Discipline, and the Queen's repentance about it.
with him, for success in obtaining a Widow) that God had showed him, the said
Coppinger, great favor, by revealing such a secret Mystery unto him as was
wonderful, being in substance thus much, viz. That he knew a way how to bring
the Queen to repentance, and to cause all her Council and Nobles to do the like
out of hand, or else detect them to be Traitors that refused: All they by such
Repentance, meaning and understanding (as it seems) the erecting of their
fanciful Discipline. For this Phrase being usual with them in Conferences of
this matter, he thereby sufficiently declared his mind to them, and they well
understood what was meant, without further a-do.

Now it had been inconvenient that Coppinger He imparts it to Wigginton.
should all this while conceal this Mystery (which he imparted unto them, and
after to Hacket) from Wigginton, who brought them acquainted together, unto
whom he so often resorted, and so highly above all other Preachers esteemed, for
his resolute dealings in God's matters, as he terms them; whom he also after
advouched unto Arthington, as an irrefragable Witness to be persuaded by, that
would justify the truth of Hacket's Torments, and whom he also knew more often
busied for attaining of that Discipline (which himself also labored for) than
perhaps for Heaven it self. And you see that he had accordingly done it,
Wigginton not discouraging him therein.

This Proposition so made by Coppinger, Arthington and Lancaster mislike the
matter as impracticable.
Arthington says, that he and Lancaster misliked, as a matter impossible by
Coppinger to be done, but by the Lord Jesus only, and such, whereof the issue
could not fall out well any way, and so put him off for the first time; not
understanding in what manner, and by what special means, Coppinger conceived
that such repentance should be wrought in the Queen's Majesty, and in others.

The manner and other circumstances of the first revealing of this pretended
Mystery, Coppinger himself at large declares in a Letter written the 4th of
February last, unto T. C. in Prison: The occasion of writing it, The manner and
circumstances of revealing the Mystery, Coppinger declares in a Letter to
Cartwright, then in Prison, desiring an Answer to some Questions.
he there says, was the said T. C's offer to take knowledge (by writing) from
him of such matter, as might induce him to suppose himself to have received
some hope of special favor from God, to some special use: But yet, without
warrant from the Word, direction of the Holy Spirit, and approbation of the
Church, he was (he said) most unwilling to enter into so great an Action. The
Letter is long, but to this effect: That upon some extraordinary humiliation of
him, he, with some other, and a Guide of their Exercise, joined in a Fast:
Their Guide (in the Evening) spoke of the use of Fasts, etc. and then willed
the others to add to that, which he had delivered, either for the general, or
particular Causes, which moved them to humble themselves: That a great part of
the said Night Coppinger found himself very extraordinarily exercised, etc. by
such a motive, as he could not well describe; partly comforted with a wonderful
Zeal, which he found himself to have, to set forth God's glory any ways, which
lawfully he might enter into; partly cast down by such a burning fire of
Concupiscence, as in his greatest strength of body, he had not found the like:
That the next day he riding into the Country (as he rid) fansied to himself,
that there was leave given him to speak to God in a more familiar manner, than
at any time before: And also persuaded himself, that God's Spirit did give him
many strange Directions, wherein the Lord would use him to do service to his
most glorious Majesty, and to his Church. Upon which, he had thought to have
returned presently back, and to have left his intended Journey: But going on,
and after being returned back, he imparted to his former Fast-fellows the work
of God in him, and desired they might again join in the like, (which he (with
some other) went forward with, to their comfort, but without their chief Guide,
for he refused to join. Hereupon (he says) that he was Note.
again stirred up to such business of such importance, as in the eyes of flesh
and blood, were likely to bring much danger to himself, and unlikely to bring
any good success to the Church of God: Hereof he writ to some Preachers out of
the Realm, and to some in the Realm: At length he writ hereof to one in the
City that was silenced: Who resolved him, that God did yet work extraordinarily
in some Persons to some special uses. Hereupon he obtained this Preacher's
consent to join with him, and about four others, on the Dord's-Day, in a Fast:
Which Day was chosen, that they might not binder their worldly Affairs in the
Week; and that they used means to have notice given to some of the Preachers in
Prison of the Day of their humiliation, desiring them to commend to God in
their Prayers the holy Purposes, which any fearing God, should (in time) Note.
attempt to take in hand, by seeking to bring glory to God, and good to the
Church: That in their Prayers at the said Fast, he and others did beseech God,
That if he had appointed to use any of them to do any special service to him
and his, that to that end he would extraordinarily call them, that he would
seal up his, or their such Calling, by some special manner, by his Holy Spirit,
and give such extraordinary Graces and Gifts as are fit for so weighty an
Action. The Night following (he says) he thought (in his sleep) that he was
carried into Heaven; and there being wonderfully astonished with the Majesty of
God, and brightness of his glory, he made a loud, and most strange noise,
whereby he awaked his Brother that lay with him, and some in the next Chamber.
Since which time (says he) I find every day more and more comfort: And
suppose, that there is somewhat in me, which my self am not so fit to judge of:
And therefore I desire the Church (I mean your self, and such as you shall name
unto me, because I cannot come to you without danger to your self and me) to
look narrowly into me: And if I be thought to be any way misled, I crave sharp
censuring: If I be guided by God's Spirit to any good end, as hereafter shall
be adjudged, I shall be ready to acquaint you and them with generalities and
particularities, so far forth as you and they be desirous to look into. At this
time the end of my writing is only to acquaint you with the occasions of mine
entering into this great Action, and to have your further answer to some
Questions, wherein I desire to be Note.
resolved; with your direction also, what hereafter I am to signify to your
self, concerning the matter it self. Of the Questions wherein he thus desired
resolution, I do find two Copies of Coppinger's own hand: The one more large
and confused, the other briefer, and in better order, but both to one purpose,
which to have set down, may give good light (in mine opinion) to this Narration.

The Questions to be resolved, viz.

1. Whether there be (in these days) any extraordinary The Questions to be
resolved are, 1. Whether there be not extraordinary Persons in the Church in
these days, as Apostles, Evangelists, etc. 2. Whether their Call be not
immediate from God, and manifested to the Church by extraordinary Gifts and
Graces? 3. Whether the Church may examine the same? and in what manner? 4.
Whether may the same be found in a Country where the Gospel is truly preached,
but the true Discipline not established, but oppugned? 5. If no extraordinary
Calls to be expected, but where there is waste in the Church; and if there be
waste in the Church where Prince and Magistrate oppose the Discipline, Whether
may not an extraordinary Call be expected of some to deal with the Magistrate
in the Name of God to Execute the True Discipline? 6. Where the true Discipline
is wanting, whether a Pastor thrust on the People without their choice have a
lawful Call?
Workers and Helpers to his Church, either Apostles, Evangelists, or Prophets,
where need requires, more or less? or Nazarites, Healers, Admonishers, in any
special sort?

2. If there be, is not their Calling immediate from God, and his Spirit, a
Seal unto their Spirits, through which they have such excellent gifts and
graces of Wisdom, Knowledge, Courage, Magnanimity, Zeal, Patience, Humility,
etc. as do manifest such their Calling to the Church?

3. If such Graces and Gifts shall appear, whether may the Church enter into
consideration of the success which God may please to give, yea or no? If they
may, in what manner are they to proceed with such a Person, extraordinarily
called?

4. If it shall be confessed, that there may be until the end of the world
immediate Callings from God: Whether may the same be found in a Country where
the Gospel is truly preached, and the Sacraments (in some sort) truly
administered, though not universally, but here and there, not perfectly, but in
part: And where the true Discipline is not established, but oppugned by the
public Magistrates, etc.

5. If it shall be answered, that no extraordinary Callings are to be looked
for, but where there is a waste of the Church, whether can it be truly said,
that there is a waste of the Church, where the Prince and chief Magistrates are
ignorant of the necessity of the Discipline, opposing themselves against it,
persecuting such as seek it: By means whereof, all wicked Persons whatsoever be
admitted to public exercise of the Word, and to the Lord's Table: Whether (I
say) may it be hoped for, that God for his glory's sake, and the good of the
Church) may extraordinarily call some, by giving him a Spirit above others, to
deal with the Magistrate in the name of God: To provide that the People may
every where be taught, and true Discipline executed, where the People already
have knowledge?

6. Whether, where there be wanting Pastors, Doctors, Elders, Deacons, and
Widows, etc. in the Church established, and only a Minister thrust upon the
People to be their Pastor, without their choice or liking: Whether it can be
truly said, a man so placed (though furnished with all inward Gifts and Graces
of God's Spirit fit for that Calling) has the lawful and perfect Calling of a
Minister, or no?

To these I find Wigginton's Resolution Wigginton's Resolutions of Coppinger's
Questions in the affirmastive.
made under his own hand, to this effect briefly, viz. That God has, does, and
will, from time to time raise up extraordinary Workers, and Helpers, to his
Church, a Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets, where need requires, and as
Nazarites, Healers, Admonishers in special sort, and such like; that these
cannot be known to themselves, but by God's Spirit; nor to others, but by godly
effects: That he who is so called, need not to ask many Questions of mortal men
for his Calling, yet must be approved godly before he enterprise his Work,
especially if he have been a known wicked Person before.

That where the chief Rulers of any House or Country, or the most part of any
House or Country be ignorant, and untaught, there it may be truly said, that
House or Country is out of frame, desolate, or waste: much more then, when one
part of Thirty or Forty is not well framed, rightly taught, or guided, etc. in
that House or Country.

And in another Paper of his own Hand, he avoucheth such extraordinary
Callings, by Such extraordinary Callings justified by two Examples.
example of one that cried up and down the Streets in Jerusalem, before it was
besieged; and by another, which (he says) the last Parliament came forth of
Yorkshire to London, saying, he was charged from God by an Angel in a Vision,
to signify great Vengeance from God upon the whole Realm, for certain great
Enormities by himself (in another man's person) untruly and seditiously
surmised. So that hereby it appears, that Wigginton is the silenced Preacher,
meant by Coppinger in the former Letter, who resolved him of extraordinary
Callings in those days; who consented to fast and pray with him and others, for
a Seal, etc. of such Calling; and who (as he afterward affirmed to Hacket)
would not discourage Coppinger in his Purposes.

This Conceit hereupon waxing stronger Coppinger waxes stronger in his Conceit.
and stronger in Coppinger, he often came to Lancaster's House (where also
Arthington then lay) to confer with them; specially to know the certainty,
whether there were any extraordinary Calling in this last Age, and how the same
might be tried? They both told him (as is now said) that they were mere
ordinary men, not able to resolve him, much less to take trial of his Gifts,
and therefore willed him to keep his Secrets to himself, or else to go to
others, that could better judge of them. Whereupon Coppinger Seeks direction
from Diverse Puritanical Preachers, is assisted by Penry.
sought for direction to diverse Preachers, and others in London, and elsewhere,
of what settled disposition may easily be conjectured: For resolution also
herein (by the help of his diligent Fellow Laborer in this business, John ap
Henry alias a Penry) he solicited the Reformed Preachers (so these Fellows
term them) of some Foreign Parts.

It may also be gathered by some Letters written by him to a Gentleman near
about a great Counselor, that he bare the said Gentleman in hand, as if he had
intelligence touching some matter of great service to her Majesty, and the
Commonwealth, to be imparted to the said Counselor. For in the Copy of a
Letter of his, of the 28th of January last, he thus writes. Your signification
Coppinger' s Letters to a Counselor, pretending some service to the Queen.
of some service, which you heard I was desirous to do, in discharge of my duty
to her Majesty, may give his Lordship cause to suspect that I honor him not so
much as I do. Your revealing thereof to his Lordship, I do assure you, does
much trouble me, because I am not furnished with such matter as I wish. My
meaning was therefore to have forborne his Lordship's trouble, until I had
learned out that which my heart desires to do, etc. And in another Letter of
his written to the same Gentleman the 1st of February after, in this sort: If
you think he looks to have me come to his Lordship, (about any thing which
you have put into his head) let me understand from you when I may attend his
Lordship's pleasure, which being known, I will (according to my duty) do it,
though I wish my self to be freed, until I may know that which may give his
Lordship cause to think of me, as I do desire to deserve, etc.

Now that this matter was the same whereof he desired such resolution, may be
gathered by a Note of his own Hand, set upon the back of these two Copies,
thus: viz. By these Letters it may appear, what care I had In his Letters to
the Preachers pretends some service to God and his Church, meaning in both the
same matter.
to carry my self in this Action. But in his Letters (about this matter)
written unto Preachers, and others of his own humor, he goes more plainly to
work, and declares another purpose, and that it is a special service by him to
be done, to God and his Church, and so no Civil Matter, as he elsewhere
pretends.

For I find by a Letter of another Gentleman P. W. a Lay Gentleman, his Letter
to Coppinger, encouraging him to go on in his Work.
of the Laity, dated the 25th of January last, and written unto Coppinger in
answer: that Coppinger had sent for him up to receive advice of him in some
matters of importance, tending to the true Service of God, wherein he was
laboring: In the end whereof are these words, viz. You are in a plentiful
Soil, where you may use the advice of many godly wise: Use the benefit thereof:
And then (as Joshua said) be bold, and of a good courage: Fear not to be
discouraged, for God, even the mighty God, will protect, and defend you.

In his soliciting the Preachers to take trial of his Gifts and extraordinary
Calling, it appears he used some more plainness, without much disguising of
the quality of the Action, which he intended, and likewise how faintly he was
discouraged from it by them. For in a Letter of his unto T. L. written the 29th
of January last, he reports, that M. E. (a Preacher) most Christianly, The
Preachers advise him to Caution; but do not discourage, nor reprove him.
wisely, and lovingly persuaded him to be careful and circumspect over himself:
To take heed lest he were deceived by the subtilty of Satan, and so misled;
whereby he might endanger himself both for his Liberty, Estate and Credit, and
also be an hinderance to the great Cause, which he would seem to be most
desirous to further; but Note.
withal, the said M. E. concluded, that he would be loath to quench the Spirit
of God in him, or to hinder his Zeal.

About this time and matter, Coppinger writ also another Letter to T. C. which
thing (besides the Letter it self) appears also by a Letter of his, written
the 24th of February last, to one M. H. The whole tenor Note. Coppinger' s
Letter to Cartwright about some special service to God and his Church; he
fancied himself called for.
of the Letter unto T. C. is (in mine Opinion) meet to be here inserted, in
many respects, viz. Right Reverend Sir, I have with much grief been put back
from doing some special service to God, and to his Church, which I hope time
will manifest, that I am appointed for: Which if it had been done by Enemies,
it should not much have troubled me: But being done by Persons as much regarded
by me, as flesh and blood can regard men, it goes near unto me. From you I
received this Message, That I should attempt nothing but by advice of those
whom you would procure to counsel me: This was done from you in the name of the
Lord of Heaven and Earth, and therefore I obey it with great care and
conscience, expecting at your hands, that Monday, being the day appointed for
conference, that it may hold; that I may be justified in my course, or
condemned. The danger that Note.
some stand in for their lives, is not unknown: And if I had not been let, I
durst have ventured my life to have procured their release ere now. God help
us: I see Wisdom, Zeal, Courage, and Love are seen but in few, and those who
would gladly use those Graces and Gifts which God has given them, cannot: But
God sees what is best to be done, and he will by contrary effects bring to
pass whatsoever pleases him. If you will answer my last Questions, there may
much use be made of them. I desire them as much in regard of others, as my
self, who are resolved of diverse things, whereof I crave to be resolved, which
I do to good purpose. And as you commanded me (in the name of God) to be wise
and circumspect, and to deal by counsel, so, (as I may) I command you in the
name of God, that you advise the Preachers to deal speedily and circumspectly,
lest some blood of the Saints be Note.
shed, which must needs bring down vengeance from Heaven upon the Land. Return
this Letter, I beseech you, to me, that I may show it (amongst other things)
when the meeting shall be, and commend me and my Purposes to God in your holy
Prayers, that they may so far be blessed, as himself is the director of them:
God keep us ever his, this 14th of February. There is also this Postscript. I
am so full of worldly business, as I have no time to attend this weighty
Action, but do only weight upon God for the direction of his Spirit, saving my
heart and soul are still mindful hereof, and to morrow (by God's grace) I will
humble my self before his Majesty in fasting and prayer, and hope that God will
stir up some other to join with me in spirit, though few or none in person do,
only one I am assured of, the Prisoners know it: I leave it to them to join or
Note.
not, as God moves them; but if ever men will fast and pray, I think it is now
more than time to do it. The Superscription was this: To my very loving and
reverend Friend, Master C.

He dealt also (about this matter) with another Gentleman of the Laity, in one
of J. T. a Lay Gentleman, his Letter to Coppinger, intimating caution about
some singular Course or special Practice.
whose Letters written in answer to Coppinger's, the 18th of the fifth Month
(meaning thereby May) I find these words of some mark. I confess (says he) I
heard some buz abroad of a sole and singular course, that either you or some
other had plotted in his head. And a little after thus: I would wish you, and
all that bear good will to the holy Cause in this perilous Age of ours, to take
both your eyes in your hands (as they say) and to be sure of your ground and
Strive to put in execution.
warrant before you strive to put in execution.

Besides these and some others, he instanted both by word and Letters (in
Easter Term last) about this business, a certain Gentleman. In his first Letter
to the said Gentleman, dated the 19th of May last, Coppinger promises to him
in the name of the Coppinger comfort a Gentleman censured in Star Chamber
for the Cause.
Lord, a recompense in the life to come, for that in the Star Chamber he feared
God more than Man, in such a glorious Action, so pleasing to God, so behoveful
to his Church, which shall also remain of record here to all posterity. And a
little after thus: If after your own holy private Prayer you find any desire of
speech with me, let me entreat you, either to send this Letter to M.
Cartwright, or rather (if you can) carry it unto him, etc. The second Letter
which he writ to the said Lawyer the 21st of May (they having in the mean time
conferred together) was thus word by word. Let thy Spirit (O gracious Father)
direct us now and for ever, in all our ways, especially in those, whereby
greatest honor may redound to thy glorious Majesty, most benefit to thy
Church, and most danger to thine Enemies.

Good Sir, and my loving Brother in the Lord, though such as are admitted to
consult with God, and have by prayer and meditation much familiarity and
acquaintance with his holy Majesty, need not doubt of good success in all
things which he sets them a work in, (though Satan and his Vassals cross
their course, and hinder their labor by all the means they can) yet is it also
necessary that while we remain in the fellowship and communion of the Saints,
that we communicate one with another, that as loving Children we may all join
together, to help each other, to be doers of our heavenly Father's will here on
Earth, as the Angels do it in the Heavens. The conscience which I had hereof,
enforced me to write unto you lately, and the like moved you to speak with me
upon that Letter. And truly I did observe many things (in that little time we
spent together) were said and done, which might move either of us to praise our
good God, and to cheer us up, to further so holy an Action as now is in Note.
hand, which must needs speed well in the end, because it is the Lord's own
work. And if we adventure our selves to do him service here, he will reward
elsewhere. You may be bold, for you have the warrant of the Word, the allowance
of the State, and you walk in your own Calling: But I am to be fearful and
circumspect, because the Dangers I enter into be infinite, my Course misliked
(though unknown) because it is extraordinary; which Callings be ceased in all
men's opinion of judgment, and have not (of long time) been heard of, or to be
hoped for, but where the Word is not preached at all, or the Church in a great
waste, which no body dare affirm our Church of England to be. Wherefore it
seems that every step that I shall make herein, shall be upon thorns, and
therefore I am to fear pricking: Yet for all this I am not without hope,
neither is the same grounded but by good warrant. The end why I write unto you,
is this, to entreat you to give thanks to those holy men all on my behalf, who
are now in question. I have reaped much benefit from them, by their carriage
toward me, though they know it not: For I durst not (in regard of danger which
might grow Note.
to them) visit any of them, since I found my self carried with a zeal to do
somewhat in the same Cause, for which they suffer. If by some effects hereafter
I may show it, that is it which I desire to do, and in the mean time do what I
can to persuade the Saints, that in this Action I seek God's glory, and not
mine own. I have been heretofore put back and dissuaded from attempting any
thing (lest I marred all) by the wisest, the learnedest, the zealousest and
holiest Preachers of this City, gene Causes and weighty Reasons moving
thereunto. But yet this will not make me leave it, but still I am enforced (by
little and little) to labor to make my self fit to take upon me the managing
of it. Wherefore, if it please you to show the other Letter and this, and
beseech them from me to lay them before the Lord, when they shall meet and join
together in prayer: And if the Lord's Spirit shall assure their Spirits, that
he has been, is, and will be with me in this Action (how hard soever it
seems to be) let me by their means be vouchsafed this favor, that I may be
allowed conference with the Preachers of the City: which Suit I make not for
that I would seek to have approbation from them, or any other living Creature,
but from God himself: Or that I purpose to do that which heretofore I have been
advised unto; namely, acquaint them with the Courses (which I purpose by God's
assistance to Note.
take in hand) whereby great danger might grow to them, and little good to me:
But that my carriage toward them, may witness unto them the humility of my
mind, and lowliness of my spirit, and care and conscience not to enter into the
matter, without offer to have my Gifts examined; and if they shall be supposed
to be such as the Church may have use of, then let all holy means be used,
which shall be advised to be fit to be done in such a dangerous time, and
weighty Action. So beseeching God to govern us in all our ways, and preserve us
in all our dangers, and supply us with whatsoever we stand in need of, I humbly
and heartily commend you to God, this 21st day of May, 1591.

The effect of the Speeches which Coppinger Coppinger incourageth the said
Gentleman to persevere in defense of the Cause. He declares to him his
Revelations and extraordinary Gifts and Calling touching the Reformation of the
Church.
had with him at their Conference (as the said Gentleman himself reported) was
to commend the Cause of the Preachers committed, to encourage him to the
defense of it; adding, that it was the truth of God, and that in the end it
would prevail. Then the said Coppinger began to declare unto him his
Revelations, his great fasting and prayer, and how God had endued him with an
extraordinary grace of Prayer, Persuasion or Prophecy: And that God had
appointed him (as he was persuaded) to reveal the will of God touching the
reformation of his Church, that he had an extraordinary Calling to do good to
the Church, and what several conflicts he had in himself before he yielded to
this extraordinary motion or calling from God. Therefore his Request was, That
by He desires that his Gifts and Calling may be tried and allowed by the
Preachers.
the said Gentleman's means, his Gifts and Calling might be tried and allowed
by those godly Preachers, etc. What the Preachers and others that were
conferred with, answered to Coppinger herein, and whether more dutifully to the
Estate, than warily; so as they might neither (as they thought) endanger
themselves, nor kill or discourage the Zeal of that their Brother, in so
pretended holy a Cause, may partly by that which is before spoken appear, and we
may then believe them when they shall tell us the whole truth thereof.

But how slender and cold discouragement A cold Answer from some.
he found with some Preachers of London (with whom he dealt) touching his
fantastical extraordinary Calling, and dangerous Plots, may also appear by
these words found in a Letter of his, viz. Good Master L. as Master E's former
carriage in this Action (which stands me much upon to deal advisedly in) did
somewhat trouble me, so his Christian and loving Answer (delivered now by you
from him unto me) does much comfort me, though by reason of some particular
business (which I must necessarily follow) I cannot attend till Friday in the
Afternoon, or Saturday any part of the day. And after in the same Letter, thus:
Satan by his Angelical wisdom (which he still retains) does many times
prevail with the holiest to make them fear good success in the best Causes, in
regard of the lets and hindrances which himself lays in the way. It cannot be
denied but that the Cause is good, which I desire to be an Actor in: But it is
said by some, that it is impossible that I should be fit to meddle therein. So
that here a Christian A further Conference. The Course not misliked, but
Success only doubted from his unfitness.
and loving Answer to his great comfort is given, further conference by speech
is offered, and the Course not so much misliked, as the Success only is doubted
by reason of his unfitness that was to be an Actor in it.

But what Resolution herein was also returned from the Preachers of Foreign
Parts to this Case of Conscience propounded by Coppinger, may hereby (not
unprobably) be gathered. Arthington at one of his Examinations confessed, that
Penry sent a Letter unto him forth of Scotland, wherein he signified, Penry
writes to A thington from Scotland, that Reformation must be set up in England.
that Reformation (for so they speak) must shortly be erected in England: And
herein he said, that he took Penry to be a Prophet. Now it is sure that Penry
conveyed himself privily into England, and was lurking about London at the
self-same time when these other Prophets arose in Cheapside, attending (as
seems) the fulfilling of this his Prophecy also by their means.

How dutifully and advisedly those that be Subjects have dealt, which (having
intelligence hereof) did conceal it, till it burst forth of it self, with
apparent danger to her Majesty and the whole State, may thus be The concealing
of this Design dangerous to the State.
gathered. For by this Conceit of Coppinger's (you hear) it is pretended and
surmised, that a commendable Cause, a Cause to be defended, yea the very truth
of God, (which must prevail) is by the State suppressed and kept under: That it
is the will of God to have such a Reformation: That impeachment of it is
offered by the Queen, Counsel and Nobles: That this is a great sin meet to be
repented of by them: That they must be brought to this repentance: That the
penalty against any of them that refuse to be brought, is to be detected as
Traitors, an offense deserving death: That this must be done out of hand: That
the will of God (in great favor for the good of his Church) was revealed to
him in this behalf, being a man of much fasting, prayer, rare gifts, a
Coppinger calls it the Cause and Truth of God, which must go or, and to oppose
it is a Sin deserving death. That this was revealed to him as a Prophet, and
not to be discredited.
Prophet, an extraordinary man, with an extraordinary Calling; such as was not
to be judged of, or discerned by mere ordinary men, and whereinto he entered not
rashly, or on a sudden, but after many conflicts with himself before his
yielding to God's extraordinary motion and calling: But submitting himself
nevertheless, to have his Gifts and Calling tried and allowed of, by the best
reformed Preachers, and therefore not worthy to be suspected, or discredited:
That the way to bring them to this repentance was a secret Mystery, such as
those Preachers and others whom he conferred with (albeit The Preachers thought
the ways of effecting of it dangerous, and refused to be made acquainted with
them, but consent he should run the hazard.
they held it a work to be wished at God's hands) yet by his talk gathered the
manner of bringing it in, to be so dangerous, as that they feared the success,
and refused to be made acquainted with the particular ways and means which he
had plotted to effect it. Thereby making choice rather that Coppinger should
venture to put it in practice (if he remained resolute herein, which they found
by him) of what dangerous consequence soever such a way might be, than that
they, by bewraying of him to Authority, should be any means to break off and
prevent his Resolution, or quench his Zeal. And thus (with opinion of safety to
themselves) they merchandized the hazard of their Friend's life, or else the
rearing of Sedition in the Realm, with the hope that secretly they nourished,
to have the Discipline (which they dream of) erected.

Thus Coppinger (remaining still more confirmed Coppinger brought acquainted
with Hacket and Arthington.
and settled in this vein) by his Pewfellow Wigginton, about Easter-Term last,
being (as is aforesaid) brought acquainted with Hacket (as with a most holy
man) soon after would needs bring Arthington also acquainted with him, as one,
whom (upon so small knowledge) he had observed to be a very rare man. For this
purpose he sent for Arthington to Dinner or Supper unto Lawson's House, near to
Paul's Gate, where Arthington met first with Hacket, together with another,
whom he calls a godly man: Of whose ordinary talk then had, Arthington liked
very well; but had (as he says) at that time no further conference with him.
After which time, Arthington discontinued from the City, Arthington retires
into Yorkshire.
and remained in Yorkshire until Trinity Term, leaving Hacket and Coppinger
behind him, plotting of their purposes together: What Purposes they had, what
Counsel they entered into, and what Conferences they entertained betwixt
themselves, and with others, by the Events ensuing, will best be discovered.
After this Hacket stayed Hacket goes also into the Country.
not long in London, but desired Coppinger at his departure, to write unto him
what succels J. T. had, and withal assuring him, that whenever he should
write for him, he the said Hacket would streightway come up again. Hereupon
Coppinger writ unto him first Coppinger sends for him to London, and provides
him Chamber and Board.
at the end of Easter Term, and after again very earnestly to be at London
three days before the beginning of Trinity Term last, but he could not be here
so soon by three or four days. When he was come, he lodged the first night at
Istington; but sent his Horse down again into the Country, as purposing to stay
long in London. Then after a night or two (one of which nights he lodged at the
said Lawson's House by Wiggington's direction) he was provided of a Chamber and
of his Board at one Ralph Kaye's House, in Knight-rider-street, by Coppinger's
means, and at his Charges, for he cost Coppinger there Eleven Shillings by the
Week: But Kayes waxing weary of him (in part for that he seared Hacket was a
Conjurer or Witch, in that the Camomil (he says) in his Garden where Hacket
either trod or sat, did wither up the next night, and waxed black) therefore
Coppinger provided at his own charges likewise another Room for him, at one
Walker's House by Broken Wharf, where he remained until his apprehension.

Whilst Hacket was at Kaye's House, he Hacket leaves the Queen out of his
Prayers.
used before and after Meals to pray (as seemed) most devoutly and zealously,
but never for the Queen's Majesty. Hacket also told Kayes, That if all the
Divines in England should pray for Rain, if he said the word, yet it should not
rain.

The first of the aforesaid Letters which Coppinger writ unto Hacket to move
him to come up, does contain matter of note besides, not unfit to be known.
Brother Hacket Coppinger' s Letter to Hacket.
(says he) the burden which God has laid upon me (you being the Instrument
to make me bold and courageous, where I was fearful and faint) is greater than
I can bear without your help here, though I have it where you are. The workings
of his holy spirit in me, since your departure, be mighty and great: My zeal of
spirit burns like fire, so that I cannot contain my self, and conceal his
mercies toward me. And a little after in the same Letter, Master Thr. is put
off till the next Term, the zealous Preachers (as it is thought) are to be in
the Star Chamber to morrow, the Lord by his holy Spirit be with them: My self
(if I can get in) am moved to be there: And I fear (if Sentence with severity
be given) I shall Note.
be forced (in the name of the great and fearful God of Heaven) to protest
against it: My desire is, that you have up so soon as you can; your Charges
shall be born by me. And somewhat after, thus: If his most holy Spirit direct
you to come, come: If not, stay: But write with speed, and convey your Letter,
and enclose it in a Letter to him who brought you and me acquainted (viz.
Wigginton) put not your name to it, for discovery: Direct your Letter thus, To
my loving Brother in the Lord, give these my Letters: I put to no name, but the
matter you know, which suffices. Pray that the Lord may reign, and that his
Subjects may obey: That all Instruments whatsoever, that shall be used, may be
furnished with such gifts and graces as every one have, or shall have need of:
That it may appear, that the Action (now in hand) is his own; and therefore he
will provide safety for his holy ones, and destruction for those who are
vessels of wrath; who have accomplished the number of their sins, which call
for vengeance from Heaven. These Letters Hacket carried to Pamplin,
Schoolmaster of Oundell, to be read unto him, for that himself could neither
write nor read: But I have not yet heard that he complained thereof to any in
Authority.

When Arthington also about the midst of Arthington returns to London,
Coppinger visits him, and magnifies Hacket to him as the Holiest man that ever
was, except Christ.
Trinity Term last, was returned to London, Coppinger (hearing thereof) came to
his Lodging, and then (with many words) extolled and magnified Hacket unto him,
for the holiest man that ever was, Christ only excepted, and one that traveled
(together with him) for the good of the Queen and the Land, but after an
extraordinary manner, and not both by one means. And albeit Arthington seems
not desirous of their Secrets. Coppinger persuades him to hear Hacket's
extempore Prayers, which he admires as divine, and esteems him as a most holy
man.
Arthington (as now he says) desired them to keep their Secrets to themselves,
and not to trouble him with them, (who had other business to attend;) yet
Coppinger importuned him so, as he could not avoid, but yield to hear Hacket
pray before them (as a man of a singular Spirit, albeit utterly unlearned of
the Book.) The first Prayer of his (that Arthington heard) was about four or
five Weeks before their apprehension. All which Prayers conceived by Hacket
(even since his apprehension) the said Arthington praised to be so divine,
sweet and heavenly, that thereby he was drawn into a great admiration of him.
In all the Prayers that Hacket made in his presence, Arthington observed this
difference from other men's: That he usually therein desired the Lord to
confound A horrible execration used in his Prayer.
him, if he did not seek only his honor and glory in all things: Which
Arthington marking from time to time in him, and seeing him still to be so
perfectly sound and very well, was thereby drawn (together with Coppinger's
words and experience of him) to reckon and esteem of him, as of a most holy man.

This Lesson of wishing themselves confounded, his said two Scholars (by
imitation) did so perfectly learn of him, that to the great astonishment and
horror of such The same used by the other two in their Affirmations.
(that afterward examined them) they used this Execration: Wishing themselves
confounded and damned, if they said not the truth, in every matter whereof they
made any asseveration, and wherein they desired to be credited, thinking (as
Arthington confesses) that whatsoever the Spirit (as he fansied) told him was
a truth, he was bound to bind it upon his Salvation or Damnation. These being
joined with the Relation of certain extreme Torments, which Hacket had
signified Hacket pretends to suffer extreme inward torments from the Devil, as
well as outward from men, for trail of the truth of the Gospel, which they
conclude he is to establish in all Kingdoms, and that all Scepters are to be
yielded to him.
unto them that he suffered, not only outwardly by the instigation of certain
noble and worshipful Persons (as he untruly made them believe) but more
grievously a great deal (he said) by suffering whatsoever either Devils in
Hell, Sorcerers or Witches in Earth, could practice against him (all which he
pretended to have endured for trial and proof, that the Gospel was the true
Religion against Popery, and all other Sects) did so deeply astonish, or rather
infatuate them; that (after great fasting and prayer used, which fasting they
usually performed on the Sabbath days) they all did resolutely conclude, That
if Hacket endured in truth all these torments and practices against him, for so
holy an end, no doubt he was a man, which should not only establish the Gospel
in all Kingdoms, but all Kings and Princes should also yield their Scepters
unto him, and he should be established chief King over all Europe. Reasoning
thus with themselves, that surely the Lord had some great good to be done by
him that had endured so much for his sake.

Now, this was the Opinion, which to This was the main drift of Hacket's
cunning, and it succeeded.
have firmly planted in them two (as indeed it was first in Coppinger, and
afterward in Arthington) was the main scope and drift (as may seem) of all
Hacket's cunning counterfeiting of so much Holiness, Piety, Zeal and Religion.

To work this, he handled his Actions so Coppinger avouched that God would deny
Hacket nothing.
warily with them, that Coppinger seriously once avouched unto Arthington, how
himself had by good experience found, that God would deny unto Hacket nothing
which he prayed for or desired, and namely protested, that Hacket begged of God
in a Drought (that was not long before their apprehension) a Shower of Rain, and
that it was presently sent in good abundance; Coppinger also so firmly believed
Hacket, that he told his own Man Emerson, how Hacket being imprisoned, the
Bolts would (often) fall off his heels miraculously.

But for proof that such incredible Torments were indeed suffered by Hacket, he
appealed herein to some of the Nobility, and to diverse others both of worship
and good credit. This did Coppinger further confirm Coppinger and Wigginton
attest to the truth of Hacket' s pretended Torments.
unto Arthington, saying, that Master Wigginton also did justify the truth of
the Torments that Hacket suffered, and could do it with a hundred honest
Witnesses more, if need required. And Arthington himself also once heard
Wigginton pitifully tell, how great and extreme Torments Hacket had endured.

But being asked by them, why he was so tormented, and how these could tend to
prove the Gospel to be the only true Religion? Hacket answered them thus: That
his Tormentors (the better to color their lewd purposes and malice) gave out
and surmised him to be out of his wits, but the truth was (said he) that being
once at Table with one G. H. an obstinate Papist, and reasoning which was the
true Religion (I Hacket' s strange way to prove the truth of Religion against
Popery, etc.
defending this which we now profess to be the truth, against Popery and all
other Sects) amongst other Speeches, I protested upon my Damnation, that this
was the truth, and withal prayed, that I might sink presently down into Hell,
if it was not so: And that, if he the said G. H. would say so much for his
Religion, if he did not sink presently into Hell, then would I take Popery to
be the true Religion. But he refusing so to do, and being greatly moved thereby
against me, complotted with a Knight (a near Kinsman of his) and with another
Gentleman (being a Papist) and with sundry others, who found such means, as
that they procured Devils to be raised, Sorcerers, Witches and Enchanters (all
which (said he) I know and can name, and mind one day, to help to burn them) to
work upon my Body, with intent to make me call back my said words of
protestation, concerning the truth of this Religion, which if I would not do
(said they) but could endure the Torments that they would inflict, then they
all would be of my Religion, and would make me Emperor over all Europe.

This Tale to them that had minds before His Tale credited.
prepared, and took Hacket by reason of his most earnest Protestations,
Prayers, show of zeal pretended, favor with God, and such like, to be a man
that would not tell an untruth for all the world, seemed no way unprobable, or
to be discredited: So that these three principal Actors having as well among
themselves, as with others, often conferred hereabouts (both by word and
writing) were by the midst of Trinity Term become most resolute, for the
advancing of their designments. For in a Letter written by Coppinger (about
that time) to the aforesaid J. Thr. it is thus contained. Mine own dear
Brother, Coppinger' s Letter to J. Thr.
my self, and my two Brethren, who lately were together with you in
Knight-rider's Street, do much desire conference with you, which will ask some
time. The business is the Lord's own, and he does deal in it himself, in a
strange and extraordinary manner in poor and simple Creatures. Much is done
since you did see us, which you will rejoice to hear of, when we shall meet,
and therefore I beseech you (so soon as you receive this Letter) hasten an
Answer in writing to my Sister's House; therein advertise (I beseech you) when
I may come to speak with you; for delays are dangerous, and some of the great
Enemies begin to be so pursued by God, as they are at their wits end. The Lord
make us thankful for it, who keep us ever to himself, to do his will and not
ours. By occasion also of hearing Master Chark on a Friday about that time at
the Coppinger' s Leter to Chark about his extraordinary Course for the
advancement of Christ's Kingdom.
Blackfriars, Coppinger says, he was thereupon moved by God's Spirit to write
unto him a Letter, which bears date the 9th day of July last. In which Letter
(amongst other things) thus he writes unto him. I do not deny, good Sir, but
that I have now (a good long time) taken a strange and extraordinary course,
such as has offered occasion of suspicion, of my not only doing hurt to my
self, but also to the best sort of men now in question, and to the Cause it
self. But by what warrant I have done this, that is all: For if the Holy Ghost
have been my Warrant, and carries me into such Actions, as are differing from
others of great note in the Church of God, what flesh and blood dare speak
against me? This is it that 1 desire at your hands, and at all the rest of
God's Servants, that you forbear to censure me and such others, as shall deal
extraordinarily with me in the Lord's business committed to our charge, and
judge of us by the effects that follow; which if you hereafter see to be
wonderful great, then are all ordinary men (placed in Callings within this
Land) to fear, and to call themselves to examination before the Justice Seat of
God, and see whether they have walked faithfully before God and man, in seeking
the salvation of the Souls of the People, and the advancement of Christ's
Kingdom, and the overthrow of Antichrist's. And if all and every one Note.
in their places shall be forced to confess, to have failed in not discharge of
their duties, let them acknowledge their sin and repent, before Plagues and
Punishments fall upon them. The waste of the Church cannot be denied to be
great, so that there is place for extraordinary men (though temporizing
Christians will not admit this) therefore God's mercies shall appear to be
wonderful great, if amongst us he have raised up such, as I know he has, and
hereafter I doubt not (by God's grace) but I, with the help of the rest, shall
be able to avow against all gainsayers whatsoever. My desire heretofore has
been to have counsel and direction from others: But now (by comfortable
experience) I find that the Action (which the Lord has drawn me into) is his
own, and he will direct it himself by the Holy Ghost, and have the full honor
of it, and therefore I wait upon him, and yet most heartily crave the Prayers
of the Saints, that they will beseech God to bless all his Servants, that he
has set awork in his own business. And I further beseech you, to show this
Letter to Master Traverse, and Master Orders it to be shown to Traverse,
Egerton, and the other Preachers.
Egerton, and all the rest of the godly Preachers in the City, and judge
charitably of me and others, and let every one look to his own Calling, that
therein he may deal faithfully, and let us judge our selves, and not judge one
another, further than we have warrant. After this Letter, it happened that M.
Chark preached in the same place again the next Sunday after, at which time
Coppinger took himself to be particularly meant by one part of the Sermon.
Whereupon he wrote a Letter to another Preacher (as I do gather) the Thursday
after, viz. the 15th of July; whereby he thus signifies. M. Chark told the
People, that there were some Persons so desperate, that they would willingly
thrust themselves upon the Rocks of the Land, and Waves of the Sea. This I took
to be spoken principally to my self; and therefore I thought good to advertise
you, that he spoke the truth in those words; but he touched not me, but
himself, and the rest of the Ministers of the Land, who have not only run
desperately themselves upon the Rocks and Waves, but carried the whole Ship,
whereby they all be in danger of Shipwreck, and should have perished, if the
Lord had not immediately called three of his Servants to help to recover it,
who are not only sent from God to his Church here, but also elsewhere, through
the World. My Calling is specially to deal with Magistrates. Another has to do
with Ministers, who has written a Letter to you of the City, but it cannot be
delivered hardly this day. The other third is the chiefest He pretends to be
chiefly called to deal with Magistrates.
(who can neither write nor read) for he is the Lord's Executioner of his most
holy will. This Letter is thus subscribed, The Lord's Messenger of Mercy, Ed.
Coppinger.

These three therefore strongly fancying to themselves such extraordinary
Callings, and standing resolute by all means to advance that (which they falsely
call Reformation) and being thus seduced and bemoped by Hacket, it is no marvel
though they entered further (as by degrees) into many lewd, dangerous, and
traitorous Attempts.

For first having conceived mortal hatred against two great and worthy
Counselors of this Estate (who they thought would not a little stop the course
they had taken, and hinder the purpose which they pursued:) Coppinger therefore
(by Hacket's advice) directed Coppinger having hatred to two Counselors of
State, pretends to impeach them of Treason.
several Letters unto some Honorable Personages, whereby he signified, that
certain Treasons were intended even against her Majesty's own Sacred Person;
meaning after to appeach those two thereof; and hoping by this means, either to
take them away, or at least their Credits with her Majesty, until he and his
Accomplices might bring their Purposes to some better pass; or else (by this
colorable Pretense having access and opportunity) to have executed some wicked
Practice against her Royal Person. The discovery, avouching and proof of these
supposed Treasons, Hacket and he did take (especially upon themselves.)

The first two Letters that (I find) Coppinger He writes a Letter to them, with
one enclosed to the Queen.
writ to the said honorable Personages about this pretended matter of Treason
to be discovered, was the third day of June last; both to this purpose, To have
them acquaint her Majesty, that intelligence was given unto him of some Treason
intended against her own Sacred Person, but naming no particular. In the one of
them, he enclosed a Letter of his to her Majesty, and certain Petitions, which
he would have had to be offered up to her Highness, being to this effect: That
he might have leave to entertain the Action of such discovery; that as matters
should come to light, he might resort to a certain worthy Counselor (by him
there named) to acquaint him therewith, and to have his Counsel and direction:
That he the said Coppinger might confer and examine Jesuits, and all Prisoners
(suspected or condemned of Treason) about these matters, in the presence of
certain others: That for better furtherance of his Service, he might have this
favor to stay judgment, or at least execution against condemned Persons for
Crimes capital or smaller, until her Majesty might have account given of the
cause of his so doing: That he might be pardoned for so bold an Attempt, if in
overmuch fear of danger to her Sacred Person, he had, or afterward should go
too far, and not effect that in the end, which he hoped to do: And lastly, That
this matter might be concealed from all men. But the said honorable Personage
finding this to be an unlikely and strange Course to be yielded unto (as may be
gathered by the Answer, and by the other Letters) directed him to a more sound
way, viz. To learn first the grounds perfectly, to acquaint none other with the
matter, and to do it speedily. Hereupon the 8th of the said His second Letter
to them, with one of Hacket's enclosed; animating him to do the Lord's business.
June, he addressed another Letter to the same Personage, enclosing therein a
Letter written to him from Hacket, and dated the last day of May, and another
Letter of his own to her Majesty, to have been delivered unto her Highness. His
Letter to the said honorable Personage, is to commend the Writer of that
Letter enclosed, not naming him, (for Coppinger had raced out both Hacket's
Name, and the Name of Oundell from whence it came) as a Man able and willing to
do her Majesty some principal service, to offer their attendances to come
before her Majesty, and to urge the delivery of the Letters, for that the
matter (he said) admitted no delays. The Letter from Hacket is nothing but an
inciting and animating of Coppinger to perform the Lord's business (he had in
hand) by many holy and devout words and hypocritical Allusions to certain
Stories of the Scripture. Coppinger's Letter to her Majesty Coppinger sends
another Letter to the Queen, and presses to get to her Presence, pretending
some special service.
commends the Inditer of that enclosed, for a Man beloved of God, and fearing
him unfeignedly, and one enabled (by God) to do her Highness some special
service: He also humbly desires thereby, that they two might appear before her
own Princely Person, in the presence only of two certain Lords, and one Lady.
But the said honorable Personage sent Hacket's Letter again unto Coppinger, as
of no moment for that purpose, and stayed the delivery of his Letter to her
Majesty, till some particular intelligence might be had, to be first delivered
to her Highness. The same day Coppinger also writ two several Letters to the
same two Lords, in whose presence he and Hacket desired to come before her
Majesty, and to deliver their Intelligence; this he did to advertise them
hereof aforehand. That which is written to the one of them, mentions a
Supplication which Coppinger sent (the day before) unto his Lordship to make
passage to some better service to her Majesty, which he hoped should be done
shortly to her Highness's good liking, and to his Lordship's great honor, for
that he should be the chief Actor therein. Upon some answer returned Coppinger,
j alous that what he had to reveal would be slighted, writes to Hacket for more
important Intelligence.
from the Lady aforementioned, craving some Particulars of that which they
meant to discover, Coppinger writ to Hacket (being in London) to urge him unto
some more special point of Intelligence: Whereunto Hacket (the said 8th of
June) answering by Letter to small purpose, and subscribing his Letter thus, As
you find me, so call me: Coppinger therefore returned in answer another Letter
presently unto him, whereby he signified, that Hacket must manifest somewhat
more plainly of some practice worth the revealing, otherwise they both should
worthily fall into her Majesty's indignation; for that which he had then writ,
would not satisfy her Majesty and the State, concerning the danger which Hacket
supposed to be coming upon the Land, and wherewith he seemed to be acquainted.

Upon such overture (as before is touched) made to one of the said Lords, he had
the Both of them are examined by one of the Lords, who finds little in their
Information, so shakes them off.
said two Appeachers before him on the 10th of June: but finding Hacket's
demeanor of himself very strange, and their Imputations as frivolous, he
dismissed them (as is said) without further ado, to their great coffeehouse.
Hereupon Coppinger (in stomach so far as he durst) writ another Letter to the
said Nobleman the 11th of June: Hereby he signified, That were it not that he
had been before acquainted with the Graces and Gifts of the Holy Ghost, which
he did assure himself to be in Hacket in an extraordinary manner, he should
have esteemed of him (by his behavior) as his Lordship did. Therefore what
trouble or danger soever might come to himself by it, he was resolute to abide
it; and further charge the said Nobleman (in God's name) to deliver the
Letters and Copies there enclosed to her Majesty, signifying, that what
punishment should in that respect be allotted to him, or unto Hacket, they
would undergo it, and not depart the City, till they might further understand
what God would do therein. Sure it is, that (being thus shaken They thus
slighted, grow malicious against him. Coppinger writes another Letter in
Hacket's name to the Queen, threatening dreadful Judgments from God, and offers
a Sign.
off by him) they grew extremely malicious also against the said worthy
Nobleman.

I find also a Copy of a Letter written in Coppinger's hand, but meant to be
sent as from Hacket, unto her Excellent Majesty; wherein (amongst other things)
he desires he may enjoy that which God has appointed him, and then lewdly and
falsely accuses and revileth two great and worthy Counselors. In the end he
says, That if he should tell her the judgments of God that lie at her Gate
(which the Lord has showed him) they would be over-fearful for her to endure,
or to hear of. And if she doubted of his sending from the Lord, he wills her
to ask a Sign, and if he give it not, let him die.

A second course taken by them besides the former Appeachments, was a
Conspiracy They conspire the death of some Lords of the Council, in case
Judgment be given against some of their Preachers, then Prisoners for
Misdemeanors.
of the death of certain of the Lords of the Council, when they should be at
the Starchamber, in case they should give any Judgment against certain that
were (sometime) Preachers, and are now Prisoners for Misdemeanors perilous to
the peaceable state of the Realm, as is intended. That this devilish Purpose
was rise amongst them, may appear by a Letter sent by Coppinger in Trinity Term
last, unto the aforenamed Lancaster. In which was contained to this effect,
That if the Lords should give a hard censure against those Parties (the next
day) if God showed not such a fearful Judgment against some of those Lords, as
that some of them should not go alive out of that place, then never trust him.
And albeit some that saw this Letter, could not pick any further matter out of
it, than Coppinger's Conceit, that God (without some speedy and miraculous
Judgment from himself alone) would not suffer such men to be punished; yet
Lancaster (to whom it was directed) justly suspected some further meaning, and
that the concealing of it might be both accounted undutiful, and further also
dangerous unto him, and therefore asked counsel of some more skilful than
himself, whether he might safely suppress it, and tear the Letter in pieces.

Another Device they also had for preparing (as is supposed) of the minds of
the People, and to stir them up to be in readiness, which was by certain
Seditious Letters They scatter Seditious Letters among the People.
that were purposely scattered five or six Nights before, in many of the Streets
of London, by some of these Actors, or by their Accomplices and Favorers.
Likewise there was found in Wigginton's Chamber (in the Great numbers of
Printed Libels found in Wigginton's Chamber.
Prison where he remains) about a thousand printed Pamphlets of two sorts;
the one of Predestination, the other carrying an odd and needless Title to
every man that knows but the Author. For it is entitled on the first side, in
great Letters thus: viz. The Fools bolt: And immediately under that Title, this
Sentence is set down worthy to be duly considered, with all his Circumstances
now apparent, viz. Such as do surmise the complaint of Innocence to be revenge,
and the report of Truth to be slander, shall never want the due reward of their
gross Error, whilst Innocence and Truth shall endure. On the other side of the
Sheet the Title is, A Fatherly Exhortation to a certain young Courtier. The
matter thereof is conceived into an halting Rhyme, roving lewdly not only at the
Governors Ecclesiastical, and at other Ministers, but also at sundry having
Civil Authority and high Places. Amongst the rest, the first two Staves and
last Stave are most perilous, if ye respect the present Action these Persons
had in hand, their Opinions of this State, and the base Condition and State of
the chief of them. The first are these, viz.

My Son if thou a Courtier sue to be,
In flower of youth this Lesson learn of me.
A Christian true, although he be a Clown,
May teach a King to wear Scepter and Crown.
And in the last Stave are these, viz. For God will sure confound such as devise
His Ordinance or Church to tyrannize, etc.


These Papers Wigginton (by the means and help of one Brown) procured privily
to be printed at Whitsontide last, and being examined Wigginton confesses that
they were all to be sent to Women, and by them to be dispersed.
touching them by her Majesty's Council and others, he confessed, That they
were all to be sent to Women, the weaker Vessels: viz. to Mistress L. Mistress
B. and to I know not how many Mistresses, by them to be dispersed abroad; to
the intent, that every one (to whom they might come) should conceive of them as
the Spirit should move them. And Hacket also confessed, that a part of certain
Writings which Wigginton and Coppinger framed, was, that a Clown might teach a
King to wear a Crown.

Now that Wigginton held intelligence in Wigginton in the Conspiracy for
advancing the Discipline.
these matters with the Conspirators, and that there was mutual and ordinary
correspondence betwixt him and them in all Plots for advancing of their
Discipline per fas and nefas (besides that which in this behalf has been
touched before) is made also manifest by the confession of Arthington, who
says, That about the 15th of July, or not long before, he heard Hacket singing
of certain Songs, who then wished that Arthington had also some of them: For it
was a very special thing, and (said he) M. Wiggington has a great many of them.

Also Coppinger had once conference with Wigginton (in the presence of
Arthington) touching his extraordinary Calling. At what time it is pretended,
that Wigginton refused to be made acquainted with the manner of Coppinger's
Secrets; and that he used these Speeches to Coppinger, viz. You are known to be
an honest Gentleman, and sworn to the Queen, and therefore I will not be
acquainted with those things which God has revealed unto you for the good of
your Sovereign. And his Opinion of such extraordinary Callings (set down under
his own hand) does elsewhere appear, whereby is argued, that he was made a
common Oracle for such Fantasticks: That he knew the matter in generality,
which by Coppinger was to be wrought upon the Queen, to bring her (forsooth) to
repentance, howsoever he refused to know the particular manner of such Secrets:
That he acknowledged it to be good for the Queen, and yielded it (without
scruple) to be revealed unto Coppinger from God, so that it could not be, but
that Coppinger hereby was much animated to go forward in his conceived
Wickedness. Besides, Wigginton takes knowledge (as appears by a Paper of his
own handwriting found in his Chamber) that Hacket had defaced the Queen's Arms,
and had uttered Hacket defaceth the Queen's Arms, and utters dangerous words.
dangerous words, importing himself to be a King, and his mislike of all Kings
now reigning, since his last coming to London. Hacket further declared unto M.
Young on the 24th of July, that he was once (in company of two Gentlemen, and
of Mistress Walker and Mistress Lawson) with Wiggington in his Chamber, where
and when he heard Wigginton say, That if the Magistrates do not govern well,
the People might draw themselves together, and to see a Reformation. This
dangerous Opinion of his may be also gathered out of a Letter of his own
handwriting (found with him) being dated the sixth of November last, wherein
he thus writes. M. Cartwright (says he) is in the Fleet for refusal of the
Oath, as I hear, and M. K. is sent for, and sundry worthy Ministers are
disquieted, who have been spared long. So that we look for some bickering ere
long, and then a battle, which cannot long endure.

A fourth Purpose of theirs was not only to They design a Change in the Civil
Government, as well as the Church.
make an alteration in the state of Church Government, and to plant in every
Congregation their Elderships, or Consistory of Doctor, Pastor, and certain Lay
Elders, with the Appurtenances; but also to change the Civil Policy of this
Realm. For which consideration, they meant to displace all the Lords and others
of the Privy Council; therefore (in their Speeches and Writings touching these
Counselors) they used of late no Title of Honor, but their bare Names and
Sirnames, or else their Names with this addition; Late L. Chapter or late L. Tr. as
if they were already disauthorised, and in their steads they had nominated and
set down certain others (in truth very honorable and worshipful Persons) that
should be Counselors, of whom every honest man nevertheless is persuaded, that
they detest both these and all other such Vile, Seditious and Fanatical Persons
and Courses.

Coppinger (not long before their rising as it seems) penned a Letter to have
been sent to the one of the aforesaid honorable Personages. In this Letter he
charge a great Coppinger charge two Privy Counselors with Treason.
and worthy Counselor (using only his Christian Name and Surname) that he,
together with his bellish and infernal Companions (for so he raveth) had
committed Treason in the highest degree against her Majesty. He desires that
honorable Personage to effect, that the said Counselor, himself, and two
others of the Lords Messengers, may be brought before the Queen's Majesty; and
if he be not proved a Traitor to God and her, then let me (faith he) for my
Pride and Presumption, be banged at the Court Gates. Then he exclaimeth against
another great Counselor (terming him but by his bare Name likewise) to whom he
had sent Letters and Copies to have been showed to her Majesty, and there
shows himself greatly offended with him; because he was not (as he hoped)
brought to her Royal presence; Note.
adding thus thereto, but he and the rest (says he) of her wicked Counselors,
and ungodly Magistrates, shall be forced to acknowledge, what they are worthy
to have; the Lord pardon their Souls, for in their outward man they must be
punished, though they repent: And a little after, thus; I do advise also that
every one of her Council be commanded to keep their House or He appoints to her
Majesty a new Council, and recommends Wigginton for her Chaplain.
Chamber, for fear of stir or danger. Then he does appoint to her Majesty a new
Council, advising that Wigginton (a man in more favor (he says) with God,
than any man of his Calling whatsoever) be commanded to be near her Highness,
to pray to God, or to preach privately.

By the like resolute vein Arthington also Arthington charge the same
Counselor.
charge the said Counselor as deeply, and upon the like and greater penalty
to himself, in a Supplication penned by him to have been sent to her Majesty.
But I will give you a taste how frivolously, and upon what fond Proofs he
groundeth his Accusation, to the end it may appear, that this was but a
colorable Pretense, wherein they reposed no great surety of success, but hoped
at length thereby to have brought themselves and Hacket to her Majesty's
presence. The issue he tendereth is this, That if in her Majesty's His
Fanatical Proposal.
presence be prove not the said Counselor to be the most dangerous Enemy that
was discovered since her Highness's Reign, then let his Body and Soul be for
ever damned: Provided always, that if her Majesty cannot (by his Evidence)
judge him the said Counselor to be so bad as be makes report of him, yet that
she would give him the said Arthington leave in her sacred Presence, to fight
the Combat of Prayer with him, wherein, if it please him (says Arthington) I
will first New Trial by combat in Prayer.
begin to pray against my self, that if he be not as deeply guilty as I have
charged him, then that God's Vengeance may presently consume me both Body and
Soul into Hell for ever, which if it come to pass, the Victory shall be his,
and he return an Innocent. But if he see me leap up for joy, as one that has
discovered him to be a Traitor, then if he dare fall down in like sort, and
make the same Prayer, that the like Vengeance may fall upon himself, if he be
so deeply guilty as I have charged him; and if God's Vengeance fall not upon
him before he depart out of her presence, let me be hanged, drawn and
quartered, for laboring to impeach a Counsellor's Credit; but if he dare not
thus enter the lists with me before her Majesty, let him be holden guilty.

Their last and most damnable Designment Their last Design was the destruction
of the Queen.
of all, was the deprivation of her Sacred Majesty from her Crown and Dignity,
and the destruction of her Royal Person, whom the Eternal God (in mercy) long
preserve, to the confusion of all Seditious Wretches her Enemies of all sorts.

The very particular and principal means how these devilish Purposes were meant
to be effected by them, Arthington now says, that they were not opened unto
him; pretending, that though the other two seemed willing to have imparted some
of their Secrets unto him, yet himself was always unwilling to hear any of
them. But for the special means that Coppinger had plotted to bring the Queen's
Majesty and Counsel to repentance, he says that this was a secret Mystery (as
Hacket and Coppinger affirmed to him) which they would keep to themselves, and
were so enjoined of the Lord. But whether soever the way to effect these, was
meant by some open violence, or secret practice; sure it is, that popular
Tumult was not the least means they trusted of, to bring them to pass, which
they hoped to stir up by their pretense of so great holiness, with calling the
Realm to repentance in the open Streets of London, by offering joys and mercy
to the Penitent, and by their Proclamation also then made in Cheapside, as
hereafter comes to be declared.

Now that these their two last Purposes were indeed the principal and main ends
which they propounded to themselves (besides that which by the way is noted
already, and that which comes hereafter to be mentioned) let these few Proofs
ensuing suffice. First, for the alteration of the whole Government
Ecclesiastical, and erecting of the new Discipline: It is confessed, that
Coppinger Coppinger and Arthington (two false Prophets) their words to
Wigginton the day before the Insurrection.
and Arthington, the two Counterseit Prophets (on the 16th of July last, being
Friday, and the self-same day that they arose in Cheapside) told Wigginton in
the morning these words amongst many others, viz. That Reformation and the
Lord's Discipline should now forthwith be established, and therefore charged
Wigginton in the Lord's name, to put all Christians in comfort, that they
should see a joyful alteration in the state of Church Government shortly. To
which words Wigginton made no reply, nor further demand, as of any matter
strange unto him, how it was so shortly to be compassed. Wherein may also be
observed, that these kind of Persons do reckon and term only those Christians
that will take comfort and joy at such an Alteration. So that (by their
Opinions) it skilleth not what be attempted or done against all others, being
but as Heathens and Paynims, or at least Idolaters.

Thus much (with their seditious Purposes Their Seditious Purposes appear in
Coppinger's Letter to Udal, then condemned for writing the Demonstration of
Discipline.
also) is plainly implied in a dangerous Letter written by the said Coppinger
since Easter last, unto one John Udal, a condemned man for Felony, in the White
Lion in Surrey, for writing of the Book termed the Demonstration of Discipline:
That Letter begins thus: Right Reverend Sir, my forbearing to visit you and
the rest of the Saints (who suffer for Righteousness sake) do give you all
cause to think that I have forsaken my first Love, and have embraced the God of
this World. But my Conscience bears me witness of the contrary: The Reasons
of my absence being so great and so weighty, that hereafter when they shall be
examined by your selves (who are endued with the spirit of wisdom and
discerning of Spirits) I doubt not but Note.
you will allow of my not coming, which might bring you into more trouble and
danger, than it would do me good, or breed me comfort. And afterward thus, You
have care and conscience to further the building of the Lord's House which
lies waste, and to seek the final overthrow of Antichrist's Kingdom: which
being the Lord's own work, he will bless it, and all the Actors in it. And this
I dare be bold (of mine own knowledge) to report, that in this great Work he
has diverse that lie hid, and are yet at liberty, who are hammering their
heads, busying their brains, and spending their spirits in prayers to God, as
much as you, or any of you that are in Prison, Note.
and hope in short time to be brought forth into the sight of their and your
Enemies, to defend the Cause you stand for. And again afterward in this wise: I
beseech you, cheer up your selves in the Lord, for the day of our Redemption is
at hand, and pray that the Hand of the Lord may be strengthened Note.
in them, whom he has appointed to take part with you in this Cause, and
beseech him that blessing may be upon Sion, and confusion upon Babel. Pardon my
long Letter, I beseech you, and impart mine humble suit to all the rest, to
whom I neither dare write, nor offer to see. I neither put to my Name, nor make
Subscription: The Bringer can report who sends the Letter, and let that
suffice.

Furthermore, that they hated deadly and maligned her Majesty (as a principal
Obstacle to their Innovation and Kingdom, and therefore sought to deprive her
Highness of her Sovereignty and Life) may be gathered by their own Words and
Actions: For Hacket confessed before the other two, that They usually attend
Egerton, a Preacher in Black-Frairs.
at a Sermon of one Egerton's preached in the Black-Fryars (whither they
usually resort) he the said Hacket remained uncovered all the Sermon time,
until the Preacher came to pray for her Majesty, but then (he said) that he put
on his Hat. And when Arthington demanded why he did so, Coppinger streightway
answered thus, There is a matter in that. Likewise when as (in their private
Prayers amongst themselves) Arthington used to pray for the Queen, Coppinger
Coppinger and Hacket forbear to pray for the Queen.
would sundry times tell him, that his so doing did much grieve Hacket, adding,
that in the beginning himself did also pray for her, but Hacket had now drawn
him from it: saying, there was a cause why, which Arthington knew not, but
should know hereafter. For (says he) you do not know this man (meaning Hacket)
who is a greater Person than she, and indeed above all the Princes in the World.

And whenas on the very Sunday before their rising (for so themselves have
since termed that Action) it happened that Arthington prayed again for the
preservation of the Queen's Majesty: Hacket (not digesting this) suddenly with
indignation turned his face away from him, but when he prayed for other
matters, then Hacket cast his countenance toward him again; which he
perceiving that Arthington also marked by him, and purposing (as it seems) to
salve up this matter again, (left Arthington happily might yet have fallen from
them) therefore when they had ended their Prayers, Hacket took him with his
Arms about the middle (in very kind sort) affirming, that he loved the Queen as
well as either of them, and desired him not to be offended, for the Lord had
commanded it: Adding further, that there was a matter in it that Arthington as
yet knew not. Hereupon Coppinger (being in hearing thereof) said, that she
might be prayed for in general terms, but not so specially as Arthington did
(whereby Hacket was grieved) nor yet to be prayed for as a Sovereign: For (said
he) she may not reign as Note.
Sovereign, but this man Hacket; and yet (says he) she shall live better than
ever she did, albeit she must be governed by another, thereby also meaning
Hacket. And to the intent they might the more assuredly retain Arthington
without suspicion of their poisonful malice (wherein they boiled against the
Queen's Highness) Hacket himself (once after this time) very subtly prayed
for her Majesty.

For proof that they also meant to deprive her of life, the several Confessions
of Arthington Arthington confesses that Hacket and Coppinger designed the
Queen's deprivation of Government and Life.
at sundry Examinations may be alleged. Whereby (upon that which he heard and
knew) is confessed, that he is verily persuaded Hacket menat her Majesty should
have been deprived both of Kingdom and Life, which he also gathered by
Coppinger's Letters, albeit he denies, that he was ever made acquainted by
what special means it should be done.

Thus having in some part described the Qualities, Persuasions in Opinion,
Familiarity, Inducements unto mutual crediting one of another, Exercises and
Designments of these Persons: It rests to go on with the Narration of the
rest of the Action, for better perfiting up of this History.

Hacket on a time recounting up unto the other two his Torments (which he
pretended to have endured) told, how (amongst others) one Pigg a Preacher did
so beat him with Rods at a place in Hartfordshire, (whilst he lay bound there
in a Sink-hole) that this cost him the said Hacket more dear, than all the rest
of his Torments; because thereby he was enforced to suffer for all Hypocrites
also; adding thereunto, that all their best Preachers (so they term such as
thirst after and persuade Innovations) were no better in very truth than
Hypocrites, nevertheless he They account their Puritanical Preachers Hypocrites
and Idolaters for their conformity to the Laws of the Church.
would (he said) daily hear them preach. Hereupon Arthington took occasion to
tell him, that he could prove all such Preachers to be Hypocrites and Idolaters
both (albeit of ignorance) because they do yield (in some sort) to the
Commandments of the Governors, and unto the Laws of this Church, that they may
be tolerated to preach.

This pleased Hacket so exceedingly well, as that he began highly to esteem of
Arthington, and hereby the rather he thought good, that Arthington should be
made acquainted with their Letters. For about ten days before their rising
(Arthington says) that Coppinger did greatly importune him to read the Letters
which he and Hacket had written, if it were but to see the style; assuring him
they tended to nothing else; but to make a way to acquaint her Majesty with
their Secrets. So that when Arthington saw so great Counselors so resolutely
thereby charged with matter of so high quality, by Coppinger especially (her
Majesty's sworn Servant) he was induced to believe it, and to think they had
some very good ground thereof.

Arthington also (with great contentment unto Hacket) framed certain Syllogisms
(I believe) in a lewd Mode, and in an unperfect and fond Figure, to prove
(forsooth) one of the said honorable Counselors (whom he and Coppinger
villanously afterward proclaimed Traitors) to be such as they do charge him to
be. This worthy work of Syllogisms therefore being first finished, his other
Treatise (to prove those Preachers to be Hypocrites and Idolaters) was
straightway set upon the stocks, and began to be built on the Monday before
their rising; after they all had (for obtaining good success in this and the
rest of their business) humbled themselves on the Lord's day Fasting and Prayer
on the Lord's Day before the Insurrection.
before in fasting and prayer, for so be their words. This latter Treatise
Arthington finished up the Thursday morning next after, and termed it A
Prophecy of Judgments against England, whose skill in this precipitate kind of
Pistling, the other two so magnified, as that they termed him by a Title
mentioned in a Psalm, viz. The pen of a ready writer. Whereas wiser men think
they might have looked a little lower, and he have better compared it, as the
Wiseman does the like, where he says, A word in a fool's mouth is like an
arrow in a dog's leg, because he will never leave wrinching and fisking till he
have got it out.

In this Prophecy he first sets down Arthington's Prophecy.
the Third Commandment, inferring what Plagues shall light on himself if he
offend therein. Then comes he to his nine several Assertions, adding to every
one of them, The Lord to confound him, viz. that if he think not himself to be
the vilest sinful Wretch living: If he take not himself to be the most ignorant
in God's Book of any man that has professed the Gospel so long: If he
acknowledge not himself most unfit and unworthy of all men to serve the Lord
Jesus: If nevertheless he be not extraordinarily called to do the Message of
God more faithfully than any Preacher in England hitherto has done: If the
Scripture do not justify extraordinary Callings before the ends of the World:
If he know not two Persons within the City of London, that have greater
extraordinary Callings than himself, videlicet, Edmund Coppinger, and William
Hacket: If the former be not a Prophet raised up of the Lord to bring a Message
of great Mercy to the Land, if all the People truly repent of their Sins: If
the latter be not the holiest Man, and of the greatest power to bring fearful
Judgments upon the whole Earth, that ever was born, Christ Jesus excepted: If
the said Hacket (as the Messenger of God's Vengeance, where mercy is refused)
do not bring such great Plagues upon this Realm of England, the like whereof
was never seen: In these, and in every of these several Cases, he prays the
Lord to confound His dreadful Imprecations.
him.

Whereupon he infers, that having thus denounced so many fearful Woes
against his own Soul, as would sink it into the bottomless Pit of Hell, if he
were guilty in any one of them. Then thereupon with cheerfulness he comes to
declare his Message to England, accusing it to be the most rebellious, though
it have been most blessed of all other Nations. Then he affirms the City of
London, and the Courts of Justice at Westminster, and the counterfeit Worship
of God with Cross and Surpless, to be worse than Sodom and Gomorrah, or the
Purple Whore of Rome, or else desires to be confounded. Nay he prefers Rome
before London; because at Rome they sin only of ignorance. Of her Majesty he
says, she is least guilty of the common Sins, but most abused (of any Prince
that ever was) by those whom she has most advanced.

Then he speaks to three great Counselors, C. C. T. daring them to protest for
their innocencies against themselves as deeply as he has done, and then, if
they be not swallowed up quick, he is contented to be hanged up in Chains at
Paul's-Cross. Then he threatens them, that they three shall be otherwise Note.
detected ere long, and all those that are their Partakers, when her Majesty
shall reign and live to see better days, if God give her true repentance. Then
he says he will leave all other of the Clergy (as sufficiently detected
already) save such as pretend to seek Reformation, who (he says) are as guilty
(in two points) as any of the other. The first point, for not crying out
continually against Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, and others, as
wicked Usurpers in the House of God. The second, for not crying out against the
wicked Magistrates of this Land, because they keep out the Elderships out of
the Church, and maintain in their room Officers and Offices of Antichrist:
Hereupon gathering thus: How can God spare this Land any longer, wherein both
the Magistrates and Messengers of God have dealt so unfaithfully in the Lord's
service? Adding, That the fearful Judgments of God shall be sure to fall on the
Reprobate; being already prepared, and put into the hands of the Mighty
Messenger of the Almighty God, William Hacket, to be poured out upon this great
City of London, and upon all Places, where repentance follows not this
publication. Then he goes about to prove all such Preachers to be Idolaters,
or consenting to Idolatry, which Practice or Consent, and suffer others to use
Surpless and Cross, because (he says) they are the marks of Antichrist.
Preferring herein the Papists before them, as sinning herein only of ignorance,
seeking also to engreeve their Faults in this behalf, for that they are all
Hypocritical Idolaters, in that (nevertheless) they profess Reformation:
Whereunto he adds (he says) a Secret: That this their halting and hypocrisy
has so hardened God's heart against their Requests, for bringing in the
Discipline, that for this unfaithful and Note.
unsingle walking in their Function, he has hitherto denied it. Neither shall
any one of them, or all of them together, have that honor given, to bring in
Reformation: For (says he) I tell you truly, the Almighty God has put his Cup
of Vengeance into his trusty and faithful Servants hand, William Hacket, to
pour it down shortly upon every wilful and obstinate Sinner that does not
repent upon the notice hereof, or else the Lord confound me. Lastly, he gives
a charge to have this Prophecy, together with the incredible, (but most
certain) History of the holiest Servant of God, William Hacket, that ever has
been, is, or shall be born, (Christ Jesus only excepted) with all speed
possible, printed and published together, as in substance true (says he) or
else the Lord confound me. This wise Prophecy is thus subscribed: By the most
unworthy Servant, but yet a faithful Prophet of the Almighty Jesus, or else his
Wrath confound me. Henry Arthington.

While Arthington was about this his Task, Coppinger writes Hacket's History at
large to be published with his Prophecy.
Coppinger (as it seems) was neither idle nor well occupied, for he was
setting down from Hacket's own mouth a long Ragman's Role of Hacket's Torments,
Revelations, and (I know not what) called Hacket's History. For by Thursday
morning Hacket having enlarged the first draught thereof, (which was at first
but scribled out by Coppinger) Arthington was to write out again fair the
enlarged Copy, that being persited, it might be annexed unto the aforesaid
Prophecy. All that Thursday was spent by them in consultation and writing:
Hacket being also present, and assisting them. But with what joyfulness amongst
them all, it is incredible, if we may believe their own Reports. Yet Arthington
was forced (for the haste that was made to have all in readiness against the
Friday following, and for the desire he had to yield unto Hacket all
satisfaction and contentment that might be) to sit up most of Thursday night,
writing out again of the said History, so enlarged.

But on Thursday it self (being the 15th of July) amongst other their Actions,
Coppinger and Arthington writ a Letter to the aforesaid T. L. which is of this
tenor: first at the top of it, thus, viz.

If this Letter be not endited by the Holy Ghost, Coppinger's and Arthington's
Letter ter unto T. Lancaster.
who has appeared (in a far greater measure) to sinful Wretches, in the end of
the World, even to us, whose Names are here underwritten, and to a third
Person, in Calling above all former Callings whatsoever, (Christ Jesus
excepted) the Lord confound us two with vengeance from Heaven, and carry us
(with all violence) into the bottomless Pit.

If we have not taken the name of God in vain, it stands you upon to read
this Letter with fear and trembling, with joy and gladness; with fear, that the
Lord should woo you to do him service; with joy, that he offers you honor,
if you accept it. We two are Messengers from Heaven, who have a good Captain to
guide us; who have received immediate Callings from God, to call the whole
World to repentance and amendment of Life; otherwise they are to fear, that
Christ Jesus's second coming in glory, will be to them as a Thief in the night.
If I, Edmund Coppinger, do not prefer you before any one man in the Land
whatsoever, for your wise, holy, loving and religious Course, both in the
general Calling of a Christian, and in your particular Calling, the Lord
confound me Body and Soul. The reason why I choose you first, is, because in
your House, in your presence, and (under God partly by your means) I had my
first extraordinary Calling, though thereof (as of all other things) the whole
honor and glory be the Lord's. And of the same mind is my Brother Arthington.
In token of our extraordinary love to you, we deal as we neither have, or will
do, with any other; for we command in the name of the Lord all Creatures upon
the Earth, and they must obey. But with you we will dispense thus far, that it
shall be your choice to come, and take a new Calling (for a time, wherein we
would use you) or refuse it. So wishing you to commend us and your self to God,
before you answer us, which we expect in word, and not in writing, etc.

The Messenger of Mercy to the whole World, if they accept me, E. Coppinger.


I avouch whatsoever my Brother has written to be most true: And further I
protest, that you are a more holy man than any Preacher in London, or
throughout the whole Land, or else the Lord confound me. If it please you to
come and see me joyful, you may hope this is true.

The Prophet of God's Judgments to the whole World, where mercy is rejected,
Hen. Arthington.


That the perfect and enlarged History of Hacket be briefly gathered into a
Summary, and here set down, it will not (I think) be amiss, for such as shall
be desirous to know, what mysteries may be therein contained, which drew these
two (amongst other matters) into such a extraordinary admiration, and opinion
of him.

First therefore, There is declared whom A sum of Hacket's History.
Hacket served; then how he got the execution of the Bailywick of Oundel, being
void: How upon complaint of the Wives there, that their Husbands spent their
thrift in Alehouses on the Sabbath days he (by a Justice of Peace not far off)
did cause all the Playing Tables that could be come by, to be burnt. Also the
light and enticing behavior of some Women toward him, and his familiarity
with them, whereby his Wife became jealous of him, so that he was forced (for
her satisfaction) to clear himself by his Oath. The sundry Baits laid by means
of some of his Fellows (that envied him for the credit he had with those whom
he served) to entrap him with Women. His attempting them in dishonest manner,
but with purpose only (as he there pretends) to learn of them the Practices
against him. The like Snares laid for him by some of better place and credit
than the former: Of his affliction in mind that he endured, because he so
behaved himself toward Women, and yet could not learn out by them the plot laid
against him: Of his going into Hampshire to have been placed there: How he was
in a place there (for the most part of 20 days) beat with a Bostonado, and into
what pitiful state of Body he was thereby brought: That this was done, partly
for his avouching that Christ was Head of the Church, against the Pope, and for
saying, That as certain Earthen Pots were there by him broken, so should all
Papists be broken in Hell, and confounded, so many as rose up against him in
Earth: How he was forced to use the Deputy-Lieutenant of Hampshire his Aid, to
be safely conveyed out of that Country, lest he should be murdered by his
Enemies: That he came thence to one M. Paul Wentworth's House, where he
remained a Month, and was used most Christianly, and where he was most deeply
exercised in the Spirit: How as he passed by the way out of Hampshire, he told
a Gentleman in company (that was privy to his Enemies Complots) of a great
Practice intended against him, and to be done in a Chamber, by certain Persons,
whom he then named aforehand: Insomuch as the said Gentleman (being made privy
to such purpose, and knowing that he said true) affirmed, surely he could
conjure, or else it had not been possible to tell such things as he did; where
indeed (he says) the Lord, in the midst of his former Afflictions, revealed it
unto him, and further showed him a Place which he had appointed for him, and
how he would bring all his Enemies Practices to confusion: How in performance
of that which was so revealed, he was afterward in a certain Place in
Hartfordshire bound, first in a Chamber, and then chained in a Sink-hole of a
Seller, and most grievously many ways afflicted there for 20 days together:
That in the greatest extremity thereof (which was greater than he could
express) a Cross came upon his Breast as he lay, and always when his Torments
were at the greatest, the Lord unloosed his Feet and Hands from his Fetters,
and Bands; nevertheless he lay still till his Tormentors came, and bound him
again: How the Lord then appeared to him, and assured him, that he would
establish the Gospel by him, and showed him all the Whoredom of Rome, in the
person of a great Personage (since deceased) as it were in Candlelight, with a
great Bell full of iniquity: That during that time, the Lord showed him a
terrible Famine which he would bring upon a Land, but whether this Land or not,
was not declared: That Christ then showed him his Wisdom and Providence, in
governing the Seas, and all other Waters in their Courses: And further showed
him the Man that should sit on Christ's Right hand, to judge both the quick and
the dead, whose Name he well knows: That then he made his Petition unto the
Lord, who answered him by a Voice, thus, What he would, how he would, and when
he would: How (by the extremity of his Torments) his Eyes were fallen down, and
his Tongue thrust out of his Head, so as he could not pull it in again one
Barley-corn's breadth; but the Lord in that extremity showed him, that he would
keep his Body from hursting, and that one hair of his Head should not perish:
That being loosed (by his Wife's importunity) soon after, in a very Rainy-day,
he, his Wife, one Richard Dickens, and one Palmer, rid altogether thence toward
Oundell, thirty Miles that day; and albeit it rained all the day very fore (so
that great floods came upon it) yet never a one of them had any drop thereof
fall upon their Clothes: That being at Oundell, and foreseeing he should be
exercised again, he prayed his Wife that no man might come at him, for he would
keep his Chamber: And then the Lord appeared unto him, and showed him in what
danger the Land was, by reason of foreign Enemies at the Sea; and commanded him
to go round about the Town, and that should be a defense to the Land round
about: That after this he kept himself in his Barn about eight days, reasoning
with the Lord touching Predestination and Reprobation, continually begging of
him, that he would save all those that fought ignorantly against the Truth, or
otherwise sinned through want of knowledge: How (after this) betaking himself
to his Chamber again, the Lord (he says) forced him to cry out against two
great Subjects and Counselors in this Land: That he was again bound and
tormented there other twenty days, in eight whereof, he neither did eat nor
drink, and was continually watched, for that they knew the Lord would come and
loose him, if they left him: That during this time Witches used their Sorcery
strongly upon him: That the Lord then told him that he would harden his own
heart against Hacket's Tormentors: How then also four or five Angels night by
night stood by him, and watched over him, like unto Doves, and one night
Spirits innumerable: And that a white Hand came from the Almighty, and took him
by the hand, whereby all Venom, Poison, Uncleanness and Corruption departed
from him for a time: whereupon the Lord showed him three Heavens together, and
all the dwelling places contrived in one of them, but the highest Heaven was
showed to be without end, which glory he was not able to behold, but was made
able to look upon the Blood of the Saints, which was made round like a Wax
Cake, in very great breadth, but the glory which therewith appeared, he could
not look upon, so that he was forced to turn his face upon the Pillow: How the
Lord also showed him the murdering of the Wicked, even like the slaying of
Swine, the Father murdering the Son, and the Mother the Daughter, and every
one another, all the day long, and no man took pity upon them: That there was
then revealed unto him a very strange fire from Heaven, the length whereof he
did see consuming all things from the Heaven to Hell mouth, but he did not see
the breadth thereof: Also that he then did see the breadth of the tormenting
place of the Damned, and what was therein, but neither the bottom, nor length
of the place: That he also supposed he saw his Liberty begged by two honorable
Personages: Notwithstanding which deliverance (that he dreamed of) he tells
that he was carried afterward to Northampton Gaol, where he remained 17 Weeks,
as before is remembered. Furthermore there is declared, That in his Torments the
Lord showed him how he would confound all his Adversaries that were guilty in
any practice against him, and that one thing which they went about, they should
never bring to pass; for he let him see, that they were all as drunken men, and
Fools without wit: That in the end they should throw all their Books away, and
be at a great confusion one with another: That afterward (viz. about the
beginning of Easter Term last) the Lord brought him to London, and how he was
made acquainted with Coppinger at that time, as has been before declared: How
after his departing out of the City from Coppinger, he could not but remember
him in his Prayers; desiring the Lord to reveal himself extraordinarily to him,
so that he might be encouraged to go forward in the Action: Whereupon (as the
said Coppinger affirmed) he had two extraordinary Seals in very short space
after Hacket' s departure, and was wonderfully strengthened to proceed in the
Cause. Then is told how the Lord commanded him to go from one place to another
in and about the City, for two days space; and how he was commanded to rail
against the said two great Counselors, in diverse places where he came: How
being (in that time) commanded to see the Lions in the Tower, he took the
fiercest of them by the Head, and had none harm: Then is told what Preachers in
the City he heard, and that going to hear one, he saw a Surpless lie in the
Church, whereupon he would not stay there: That he went to certain Preachers in
Prison, to command them to deal faithfully in the Lord's business: And how he
was commanded by God to deface the Arms of England in Kaye's House in
Knight-Rider's-street. Lastly, It is said, that God has appointed two others
to deal for, and with Hacket, whom it will stand upon to deal faithfully for
the Lord, for they know what Hacket is, and what shall follow, if their
Counsels and Directions be not followed. Now if any shall marvail, how such an
absurd and ridiculous lying Legend should seduce men of any consideration, so
earnest for a supposed Reformation, and so exercised in praying and fasting;
let him remember, not only the effectual, but the efficacy it self of illusion,
and the spirit of slumber, falling (by God's secret, yet always just Judgment)
upon the Children of disobedience, such as be wise in their own conceits, and
not wise with sobriety; that they might believe Lies, because they have not
believed the Truth: And that they might ask and not obtain, because they ask
not as they ought.

After Arthington (On Thursday morning) had ended his aforesaid Treatise of
Prophecy (being the very day before their rising) Coppinger told him, that God
(the night before) had enlightened him the said Coppinger, who they all three
were, saying, that Arthington had unawares prophesied truly; for he was the
greatest Prophet of God's Judgments against the whole World that ever was, but
that they both were greater than he; for Coppinger himself was (he said) the
greatest that ever was, and last Prophet of mercy: and that he must describe
the new and holy Jerusalem, with the several places of joy that the Elect
should enjoy after this Life, and that they the said Coppinger and Arthington,
were ordained to separate the Lambs from the Goats before the Lord Jesus at the
last day. Whereat (it is said) they were both astonished, considering their own
unworthiness and unfitness, crying out against themselves and their Sins; yet
submitting themselves to the direction of God's Spirit, which they were assured
should sufficiently furnish them to do him that service which himself did
command. Then Coppinger proceeded to tell further, That Hacket was greater than
either of them, and that they two must obey him in whatsoever he commanded, but
told not then what, nor how great he was, other than King of Europe; which
Title was (before this time) concluded of amongst them. Hereupon (according to
Coppinger's commandment) Arthington offered to honor Hacket with his Title of
the King of Europe, and to demean himself toward him accordingly. But Hacket
himself herein dispensed with him, until the time should come, that he was to
honor him before others, bidding him withal to be of good cheer; for (faith
he) I serve a good Captain, who makes so dear account of me, that all the
Devils in Hell, nor Men in Earth, cannot take my life from me. Then Coppinger
(for confirmation of the like unto them two also) said, that Arthington and
himself were possessed, not only with Prophetical, but also with Angelical
Spirits, which Arthington taking to be true (by a great burning that he felt in
himself after that time) did thereupon fancy to himself, that no power in Earth
nor Hell could hurt either of them, because they had the spirit of Angels, and
they were subject to no Power, but to God alone: And that (God being the master
of the whole Work) all things should prosper with them, they only seeking his
glory, which (he faith) he vowed with himself, and to deal thoroughly in his
Office, to rebuke the World of Sin, and to denounce Judgments against
whomsoever the Spirit should move him, without fear or favor of Men, or of
Devils in Hell: which Spirit (he faith) then moved him (according to his hatred
before conceived against them, and his opinion that they were Trayors against
the Queen's Majesty) to utter and to declare his detestation he had against the
aforesaid three worthy Counselors, being by their places the greatest Subjects
in the Land. But herein may be said with the Poet:

Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione querentes?
Verrem de furto? --
Who can with any patience endure such Seditious Companions as these, to
appeach others of Treason? but especially so Loyal, Honorable and Worthy
Counselors, as they three are known to the World to be.

By the way, we may note the subtle managing and carriage of this Action by
Hacket and Coppinger in this one principal Point, which Arthington himself also
now observes: Videlicet, in that they opened not at any time Hacket's chief
pretended Office unto Arthington; videlicet, to represent, and to participate
with Jesus Christ's Office (of severing with his Fan the good from the bad)
until the very time they were to go into the Streets to do the Message that
Hacket enjoined them. For hereby they prevented a doubt of driving Arthington
back, who seemed a Man so serviceable for their purpose, as that he was worthy
to be still retained by them: and the rather, for that he had not yet finished
the writing up of Hacket's History that was to be annexed to the Prophecy)
until late that Thursday night which was before their rising, for they might
have feared (if leisure had served him to have considered of it, and examined
it at full how this could be) lest it might have made him at least to stagger,
and be doubtful of it.

Besides, Hacket kept (as Arthington now gathers) that honor wholly to
himself to proclaim it to them both together, as it were by a Voice from
Heaven, at that very instant when they should receive their charge of him; and
thereby have no time to reason against it, being straightway to go forward as
obedient Persons to him in all things.

Thus that Thursday passed on. On Friday morning Coppinger sent his Man Emerson
(by Five of the Clock in the morning) unto Arthington's Lodging, but his Wife
would not then awake him; so he sent for him again at Six, and they two then
went together unto Coppinger. Then Coppinger and Arthington determined (that
Friday morning, being the 16th day of July last) between Six and Seven of the
Clock in the forenoon, to go unto a certain Gentleman's House about the City,
of good behavior, and they forsooth to honor him, to be chief Governor under
her Majesty, which they also did that Morning, and promised unto him
accordingly that he should so be. Leaving also with him both the said Prophecy
and Hacket's History to peruse, but the good Gentleman was unwilling to deal
either with them or their Papers any way. They flayed not there above half an
hour. From thence they came betwixt Eight and Nine of the Clock in the Morning
unto Wigginton's Chamber (being Prisoner in the Counter in Woodstreet) with
whom having much speech and conference (part whereof is touched before) among
other things, they signified unto him, (as Arthington confesses) that they
were provoked to pronounce him the holiest Minister of all others, for dealing
so plainly and resolutely in God's Causes above all Ministers, which God would
manifest one day to his comfort.

Wigginton at his examination confesses such Conference by him at that time to
have been had with them, and (as he was enjoined by those who examined him)
has reported it by writing somewhat largely. He therein also sets down a
Conference had by him about the same matters with Hacket himself, coming to him
thither alone (as he says) the selfsame Friday morning, some while after the
other two were departed from him.

It may be gathered by his own Narration, that betwixt the time of Coppinger
and Arthington's talk with him, Wigginton had set down Article-wise, and
distincted with number the several Heads of their Speeches had with him. And
after he also enquired and set down in writing Hacket's Opinion likewise, unto
every of the said Articles severally. And albeit it need not be questioned, but
that both for Circumstance and Matter he would set it down, the least that
might be either to his own, or any his Accomplices disadvantage, yet may it serve
for the fuller understanding of the whole Action, and for necessary observation
besides, to touch some chief Points of those Conferences, though it be but as
himself tells them.

The principal Points of Wigginton's Wigginton' s Report of his Conference and
Speeches with Coppinger, Arthington and Hacket.
own Report touching Conference and Speeches had by him to and fro with
Coppinger and Arthington, and afterward with Hacket, the 16th day of July in
the Morning, 1591.
He says, That Coppinger and Arthington came unto him about Eight or Nine of
the Clock of the 16th day of July in the Morning, full of courage and comfort,
saying unto him thus: We are come to you now to bring you certain News of great
comfort, which is this, viz. That we have 1.
seen Jesus Christ this day in lively and extraordinary shape or fashion
presented unto us, not in his Body (for so he sits at the right hand of God
in Heaven, until the last Judgment) but in his effectual or principal Spirit,
whereby he dwells in William Hacket, more than in any Creature upon the Earth.

When Hacket came not long after their departure that Morning unto him,
Wigginton says, That he examined him about the whole Speeches of Coppinger and
Arthington uttered before unto him; whereunto Hacket answered first generally
thus: That he approved them no further than he saw they had warrant for their
doings, but particularly to this first Article thus, viz.

Hacket's Answer thereof unto Wigginton.

To the first, That he knew not of that their Vision, but he accounted himself
to be a chief Messenger of God, in such sort as follows.

Coppinger and Arthington's Speeches to Wigginton.

That the said William Hacket is the very same Angel forespoken of by the
Scriptures, who should come before the last Judgment of Christ with a Fan or
Sheephook in his hand, to separate the Goats from the Sheep.

Hacket's Answer.

To the second, That he was the only principal Man sent of God to decide the
Controversies of the Gospel of Christ in the World, or in England, or in
Europe; into which Controversies some bad Persons (being Enemies to him and to
the Gospel in England, and some of them being great Personages) had drawn him
to enter by their Cruel, Unjust, and Extraordinary Practices and Treacheries,
or Sorceries used against him: and that by him, as by a principal Angel of God
(with his Fan in his hand) God would now separate the Sheep from the Goats; and
that God would establish the Gospel by him generally, either by his death, or
by his life; but (quoth he as it were correcting himself) by my life it must be.

Coppinger and Arthington's Speeches.

That Hacket is a Man dearer or nearer unto God in some respects, than Moses or
John the 3.
Divine, who wrote the Revelation; because he must (as it were) bring an
accomplishment unto their Prophesies, and has a more excellent spirit or work
to do than they in some respects.

Hacket's Answer.

To the third, That God would do a greater Work by him the said William Hacket,
than ever he did by any of all the Prophets, for the establishment of his
Gospel, to the confusion of Satan and Antichrist.

Coppinger and Arthington's Speeches.

That the said Hacket had laid two several Charges in the name of Christ upon
them two, 4.
which they must needs perform or execute; the one upon Arthington of Prophecy,
concerning the end of the World; the other upon Coppinger, of painting out the
good and bad in the World, or in these parts of the World; and one of them had
in purpose or charge to read over the whole Bible for proof of their Office and
Business.

Hacket's Answer.

To the fourth, That God had sent Arthington to be the said Hacket his Writer
or Pen, and the said Coppinger to be the Expounder of his Mind, or Deliverer of
his Message to the old Magistrates (which were almost gone) and to the New, and
to the World.

Coppinger and Arthington's Speeches.

That they had some sight of the glory of the 5.
World to come, where they found that the Queen was highly in God's favor,
because she had cut off much of Antichrist's Force or Train: but, etc.

That M. Cartwright had done more against 6.
Antichrist, than any in the World before him since the Apostles time; and that
Wigginton was Mutuum muli scabunt.
comparable unto him, and M. Lancaster (meaning a Schoolmaster in Shoe-Lane)
was above them both, in the state of heavenly glory, because he had kept
himself undefiled from the common Corruptions of these Times, and had a most
single heart to God.

Hacket's Answer.

To the fifth and sixth, That men should shortly turn their Spears into
Mattocks for the making of a true or better Reformation, or else a great
Plague, as it were Fire from Heaven should fall upon them for their rebellion
against God: And that the Queen was undone, and all we Preachers should be
damned, if we fall not to Reformation speedily. And that he knew not of any
such Comparisons or Degrees to be in the seat of Glory; but sure he was,
although every man should be rewarded according to his works, yet he that would
be highest, should be lowest there, where all be as one in Christ.

7. The seventh Article by them then uttered, 7.
is nothing but a lewd and slanderous railing against two of the said
Counselors, whereunto Wigginton shapeth no Answer in Hacket's behalf, belike
allowing it; and therefore did not ask Hacket of it, because himself made no
doubt of the truth thereof, as it seems.

Coppinger and Arthington's Speeches.

8. That many of the Preachers and People in 8.
England professing Religion, were blind and careless in many things, yet the
Servants of God to be saved upon repentance; and that some few which were more
forward than others, should have more honor, or higher places in Heaven than
they.

Hacket's Answer.

To the eighth; That it was true, so near as Wigginton could call to
remembrance.

Coppinger and Arthington's Speeches.

9. That these things they would confirm unto 9.
him by God's Spirit out of his word: In the mean while, they both used
vehement Protestations, that it was most true which they spoke, and that their
Doctrine was or should be fetched out of the Third Heaven: and they would prove
themselves and William Hacket to be extraordinarily called and sent of God as
aforesaid; and they exhorted him to be constant in the Truth. Arthington also
pronounced Wigginton to be highly in God's favor, and assured him, that God's
Spirit should be doubled upon him.

Hacket's Answer.

To the ninth be avoucheth the full effect thereof, and he also pronounced
Wigginton to be highly in God's favor: And further told (after a bold and a
resolute manner) that he had appointed him, and some few others, to be
Assistants to Coppinger and Arthington in their foresaid Offices, etc.

Besides the Premises, Wigginton has set down (as pleased him best) a
Dialogue had with Coppinger and Arthington at that time not worth the inserting
here: Yet this may be observed in it, that they then said, they Note.
would prove the things aforesaid by God's Spirit (which was above his word)
and by his Word also. Secondly, By Wigginton his own Report it appears, That
they answered unto his Speeches very temperately, directly, and pertinently.
Thirdly, It appears also therein, that he did not contradict any of their
sayings, nor rebuke them, nor found fault with the absurdity and blasphemy of
their Opinions, and undutifulness of their Speeches, or danger of their
Purposes, but only warned them to be wary, etc. lest they might be illuded of
the Devil: So leaving it at that time doubtful, whether he allowed them to be
such extraordinary Men or no.

In his said Narration he further shows, That he asking Hacket, when he saw
the two Wigginton' s further Report.
Gentlemen? Hacket answered, They had been with him that Morning whilst he lay
in his Bed, and had suddenly departed from him with one cry, saying, Christ is
come, Christ is come; where at he said he marvailed, not knowing what was their
meaning in the matter: Adding furtherm, That he had often warned Coppinger to
take heed of conceiving too much liking of his own spiritual Gifts, whom he
perceived to be ravished with an exceeding love, and extraordinary care for the
safety of his Mistress, meaning the Queen's Majesty, who (quoth Hacket) is
undone (and here is put an etc.) For you and all other Preachers shall be
damned, unless she for her part, and you for your parts, do speedily fall to
Reformation. Wigginton also says further, That Hacket either at that time, or
not long before, did exhort him to deal faithfully in the Lord's business; and
that he had heard Hacket pray sometimes before, in strange terms, as these and
such like, viz. Father, I know thou love me as well as thou love thine own
self. Thus when Hacket had answered Wigginton's demands touching Coppinger and
Arthington's Speeches (as is before set down) he said he would depart home into
the Country; yet he would leave word behind, for his Adversaries to know in
what place they should find him, if they were disposed to call for him. And
withal made great show (after his former wonted manner) as though he neither
feared Magistrate, nor cared for any punishment, nor doubted any danger to
ensue upon him, for any thing he had done or said, or should go about.

Now touching some things markable in Remarks on Wigginton's Narration.
this Narration of Wigginton's. First, If Arthington say true in his
Confessions; That Hacket published not himself to have that 1.
Office of Christ, or his principal Spirit, till the very moment that they were
to go into the City to proclaim (as they did) and if they went not unto Hacket
that day till they had first been with Wigginton, which seems to be true;
then could it not be, that Wigginton heard that of them two at that time, which
he reports them to have spoken in the first, second, third and fourth
Article; and therefore he was made acquainted with it before that time.
Secondly, That which 2.
he makes Hacket to fumble about somewhat doubtfully in answer to the fourth
Article (touching the old Magistrates that were gone, and of new) does argue,
that Wigginton was also made privy to the Intent of displacing all the old
Counselors, and placing of new, as was plotted by the Conspirators. Thirdly, 3.
Their lewd and malepert imputation of her Majesty's Honor to be blemished,
and affirming she was undone, though it had been no more, were matters of that
quality, that no dutiful or well-advised Subject would have either concealed,
or so lightly passed over as he did. Fourthly, It is probable, 4.
that Hacket meant rather to have Mattocks turned into Spears, than
contrariwise; for I see no peaceable means that was thought on by them.
Fifthly, We may observe that 5.
here is a Reformation moved, which upon pain of damnation must be undertaken,
and that with all speed; even Now, (they say) wherein others beside the Queen
have their parts to perform in erecting of it; some whereof have also
extraordinary Gifts and Callings to run in that course of Reforming; and
Wigginton (being yet a Prisoner, but belike put in hope of speedy deliverance
by their means) is appointed a principal Assistant to them; yea, and is made
privy unto some matter, for which Hacket thought he was not unlike to be
afterward sought for, and which he knew might be dangerous unto him, had he
been such a man, as any Magistrate, Punishment or Danger might have dismayed,
and yet not sought to be revealed by Wigginton unto any Magistrate, till upon
his examination it was found out. Lastly, I observe the Coggery of the 6,
Reporter, or else the lewd lying and contradiction to himself of that wretched
Seducer Hacket. For in his Answer to the fifth and sixth Articles, he knows no
degrees of glory in Heaven; and yet in his Answer to the eighth, he assigns
more honor and higher places in Heaven unto some few that are the most
forward, than he does unto others.

But let us go on with the Narration of the principal Action, interrupted by
occasion of the Conferences had with Wigginton, and of his report of them.

From Wigginton's Lodging the said Coppinger Hacket' s History continued.
and Arthington came directly to Hacket's Chamber in Walker's House at Broken
Wharf, and there found the Beast in Bed after Eight of the Clock: Where being
enflamed (they say) with zeal out of all measure, Coppinger began to pray at
the Bed's feet, and Arthington joined with him; wherein they stood much upon
their own unworthiness, etc. but yet offered their obedience to do as the Lord
should direct them by his Spirit, having already done so much as was enjoined
them. Whereupon Hacket came out of his Bed, and prayed with them in his Shirt
twice, that the Spirit might direct them, and they likewise obey the same in
all things, to the glory of God only. After Hacket's latter Prayer, Coppinger
offered to go on in his Prayer, but the Devilish Spirit moved Arthington to
interrupt him, and to charge him in the Name of the Lord Jesus to arise and
anoint the King with the Holy Ghost. Whereupon Coppinger straightway rose up,
and three times kissed the Boards under his feet, rising up after every time,
and making great reverence with bowed knee; and after the third time he came
toward Hacket as he lay in his Bed, who put out his hand, and took Coppinger
by the hand, and said, You shall not need to anoint me, Blasphemy.
for I have been already anointed in Heaven by the Holy Ghost himself. Then
Coppinger asked him, what his pleasure was to be done, Go your way both (said
he, as Arthington reports) and tell them in the City, that Christ Jesus is come
with his Fan in his hand to judge the Earth. And if any man ask you where he
is, tell them he lies at Walker' s House by Broken Wharf: and if they will not
believe it, let them: come and kill me, if they can; for as truly as Christ
Jesus is in Heaven, so truly is he come to judge. the world. Then Coppinger
said it should be done forthwith; and thereupon went forward, and Arthington
followed so readily the said Prophet of Mercy, that he had no leisure to take
his Gloves with him, and ere Arthington could get down the Stairs, Coppinger
had begun (in the House below) to proclaim News from Heaven of exceeding great
Mercy: That Christ Jesus was come, etc. as above is said, with whom Arthington
also cried the same words aloud, following him along the Streets from thence by
Watling-street and Old Change, toward Cheapside, they both adding beyond their
Commission, these words, Repent England, Repent. But surely either their
Commission was delivered them (at one time or other) more largely than the one
of them now reports; or else they went beyond and exceeded it in many other
material Points besides this. For after they both had thus come (with mighty
concourse of the common multitude as to such a novelty of hearing two new
Prophets in these days arisen was likely) with an uniform cry into Cheapside
near unto the Cross: and there finding the throng and press of People to
increase about them, in such sort as that they could not well pass further, nor
be conveniently heard of them all, as they desired; therefore they got them up
into an empty Cart which stood there, and out of that choice Pulpit (fur such a
purpose) made their lewd and traitorous preachment unto the People: wherein
they stood not only upon the words of their former cry, but (so near as I could
learn from so common an Auditory, and in so confused an Action) they reading
something out of a Paper, went more particularly over the Office and Calling of
Hacket; how he represented Christ, by partaking a part of his glorified Body;
by his principal Spirit, and by the Office of severing the Good from the Bad
with his Fan in his hand, and of establishing the Gospel in Europe (which as it
seems they took to be all the World, or else supposed, that all Europe did
profess Christianity) and of bringing in that Discipline which they so often
babble of, and which they mean by the term of Reformation, and the holy Cause:
That he was now come, and all these things were presently to be performed by
him, telling also the People where they saw him, where he lay and remained:
That they were two Prophets, the one of Mercy, the other of Judgment, sent, and
extraordinarily called by God to assist him in this great Work, and were
Witnesses of these things: confirming the same upon their own Salvation, and
wishing themselves confounded and damned for ever, if these things they spoke,
were not true. And thereupon, the one of them pronounced Mercy, great Comfort,
and unspeakable Joys to all that should repent presently, be obedient, and
embrace this acceptable Message and opportunity offered: And the other
denounced terrible Judgments, if they repented not, which should even presently
(also) fall upon them, and especially upon that City of London; affirming that
all that believed them not, were condemned Body and Soul. This Judgment against
London (as Arthington the pretended Prophet of Judgment, says he gathered out
of Hacket's History) was, that men should (there) kill and massacre one another
(as Butchers do kill Swine) all the day long, and no man should take compassion
of them. There was then and there further delivered by them, or by the one of
them, that Hacket was King of Europe, and so ought to be obeyed and taken; and
that all Kings must hold of him, and that the Queen's Majesty had forfeited her
Crown, and was worthy to be deprived. Which most traitorous Point amongst
others Hacket enjoined them to publish, as in the one of his Indictments is
contained. Lastly, In very unmannerly and sawey terms they prayed to God to
confound two great Lords of her Majesty's Counsel; for these two, (together
with a certain Knight) they then and there openly and most lewdly accused in
general terms of Treason. This outrage was done the sixteenth day of July
aforesaid, about Ten of the Clock, or something after, in the Forenoon.

By which their Proclamation, being laid together with their former
Conferences, Letters, and Purposes against the Queen and Counsel, and for
advancing of Hacket, and for altering the State, with the very time (when so
many Soldiers were about the City) it is evident to any, who has but half an
eye to see with, that they intended and hoped to move Tumult and Sedition: That
by many hands of the common multitude (which they brag of, saying, they are
already inflamed with zeal) they might have brought all their Purposes at
length to a sure and speedy conclusion; which designment, for their pretended
Reformation, this sort of People do greatly lament, so long to have been
frustrated, after so many other several kind of means, in vain attempted by
them. But God (who stays the raging of the waters, and the madness of his
people) did frustrate them herein of their purpose and expectation: his Name be
always praised therefore.

And whereas they had purposed to have gone with the like cry and proclamation
through other the chief parts of the City, the press (not of Officers to take
them, but of common People to gaze and wonder at them) was so great, as that
they were forced to go into a Tavern in Cheapside, at the Sign of the Mermaid;
the rather, because a Gentleman in a white Doublet, being of his Acquaintance,
plucked at Coppinger whilst he was in the Cart, and rebuked him for his strange
and lewd Demeanor and Speeches.

Whereupon (though Arthington were offended with the said Gentleman for
touching a Prophet of God in so rough a sort as he said) yet they were both
contented to slep aside into the said Tavern with him; where when they had
remained a space, Coppinger was persuaded by one of the aforesaid Lawson's Men,
that staid there at that time (for avoiding the wondering and press of the
People) to step over into Woodstreet, and from thence by back Lanes to his
Sister's House near unto Paul's Wharf, where he lodged. But whilst they two
were going together, Coppinger was very careful to know whether Arthington
followed them or not; insomuch as he would not be satisfied, till the said
Apprentice went back again for him. At whose coming back, he found Arthington
still publishing his foresaid Messages to the People, and telling them of
Hacket, and of his Office, with whom Arthington was content also at last to go
by the same Streets that Coppinger had gone, but yet crying (as he did before)
Repent England, Repent, etc. When in this sort they two were come together to
Coppinger's Lodging, they found the Gates shut against them; whereupon the said
Apprentice would have had Arthington to have gone to his own Lodging, but he
would needs go to Walker's House at Broken Wharf, where not long before he left
Hacket. All the way that Arthington went, he was followed by a great multitude
of Lads and young Persons of the meaner sort: But at his coming to Walker's
House, Hacket was not yet returned out of the City from Wigginton.

After that Arthington was entered the House, he was there staid by one Edward
Jones, an honest Citizen: And when Hacket (not long after) came in, Arthington
said, There comes the King of the Earth. But Hacket willed him to keep
silence, telling him he was too outrageous: whereupon he straightway (in very
dutiful manner) obeyed; for he called Hacket his Captain, and said, That he
would do whatsoever he commanded him to do.

When the said Jones (in searching about Arthington) found a Writing in his
Sleeve, Arthington said, That fell out as he would have it, for now it would be
seen; for he had made (he said) an Epistle to the Queen, and she would not
receive it, and therefore she was (he said) no longer Queen, but was deprived
of her Crown, Hacket saying nothing thereunto.

There was found also in Hacket's Chamber, hidden at the Bed's feet, many
Writings; and Walker (the Owner of the House) brought also unto the said Jones
other Writings of theirs out of a Stable.

And when Master Heyney, Parson of the Church of St. Mary-Somersets, an honest
and learned Preacher, looked on one of the said Papers, Hacket reproving him,
said, that it appertained not unto him, but unto the Magistrates, to look on
them.

Arthington (in Speeches with the said Heyney) said amongst other things, That
the Judgments of God over that City were very great, and that the time was now
come, that God would reform his Church universally, and root out all Idolatrous
Priests, and that the Ministers of that City were no better; affirming himself
to be a Prophet sent purposely from God to denounce his Judgments, and that
Coppinger was a greater Prophet than he: That Cartwright was a great learned
Man, and a Saint of God; but Wigginton was less learned than he, yet far before
him in Dignity for his Zeal; always concluding his Speeches with these words of
imprecation against himself, viz. else God confound me.

When the said Preacher demanded of Hacket, why he had seduced Arthington to
bring him into such Blasphemies? his Answer was, that abundance of Zeal did
cause him to exceed in that sort. Then he asked Hacket, how he liked that
Arthington ascribed unto him an Office peculiar to Christ? To which he would
not directly answer, but said, that God had a great Work to bring to pass by
himself in this Land; affirming that himself also was a Prophet, and had
endited that Prophecy (which Arthington writ) to be sent to the Queen or
Counsel, and that he prayed to God to direct Arthington's Pen therein.

This strange Accident being quickly blown through the City, all was in a buz,
and in a kind of astonishment, what to think of the matter: And being speedily
brought to her Majesty's ears, (then lying but at Greenwich) two of her
honorable Counsel were presently dispatched unto London, to take further
notice of the whole matter. About One of the Clock in the Afternoon Coppinger
was sent for, whilst Hacket and Arthington were brought before those honorable
Counselors and others at the Lord Mayors to be examined: but (as is informed)
they would not show any token of duty or reverence unto those honorable
Persons, not so much as by putting off their Hats unto them. Then their Hats
were plucked off by others, and they were told their duties, and were asked
whether they did not know before whom they stood? To which they answered, that
they knew them right well; nevertheless they would yield them no duty nor
reverence, insomuch as themselves (they said) were greater Persons than those
before whom they were convented, yet they seemed well content to stand
bareheaded, so their Hats were taken off by force, and not put off by their own
wills, This course of insolent behavior toward all that examined them, both
Hacket and Arthington held on at sundry other their Examinations. Nevertheless,
Arthington that was so scrupulous to yield any reverence to the Queen's
Counsel, and Officers, at one time when he saw Hacket, presently fell down
grovelling upon his face on the ground and honored him, according to the
Convention among them mentioned before. And albeit both these continued still
resolute in their former Fancies, conceived of their extrarordinary Callings
and Offices, and sought most absurdly to defend it by Scripture, (but chiefly
by most terrible Imprecations unto themselves, praying to be confounded and
damned if they said not true:) yet to all Questions that were asked of them,
they answered (though most confidently) yet pertinently, and directly to
purpose, saying, That Hacket used the matter somewhat more craftily, when any
Question of especial danger was propunded unto him. For then would he by
cunning Evasions, by Cavils, and by frustratory kinds of Answers go about to
put off such Interrogatories, seeming when he was pressed somewhat hard, to be
weary of his Part and Person put on, if he could have then told how to have
shaken it off, and been rid of it again with any honesty.

Coppinger (soon after his first examination) finding the event of things not
to answer their expectations, seeing also the matter somewhat warmly taken (as
there was good cause) and thereby gathering the danger which he and his
Accomplices stood in, and perceiving also (by the Questions asked) the
intercepting of their Writings and Letters, whereby their dealings were at full
discovered and brought to light; began, either by his own voluntary choice (as
some perhaps not unprobably have imagined) or through anxiety (indeed) of mind,
growing forth of the badness of the Cause, to behave himself as a Man
distracted of his Wits. Insomuch as coming at one time to be examined, and
finding Hacket there, at his sight he presently roared out in a very strange
and horrible kind of voice; which Hacket willing to turn to the best,
straightway said, It was no marvail, though Coppinger did now so behave
himself, for that he had given him over already unto Sotan.

By perusal of their Writings and Letters, and by their Examinations, all the
Plots of Treason and Lewdness (before mentioned) fell out very evidently, and
more at full against them.

Touching the Queen's-Arms defaced at Kaye's House, Hacket did confess, at the
times of his examination, that he did it, none other being present, and that he
was moved thereunto inwardly by the Spirit, to take away her whole Power of her
Authority; and that he would have done worse, had it not been for disquieting
his Hostess where he lay, because when she found it, she was very angry
therewith: For he was not sorry, neither is sorry (as he then said) for doing
the Act, because he was commanded by God to do it, and durst do no otherwise.
He confessed also, that he was likewise moved to put out the Lions and the
Dragons Eyes in the Arms; but being asked why he did so? he bitterly and
maliciously answered, that he did know that Lions and Dragons did afflict God's
People. He did also raze out the Cross that was pictured on the top of the
Crown. He further confessed, That he meant also her Majesty's Counsel should be
removed, because they were (he said) wicked; and that he himself (being moved
by the Spirit) would have placed certain other new Counselors (whom he then
named) to wait upon the Queen, and to reform Religion. It is also confessed by
him, that he told Arthington and others, that he was the anointed King of
Europe. By the Depositions of the said Kaye and his Wife, it appears, that
they finding, (about a fortnight before Hacket's departure from them) the
Queen's Majesty's Picture pricked with some Bodkin or Iron Instrument in the
very place representing her Royal Heart, did in great anger charge Hacket with
it. Whereunto he answered, that he had done it, and must and would answer it;
adding, he had greater Matters to answer than that, and therefore (said he) you
need not make such ado for it. But Hacket at all his Examinations either denied
this Point slatly, or said, he did not remember it. This Noble Heart, which
thereby he so traitorously despited, God of his infinite mercy long bless and
continue still most happy and hearty in his love and fear, within her Majesty's
sacred breast, maugre all such execrable fiery spirits and hell hounds in
earth, and all the damned devils in hell. Amen.

Likewise he confessed, that he moved and sent forth Coppinger and Arthington,
to go whither God should send them, and to declare and publish, that there lay
a Man (namely he the said Hacket) at Walker's House, which made claim to the
Crown of England, and that her Majesty had forfeited her Crown, in that her
Ministers have used extraordinary means to set up Religion. This he confessed
on the 21st and 23d of July. But at his former examination on the 19th of July,
being demanded whether he would acknowledge that the Queen's Majesty is Lawful
Queen of England or not? he subtly then said, he would not answer to that
Question, but said she was Queen of England yet, if she had not forfeited the
same. And he further confessed (on 23d of July) that he First published in
Hamp-shire (about Three or Four Years past) and afterward in Hartford-shire,
and in Northamptonshire, that her Majesty was not Queen, and that she had
forfeited her Title to the Crown: And that he told Arthington so much in
Trinity Term. All these aforesaid, were confessed by him, without any Torture:
but being Tortured, he then Sang another Song, and confessed her Majesty to be
his lawful Queen, and affirmed, that he Honored her, and was Sorry for his
Offense: adding, that if Coppinger, Wigginton, and one other (whom he named)
were well sifted, and straightly examined, they would utter and declare sundry
matters of Treason.

It fell out besides upon deposition of Kayes, that Coppinger (being told how
Hacket had used the Queens Picture and the Arms) at the first seemed to mislike
with it, saying, that if he were such a fellow, he had done with him; but
(says he) you must bear with him: for some great men have also born with him,
and he is with you, but as it were a Prisoner.

Coppinger himself also at that his examination (which was taken the 19th of
July) confessed, that the Letter then showed to him, (and inferted before) was
the Copy of a Letter which he sent to the said John Udall about ten weeks then
past, and that the cause why he wrote to Udall that he used not to repair unto
him and the rest who were in prison, so often as he was wont to do, for doubt
of more trouble and danger that might grow to them thereby, was, in respect of
this action, which he had to do: He also then affirmed, that the Queens
Majesty, Queen Elizabeth, is not Queen of England, neither is he (as he said)
now her servant, for Hacket is the only King of the World, and that Hacket was
commanded by God to deface her Majesty's Arms which were in the House where he
then lay, and that Hacket also pricked the Picture of the Queens Majesty at the
Heart. That himself, Wigginton, and one other (the very Week before Wigginton
was committed) had a Fast together, where they Prayed, that if any of them
should have any extraordinary calling, they might have some extraordinary seal
of it: about the which time, he the said Coppinger was called in a Dream. And
that he (together with Arthington, and one other) had a former Fast at the
aforesaid Lancaster's House, about one Week before that time: and that her
Majesty's Counsel (that now are) must be Tried by this King, whether they are
to be removed from her Majesty or not: and that she is to have to be about her
to attend her Person (for the time) such as himself should assign, which shall
be those, whom he has named in a Letter of his, that is found with him: and
some others also (he said) were meant to have been assigned also for that
purpose.

There fell out also upon some of Arthington's Examinations (while he remained
obstinate) certain other points not unworthy to be remembered. One was, that
whereas he, in writing of a treatise against the state of this Church as it now
stands, observed (as he says) therein his old want to abstain from bitter
speeches and raylings, as a thing which he naturally abhorred: yet within these
few Months, and after he had entered into these actions, he had altered his
opinion, and was moved, in spirit, to follow another sharp and biting course of
Writing, as being more convenient in his judgment. Also, when some that
examined him, stood greatly upon this point, to persuade him, that he was
seduced in those things wherein he seemed so resolute: and reasoned against
such their pretended extraordinary callings, gifts, and offices: then he (for
better confirmation thereof) said; that it should very shortly appear to the
world, that they were no such seduced persons, as was imagined. For whereas a
godly Gentlewoman in London (so he termed her) had been by the space of 14
years possessed with a Devil, (as is before touched) that (for a sure sign of
their vocation) the said Devil should be thrown out of her, by all, or some of
their three means, very shortly. He also persisted wilful in his former
fancies, until the very time that he knew Hacket was hanged; for until that
day, he very confidently affirmed, that he was most assured by the Spirit of
God, and by the joys and comfort he inwardly felt, that Hacket did participate
with Christ in a part of his office, and was indeed King of all Europe, on whom
her Majesty and all other, must hold their crowns and scepters, and must govern
(if they would continue their government) by such Laws, as he should prescribe
and set forth: That all they three should shortly be dismissed, and should go
over-Sea with Hacket, to take possession of all those his other Kingdoms
abroad, and to perform their Offices. But when the vanity and danger of this
strange fancy was opened unto him, his answer was to this effect: You think
(says he somewhat pleasantly, as it were pitying their error and misconceit)
that we have incurred the danger of laws herein; and that we shall therefore be
put to death: but as sure as God is in Heaven, the sword shall not come near to
hurt us, neither shall any man be able to touch the least hair of any of our
heads.

Thus, the mean time (for the most part Hacket comes to his Trial.
thereof) from Friday the 16th of July, until Monday sevennight after, being
spent in examinations, it was thought good, that Hacket should then come to his
Trial: on which day (being the 26th of July) he was brought from Bridewell to
the Sessions House near Newgate, before the Lord Mayor, the Lord Wentworth, Sir
Gilbert Gerrard Knight, Master of the Rolls, Sir Walstane Dixie, and Sir
Richard Martin Knights, Mr. Sergeant Fleetwood Recorder of London, Mr. Daniel
and others in that Commission: where after the Grand Jury was Empannelled, the
Witnesses that should give evidence Sworn, and two several Indictments against
him found, Hacket was willed to hold up his hand, which he did: then the first
Indictment was read being of this tenor being turned into English, viz.

The Jury do present for the Queen, That The Indictment. London ss.
William Hacket late of Oundel in the County of Northampton Yeoman, as a false
Traitor against the most excellent and Christian Princess our Sovereign Lady
Elizabeth, by the grace of God, of England, France, and Ireland, Queen,
defender of the Faith, etc. his natural and Sovereign liege Lady, having not
the fear of God in his heart, nor weighing his due allegiance, but seduced by
the instigation of the Devil, maliciously and traitorously, compassing,
imagining, devising, and intending the deprivation and deposing of our said
Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, from her honor and royal name of the Imperial Crown
of this Realm of England, on the 21st day of July, in the 33d year of the reign
of our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth now Queen of England, at London, that is to
say, in the Parish of St. Brides in the Ward of Farringdon extra London, and
diverse other days and times, betwixt the 12th of February last past, and the
25th day of July, in the said 33d year of her Majesty's Reign, as well in the
Parish and Ward aforesaid, as elsewhere in London aforesaid, of his own
perverse and traitorous mind, and imagination, maliciously, expressly,
advisedly, directly, and traitorously in the presence and hearing of sundry
faithful Subjects of our said Sovereign Lady, these false, malicious, and
traitorous English words following, concerning our said Sovereign Lady the
Queen's Majesty, falsely, maliciously, advisedly, expressly, directly, and
traitorously said, rehearsed, published, and spoke, viz. That the Queen's
Majesty (meaning thereby our said Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth) was not Queen
of England: and that the Queen's Majesty (meaning thereby our said Sovereign
Queen Elizabeth) did represent all hypocrisy, and had forfeited her Crown, and
was worthy to be deprived, and that he had been of that opinion this four
years: and that he defaced her Arms in Kayes house (thereby meaning the house
of one Ralph Kayes situate and being in Knightrider-street in the Parish of St.
Gregory near Paul's in the Ward of Baynard' s Castle London) to take away her
whole power of her Authority, and was moved thereunto by the spirit, and that
he neither was, nor is sorry therefore, to the great scandal and derogation of
the person and Royalty of our said Sovereign Lady the Queen, and to the
subversion of the State of this Realm of England, and contrary to the form of a
statute in this case made and provided, and also against the peace of our said
Sovereign Lady, her Crown and dignities, etc.

Being asked whether he were guilty to this Indictment or not? he confessed and
He pleaks guilty.
pleaded guilty: adding this, All must be as you will. Whereupon Mr.
Attorney General desired for the Queen, his confession of the Indictment might
be entered. Then Hacket being again bidden to hold up his hand, he did so
accordingly: whereupon the second Indictment was read being in English as
follows, viz.

The Jury presents for the Queen: That William Second Indictment. London ss.
Hacket late of Oundel in the County of Northampton Yeoman, as a false traitor
against the most excellent and Christian Princess our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth
by the grace of God of England, France, and Ireland, Queen, desender of the
Faith, etc. Having not the fear of God in his heart, nor weighing his due
allegiance, but seduced by the Instigation of the Devil, and intending wholly
to withdraw, put out, and extinguish the hearty love, and the true and due
obedience, which a true and faithful subject of the Queen's should bear, and by
law is bound to bear, toward our said Sovereign Lady the Queen; the first day
of July in the 33d year of the Reign of the said Queen, at London, in the
Parish of S. Gregory near Paul' s in the Ward of Castle-Baynard London, falsely,
maliciously, and traitorously intended, imagined, went about, and compassed,
the said Queen his Sovereign and natural liege Lady, not only from her Royal
state, title, power, and government of this Realm of England, utterly to
deprive, depose, cast down, and disherit, but also to bring and put the said
Queen's Majesty to death, and final destruction, and sedition in the said Realm
of England to raise up, levy and make: and also wholly to subvert and destroy
the state of this whole Commonwealth, being in and throughout every part
thereof, well constituted and ordered. And to the intent be might fulfill and
bring to pass those his aforesaid traitorous purposes, imaginations,
compassings, and intents, the said William Hacket afterward, that is to say,
the said first day of July, in the 33d year of the Reign of the Queen's Majesty
that now is, did come to the mansion house of one Ralph Kayes, situate and
being in Knight-rider-street in the said Parish of St. Gregory in the Ward
aforesaid: and then and there, maliciously, devilishly, and traitorously, raced
and defaced the Arms of the Queen's Majesty then and there in the said house
being, with this intent, traitorously to take away, put down, and overthrow the
power of Authority of the said Queen. And that the said William Hacket for
further accomplishing and effecting of his said traitorous purposes,
imaginations, compassings, and intents, the said first day of July, in the said
33d year of her Majesty's reign, in the house of the said Ralph Kayes, situate
in the parish and ward aforesaid, did traitorously raze a certain Picture of
the Queen's Majesty, then and there in the said house likewise being: and then
and there did maliciously and traitorously put in and thrust an Iron Instrument
into that part of the said Picture, that did represent the Breast and Heart of
the Queen's Majesty. And afterward, that is to say, on the 16th day of July in
the 33d year of the reign of the Queen's Majesty that now is, the said William
Hacket, traitorously came to the house of one John Walker situate and being in
the Parish of St. Mary Somerset in the Ward of Queen-hith in London aforesaid,
with intent traitorously to confer and treat with one Edmund Coppinger Gent.
and Henry Arthington Gent. concerning his traitorous purposes, imaginations,
compassings, and intents aforesaid. And that the said William Hacket afterward,
that is to say, on the 16th day of July in the 33d year of the Reign of the
Queen's Majesty that now is, at London aforesaid in the house of the said John
Walker, in the foresaid Parish of St. Mary Somerset in the said Ward of
Queenhith in London, of his own perverse and traitorous mind and imagination,
maliciously, advisedly, expressly, and traitorously did treat and had conference
with the said Edmund Coppinger and Henry Arthington, by what ways, means, and
manner, the said traitorous purposes, imaginations, compassings, and intents,
might be accomplished and brought to pass. And thereupon on the said 16th day
of July, in the said 33d year, in the said house of John Walker aforesaid,
situate and being in the said Parish of Saint Mary Somerset in the said Ward of
Queenhith London, in the presence and hearing of the said Edmund Coppinger and
Henry Arthington (being then and there in the said house) the said Hacket these
false traitorous English words following, of our said Sovereign Queen
Elizabeth, falsely, maliciously, advisedly, expressly, directly and traitorously,
said, rehearsed, published and spoke, viz. That the Queen's Majesty, (meaning
our said Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, had forfeited her Crown, and was
worthy to be deprived. And that furthermore the said William Hacket thereupon,
the said 16th day of July in the said 33d year, in the said house of John
Walker situate in the Parish of St. Mary Somerset in the said Ward of
Queen-hith London, maliciously, and traitorously moved and stirred up the said
Edmund Coppinger, and Henry Arthington, traitorously and openly to publish and
declare in London aforesaid, that the Queen's Majesty that now is, had
forfeited her Crown, to the great offense and derogation of the person of the
Queen's Majesty, and to the subversion of the state of this Realm of England,
and contrary to the peace of our said Sovereign Lady, her crown and dignities,
etc.

And being likewise asked whether he were guilty to this Indictment or not, To
this he answers perversely.
(belike perceiving that he was already plunged in far enough) he began then to
answer more perversely, saying to the Bench, You have wit enough to judge for me
and your selves too: Being asked the same again, he said, Few words are best;
it is good to know much and to say little: And being diverse times asked, he
still repeated these words. Then being told, that if he should persist in that
sort, not to plead directly as by Law he ought, it could not serve his turn,
for that alone was sufficient of it self to condemn him of the Treason: and
being asked again, whether he were guilty or not, he said, Ambo. But some
further good advertisements being given unto him, at last (after much ado) he
pleaded, Not At last pleads not guilty.
guilty, to that second Indictment. Thereupon being asked, by whom he would be
Tried, he said, By the Country: But being told he ought to say, By God and by
the Country, he said, That he would be tried by the Jury. And therewithal burst
He blasphemes,
out into such blasphemous and hellish words against the Majesty of God (in
truth, not to be heard by Christian ears, and therefore not to be uttered or
repeated here) that they were to the great astonishment and horror of all, and
detestation of him with all the hearers. It may be that he Intending to induce
the Court to believe him mad.
hoped thereby to induce the Judges to an opinion that he was mad and furious;
albeit in his countenance, gesture, attentiveness to that which was spoken,
silence when he ought, holding up his hand when he was commanded, perceiving
the effect of all was spoken, pertinent (though sometimes perverse) answers,
through all that action, no tokens of any fury or madness at all could be noted
in him.

Some have imagined that the Illusion of the Devil was so strong, to persuade
him of an immunity from all danger, according to his former conceived Opinions,
that thereby he grew to such a devilish impatience against God, when as now he
saw himself to be brought to more apparent danger than (happily) he supposed
there ever would be cause for him to fear. Which thing seems more probable to
have been the occasion thereof; for that immediately after his Blasphemy, he
also used these words; God Almighty is above, and will he not revenge? But
seeing he could not be brought to any other Plea, the Queen's Attorney General
desired in behalf Not pleading as he ought, the Queen's Attorney demands
Judgment to be entered. No Evidence being heard.
of the Queen, That Judgment thereupon might be entered. And seeing he pleaded
Guilty to the one, and stood mute to the second, in that he answered not as Law
would (whereupon he was to be convicted of both the Indictments) so that none
Evidence (which was there ready) needed either to be used, or by the Queen's
Council Learned to be opened or enforced: Nevertheless, for better satisfaction
of the World, it was by them thought meet, somewhat to show both how heinous,
and how evident (for Proof) his Treasons were. And albeit I am not able (in any
tolerable sort) to repeat the grave, wise, and pithy Discourses that were made
in this behalf, by those two worthy Gentlemen, Master Attorney General, and
Master Solicitor to her Majesty; yet (I hope) they will pardon me, to set down
only some few heads of their Speeches, as they were noted briefly from their
mouths, and afterward brought unto me. Master Attorney declared, That the
Original of The Substance of Mr. Attorney's Speech.
these Plots and Conspiracies came from, and were for the Sectaries of this
time: That Coppinger in a Letter to Udall, prays him and the rest in Prison
not to faint: That he and others had taken a course for their speedy
deliverance, and desired pardon for not coming to him, which he said might be
dangerous, for that they should be the sooner suspected; or to that effect:
That there were Letters dispersed in the streets five or six days before the
Action: That there were found in Wigginton's Chamber printed Pamphlets, which
should be sent to a great number of Women (whom I, quoth Master Attorney,
forbear to name) as is touched before: That in other Letters was contained,
That the Queen should command her Counselors to their Chambers, because of the
stir and danger which then should be: That Hacket himself had before confessed
(besides the other Points of the Indictments) how he sent Arthington and
Coppinger to do and proclaim as they did.

Then Master Solicitor very excellently The Substance of Mr. Sollicitor's
Speech.
also discoursed, How there was no Treason more dangerous than that which is
practiced under other colors, as it were in the clouds, and none wounded so
deep as those that were shadowed under the cloak of Religion and Zeal; for of
it commonly followed greatest destruction and calamities. This he exemplified
by the Anabaptists at Munster in Westphalia, and some others: That in like sort
(as (they did) this Hacket also affirms he was sent from God, was a principal
Angel sent before the Judgment; that he does participate (with horror I
rehearse it, said Master Solicitor) of the Human Nature of Jesus Christ, and
the two other are Prophets, one of Mercy, and the other of Judgment. That the
Queen had forfeited her Crown: That the Council was wicked, and must be
overruled; and by whom but by him? etc. Then he showed what Hacket was, viz. a
Bankrupt; that he had married a Widow, and had spent all.

Which done, Master Recorder of London gave Judgment upon Hacket, as in like
Mr. Recorder gave Judgment for Execution.
cases is accustomed. From thence Hacket was carried to Newgate, and there
remained till Wednesday next after (being the appointed day for his Execution)
that in the mean while he might (by godly counsel) be brought to Repentance,
and to provide for his Soul's health. Certain Preachers so traveled with him
in the mean time, that albeit (for some while) he thought to advantage himself,
and to respite his execution, by giving (through dissimulation) froward and
lewd Answers; yet at length they brought him (as it then seemed) to a serious
consideration of his own state, and of the grievousness of his Treasons.
Insomuch as Master Richard Young of London, coming He is visited by Preachers,
is brought to sober Temper:
also unto him thither, on the Tuesday being the 27th of July, betwixt the
hours of six and seven in the Afternoon (sundry others also being in company)
he found him (in outward appearance) well affected. For when Master Young
wished him to submit himself, and to confess his fault toward Almighty God, he
presently with good words did it accordingly. Then Master Young told him that
God had appointed Death unto all men, but unto diverse in diverse sorts, and
wished him to take patiently that which God had laid upon him. This Hacket said
he would unfainedly do, and withal asked the Queen's Majesty Confesses the
Fact, seems sorry, and asks the Queen's Forgiveness.
Forgiveness; saying, he was very sorry for the words he had spoken, and that
it was a gracious and happy turn, that their Treasons were in time revealed:
For otherwise it would have cost a number of innocent men their bloods, and
himself (he thought) should nevertheless also have been slain amongst them: But
now trusted in God that the others would confess also their Treasons; and that
her Majesty was a gracious Prince, and would forgive them if they asked mercy.
And if it would also please her Highness to be so gracious unto him as to
pardon him, he would henceforth become a good Subject. Furthermore (because he
had no Money) he then desired Master Young either to give or to lend him some
Money; saying he would repay it again if ever he were able, who thereupon did
his devotion toward him. Then Hacket thanked him, and desired Master Young to
pray for him. Thus he continued in good Temper that night and the next morning,
until (looking out at one of the Windows into the Street leading toward
Cheapside) he saw all the street even filled (as it were) up with people,
expecting his Execution. There Seeing the Multitude waiting his Execution, he
raves, and blasphemes.
upon he began to answer such as exhorted him, very desperately and
blasphemously: And when as coming down the Stairs one of the Sheriffs wished
him to be mindful of Christ's Death, who suffered for him, he thereupon uttered
most execrable Blasphemy against Christ's blessed Passion.

He was brought from Newgate toward the place of Execution, the Eight and
twentieth day of July (being Wednesday) after Ten of the Clock in the Morning,
albeit by reason of the incredible multitude (then in the streets) but
especially in Cheapside, from one end thereof unto another, (the like whereof
at no assembly in memory has been seen) it was very long ere the Officers
(with all they could do) could get him to the very place. All the way that he
was dragged upon the Hurdle, he continued his counterfeit vein that he had then
undertaken; one while crying out Jehovab Messiah, Jehovab Messiah; His
extravagant Speeches going to Execution.
another while crying out thus; Look, look, how the Heavens open wide, and the
Son of God comes down to deliver me. When he came under the Gibbet (which was
reared hard by the Cross in Cheapside, toward the right hand of the Street as
you come from Paul's) and the noise being appeased, he was exhorted to ask God
and the Queen Forgiveness, and to fall to his Prayers: But he persevering in
his unprofitable course of dissimulation, instead thereof, fell to railing and
cursing of the Queen's Majesty, most villanously. He curses the Queen.
But being more vehemently urged to remember his present state, and to give
over all hope to do himself good by such dissembling, he began to pray this
most passionate, blasphemous, and execrable Prayer, viz. O God of Heaven,
mighty Jebovah, His blasphemous execrable Prayer.
Alpha and Omega, Lord of Lords, King of Kings, and God everlasting, that
know me to be that true Jebovah, whom thou have sent: send some miracle out
of a cloud to convert these Infidels, and deliver me from these mine enemies:
If not, I will fire the heavens, and tear thee from thy throne with my hands.
With other words of most execrable blasphemy against the divine Majesty of God
(not to be rehearsed) by reason that he found not that deliverance which he
fancied God to have promised. Then turning toward the Executioner, he said
unto him, Ah thou bastards chila, will thou His words to the Hangman.
hang Wm. Hacket thy king? The Magistrates and people detesting this subtle,
seditious, and blasphemous humor, commanded and cried to the Officers to
dispatch with him, or to have his mouth stopped from blaspheming: but they had
much ado to get him up the Ladder: And when he was up, he struggled with his
head to and fro, (as well as he could) that he might not have the fatal noose
put over his head. Then he asked them (very fearfully) O what do you, what do
you? but seeing by the circumstance, what they intended, he began to rave
again, and said, Have I this for my kingdom bestowed He dies horridly
blaspheming.
upon thee? I come to revenge thee, and plague thee; and so was turned off. But
the people unwilling that so traitorous and blasphemous a wretch, should have
any the least favor: cried out mightily to have him cut down presently, to be
quartered, and seemed very angry with the Officers, that made no more haste
therein: but as soon almost as he was cut down, (even with a trice) his heart
was taken forth, and showed out openly to the people, for a most detestable,
blasphemous Traytor's heart.

Thus died the most dangerous firebrand of sedition, most detestable Traitor,
most hypocritical seducer, and most execrable blasphemous hellhound, that many
ages ever saw, or heard of, in this Land.

The next day after this (being Thursday,) Coppinger having wilfully abstained
Coppinger starves himself and dies next day in Bridewel.
from meat (as is said) seven or eight days together, died in Bridewell: and
Arthington lives yet in the Counter in Woodstreet, reserved (I hope) unto
sincere and perfect Arthington in the Counter repents and sues for Pardon.
repentance. For immediately upon Hacket's execution, he wrote a Letter unto
two great Counselors, (whom among others he had lewdly slandered) of
submission, and afterward (more at large) he wrote to the body of the Council,
the whole course (as he pretends) of this action, so far as he was made
acquainted therewith, humbly craving their Lordships mediation unto the Queens
most excellent Majesty for his pardon, and acknowledging his dangerous error,
and devilish leduction (by Hacket especially) into this traitorous action.

This Declaration is truly taken forth of their own Letters, Writings under
their hands, and their Confessions upon Examinations, subscribed by themselves,
and by sundry honorable and worshipful persons of great gravity, and wisdom,
before whom they were made: and therefore may suffice, to show unto all
reasonable and well-affected, the lewdness and danger of the hypocritical
Plots, and seditious Conspiracies entered into by these persons.

But some there are so perversely wedded to The state slandered in these
Proceedings.
their own wills, and addicted to their fancies once conceived, that they give
out they were mad, and furious persons, choosing therein, rather to accuse the
honorable Justice of the Realm, and all the administers thereof, than that any
of their factious Crew (professing desire of pretended Reformation, and to
bring in The Discipline as they call it) should be noted with so deep
disloyalty.

As it is not the part of any honest Christian, by calumniation to charge those
that be innocent; so does it not become a loyal Subject, to justify any
Traitors, especially with slandering of the State. It therefore seems
requisite, that this point be not left uncleared: whether they or any of them,
in these practices, were indeed transported The Justice vindicated.
with fury, besides themselves, so as they needed not to have been regarded,
nor (by Law) ought to have suffered death for them?

In wants of understanding and reason (after such time as men should naturally
have them) there are noted diverse degrees, that are also of several
consideration; that is to say: Furor sive Rabies: Dementia sive Amentia:
Insania sive Phrenesis: Fatuitas, Stultitia, Lethargia, and Delirium. And
albeit the three first (by sundry Writers) be sometimes confounded and taken
for one, like as also the fourth is with the fifth, and the sixth with the
last: yet when the diversity espied in the things themselves, do drive men to a
more exact consideration, and distinction of the words (by which those passions
are to be expressed) they are for the most part thus properly termed and
distinguished by the best Writers.

Furor (as it is described by Tully) est mentis ad omnia coecitas: an entire
and full Tusc. qu. li. 3.
blindness or darkening of the understanding of the mind, whereby a man knows
not at all, what he does or says, and is englished madness or woodness. He
that is Bal In Lsed and milites (...) autem ffide excus. tuto: and passim alij.
possessed, herewith is carried with fury of mind, into great violences, and
outrages, so that he neither spares himself, nor other men, and is called in
Greek (...) Such was the madness of Ajax (as is fained by the Poets) who
whipped and scourged droves of beasts and cattle, thinking they were the
Groecians that had displeased him, and afterward in that rage killed himself.

Dementia is described there, by the same Ibidem.
Author, to be affectio animi lumine mentis carens, A passion of the mind,
bereaving it of the light of understanding: Or as another Quintil. Declamat.
348.
grave and learned Author calls it; ablatus rerum omnium intellectus, when a
man's perceivance and understanding of all things is taken away, and may be
englished distracted of wit, or being beside himself. Such one is called also
Mente captus, cum Festus.
men's ei e potestate abiit, in Greek (...) This infirmity of the mind is less
than furious l 2. D. de inoffic. testamento.
rage, and to be distinguished from it. They differ in this, that the first is,
as it were carried with great outrage of mind, into violent courses; but he
that is only mente captus, uses greater quietness of body, and calmness, and
shows not such outward D. D in 1. Instit. de curat.
testimonies in his actions, of alienation of his wits: yet neither of these
have any ruled memory, will, understanding, or feeling, of that they do or say.

Insania is also defer b^d by Tully (upon Tusc. qu. li. 5.
the judgment of the Authors of the 12. Tables) to be inconstantia sanitate
vacans, quoe tamen possit tueri officium vitoe communis, and cultum usitatum; A
kind of Inconstancy void in deed of perfect soundness of mind, yet such, as
that he which has it can observe and do the common offices of this life among
men, in some reasonable and tolerable sort: such be all they, whom commonly we
term either frantic, brainsick, crack'd-witted, cock-brains, or harebrained
men, being not altogether unapt for civil societies, or void of understanding,
to perceive what they say or do, or what is said unto them: albeit they have
many strange conceits, toying fancies, and perform sundry, rash, undiscreet,
mad, and foolish parts. Many examples of these three degrees, much differing
one from another; may be observed in our daily experience, and in histories of
all ages.

Fatuitas is the want of wit and understanding, wherewith natural fools are
possessed: But Stultitia is that folly which is seen in such, as albeit they be
but simple and gross-witted, yet are not to be accounted very Idiots, or
Naturals. Therefore one speaking modestly of himself, said thus: Ego stultum me
existimo, fatuum esse none opinor. I take my self to be but a Afranius.
simple Man, yet (I hope) no stark Idiot.

A Lethargy is a notable forgetfulness of all things almost, that heretofore a
man has known, or of their names: so that such one oftentimes forgets also
his own name, calls any thing by a wrong name; and beginning to speak,
forgets what he had said before, and what he meant to say after This
distemperature and weakness comes by some blow, sickness, or age.

Delirium is that weakness of conceit and consideration, which we call dotage:
when a man, through age or infirmity, falls to be a child again in
discretion: albeit he understand what is said, and can happily speak somewhat
pertinently unto sundry matters.

If a man, whiles he is troubled with either of the first two infirmities,
shall commit any thing, which in his own nature is criminal, all good laws do
rather pity his case, than punish him, albeit, in the rest it be not absolutely
so observed: for voluntas non actus, affectus non effectus distinguunt
maleficia: we are not in punishing offenders, so much to respect the event, and
what is done, as with what purpose, mind, and affection the thing is done. But
such as be furious, and distracted of their wits, are intended (whiles that
passion lasts) to have no will, to know or perceive nothing, and therefore
not to give consent to any 1. 17. filio. D. de injurijs L. 2. finali D. de jure
Codicillorum.
thing they do or say. In which respects they are compared in law, to men
absent, and utterly ignorant of any thing done by themselves, on in their
presence.

Now then, to examine these three persons by that which has been said: It may
be yielded, that their imaginations, purposes, plots, and designments,
respecting the weightiness of the end and weakness of the means, were
fantastical, unadvised, and most fond and unlikely, yet none otherwise than may
be also truly said for the most part of all such fanatical fantasticks,
schismatics, heretics, or malecontented treasonable conspirators whatsoever.
But cannot (truly or with any color of probability) be affirmed, that any of
them were mad, besides themselves, and out of their wits, as not knowing and
perceiving what they did or said, or what others said or did unto them.

First concerning Arthington, I have not heard so much as any doubt at all of
Madness to have been made by any man that conversed, or had to deal with him,
either in or after this action. But because Coppinger has been supposed by
many (after the time of his first examination) to have fallen into stark
madness, let us a little look back, and briefly recapitulate some points, that
have been before touched concerning him, to see, if any such distraction of mind
could also be noted in him, by the carriage of this action, before his
apprehension. Yet I do know, that it has been doubted (upon some good ground)
by wise men, whether he were indeed mad, even at any time after he was
apprehended, as he made-shew, or whether it were only fained by him. For a mad
man may, and often times does, for two or three days together, eat no meat, nor
happily drinks not at all. But when the humors of his stomach are fully
concocted and put over, so that for want of food, it begins naturally to
suck back the blood and nourishment, distributed before into the veins and
parts, which breeds hunger: then will a madman (most commonly) very greedily
and ravenously, even by course of nature, fall to his meat, if it be showed
him, and cannot abstain, because he cannot dissemble this appetite, in the time
of his fury. But Coppinger is said to have forborne and abstained from meat and
drink (though they were offered unto him) by the space of eight whole days:
whereby he grew so weak, as that it may seem, he died for want of Sustenance.
Such resolution or obduration of mind, can hardly so long together remain with
him, that is mad indeed, and knows not what he does. Howsoever it were after,
it is sure, that before their Pageant was played, (wherein matters prospered not
as they expected) the whole course of his speeches, writings, and other
dealings were such, as do argue no defect at all of reason, memory, wit, or
understanding, setting aside the absurdity and folly of the fancy, wherewith he
was led.

For when he first had taken apprehension of such extraordinary calling, he
yielded not straightway and unadvisedly unto it, but after long and deliberate
debating with himself: his care was great, and course (as in such a matter) was
considerate, in seeking to be resolved by such, as he both then, and before
held, to be best able to judge of his gifts and calling: The questions that he
framed were very pertinent to that purpose, and orderly penned: His Letters and
speeches to T. C. to Eg. to Chapter to Vd. to Lan. to Wig. to P. W. to I. T. and
others, and to them of foreign Churches, were (for that matter) well and
advisedly endited: His cunning was not small, to keep the very particular way
of effecting that which he desired, from those he dealt with, because himself
knew it a dangerous secret, and a course not justifiable, unless it came by
extraordinary motion, and special economy from God, and therefore he desired
to have it allowed so to be: His pretense of entertaining intelligence
(touching some important service to the State of the Realm, whereof he
pretended to have an inlking, but no full and particular knowledge) was none
unadvised or simple reach of policy, in him. For if in platting of his
purposes, and dealing in the principal action, any thing of doubtful
acceptance, should happen to have been after discovered, then might he well and
with good color, have pretended, that he did it but in way of attaining to
intelligence of those dangers, whereof the generality (as it were in the
Clouds) he had before delivered to a Counselor. For he might not seem a man to
be suspected of any disloyal purpose, who showed himself so careful for his
Sovereign's safety. Add to these, his cunning petition, to have prisoners for
treason, etc. to be examined by himself, and execution of condemned persons to
be stayed at his beck, whereby he might more easily have induced them to
appeach, whom he list to have overthrown, and whom he principally aimed at. His
subtilty also does notably appear in his petitions to her Majesty; where he
makes show of great secrets to be delivered only in her presence, and prays
to be pardoned, if in overmuch fear of her safety, he had attempted to prove
that, which he could not, which argues, that he had (indeed) not so much as
any colorable intelligence delivered unto him, of Treason intended, by such
great men, as he pretended: but used this as a means, to have access, for
himself and the others, unto her Highness's presence, for some further intended
mischief: Then his allowance and commendation of sound and good counsel given
him, by Eg. a preacher, and by others; his sparing to reveal the great and
dangerous secret unto Hacket, upon their first acquaintance; his razing out of
Hacket's and the Town's Name, out of the Letter sent by him to a Noble
personage, to give inkling of Treasons intended against her Majesty, lest the
quality and unlikelyhood of the man being enquired after, that that plot should
be dashed; his not subscribing of his name to sundry Letters; his directing of
Hacket, neither to subscribe nor endorse (but in that sort as he prescribed)
for fear of discovery; his desire to have all the Letters again, that he had
written to Eg. about that matter; his wary and diligent keeping of copies of
every Letter that he writ in that cause; and when leisure served not so to do,
his great care to have the very Letters again; his offense with one Hoc. for
keeping a Letter from him, which he had sent unto him; his cunning excuse of
Hacket's defacing of the Queen's Arms; his counterfeit revelation to bring
Arthington further in; his device to make Arthington resolute, by saying it was
revealed to him, that they had Angelical spirits, not subject to hurt, by any
mortal power; his willing choice to withdraw himself into an house, when (after
their proclamation) things fell not out as was expected, and from thence
afterward to go to his place of abode, through by-lanes; his and Hacket's
putting off the matter from knowledge of Arthington for a time, though afterward
(happily) to be opened, why the Queen might not be prayed for, in particular;
their pretense of the Lords commandment, to keep the means secret; how the
Queen's Majesty and the Counsel were to be brought to repentance, and unto
their pretended Reformation; the sensible and coherent manner of report unto
Wigginton, touching Hacket's and their own callings, and offices, by Coppinger
and Arthington; their temperate and pertinent answers unto Wigginton's
speeches, and all their consulting sundry times together, about their business,
namely, the night before, and the day of their proclamation, do plainly argue,
that Coppinger (albeit he were greatly misled by a false and spightful zeal,
and by much hyprocrisie) yet was he far enough, from any distracting of his
wits, in every part of this action.

And concerning Hacket (whose terrible blasphemies at the last, do argue either
a villainous dissimulation to have his execution respited, or a desperate
intemperancy against God, for frustrating his expectation) there can no fury or
madness be justly noted in him, by the whole managing of this action, but
rather, notable hypocricy, craft, and dissembled holiness. First, in that he
seemed a man most zealous for the pretended Reformation of the Church, by
erecting the Discipline, and afterward also for reforming of the
Commonwealth: That he used (in outward appearance) a most servent and devout
manner of praying: that in his prayers, he did execrate himself most deeply, if
he sought not the glory of God only in this action, thereby the better to be
credited, and to cover his villainies: that he took a day's deliberation, to
answer the great matter, after it was first propounded by Coppinger: that he
sought to get credit to himself, and to terrify her Majesty, by telling (in
generalities) of strange judgments of God, imminent over her, that were
revealed unto him: that foreseeing it not unlikely to rain (after a long time
of drought) he prayed in Coppinger's presence for rain, whereby it might seem
to be sent by God, at his only prayer and mediation: that he bare them in hand
he could tell things to come, being merely contingent: that he could fain such
kind of Revelations, as if they were showed to him in the midst of his
torments, (which if they be marked) tended only to have himself magnified, as a
man placed most highly in God's favor: that when the one of his followers
seemed offended, he craftily excused the mislike which he had showed, to hear
her Majesty prayed for: that the better to color his hatred and malice, he
afterward prayed for her himself: that he cunningly induced Coppinger, either
to fain or to fancy a Revelation, that he, and Arthington must obey him the
said Hacket in all things: that he pretended to dispense with Arthington, for
honoring him as King of Europe, until he should do it before others, where it
might stand him in better sted: that he craftily put off his intended anointing
by Coppinger, (as being already done in heaven) left some (unlooked for)
accident happily falling forth, the whole pageant might have been marred: that
his pretended greatest office of severing (in Christ's behalf) the good from
the bad, with his Fan in his hand, was concealed from Arthington, until the
very time that the message was to be done by them, when as it was too late to
consider of it, and unlawful to be disobeied: that this office he proclaimed
unto them (after his two solemn prayers, for direction of them by God's spirit,
to the glory of God only) as it were an oracle newly dropped down from heaven:
that he aswered Wigginton's questions very cunningly, as touching the old
Magistrates that were gone, and the new come in place, meaning thereby (in
truth) the displacing of all her Majesty's Council: that he warily qualified
Coppinger's and Arthington's speeches, which seemed unto Wigginton, to
attribute a little too much unto him: that (coming through the streets, and
seeing their proclamation had not made such sturr, as was hoped) he then
pretended unto Wigginton that he had not set them on work, but marvelled what
they meant thereby, and thereupon signified, he would depart the city, and be
gone home: that fearing what might happen in the event of the tumult he sent
them into the streets, but tarried behind in the House himself: That he put the
trial of his said pretended great Office (which he claimed in Christ's room)
upon this issue and trial, That none of the People which should come to see
him, had the power to kill him; for he knew that no private Subject might or
would attempt to do it, howsoever otherwise they took the matter. That after
the matter fell not out to his purpose, and being returned to Walker's House,
he rebuked Arthington's overmuch forwardness, for calling him there (openly
before others) the King of the Earth, and excused this in him, by his great
Zeal. That he slily avoided the questions which the Minister of that Parish did
ask him, touching those things which Arthington attributed unto him. That he
used at his Examinations many crafty Evasions; when any question of capital
danger to him was asked. That he constantly at all his Examinations persisted
in denying, and said he did not remember that Action which seemed most odiously
Traitorous, touching the piercing that part of the Picture which represented
her Majesty's Royal Heart. That he denied also to have sent them to publish as
they did. That he did answer so doggedly and (in truth) knavishly, to the
question of defacing the Lion and Dragon in her Majesty's Arms. That to a
question (of most importance) whether her Majesty were lawful Queen of England?
he refused to answer. That he subtly answered (albeit not to the Lawfulness
of her being Queen) yet she was (in fact) Queen as yet, if she had not
forfeited it. That when he was tortured, he revoked his Treasons, and
sorrowfully submitted himself; a course which by the extremity of Pain (at the
first assaying of it) does drive a man (being indeed mad) into a far greater
rage and impatience than he was before. That till he was tortured, he would not
appeach any other his Accomplices in the Treasons. That being not willing to
plead directly to his second Indictment, he drove off the time with cunning
Answers, indeed importing nothing less than madness. That being in good Temper,
and (as seemed) well disposed in mind both the Night before, and the Wednesday
morning, until he saw no remedy, but that he was presently to be executed, he
burst not forth into his horrible Blasphemies. And that at the very Execution,
in his greatest impatience pretended, (albeit his Speeches were most villainous
against the Queen, and blasphemous toward God) yet he understood what was said
and done; his Words had Sense, and his Prayer was coherent together, one part
with another. None of all which things premised, can happen or be found in him
that is indeed furious and distracted of his Wits; such as the Laws not only do
pity, but also spare and protect from all Punishment.

If any man now shall marvel how such vain and foolish Conceits could so deeply
possess men of any consideration, let him remember what Luther writ against
certain like Phanatical Persons, the Anabaptists in Germany; who pretended like
Purity, and intended also a dangerous Reformation: There is (says he) none
Error so absurd, but (when God's Wrath is once kindled) the Devil is able to
persuade it.

But if offense be taken by any against the Gospel it self, for that these
Weeds have sprung up in the Times, and amongst those Persons that make outward
Profession of it, let that be called to mind which I said in the beginning of
this Treatise, and the Comparison and Resemblance now ensuing be considered,
with these men's Purposes, Opinions, A resemblance betwixt these men and the
Anabaptists in Germany in Luther's time.
and Actions, which there I promised to make, betwixt them and certain Heresies
and Tumults stirred up in Germany, at the very beginning of the renewing of the
Light of the Gospel by the preaching of Luther, Zuinglius, and others; the
brief of which Story is thus; viz.

About six or seven Years after Luther began to preach the Gospel, the Devil
(to Sleidan lib. 4. and 6.
disturb this work) stirred up certain hotbrain'd, unconsiderate, and importune
Preachers, The Story.
that misliked not only the Doctrine of the Pope, but the Doctrine of Luther
also, as not being so spiritual, nor serving so fitly for planting of Purity,
as they thought requisite. By whose continual Clamor, and sharp Invectives
against the Enormities of the Ecclesiastical State, the Nobility and
Magistrates, such Effect was wrought, as that (in short time) there was kindled
a most fearful War of above one hundred thousand of A hundred thousand rise in
Arms.
the common and uplandish People, rising and taking up Arms, almost about one
time, in several parts of Germany, where they sacked Towns, killed certain of
the Nobility, and did many other Outrages. For such Preachers having set them
on fire, did so harden them also, as that they could not be wholly vanquished,
until (what in one place Fifty thousand of them stain by the forces of the
Lupire. They link themselves together by mutual secret Conventrcles, and plight
their Faith to each other ly Oath. Their purposes to overthrow the State
Ecclesiastical and Civil Their pretenses the upholding the Gospel. Their
Grievances they urge to be reformed.
and in other of that Country) Fifty thousand of them were killed and cut in
pieces, by the united Forces of the most of the Princes of the Empire. The
manner of these Peasants linking themselves together, was in secret
Conventicles by Night, and Assemblies in private Houses, where they gave mutual
Faith and Oath each of them to stick to other. Their purposes and counsels were
how to overthrow the State Ecclesiastical, the Magistrates and Councils of
Estate in every several Province. When they were up in Arms, they made the
Pretenses of their Actions to be the defending, erecting, and upholding of the
preaching of the Gospel through every place. Being once assembled in great
Troops, they then set forth and published certain Points, which they required
the Princes and Magistrates to perform and yield unto them; whereof these
following were some, amongst sundry other Grievances which they pretended were
offered unto them by Princes, Noblemen, Magistrates; and Gentlemen, and whereof
they urged a Reformation; viz. One Petition of those Uplandish Rebels was this;
That they and I.
other the common people, themselves might every where have the free choice of
sincere Ministers. Another, That Mortuaries might wholly be taken 2.
away. A Third, That they might be disburdened of paying any Tithes to
Ecclesiastical Persons, but only Corn. And a Fourth, That 4.
they might also prescribe how these Tithes should be better employed. Luther
in an Answer that Luther calls this Sedition a Stratagem of Satan.
he made to that Book of theirs, says, he conceived that this Sedition was a
very Stratagem of Satan; to the intent that the Devil might destroy and kill
him, and other true and sound Preachers of the Gospel, by men making outward
show and profession of the same Religion, because he saw he could not effect
it, nor so far prevail by open Adversaries, such as the Pope was and his
Adherents. For these Rebels called themselves a Christian Congregation, and
bragged They call themselves a Christian Congregation, and pretend to follow
the precise Rule of God's Word.
much that they would (in all their actions) follow the precise Rule of God's
Word. And whereas (under the pretense of detestation of sin, and of their own
great sincerity and good lives) these Traitorous Rebels noted many Faults in
all other sorts and states of men, and protested also great Loyalty and
Fidelity to the Persons of their Princes, so they might but have things amiss
reformed; he freely and truly puts them Luther winds them of their Pride and
Hypocrisy.
in mind, That whiles they pried thus narrowly into other men's faults, the
Devil had so blinded them (through Pride and Hypocrisy) that they could not see
their own detestable Treasons, with other their Sins and Impieties: Adding
also, That such as wrest away or abate Princes Swords and Jurisdictions, will
(upon any fit opportunity offered) no doubt take away their Lives also; which
is chiefly maintained by their Sovereign Jurisdiction, and by Power of the
Sword.

Amongst others, Carolastadius a Preacher, Carolastadius one of their
Encouragers.
professing the Gospel, but fallen into discontentments and emulous oppositions
against Luther, gave no small advancement to this fearful Commotion. This man
attributed much to Cabinet Teachers in private Conventicles, and unto Visions,
and pretended Conferences with God. But of all other Preachers that pretended
Enmity both to the Pope and unto Luther, one Thomas Muncer Muncer the hottest
and chiefest Leader. He exhorts them to great strictness of Life.
was the hottest and chiefest Boutifeu and Bellows of this Sedition. At first
he urged and exhorted men (in his teaching by a good space together) and that
with great vehemence, unto a singular, strait, precise, and holy course of
life; namely, to fly all, even the least show of actual sin; to fast much, to
array themselves with mean and base Raiment, to retain a settled Austerity in
Countenance, to speak seldom, and such like; which he called the bearing of the
Cross, Mortification, and Discipline. Now when as hereby he had procured unto
himself a great Opinion of Holiness, and Reputation with the common People, he
proceeded further He broacheth dangeroas Opinions. Teaches men to pray for
Signs, and expect Visions from God.
unto strange and very dangerous Opinions: For then he began to teach men, in
their Prayers to ask a Sign of God, Whether they held the Truth in Religion, or
not? That if he gave not a Sign, they might importune him, and expostulate with
him, that he dealt not well with them in not giving a Sign to them who (in this
sort) begged but true knowledge of him; saying, that to show such Anger in
Prayer, was acceptable unto God, for that hereby men did show their fervency in
Zeal. He taught also, that God (even in these days) did reveal his Will by
Dreams and Visions: That all Judgments civil must be by the Bible, or
Revelation from God: That all in dignity must be equal. He railed against
Princes, and imputed Rails at Princes.
many faults unto them, and namely this, That they suffered the Ecclesiastical
State with great Impiety. This Opinion of Equality of Authority and Dignity,
made the common People fall from their Work, and beginning to gad idly up and
down, they took away (by violence) such things as they had need of, from those
that were more wealthy.

Muncer (in this sort) winning many They enter into Leagues to root out wicked
Magastrates.
unto him, they entered from time to time into secret Leagues together, upon
mutual Oaths given, to help to root out and kill all wicked Magistrates, to the
intent new that were more godly, might be set in their places; for so (he said)
God had given in commandment unto him. According to which Plots (by a Tumult of
the People) at Mulhusin, he procured the old Officer to be deposed, and a new
Magistrate to be set up in his place, and himself to be chosen a Senator of
that City, albeit he was still a Preacher, and seemed to mislike this course in
other men. Now when as by these and other like means, great multitudes of men,
to the number of Forty thousand had taken up Arms, throughout Franconia and
Suevia, then Forty thousand arm in Franconia and Suevia. One Physer joins them.
he thought opportunity served him to set forward his purposes, by adjoining
himself unto them: and in this action one Phyfer, a near Companion of his, and
like affected to him, did also Join. But when the Rebellious Rout wanted
Victuals, and many other Necessaries, whereby their courages began to Fail;
then he comforted them in his Sermons, and assured them (as from God) that
their Cause and Quarrel was so good, that the Frame of the whole World should
sooner be changed, than they should be forsaken, or left destitute of him. And
when the Prince's Army (gathered to subdud them, being greater and better
furnished than theirs were,) was ready to join in battle; he still most
resolutely assured them, of some evident miraculous help, to be manifest from
Heaven, for the overthrow of their Enemies; saying, that God would so enfeeble
all their Enemies Shot, that Muncer himself would receive them all (without
harm) into the Lap of his Coat, before they should Light. For a token hereof,
it happened that they had taken the Sign of a Rainbow for their Ensign. He
showed A Rainbow is their Ensign, a token of Victory.
them (as it fell out the self same time) a true Rainbow in Heaven, as an
undoubted sign, that they should obtain the Victory. Whereupon they
courageously at first set forward, singing a Song for aid by the Holy Ghost:
But being nevertheless all put in Rout and They are routed. Muncer flies, is
taken; be justifies the Fact.
discomfited, Muncer fled away, and disguised himself. Yet by means of certain
Letters that were found with him, he was afterward in a House discovered, and
taken. Being brought before the Magistrates, he stoutly defended his fact,
affirming, that Princes, who refused to establish the purity of the Gospel,
were in that sort to be bridled. When he was brought to the place of Execution,
and saw no hope of Escape (which before he hoped for) he grew to be At his
Execution is dejected and poplexed.
very much dejected, and perplexed in Mind, insomuch as without help of a Godly
Prince, which then stood by, he could not repeat so much as the Articles of his
Christian faith.

I shall not need to dwell long in the application The Story applied to our
Disciplinarians, and the Parallel alike in all particulars.
and resemblance of these points unto this late Tragedy; the very reading of
them over giving sufficient Light unto the same. For the sharp and angry Zeal
of some unadvised Preachers, which pretend neither to like of the Pope, nor of
the present state of the Church, for want of some purity, as they fansy, Has
it not incensed, and made to boil over, not only the foul Mouths of Martinists,
but also the traitorous actions of these Conspirators? And albeit the common
multitude (whom the Disciplinarians brag to be already inflamed with Zeal,
ready to lend a hundred thousand hands for the advancement of their Cause, and
by whom they hope and say such Reformation must at last be brought in) did
better keep themselves out of this Action than was expected; Yet the danger
thereof was as great, and if it had once taken head, would (happily) as hardly
as the other have been subdued. Were not the Treaties of these men also in
private Houses at Night-Fasts, and the Consultations concerning it, at
Classical Conventicles, and like Assemblies? Did not these likewise shoot at
the Overthrow of the whole State Ecclesiastical, and at the displacing of her
Majesty's most Honorable Council, and that under pretense of Reformation, and
to advance the preaching of the Gospel in every Congregation throughout this
Land? Made not these the like Complaints of wicked Counselors, Noblemen, and
Magistrates, for keeping out the Discipline, for persecuting sincere Preachers,
and afflicting God's People, like Lions and Dragons? And do they not pretend
this to be a special Grievance of theirs, That the common people of every
Congregation may not elect their own Ministers? That the People are brought
under the Yoke of the Law Ceremonial, by paying Tithes, etc. and is not the
hand and head of Satan as plainly in this Action, to seek the overthrow of
sound Professors, by others of the same Profession, under pretense of greater
Sincerity? Do not these likewise almost appropriate to themselves and their
Favorites, the Terms of God's Church, of Christian Brethren, and of true and
reformed Preachers? Is any Speech more rise in their mouths, than that they
will only be tried and judged by God's Book, and by his Spirit? Do they not tax
all other men (not so far gone as themselves) of loose Lives, of
Antichristianism, of Hypocrisy, and Idolatry; in the mean time never looking at
their own Treasons, Disloyalties, and other Vices? Make they not great
Ostentation of Love and Fidelity to her Majesty's Person, and of Care of her
Safety, even when they secretly nourished a fancy of Forfeiture of her Crown,
and sought to overrule her by Hacket their imagined Sovereign King of Europe?
Had they not their Cabinet Preachers, their Table-end Teachers, their Guides of
Fasts, etc. that teach, pray for, and attend extraordinary Callings by Visions,
Dreams, Revelations, and Enlightnings? Was not Giles Wigginton and some others
unto them, as Thomas Muncer, and Phifer were to the Germans, men of supposed
great Austerity of Life, Holiness, Favor with God, Resoluteness in his Cause,
Singleness, and Uprightness of heart? Did not Wigginton resolve them, by
Examples he gathered touching Extraordinary Callings in these days, by reason
of the great Waste of this Church of England? Had not he and they likewise
learned of the same Devil (in the Prayers at Fasts) to ask Signs and Seals of
God, for their extraordinary Callings? Does not Arthington say, that he
importuned God in his Prayers? And Coppinger, That he had leave given to talk
more familiarly with God than before? Did not Hacket in praying for the
pretended possessed Gentlewoman, sawcily expostulate with God, and charge him
with his Promise, as if he dealt not well with him? Did he not at his
Arraignment and Execution show such Anger in his Prayers against God, thinking
belike, as those did, to be excused by his Fervency of Zeal? Did not both he
and Coppinger pretend Conference with God by sundry Revelations and Dreams? Do
not they and the rest of the Disciplinarian Humor, Fenneritheol.
exact and seek to square out, even in Hypothesi, all Civil Policies and
Judgments (in Causes Criminal especially) unto the Judicials of Moses, given
for the People of the Jews? Is there any thing they stand more upon, or condemn
the contrary deeper, than to have an Equality among all Persons Ecclesiastical?
Do they not inveigh sharply against Prince and Nobles, for upholding the State
Ecclesiastical; and in this respect intended to have them brought to
Repentance, when their Opinions grew to a Ripeness? Was not this their
principal pretended purpose, to plant the Gospel and their Reformation by
rooting out wicked Magistrates, and Counselors (as they judged) and by setting
others in their places? Did Hacket's fancied Fan, instead of Christ, to sever
the good from the bad, import any thing else, or should it have served any
other turn, than for the killing up of all that thought not well of their
Discipline and Reformation? Did they not pretend the Will of the Lord so to be?
And was it not plainly meant, this to be effected by tumult of the common
people? Did not these likewise bear one another in hand, that all things should
succeed and prosper with them? that no violence could harm them, nor any man
had power to hurt them, as having Angelical Spirits, and being in most high
favor with God? And Hacket accordingly (even in going to execution) did he not
call for and expect a miraculous deliverance from heaven, out of the hands of
those, whom he called his enemies? Did he not likewise (for a certain sign of
his favor with God) make Coppinger believe, that he could and did obtain rain,
and could stay it at his pleasure? Was not the chiefest of their plots and
conspiracies detected by their letters found with them? Did not they likewise
when they were convented before the Magistrate, stoutly and resolutely defend
their dealings, and maintain, that the Princess had for seited her right, and
was now to be bridled and overruled by others? and lastly: Was not that
impious Wrech Hacket as irresolute, dejected, and base-minded toward his
death, as Muncer, or any man either could be, or as so bad a cause might
procure?

Not long after those former Rebellions in Another like Commotion of the
Anabaptist's in Munster.
Germany, another strange and memorable Commotion happened in Munster, the
principal City of Westphalia, a Province also of Germany; which is not unmeet
to be (in some points) also touched in this place, for the near resemblance
that it has unto this late action.

After the suppression of this former Rebellion, Sleydan lib. 6.
and about the year of the Lord 1527. Anabaptistrie began mightly to spread it
self in sundry parts of Germany, even as Cockle and Darnel does (by the sowing
of The First Preacher against them was Bernard Rotman, 1532. Id. lib. 10.
the envious man the Devil) among good wheat. It happened that in the year
1532. one Bernard Rosman first, and afterward five others (sent to assist him
from the Lantzgrave of Hess) began to preach the Gospel truly, in and about the
said City of Munster. In the year 1533. one John surnamed of John of Leyden a
Cobbler. arises, 1533.
Leyden a Town in Holland (having none other known surname, by reason of his
Ignobility, being but a Cobbler, or a Currier by his occupation) came unto the
City of Munster. This Cobbler was an egregious Anabaptist; under pretense of
professing the Gospel, and of an hatred he had of Popery, he insinuated himself
into the acquaintance of the Preachers of the City of Munster: But when it
happened once that in answer to a question of his (in that behalf made) they
told him, that young Infants ought to be baptized, he laughted at them, as it
were in scorn and of pity of their ignorance. Not long after this, one Herman
Staprede, a Herman Staprede.
preacher came also thither; but he preached openly against the baptism of
young children. By these means (but especially by their secret Assemblies and
Conventicles by night, this heresy of Anabaptism spread it self largely
throughout that City, so that great speech was made in every place thereof;
albeit no certain knowledge was had, because they admitted none other to their
close assemblies but such, as stood alike persuaded. This their course being
come to the Magistrates ears, all that favored that opinion, and had assembled
themselves in any such dangerous Conventicles, were (by a general Edict) By the
Magistrates they are Banished the City, but return again.
banished the City: but as they went out at one gate, so (being confident upon
their multitudes) they returned in at another, pretending that they were
commanded by God to stay there, and to deal more earnestly and resolutely in
their business. It happened, that Rotman (who before had Rotman becomes a
favcurer of them.
preached against them) began at that time, to show himself to be a favourer of
their opinions; which thing gave also great encouragement unto them, insomuch
as they then challenged the sound Preachers (which stood against them) unto
disputation. But when this challenge was accepted, so that learned and grave
Judges and assistants might be chosen, and that whatsoever should be
determined, might firmly be stood unto, and observed of all without further
contradiction; then they shrunk back, and refused disputation upon any such
conditions. Hereupon they began to be less esteemed with the people, than they
were before; therefore to recover their former reputation with them, they
devised another more short and plausable course, which was this. About the end
of December, one of them pretending One of them pretends to Inspiration. 1533.
to be divinely inspired, and to be ravished in spirit, did go through the
streets of the City, crying, Repent, Repent, and be again baptized, or else the
judgments and wrath of God will quickly and suddenly overwhelm you. By this
occasion, many of them which before did lurk secretly in corners, and kept
themselves close, came suddenly abroad, and in great routs and plumps ran
together (with the former cry) into the chief street of the They declare all
that are not Rebaptized to be slain as Heathens.
City, being the Market Place, making great outcry's, that all which were not
rebaptized in token of repentance, should be slain as heathens, and as ungodly
men. After this, (with sundry great outrages done by them against many of the
Citizens) they invested Seize the Townhouse and Arms of the City.
themselves of the Guild Hall or Townhouse, and of all the Artillery and
Munition of the City; so that many persons, what upon credulous simplicity, and
what for saving their goods and lives, were content to be rebaptized with them.
Nevertheless, others (for safeguard of their goods and themselves in this
perilous uprore) betook themselves to a place in the Town, very strong by
natural Are opposed, and some apprehended.
situation, and apprehended many of the seditious Anabaptists for prisoners.
These skirmishes lasted betwixt both the parties, until they grew to a parley
and composition, giving Hostages each to other, for observance of it. And
albeit the said Rotman, and one Bernarde Knipperdoling. (being chief Rotman and
Knipperdoling agree to a Composition, but privily promote the Faction.
in the Faction) had also allowed of such composition; yet by their sundry.
Letters, privily and underhand sent unto others of their Faction and Sect in
Places and Cities abroad, they treacherously (from time to time) invited very
many, (though it were with loss of their Goods abroad) to retire themselves to
dwell at Munster; assuring them of ten times as Munster is filled with
Strangers, the Citizens through fear forsake it.
much as they did forego. Hereby the City began to be replenished with
strangers of that Faction, insomuch as most of the wealthy and grave Citizens,
fearing whereunto it might tend, abandoned the City, and left it to the
Anabaptists, and to the rest of the common sort. Thus becoming Masters of the
place, they by and by put out all the old Senators or Counselors of that
Estate, and The Magistrates put out; Knipperdoling made consul.
the two Consuls (being the chief Magistrates) and put others in their places,
and namely, they called Knipperdoling to be one of their Consuls. Then they
fell to burn, rifle and deface the Churches, and in plumps went through the
streets, crying, Repent, repent; and immediately after, Avoid all ye wicked,
upon peril of your lives. Whereupon all the Anabaptists put themselves in Arms,
and (according to their Proclamation) drove out of the City, all whom they
supposed not to be of their Sect, without regard either of age or sex. Insomuch
as diverse women with child, through the great throng and their overhasty
departing, pitifully miscarried. This banishing and proscription happened the
very day before the Bishop of the City, The Bishop Besieges the City.
being also Temporal Lord thereof, planted his Siege against the Town for
revolting from his Obedience. In the midst of all these Outrages, sundry
(calling themselves Prophets) did arise up amongst them; who pretended to have
extraordinary callings, gifts, functions, and revelations from God; the chief
whereof was one John Matthew, next John Matthew, John of Leyden, Knipperdoling,
etc. arose as Prophets.
to him was the said John of Leyden, and then Knipperdoling, Crecthing and some
others. This Matthew (their principal Prophet) charged every man (upon pain of
death) to bring all his gold, silver, and Matthew Commands the People to bring
their goods into Common.
moveable goods into a great common storehouse appointed for that purpose, to
the end they might be used and bestowed in common; for so he protested to them,
it was the will of his heavenly Father. The people were greatly grieved with
this rigorous Edict; nevertheless they obeyed, though sore against their wills.
Neither They affrighted, obey.
was it possible (without great danger) for any to conceal or hide any part
from them, because there were in the City two Girls, soothsayers, that did
reveal whatsoever was concealed, at least so it was believed. Then the said
Matthew commanded every one to bring all his Books whatsoever saving the holy
Bible) to be publicly burned, He commands. all Books to be burnt but the Bible.
which was accordingly performed. Thus taking great confidence and boldness
that his hestes and advices were so readily obeyed, and had so good success; he
most insolently and cruelly thrust in with a Pike, and after shot in with a
Harquebuz one He murders Hub. Truteling.
Hubert Truteling, only for a merry jest that he made, touching one of their
Prophets. Yet seeing that he did not die thereof out of hand, the said Prophet
told them, it was revealed to him from heaven, that Trueteling should live, and
continue, and that God had forgiven him. Nevertheless, he died of his wounds
within few days after. Then Matthew got into his hand a long Pike; and running
hastily therewith through the Town toward the Gates, he proclaimed as he went,
that God the Father had commanded him to beat back all the enemies (that
besieged them) from the Town. But being met near the Camp, by one only
soldier, he was by him thrust through, and He is slain by a Soldier.
so died. And albeit the falsehood of his forged prophesies was thus twice
detected, yet the other Prophets (his companions) did so disguise the matter,
and bewitch the people, that they could not perceive his coggeries, but did
rather much lament his death, as a matter ominating some great mishap toward
them, for that so excellent a man was taken away. Yet John of Leyden John of
Leyden and Knipperdoling comfort the People and Prophecy.
comforted them, saying, that God had revealed unto him long before, that
Matthew should have such an end, and that he should marry his widow. Some few
days after, Knipperdoling also prophesied, that high mountains should be
brought low, and the poor and mean should be exalted; and thereupon commanded
all which was left standing Command the Churches to be demolished.
of the Churches to be demolished even with the ground; assuring them (and that
with a constant settled gravity and great earnestness) that this Commandment
came from God himself: And in further accomplishment (as may seem) of such his
prophesy, John of Leyden gave to the said Knipperdoling John of Leyden gives
Knipperdoling the sword of Execution.
the sword of execution, and so made him the common Hangman of the City, that
immediately before was Consul and chief Officer. This office of Executioner
(belike upon compact between them) he willingly accepted, and obeyed Leyden
therein, as the messenger of God. Now after that some assaults had been made
against the City, by the Bishops Army besieging it, (albeit with no success)
John of Leyden laid him John of Leyden dreams three days together.
down to rest, and dreamed three days together. Being awaked, he spoke not a
word to any person, but calling for paper, writ down the names of twelve men He
awakes and names Twelve men to govern the City.
(whereof some were indeed Gentlemen of blood) who should have the sovereign
charge of all, and should govern the City, as the heads of the Tribes did in
Israel: for so he said, it was the heavenly Father's will. But hereby (in very
truth) he laid the foundation of a kingdom, whereunto he aspired. Then he
propounded unto their Reformed Preachers, certain Articles to be resolved in He
propounds certain articles to the Preachers.
by the Scriptures alone, by which, if they could not confute them, then he
would (as he said) put them up unto the people, that by their authority they
might be established. The effect of them was, that a man was not bound unto one
wife, but might marry One was about Bigamy:
so many as himself lusted. When their Preachers made some difficulty, and
sticking They boggle.
at it, he called them into the Council-house, together with the Twelve new
Governors-or Elders. Then he put off his Coat and laid it and the New Testament
down together He swears it is from God.
before them, swearing by those two (as by assured tokens) that the Articles by
him proposed, were revealed unto him from Heaven, and that God would never be
merciful unto them, if they did not yield unto them. Hereupon they gave their
assents, They assent.
and after (for three days together) they preached of nothing but of Marriage.
Then He marries three Wives.
Leyden married three Wives: one whereof was the Widow of their great Prophet
Matthew lately deceased, and diverse other followed Others follow his example.
the like example, as if it had been a matter most allowable and laudable. But
Some Citizens abhorring the Practice, seize the Prophets.
some of the Citizens (of better disposition) finding this course to be most
abominable, gave a watchword through the Town for all that truly favored the
Gospel without fantastical Novelties, to come into the Market place, where
being assembled, they apprehended Leyden, Knipperdoling, and all the rest of
their Prophets. But when the Common people were advertised hereof, they The
People rescue them and stay 50 of the Citizens.
straightway took Arms, and rescued the Prisoners from them. The people also
laid hands on them, which had apprehended their Prophets, putting them to death
with most exquisite torments; namely, they fastened fifty of them unto Trees,
and shot at them with Harquebuzes, their great Prophet (all the while) crying
thus unto them, That he that would do God good service, should first shoot at
them; and others were put unto sundry other several kinds of death.

In the Month of July that year, a new Prophet (being a Goldsmith by his Trade)
A Goldsmith. A New Prophet arises and declares from God John of Leyden to be
Emperor of the Earth, and the Godly only must rule.
did arise up among them; who having called the Multitude together into the
Marketsteed, signified unto them, It was the Will and Commandment of the
heavenly Father, that John of Leyden should be Emperor of all the Earth; and
that he marching forth with a puissant Army, should destroy all Kings and
Princes, but should spare the Common people that loved righteousness and
sincerity, to the intent he may hold the seat of David his Father, until the
heavenly Father should receive again the Kingdom: For (said he) Godly men must
only rule in the World, after they have once dispatched all the wicked out of
the way. When the Prophet had ended these Speeches, suddenly John of Leyden
John of Leyden pretends he knew this before.
kneeled down, and lifting up his hands to Heaven, said thus: Brethren, it is a
good while agone since I first knew this, and yet would not hitherto publish it
abroad: but now the Father has used another Minister to bring it to pass and
to proclaim it. So having (by this subtilty) compassed to be King, he first
deposed the Twelve Governors, and after the manner He deposes the 12
Governors. He creates Lords, and wears the Robes of Majesty, and ascends a
Throne.
of other Kings, did choose and create sundry to be great Lords about him: He
also caused two Crowns of pure Gold to be made for himself, and a Royal Robe,
Collar and Scepter, with other Complements of Majesty. He assigned also certain
days, wherein he would give Audience to all Complainants and Suitors. Whenever
he came abroad, he was attended with his Officers and Gentlemen of his Court,
and with two young Henchmen on horseback, the one on his right hand carrying
the Bible, and the other on his left, carrying a drawn Sword. He had also a
magnifical Throne prepared and set on high for him, with a golden Cloth of
Estate. At a certain time, when the King was thus set in his Majesty, and
Knipperdoling pretends to breathe the Holy Ghost on the People.
the people thronged close together about him, Knipperdoling, one of the
Prophets, got upon the peoples heads, and so creeping along on his hands and
feet, he breathed upon them in their mouths one after another, saying thus: The
Father has sanctified thee, receive the Holy Ghost. Certain Weeks after, the
new Prophet (before mentioned) The New Prophet summons the People to Arms.
caused (by sound of a Trumpet) to be proclaimed, That all should retire
themselves in Arms unto the Churchyard of the chief Church, for that the Enemy
must be repelled from the Town. Coming thither, Five thousand of them
entertained at a Supper.
they found a great Supper ready prepared. Then there sat down to Supper (as
they were commanded) four thousand: and after these had supped, one thousand
more (that had waited) sat down. The King The King and Queen serve at Table.
also, and the chief Queen, together with their Courtiers did serve at table.
The supper being toward an end, the King gave bread unto every one of them,
saying, Take, eat, and show forth the Lord's death. Then the Queen presented
them with the They profanely give them the Communion.
cup, saying, Drink, and show forth the Lord's death. This being done, the said
Prophet got him up into a pulpit, and asked them if they would obey the word of
the Lord? which when they had yielded unto that they would, he said it was the
Father's commandment, 28 Teachers sent forth.
that eight and twenty Doctors or Teachers should be sent forth into all the
corners of the world, to teach the doctrine that was taught and received in
that City. Then he named them all, and the particular place whither each of
them should go. So after all was done, they let the said eight and twenty
Preachers out of the town by night very closely, for fear of those without, who
besieged them: giving to every one (above that which should defray his charges)
one piece of gold, and commanding them to leave it at such places where their
doctrine should not be received, for a testimony of such peoples damnation, and
everlasting perdition, for refusing such message and wholesome doctrine. When
those Preachers were come to the places assigned unto them, they cried in the
streets of the Towns where they came, Repont, repent, or else you shall all
quickly perish. Then They preach Repentance, Community of Goods and the
universal Reign of Rightcousness, brought to pass by King John of Leyden.
they spread their garments on the ground before the Magistrates, and upon them
they laid the pieces of Gold which were before delivered unto them, assuring
them, and protesting that they were sent from the heavenly Father, to bring
them peace and mercy: and if they would receive it, then they must give up all
their Goods to be used in common: but if they refused it, then that sign and
token should be a witness against them of ingratitude and rebellion against
God. For (said they) now is the time come that was spoken of before by the
Prophets, in which Righteousness shall reign in the Earth universally; and when
the King (meaning John of Leyden) has brought to pass, that Righteousness
shall rule in every place, then Christ shall give up his Kingdom to his Father.
But these Preachers being hereupon apprehended, they resolutely stood The
Preachers apprehended, they defend their wicked Practices with Scripture falsely
applied.
in it, and defended, that they only held the true doctrine, which they would
maintain upon peril of their lives. Being asked, with what justice they could
enter upon, and possess other men's Wives, Children and Goods as they did? they
said, The time was come forespoken of by Christ, that the meek should possess
the earth, and that God gave these unto them, as he did give the Goods of the
Egyptians unto the Israelites. They affirmed also, that King David and John of
Leyden were two righteous Prophets: but the Pope and Luther were both false
Prophets; whereof Luther was the worse. Thus still persisting obstinate in
their erroneous Opinions, (notwithstanding the Tortures which they endured)
they were all beheaded, saving One of them escaped, all the Rest put to death.
one of them that escaped away by slight. Whilst these things were thus in
doing within and abroad, the City of Munster was every day more and more
straightly besieged, and pressed with extreme famine; so that for fear lest many
the chief Burgers should capitulate with the Enemy, and yield the King up unto
the Bishop; their King therefore did choose Twelve, whom he held most faithful
unto him, and appointed them to be Captains of War over so many several Parts
of the Town, into which he did quarter it; entertaining the said Twelve persons
with Mountains of large Promises, and telling them over what great Provinces
and Dominions under him he would after A Famine increases in the City.
place them. Thus the Famine still more and more increasing in the City (so
that sundry died thereof, albeit the King had abundance for himself and his
special Favorites, not only for supply of necessity, but also to riot and
banquet) it happened, that one of his Queens, in commiseration of the
distressed, said unto the rest, That she could not believe it was the Will of
God, that men should in that sort be suffered to die for want of food. Hereupon
being accused, she was brought into the Marketplace; and being commanded to
kneel down, the King struck off her Head; all the rest of his Queens singing,
dancing, and giving thanks therefore to the heavenly Father. But whenas the
common sort had like to have mutined, The King proimseth them Deliverance
before Easter. It not coming, he fains himself sick, and puts a Cheat upon them.
by reason of the extremity of Famine, their King promised them assured
deliverance from God before Easter. When Easter was come, no sign or token of
their deliverance appeared. Then the King feigned himself to be sick for six
days: afterward (assembling the people into the Market steed) he told them,
that all that while he had ridden upon a blind Ass, and that the Father had
laid upon him the sins of the whole Multitude, so that now they were cleansed
and freed from all Vice; which was the Deliverance which he promised unto them,
and therewith they were to hold themselves contented. When the Bishop's
Strength, by common Supplies from the Princes of the Empire were much
reenforced, matters (in the Town) grew to that Extremity, that by means of two
Persons (who conveyed themselves secretly forth of the Town) it was at last
surprised by the The City is surprised. The King. Knipperdolung. and Crecliting
taken alive. Rotman is slam.
Assailants, though with much ado and Bloodshed, even after they were entered.
Their King, with Knipperdoling and Crecliting, their two false Prophets, were
taken alive: But Rotman their Reformed Preacher (seeing no hope to escape)
desperately ran in amongst the thickest of the Armed Companies, and by them he
was cut in pieces. The three Persons aforenamed were carried about the
Country, as a Spectacle to sundry the Princes and others thereabouts, and
after were brought back again unto Munster. The Bishop of Munster demanded of
the King, by what Authority he took upon him to rule in that City? Who asked
the said Bishop again, by what Authority he the said Bishop claimed any Power
there? When he answered, that he had it by means of Election of the Chapter,
and by Consent of the People, the King replying, said, That himself had his
Authority from God. After two days had been bestowed with them, to reduce them
(by godly Persuasions) from their Errors, Leyden their King confessed his
Leyden repents. Knipperdoling and Crecliting arc obstinate. They are all three
executed.
Sin, and desired Forgiveness at Christ's hands. But Knipperdoling and
Crecliting would confess no fault, but defended their course and Opinions with
great Obstinacy. So all Three being tied unto Posts, were dismembered by piece
meal, and pulled in small pieces with hot burning Pincers and Tongs, and
afterward their Carcasses were hanged up there in Iron Cages; but the King in
the midst, and much higher than the other two, as his Place required.

Besides certain especial Opinions which Some of their Erroneous and Heretical
Doctrines.
these Anabaptists held, namely, That Young Children were not to be baptized;
and touching Lawfulness of Poligamy, or having many Wives: Of Community of
Goods; and that Christ took not Flesh of the Virgin Mary, etc. they also taught
and defended many other strange, erroneous, and heretical Positions: And yet
they showed as much Devotion, outward Holiness and Purity, as might be. As for
example; they held these following; viz. That a perfect Christian might not
exercise the Office of a Magistrate, nor might take an Oath before him. That
God does now oftentimes show his Will by extraordinary Revelations, Dreams, and
Visions. That the common people have an especial Authority in determining and
establishing of Church-causes. That before the day of Judgment the Kingdom of
Christ shall be such, as that the Godly and Elect shall overthrow and subdue
all the wicked, and then they alone shall rule in the earth. That it is lawful
for the People to depose and put down the Prince or Magistrate. That Ministers
and others godly affected, ought to establish (though it were by Force) a
Reformation in all Countries. That Princes and Magistrates ought not to pursue
this kind of persons, for that they are Innocents, and the beloved People of
God. That the Seat of David which was fallen down must be reestablished, and
that Christ now in the latter end of the World shall reign externally upon the
Earth. That the time of besiege (they then lived in) was that where of Isaiah
prophesied, wherein the just and godly were afflicted and persecuted. That the
time of their deliverance and enlargement was at hand; which should be like to
that deliverance of the Israelites from the Thraldom under the Babylonians: And
that then the wicked and ungodly shall receive the guerdon and recompense of
all their Impieties committed against the Saints, all the ungodly being rid out
of the way, the seat of Righteousness should be prepared and advanced. That
there is none efficacy or force in that Baptism wherewith Infants are baptized.
All which they obstinately defended; and yet (whenever they were charged)
they pretended that they would acknowledge and confess their Errors, if they
should be showed unto them by the Scriptures, to be Errors.

Now as I have done before, in the History A comparison of the Anabaptists in
Munster with the Disciplinarians in England, in Opinion and Practice.
of Thomas Muncer, I must crave leave, that with the Readers patience, I may
also briefly compare and resemble some of the Dealings and Errors of the
Anabaptists of the City of Munster, with the actions and opinions of these late
Conspirators, and of their Disciplinarian Schoolmasters, from whom they have
sucked like Poison.

For did not Hacket (the most ignorant of all the three, being but an
unlettered Maltster) in like sort take upon him to rule the other, and to
manage the whole Action? and are not the most ignorant of such as be of this
humor, most presumptuous to direct all others, and to discuss deepest doubts?
Have not their mutual cohortations, and seditious instructions, with their
conceived Prayers, and hypocritical Fasts, (that they practiced in privy
conventicles, and assemblies) given greatest strength to his faction, to the
seduction of numbers? Have not the Magistrates now as great cause to look into
these proceedings, before they make head, upon confidence of their multitudes?
Have not all the stayed and sound Preachers of this Land by sundry Maleperts,
and now again by Arthington, been (most insolently) challenged unto
disputation? Has not the cause of this pretended Discipline, been nevertheless
quashed (oftentimes) in Pulpits, in public disputations in the Universities,
and by learned treatises written: whereby the weakness, and meagerness of their
childish collections, have been fully displayed? Will they make any have, or
dare they to offer disputation, if such conditions, assistants, and indifferent
and learned Judges as are fit, shall be set down and appointed? and (being
beaten from their ordinary means) have not these Conspirators, and such as have
animated them, betaken themselves unto pretended extraordinary Callings,
ravishings in Spirit, carryings into Heaven, Revelations, Dreams and Visions?
Have they not seditiously filled out Streets with their like hypocritical
Outcries of Repent, Repent, etc. and by gathering of Routs, tending to Uproar
and popular Tumult? If their purposes had succeeded, and their Prophecies of
killing and massacring men (like Swine) in London Streets, had come to pass,
would the Outrages, in hainousness, have come any whit behind those of Munster?

If this sort of Persons have been gratified with any indifferent Toleration,
could their restless busy Heads (though they have promised otherwise) cease to
hammer, by long hand, and secretly, the bringing to full effect of their
designments, viz. That they might govern in the Church with Christ's Scepter,
and administer his Kingdom? For so they (blasphemously) term the Discipline,
which they have forged. Was not the displacing of her Majesty's Council plotted
by the Confederates, and had they not assigned other Counselors in their
rooms? Should those whom themselves had thus chosen and assigned, have remained
long in place, if their K. Hacket had been once invested as fully and royally
as John of Leiden was in Munster? Would they not quickly have brought them
down, as Knipperdoling was, from being Consul, to the basest room of account
that might be? Would these (if they had prevailed) have spared (think ye)
either Place, Age, or Sex; or should Banishment only have served? No: Viscera
impiorum crudelia. And did not Hacket take upon him to be as great a Prophet as
John Matthew, or John of Leyden, his Successor? And Coppinger the Prophet of
God's Mercy, as high as Knipperdoling? And Arthington the Prophet of Judgment,
and Pen of a ready Writer, as refined and excellent as Crecliting the
Goldsmith? Had not these also appointed out Wigginton and Lancaster to be their
Assistants for a time, as it were their petty Prophets? Did they not pretend
the Will of the Heavenly Father for every most ungodly and absurd Motion,
Speech, or Action, as namely, for the defacing of her Majesty's Arms; and that
she should not be prayed for? Did not these pretend and seign to be in high
favor with God, and that they could tell secrets, and things to come, merely
contingent, and to be able to cast out Devils, and to obtain Rain at pleasure?
Matters of as great difficulty and unlikelihood, as soothsaying and bewraying
of things concealed. Did they not inveigh against the human Wisdom (of diverse
of their own Judgment) whom they supposed not to be forward enough? And do not
many of the Disciplinarian Vein despise and condemn all helps of good Arts and
Learning, as little less than impious, but specially in Sermons? Was not
Matthew the chief Prophet of Munster his Fancy stronger and his Resolution
greater than these Conspirators showed in any part of their action; when he
thought himself alone able to repel an whole Host? And yet he was not therefore
accounted srious, mad, or distracted of his Wits. Was not Coppinger likewise as
deeply bewitched as the people of Munster, when he could not perceive that
Hacket did but dally with him about particular Intelligence of some Treasons,
supposed to be plotted by some Great Persons? Had not these three, and this
sort of Humourists, as great Envy at old and Cathedral Churches and others,
whenas they seek to procure their Overthrow? Did not Coppinger fancy to have
had his extraordinary Callings and Enlightnings by Dreams in his Sleep? Had
they not likewise appointed their Governors for matters of Counsel, and for
other Civil Administration? Do not this kind of persons also make show of
desire to have all questions decided only by Scriptures? Does not the
Discipline give the chief and sovereign allowance or disallowance of all
Ecclesiastical determinations, unto the whole Congregation? Did not these
Conspirators use (as means to be trusted, that God had revealed such things
unto them) Oaths and Execrations of Damnation and Confusion to themselves, as
deeply as John of Leyden did, when he did swear by his Coat, and by the New
Testament, touching the like Revelation? Did not Hacket their great Prophet,
thirst after, and threaten Revenge against some Great Persons, who he thought
did stand in his way? Did not Coppinger and Arthington proclaim in the
Marketplace of Cheap, and afterward defend, That Hacket was King and Emperor
of all Europe, and that God had so appointed it? Did they not hold, That he,
together with themselves, should go forth, and take Possession of all his
Kingdoms here and abroad; and subdue all Kings that would not hold their
Scepters of him, and be governed by such Laws and Orders as he should appoint;
and that he should sever with his Fan the good from the bad, so that they
should not trouble and afflict the Godly any more? Had not Hacket also his said
Prophets to proclaim him publicly King of Europe, as John of Leyden had the
Goldsmith? Did not Coppinger (upon Arthington's Advertisement) with three most
lowly Obeisances, and with great Gravity, take upon him, and was ready to
anoint and sanctify Hacket with the Holy Ghost, but that (by a shift) he was
put off? And as they of Munster had their profane and impious Celebration of
the Communion, before they sent forth their Twenty eight Preachers; in like
manner, Had not these their Hypocritical Fasts and Prayers, promulgated and
made known unto sundry of their own disposition, that they might join (either
in Body or Spirit) with them, before they enterprized any matter, or entered
Consultation of weight, or would assume their supposed extraordinary Callings?
Do not these and all like affected to them, by their Teachers in every Corner,
seek to win or persuade as many to the liking of their Opinions, as possibly
they can any way compass and hem in? Have they not also their set, empty,
thundering Words, and solemn Obtestations, to allure men to believe that which
they teach? Did not the said two English Prophets offer by their Proclamation
great Mercy and Joys to them that should believe or follow them; and infinite
Woes and Damnation to those that should reject them? Did they not signify, That
the time was come for the establishing the Gospel and Reformation by their King
Hacket; and therefore willed all true Christians to be of good comfort, because
the Wicked should be overthrown? Did they not engage their Lives, yea, and
Souls, upon the Verity of the Messages that they published? And were they not a
good while (after their Apprehension) very obstinate and resolute in their
Fancies conceived? Was not Coppinger's Promises of speedy Deliverance unto
Udall, as confident and resolute as John of Leyden's was unto the People of
that City? Though the Event showed, that at last all did but come to the riding
of a blind Ass? Did not Hacket likewise blasphemously affirm, That by the
whipping which Pigge bestowed on him, he did suffer for the sins of all
Hypocrite Preachers, such as favored the Discipline, but were not so forward
as he thought they ought to be? Was not the resolution of one of these as lewd
as Rotman's (who after all hope was past, ran amongst the armed Companies) if
he also did (as was said) with like wilfulness refuse to take any Sustenance?
Was not the desperateness of Hacket also most horrible and fearful, whenas
(seeing no Remedy but Death) he opened his mouth blasphemously against Heaven,
and against the Majesty of the Eternal God?

And concerning certain opinions of the Anabaptists, do not many of the
Disciplinarian humor, come far nearer unto them than were to be wished? for
though they deny not the Civil Magistrates superiority altogether, yet in
Causes Ecclesiastical, though they admit it (in words) they allow unto him
nothing else but execution of their Orders, without attributing any superior
pre-eminence of commandment in Church-causes, for retaining of good order, and
of soundness of Doctrine in the Church. Likewise, though they take not the
sovereignty from the chief Magistrate in causes of the Commonwealth, do they
not so abridge and bound his Authority in causes Ecclesiastical, that the very
Papists do attribute as much in this behalf unto him, as they do? And albeit
they will not absolutely in judgment deny the lawfulness of an Oath before a
Magistrate, yet if their sundry and variable Positions in this point be marked,
they do (in effect wholly) repeal the use of it. For do not some of them
plainly refuse to take an Oath, whereby they may be urged to discover any thing
which may either be penal to themselves, or to their Christian Brother, and so
in effect deny it altogether? Do not others of them refuse to tell any thing
that is criminal concerning any other person, though perhaps they will do it
against themselves, especially when they think it is before discovered and
known? Do not some of them refuse an Oath simply, yea, and to answer (without
Oath) either affirmatively or negatively, but do will their accusers to stand
forth. Do not others deny to take an Oath, except every particular question be
before made known unto them? a matter impossible, because sundry Questions that
shall be asked, do arise forth of the matter of the Answer? And do not sundry
of them (albeit they yield to detect by Oath both their own and others
offenses) yet deny to reveal any thing whereof they are asked, if themselves be
persuaded the matter demanded of, be none offense? And so they do hang
obedience to Laws, Allegiance and Duty of Subjects, upon every particular man's
conceit, even as he by circumstances, or his own fond persuasion, shall list to
measure matters. Do they not resolutely hold, that summa potestas, the Chief
and Sovereign Power in all Church-causes, belongs to a Presbytery, who though
they may consult, yet may not determine matter of any moment, without the
allowance of the People? Had not these Conspirators a like opinion to those of
Munster, that the principal spirit of Christ (being in Hacket) he was come with
his Fan to sever and dispatch out of the way all the wicked and ungodly, from
the good and godly? Has it not been set down by an English subject, and twice
printed with singular allowance of the English Arch-Prophet of discipline, for
Sound and Holy Divinity, that it is God's ordinance, to have in every Kingdom
certain chief Officers (like Ephori in Lacedoemon) who should have authority to
depose Kings, though they come unto it by lawful Succession, if they shall
judge them to be Tyrants? Did not Wigginton deliver for sound Doctrine, That if
the Magistrates did not govern well, the people might draw themselves together,
and to see a Reformation? Do not these kind of persons likewise slander the
Prince and State, with persecution of the Saints, and of innocent men, because
they are a little restrained from running on in their Seditious courses? Did
not these Conspirators also hold, That now in these latter times, Christ by his
principal spirit (imparted unto Hacket) should reign and erect an external
kingdom on earth, and in the world? And did they not fancy, that even at that
time the Gospel with their discipline, should be universally established, and
all the ungodly abolished? Do not all of the Disciplinarian Sect hold, that to
the very being of Baptism (and without which, it is of no more force in any
case, than the Nurses washing) it is required, that it be administered by a
lawful Minister? thereby derogating, not only from the true Baptism of
Thousands, but also of all whomsoever that were Baptized by Popish Sacrificing
Priests themselves, and from all that have received Baptism of such as were
Baptized by them? whereupon must needs follow necessity of Rebaptization, or
else that it were lawful to neglect and contemn that Sacrament, and high
Mystery of our Salvation. Lastly, Do they not make great shows, and many
pretenses, for all their unsound and absurd Opinions, that they are taken from
the holy and sacred written word of God? which by this means they make to be of
private interpretation, and do not reduce their senses unto it, when they read,
but do wickedly captivate the Scripture unto their own senses and meanings?
even as (in this behalf) Coppinger or Arthington did first take upon them an
extraordinary calling, Scripturas ad suum non suum sensum ad Scripturas
adducunt.
and were afterward charged by Hacket to read over the whole Bible, there to
find an approbation of it.

God of his infinite mercy forgive, and turn the hearts of all that trouble his
Church, fromrunning well, or that impugn his Ordinance, and such as are set
over them: and restrain, or root out all Fantastical Errors and Fanatical
spirits, which the envious man (from time to time) does sow among the good
Wheat: that holding the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, we may all
meet together (in the unity of faith, and knowledge of the Son of God) unto a
perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ, and so
speedily and joyfully meet him our Bridegroom in the Clouds, with our heads
lifted up, and full of Comfort, and so reign with him for ever, through the
same Jesus Christ our Lord; To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, one
Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, and only wise God, be all Honor, Praise, Glory,
and Dominion, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Books Sold by R. Chiswell.
DAngerous Positions and Proceedings, published and Practiced within this
Island of Britain, under pretense of Reformation; and for the Presbyterial
Discipline. Written in 1593. by Dr. Riohard Bancrofe, afterward Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury 4o.

His Survey of the pretended Holy Discipline, Containing an Historical
Narration of the Beginnings, Success, Parts, Proceedings, Authority and
Doctrine of it; with some of the Manifold and Material Repugnancies, Varieties
and Uncertainties in that behalf: Faithfully gathered out of the Writings of
the Principal Favorers of that Platform. Written 1593. 4o.

An Apology for Sundry Proceedings, by Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, in 3 Parts.
Written 1593. By Richard Cousin L. L. D. Dean of the Arches, and
Official-Principal to Archbishop Whitgift. 4o.

The Sum of a Conference held by King James the First, at Hampton Court. 1603.
with the Bishops and Clergy, and some Chief of the Puritan Ministers, about
sundry Church Matters. 4o.

Mr. Richard Hookers Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity in 8 Books. Fol.


