A Practical Discourse Upon the DEATH Of Our LATE Graeious QUEEN. BEING A
SERMON PREACHED The 10th of March, 1694/5, at St. James Clarkenwell, By D.
Pead, Chaplain to his Grace the Duke of Newcastle.

Published at the Request of the PARISHIONERS.

LONDON. Printed for Abel Roper, E. Wilkinson, and Roger Clavel, over against
St. Dunstans Church, Fleetstreet; and Joseph Fox at the Seven Stars in
Westminster Hall, 1695.

St. Luke 28th, Verse. 23d, -- Latter part. Weep not for me, but weep for your
selves and for your Children.


THESE Words were spoken by Jesus Christ to the Virgin Mary, and other Women,
whose Devotion led them to attend him in the Agonies of Death; I shall at
present consider them, as coming from our late Gracious Queen, at Her
Departure; and, in this Sense you may look upon them as Her Last Advice, or
Legacy to us, and (...) all of both Sexes within this Realm; Weep not for me,
but, etc.

Here we find Two Parts;

1. A Prohibition; Weep not for me. 2. An Injunction; but weep for your selves.
First, The Prohibition, or Caution; Weep not (...) me.

(...), To weep, imports more than a bare weep^^g, or shedding of tears, for it
signifies also an Ejulation, Howling, or Crying out; moreover, it implies an
Hearty and Intrinsecal Sorrow, arising from a due consideration of our present
pressure.

So that in a Day of Calamity, such as this (when God has called us to
Mourning and Lamentation) for any to say, They cannot weep, for they are of too
dry a Constitution, will be no excuse; for, admit they have not Tears at their
disposal, yet, unless they are stupid and senseless, or possessed with a Stoical
Apathy, they cannot but be greatly affected with what is come to pass; and this
is one sort of weeping, though we weep best when both the eyes drop and the
heart sighs.

Weep not. ^^ot.


Not, you may observe, in Reading the Scripture is not always taken as an
Absolute Denial, but sometimes it is used in a Comparative Sense, and direct^
us in two several things, which is better and more expedient; ^^t. 9.
Thus, * I will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice: God did not hereby prohibit
Sacrificing (...) but minded them, that Love and Charity should b^ mixed with
their Piety and Devotion: So also (...) (which comes up to our present purpose)
Re^^ your hearts, ^^el 2.
and not your garments; i. e. Rather griev^ inwardly, than outwardly; the
humbling you^ Hearts, and the afflicting your Souls, is a mu^^ better Testimony
of your Mourning, than the Taring your Robes, though this you may do, yet the
other you ought not to leave undone.

Weep not.

These words and the Age suit together; for though Wise Solomon affirms, (...)
There is as proper a Season ^or Sorrow, as for Mirth; yet many of us are slow
^f heart to believe him: We are grown like the ^nhabitants of Tambutum in
Afric, whom Travel^ers report to spend their days in Singing and Daun^ing;
the great business of our time is to drive away ^orrow.

The Reproof given the Jews Ma^^ 11.1
, is very Applicable ^o us; they were like those Children which their ^ellows
complained on, saying, We have Piped unto ^ou, and you have not Daunced; we
have Mourned unto you, and you have not Lamented: Neither Mirth ^or Sorrow,
Prosperity nor Adversity affect us as ^hey ought. When God listed up his
Countenance upon this disconsolate Kingdom, and with a Graci^us King and Queen
Restored our Religion, Laws, ^ives and Liberties, In how few did their Hearts
^aunce for Joy? and now he has taken from our ^ead our great Queen, How few in
this Lamenta^le Catastrophe are true Mourners?

Weep not for me.

Your Tears, I want not, they cannot reverse the Sentence already executed;
such Lamentation for me is as Impertinent as Invocation of the Virgi^ is
Idolatrous: For, How can Mortals Believe (...) that we in Abraham's Bosom take
Cognizance o^ what they do or suffer, (...). 63.
when * Abraham himself (...) in such cases, is ignorant.

While in the Body, I had, and showed Compassion; but it is one Privilege of
Heaven to b^ above all occasions of it: We are so Ravished wit^ the Glorious
Presence, and so Diligent at our Ha^lelujahs, that had we Intelligence, yet we
wante^ Opportunity to consider your Circumstances.

Weep not for me, because Dead and D^parted.

No more in this is befallen me, than what wa^ Natural, than what I ever
Expected, Death is the common Lot of Mortals, neither Crown nor Scepter,
Authority nor Treasures, Health or Beauty (...) Youth or Strength, Wit or
Policy, no nor Grace (...) self, is a Sanctuary from the Arrest of Death (...)
not only Kings and Queens, Emperors an^ Emperesses, but Mary the Mother, and
Lazarus, the Favorite of the Lord of Life have gone this way before Me.

3. Weep not for Me, because so early Dead.

Death is a Lawless Tyrant, observing no Rules, moving in no steady course;
some he seizes in their full strength, their bones well-stor'd with Marrow, and
their breasts with Milk Job ^^ 24.
On some ^e steals, sending no fatal Symptoms as Fore-run^ers.

Death is grown dainty, and indulges himself ^ith Variety, as well High as Low,
Poor as Rich, ^trong as Weak, Healthy as Crazy, Young as Old ^e feeds upon.

He Respites not the Strong, till he has first dis^atcht the Feeble, and the
Decrepit; he will some^^mes neglect an old weather-beaten and tottering
^^ottage, while he takes a pride to demolish a new^^ected Palace; he is too
bold to pass by him ^^at handles the Sword, to take him that leans (...) his
Staff; nor has he the tenderness to pity ^^e Beautiful in their Flower and
Prime, and take (...) with the Old and Withered; but, when ever (...) pleases he
makes bold with all: For, Ps. 89.48.
What ^^an is he that lives, and shall not see death? The ^^ave is our home,
we are but wanderers till we come there. The youngest is old enough to die,
Death's Scythe will cut as will the Green, as Ripe Grass.

4. Weep not for Me, in that Death has snatched me so hastily away.

(...), Those whom God Loves, he soonest sends for; you may think it too soon,
yet to me a Sinner, he conceeded as long, if not longer duration than to his
Son, in whom was no sin: Weep till you are planted in the Garden of God, for it
is his particular care to House his Choice Plants, and not leave them too long
exposed to Storms.

5. Weep not for me, as if by Death I were a Loser.

Though dead, yet am I not killed with Death. * I died to live. ^^v. 2.
For me to die was gain.

I have left my Heavy, Thorny, and Anxious Crown, but speak it not that you
should weep having, in exchange, received from him (for whom I Reigned among
you) an Immarcessible Crown o^ Glory.

It Is true, I have left my Palace, my Train and Attendance, who may bemoan my
Retiring; but these I cannot miss, being arriy'd at the Heavenly Jerusalem, and
incorporated in an Innumerable Company of Angels, I am come to a Glorious
Assembly of holy and happy Souls.

Some accounted my Life Madness, and that I was beside my self, in that I
exerted not my Authority, consumed not my Revenue to the Pampering and
Indulging Nature; my Devotion and Charity, my Watchfulness over my self, my
Circumspection among my Attendants, was a Riddle, if not a Scorn to others;
but, how sweet was the Reflection in the Agonies of Death! and how Merciful has
the Gracious Lord rewarded those small pittances of Duty and Service! Weep not
for me, for Psa^ 11.
verily there is a Reward for the Righteous.

But methinks I hear of some of you protesting your noble and grateful tempers
cannot dispense with this Counsel; but though she neither wants nor takes
notice of your Tears; Though Death be as natural to Princes as to Beggars;
Though an early departure to Bliss be an happiness; And though she is the
Gainer by Exchange of Crowns, yet you must and will Weep, you cannot refrain.

1. Because Tears are the Due Rights, the Accustomed Benevolence paid to
departed Friends, it was not Reason, but Morossness, that Spoke in Ennius, Nemo
me decoret Lachrymis.

Tears are called (...), justa defunctorum, the Dues, the Tribute belonging to
the Dead: Thus Abraham, a great Prince, bemoaned his deceased Sarah; Jacob,
Moses, Samuel, and many others were Lamented when dead, because they had been
so useful and good when Living.

The Greater the Person, the higher in degree and Quality, the more Religious
and Beneficial in his Generation, the Greater was the lamentation; thus Ahijah,
Jeroboam's Son died, and, by God's Special Command, King. 13.
all Israel Mourned for him; and the Reason is there given, Some good thing
toward the Lord God of Israel was found in him.

But when the Good King Josiah was taken away by death *, Chron. 31.
his death was in an extraordinary manner Lamented; all Judah and Jerusalem
Condoled him: The Prophet Jeremiah's head was as a Fountain of Tears, ^ers. 25.
all the Singing Men and Singing Women made great Lamentation for him: Such was
the Mourning for that good Prince, so that it grew into a Proverb, ^^ch. 12.
* As the Mourning of Hadadrimmon in the Valley of Megiddon.

The Comparison were at hand, had Grief a Tongue, and delighted in Loquacity.
Was Josiah zealous for the Lord, according to the Law of Moses? Who more
zealous than the Late Queen? (whose Translation hence we now Commemorate) She
was zealous for God, both according to the Law and the Gospel; How industrious
was She to Suppress Swearing, Drunkenness, Whoredom, and Sabbath-breaking? And
how did She commend each respective duty of the Gospel to Her Subjects, by her
own Practice and Example? Was Josiah zealous against Idolatry? She more against
all Idolatry and Profaneness; Did he turn unto the Lord with all his Soul? Who
could perceive that she had many Thoughts, Desires, Studies, or Delights, but
what tended either Primarily or Subordinately to the Glory of God? It was that
King's Praise, That he had the Law Read in the Audience of the People; It was
our Queen's, That She delighted in having the Gospel Piously, Reverently and
Frequently Preached; In a Word, he was Chronicled for his Strict Observation of
the Passover; She ought much more to be had in Remembrance, for her Devout and
Frequent Receiving the Sacrament of the LORD's SVPPER.

I want Time, to show what Zeal She had, what Travel She underwent, to Settle
the Church, to heal our Distractions, to compose our Differences; How Fervent
was Her desire to see the House of God purged from all its dregs? to remove all
just and tolerable Causes of Separation? and to make the Terms of Communion as
clear and comfortable as became the Christian Religion? Doubtless, had God
spared Her, She would have so Labored our Reformation and Union, that our
Church should have been a Praise in the Earth: Should I proceed by the Rule of
Her Deserts, and you, by the same, Commensurate your Weeping, it were enough to
Convert this Island into another Hadadrimmon.

Is it not Reason then to say, Ah Lord! and, Ah Her Glory! It were unpardonable
if such a Princess should depart without the Groans of Her People.

2. We cannot prevent weeping, nor would we, because an Unlamented death is
Threatened by God as a Curse: and, the worst of Her Enemies will not Judge so
hardly of Her, therefore it is pardonable if Her True Admirers Mourn for her.

God threatens 16.
the Restraining of Lamentation at death, as a grievous Punishment; and more
expressly concerning Jehojakim King of Judah, God said, 22.
They shall not Lament for him, saying, Ah my Brother, or, Ah Sister; Ah Lord,
Ah his Glory, i. e. neither his Relations, nor his Subjects were permitted to
make Lamentation for him.

Solomon speaks of it as a thing usual and common, Ecc^^ 12.5
That when Men die, and go to their long home, The Mourners go about the City:
And how then shall we say, That they whom God calls Gods, die like Men, if a
Queen shall want what is allowed to common Subjects.

In a word, God seems to Resent it very ill, when this Kind Office is
neglected, when these Tributes of Tears are kept back, Isa. 1.
The Righteous perish, and no Man lays it to heart: To spare, where God calls
for spending; to grudge, where a gracious Princess so highly deserves, is
surely Impious.

But, notwithstanding, let us once more Mind ^he Text, and although it be a
general Custom, and so we were out of Fashion if we did not weep; Although God
wills this Respect be shown to so Eminent an Instrument of his Glory, and our
Good; yet, Weep not for me.

1. Hypocritically.

Take heed your Grief, your Tears, your Con^^rnedness for this Great Loss, be
not Counterfeit; Country have swept away Thousands? Hear you not the Cries and
dismal Complaints of the Poor? The Threats of Enemies? The Conspiracy of
Traitors? The Frauds and Deceits of Subjects? And will not the blackness and
horror hereof raise a Tempest of Tears? Then surely all Compassion is extinct;
the Clouds are wont to drop upon less noise.

Yet behold so little are we affected with ou^ Sufferings, or sensible of what
we have to fear that every one keeps on his old Rode, one to his Farm, another
to his Merchandise, one to hi^ Business, another to his Pleasure; and few la^
either the present, or what we may hereafter lose to heart.

God took away Josiah, 22.10.
that he should not see the Evil that was coming on his Kingdom; and who
knows but that our Queen was taken away in like manner?

Could we weep and pray, pray, and drow^ our Prayers in Tears, God would
certainly hea^ our Cries; for Tears have an audible and significant Voice. Man
may hear their general Voice and from our weeping, collect we are in Sorrow but
God hears their secret, and special Voice, an^ in our weeping reads our
Humility and Repentance

Weep for your selves.

We have just cause to fear our Sins have hastened this Death, which we now
deplore. God in his Goodness sent us such a Princess, as was both a Patroness,
and Example of Goodness: A Glass by which this crooked Age might have rectified
it self; and seeing he has waited diverse Years, and found no amendment, what
was it but just to take the Mirror from us? What should they do with a Light,
who will not walk by it? This is no new thing; for If you continue to do
wickedly, 1 Samuel
both you and your King shall be destroyed.

So Solomon's Observation was; Prove.
For the Transgression of a Land, many are the Princes thereof: And if we have
not dissembled with God, in the Service for the Thirtieth of January, we
confess that the Crying Sins of the Nation occasioned the Death of King Charles
the First.

The Throne feels many Removes, when Subjects go on still in their Wickedness;
so that there ^ies a necessity upon us to weep an hearty Repentance by way of
Atonement, and hereafter to live most religiously by way of Prevention: Which
brings us to the next Consideration.

III. Weep for your selves, and your children.

Weep so as to reform; shed Tears of abhorrence and detestation: It were
extremely provoking for all this to sin on; to be found sinning against God in
the day that we should be crying out of our Trouble and Misery.

While Amasa lay openly wallowing in his Blood the whole Congregation stood
astonished, they were all highly concerned to see the Land so defiled with Blood;
20.12.
but yet no sooner was the Dead covered with a Cloth, and removed out of sight
but every one marched on as he was going.

I no ways question, but the first relation of the Queen's Sickness was dismal
to most; and at the report of her Death, the hearts of many good People were
ready to sink within them; and all concurred in this Opinion, that for the
Wickedness of the Land she was fallen; and shall we now the Solemnity of her
Funeral is over, recant? God forbid: I hope as every day will discover our lo^^
to be greater and greater; so our loss will imbitte^ our Sins to us, that we
shall set upon a general Reformation.

Some Tempers are corrected when brought to weeping: God grant us Hearts to
weep, and Grace to amend. It was an Observation made of the Jews, that they
were best in their worst Condition; of the Athenians it was spoken
Proverbially, Non nisi Atrati, they never kept any decorum, but when in
Mourning: And a great Statesman once spoke of this Nation, Anglica gens est
optima slens, pessima ridens, The English are most like themselves when God
turns their Mirth into Sorrow. Now therefore you are called to the House of
Mourning, it is very seasonable both to weep and amend.

Could we thus mourn, God would return, and leave a Blessing behind him, as ^e
did to Nineveh, we might yet see Jerusalem in Prosperity. Could we thus weep
for ^^ur Sins; and in weeping, leave them off, there were hopes, after a fair
Enjoyment of Peace and Prosperity here, we may, like her that is now gone
before us, dye willingly and cheerfully; for she willingly resigned her Breath;
she ^^ll a-sleep without the least reluctance or resistance: It was not
regardlessness, or ignorance of Death; nor was it the Gallantry of her natural
Courage, that taught her thus to defy the ^ing of Terrors, but the good
Foundation she had laid up against this Day: Her Fidelity in God's Service
emboldned her Trust in his Mercy.

To Conclude.

I shall now endeavor Two things.

I. To remove some Discontents. II. To give some needful Exhortations.
1. Peradvenrure my appearing no sooner upon this Occasion, may be called
Coldness or Unconcernedness; I shall excuse my self no otherwise, than by
showing you that I learn from Joab's Reproof to Ahimaz, 18.
it was manners to l^^ Zadock, who was thereunto appointed, run before.

2. Perhaps I may be censured as too partia^^^ that I have not sufficiently
illustrated, and bl^^^ zoned the Queen's Virtues. In answer hereunto my Opinion
is, true Grief loves not to be Rh^^torical; where it does speak, it is but
abrub^^^ and brokenly, like the harsh Cry of Cranes, (...) the unpleasant
chattering of Swallows: Beside* I did conclude, should I have told you in the
Language of some, that she exceeded King David, Queen Elizabeth; nay, all the
Kings and Queens that ever were, this would offend as fulsome: I could not in
one breath declare she was beyond Description, and in the next do it in a few
Words.

In short, I have seen and observed many things, I have heard more, and do
probably believe as much as another; but yet dare not speak too liberally, for
fear I should be thought another Sostratus, and to offer more to the Living
than Dead.

Yet however I will not deny my Character; which is this: Our late Queen Mary
was so good, that God took her away as too good for such a wicked People as we
are. You may have a larger, Prove. 31.

3. There is yet another prejudice, some reproached ^he deceased Queen when
living, and still brand her Honor now dead, by charging he with Forgetfulness
of the Fifth Commandment.

This is the Charge; but they that are so industrious in spreading and
aggravating it, would do better to consider; The Conjunction of Matrimony is
nearer and stronger than that of Parents and Children; for God who so strictly
commanded, and encouraged the Obedience of Children to Parents, yet was pleased
to dispense with this Law, (...) 13.
in case of Matrimony: For thi^ cause shall a man forsake father and mother,
etc. which Law is equal to either Sex; and shows us, that i^ ever the Paternal
Duty should contradict the Marriage, that of the Marriage has the
pre-eminence. Moreover, in the State of Matrimony, the Husband has power over
the Wife: So that it is against all Reason, that the Queen should answer as a
Daughter for what she could not refuse as a Wife.

Plancus, near his end, was told that Asinius Poll^ had prepared
Funeral-Orations against him, and had steeped his Pen in Gall, Plancus slighted
the Information, saying, None but Ghosts will contend with the Dead: Though he
thus bravely scorned Pollio's Malice, yet could not Pollio digest Plancus's
Answer but departed from his intention of railing at him For fear the Manners
and Wisdom should be wanting among Christians, which was found in th^^ Heathen,
something I will say, though not much left the adverse Party should conceit
their Objection of greater weight than really it is.

Put case God had in Mercy to his afflicted Church dealt by the Father, as he
has formerly done b^ other Crowned Heads, removed him by some strange Death,
had not the Daughter's Title then been good? Had she not then legally ascended
the Throne? What is it then that occasions all this Discontent, unless it be
God in Judgment remembered Mercy; and, by one single Act of his Providence, both
prevented farther Mischief, and conceeded the Deluded a larger time for
Repentance.

It has been said by them of old time, Vox Populi, Vox Dei; then, when so
fairly called, who was she that she should withstand?

We are told our Laws are consonant to Gods; if so, what are they but Murmurers
who complain of what the Law justifies?

Some Exhortations.

I. Resolve henceforward to be more Loyal, Obedient, Faithful, and Assisting to
his Majesty: All wise People will remember they have the Dues of Two to pay to
one.

II. You have great cause to love, and be steadfast in your Religion, if you
consider rightly what of late God has done in its defense.

David says, Psalm.
Let the multitude of the Isles rejoice (we may particularly call upon our own
to do so) for you ^ee God rules in the Kingdoms of Men.

You have read that Moses young and helpless less) was cast out, and should
have been destroyed, the King had given such Order; yet he that sits in
Heaven consented not, but chose the Daughter of that King to preserve him: God
can secure our Religion by ways unthought of by us; if ever it fall, it will
not be for want of power in God, but love in us.

I could not leave you with a better Remark, that you may remember what great
things God has done for you, and yours, by her means whom he has now taken to
himself.

God grant what has been said may prove as profitable, as it has been
seasonable; and that we may all of us weep so heartily for our Selves, and our
Children, that God may depart from his Wrath and by his gracious Providence
make up the breach he has made upon us.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Abel Roper, E. Wilkinson, and Roger Clavell.
DR. Hammond's Works.

Dr. Cudworth's Works.

Dr. Lake's preparatory Office for the Sacrament.

Week's Exercise for the receiving of the Sacrament. Dedicated to the Princess
Ann of Denmark. The Fourth Edition.

Westly's Life of Christ. In Heroic Verse. Adorned with Sixty Copper Cuts.

A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of the Father of the Prince of Orange.

Walker's Epictetus. In English Verse.


