A MANIFEST TOUCHING M. W. F. Aversion from the Protestant Congregation. AND
HIS Conversion to the Catholic Church Presented to the Right Worcester. ll Sir A.
P. his much honored Father, and his other best Friends, for their better
satisfaction and his own Justification.

Viam iniquitatis amoue a me: and de lege tua miserere mei.

Viam veritatis elegi: iudicia tua non oblitus.

Psalm. 118. PERMISSV SVPERIORVM Anno 1650.

TO HIS HONORABLE DEAR UNCLE S. ir H. W. BARONETTE etc.
Dominus det vobis suam Pacem.
SIR.
Having obtained a copy of my dear deceased Brother Williams Manifest which in
his life was presented unto my Father, I make bold to address it unto you in
print, as more legible and useful, to fulfill and execute the will of my
Brother, who was in his life most entirely devoted to you, and most singularly
Zealous of your souls salvation: which according as my bounden duty requires I
equally tender and affect. I can not tell what acceptance it may relish with
you, in respect of your old age; yet sure I am, were you traveling unto
Jerusalem, and should be informed by him or me, though inferior in years, of
the great dangers assuredly you would fall into, if you held on in the new way
you had commenced your journey in, doubtless you would take it marvelous
kindly of us, and as an argument of our true respectfull love toward you, that
by our notice you were prevented from falling in to the hands of bloodsucking
enemies, or being swalowed up in some unknown gulf in your new passage. This
is now you case: you are traueling in your Resolution to the beauenly
Jerusalem: but under favor and without offense, give me leave to tell you,
that if you proceed in this new way, and new Religion you are in, the perils
are unspeakably great, for that all going and holding this new way ar robbed:
not of their temporal wealth, nor of their temporal life deprived by
drowning, but by a Diabolical crew and an Infernal gulf spoiled of their
sowles, to their own irreparable damage, and the opprobrious disgrace of
Christ most precious blood spilt in vain for them. And howbeit this new way
you walk in, may peradnenture seem to you to be right and secure; Yet
undoubtedly except you turn out of it, in the end it will lead you to endless
perdition. You can not be ignorant, that the Origin of this new way, and
occasion of putting our poor distressed countrymen out of the old approved
path and good way, in which our ancestors walking, securely arrived to
heaven* was the sacrilegious avarice and insatiable lust of King Henry the
eight (in whom alone, not I, but, Sir Walter Raulie affirms, all the marks of
a Tyra^t might be found in case they were lost) who as all know that are
versant in the hictory and tradition of our Nation, withdrew himsefe and the
Realm from the obeyssanee of the Catholic Church, the old and only assured
way to Salvation. Deus vnus est, and Christus vnus, and vna Ecclesia and
Cathedravna super Petram, Domini voce fundata Says S. Cyprian l. 1. Epist. 8.
This Henry the eight because the Bishop of Rome S. Peter's successor and
Christ's Viccar on earth would not dispensc with him, to put a way his lawful
wife Queen Catherine of Spain of blessed memory: he usurped and took upon
him to be head of the English Church, and put away most injuriously his Queen.
Which unheard of arrogance of his usurped spiritual supremacy how God has
punished in his Successors, is too too sad, and too too fresh to rehearse.
Patres nostri peccauerunt and nos portauimus iniquitates eorum, If God has not
his due in his vicegerent of his Church, it is no wonder that Caesar wbo by the
grace and favor of God temporaly governs, has not his due obedience from
his subjects, and that they usurp a power over him: In quo quis peccat in hoc
punietur. And seeing so much innocent blood of Catholics have been spilt,
and so many Priests slain, as Prophets sent to reclaim her, I do not wonder
that God after so long a patient frustrated expectation of our Countries penance
and return, does now bring forth the iron rod of the sword, and chastise the
Kingdom with so much effusion of blood to avenge the contempt of his house the
Catholic Church, the innocent members and Pastors put to death, and that the
Bishops and others Who so much striued to put down Catholic Religion, should
now, by the just judgments of God, be pulled down, and have their Church and
Religion destroyed by themselves. I will set the Egyptians against the
Egyptians and the brethren shall fight against the brethren Esaias 19. Vaegenti
peccatrici, woe woe to a sinful nation, which by its heinous schism and
heresy has forsaken God; teaching and speaking in his Catholic Church: which
has blasphemed holy Israel, and followed its own giddy private spirit which
sees nothing aright: where every one at his pleasure, carues and cut to
himself a Religion out of the Scriptures interpreted according to their own
private and unwarranted spirits: as if all were Apostles, all Prophets, all
Doctors all Pastors contrary to the Ecclesiastical order and Hierarchy
instituted by Christ our Savior; as witnesses the Apostle S. Paul. 1. ad Cor
12. But alas will our poor distressed country never rise and return again
to her Mother the Catholic Church, that she may have access to God as a
Father? Nunquid qui cadit non resurget and qui auersus est non reuertetur,
quare ergo auersus est populus iste in Jerusalem, auersione contentiosa,
apprehenderunt mendacium and noluerunt reuerti? etc. nullus est qui agat
poenitentiam super peccato suo dicens quid feci etc. The turtle Dove, the
Swalow, the Storke have observed the time of their comeing, but my people
(says God by his Prophet) have not known the judgment of the Lord. Hier. 8.
And for as much as our poor Countrymen will not reflect upon the manifest
judgments of God upon the Kingdom for its revolt by Schism and Heresy from
the Catholic Church: therefore is she become desolate Desolatione desolata
est omnis terra quia non est qui recogitet cord. Hieri. 12. Wherefore, Dear
Sir, to prevent the maine misery of miseries, since God of his immense Clemency
has lent you space to return (whilst thousands, and thousands in these
calamities of our Nation are ingulfed in the bottomless pit of hell) promptly
obey the voice of God by the prementioned Prophet Heremie Ask of the old paths
which is the Good way, and walk in it, and you shall find refreshing for your
souls. Cap. 6. v. 16. But ask timely with all possible diligence, breaking
with all worldly considerations of honor, riches, or pleasures, for the love
of sweet Jesus, who not only endured for your sake all contradictions and
opprobrious disgraces, but laid out all he was worth, every drop of blood,
yea his most precious life, that you might live for ever in eternal glory, in
never ending pleasures, and the rich fruition and possession of his immense
Majesty, the All Good, the supreme Good, and the sovereign sole Good. Let not
momentary pleasure procure you an everlasting paeine, nor let a short
sufferance deprive you of an infinite reward. Breuis voluptas, sempiterna
poena: modica passio, infinita gloria, Says the Seraphicall Father Saint
Francis. Therefore whilst you have time work well for your soul, the one
thing which is necessary: differ not so consequent an affair, least
forgetting God in your life, he forsake you in your death bed, according to
that dreadful saying of S. Augustine. Hac animaduersione percutitur peccator,
vt moriens obliuiscatur sui, qui dum viueret oblitus est Dei. Ask then I
beseech you timely of the old paths: which is the Good way, and walk in it,
and you shall find refreshing for your soul, These old paths, which is the
Good way in which all the godly and holy persons walked to the heavenly
Jerusalem, is the infallible judgment of the supreme Pastors and Gouenours
of Gods Church, which they followed as the guide of faith and necessary way of
Salvation. In the old law it was strictly commanded by almighty God. Exodus 17.
insomuch as whosoever should be so proud, as that he would not obey the order
and command of the Chief Priest, who was the judge in Ecclesiastical
affairs, he was to die: This also in the beginning and foundation of the new
law our B. Savior so strictly commanded as he that would not obediently
harken to the Church, he was to be reputed (not as one capable of life
everlasting) but as a beathen and publicane, that is, a person out of the state
of salvation. This was the way S. Austen (whom even the Protestants affirm to
have been a most excellent wittnes of Antiquity, as living about the Primitive
times of Christ's Church) took to resolve himself infallibly in doubts of
Religion, as is to be seen in diverse places of his divine works; finally this
also is the final and continual way in all ages since, all Orthodoxe
professors have followed in the determination of controversies of faith, as is
manifest by the perusal of the Ecclesiastical Records. This way did my
deceased Brother take to resolve himself, employing all his cares to find out
the true Church of Christ, that is the Catholic Church: which the Apostles,
in their Creed, only teach us to believe at all times, it being true at all
times, to say, I believe in the holy Ghost, the holy Catholic Church: and to
rest himsefe touching all points of faith in her judgment, she being infallible
therein, as perpetually being taught by the holy Ghost all truth and no error.
He sought humbly with perseverance, and through Gods merciful goodness found it
out'seeke also and you shall find. Shall you vouchsafe to peruse impartially
this his Manifest I am confident it will contribute much direction to the
knowledge and embracement thereof, to the glory of God, the joy of the Angels
and heavenly Saints, the salvation of your soul and comfort of your best
friends, among whom he is one, who will not cease to pray our Blessed Lord and
Savior, that he will illuminate the darkness of yours, my other friends, and
Countrymens souls, that he will give you a true faith, an assured hope, a
perfect Charity; and endue you with the knowledge of him: that united to the
Catholic Church, in all things all manner of ways, you may accomplish his
holy pleasure in this life, and in the next, enjoying him with all the Saints,
you may sing his mercies for ever. Which is, and shall be the daily prayer of
him, who humbly begging that the necessary discharge of his bounden duty sor
your souls Good, may find pardon for his freedom, remains ever as he
professes and subscribeth.

On the Vigill of all Saints. 1650. HONORABLE DEAR SIR. Your most dutiful and
affectionate poor Nephew. H. P.

TO THE READER.
ALLTHOVGH to some it may seem superfluous to print any thing in this nature,
for any of our Countrymen, for that the present confusion and destruction of
the English Church is manifest to all, who know what belongs either to the
Hierarchy, doctrine or discipline thereof, By which it is evident their
Religion was never Scripturall, but parlamentary, founded on the changeable
vote of a Mayor part; Yet to satisfy the will of the dead, I have done it, to
the end it may the more easily be communicated to all his Protestant friends,
as it was by him intended. Some happily might have expected in the
publication, I would have divided it into certain Chapters, and in the end of
them, according as occasion required, have confirmed what therein is said or
supposed, with some additions. But I am as well acquainted with the humor
of the times, which loatheth prolix tracts, as I am with the multiplicity of
mine own occasions, which will not permit any such fraternall office:
Besides that it is my intention only to print it according to the Copy of the
Original, which is in the hand of a Protestant friend who is a man of
quality. I could truly have wished that I had had the benefit of those
Protestant books, he perused in order to this Manifest, that I might have put
the form and year of the editions of these Authors he cites, in regard the
several editions and change of the form in the editions, sometimes in quarto:
another time in folio, or octauo, make the citations not so easily to be found
out as otherwise: besides many enlargements in the latter editions, which
disorders the text of the former; yet this in part is observed by the Author.
In the 14. page I know not how the quotations of M. Bruges, Broughton and D.
Whitaker were omitted: but know that M. Bruges words are in his 6. Section
of his Apology, and M. Broughton in his, aduertisment to the Bishops. M.
Whitakers in his Answer to M. William Reinolds page 225. As for the faults
escaped in the printing, I must in the Printers behalf, crave thy charity to
cover his defects, for that he was a stranger to our language; to say nothing
of the ill caracter of the Manuscript, which for the orthographie and
mispointing must plead his pardon: for what is otherwise material, I have
represented with the correction, leaving the rest to thy charity, and
recommending thee to svveet JESUS our Blessed Saviors favorable mercy and
protection.

ERRATA.
Page 3. linea 17. In steed of their read your. P. 4. l. 11. over vvauetring.
ouervveening. P. 16. this. his P. 12. and alibi infalloble. Infallible P. 22.
and 23. and 31. insepable. Inseparable P. 27. Champpon. Champion P. 38.
Conditions. Traditions P. 30. Praeches. Preachers P. 37. tho. the P. 39. Mose.
Moses. P. 4. Antinomay. Antinomians P. 50. Alleagtion. Allegation P. 54. and
58. Maine. Many P. 62. Heathers Heathens Ibid: put out Math. 28. P. 63.
Captivity. Captiuate Ibid. Madmes. Madness

THE CONTENTS.
THE cause of vvriting this manifest. page 1. The real Motives of making his
Search into matters of Religion. p. 2. A fit disposition for the finding out
the truth of Religion. p. 4. The false deating of Protestant vvriters
acknowledged by themselves. p. 6. The blasphemous absurdities of Protestants
auouching the Church to have perished. p. 7 The union of Sectaries which
principally consistes in their common conspiracy against the Roman and
Catholic Church. What it argues p. 8. The reason why none with a safe
conscience can adheare to the English Church. p 9. The guile full deceit of
Heritickes pretending to fly to the Scripture. p. 10. Whether Protestants
have infallibly any true Scripture to dispute out of, or to build their faith
on. from the 10. to the 13. Their falsifying the Scriptures and unconscionable
dealing in commending them to the people, for the pure word of God. p. 14.
That Protestants can not prove any thing assuredly out of Scripture. p. 16. The
cunning of Heretics in affirming the Church can err, and that they take
away all means of ending controversies in Religion. p. 17. The manifold old
heresies Protestants have renewed. p. 18. to the 20. Their contempt of the
Churches authority makes them guilty of Antichristian pride. p. 20. What
effect the consideration of the Prementioned absurdities wrought. p. 21. The
perpetual visibility or succession of Pastors as the mark of Christ's Church
(which is but one) established. p. 22. of which also p. 66. etc. That the
Fathers sled thereunto to confute heretics. p. 23. to 26. proved. The Argument
demonstrating that only the Roman Church is Christ's true Church founded on the
inseparable marks thereof. p. 26. Protestants Confessions that their Church was
not in the ages before Luther, but that truth was unknown an universal
Apostasy over spreading the world till his coming. p. 27. to 31. The
consequence drawn from their style of Reformed Church incompatible in points
of faith with Christ's true Church. p. 30. Their euasions of the Argument
confuted. p. 31. A trial by express Scripture of the controuerted points of
Religion. p. 32. to 38. Protestants impious dealing with Scriptures. p. 39. to
43. A Trial by the ancient Fathers according to Protestants own Confessions
p. 44. The deep hypocrisy of Ievvel the English Protestants grand champion in
Appealing to the Fathers. p. 47. The vanity also of Witthaker therein p. 48.
Also VVillets diabolical dissimulation in that point. p. 49. The exeerable
blasphemy which follows from Protestants pretended Reformation of the
Church. p. 51. A Further prosecution of the Argument against other Sects. p.
53. Protestants Confessions in behalf of the Roman Church that she was the
true Church and that she never fell. p. 55. to 61. The issue or result of the
former discourse, and the Authors Resolution. p. 61. 62. etc. An Answer to
the objection of differring his Conversion to the Roman Church. p. 72. The
Fathers testimonies of her. p. 68. etc. The Conclusion and reason why he so
much uses the Protestants confessions and testimonies. p. 75.

M. W. P. MANIFEST TO HIS FRIENDS IN JUSTIFICATION Of his abandoning the
English Church and becoming Catholic.
BEING not ignorant, but very sensible how falsely my brother is voyced to
have seduced me (such is their phrase they please to use) to become
Catholic; and again how temerariously, noe less unjustly my self is
accused of Levitie and inconstancy for abandoninge the Protestant reformed
Congregation: I have therefore thought it a very behouefull part to declare my
self briefly by this ensueinge manifest, as well to clear my brother, as to
render your self, an dmy other best friends some satisfactory accoumpt in
justification of mine own Action.

First then, although my brother do much joy with the Angels for my
Conversion (as I doubt not but all godly people do) and might much more have
gloryed, had he been the Instrument or Agent thereof; yet upon my resolution, I
assure you, he was so great a stranger unto it, as that he knew me not to be
otherwise then a Protestant, before that some weeks aster my reconsiliation to
the Church of Christ, I told him I was a Catholic.

Yea so far was he from conceavinge any hopes that way, as that he
ingeniously and plainly told me: that I was one of the prophanest Spiritts
that ever he heard speak against his Religion.

How then was he an Actor in my Conversion to the Catholic Church, that was
not only such a stranger to it, but also in a manner dispayringe thereof.

As Concerning the objected Levity: I sincerly protest it was the due
Consideration of the vanities of these transitory affayrs, the uncertainty of
this present life, the Innumerable daingers that therein occur, the Dreadful
Judgment that I was to undergo, and the fynall sentence of eternal Joy, or
misery, never dyeing but everlastinge, which I was to receive:

These important points (I say) seriously pondered, and not levity, occasioned
my search into matters of Religion, on the verity or falsety whereof accordingly
depends the salvation or damnation of every man's soul: which is the Vnum
necessarium, (to use the Gospel phrase) that above all affairs is to be
regarded, What exchange will a man make for his soul? Verily by the
irrefragable testimony of our Savior, If he gaynes the whole world he profitts
nothing if he suffer damage thereof; Understand ye these things that forgett
God, whilst peradve^ture there will not be any to redeem you. Ps. 49. Oh all
ye who are enthraled by the love of perissinge riches, temporal honnors,
Carnal friends, and wordly respects; who by their actions and deeds deny God,
nothing fearinge the fynall sentence of eternal woe, or welfare! Oh all ye
(I say) tymely consider and take to heart this most Consequent affair; least
hereafter when it will be too late, there will be none to relieve or succor you;
and therefore let us while we have time, work good for our souls: Let us now
(I say) while it is A nunc acceptabile, seek our Lord while he may be fownd,
and be prepared to ascertayne our selves in the knowledge and embracement of
the one Catholic Church, out of which there is noe salvation; least when we
little think of it, the Son of man will come to call us to a dreadful
accoumpt, and find us Et minus habentes, and ad recte credendum tardos:

And forasmuch as that in the Inquest after so weightye an argument, there can
be noe worse preparatiue disposition, and more disadvantagious to the findinge
out of the soul savinge truth, then to have aforehand an over wayueringe
conceit of the one side, and to be prepossest by preiudicate opinion of the
other part, I was resolved utterly to divest my self of the passions of love
or hatred toward either side; and dilligently with the impartial eye of
Charity, to look into the principales of both Catholic and Protestant
Religion, And seeinge faith is a fupernaturall guifte descendinge from the
Father of Light, and the goodness of the Allmighty of his part is such, that he
would have all saved, and forsakes none that Cordially, humbly, and
perseverantly seek him; It was daily my earnest and humble petition to him,
so to illumenate me, that if I were in the right, I might be Confirmed therein,
If not to state me in that Church which is the pillar and foundation of truth:
assureing my self that in such a disposition and resignation of my self into
the hands of God, I should never be confounded, but secured: according to that
of the Royal Prophet he that dwells in the aid of the heighest, shall
abide in the protection of the God of heaven: And therefore freely excite us
with an Accedite ad Deum and illuminamini and facies vestrae non confundentur;
Psalm. 33. v. 6.

Now then to the eye of the matter amongst many other motives which warrants my
aversion from the English Congregation, to omit the many absurdityes and
daingerous Consequences of Protestants, Justification by faith only, the
impossibility of Gods Comaundements: the blemishinge the best works with sin;
their impious impugnation and hatred to Gods dearly beloved friends, the
heavenly Saints, the negation of Frewill, the neglect of the Sacrament of
penance, and the penitential Acts: (vzt) humble confession, hearty Contrition,
and effectual satisfaction, the fcoffinge at fasts, Corporal mortifications:
and such like Doctrynes, of theirs tendinge to vicious liberty of life: As
allsoe the manifould deceipts, falsifications, and impostures Protestant
wrighters do practice to support their Religion, of whom Sir Edwin Sands an
eminent man amongst Protestants In his relation of matters of Religion
pronounces these words. The Protestant writers in relation of things, have
abused this present age, and prejudiced posteritye. Love and dislyke have so
dazelled their eyes, that they cannot be believed: Agreeable to which is the
Confession of that Learned, and ingenious Protestant Zantius in his 10. Epist.
to Strumus in the end of the 7. book, and 8. of his Missellans: where he
utters these words of the proceedings of Protestante wrighters, Doctors and
pillars of the reformed Church: The state of the question that it may not be
understood, we often with set purpose ouerclowde with darkness: Things which
are manifest we impudently deny, Things false without shame we avouch.
Things playeinly impyons we propose as first principalls of faith: Things
Orthodoxal we condemn of harisye; Scripture at our pleasure we detort to our
dreams etc. To omit I say the prementioned motives with many more which
exceedingly averteth me from the Protestant Congregation; the prime motives,
which warrante my aversion from Protestants, are for that not only I have ofen
heard them aver that the Church of Christ might err in matters of faith: and
read their many testimonies that it hadd erred, made an universal Apostasye,
and that for a long space Truth was unknown, before that Martin Luther an
Apostata, both from the holy order of S. Augustins Eremitticall Friars; and the
Catholic Church, became a new Apostle to them, whom they term a man sent
from God, to illuminate the world, another Elias: First Apostle of the pure
refined Gospel; The father of Protestants, and reformer, which restored the
decayed Church of Christ to the primitive Model which is most blasphemous,
contrary to the predictions of the ancient. (Note.) Prophetts, contrary to the
promises made by God and Christ touching the perpetual existence and
assistance of his Church: yea distructiue of Christ himself: The new
Testament: The Creed of the Apostles, and exceedingly strengthennige and
advantaginge the perverse Sinagogue of the Jews, as here aster in place
convenyent I will further declare, not only (I say) this: which principally
moves me above all; but allsoe that I find in the 39. Articles of the
public Confession of the faith and Religion of English Protestants, that
particular Churches, as namely Jerusalem, Antioch etc. might as well err in
matter of faith, as in livinge and Ceremonies: Now seeinge in reallitye, the
English reformed Congregation is but a particular Church: not only for place,
but for that it is never able to demonstrate that any other Congregation of men
in the universal World, either before Luther or since Luther, ever had
Communion with them in the 39. Articles which is the propper essence of our
Englisse Protestant Religion (Note.) Howbeit by the way I do grant, that as
there are many falsityes howsoever different compared to each other, yet all are
against one truth, So likewise all Sects, that formerly were, and now are, as
Protestants, Anabaptists, Puritanes, Brownists, Sacramentaryes, Hugonotes,
Arminians, Gomorists, Sosinians, Semilutherans, etc. howsoever they iarr and
impugn one another in many and werghty controversies of faith, as appear by
their innumerable books eagerly writ against one another: yet in this one
thing they accord by Common union, or rather Conspire, (to wit) against the
Roman Church, which clearly discovers it to be the true Church of Christ,
were all Catholics silent in her behalf: If then the English Congregation be
but a particular Church; For that it wants Communion with the Christian World
in the 39. Articles of their Religion, consequently by her own acknowledgment
she may err in matters of faith. Which being so, what infallable assurance
generally I pray you can the members of such a Church have for their salvation?
Seeinge according to the testimony of holy wit It is impossible to please God
without faith: (wz^t) orthodoxall, much less to enjoy him, Being then that
the Certaynety of the salvation of the Churches members necessarily dependes on
the Certaynty of a true faith, without which they cannot please God, noe
members that really tenders their souls salvation can with a secure Conscience
follow or have Communion with such a Church, which by her own confession is
liable to err in faith: which is further thus demonstrated:

For either such a one follows his whole Churches authority and doctrine, or
he dissents from it? If he follow his Church and general doctrine of his
Pastors and teachers, then has he noe certaynty or security, seeinge she is
subject to err in matters of faith, accordnge to his own Confession: If he
dissents from her, then is he more perplexed and endaingered, for if his whole
Church be liable to err in matters of faith, how much more any private member
thereof; and indeed it were intolerable pride for any inferior member to
arrogate without showinge any Divyne warrant, such a privilidge of not erringe
in faith, which his whole Church, as he supposed (according to his own
confession) does not participate.

Now to come to the pretended foundation of Protestant Religion, which is
usually to all other heretics, the more colorably to disguise their errors,
imitatinge the Devils transformation into an Angel of light, and usurpation
of That it is written, I mean the Bible, which they so much appeal too,
though with as little reason as ever auy Sect; for if these plaintiffes that
accuse the Roman Church of Error, superstition, Noveltye and Idolatry, be
urged to produce any plain place of holy writ to prove their accusation, for
example sake: where in holy writ it is syad That Gods Commandments are
impossible to be kept? or where in holy writ there is any prohibition to crave
the assistance of the heavenly Saints to join their prayers with ours to our
Lord Jesus Christ, that we may be made worthy of this promises? etc. the
whole pack of them are not able to produce not so much as one express text to
that purpose but givinge slipp to the demand in question, they fly to bye
difficultyes, fabulous, or impertinent narrations, relatinge many tales of
Cocks and Bulls, of this Pope and that Pope, of this Bissopp or that Friar,
So destitute are they of the aid of holy writ which vaynely and frequently
they pretend, so that the sayeinge of the holy Prophet is well verifyed in
them, The ungodly have told me their fables, but not as thy Law, Ps. 118. But
wheter have these frivolous impertinences of Protestants wrested my discourse?
To return then to the Bible, on which solye they pretend to build all their
faith, although it be not controuerted betuene Catholics and Protestants, or
any other nomynated Christians: whether God has any word written which is
infallable, usually called the holy Scripture? As it is one thing to question,
whether there be a King of Spain, and another thing wether Phillip, or
Ferdinando be the King thereof? For that though the first (to wit) that there
is a King of Spain be most Certain; yet the latter may be debated, which is
the Lawful true King (vzt) Ferdinando, or Phillip; So though it be most
Certain that there is a written word of God infallable: yet justly may it be
questioned whether that book which Protestants have and call the Bible be the
holy Scripture or not: For (as the Learned do observe) in the Scriptures three
things are to be considered, First the Cannon or Catologue of divyne books;
Secondly the translation; And thirdly the sense which is the soul of the
Letter:

Now then I demand of Protestants what Infallible assurance they have that the
books which be in their Cannon, be only divyne? And those which they reject
(as Apocripha) be really such: Will you say with Luther, and with other
Protestants as Whitakre, and Dove, that you received them from the Roman
Catholic Church; Then it follows if her authority who you Credit therein be
infallible, you are allsoe bound to stand to her word in other points of
Religion: For if she be infallible (as she must) if you have any infallible
assurance that the Scriptures you received from her be really divyne in a
matter so fundamentell, much more is she to be Credited in other points, as
namely concerning the true interpretation thereof etc. Secondly out of this
answer it follows, that the Roman Church cannot be Antichristian (as some
Protestants vaynly pretend) For it cannot stand that they should preserve the
Scriptures for so many ages, wherein you pretend your Church was unknown and
latent: For then may Israel be fownd in Babylon, and participation bebetwene
Christ and Belial: And she who is falsehood it self, be, by your own
inference, the pillar and foundation of truth; To be short then, must the
whore of the Apochalips (Thus is Antichrist become Christ Servante and best
supporter) Keep safe those Records whereby those many hundred Thowsonds of
Christ virgins make their Claim to the inestimable reward alloted for their
vow of Chastitye: As easily we may believe, that the Arc, and the Idol
Dagon may be placed together. But indeed though you have the Roman Churches
warrant, that those books that you admit as Canonical to be divyne: yet
never did the Roman Church warrant or assure you that only those books placed
in your Cannon, be divyne, and the rest which you reject, to be Apochripha: It
rests then that the greatest assurance you have is the authority of your own
Church, which Confessedly is liable to Error what infallible assurance have
Protestants of the purity and incorruption of their translation: especially
seeinge many of their brethren hardly Censure it: How stall I approve (says M.
Burges) under my hand a translation which has many omissions, many additions,
which sometimes obscureth, sometimes perverteth the sense, being sometimes
senceles, sometimes Contrary: M. Bronghton the great Hebritian thus says, The
public translation of the Scripture in English is such, as it perverteth the
Text of the old Testament in eight hundred forty and eight places: and it
causes Millions of Millions to reject the new Testament, and to run into
eternal flames: And to omit how Bishopp Tunstall noated two thousand
Corruptions of the Bible in Tindalls translation, And allsoe how the Remists
noated two hundred and tenn corruptions of the new Testament out of Greek,
which Protestants pretended to translate, not Chardginge them with an infynite
number of their Corruptions repugnant to the ancient authenticke Lattin, To
omit (I say) these, and many other Catholic observations for which they
Justly except against the English Bybles; I add this Confession of the famous
Protestant, D. Whitakre who though favouringe the English translation of the
Bible, as much as possible he might, yet thus he confesses, I have not said
otherwise but that somethings in the English translation might be amended; Now
what infallible assurance (I say) have they to warrant their translation as
incorrupt, seeinge the greatest warrant they have for it is the authority of
their Church, which by their confession may err, And with what Conscience can
they Commend unto the people their English Bible thus Corrupted for the pure
word of God: (Note.) Again what infallible assurance have they of the sense
which is the life of the Letter, (to wit) that their expositions be the true
meaning of the holy Ghost; but the authority of their Church, which by their
own Confession is subject to Err? On the contrary what infallible assurance
have they that the Catholics Cannon, translation, and exposition of the Bible
are not Orthodoxe, but the authority of their errable Church. (Note.) Now the^
if faith be an infallible Knowledge, (for by falliable and errable doctrine it
is impossible to be saved) can any one with a safe Conscience build all his
faith upon such a Bible whose Cannon, translation, and interpretation has noe
infallible assurance; And in this I was infinitely confirmed when afterward I
read in M.r Shillinghworths book, approved by three Oxford Doctors as
conformable to the Doctrine of the Church of England, (vzt,) that there was noe
infallible Certaynety to be assured That the Scriptures were really Gods word.
Which in effect is to suye, That Protestants who pretend to believe nothing
but that which is contained in Scriptures have noe infallible assurance,
whether their Congregation be truly faithful Christiains or no.

Moreover I demand what certain warrant Protestant Ministers and teachers
have of any Lawful ordination or vocation for their pretensiue reformation,
and departure from the Roman Church; with whom sometime their Sect-masters were
united in Communyon of faith: but their own errable authority?

And consequently saying their Church can err, how can Protestants be assured
that their Church does not err in Condemninge the Roman Church of
superstition? Or how can the vulgar be sure they are taught the truth, when
their teachers themselves confess that their Church and all their Pastors may
lie: In a word noe Protestant can produce any prooffe ont of Scriptures in his
own defense, or impugnation of Catholic Religion, but it is glossed or
expounded (litterallie or misticallie) either by his Church, or his own
private Spirit? If by his Church, what Certaynty or security, when
confessedlie she may err: If by his private Spirit, much less is he free
from error: And indeed by how much the more I hear and see Protestants amayne
strive to maintain, that the Church may err in matters of Faith, it renders
me more averse from them, and Justly to suspect their Religion, for that they
seem to be heirs of unworthy progenitors; (to wit) of the Arians who taught
all Counsels to be subject to error; The heretical Donatists who condemned
the whole Church of Error As likewise of the Wiklefians, and Waldenses: And
would you know the fundamental reason of this their assertion: Truly there is
noe other then that by disgraceinge the Churches authority whith errability
their doctrine might be exempted from the note of heresy, and themselves avoid
the title of heretics, for if the Church could err in the determynation of
controversies of Religion, why might not the decrees of the Church in
Condemninge of heretics be called in question, and so in fine there would
remain noe means to know who are heretics, for if you go to the scripture
which they whith great forwardnes will allege, and seclude the Churches
exposition of the true sense, they can never be Convinced, but will allsoe
easilye elude whatsoever Text can be brought against them as long as themselves
be judges of the controversy and sense. And whem I Consider the many doctrines
renewed by Protestants which formerly have been Condemned by the Church as
heretical Noveltyes contrary to the faith generally and aunciently professed,
how can I again imagine otherwise, then that they maintain this dangerous and
absurd position of the Churches errabilitie: for noe other end, then that their
doctrine might be the betther freed from the Censure of heresies: for what, is
not the denyinge of man's frewill the heresy of Simon Magus? Is not the
affirmeinge that distinction and order onght not to be observed in the Church
of God, the heresy of the Prepusians? Is not the denyinge that all sins are
forgiven by the Sacrament of penance, the heresy of the Nouatians? Is not
denyinge of the water of Baptism, to avail any thing to our salvation one of
the heresies of the Mamkeans? Is not the denyinge to offer sacrifice for the
Dead, and that there is noe difference between a Bissopp and a simple Priest,
and that the fasting days of the Church ought not to be kept, the heresies of
Aeriaus: Is not the affirmation that by faith only, men may obtain life
everlastinge the heresy of the Eunomians? Is not the theachinge that Infants
may be saved without Baptism one of the heresies of the Pelagians? Is not the
theachinge Marryage to be as acceptable to God, as virginity, and that it is
lawful for Nonnes and Monks to Marry the heresies of Iouinian? Is not the
denyinge the intercession of Saints, And the honoringe of the Martyrs relics
the heresies of Vigilantius? Is not the breaking down the Images of our Lord
Jesus and of his Saints the Iconomachians heresy? Is not the denyinge of the
body of our Lord Jesus to be really present in the Sacrament of the Alter, the
heresy of Beringarius? In a word to omit many other renewed heresies of the
Albigenses, Waldenses Wicklifts, Hussitts and other detestable heretics many
years ago condemned by the Church of God, Is not the denial of the
possibility of Gods Comaundements condemned, (as the famous and ancient
Doctors, S. Jerome, and S. Augustine, witness:) Condemned (I say in certain
old heretics yea verily. What marvill then is it, that when they see their
Doctrine Condemned of heretical novelty if they contemn the Churches
authority in General Counsels, and reject the ancient Fathers: As patrons of
Papistrie: (Note) What marvill I say seeinge in these they find their
condemnation in most Articles, now in contestation if they affirm the Churches
errabilitie in matters of Faith: True it is as S. Paul says, that an heretic
is condemned by his own Judgment seeinge he disclaymes from the authority of
Gods Churchs Which is the pillar and foundation of truth: and betrampleth the
Pastors and Doctors, lights of the Church, in which he manifestly prefers
himself before the holy Ghost the ruler and director of the Church. According
to Christ infallible promise (Note) And what is this else but to extol
himself above God: Super omne, quod dicitur Deus: Which is one of the special
marks of Antichrist, and yet this Antichristian arrogancy in treadinge
underfoot the diffinitions of the Church and the authority of the ancient
Fathers and Doctors thereof is the very main grownd of Reformers: And therefore
Peter Martyr one of the pryme wpholders of the Reformed Church endoctrinates
his fellows with this principle, saying: That so long as we stand to the
Counsels and Fathers, so long we shall remain in the Papists errors: Lib.
de votis:

Oh when I seriously considered and discussed the former discourse with many
daingerous Consequences, which thence issued and seeinge my self to sail in
the bark of such a Congregation which had noe assured safeguard against
eternal Shippwrack, it was high time to leave her, and spedily to employ all
my endeavors for findinge out of that Church which is the Arc of safetye, the
mother of the faithful, the pillar of truth, So beutifull a spouse of Christ,
which has neyter spott nor wrincle, so infallible a Judge of all
Controversies of Religion, as whosoever shall refuse to receive her sentence,
is to be reputed as a Heathen and Publican: It is this unspotted Church, not
liable to error in faith, espoused to Christ for ever, who is with her to the
consummation of the world and directs her by the holy Spirit which shall abide
whith her for ever, and teach her all truth: It is this unspotted spouse of
Christ (I say) my cares were incumbant spedily to procure for my mother to the
end I might have God for my Father.

The Caracteristicall and insepable mark of Christ Church which is but one, is
that in her shall always be found Pastors and Teachers for the Contineuall
preachinge of the word, and administration of the Sacraments, the ordynarie
means necessary to Salvation To this effect are alleged these words out of
the Apostle S. Paul: A text for its Clearnes able to Comment its Comment; (to
wit) that Christ has placed in his Church Pastors and Doctors to the
Consummation of Saints till we all meet in the unity of the faith: That is
(as Doctor Fulke a Protestant divine expounds for ever, Calvin himself
expowndinge it thus, Concluds in these words, The Church cannot at any time
want Postors and Doctors, Now that these Pastors and Doctors must not at any
time in their office and duties be sylent It is not only witnessed by the Holy
Ghost (I say 62.) but allsoe besides (the nature of their function requiringe
it) acknowledged by Protestants: And therefore Doctor Fulke says well, Truth
cannot be continued in the world, but by the Ministry of the Pastors and
Doctors: In like sort touching the administration of the Sacraments the same
is more particulerly evicted from the clear words of our Savior, and S. Paul:
saying by the help of them we shall Show the Lords death till he come, 1. Cor.
11. A point so evydent that it lies out of the way of all contradiction And
therefore Willett a Protestante in plain words mayntaineh that the absence of
the Sacraments makes a nullity of the Church: And again in Doctor Whittakres
phrase, That The administration of the word and Sacraments being present
Constitute a Church, being absent do subvert it: And again as the some
Doctor styleth them they are Ecclesiae essentiales proprietates: Thus does
Protestants jointly with Catholics teach that not at same times only the
Church of Christ being his insepable and immaculate Spouse with whom he isto
the Consummation of the world, is to enjoy Pastors and Doctors for the use of
the word and Sacraments, at other times to be wholly destitute of them, (ague
like havinge their accesses and remissions) but that at all times, and in all
ages, in all seasons, the Church without any interruption is to Continue in his
full Orb, by ever inioyinge the aforesaid means of salvation.

Hence it is that the Fathers to confound heretical congregations press
heretics to show their contynuall succession of Pastors and professors of
their doctrine, because if they go to scriptures interpretating it according to
their own judgment there can be noe determination or end Thus S. Ireneus
confounded Valentinus, Cedron, and Marcion By this ordynation of succession
(says he) the tradition which is from the Apostles received into the Church
and the publishinge of faith has come even unto us, we being able to show,
we put all those to confusion, that through vain glory and ignorance broach
new doctrines in the Church. l. 3. c. 3. 4. 5. For none of these Heretics can
deryue their succession from the Apostles, nor show how their doctrine was
received by tradition from thence; Thus Turtullian de praes. c. 11. confounds
Valetinus Apelleus and other heretics; Let them publishe the Origens of
their Church (says he) let them unfold the order of their Bishopps so
proceedinge by successions from the begininge so that the first Bishopps have
predecessors some Apostle or Apostolical man, perseveringe with the Apostles:
in that manner they produce the sense of the Apostolical Church. In this sort
does S. Cyprian confound Novatian because he cannot prove his su^cession
according to Apostolical tradition: Novatian: (says he) l. 1. Ep. 7. is
neither Bishopp nor member of the Church: who Contemninge Evangelicall and
Apostolical tradition, succeeding noe man, is ordained of himself. Thus does
S. Augustine l. 2. cont. Retil. c. 51. confound the Donatists, and Sectaryes of
his time, Number (says he) Your Priests even from the seat of Peter, and
observe that order of fathers who succeeded one another; and the Successions of
Bishopps, was one thing amougst others, that kept the same S. Augustine,
glorious Doctor of the Church, from departinge out of the bosom of the
Catholic Church: for thus he says in his Epistle to the Manicheans, Many
things most justly retayneinge me in the bosom of the Church, the succession
of Priests from Peter's seat to this present Bishopp keeps me in the Church:
the name Catholic keeps me etc. Finally hence it is, that S. Jerome thus
Counsels, In that Church we ought to abide which founded by the Apostles to
this very day lasts: yea such an evydent verity it is that Christ true
Church shall never want at any time Professors and members thereof, as that it
extorts this testimony from her adversary D. Whitakre Not without great joy of
mind we do believe, that Christ Church hitherto has endured, neither shall
it perish, so long as the world stands, and the Contrary opinion we esteem
as a profane heresy. From this established foundation is erected this
discourse for my purpose. (Note) The true Church of Christ which is but one,
shall in all ages ever inioye a succession of Pastors and Doctors for the
administration of the word, and Sacraments; Therefore the true Church of Christ
has ever remained without interruption of such Pastors and Teachers from the
Apostles time even until this day: But noe Church extant in the world can be
assigned to have remained without interruption of Pastors for the
administration of the word and Sacraments, save only the Roman Church Therefore
irrefragablie it follows that the Roman Church only and those which have
Co^munyon of faith with her, to be the only true Church of Christ, or else,
which is most absurd and Blasphemous, that Christ has noe Church upon earth,
but that the gates of hell to her destruction has prevayled against her,
contrary to Christ promise. That there is noe Christian Church extant, but the
Roman Church that has withont interruption in all ages enjoyed both Pastors
and Doctors, is esilie demonstrated, for neither the Protestant Church, nor the
Jews, nor the Arians, Donatists, Manicheans, Pelagians, Wicklefians Graecians,
Mahometans, or any other Church can be assigned but the Roman: Therefore etc.
First concerning the Protestant Church it is but new and began from Luther,
from whence it is called Lutheran and reformed, which is manifest by the
restimonies of the learned Protestants, and Luther himself which I will here
inserte. Let then first their Champpo^ of the English Church, Iuell speak in
the first place, he in his Apology of the Church of England in the fowerth
part, and fowerth Chapter, And in his defense of the Apology Anno 1571 page
426. Truth (says he) was unknown all that time, and unheard of, when Martin
Luther, and Vldericke Zwinglius first came into the knowledge, and preachinge
of the Gospel, M. Perkins says in the exposition of the Creed and in his
Reformed Catholic; We affirm: says he, that before Luthers days for many
hundred years our Church was not visible to the world an universal Apostasy
over spredinge the whole, face of the earth; In so much as Bucer in his
epistle to the Bishopp of Hereford calls Luther The first Apostle of the
reformed Gospel, whose vocation, says Conradus Sohlussburg, by reason of the
then general defection of all Protestant Pastors was immediate and
extraordinary, and again, says the same Author, had Luther had any Orthodox
predecessor there had needed noe reformation, Doctor Whitackres Con. 4. qu. 5.
C. 3. In times past noe Religion, says he, had place in Churches but
Papisticall; And therefore in another place he thus write h: we acknowledge
Luther to be our father, Brocarde in the 2. C. Apocal. says thus: when the
preachinge of the Gospel was allowed in Luther, and his first onsett against
the Papasie, the knowledge of Christ was fownd missinge in all and every of his
members: D. Bancrofte in his Survay c. 4 has these words, both the Priests of
all sorts and likewise the people, began in time to be drowned in the puddles
of Popery, all of them together from the topp to the toe; Calvin who in his
Epistles affirms that they weere enforced to depart from the whole world in
his book of the necessity of reformation, thus writes: It is manifest that
the whole world was bewitched with these wicked opinions before Luther
appeared. Morgastren in his Treatise of the Church avou^heth that it is
ridiculous (to thimke) that in the time before Luther, any had the purity of
doctrine and that Luther should receive it from them, and not they from Luther.
Consideringe it is manifest to the whole Christian world, that before Luthers
time all Churches weere overwhelmed with more then Chimerian darkness and that
Luther was divinely raised up to discover the some and to restore the light of
true doctrine: And Luther himself in the preface of his 1. Tom. Here see even
by my case how hard it is to get out of errors, which are confirmed by the
example of the whole world, and by long custom, as it were, changed into
nature, And To. 2. This is written his Epitaph. Oh Christ he showed thee, when
all the world was overwhelmed with darkness, And li. 1. de captiu. Babil. being
to wright against the Mass he says, neither let it move thee, that the whole
world has the Contrary opinion and custom, And fo. 68. There is almost this
day nothing more received or more settled in the Church then that Mass is a
sacrifice: Again I set upon a thing which being approud by the custom of
so many ages and consent of all, is so ingrafted as it is needful to change
almost the whole face of the Church: But by the way will you know by whose
instigation and what spirit moved him there unto? Let Hospinian, a learned
Protestant speak Hist. Sacram. part. vlt. Luther Confesses (says he) that he
was taught by the Devil, that Mass, and chiefly private Mass is naught, and
that being overcome by the Devils reasons he abolished it, And therefore noe
marvaill if Luther li. de Abrog. Miss. fo. 244. thus writes, How often did my
tremblinge heart quake, and reprehendinge me objected, that their strongest and
only Argument: Art thou only wise what did all err, were so many ages
ignorant? Behold how Luthers heart and conscience did tell him that he aloue
knew Protestancie, and was the first Pastor and Preacher thereof; Hence in his
Epist. ad Argent. Anno 1525. he maintaynes this point against Zwinglius
sayeinge we dare boast that Christ was first published by us. So playnlie do
the Protestants and Luther himself freely confess, an utter defection and want
of their Churches Pastors and preaches for administration of the word and
Sacran ents before Luther. And indeed this manifestly appears out of the name
of reformed Church. For it is impossible the Church should be reformed except
it first had perished and been deformed, so that Protestants teach and
profess a Faith formerly decayed and deformed, afterward restored and
reformed: But the Catholic faith of Christ Church (foe firmly built on a
rock that Hell gates shall never prevayle against it) is an incorruptible Faith
of all times and consequently cannot be deformed or decay at any time, and
especialy in such essential matters which the reformers pretend the Catholic
Church to have been deformed. (Note) Wherefore Protestants that do teach a
faith which heretofore was deformed and decayed, do not profess nor teach
Catholic faith, but a novitiall innovated Religion. Seeinge then Luther was
the first Pastor and teacher which reformed it, it is evident, that imediately
before Luther they had noe Pastors nor Doctors of their Church. But
peradventure you will say that the Apostles, Evangelists and all the au^cyent
Fathers, pillars and lights of Gods Church, of the first six hundred years
were all Protestant Pastors and teachers of the reformed doctrine, but
afterward for the space of nine hundred years there were none extant till
Luther. But this answer satisfies not my argument, but rather Confirms it,
(to wit) that the Protestant Church, has not in all ages ever enjoyed Pastors
and Doctors for the administration of the word and Sacraments. Which is an
insepable Mark of Christ true Church: for were Protestants Christ true Church,
then should they have had in all ages Pastors and Doctors to have taught their
faith; and not decline the Judgment of the Pastors and Doctors of the Church,
which lived in the nine hundred years before Luther and communicated realy
with, those of the 600. Secondly the answer is false, if they will either be
tried by express Scripture or Fathers, as it will appear by the revnnige
through of the principal points, which are now controverted betwixt
Catholics and Protestants.

First then by Scripture Catholics doctrine is there plainly confirmed, and
the reformers condemned, for example, Catholics have expressly, If thou will
enter into life, keep the Commandments Matthew 19 17. And that his
Commandments are not heavy. 1 10. 5. 31. And again, In this we know that
we have known him if we observe his Commandments. He that says he knows
him and keeps not his Commandments is a liar and the truth is not in him:
But he that Keeps his word, in him in very deed the Charity of God is
perfected, in this we know that we be in him. 1. 10. 2. v. 3 4. 5. and 10.
17. 6. Protestants who brage they know God better and that they are Dearer to
the spirit then other men have noewher any plain Scripture, that they are
either intolerable or impossible to be kept, or that they may have life
everlastinge without keepinge of them. Catholics have expressly, whose sins
ye forgive, are forgiven, whose sins ye retain they are retained John. 20.
Protestants have noewhere that Priests on earth cannot forgive sins or retain
sins. Catholics have expressly That a man is Justified by works and not by
faith only I am. 2. and that the doers of the law shall be Justified To. 2.
Protestants have noewher that man is Justified by faith alone, noe, nor that he
is Justified by faith without works, speakinge of works that follow, and
presupposeih faith of which the Controversy only is, nor that the Law required
at Christians hands, is impossible, and that the performance thereof justifies
not a Christian; Catholics have expressly, work out your salvation with fear
and trembling. Phillp. 2. Protestants have noewher either that a man can work
nothing toward his own salvation, being helped by the grace of God, or that
a man should make it is beleiffe to be saved without fear or doubt:
Catholics have expressly Vow ye, and render your vows, psalm. 75. Protestants
have noewher, vow ye not, or break your vows, as being unlawful to vow,
Catholics have expressly: Do ye the worthy fruits of penance, Luke. 3.
Protestants have noewhere that faith only is sufficient without all
satisfaction and other works of pe^nance on our parts, Catholics have
expressly, That every man shall be saved according to his works Revela. 20.
Protestants have noewhere that men shall be Judged according to their faith:
Catho. have expressly, That the Angel of our Lord said, Oh Lord of host how
long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and on the Citiyes of Judah, with
which thou have been angry: Za. 1. 10. Protestants have noewhere that Angels
or Saints Make not intercession for men in this miserable life, and therefore
that it is idle to crave their prayers: Catho. have also expressly, that
Another Angel came and stood by the Alter of gould which is before the throne
of God, and the smoke of the incenses of the prayers of Saints ascended from
the hand of the Angel before God. Revel. 8. Protestants have noewher that
Angels and heavenly Saints do not offer the prayers of the Saints of the
Militant Church on earth and that they cannot know them to present the^ unto
God. Catholics have expressly, Grace to you, and peace from him that is, and
that was, and that shall come, and from the seven spiritts which are in the
sight of his Throne, and from Jesus Christ; Revel. 1. 4. Protestants have
noewhere, that S. John the Evangelist did not invocate the seven Spiritts or
Angels (whereof in the first Chap: he makes mention) for the obtayninge of
grace and peace for the Churches of Asia: and that only we must pray to God
alone, and not to Christ as man and the Angelical Spiritts and heavenly Saints
Living with Christ. Catholics have expressly, that God is wonderful in his
Saints: psalm. 67. Protestants have nowhere that he is dishonnored in them,
Catholics have expressly without any limite of time: And these signs shall
follow them that believe, In my name shall they cast out Devils, they shall
speak with new tongues, they shall take up Serpents, and if they drink any
deadly thing it shall not hurt them, they shall lay hands on the sick and
they shall recover, Mar. 16. And again verily. verily, I say unto you, he
that beleiveth in me, the works that I do he shall do allsoe, and greater
works then these shall he do: Io. 14. Protest: have nowhere that none which
are of Christ Church, or faith, and Congregation shall do any Miracles like
unto his, and that it is a sign of an Antichristian Church to work such
profitable Miracles, Catholics have expressly, that: From Paul's body were
brought unto the sick handkircheeffes, or napkins and the diseases departed
from them, and evil Spiritts went out of them, Act. 19. 12. Protestants have
noewhere that by the Relics of Saints Miracles may not be wrought, and that
they are not to be esteemed or regarded: Catholics have expressly Concerning
Virgins, I have not a Commandment from our Lord but Counsel I give: 1. Cor.
7. And again: the unmarried shall be more blessed, if she remain so according
to my Counsel: Joan. 40. Protestants have nowhere that it is not lawful to
do any thing except it can be warranted by an express Command from God.
Catholics have expressly; And the Apostles and Elders came together for to
consider of this matter Act. 15. 6. Allsoe we have sent therefore Judas and
Silas who shall allsoe tell you the same things by mouth, for it seems good
to the holy Ghost and to us etc. Ibide; ve. 27. 28. Protestants have noewhere
that when important Controversies of Religion do arise, men must be sent only
to Scriptures, and to every ones private Spirit, or that it is needles to
assemble Counsels of the Pastors of the Church, for the determination of them,
and that their decrees be not infallible and proceeds not from the holy Ghost,
Catholics have expressly, that He that has determined in his heart being
settled, not havinge necessity, but havinge power in his own will, and has
judged this in his heart to keep his virgin does well, therefore he that joins
his virgin in Matrimony does well, but he that joins it not does better: 1.
Cor. 7. 37. Again tho Lust thereof shall be under thee and thou shall have
dominion over it, Genesis 4. 7. Protestants have noewhere that man has not free
will or power to choose good, and to eschw that which is badd, througe the
assistance of Gods grace: Catholics have expressly, This is my body, this is
my blood: Mat. 26. Also the bread which I will give is my flesh: which I will
give for the life of the world, Also my flesh is meat indeed and my blood is
drink indeed. Io. 6. Protestants have noewhere that under the external
accidents, of bread and wine that really the body and blood of Jesus Christ is
not there, and that it is not in substance flesh and blood indeed, but only a
figure or sign of it, Catholics have: From the risinge of the Son even to
the goeinge down, great is my name amongst the Gentiles, and in every place
there is sacrificinge, and there is offered to my name a Clean oblation because
my name is great among the Gentiles, says the Lord of host Mall. 1. 11.
Protestants have noe where that there is noe sacrificeing or public oblation
since Christ offerred himself at Jerusalem upon the Cross. Catholics have
expressly, Hold the traditions which ye have learned whether it be by word or
by our Epistle, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Allsoe my words which I have put in thy mouth.
Shall not depart out of thy mouth, and out of the mouth of thy seed, and out of
the mouth of the seed of thy seed, says our Lord from this present and
forever, Esaias. 59. and. 21. Protestants have noewhere that Apostolical
unwritten conditions are not to be observed, and that none of Gods word by
divine assistance shall be co^tinnallie delivered by word of mouth, and not
openly be still professed, nor that there is noe infallible deliverie of true
doctrine by word of mouth, Catholics have expressly I will give you another
Paraclet that he may abide whith you forever, the Spirit of truth: he shall
teach you all truth. 10. 14. 16. and 16. 13. Protest: have noewhere that the
Church is not ever assisted by the holy Ghost, and that at some times she may
teach some errors, Catholics have expressly: Thou art Peter and upon this rock
will I build my Church Mat. 16. 18. and that I have prayed for thee that thy
faith may not fail; Allsoe Jesus said to Simon 'Peter, Simon of Iona love
thou me more then these; he said unto him, yea Lord, thou know that I love
the etc. He said unto him feed my sheep: 10. 11. 15. To thee will I give the
keys of the Kingdom of heaven: Mat. 18. Prostest: have noewhere that upon S.
Peter (by grace made a rock) the Church was not built, nor that he was
instituted Pastor to feed the Christian flock, and that to him were not given
the Keys of principallitie, and that he had not the privilege after that he
was Pastor of not erring in matters of says.

But can there be a more evide^t argument that the holy Scriptures confirm not
Protestant Religion how impude^tly soever they pretend Scriptures, then their
impious detraction from the authority of Moses, the Evangelists, the Apostles,
and their writings? Whereas Mose, was the first that writ any part of
Scriptures and he who writ the Law of God, or ten Commandments. Luther
thus rejects him and his tenn Commandments. Tom. 3. Sermon. fo. 40. 41. and
in Colloq. Mensal. Ser. fol. 152. 153. We will neither he are nor so Moses,
for he is given only to the Jews, neither does he belong to us. In Colloq.
Menfal. C. de lege and Evangel. I will not receive Moses whith his Law for he
is the enemy of Christ, And ibid. fol. 118. Moses is the master of all
hangmen, and in Sermon. de Moyse The ten Commandments belong not to
Christians, and in Convin. Coloq. cyted by Ourifal Cap. de lege, let the
Commandments be altogether rejected, and all heresies will presently cease,
for the ten Commandments are as it were from whence all heresies spring.
Islebius Luthers Scholar taught that the decalogue was not to be taught in the
Church. And from him came the Sect of Antinomans who publikly taught that the
Law of God is not worthy to be called the word of God. If thou be a
whoremonger, if an adulterer, or otherwise a sinner; believe, and thou walk
in the way of salvation: when thou art drowned in sin even to the bottom, if
thou belivest, thou art in the midst of happiness: All that busy themselves
about Moses, that is the ten Commandments, belong to the Devil, to the
gallows with Moses. Luther does not belive all things related in the book of
Job. And with him it is as it were the argument of a fable; He says of
Ecclesiasticus, this book is not prefect, many things are taken away, it
wants boots and spurs, that is, it has noe prefect sentence, And in his
preface upon S. James Epistle, he styles it contentious, tumide, strawie and
unworthy of an Apostoticall spirit, and again Luther preposterously
comparinge the four Evangelists among themselves prefers, the Epistles of
S. Paul far before the three former (to wit) before S. Mat. S. Mark, and S.
Luke: and judges that the only Gospel of S. John is excelent and true.
Castalio commanded the Canticles of Solomon to be thurst out of the Cannon, As
an impure and obsceane song. Calvin feared not to affirm that S. James
approved superstitious vows, and brought Paul to consent with him in the same
faults, in Ca. 21. Act. and upon the 2. of S. Math. wrights that Matthew did
improperly and osten cite the sentences of the old Prophetts against their
true and proper sense. See him also upon the 4. Chap. 13. ve. and in 8. C. v.
17. and n. 27. C. v. 9. And in his institutions li. 2. C. 16. 8. 10. doubt
whether the Apostles Creed were made by the Apostles; and in the 15. C. Act.
affirms that S. Mark Was a forsaker of his vocation, and an Apostata etc. and
that he had filthilie through his own fault fallen from his Chardge. Elebitius
opposes the Evangelists one against another, for in his victory of truth and
ruin of Popery, he has these word, Mark and Matthew deliver the Contrary,
therefore to Matthew and Mark being twoe Witnesses, more credit is to be given
then to one Luke. Swinglius Tom. 2. cont. Anabapt. chardgeth the Anabaptists
with ignorance for that they think the Commentaries of Evangelists, the
Epistles of the Apostles, to have been then in authority, when Paul did wright
these things, as though Paul did attribute so much to his Epistles that what
soever was contained in them wus sacred etc. which thing (says Swinglius)
were to attribute immoderate arrogancy to the Apostle. Others as Witakres
cont. Bell. Controu. 2. 9. 4. p. Fulk 32. Fulke against the Rem. Test. in Gal.
2. fo. 322. Condemn S. Peter to have erred in matters of faith, even after the
holy Ghosts descendinge upon the Apostles: (Note) But these things once
admitted how then were the Evangelists and Apostles, Scribes of the Holy
Ghost, and Erred not in their preachings? M. Rogers upon the 6. Article
confesses and names sundry of his brethren Protestants rejecting for
Apocriphall, S. Paul's Epistle to the Hobrewes, the epist. of S. James, the. 1.
and 2. and S. Io. of Jude, and the revelation of S. John, (where by the way you
may observe the Concord, or Communion, which Protestants have even touching
the Scripture, and pretended principales of their faith) finally do not our
English Protestants discarde as Apocriphall, and raze out of the ancient
Cannon of the Church Tobie, Judith, Esther, Baruch, the book of Wisdom, the
1. and 2. of the Machabees etc. here I say nothing of the manifould
corruptions and erroneous interpretations made by Protestants even in these
Scriptures which themselves admit to be Canonical; and how their Apostle
Martin Luther whom they so much magnify, says in his. 1. Tom. wit. fo. 155.
In regard that Christ is the treasure, I care not for all the sayings of the
scripture, Plane nihil curo omnia Scripturae dicta: And to omit allsoe how in
his Colloq ad Mensall. fo. 286. he calls the Apostles, great Knaves, these be
his words Apostoli etiam fuerunt peccatores, and crassi magni nebulones: C. 2.
p. 18 (Note) Here I appeal to the indifferent Judgment of an impartial
reader, whether any men livinge would ever like unto the Protestants and
reformers, so reject, deride, and Censure either the Prophetts, Apostles,
Evangelists, and the sacred Scriptures, if they did favor their cause, as they
vaynly pretend.

Now to come to the trial of the ancient Fathers, who interpreted the
Scriptures with great fame and praise, in the Church of God, and lived within
the first six hundred years; which times they acknowledge to be pure, and
therefore appeal unto them, as best able to wittnes the profession of faith of
the primitive Church, as being the Pastors and Doctors thereof. For brevity
sake I will forbear to allege the Fathers testimonies in prooffe of
Catholics doctrine, which I have read, But I will make evident by the plain
Confessions of the best Champions of the reformed Church, and greatest
adversaries of Catholics that the ancient Fathers in Controversies of
Religion are on the Catholics side, for which reason they Censure them. For
example, to begin with S. Peter's primatie, M. Fulk when the consent of ancient
Fathers were alleeged against them to that purpose, upon the words of Christ:
Then art Peter and upon thee will I build my Church, Answers it Cannot be
denied, but diverse of the ancient Fater otherwise goodly and learned, were
deceived, in opinion of Peter's prerogative: And Zantius another great
Protestant says, the Fathers exposition, upon this Rock, that is upon Peter is
not admitted, And Luther the great Apostle of Protestancie says: Hear all
either Fathers or Doctors as many as hitherto have interpreted Scriptures,
have stumbled, as when that of Math 16. Then art Peter etc. they interpret of
the Pope; Kemtius Co^c. Tr. p. 3 says, hat most of the Fathers, as Nazianze^,
Nisse^, Basil, Theodorett, Ambroi, Jerome, Augustine, did not dispute but
avouch the souls of Saints and Martyrs to hear the petitions of those that
prayed unto them, they went often to the monuments of Martyrs, and invocated
Martyrs by name. Whitgifte, defen. p. 473. All the Bishopps and learned
wrighters of the Greek Church and Latins allsoe for the most part wree spotted
with doctrines of frewil, of merit, of invocation of Saints and such like.
Doctor Whitakers de Sac: Script. p. 655. and 678. and 68. beside that he says
of Dionisius S. Paul's disciple, that he was a great patron of traditions, and
of S. Basil that he believed Limbus Patrum and unwritten traditions, he
confesses generally of all the ancient Fathers, that they held Limbus
Patrum, free will, merrits of good works, invocation of Saints, Single life of
Bishopps etc. And that the Popish Religion is patched out of the Fathers
errors. D. Homph. in his Iesuitis part. 2. p. 930. teaches that it may not be
denied but that Ireneus, Clement, and others called Apostolical, have in their
wrightings the opinions of free will, and merrite of works: Lascitius a
Protestant of noe mean rank would have us to believe: in his defen. pa. 146.
that the Fathers devised Purgatory, that they were of opinion, that prayers
and Sacrifice of the Mass was to be offered up for the dead, that they
bereaved the lay people of the Cupp, called upon dead Saints, and brought in
such like errors. Calvin allsoe says it was a custom one thousand three
himdred years ago to pray for the dead, but all of that time I confess were
carried away into errors. Those things which occur here and there abont
satisfaction in the writings of all those in old time, moved me little, I see
indeed some of them, I will speak playenly, almost all whose books are
extant, have either slipped in this point or spoken too rigorously and too
harshly: But will you see how Luther betramples the Fathers in his Colloq.
Mensal. Cap. de Patribus Eccles. (Note) In the wrightings of Jerome, there is
not a word of true faith in Christ and sound Religion: Tertullian is very
superstitious: Of Chrysostom I make noe accoumpt. Basil is of noe worth, he
is wholly a Monk, I weigh him not a hair, Ciprian is but a weak divine etc.
Thus your grande Apostle Luther, who therefore reads this lesson to all his
followers; Lay aside all such weapons as the ancient Orthodoxall Fathers,
Schools and Divines, authorities of Counsels and Popes, the consent of so
many ages, and of all Christian people does afforde: (Note) We receive
nothing but Scriptures, but so, that we alone may have the approved
authority of interpretinge them: (Note) as we expownd them, so was the
meaning of the holy Ghost, what others bring be they never so great, be
they never so maine, it proceeds from the spirit of Satan and from a madd
and alienated mind. Peter Marter one of the principal of the reformed Church
li. de votis, says, so long as we do insist upon Counc^lls and Fathers,
we shale always be conversant in the same Errors: Duditius says, If that be
the truth that the Fathers have professed with mutual consent, it is
altogether on the Papists side.

Alas what meant M. Jewel then with such deep dissimulation to the prejudice of
his own and others souls, by solemn acclamation in a public Sermon at
Paul's Cross, to utter these words. Oh Gregoire, Oh Augustine, Oh Hierome, Oh
Chrysostom, o Leo, o Dionisius, o Anacletus, o Calixtus, o Paul, o Christ! If
we be deceived, ye have deceived, this you taught us, had not M. D. Humphrey in
the life of Jewel good reason to reprehend his bold appeal, affirmeing
therein that he granted over much, and yielded more then of right unto the
Papists, and injured himself over much, etc. And in a manner spoiled himself
and the Church etc. what have we to do whith the Fathers, with flesh, or
blood: had not D. Steephens his intimate friend better reason to abandon the
Protestant Religion when upon M. Jewels entreaty, he had revewed his book
and admonished M. Jewel of his Manifould falsifications of the Fathers, he
obtained nothing at his hands, but diabolicallie persistinge told him, they
would disgrace so the Papists that they should not be believed against him,
though they discovered never so many of his falsifications: Had not allsoe M.
Wallsingham just reason to leave the Church of England when he fownd so many
corruptions and falsehoods in this their greatest Cha^pion of their Church. So
heighly honored by Protestants, as that he has been kept in diverse Churches
as a pullpitt book.

Alas what meant M. Doctor Whitaker allsoe with the like damnable hypocrisy,
so confidently to say. The speech of M. Jewel was most true, and Constant:
when provokinge you to the Antiquity, of the first six hundred years he
offerred: That if you could show but any one clear and plain saying out of
any Father, or Council he would grant you the victory: It Is the offer of us
all, the same do we all promise and we will perform it, what meant he (I
say) saying be himself contrary to himself in another place de S. Scrip:
avoucheth that the Popish Religion is a patcht coverlett of the Fathers Erros.
(Note) For I will demand of him, whether the Popish Religion be a patcht
coverlett of the Fathers Errors, in these points of Religion, where both
Catholics and Protestats agree, or in the other controverted points? If he
say the first, then is his Religion likewise the Errors of the Fathers, If the
second, then according to himself the Fathers be of the Catholics side in
the points of Controversy.

What meant likewise M. Willett in his Antol. pa. 263. diabollicallie against
his own Conscience with such impudence to protest in this manner; I take God
to witness before whom I must render an accoumpt, that the same faith and
Religion which I defend, is taught and Confirmed, in the most substantial
points, by those histories, Counsels and Fathers, that lived within five or
six hundred years after Christ. When as he himself in his gross survay of
Popery is so bold to nickname antiquity the alleagtion of the holy
Council under S. Silvester above thirtene hundred years ago hestilles,
Thevaine show of Moath worm Antiquity; and whereas Bellarmin thinks it a
probable opinion that Antichrist shall be of the Tribe of Dan; For that many of
the Ancient Fathers probably so held, namely S. Ireneus, Hippolitus, Ambrus,
Augustine, Prosper, Theodorett, S. Gregory, etc. M. Willett without ever
strayninge of Courtesy, calls them plain Heretics, It is a very fable and
Couseninge device of Heretics (quoth he) to make men believe that Antichrist
shall come of the Tribe of Dan. Surly D. Parkes in his rejoinder pa. 7. pa.
365. had good reason to tell him, like a brother of his; you have committed
such faults even in that great work, whereof you bragg so much, as you can
neither defend with honesty, nor with modesty excuse: yea the same D. Parkes
his fellow Minister, as Willett himself recounts, in his Lodoromast: Chardgeth
him with folly, Hypocrisy, falsehood, lyeinge Infidelity, Impudency,
Machivilisme, Athisme, etc. And iudeed who but a Machauilian Athist, if really
he had thought that there had been a God after this life to have punished:
durst have made such a protestation: And to omit the like vain cracks of M.
Usher copiously discovered by Mallone in his reply to his answer; It is most
true, that which Zantius a great Protestant ingeniously confesses of
Protestant writers viz: Scriptures at our pleasures we detorte, to our
dreams, we boast of Fathers, when we will follow nothing less then their
doctrine, so he in his Epist. 10. to Sturmius.

But is not Luther then the author of the Protestant reformation with his
brethren to be esteemed for havinge endeavored to reform the Church in
diverse many points of Faith, wherein they affirm for many ages she has
erred: Surly noe: except we should honor and esteem those who renew
Ancient condemned heresies, and heretical manners, whereof Luther and his
sectaries are in a heigh degree guilty: But as for reformation in matters of
faith: wherein they pretend the Church has erred: They are rather to be
avoided, who glories in any such title: (Note) Saying that herein they destroy
the Godhead of Christ, and make him an imposture for if the Church of Christ
which he promised so firmly to build on a Rock, as that Hell gates should
never prevail against her, and unto the Pastors whereof he promised that he
would assist to the Consummation of the world, and give them the spirit of
Truth to abide with them forever for the teachinge of them all truth: If I say
the Church of Christ could, or had erred in matters of faith; as the pretended
reformers affirm, Then does it follow that they make Christ not ominipotent,
able to uphold his Church, against her enemies, and so destroy his Godhead: or
an imposteur in not fullfillinge what he promised, because the Church for
Errors of faith, and want of truth, is as much destroyed, as a man if he
wants, or is deficient in any one of his essential parts, (to wit) if he be
not a livinge, or a reasonable Creture, The defect of any of these destroys
him. So in like manner if the true Church of Christ could Err in faith, or
fail in truth which is essential to the Church, it could not subsist
possibly: For according to themselves the Church essentiallie is a
Congregation of faithful where truly the word of God and the Sacraments are
administered; wherefore if the word and Sacraments have erroniously been
administered for so many ages as they pretend, then Consequently of necessity
has the Church of Christ perished and Hell gates prevayled against her: And so
by this doctrine it follows that Christ is not God: and that the Jews may
well reject him, and the Gospells anounceinge and speakinge of him, as a grande
impostour, which is most blasphemous. And this doctrine of the Churches error
in faith, by which Protestants pretend to justify their revolte and speration
of there reformed congregation, from the Catholic Church; is the maine motive
why I am averted from their society: and relinquish their Communion; And so
much in proffe that the Protestant Congregation wants the insepable mark of
Christ his true Church, and in confutation of there shufling evasions.

Secondly, the Jews have not inioyed in all ages Pastors and Doctors to
administer truly the word and Sacraments, for their Church at this present is
not Christian: nor the Arians Pelagians, Manicheans, Donatists, Wicklifians,
etc. for they have all perished, and that in such serte as had not Catholic
Doctors, impugned them in their wrightings, and that these present reformers
have here and there renewed some of their heresies, there had scarcely remained
any memory of them. Neither also the Graecians, for they were in Communion with
the Roman Church, of and on, about one thousand years: So that for such a
space since the Apostles time they cannot be said to have bin a distinct Church
from the Roman Church from whom the Patriarch of Constantinople was Confirmed,
and the Bishopp of Rome by himself or his legate presided in all lawful
general Counsels, Celebrated formerly in Greece although now unfortunately,
as all knows they be sepated by reason of the heresy touching the Holy
Ghost etc. Mereouer their succession has bin interrupted by the intrusion of
maine heretical and not lawfully ordained Bishopps, as confessedlie is
auerred, by all Catholics, and cannot be denied by Protestants: Neither the
Turkishe Mahometans, for they have not had existance in the world ever since
Christ his time, and so cannot glory of their Antiquity, professinge
Christian faith, as indeed also not being Christians, and so consequently
comes not into question: For here we treat of the perpetual existence and
Antiquity of a Church professinge Christian Doctrine, according to the Marks
which insepablie acco^paine Christ his Church as in the begininge was
established: Finally the like may be demonstrated of any other Christian Church
that may be assigned (to wit) that they want the insepable Mark of Christ his
Church that is the enioyinge of a continual succession of Pastors in all ages
to administer the word and Sacraments.

On the contrary, by the confession of the Protestants the Roman Church many
hundred years was the true Church of Christ, and noe Protestant is able by
evidence of any Authenticke Ecclesiastical history to show any Christian
Company or Church In rerum natura more Ancient of different faith, from
whence the Roman Church departed, Therefore as yet she is and onght to be
esteemed, and consequently must enjoy in all ages Pastors and Teachers for
the administration of the word and Sacraments, being the true Church cannot
fubsist without them. Here then I urge, that if the Roman Church, whose faith
(as testifies the Apostle; Ep. ad Romans c. 1. was published and renowned
throughout all the world, that is with whom all the Christian world had
Communion of faith, here I urge, I say, That if the Catholic Roman Church
had departed from any other extant Church that enjoys a succession of Pastors
up to the Apostles time, that they would name the time when she fell away from
that Church: name the Company of Christians of more Ancient, and of different
faith from whence she is departed, Tell where this Christian company more
Ancient is extant: Rehearse the succession of their Pastors out of
Ecclesiastical records: For seeing it is a prophecy drawn from aknowledged
Scriptures on all sides: and from the acknowledged sense on all sides That
Christ Church shall forever enjoy continewally Pastors and Doctors for the
work of the Ministry, that is for preaching the word and administringe the
Sacraments: The verification of this prophecy can be drawn from noe other
testimony then the evidence of Ecclesiastical history. And truly it is a
strange incredible thing, That seeinge Christ Church is so visible, as she is
compared to a Tabernacle placed in the son, to a light not hidd under a
bushel, but placed on a Candlestick and finally to a City of everlastinge
foundation, builded upon a mountain, which was in such manner without any
limit of time to shine to the world (to wit) Cheiffly by her Pastors and
Teachers, the lights thereof: so that it cannot be hidd: How is it possible
that if there were extant, any such Ancient Compaine of Christians, but that
some history would give some testimony of her succession of Pastors, and
Apostolical Acts: and certainly if men were void of reason or sense, perad
venture they might be persuaded that for nine hundred years together men had
noe eyes, noe ears, and noe tongues, as easily as that there was a more
Ancient Church which had Pastors that had noe tongues to preach with, had such
members as had neither eyes, nor ears, to see and hear their Pastors to
administer the word and Sacraments, and yield any testimony that they either
saw or heard such Pastors and Doctors: and questionles some historians that
lived in those days would mention, the departure of the Roman Church so
renowued for her faith through the world, if she had made any deperture from
such a more Ancient Christian Company, professing a different faith. Where
were the watchmen God placed upon the walls of his Church that should not hold
their peace neither night nor day: Esaias 62.? were they asleep and silent,
when so notorious a breach was made? were the Pastors and Doctors which Christ
had given to his Church for the work of the Ministry unto the consummation of
the number of the elect, and until we met all in the unity of faith, Ephesians.
4. were not (I say these Pastors and Doctors able to confirm in sownd
doctrine and stoutly and corragiously even with importunity to reprehended
and argue the Roman Catholics, for the introduction of such gross errors as
Protestants accuse the Roman Church to have been possessed with for so maine
ages? Could they take notice of the least chinkes of the Churches walls, that
is, of the few errors of faith, (in comparison of those the Roman Church is
accused of by Protestants) which either Arians, Pelagians Marchionists,
Manicheans, etc. attempted to have made? And only were they unable to argue
the Roman Church? Or were they partial or corrupted to be silent and dombe,
until Papistrie overran and possessed the whole Christian world: And did the
Holy Ghost, which by Christ infalliblie was promised to abide forever with
these Pastors to teach them all truth forsake them so maine ages, and at last
take their flight to a Sacrilegious Luxurious Apostata, Martin Luther, and a
branded Sodomite John Calvin who at last should discover the Roman Churches
deperture from the more Ancient Christian Church, God knows in what
imaginary spaces extant to be fownd? Credit posteri.

Noe, noe, so far is the Roman Church from havinge departed from any other
more Ancient extant compagny of Christians professinge a different faith as
that her greatest enemies witness the contrary:

D. Field. l. 3. de Eccle. C. 13. says, the Roman Church always had
Communion with those Churches which never fell into error: D. Sutcliffe allsoe
pressed with the truth does acknowledge in his answer to a Mass Priests
petition, That the Roman Church never departed from any visible company of
Christians, Bunny in his Treatis of pacification, says that she always
communicated with the true Church, and never went from the Christian company.
Yea, Cassander much magnified by Protestants says, that the Roman Church is
to be reverenced as being the true Church of God: And Somes in his defense
against Penrie says, that by the Judgment of all learned men and of all the
reformed Churches, the true Church is the Papistrie.

John White in his defense C. 41. in the name of his fellows says, we
profess the Roman Church, in all ages to have been the visible Church of God,
we never doubt, says Field, li. 3. de Eccl. But that the Churches wherein
those holy men S. Bernarde, S. Dominike etc. did live and die, were the true
Churches of God; and held the savinge profession of heavenly truth, yea Luther
whom with title of Father of Protestants M. Whitakers honoreth, says in his
Epist. against the Anabaptist we confess that all Christian good is in the
Papacy, and that from thence it came down to us; And in the self some place
he says, I say farther that in the Papasie is the true Christianity, yea and
the true curnell of Christianity; And Anthony Saddell in his book de rebus
graniss controversis etc. titulo de legitima vocatione Pastorum Ecclesiae
reformatae, affirms that sundry Protestants Confess that the Ministers with
them to be destitute of Lawful calling, as not havinge a contineual visible
succession from the Apostles time, which they do attribute only to the
Papists; And M. Fu'ke allsoe accordingly says, You can name the notable
persons in all ages in their government and ministry, and especially the
succession of the Popes, you can rehearse in order upon your fingers, so he in
his auswere to a Counterfett Catholic:

It being then made manifest by the Text of Canonical Scriptures, the
testimonies of the approved ancient Fathers, yea and from the plain
Confession of the Learned Protest: (so powerful is truth as she extorts
weapons from her adversaries in her own defense) that it is an insepable true
mark of Christ his Church, his spowse, which is but one, that she shall
always enjoy Pastors and Doctors rightly to administer the word and
Sacraments: Insomuch as where there is a cessatio^ or want of these Pastors
given for the work of the Ministry, until we all meet in the unity of
faith, There can be noe Church, and consequently noe salvation. And seeing
also this Mark agrees not with Protest: or any other congregation save only
the Roman Church, as has aboundontly bin declared, it follows by a
necessary sequel, that the Roman Church is the only Church to which we must
be united, if we will be saved: she only being infallable and secure, in her
doctrine. For if she only bears the cognissance and inseparable mark of
Christ his Church as has bin demo^strated, then necessarily to her only, are
agreeable those prerogatives, which by holy writ are conferred and confirmed on
Christ his Church, to wit, that she is the foundation and pillar of Truth, 2.
ad Tim. 3. That she has the spirit of truth ever to abide with her Pastors to
teach her all truth, Io. 14. c. and. 16. c. That she is the spowse of Christ
without wrinkle or blemish which he has espoused to himself by a continual
assistance unto the consummation of the world, Ephesians. 5. And finally that she is
the Church, to whose Iugment in Controversies of Religion we are to refer
our selves, and to whose determination without further appeal we onght to
obey, under the penalty of being reputed Heathers and publicans. Math. 28.
Math. 18.

Wherefore I thus resolve, that seeinge the Roman Church is Christ his true
Church, if he has any on earth, as most certainly he has, and that in no age
or season Christ his true Church can err in matters of faith: I am resolved,
I say, to receive for a verity of faith that which the Roman Church has or
shall declare to be such, and on the contrary reject and disclayme from
whatsoever doctrine she has, or shall disapproue or condemn, as repugnant to
Gods word written or unwritten.

Let then her Athistical adversaries press never so much to receive nothing
but that which by their natural reason they can be convinced of, I am
prepared according to the advice of the Apostle to Captivity my understanding
obsequiously to the mysteries of faith, as being supernatural and
transeendinge natural reason: And therefore will I rest in the Judgment of the
Church, which is ever directed by a supernatural Agent, that teaches her all
Truth: He that seeks faith seeks not reason, Says Tertullian and
Chrisologus, Athens has nothing to intermeddle with Jerusalem, nor the
Academy with the Church; our school is the porch of Solomon which teaches us
that we must search for God with simplicity of Heart, and not with frivolous
curiosity of natural reason; what wrong does the Creator to us, if he would
have us believe more then we are able to comprehend? It is not for the iron to
ask of the Adamant from whence those charms and secret influences come,
wherewith he attracteth and captiuats him; It is enough that he follow: when
God proposes a verity to us by the voice and general consent of the Church,
we are not to appeal to human reason, and to sense, which have wings
tooshort to undertake such a flight: while one proceeds in this Manner, faith
will be noe true faith, but a fantesy or opinion; If S. Peter would not have
believed Christ to have bin the son of God, except natural reason and
carnal sense had convinced him thereof; Our Savior had not pronounced Blessed
art thou Simon Bariona: for that flesh and blood has not revealed it unto you
etc. upon this Rock will I build my Church. For in the comprehension of the
verities and the mysteries of faith, It is the spirit that quickens and the
flesh profitteth nothing, as our blessed Savior avoucheth against those
which were incredulous, that the bread which he would give to eat was his
flesh for the liffe of the world. For according to S. Gregoire: Fides non
habet meritum vbi ratio praebet experimentum: and therefore blessed ore those
who believe and do not see, viz: by the evidence of natural reason or sense.

Let also Heretics object against any Article of our faith any Text of
Scriptures, perversely or maliciously interpretted, and to their own perdition
misunderstood, according to the dictamen of their own private unwarranted
spirit: Let them I say with noe less pride, then madmes, proclayme the
Churches authority liable to Error in declaringe what is truly Comfortable or
repugnant to the word: I value not their erroneous Judgments, knowinge full
well that she is ever assisted by the spirit of all teachinge truth, according
to the infallible promise of Christ and cannot teach any thing repugnant to
the word of God, noe more then God can teach contrary to himself, who is her
director: And therefore whosoever harkenneth unto her voice, that is to the
general Judgment of the Pastors and teachers, hears the voice and word of
Christ, so that the word of the Church is the word of Christ: Whence S.
Augustine, who dilligently observed this rule, says, The truth of Scripture is
holden by us, when we do that which know has pleased the universal Church,
which the authority of the same Scripture does commend: that seeinge the Holy
Scripture cannot deceive, whosoever fears to be deceived by the obscurity of
this question, let him take Counsel thereof from the Church; which without any
ambiguitie the Scriptures does demonstrate; And in another place he says, it
is most insolent madness, what she professes and practices to call in question,
Epist. 118. ad Ianuarium cap. 5.

And why, I pray, is this most insolent madness to question what the Church
professes and practices, but because this in effect is to deny, or dispute
against the Canonical Scriptures aknowledged on both sides? For if in the
aknowledged word of God, by most clear testimonies, the authority of Christ
his Church is so highly magnified as that she is styled the pillar and
foundation of Truth, the unspotted Spouse without wrinkle; his body, his Lot,
his Inheritance and kingdom given him in this world, in which he has placed
Apostles, Doctors and Pastors to the Consummation of the Elect, which Doctors
are ever assisted by the spirit that teaches them all truth, and accompanied
hy our Savior to the Consummation of the world, who Comaunds us to harken to
his Spouse the Church: Sub poena of being reputed Heathens or Publicans: Tell
me then is not this most insolent madness to call her profession and practice
in question: (Note) To be so Antichristianly proud, as to prefer our own
Judgments and expositions of the word, before the Church which is directed by
the Spirit of Truth; Is not this in words to boast much of Scriptures, and
indeed not to follow them, for if you search the Scriptures, that is
profoundly, and not superficiasly or maliciously consider them, you shall find
that the same are they that give testimony of her, and how she is to be obeyed
and as eagerly followed.

Wherefore to draw to a Conclusion, seeinge the true Church of Christ which is
but one, cannot Err in matters of Faith, and only the Roman Church bears
the inseparable mark of it: To use the Apostle S. Paul's words: From hence
foward let noe man trouble me, for I bear the marks of my Lord Jesus in my
body ad Gal. 5. from hence forth let noe man go about to molest my conscience
for being incorporated in the body of the Roman Church, which is only
remarkable with the cognizance and marks of Christ unspotted Spouse, whose
infallible rules and prescriptions I will follow as a secure guide of my
faith, to procure the peace of reconciliation and mercy of God: And whosoever
shall follow this Rule (to speak with the Apostle) peace be upon them and
mercy: This is the way so direct, as that fools cannot err in it: This is
the Church whose Faith, as testifies the Apostle, was published through the
world, that is which had the Communion of the Christian World, which truly
makes it Catholic, that is the Church, with whom all the renowned Saints and
Martyrs have had union: And of this they utter such honorable testimonies as
are agreeable to noe other the^ Christ his Church. S. Lucius B. and Martyr
Epist. 1. thus speaks of her; The Roman Church is Apostollicall and mother
of all Churches, which is never proved to have erred from the path of
Apostolical tradition, nor depraved with heretical novelties to have failed,
according to the promise of the Lord himself saying, I have prayed for thee
that thy faith fail not S. Cyprian the glorious Martyr avoucheth in his 52.
Epist. that to have Communion with the B: of Rome to be all one and the same as
to Communicate with the Catholic Church: And in another place, That to this
Sea, treachery can have uoe access, being the Chair of Peter: S. Hierome
also that renowned Scripturist and Doctor of the Church, thus writes to Pope
Damassus, I being a sheep do require from the Priest the host of salvation,
and from the Pastor fasafegard etc. I speak with the Successor of the Fysher
etc. I follow none first but Christ, and joined with Communion to thy Holiness,
that is to the Chair of Peter, upon that rock I know the Church to be builded,
whosoever out of this house eats the Lamb is Profane, whosoever shall not be
in the Arc of Noah shall perish in the deluge: S. Augustine in his 162. Epist.
puttinge a Catalogue of the Bishopps of Rome, begins first with S. Peter, and
says that the principallity of the Apostolical Chair has ever flourished in
the Church of Rome; And in another place above prementioned affirms the
succession of these Pastors from Peter, amongst other motives to have kept him
in the bosom of the Catholic Church; S. Ambrose calls the Bishopp of this
Sea governor of the whole Church. That holy Seat, says Theodorett houlds the
stern of governinge the Churches of all the worlds: S. Ireneus that great
hamerer of Heretics says, That for the more powerful principallity, it is
necessary that all Churches have recourse unto it, S. Prosper, avoncheth that
the Apostles Peter and Paul founded the Church of the gentiles in the City of
Rome, where they taught the doctrine of Christ our Lord, they delivered unto
their Successors peacable and united together, they consecrated it with their
blood and memories according to the passion of our Lord, a Christian
communicatinge with this general Church is Catholic, but if he be separated
from it, he is an Heretic, Antichrist: So this glorious Doctor in his
Treatise de Promis: and Predict dei part. 4. E. 5. finally both East and
Western Fathers assembled together in the Council of Florenee thus decreed:
we define that the holy Catholic Sea. And Bishopp of Rome have the primacie
over the whole world: And that the Roman Bishopp is the Successor of blessed
Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and the true viccar of Christ, and head of the
whole Church, and Father and master of all Christians, And that unto him, in S.
Peter, is given by our Lord Jesus Christ full power to feed, rule and govern
the universal Church: (Note) If then the Roman Church bearinge the
inseparable mark of Christ his Church be according to the Fathers the
Apostolical Chair of S. Peter: Christ's Vicar never depraved with heretical
novelties, with whom a Christian, communicatinge is Catholic, from whom
being separated is an heretic: what shall I regard more the impious raylings
and fictions of an ignominious Apostata Martin Luther and his adherent
Sectaries against the Roman Church, then the uncontrollable testimonialles of
the venerable Ancient Fathers: whose sanctity and learnige, the whole
Christian world has ever reverenced? Or shall I adhere rather to a new
reformed Congregation. The Pastors and teachers whereof are never able more to
make good their vocation of the Ministry of the word and Sacraments, then any
other heretical Intrudors clymeinge like thieves by an indirect way? Or shall
I follow a Congregation of such teachers which confesses her self liable to
Error in Faith: or rather cleave to that Church, which is founded upon a Rock,
against which the gates of Hell shall never prevayle, as being directed
according to the infallible promise of Christ, by the ever assisting Spirit,
teachinge all truth, and noe falsehood; (Note) Certainly to this Rock will I
adhere, otherwise shall I change a Certainty into an uncertainty, an
infallibility into a fallibilitie. A security into a Ieoperdie, yea otherwise
in a matter that concerns my souls greatest good, or ill, I should
effectually demonstrate that I make noe reckoninge of the dreadful general
accountinge day, nor have any feelinge thougts of the hideous horror of the
infernal Lake of the rauenige Devils, where it is true that tenn hundred
millions of millions of years in vnsuportable torments is but the beginnige,
as it were of inexplicable dolors; o Eternity! o Eternity! where it is true,
that all the grievous pains that from the begnimge of the world all men upon
earth ever endured or could excogitate, is but the greatest ease or
consolation. O extreme torments in the vnquenshable scorchinge flames of Hell
fire. O God, what an Abisle is thy just Judgment in punishinge Scismatickes and
Heretics, who for wordly ends, wilful ignorance, obstinate adheringe to
their own private spiritts, will rather feel them, then before hand prevent
them by seekinge to incorporate themselves into the true Church of Christ,
which is the vine out of which if any branch be, it shall undoubtedly be
eternal fuel for Hell fire.

But some will peradventure say that feinge the Modern Laws of the realm
inflicts such great penalties upon Catholics; It had bin better for me to
have deferred my conversion until my death, and then to have repented me, and
then with hearty sorrow to have confessed my sins bin reconcilid to the
Catholic Church: To these I answer that though true it be, At what time
soever a sinner heartily repents For so long communicatinge with Schismatic
and heretical new Congregations, he may find favor yet consideringe the
innumerable daingers which often vnespectedly depriues man of this liffe, who
is he that can promise himself Gods grace, without which he cannot repent and
be reconciled? yea must he not rather think that he shall be debarred thereof,
when he shall refuse to come to the banquet of the holy Lamb in the Catholic
Church being invited by many inspirations soundinge in his ears, This day if
you shall hear my voice, obdurate not your hearts, and affect not to be
ignorant of the true Church, least you should be converted and live forever.
Moreover if ye consider the nature of Celestial glory which is such as the
least glimpes thereof but for one moment, in an eminent degree surpasses all
wordly honnors, pleasures and riches, that ever the eye of man did see in this
world, or is able to see, the ear to hear, yea or then can be comprehend by
the understanding of man which in one quarter in thought can represent far
more then the eye can see in many years, or the care hear in a long space.
what Merchant then is he who would not give all to procure the inestimable
treasure of everlastinge glory in noewise to be purchased but by those that be
members of the Catholic Church? For them do I pray: not for the world do I
pray: but for them whom thou have given me because, they be thine: 10. 17. ve.
9. For none indeed be Children of the heavenly Father, who be not Children of
the Church; who so is sound to be out of her Communion, says S. Augustine: de
Simb. ad Catechu. He shall be excluded from the number of Gods Children: nor
shall he have God for his father, who would not have the Church for his Mother,
and it shall avayle him nothimge that he believed etc. to the same purpose he
speaks in diverse other places, as, de verit. Eccles. ad Bonif. And S. Cyprian
the glorious Martyr in his book of the unity of the Church, says that he
belongs not unto the rewards of Christ, who abandoneth the Church of Christ:
He is an alyen, he is profane, he is an enemy, he cannot now have God for
his Father who acknowledges not the Church for his mother. Yea says S.
Cyprian that great Champian of the Church says in the same book. He may be
killed, but he cannot be Crowned, for he professes himself to be a Christian
noe otherwise then the divill faineth himself to be Christ: according to our
Lords sayeinge Luke: 21. Many will come in my name and say I am Christ: O
then says S. Fulgentius another Phoenix Let them all make have whilst they
have time unto their Lawful mother: For even as within the Catholic Church
faith is in the heart unto Justice, and Confession is made with the mouth unto
salvation: So without the same Church an evil self persuasion attayneth not
unto righteousness but unto punishment, and a wrong Confession brings death,
and not salvation to him that makes it: etc. Hold it then for most certain
and undoubted that noe Heretic, noe Scismaticke, though baptizred in the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Goast etc. can possibly be
saved unless he be recounsiled to the Catholic Church. Thus S. Fulgentius. And
that the Roman Church is that society out of which is noe salvation, you have
heard before by the many testimonies prealledged of the Fathers: and by what I
have demonstrated of.

These (most dearly beloved Father and best friends) are the motives which
amongst many other I have read and Collected, which have occasioned my spedy
aversion from the English reformed Congregation of Protestants, which I have
confirmed by the manifould confessions of your own brethren, not for that I
weigh their Authority but partly for that Protestants contemn all authority
of the Church, Counsels and ancient Fathers, and with unreasonable pride and
arrogance will have their own words stand as Gospel: partly allsoe for that
these can not be a more excellent witnessinge then where an enimye does approve
our cause and Criminalls confess the truth against themselves: These allsoe
are the principal motives of my Conversion to the holy Catholic Apostolical
Church of Rome, that is to the Co^munitie which by obedience and in union of
faith communicates with the Bishopp of Rome, Successor of the holy Apostle S.
Peter, and Christ's Vicar upon earth: From whose Communion in the Sect masters
of Protestancy, viz: Luther, Calvin etc. ye have departed not without the just
Censure of Schism, as invinceblie and unanswerably is thus demonstrated by M.
D. Hardinge in his Text related by your great Campion M. Jewel in his defense
of the Apology of the Church England, part the 6. fol. 576. printed 1567. in
folio.

Whosoever depart from the Catholic Church They be Schismatikes, ye have
departed from the Catholic Church of these nine hundred years, ergo ye be
Schismatikes, The first proposition ye will not deny, the second your selves
confess, the Conclusion then must needs be true, if we say the same blame us
not neither say we that only but also that ye ar Heritikes. So M. Harding to
which argument drawn from Protestants own confession M. Jewel gives the
slipe, without answer, fathering in his marginall note a manifest untruth
according to his usual manner upon D. Harding which any one that has the
least dram of wit may evidently perceive.

These most dearly beloved friends I say are the motives of my auersion from
the pretensiue Reformed Church of England; and of my conversion to the
Catholic Roman Church my mother, of which I hold so great an accoumpt and
esteem that fearing those more who can slay both body and soul, then those
who have power over the body only, as had I as many lives as hairs on my head,
I would most willingly depose them rather then be separated from Christ his
unspotted Spouse, the Cathelique Church my mother, to the end I may have God
for my Father. Cord creditur ad iustitiam, ore autem fit Confessio ad salutem
S. Paul to the Romans c. 10. v. 10.

FINIS.
Confirma hoc Deus quod operatus es in nobis.
A templo sancto tuo quod est in Jerusalem.
OREMVS.
DEVS qui corda Fidelium Sancti Spiritus illustratione docuisti, da nobis in
eodem spiritu recta sapere, and de eiusdem semper consolatione gaudere per
Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum filium tuum qui tecum viuit and regnat in
vnitate eiusdem spiritus Sancti Deus per omnia saecula saeculorum. Amen.

O My God that I had never offended thee in any erroneous belief or sinful
life, thee I say who art my only good, worthy to be loved for thine own self
with all possible love; for thy love I firmly purpose never to offe^de thee
more, but by thy grace to do whatsoever shall be necessary, and I hope in thy
mercy, which by the merits of thy Sons sacred Passion o Father of Mercies
grant un to me. Amen.


