SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the ROOT CALLED Serapias, or Salep, IMPORTED FROM
TURKEY.

SHOWING Its Admirable VIRTUES In Preventing Women's Miscarriages.

Written by a Doctor of Physic in the Country to his Friend in London.

Printed in the Year 1694.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the ROOT CALLED Serapias, or Salep, IMPORTED FROM
TURKEY. In a LETTER, etc.
SIR,
I Perceive by your Letter, that your Lady is subject to frequent Miscarriages,
and finds her Health very much Impaired thereby. I greatly compassionate your
Condition, because it occasions Melancholy Thoughts, to consider that you are
not like to survive in your Posterity, Virtuous Children being the Best
Monuments to preserve our Names to future Ages. I Will therefore give you the
Best advice I can: And I think I am obliged to communicate what I know, for the
Good of Mankind: Therefore, I pray take Notice, that the Root above named has
done great Service in preventing Women's Miscarriages, whereof I could give many
Examples. I observe, that our yearly Bills of Mortality give an account of many
Hundreds of Children that are lost in a year by Abortion; besides the great
Danger that many Women are exposed unto upon that account.

I know there are many Causes of Abortion, but let it proceed from Wind, or
Weakness, or sharp Humors, or any of those usual Causes, which are well known
to Women, yet this Root affords Help in them all; but it neither purges,
vomits, nor sweats, but performs its Operation only by Corroborating Nature,
and mending the Soil, that it may be rendered fit to bear Fruit, and to preserve
it until it is ripe.

There are very few Gentlewomen who have had Children, but to their sorrow
understand, that one Miscarriage does impair Nature, and injures their Health,
more than several Natural complete Births.

This Root not only prevents the Woman's Coming before her time, but also gives
a safe, speedy and Easy Delivery when Natures Time is accomplished. I have told
this Remedy unto diverse Midwives, and they familiarly recommend it to their
Women, and by this means we have very few Miscarriages, or very rarely need the
help of Man's hands to bring the Child into the World: our Wives are like the
Hebrew Women we read of, speedily delivered.

I could tell you of a Citizens Wife, who had miscarried of five Children, and
almost brought to Deaths door with every one. We gave her Broaths and Caudles
made with this Root beaten to powder, and she went out her Time, and is now
bravely brought to Bed of a lusty Lad, like to live to do his King and Country
good Service.

Another Gentlewoman, a Justice of the Peace his Wife, who had miscarried
Eleven times, and spent many Pounds upon Advice in order to prevention, but all
in vain, at length she was Recommended to the Drops drawn out of this Root,
which she drank three times a day in Tent, or what Liquor she pleased; and
although she had many Frights, yet they made no Impression upon her, she went
out her time, and had a Good Delivery, and enjoys an Heir to the Family.

An Eminent Midwife told me, she had recommended this Root to a Gentlewoman who
had been Married Nine years, and had never been with Child; she made Caudles
with it, which she drank every Morning one Month, and proved with Child, to the
Great Joy of her Hushand.

Some Authors say, 'twas the Flowers that Grew upon this Root, were the
Mandrakes of Leah we read of, because they had the resemblance of a Man.

FINIS.

