SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Maldiva Nut: SHOWING Its Admirable Virtue in
giving an Easy, Safe and Speedy Delivery to Women in Childbed.

Written by a Physician in the Country to Dr. Hinton at London. 1663.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1694.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Maldiva Nut; SHOWING Its Admirable Virtue in
giving an Easy, Safe and Speedy Delivery to Women in Childbed.
SIR,
I Received your last, with your Request, to know what Specific I have
observed in the Indies to be most Effectual against difficult Labor in Women,
which amongst us in Europe sweeps away so many People. I must tell you, that I
have been very Curious in taking Notice of this particular Case and have
observed them to make great use of the Maldiva Nut, with very good Success.

Dr. Grew tells us, that one of these Nuts was presented as a great Rarity to
the Royal Society at Gresham-Colledge, generally esteemed in the Indies worth
twenty five Pounds. It Is Death for any Common People to meddle with them, as
being the Kings Profit.

Augerius Clusius has written a Book in Commendation of this Rare Nut, and
given many Examples of the wonderful Cures wrought by it, and particularly of a
Patient of his, a Citizen of Amsterdam, whose Life was in great Danger by an
acute Disease, when all other Means failed, very much importuned him to
prescribe him the Maldiva Nut, which the Patient had seen do great Cures in
India, and particularly in Women's difficult Labor, and therefore told Clusius
it could do him no Injury if it did him no Good; upon which he gave it him, and
the Man speedily recovered; upon which he gave Dr. Clusius a piece of the Nut,
with which he gave Relief to many Women in Difficult Labor.

Dr. Groll tells us of the Wife of one Bernardus, who had been tormented for
three days with most violent Pains of Child bearing, and filled all the
Neighborhood with her Outcries; when all things had been given as are usual in
that Case, and to no purpose, he then gave her the Powder of this Nut in a
little Sirrup and Water that is usual in that Case, upon the use of which she
was speedily and safely delivered of a Child, to the great Joy and Comfort of
the Mother.

He also tells of a Shoomakers Wife who endured great Misery, and was in great
Danger, her long and acute Pains having caused a Feavor; at length the Maldiva
Panacea being administr'd, she was delivered of a dead Child.

Dr. Clusius tells of the Son of a Duke, who was strangely recovered from a
languishing Distemper, only by Drinking all his Liquid Aliment out of this
Shell, it did mightily corroborate all the Power of Nature.

The Famous Dr. Tulpias used frequently to prescribe this Nut with very good
Success.

And Mr. Parkinson in his Herbal tells us, that Persons of the Best Quality in
India carry a piece of it always about them, fastened to a Chain, which they
steep in Wine or other Liquor, as an Antidote against any Poison or Infections;
and drinking out of the Cup made of the shell they look upon as a Preservative
against all Diseases, and a Means to keep themselves in a sound and healthful
state: He also commends it as very available in Women's hard and difficult
Labor.

When I traveled in Spain, they used to call it the Egyptian Midwife, I
suppose only by way of Allusion to the speedy Delivery of the Hebrew Women by
their Means.

For my own particular, I can truly say, that I have often experienced it to be
admirable in that Case, if I may believe the good Women in our Country, and
particularly one famous Midwife, who has gotten great Reputation by the use of
it.

I knew a Country Gentlewoman who by very strait Lacing her self, and Eating
Green Fruit, and Drinking Red Wines, used to have hard Labor, but after she
had found out this Indian Remedy, never met with Difficulty in her Travels. I
could name others but I forbear, because they are needless.

FINIS.

