SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Banellas, Imported from the INDIES: SHOWING
Their Wonderful Virtues in Curing Melancholy and Distraction.

Written by a Physician in the Country to Dr. Allen, one of the Royal Society
at London.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1694.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Banellas, SHOWING Their Wonderful Virtues in
Curing Melancholy and Distraction.
SIR,
I Have a Friend at London, whose Son is under your Care for the Cure of his
Melancholy: I am glad he is under the Management of so Experienced a
Physician. I hear you have Blooded him several times, and shaved his Head, and
Blistered him, and given him many Purges, which I believe are very proper: I
beg leave to recommend an Admirable Specific in this Distemper, and that is
the Banella's which come to us from the Indies, a Tincture, Spirit and Extract
drawn out of them are of excellent Use in this young Man's Case.

They have been often tried, and found serviceable, when other Means and
Methods have failed: They wonderfully cheer the Heart, and relieve the Animal
Spirits, when oppressed with Hypocondriacal Fumes from the Spleen. They refine
the Blood, and clear the Brain, and disperse Melancholy Winds and black
Humors, which if let alone would end in distraction.

A Minister about Fifty Years of Age, a Grave, Serious and Devout Man, who fell
into profound Melancholy, occasioned by hard Study and deep thoughts about the
Prophetical part of Scripture, relating unto the future State of the Church. He
could remember whole Nights wherein he had not slept, and whole Weeks wherein
he had not Dined: He had been let Blood several times in the Jugular Veins with
a Lancet, and in the Hemorroide Veins with Leaches; his Head shaved, and
Anointed with Cephalic Oils; he had been Vomitted and Purged very often, and
taken Mineral Waters, but all in vain; at length I gave him the Banella Mixture
in Whey for one Month, and he is perfectly Recovered, and Preaches very
judiciously and vigorously, to the great Satisfaction of his Auditory.

A young Gentlewoman who had a very great Respect for a Person whom her
Relations had no good Opinion of, being unwilling to Disoblige her Friends, and
yet desirous to comply with her own Inclinations, she fell into great
Melancholy, and that sower'd her Blood, and caused Obstructions, and altered
the whole Habit of the Body, and brought her into a Consumptive languishing
Condition: Much Advice was taken for her, and many Methods prescribed by
Learned Physicians, at length she was told of this Specific Mixture, and took
it three Months together in Spaw-Waters, and sometimes in Purging Waters, and
she is now in a good State of Health of Body, and enjoys great Tranquillity of
Mind.

A Gentleman of a tender Mind and Religious Disposition, upon the Breach of a
Vow and Scruples of Conscience, was attended with great Melancholy, which at
length degenerated into a Maniacal Distemper of the Brain, wherein the
Spiritous Parts of the Nervous Juice being debased, and the Saline parts
exalted, and brought to a Fluor, which which being mixed with Sulpherous
Particles, derived from feculent Blood, at length produced delirous Phantasms
and depraved Imaginations, which perverted his Understanding, and qualified him
for Bedlam every Full Moon; and indeed which made him the more subject to
Relapses into his Distemper, was its being somewhat Hereditary on the Mothers
side; yet notwithstanding this frequent returns, and great Rage and Disorder of
the Animal Spirits, this Person was Cured by the use of the Mixture, and now
continues clothed in his right Mind, to the Praise of the Omnipotent Physician.

An Ancient Gentlewoman, whose Husband fell into a Decay in his Estate, was
much disappointed thereby, and hereby her Mind much disturbed, which tottered
her Understanding, which at some certain times put her upon very unseemly
extravagant Actions and Discourses, very disagreeable unto her former Pious ane
Prudent Behavior, to the great Grief of her Children, and other Relations.
Much Advise was taken, and all to no purpose; at length I resolved to give her
the Specific Mixture of the Spirit, Tincture and Extract drawn out of the
Banellas Bean; for its shape it resembles a French Bean, and contains a Seed as
that does, and was much used in Chocolate, but being dear, is frequently left
out of late, as the Makers of it tell us. I gave this Gentlewoman Morning, Noon
and Night 30 Drops of this Mixture at a time, she took it in small Beer six
Months, and through God's Mercy it brought her to the free Exercise of her
Reason. I could give many more Examples if it were needful.

FINIS.

