The Worth of a Penny: OR, A Caution to keep Money. With the causes of the
scarcity and misery of the want hereof in these hard and merciless Times: As
also how to save it in our Diet, Apparel, Recreations, etc. And also what
honest Courses men in want may take to live.

By H. P. Master of Arts.

LONDON, Printed by R. Hearne. 1641.

To the every way deserving and worthy Gentleman, M. Richard Gipps, eldest son
unto M. Richard Gipps, one of the Judges of the Court of Guild Hall in the
City of London.
SIR,
WHen I had finished this discourse of The Worth of a Penie, or, A Caution to
keep Money, and bethinking my self unto whom I should offer the Dedication,
none came more opportunely into my thought then your self: for I imagined, if I
should dedicate the same unto any penurious or miserable minded man, it would
make him worse, and be more uncharitable and illiberall; if unto a bountiful
and free-minded Patron, I should teach him to hold his hand, and against his
nature make him a miser. I to avoid either, made choice of your self, who
being yet unmarried, walk alone by your self, having neither occasion of the
one nor the other: Beside, you have traveled France and Italy, and I hope
have learned thrift in those places, and understand what a virtue Parsimonie
is; for want whereof, how many young heirs in England have galloped through
their estates before they have been thirty? Lastly, my obligation is so much to
your learned and good father, and for goodness your incomparable mother, that
I should ever have thought the worse of my self, if I had not Cum tota mea
supellex sit chartacea, as Erasmus says: I had not expressed my duty and
hearty love unto you one way or other,

Whose in all service I am truly, Hen. Peacham.

The Worth of a Penny: OR, A Caution to keep Money.
THe Ambassador of Muley Hamet, Sheck. K. of Morocco, when he was in England
about four or five years since; said on a time, sitting at dinner at his house
at Woodstreet, he thought verily that Algiers was four times as rich as
London: An English Merchant replied that he thought not so; but that London was
far richer then that, and for plenty London might compare with Jerusalem in
the peaceful days of Solomon. For my part, I believed neither, especially the
Merchant, for in the time of Solomon, silver was as plentiful in Jerusalem as
stones in the street; but with us stones are in far more abundance, when in
every street in London, you may walk over five thousand load ere you find a
single penie. Again, the general complaint and murmr thorowout the Kingdom
of the scarcity and want of money, argues that we fall far short of that
plenty which the Merchant imagined.

And one time I began to bethink my self, and to look into the causes of our
want, and this general scarcity, and I found them manifold. First, some men
who by their wits or industry (or both) have served and wound themselves into
vast estates, and gathered thousands like the Griffons of Bactria when they
have met with a gold mine) so brood over, and watch it day and night, that it
is impossible for Charity to be regarded, Virtue rewarded, or Necessity
relieved: and this we know to have been the ruin, not only of such private
persons themselves, but of whole estates and kingdoms. That I may instance one
for many, Constantinople was taken by the Turk when the Citizens abounding in
wealth and money, would not part with a penny in the common necessity, no, not
for the repair of their battered walls, or the levying of soldiers to defend
them.

Another sort dote upon the stamp of their money, and the bright luster of
their gold, and rather then they will suffer it to see the light, will hide it
in hills, old walls, thatch or tiles of their houses, tree-roots, and such
places, as not many years since at Wainslet in Lincolnshire, there was found
in digging of a backside to sow hemp in, an old rustie helmet of iron, rammed
in full of pieces of gold, with the picture and arms of King Henry the first;
and money thus hid, the owners seldom or never meet withal again, being many
times prevented by sudden death, lost by casualty, or their forgetfulness.

Mounsieur Gaulart, a great man of France (though none of the wisest) in the
times of the civil wars buried some two thousand crowns, a mile or two from
his house, in an open fallow field; and that he might know the place again,
took his mark from the spire of a steeple, that was right against the place:
the wars being ended, he came with a friend of his, as near the place as he
could guess, to look for his money, which he not finding, and wondering what
the reason should be, after (in the circumference) he had gone about the
steeple, (being right against it which way soever he went) quoth he to his
friend, is there no cheating knave (think you) in the steeple that turns it
about, intending to cheat me of my money, imagining that it went round, and
himself stood still, as Copernicus did of the Globe of the Earth.

Indeed much money and treasure, in former times, as of the invasion of the
Saxons, Danes, Normans here with us, and of others in other places, has been
this way bestowed, and for this reason in such troublesome times become scarce
for whole ages after: but this is no cause of want of money in our times,
wherein (it is true) we have little money to hide, yet there are not wanting
among us, those Monedulae, or money hiding Dawes, who repine and envy, that
either King or Country, should be one penny better (yea even in the greatest
extremity) for what they have conveyed into their holes. And most true it is,
that money so heaped up in chests, and odd corners, is like (as one says)
unto dung, which while it lies upon an heap does no good, but dispersed and
cast abroad, makes fields fruitful. Hence Aristotle concludes, that the
prodigal man is more beneficial to, and deserves better of his country then
the covetous miser, every trade and vocation fares the better for him, as the
Tailor, Haberdasher, Vintner, Shoemakers, Sempsters, Hostlers, and the like.

The covetous person is acquainted with none of these, for in stead of Satin,
he suits himself with Sacken, he trembles as he passes by a Tavern door, to
hear a reckoning of eight shillings sent up into the half Moon, for Wine,
Oisters, and Faggots, for his own natural drink (you must know) is between
that the Frogs drink, Scar beer brewed with broom in the Low Countries at penny
farthing the gallon is much like it.
and a kind of pitiful small Beer, too bad to be drunk, and somewhat too
good to drive a Water-mill: the Haberdasher gets as little by him as he did by
an old acquaintance of mine by Li^ne in Norfolk, who when he had worn an hat
eight and thirty years, would have petitioned the Parliament against
Haberdashers, for abusing the Country in making their ware so slight. For the
Shomaker, he has as little to do with him as ever Tom Coryat had: for
Sempsters (it is true) that he loves their faces better then their fashions:
for Plays, if he read but their titles upon a post, he has enough. Ordinaries
he knows none, save some of three pence in Black-Horse-Alley, and such places.
For Tapsters and Hostlers, they hate him as hell, as not seeing a mote in his
cup once in seven years.

Another cause of scarcity and want of money, are peaceful times, the nurses
of pride and idleness, wherein people increase, yet hardly get employment,
those of the richer and abler sort give themselves to observe and follow every
fashion, as what an infinite sum of money yearly goes out of this kingdom
into foreign parts for the fuel of our fashionable pride? Let me hereto add
the multitude of strangers that daily come over into our warmer soil, (as the
Cranes in winter betake themselves to Egypt) where having enriched themselves
through our folly and pride return, and purchase great estates in their own
Countries, enhaunsing there our moneys to a higher rate, to their excessive
gain, and impoverishing of our people of England. Let me add hereto beside
the great sums of money, and many other great and rich gifts, which have
been formerly conferred upon strangers, which how they have deserved, I know
not; some I am sure like snakes taken up and having gotten warmth from the
Royal fire (have been ready to hiss at, and sting (as much as in them lies)
both their finders and their founders.

Again, there is an indisposition of many men to part with money in these
tickle times, being desirous, if the worst should happen, to have their friends
about them, as Sir Thomas Moore said, filling his pockets with gold when he was
carried to the Tower.

There is likewise, almost a sensible decay of trade and traffic, which being
not so frequent as heretofore, by reason (as some would have it) the seas are
now more pestered with Pirates then in times past, the Receipt of Custom, like
the stomach wanting the accustomed nourishment, is constrained to suck it from
the neighbor veins, to the ill disposition, and weakening of the whole body.

They are no few, or small sums, which in pieces of eight are carried over to
the East Indies, no doubt to the great profit and enriching of some in
particular, but whether of the whole kingdom in general or not, I know not.
What hurt our late questioned Patentees (in Latin Hirudines) have done to the
Common Body in sucking and drawing forth even the very lifeblood from it, we
know daily, and more we shall know shortly; I wish some of the craftiest, and
most dangerous amongst them, might be singled out for examples, remembering that
of Tacitus, Poena ad paucos, timor ad multos.

All people complain generally (as I have said) of the want of money, which
like an Epidemicall disease, has overrun the whole land, the City has little
trading, Countrey-Farmers complain of their Rents yearly raised, especially by
their Catholic Landlords) which in times past have bin accounted the best,
though now the case is altered, (and easily may the reason be ghessed) yet can
find no utterance for their Commodities, or must sell them at under rates.
Scholars without money get neither Patrones nor preferment, Mechanique Artists
no work, and the like of other professions.

One very well compared worldly wealth, or money, unto a foot all, some few
nimble heeled and headed run quite away with it, when the most are only look
is on, and cannot get a kick at it in all their lives.

Go but among the Usurers in their walk in Moore-fields, and see if you can
borrow an hundred pounds of any of them without a treble security, with the use
one way or other doubled, and as your self, so must your estate be
particularly known. A pleasant fellow came not long since to one of them, and
desired that he would lend him fifty pounds: quoth the Usurer, my friend. I
know you not, for that reason only I would borrow the money of you, for if you
knew me, I am sure you would not lend me a penny.

Another meets a Creditour of his in Fleetstreet, who seeing his old Debtor, Oh
Master A. quoth he, you are met in good time, you know there is money between
us, and has been a long time, and now it is become a scarce commodity; it is
true Sir, quoth the other, but (he looking down upon the stones that were
between) in good faith I see none: and this was all the Citizen could get at
that time, but afterward he was well satisfied.

Whom would it not vex to be indebted to many of your shopkeepers, who though
they have had their Bills truly paid them for many years together, yet upon the
smallest distaste of a petty mistake, reckoning, or some remnant behind, be
called upon, openly ra^led at, by their impudent and clamorous wives, insulted
over, and lastly, arrested; which should, me thinks, teach every young
Fashion-monger, either to keep himself out of debt, or money in his purse, to
provide Gerberus a sop.

Another misery proceeding from the want of money is, that when it is due unto
you by your own labor or desert from some rich miserable, or powerful man or
other, by long waiting day by day, yea, hourly attendance at his house or
lodging, you not only lose your time and opportunity of getting it elsewhere,
and when all is done to be paid after five in the hundred, in his countenance,
or else fair and candid promises, which will enrich you straight, Promissis
dives quilibet esse potest And some men there are of that currish and inhumane
nature, whom if you shall importune through urgent necessity, then are you in
danger to lose both your money and their favor for ever.

Would you prefer and place your son in the University? Let him deserve
never so well, as being anable and ready Grammarian, yea Captain of his form,
you shall very hardly prefer him, without great friends joined with your
great purse; for those just and charitable times, wherein desert seld went
without it due, are gone; the like I may say of the City, where if the Trade
be any thing like, you cannot place your son under threescore or an hundred
pounds, though by nature he were (as many are) made for the same, and of wit
and capacity never so pregnant.

Or have you a daughter, by birth well descended, virtuous, chaste, fair and
comely, endued with the best commendable qualities that may be required in a
young, beautiful, and modest maid, if you have not been in your life time
thriftie to provide her a portion, she may live till she be as old as Creusa,
or the nruse of Aeneas, Ca^et.
are you shall get her a good match. Nam genus and formam Regina pecunia donat.
It is as true as old: Hence the Dutch has a proverb, that, Gentility and
fair looks buy nothing in the Market.

If you happen to be sick or ill, if your purse has been lately purged, the
Doctor is not a leisure to visit you, yea hardly your neighbors and familiar
friends; but unto monied and rich men, they sly as Bees to the willow palms,
and many times they have the judgments of so many, that the sick is in more
danger of them, then his disease.

A good and painful Scholar, having lately taken his orders, shall be hardly
able to open a Church door without a golden key, when he should ring his
bells; hence it comes to pass, that so many of our prime wits run over sea
to seek their Fortunes, and prove such Vipers to their Mother-Countrey.

Have but an ordinary suit in Law, let your Cause or Case be never so plain or
just, if you want where with to maintain it, and as it were ever and anon to
water it at the root, it will quickly wither and die; I confess, friends may
do much to promote it, and many prevail by their powerful assistance in the
prosecution.

There was of late years in France, a mavelous fair and goodly Lady, (whose
husband being imprisoned for debt or something else) was constrained to be his
Solicitor, and in her own person to follow his suits in Law, through almost
all the Courts in Paris, and indeed through her favor, gat extraordinary
favor among the Lawyers and Courtiers, and almost a final dispatch of all her
business, only she wanted the Kings hand, (who was Henry the fourth of famous
memory) he, as he was a noble, witty, and understanding Prince, understanding
how well she had sped, (her suit being in the opinion of most men desperate or
lost) told her, that for his part he would willingly sign her Petition;
withal, he asked how her husband did, and bad her from himself to tell him,
That had be not pitched upon his horns, he had utterly been spoiled and
crushed. So that hereby was the old Proverb verified: A friend in Court is
better then a penny in the purse: But as friends go now adays, I had rather
seek for them in my parse, then in the Court, and I believe many Courtiers are
of my mind. Again, to teach every one to make much of, and to keep money when
he has it; let him seriously think with himself, what a misery it is, and
how hard a matter to borrow it, and most true it is that one faith, Semper
comitem aeris alieniesse miseriam. That misery is ever the companion of
borrowed money. Hereby a man is made cheap, and undervalued, despised;
deferred, mistrusted, and oftentimes slatly denied. Beside, upon the least
occasion upbraided therewith in company, and among friends, and sometime
necessity drives men to be beholden to such as at another time they would
scorn to be, wherein the old saying is verified: Mis^rum est debere cui nolis.

And on the contrary, how bold, confident, merry, lively, and ever in humor
are monied men; they go where they list, they wear what they list, they eat
and drink what they list, and as their minds, so their bodies are free; they
fear no City Sergeant, Court-Marshalls-man, or Countrey-Bailiffe; nor are they
followed or dogged home to their ordinaries, and lodgings by City-shopkeepers,
and other Creditours, but they come to their houses and shops where they are
bidden welcome; and if a stool be fetched into the shop, it is an
extraordinary favor, because all passers by take notice of it; and these men
can bring their wives, or friends, to see in Court the King and Queen at
dinner, or to see a Mask, by means of some eminent man of the guard, or the
Carpenter that made the scaffold.

The Common and Ordinary Causes why men are poor and want money.
THere must, by the Divine Providence, in the body of a Commonwealth, be as
well poor as rich, for as an humane body cannot subsist without hands and feet
to labor, and walk about to provide for the other members, the rich being the
belly which devour all, yet do no part of the work, but the cause of every
man's poverty is not one and the same. Some are poor by condition, and content
with their calling, neither seek, nor can work themselves into a better
fortune; yet God raises up, as by miracle, the children and posterity of
these, oftentimes to possess the most eminent places either in Church or
Commonwealth: as to become Archbishops, Bishops, Judges, Commanders and
Generals in the field, Secretaries of State, Statesmen and the like, so that
it proves not ever true which Martial says, Pauper eris semper, si pauper es
Aemiliane.
If poor thou be, poor thou shall ever be,
Aemilianus, I assure thee.
Of this condition are the greatest number in every kingdom; other there are
who have possessed great estates, but those estates (as I have seen and known
it in some families, and not far from the city) have not thrived or
continued, as gotten by oppression, deceit, usury and the like, which commonly
lasts not to the third generation, according to the old saying, De male
quasitis vix gaudet tertius haeres. Others come to want and misery, and spend
their fair estates in ways of vicious living, as upon drink and women; for
Bacchus and Venus are inseparable companions, and he that is familiar with the
one, is never a stranger to the other, Vno namque modo Vina Venusque nocent.
Some again live in perpetual want, as being naturally wholly given to
idleness, these are the droanes of a Common wealth, who deserve not to live,
Qui non laborat, non manducet, says the Apostle Paul. Both country, and city
swarmeth with these kind of people. The diligent hand (says Solomon) shall
make rich, but the Sluggard shall have scarcity of bread. I remember when I was
in the Low Countries, there were three soldiers, a Dutchman, a Scot, and an
Englishman, for their misdemeanors condemned to be hanged: yet their lives were
begd by three several men, one a Brick-layer, that he might help him to make
bricks and carry them to walls, the other was a Brewer of Delft, who begged his
man to fetch water and do other work in the Brewhouse; now the third was a
Gardener, and desired the third man to help him to work in, and to dress an
Hop-garden: the first two accepted their offers thankfully, this last the
Englishman told his master in plain terms his friends never brought him up
to gather Hops, but desired he might be hanged first, and so he was.

Other having had great and fair estates left unto them by friends, and who
never knew the pain and care of getting them, have as one said truly,
galloped through them in a very short time; these are such of whom Solomon
speaks, who having riches, have not the hearts (or rather the wit) to use
them: these men most aptly Homer compares unto the Willow tree, which he
calls by a most significant Epithete, (...), in Latin, Frugsp^rda, or
loose-fruit, because the palms of the Willow-tree are no sooner ripe, but
blown away with the wind. I remember in Queen Elizabeth's time, a wealthy
Citizen of London left his son a mighty estate in money, who imagining he
should never be able to spend it, would usually make Ducks and Drakes in the
Thames with twelve pences, as boys are wont with Tilesheards and
Oister-shells, and in the end he grew to that extreme want that he was feign to
beg or borrow sixepence, having many times no more shoes then fect, and
sometime more feet then shoes, as the beggar said in the Com^^die.

Many also there are who having been borne to fair Estates have quite undone
themselves by marriage, and that after a twofold manner; first by matching
themselves without advice of parents or friends in heat of youth, unto proud
foolish light huswifes, or such perfect Linguists, that one were better to take
his diet in A place near to Westminster Hall where very good meat is dressed
all the Term time.
hell then his dinner at home: and this is the reason so many of their husbands
travail beyond Seas, or at home go from town to town, tavern to tavern, to
look for company; and in a word, to spend any thing, to live any where save
at home, and in their own houses.

Others there are again who match themselves, for a little handsomnes and
eie-pleasing beauty, unto very mean and poor kinreds, sometimes drawn in
hereto by broking knaves, and necessitous Parents, who are glad to meet with
such that they might serve them as props to uphold their decaying and ruinous
families; and these poor silly young birds, are commonly caught up before
they be judge, and pulled bare before ever they know they have feathers; for
their fathers in law, or some near of the kin, as soon as they have seen
one and twenty, have so be^^m'd them in bands, that they shall hardly as long
as they live be able to fly over ten acres of that land their friends left
them.

A Knight of eight or ten thousand pound land by the year doated upon a poor
Alewives daughter, and made her a Lady: it cannot be denied, but women of the
meanest condition may make good wives, since Paupertas non est vnium, poverty
is no vice; but herein is the danger, that when their husbands in a short time
having, as it were, taken a surfeit of their beauties, and finding their error,
they begin (as I have known many) to contemn them, and fly abroad, do ^te
upon others, and devise all the ways they can (being grown desperate) to give
or sell all that they have, Besides such poor ones often times prove so impious
and proud, as that they make no conscience to abuse, insult over, and make
silly fools of their husbands, as by letting and disposing of his land,
gathering up his rents, putting away and entertaining what servants they list,
to verify that old verse, Asperius nihil est humili cum surgit in altum.
There Is nothing more perverse and proud then she,
Who is to wealth advanced from beggerie.
An Italian Earl about Naples of an hundred thousand crowns by the year in
estate married a common Laundresse whereupon the old Pasquine (the Image of
stone in Rome, the next sunday morning, or shortly after, had a foul and a
most filthy shirt put upon his back, and this tart libell beneath; Pasquine how
now? A foul shirt upon a sunday? the Resposto or answer in Pasquines behalf
was; I cannot help it, my Laundresse is made a Countess; Besides another
inconvenience is that beside the calling of his wit and judgment into
question, he draws unto him so many leaches and down-drawers upon his estate
as his wife has necessitous friends and kindred; but they that thus marry are
commonly such young men as are left to themselves, their parents, overseers, or
faithfullest friends being either dead or far from them.

Others not affecting Marriage at all live (as they say) upon the Commons, Nil
ait esse prius, melius nil coelibe vita.
unto whom it is death to be put into the several, but spend that they have
altogether in irregular Courses of life, as in change of houses and lodgings,
entertainment of new acquaintance, making great feasts in tavernes,
invitations and visits of their (common) mistresses, Coach hire, clothes in
fashion, and the like: besides the hanging on and intrusion of some necessitous
parasites, of whom they shall find as much use as of water in their boots.

There are others again of overgood, free natures and dispositions, who are
easily fetched and drawn in by decayed and crafty knaves (I call them no
better) to enter into Bonds, and to pass their words for their old debts, and
engagements; and this they are wrought to do in Taverns, in their cups and
merriment, at ordinaries, and the like places. I would have in the fairest
room of one of these houses, the Emblem of a gallant or young heir, The old
Emblem of suretieship.
creeping in at the great end of a hunters horn, with ease, but cruelly
pinched in coming forth at the small end, a fool standing not far off
laughing at him: and these be those fools who will be so easily bound, and
pass their words in their drink. Facilis descensus Averni, Sed revocare
gradum, etc. It is easy slipping in, but the return and getting our full of
difficulty.

Infinite also are the casualties that are incident to the life of man, whereby
he may fall into poverty, as misfortune by fire, loss at sea, robbery and
theft on land, wounds, lamenesse, sickness and the like.

Many run out of great estates, and have undone themselves by over-sumptuous
building, above and beyond their means and estates.

Others have been undone by careless and thriftlesse servants, such as waste
and consume their masters goods, neither saving nor mending what is amiss, but
whatsoever they are entrusted withal, they suffer to be spoiled and to run
to ruin. For, Qui modicaspernit, paulatim defluit: He that despises small
things, falls by little and little, says the Wiseman.

Some (yea a great many) have brought themselves to beggary by play and gaming,
as never lying out of Ordinaries, and Dicing-houses, which places, like
quicksands, so suddenly sink and swallow them, that hardly you shall ever see
their heads appear any more.

Others (and great ones too) affect unprofitable, yea and impossible inventions
and practices, as the Philosophers Stone, The Adamantine Alphabet, The
Discovery of that new world in the Moon, by those new devised perspective
glasses (far excelling (they say) those of Galilaus) sundry kinds of
useless wild fire, Waterworks, Extractions, Distillations, and the like.

If any would be taught the true use of money, let him travel into Italy; for
the Italian (the Florentine especially) is able to teach all the world thrift.
For Itali^ being divided into many Principalities and Provinces, and all very
fertile, the inhabitants are many, (and by reason of often differences amongst
them, apt to take up Arms) the people are subject to taxes and impositions, as
in Florence the Duke has a Custom at the gates, even out of herbs, that are
brought for Sallets, and Broaths into the City.

The Symptoms of a Mind dejected, and discontent for want of Money.
HE that wants money, is for the most part extremely Melancholique, in every
company, or alone by himself, especially if the weather be foul, rainy, or
cloudy, talk to him of what you will, he will hardly give you the hearing;
ask him any questions, he answers you with Monosyllables, as Tarleton did one
who out-eat him at an ordinary; as, Yes, No, That, Thanks, True, etc. That
Rhetorical passage of Status transtativus, is of great use with him: when he
lays the cause of his want upon others, as protesting this great Lord, that
Lady, or kinsman owes him money, but not a deniere that he can get: he swears,
he murmures against the French, and other strangers, who convay such sums of
money out of the land, besides our leather hides, under the color of
calve-skins, with that he shows you his boots out at the heels, and wanting
mending; he walks with his arms folded, his belt without a sword or rapier,
that perhaps being somewhere in trouble; an hat without a band, hanging over
his eyes, only it wears a weather beaten Fancy, for Fashion sake: he cannot
stand still, but like one of the Tower wild beasts, is still walking from one
end of his room to another, humming out some new Northern tune or other; if he
meets with five or ten pieces, happily conferred upon him by the beneficence of
some noble friend or other, he is become a new man, and so overjoyed with his
fortune, that not one drop of small drink will down with him all that day.

The Misery of want of Money inregard of Contempt in the World.
Whosoever wants money is ever subject to contempt and scorn in the world,
let him be furnished with never so good gifts, either of body or mind: So that
most true it is that one says, Nil infoelicius in se paupertas habet quam quod
homines ridiculos facit: The worst property that poverty has, it makes men
ridiculous, and scorned, but oftentimes of such as are more to be contemned
themselves, in regard either of their ignorance, or vicious living, or useless
company: if we do but look back into better and wiser Ages, we shall find
poverty, simply in it self, never to have been (as now adays, in this last
and worst act of Time) esteemed a Vice, and so loathsome as many would have it,
it having been the badge of Religion and piety in the primitive times since
Christ, and of wisdom and contempt of the world, among the wisest
Philosophers, long before. But, Tempora mutantur, and in these times we may say
with the wise man: My son, better it is to die then to be poor, for now
money is the worlds God, and the card which the Devil turns up trumpe to
win the Set withal, for it gives birth, beauty, honor and credit, and the
most think it conferreth wisdom to every possesso, P^cuniae omnia obediunt:
hence it is so admired that millions venture both souls and bodies for the
possession of it.

But there is a worse effect of poverty then that, it makes men dissolute and
vicious, Oh mala paupertas vitii scelerisque ministral Says Mantuan, It
wresteth and makes crooked the best Natures of all, which, were their
necessities supplied, they would rather die then do as they sometimes do,
borrow and not be able to pay, to speak untruths, to deceive, and sometime to
cheat their own fathers and friends. What greater grief can there be to an
ingenuous and free spirit, who sitting at a superiors table and thought to be
necessitous and only to come for a dinner, to be placed the lowest, to be
carve dunto of the worst and first cut, as of boild beef, brawn, or the like,
and if the Lady or loose bodied mistres presents unto him the milk from her
trencher, then assuredly it is burned to the body, if he be carved unto out of
a pastie of venison, it was some part that was bruised in the carriage and
began to stink, yet for all this he must be obsequious, endure any jeere,
whisper for his drink, and rise at the coming in of the Basin and Ewer. To do
the which, any generous and truly Noble spirit had rather (as I am persuaded)
dine with my Lord Majors hounds in Finsburie fields.

Another misery, a kin to the former, is what discourse soever is offered at
such tables, the necessitous man, though he can speak more to the purpose then
them all, yet he must give them leave to engrosse all the talk, and though he
knows they tell palpable and gross lies, speak the absurdest nonsense that
may be, yet must he be silent, and be held all the while for a Vau-neant: let
these and the like examples then be motives unto all to make much of money, to
eat their own bread in their houses; and to be beholden as little as may be to
any for their meat, for, Est aliena vivere quadra, miserrimum.

How necessity and want compels to offend both against body and soul.
Seek not death in the error of your lives (says the Wiseman) that is,
Wisdom.
by taking evil courses, to procure unto your selves untimely ends, as those
do who through extreme necessity are constrained to steal, lie, forswear
themselves, become cheaters, common harlots, and the like, whereof now adays we
liave too many examples every where, to the hazard of their souls to hell,
and their bodies to the hands of the Executioner.

Hereby we may see how much it concerns all parents to give their children
virtuous education, in the fear of God, and to employ them betimes in honest
vocations, whereby they may be armed against want and ill courses, and doubtless
many (yea too many) parents have been, and are herein, much too blame, who
when they have given their children a little breeding and bringing up, till
about twelve or fourteen years of age, they forsake them, and send them out
into the wide world to shift for themselves, to sink or swim without trades
or portion provided, so they be rid of a charge what care they; hence we see so
many young men and women come to untimely ends, who living might have been
comforts to their friends and parents, and prooved good members in the common
wealth, I spoke before of idle persons, whom Saint Paul denies to eat, which
are the droanes of a Common wealth, not to be pitied, whom Homer pretily
describes.

Of Frugalitie or Parsimonie what it is, and of the Effects thereof.
HAving already showed you the misery of want, from the want of money, let me
give you a preservative against that want, from the nature and effects of
thrift, which if not observed and looked to, he shall live in perpetual want,
and indeed (next to the serving of God) it is the first we ought, even from
children to learn in the world, some men are thriftie and sparing by nature,
yea saving even in trifles, as Charles the first was so naturally sparing, that
if a point from his hose had broken, he would have tied the same upon a knot,
and made it to serve again.

Others again are thriftie in small matters, but lavish and prodigal in
great, these we say are, Penny wise and pound foolish. Many great Ladies, and
our great dames are subject to this disease.

Others having had long experience in the world and having been bitten with
want, (through their unthriftinesse when they were young) have proved very
good husbands at the last.

Others again there be who cloak their miserable baseness under the pretense
of thrift, as one would endure none of his family to eat butter with an egg
but himself, because it was sold for five pence the pound.

The Definition of Frugalitie or Thrife.
FRugalitie is a virtue which holds her own, lays out or expendeth
profitably, avoideth unnecessarie expenses, much buying, riot, borrowing and
lending, superfluous building, and the like; yet can spend in a moderate way as
occasion and reason shall require.

It is a virtue very near allied to liberality, and has the same extremes,
for as Liberality is opposite to covetousnes, so frugalitie is more opposite
to profuseness or prodigality.

This virtue is the fountain or springhead of beneficence and liberality, for
none can be bountiful, except they be parsimonious and thrifty. Bonus
Servatius facit bonum Bonifacium: is an old Monkish (but true) Proverb: Quod
cessat reditu ex frugalitate suppletur, ex quo velut font liberalitas nostra
decurrit; qua ita tamen temperanda est, no n^mia profusione in^rescat, says
Seneca.

It avoideth ambitious buildings, pompes, shows, Courtmaskings, with excessive
feasts and entertainments, as M. Anthony spent at one supper a thousand wild
Boares: Heliogabalus had served him up at a supper likewise six hundred heads
of Ostriches. For the Romans had nodinners, but suppers, which were about
three of the clock in the afternoon.


Vitellius at one feast, had two thousand fishes, and most of several kinds,
besides seven thousand fowls.

Many such like feasts have been made by the Roman Emperors, and some so
excessive, that an infinite quantity of bread, meat, and other good victuals
(all sorts of people being satisfied) has been thrown into the River of Tiber.

Again, on the other side, there are as miserable Eu^li'os, and base penurious
slaves, to be found in all parts, yea in every town of a kingdom, as one at
Pr^^rs Thorn, near to Swafham in Norfolk, made his man pay a penny out of his
wages for a rope he cut, when he was hanging of himself in his barn.

Another in the springtime, because the market should not thrive by him, would
make boys climb trees, and search steeples for all the Crows and Dawes they
could find, which he lived upon, (while they lasted) to save other victuals.

Now there is an (...), or a selfe-contented sufficiency, which is most
pleasing and agreeable to the Nature of many men, as Phocion when Alexander had
sent him a gift of an hundred talents of gold, he sent it back again with this
message, That he needed not Alexanders money; (...), etc. be the words of
Plutarch.

The Derivation of the word Penny, and of the value and worth thereof.
OUr English Penny consists of four farthings, and a farthing is so called
from the old Saxon, or high Dutch, Ein vier^ ding: that is, a fourth thing,
because from the Saxons time, until Edward the third, the Penny of this land
had a Cross struck so deep into the midst thereof, that you might break out
any part, of the four, to buy what you thought good withal, which was in
those times their farthing.

This word Penny, is so called, (...), that is, Poverty: because for the most
part poor people are herewith relieved: the old Saxons called it P^nig the high
Dutch Pfennig, the Netherlands Peni^^uk in Italian Denaro in Spanish Dinero, in
Latin Denarius, which some fetch from the Chaldean, Denar; but some body has
taught the Chaldean to speak Latin: it is indeed derived, A numero Denario,
because De^em asses made a Penny; or according to Plutarch, A dicem ar^is, (...).

In the British, or Welsh, it is Keniog, from being current, because it goes
away faster then other money; as Scavernog is Welsh for an Hare, because she
runs over the mountains faster then an ordinary runner in Wales can overtake
or catch her, as my honest friend Master Owen Morgan, that Countryman, once
(in good earnest) told me.

There are so many kinds of pence as there are several countries or nations;
our English penny is a Scottish shilling; in the time of King Edward the first
our English penny being round and unclip'd was to weigh two and thirty grains
of wheat, taken out of the midst of the care; twenty of these pence made an
ounce, and twelve ounces made a pound.

There were also golden pence, as we may find in Didymus Clandius de Analog.
Romanorum: in a word, I might discourse ad infinitum, of the variety of pence,
as well for the form and stamp, as weight and value, though I sought no
further then among those of our Saxons kings, but it were needless. I will
only content my self with our own ordinary penny, and stay my Reader a while
upon the not unpleasant consideration of the simple worth of a single penny,
reflecting or looking back as often as I can, and, as ( Pliny advises) upon my
Title.

The simple worth of a single penny.
A Penny bestowed in charity upon a poor body shall not want an heavenly
reward.

For a penny you may in the Low Countries in any market buy eight several
commodities, as nuts, vinegar, grapes, a little cake, onions, oatmeale, and the
like.

A penny bestowed in a small quantity of Aniseed, Aqua vitae, or the like
strong water, may save ones life in a fainting or swound.

For a penny you may hear a most eloquent Oration upon our English Kings and
Queens, if keeping your hands off, you will seriously listen to David Owen,
who keeps the Monuments in Westminster.

Some, for want of a penny, have been constrained to go from Westminster about
by London Bridge to Lambeth; and truly said, Defessi sumus ambulando.

You may have, in Cheapside, your penny tripled in the same kind, for you shall
have Peny-grasse, Peny-wort and Peny-royall.

For a penny you may see any Monster, Jackanapes, or those roaring boys, the
Lions.

For a penny you may have all the News in England, of Murders, Flonds, Witches,
Fires, Tempests, and what not, in one of Martin Parkers Ballads.

For a penny you may have your horse rubbed and walked after a long journey, and
being at grass, there are some that will breathe him for nothing.

For a penny you may buy a fair Cucumer, but not a breast of Mutton, except it
be multiplied.

For a penny you may buy Time, which is precious, yea and Thrift too, if you be
a bad husband.

I or a penny an Hostess, or an Hostler, may buy as much chalk as will score
up thirty or forty pounds: but how to come by their money, that let them look
to.

For a penny you may have your dog worm'd, and so be kept from running mad.

For a penny a Drunkard may be guarded to his lodging, if his head be light, and
the evening dark.

For a penny you shall tell what will happen a year hence (which the Devil
himself cannot do) in some Almanac, or other rude Country.

An hard-favoured, and il-bred wench, made penny white, may (as our times are)
prove a gallant Lady.

For a penny you may be advanced to that height, that you shall be above the
best in the City, yea the Lord Major himself; that is, to the top of Paul's.

For a penny, a miserable and covetous wretch, that never did, or ever will
bestow penny upon Doctor, or Apothecarie for their physic or advice, may
provide a remedy for all diseases.

For a penny you may buy the hardest book in the world, and which at some time
or other has posed the greatest Clerks in the land, viz. an Horn-book.

In so great esteem in former times have our English pence been, that they have
been carried to Rome by Cart-loads.

For a penny you may search among the Rolls, and withal give the Master good
satisfaction; I mean, in a Bakers basket.

For a penny a Chambermaid may buy as much Red-Oker as will serve seven years
for the painting of her cheeks.

For a penny the Monarch of a Free-Schole may provide himself of as many Arms
as will keep all his rebellious subjects in awe.

For a penny you may walk within one of the fairest gardens in the City, and
have a nose-gay, or two made you of what sweet slowers you please.

For a penny you may buy as much wood of that tree which is green all the year,
and bears red berries, as will cure any shrews tongue, if it be too long for
her mouth.

A penny may save the credit of many, as it did of four or five young Some of
them are yet living in London.
Scholars in Cambridge, who going into the Town to break their fast with
puddings (having sent to their College for bread and beer) the Hostess
brought them twelve puddings broiled, and finding among themselves that they
had but eleven pence, they were much troubled about the other penny, they
neither having any book about them to lay to pawn for it: quoth one, bolder
then the rest, Audaces Fortuna juvat; Fortune favors the venturous, and biting
off a piece of the puddings end, by wonderful luck spit out a single penny that
paid for it, which it seems was buried in the oat-meale, or spice, so for that
time they saved their credits. But I will leave this discourse of a
Penies-worth to their judgments and experience, who having been troubled with
overmuch money, afterward in no long time, have been fain ( after a long dinner
with Duke Humphrey, to take a nap upon penielesse Bench, only to verify the
old Proverb, A fool and his money are soon parted.

How money may many ways be saved in diet, apparel, recreation, and the like.
AS there are infinite ways and occasions of spending and laying out money,
which were superfluous here to recount, whereof some may be well omitted, but
others not, except we would want meat, drink and our apparel with other
external necessaries, as horses, armor, books, and the like, in a word
whatsoever may conduce either to our profit or honest pleasure, yet in
husbanding our money in all these, there is a great deal of caution and
discretion to be used, for most true it is, that of all nations in Europe, our
English are the most profuse and careless in the way of expense, go into other
countries (especially Italy) the greatest Magnifice in Venice, will think it
no disgrace to his Magnifenza to go to market, to choose and buy his own meat,
what him best likes: but we in England scorn to do either, surfeiting indeed
of our plenty, whereof other countries fall far short. Insomuch as I am
persuaded that our city of London of it self alone eats more good Beef and
Mutton in one month then all Spain, Italy, and a part of France in a whole
year. If we have a mind to dine at a tavern, we bespeake a dinner at all
adventure, never demanding or knowing the price thereof till it be eaten,
after dinner there is a certain sauce brought up by the drawer called a
Reckoning in a bill as long as a Brokers inventorie. I have known by
experience in some tavernes sometime of at least twice and sometime thrice as
much as the meat and dressing has been worth: no question but a fair and an
honest gain is to be allowed, in regard of house rent, linen, attendance of
servants, and the like; there are without doubt very many tavernes very honest
and reasonable, and the use of them is necessary, for if a man meets with his
friend or acquaintance in the street, whither should they go, having no friends
house near to go into, especially in rainie or foul weather, but to a
tavern? where for the expense of a pint or a quart of wine they may have a
dry house and room to confer or write to any friends about business, but to
have in a bill 8. s. brought up for an ordinary Capon (as my Lord of
Northamptons gentlemen had at Greenwich in king James his time) 7. or 9. s. for
a pair of soales, four shillings for a dozen of Larkes, would make a Horentine
run out of his wits: how excellently in some houses are their Neates tongues
poudred when the reckoning is brought you up? again what can be more
distasteful to an ingenuous and free spirit, then to stand to the courtesy of a
nimble tong'd drawer, or his manie-ringed Mistress, whether they or your self
shall have the disposing of your money; it is no small sum that our young
Gallants might save in a year, if they would be wise in this respect. Beside
in your own private house or chamber, a dish or two, and a good stomach for
the sauce shall give you more content, continnue your health, and keep your
body in better plight, then variety of many dishes: this pleased ever the
wisest and best men. Horace affirms him to live healthie and happily; Cui
splendet in Mensa tenue Salinum: meaning by the small and poor salt seller, a
slender and a frugall diet. Curious that Noble Roman, a man of mervailous
honesty, temperance and valor (who overcame the Samnites and Pyrrhus himself)
when the Ambassadors of the Samnites brought him an huge sum of gold, they
found him sitting by the fire, and seething of Turnips for his dinner with an
earthen dish in his lap, at what time he gave them this answer, I had rather
eat in this dish and command over them, that have gold, then be rich my self,
a while after being accused for deceiving the state of money, which he had
gotten in his conquests and kept to himself: he took a solemn oath, that he
saved no more of all he gat but that one tree'n, or wooden barrel, which he
had there by him. Mavelous was the temperance of the Romans in their diet,
as also of the Turks at this day, the Italians and Spaniards, but it is in
them natural, not habitual, and by consequent no virtue as themselves would
have it, for the inhabitants of hot countries, have not their digestion so
strong as those under cold climates, whose bodies by an Antiperistasis or
surrounding of the cold have the natural heat repelled and kept within them,
which is the reason that the Northern nations are of all other the greatest
eaters and drinkers; and of those, the French say we of England have the best
stomachs and are the greatest trenchermen of the world, Les Anglois sont les
plus gros mangeurs, de tout la monde: but they re deceived; those of Denmark
and Norway exceed us, and the Russians them. I confess we have had, and have
yet some remarkable eaters among us, who for a wager would have eaten with the
best of them, as Wolmer of Windsor, and not long since Wood of Kent, who eat up
at one dinner nineteen green geese equal to the old ones in bigness with
sauce of gooseberries, according as I heard it affirmed to my Lord Richard
Earl of Dorset at a dinner time at his house at Knowle in Kent, by one of his
gentlemen who was an eye witness to the same.

But the truth is, that those men live the longest and are commonly in perfect
health, who content themselves with least and the simplest meat, which not
only saves the purse, but preserves the body, as we may see in Lancashire,
Shropshire, Cheshire, Yorkshire, and other countries which are remote from the
city; and it is Master Cambdens observation in his Britannia, Vt diutius
vivant qui vescuntur Lacticiniis: they commonly are long lived, who live by
whitmeates, as milk, butter, cheese curds, and the like. For, That many dishes
breed many diseases.
Multa fercula multos morbos gignere, was truly said of Saint Hierome, as
being apt by their sundry and opposite qualities to breed much corruption. How
healthful are scholars in our Universities, whose commons are no more then
needs must! Neither would I have any man starve himself to save his purse, as
an Usurer confessed upon his deathbed, how he was above two hundred pounds
endebted to his belly, for breakefastes dinners and suppers which he had
defrauded it of in term times at London, and in other places, employing his
money to other miserable purposes.

Money may be well saved, in travail or in town; if three or four shall join
their purses, and provide their diet at the best hand, it is no shame so to do.
I have known also some, who have been very skillful in dressing their own
diet. Homer tells us that Achilles could play the Cook excellently well, and I
believe it were not amiss for our English Travailers so to do in Foreign
countries, for many reasons I have known.

And execrable is the miserable and base humor of many, who to save their
money will live upon vile and loathsome things, as Mushromes, Snailes, Frogs,
mice, young Kitlings, and the like. In times of extreme dearth or famine,
people (I confess) have been driven to look out for whatsoever could nourish,
and (as we say) keep life and soul together; yea, and of far worse things
then these, as Josephus reports of the Jews, in that horrible and fearful
famine in Jerusalem, at the time of the siege by Titus and Vespasian: such we
blame not, most blame worthy are they, who as it were surfeiting of, or
loathing that abundant plenty of all good and wholesome meats God has afforded
us in this land, and which God by name has commended to his people, make these
stuff their greatest dainties; as I have known Ladies, who when they have
eaten till they could eat no more of all the daintiest dishes at the table, yet
they must eat the legs of their Larkes, roasted a new in a greasy tallow
candle, and if they carved but a piece of a burnt claw to any Gentleman at the
Table, he must take it as an extraordinary favor from her Ladyship. It were
much to be wished, that they were bound to hold them to their Diet in a dear
year, or a wet spring, when Frogs and Snailes may be had in greatest abundance.

Of Thrift and good Husbandry in Apparel.
YOu must, if you would keep money in your purse to uphold your credit, at all
times be frugall, and thrifty also in your apparel, not dogging the fashion,
or setting your tailor on work at the sight of every Mounsieurs new suit; there
is a middle, plain and decent garb, which is best, and most to be commended:
this is commonly affected of the most stayed and wisest: What money might be
saved, if we were so wise as the Dutch or Spaniard, who for these two or three
hundred years, have kept themselves to one fashion? But we, the Apes of
Europe, like Proteus, must change our shapes every year, nay quarter, month
and week, as well in our dublets, hose, cloaks, hats, bands, boots, and what
not: that Emblem was not unproper which once I saw in Antwerpe, which was an
He and a She fool turning a double rimmed wheel upon one axeltree, one on
the one side, and the other on the other; upon the Hee-fooles wheel, were the
several fashions of men's apparel, on the others wheel of women's; which, as
with the revolution of time, went round, and came into the same place, use, and
request again; as for the present, aloft, and followed of all, by and by cast
down, and despised. I see no reason why a French man should not imitate our
English fashion, as well as we his: What, have the French more wit then we in
fitting clothes to the body, or a better invention or way insaving money in the
buying or making of apparel? Surely I think not: it may be our English when
they had to do in France, got a humor of affecting their fashions, which they
could not shake off since: there is no man ever the warmer, or ever the wiser
for a fashion, (so far forth as it is a fashion) but rather the contrary; a
fool: for needless expense, and suffering himself to quake for cold, when
his clothes in the fashion must be cut to the skin, his hat hardly cover his
crown, but stands upon his perewig like an Extinguisher: and we know, by
ridiculous experience, every day in the street, that our Ladies, and their
waiting women, will starve and shiver in the hardest frost, rather then they
will suffer their bare necks and breasts to pass your eyes unviewed. But some
will say (as I have heard many) there is no man now adays esteemed, that
follows not the fashion; be it so, the fashions of these times are very fit to
be observed, which is, to be deeply indebted to Mercers, Haberdashers,
Sempsters, Tailors, and other trades, for the fulfilling of a fashionable
humor, which a thrifty and wise man avoideth, accommodating himself with
apparel fair and seemly, for half, or a third part of the others charge.
What makes many of our City Tailors arise to so great estates as some of them
have, and to build so brave houses, but the fashion? Silkmen and Mercers to buy
such goodly Lordships in the Countries, where many times they are chosen high
Sheriffs, but the fashion? And I would fain know of any of our prime
Fashion-mongers, what use there is of laced bands, of six, seven, and eight
pound the band, nay of forty and fifty pound the band. Such d^ubing of cloakes,
and dublets with gold and silver, points of five and eight pound the dozen to
dangle uselesly at the knees, In Philop.
Philopoemon, a brave Commander among the Graecians (as Plutarch reports)
commanded that all the gold and silver which he had taken away from his enemies
(which was a very great quantity) should be employed in gilding, inlaying of
Swords, Saddles, Bridles, all furniture both for his Men and Horse. For gold
and silver worn by martial men, adds, says Plutarch, courage and Spirit
unto them; but in others effeminacie, or a kind of womanish vanity. Moderata
durant, and Mediocria firma, were the Motto's of two as grave and great
Counselors as were (of their times) in England. A Gentleman in a plain cloth
suit well made, may appear in the presence of the greatest Prince. The
Venetians as wise a people and state as any other in Europe, are bound by the
Laws of their Common wealth, that their upper garments (worn within the city)
should ever be of plain black: yea the greatest princes go many times the
plainest in their apparel. Charles the fifth Emperor the Bulwark and
Moderator of Christendom in his time, went very plain, seldom or never
wearing any gold or silver, save his order of the Golden Fleece about his neck.
Henry the fourth King of France (worthily styled the ninth Worthy) many times
in the heat of Summer would only go in a suite of Buckram cut upon white
canvas or the like; so little they, (who had the kernel of wisdom and
Magnanimity, cared for the shell of gaudie apparel: and it is worthy the
observation, how for the most part, the safest and most excellent men in inward
knowledge and multiplicity of learning, have been most negligent and careless in
their apparel, and as we say, Slovens; In Farra: Epistolarum
Erasmus says of Sir T. Moore, Quod a puere semper in vestitu fuit
negligentissimus, That from a child he was ever most careless and slovenly in
his apparel. Paracelsus we read to have been the like; and to parallel him,
our late Master Butter of Cambridge, that learned and excellent Physician.
There is much money to be saved in apparel, in choice of the stuff, for
lasting, and cheapnesse: and that you may not be deceived in the stuff or
price, take the advice of some honest Tailor, your friend, as no question but
every where there are many. I will instance one; In Cambridge there dwelt, some
twenty or thirty years ago, one Godfrey Colton, who was by his trade a Tailor,
but a merry companion with his taber and pipe, and for singing all manner of
Northern songs before Noble and Gentlemen, who much delighted in his company.
Beside, he was Lord of Sturbridge-Faire, and all the misorders there. On a
time, an old Doctor of the University brought unto him five yards of pure fine
scarlet, to make him a Doctor of Divinities Gown: and withal, desired him to
save him the least shred, to mend an hole, if a moth should eat it: Godfrey
having measured, and found that there was enough, laid it by: Nay, quoth the
Doctor, let me see it cut out ere I go, for though you can play the knave
abroad, I think you are honest at home, and at your work. God forbid else,
quoth Godfrey, and that you shall find by me; for give me but twenty shillings
from you, and I will save you forty in the making of your gown: that I will,
said the Doctor (who was miserable enough) with all mine heart; with that he
gave him two old Harrie Angels out of his velvet pouch, which Godfrey having
put into his pocket, the Doctor desired to tell him how he would save him forty
shillings: marry will I (quoth Godfrey) in good faith Sir, let some other
Tailor in any case make it; for if I take it in hand, I shall utterly spoil
it, for I never, in all my life, made any of this fashion. I report this for
the credit of honest Tailors, who will ever tell their friends the truth.

Of Recreations.
OF Recreations, some are more expensive then others, as requiring more
address and charge: as Tiltings, Masks, Plays, and the like, which are
proper to Princes Courts: but I speak of those which are proper to private men,
for such is our nature, that we cannot stand long bent, but we must have our
relaxations, as well of mind as body; for of Recreations, some are proper to
the mind and speculation; as reading of delightful and pleasant books, the
knowledge of the Mathematical and other contemplative Sciences, which are the
more pleasing and excellent, by how much the pleasure of the mind excels
that of the body; others belong to the body, as walking, riding upon pleasure,
shooting, hunting, hawking, bowling, ringing, Paille Maille, and the like,
which are Recreations without doors; others are within doors, as chesse,
tables, cards, dice, billiards, ^ioco d^oco and the like: but the truth is, the
most pleasing of all is, riding with a good horse, and a good companion in the
spring, or summer season, into the Country, when blossoms are on the trees,
flowers in the fields, corn and fruit are ripe; in autumn, what sweet and
goodly prospects shall you have on both sides of you upon the way, delicate
green fields, low meadows, divorces of Crystal streams, woody-hills, parks
with dear, hedgerows, orchards, fruit trees, churches, villages, the houses of
Gentlemen, and husbandmen, several habits and faces, variety of country
labor and exercises, and if you happen (as often it falls out) to converse
with country men of the place, you shall find them for the most part
understanding enough to give you satisfaction, and sometimes country maids,
and market wenches, will give as unhappy answers, as they be asked knavish and
uncivil questions; others there be, who, out of their rusticall simplicity,
will afford you matter of mirth if you stay to talk with them. I remember,
riding once by Horn-Castle, near to Stikeswold, in Lincolneshire, in the heat
of summer, I met with a Swineherd keeping his hogs upon a fallow field. My
friend (quoth I) you keep here a company of unruly cattle, I poor souls,
they are indeed (quoth he) I believe, said I, they have a language among
themselves, and can understand one another, I as well as you and I: Were they
ever taught? Alas, poor things, they know not a letter of the book, I teach
them all they have: Why, what says that great hog with red spots (quoth I)
that lies under another, in his grunting language: Marry, he bids him that
sleeps so heavy upon him to lie further off. But to our purpose; The most
ordinary recreations of the Country are football, ska^es, or nine pins,
shooting at butts, quaits, bowling, running at the base, stooleball, leaping,
and the like; whereof some are too violent and dangerous: the safest
recreations are within doors (but not in regard of cost and expense) for
thousands sometimes are lost at Ordinaries, and Dicing-houses; yea, I have
known goodly Lordships to have been lost at a cast, and for the sport of one
night, some have made themselves beggars all their lives after.

Recreation, is so called, a Recreando, that is from (by a Metaphore) of
creating a man anew; by putting life, spirit and delight into him, after the
powers of his mind and body have been decayed, and weakened, with overmuch
much contemplation, study and labor, and therefore to be used only to that
end: some go for recreations which trouble and amuse the mind as much, or more
then the hardest study, In Basilicondoron.
as Chesse, which King James therefore calls, Ouer-Philosophicall a folly:
and indeed, such Recreations are to be used, that leave no sting of repentance
for sin committed by them, or grief and sorrow for loss of money and time
many days after: I could instance many of that nature, but I will only give
some general rules to be observed in some of them.

If you have a mind to recreate your self by play, never adventure but a
third part of that money you have: let those you play withal be of
acquaintance, and not strangers, if you may avoid it.

Never mis-time your self by sitting long at play, as some will do three or
four days and nights together, and so make your self unfit for any business
in many days after.

Never play until you be constrained to borrow or pawn any thing of your
own, which becomes a base groom better then a Gentleman.

Avoid quarrelling, blasphemous swearing, and in a word, never play for more
then you are willing to lose; that you may find your self, after your
pastime, not the worse, but the better, which is the end of all Recreations.

There are some, I know, so base and penurious, who for fear of losing a penny,
will never play at any thing; yet rather then they should want their
recreations, I would wish them to venture at Span-counter, and Dust-point with
Schole-boyes upon their ordinary play-dayes in a Marketplace or Church Porch.

Of such honest ways that a man in want may take to live and get money.
IF a man has fallen into poverty or distress, either by death of friends,
some accident or other by sea or land, sickness, or the like; let him not
despair, for, Paupertas non est vtium; and since the Commonwealth is like
unto an humane body, consisting of many members, so useful each to either, as
one cannot subsist without the other; as a Prince his Counsel and Statesmen
are as the head, the arms, are men of Arms, the Back, the Communalty; Hands and
Feet, are Country and Mechanique Trades, etc. So God has ordained, that all
men should have need one of another, that none might live idly, or want
employment; wherefore Idleness, as the bane of a Commonwealth, has a curse
attending upon it, it should be clothed with rags, it should beg its bread,
etc. I remember I have read in an Italian History, of one so idle, that he was
fain to have one to help him stir his chaps when he should eat his meat. Now
if you would ask me what course he should take, or what he should do that
wants money, let him first bethink himself, to what profession or trade of
life he has been formerly brought up, if to none, to what his Genius, or
natural disposition stands most affected unto: if he has a mind to
travail, he shall find entertainment in the Netherlands, who are the best
pay-masters except the Emperor of Russia, and the Venetians (I mean for the
most means) in Europe. If you list not to follow the wars, you may find
entertainment among our new Plantations in America, as New England, Virginia,
the Barbadas, Saint Christophers, and the rest, where with a great deal of
delight you may have variety of honest employment, as fishing with the net or
hook, planting, gardening, and the like, which beside your maintenance you
shall find it a great content to your conscience to be in action, which God
commands us all to be, if you have been ever in a Grammer-Schoole you may
every where find children to teach, so many, no doubt, as will keep you from
starving, and it may be in a gentleman's house, or if you get entertainment of
any who follows the Law, or practifeth Physic, you may with diligence and
practice prove a Clerk to himself or some Justice of the Peace, by the other
you may get the knowledge and nature of herbs and all foreign Drugges from
his Apothecarie, and perhaps many good receipts for agues wounds and the like:
I have known many this way to have prooved in a country town tolerable
Physicians, and have grown rich, if being borne a gentleman (as our gentlemen
do) you scorn to do any of these, you may get to be a gentleman usher to
some Lady or other, they are not a few that have thrived passing well this
way, and in a word, rather then in miserable and pitilesse want, let a man
undertake any vocation and labor, always remembering that homely (but true)
distich of old Tussers.

Thinks no labor slaverie,
That bringes in penny saverlie.
And as a necessary rule hereto coincident, let every man endeavor by a
dutiful diligence to get a friend, and when he has found him (neither are
they so easily found in these days) with all care to keep him, and to use him
as one would do a crystal or a venice glass, to take him up softly and use
him tenderly, or as you would a sword of excellent temper and metal, not to
hack every gate, or cut every staple and post therewith, but to keep him to
defend you in your extremest danger. False and seeming friends are infinite,
and such be our ordinary acquaintance, with the complement of glad to see you
well, how have you done this long time, etc. and with these we meet every day.
In a word, for a conclusion, let every one be careful to get and keep money,
know the worth of a penny, and since we are born, we must live, Vivions nous,
let us live as well, as merrily as we can in these hardest times, and say every
one of us as Sir Roger Williams that brave soldier said to Queen Elizabeth,
when he wanted pay for himself and his soldiers; Madam, I tell you true, we
will be without money for no man's pleasure.

FINIS.

